Daa rens pee 
DRAGONS 


STARTER SET 


x ‘ wi 
EVERYTHING YOU NEED TO EMBARK ON A STRANGER THINGS ADVENTURE! 


STARTER SET RULEBOOK 


Contents: 

Stranger Things adventure book * rulebook · 

5 Stranger Things character sheets * 6 dice · 
Demogorgon figure e Paintable Demogorgon figure 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS* — 


—— 


Chapter 1: How to Play Chapter 4: Spelicasting. 
Getting Started What Is a Spel 
Six Abilitie Casting a Spel 
Chapter 2: Combat 8 
The Order of Combat 
Movement and Position 


Actions in Combat. -- 10 Appendix B: Monsters. 
g an Atta Appendix C: Conditions. 


Damage and Healing. 
Chapter 5: Adventuring 


Travel 


Equipment... 


CHAPTER Ha HOW TO IPILANY 


The Dunceons & Dracons roleplaying game is about storytelling in worlds of swords and sorcery. 
Like games of make-believe, D&D is driven by imagination. It's about picturing a crumbling castle 
in a darkening forest and imagining how a fantasy adventurer might react to the challenges that 
scene presents. In this fantasy world, the possibilities are limitless. 


Mike (Dungeon Master): The castle stands among 
the trees, the crumbling ruins of seven round towers 
jutting up from it like broken teeth. An archway littered 
With twisted shards of rusted metal gapes open at 

the top of a short flight of steps. Two of the towers, 
speckled with dark arrow slits, loom beside the entry- 
way, and a dark hall yawns beyond. 

Will Cleric): Let's send the ranger up ahead to look in 
and make sure it’s safe. 

Lucas (ranger): OK, PIL move to the side and sneak 
along the wall of the tower until | can peer in through 
the entrance. 


Unlike a game of make-believe, D&D gives structure 
to the stories—a way of determining the consequences 
of the adventurers’ actions. Players roll dice to deter- 
mine whether their attacks hit or miss and whether 
their characters can scale a cliff, roll away from the 
strike of a magical lightning bolt, or pull off some other 
dangerous task. Anything is possible, but the dice 
make some things more probable than others. 


Mike (DM): All right, Lucas, let's see how sneaky 
you are. Make a Dexterity check. 

Lucas: With my Stealth skill, right? 

Mike (DM): You bet. 

Lucas (rolling a d20): lm pretty sneaky—that’s a 17. 
Mike (DM): OK, there’s no sign that anyone 
notices you. And you're looking inside? 


2° CHAPTER 1: HOW TO PLAY 


When you play D&D, you take on the role of an ad- 
venturer, such as a devout cleric or paladin, a skilled 
bard or ranger, or a spellcasting wizard. (The character 
sheets included in this set describe five heroes to get 
you started.) With some friends and a little imagination, 
you strike out on grand quests and daring adventures, 
testing yourself against an array of challenges and 
bloodthirsty monsters. 

One player takes on the role of the Dungeon Master, 
the game's lead storyteller and referee. The DM is in 
charge of the adventure, which appears in the adven- 
ture book, while the characters navigate the adven- 
ture's hazards and decide where to explore. The DM 
might describe the entrance to an ancient, ruined cas- 
tle, and the players decide what they want their adven- 
turers to do. Will they boldly stride up to the fallen gate, 
or try to sneak up in case anyone's watching through 
those arrow slits? Circle around the castle looking for 
another entrance? Or cast a spell to cloak themselves 
in invisibility? 

The DM determines the results of the adventurers’ 
actions and narrates what the characters experience. 
Because the DM can improvise to react to anything the 
players attempt, D&D is infinitely flexible, and each ad- 
venture can be exciting and unexpected. 

There's no winning and losing in D&D Hat least not 
the way those terms are usually understood. Together, 
the DM and the players create a story of bold adven- 
turers who confront deadly perils. Sometimes an 
adventurer might come to a grisly end, torn apart by 
ferocious monsters or done in by a nefarious villain. 
Even so, the other adventurers can search for power- 
ful magic to revive their fallen comrade, or the player 
might choose to play a new character. The group might 


fail to complete an adventure successfully, but if the 
players had a good time and created a memorable 
story, they all win. 


Getting Started 


If this is your first time playing DusaEoss & Dracons, 
start by reading the rest of this chapter. It tells you the 
most important rules you need to play the game. 

Someone needs to be the Dungeon Master for your 
first play experience. Since you're reading this, you're 
a good candidate to be the DM. (If one of your friends 
knows how to play D&D already, you might want to 
ask that person to be the DM and help you learn the 
game.) Once you've read this chapter, take a look at 
the first few pages of the adventure book. That will 
help you understand the role of the DM and the basics 
of a D&D adventure. 

From there, look over the rest of this book. You don't 
need to memorize everything before your first game, 
but it helps if you know where to find the rules while 
you play. Then get familiar with the adventure, and 
you'll be ready to gather your friends together to play. 

Each player chooses one character from the five op- 
tions included. It's up to the players to turn these bare- 
bones characters into people by giving them names, 
describing their appearance, and bringing them to life 
while playing through the adventure. If you have more 
than five players, it's OK for two players to use the same 
character, as long as they make the details of the char- 
acter distinct; one cleric might be a jolly woman named 
Sefris, while the other is a severe man named Albric. 


Game Dice 


The game uses the polyhedral dice that come with this 
set. In these rules, the different dice are referred to by 
the letter d followed by the number of sides: d4, d6, d8, 
dio (the O on the die represents a 10), d12, and d20. 
For instance, a d6 is a six-sided die. 

Percentile dice, or d100, work a little differently. You 
generate a number between 1 and 100 by rolling the 
ten-sided die twice. The first roll gives the tens digit, 
and the second gives the ones digit. If you roll a 7 and 
a 1, for example, the number rolled is 71. Two Os rep- 
resent 100. 


When you need to roll dice, the rules tell you how 
many dice to roll of a certain type, as well as what mod- 
ifiers to apply. For example, “3d8 + 5" means you roll 
three eight-sided dice, add them together, and add 5 to 
the total. 


The Structure of Play 


The D&D game consists of a group of characters (con- 
trolled by the players) embarking on an adventure that 
the DM presents. The adventure is the heart of the 
game. An adventure unfolds as a story that the DM and 
the other players tell together using the material in the 
adventure book, in another published adventure, or in 
a setting of the DM's creation. The DM sets the scene 
at the start, giving the adventurers a reason to get 
involved. They are the stars of the story. The players 
control what they do, and the DM controls the monsters 
and people they meet. The DM also decides how the 
world changes as à result of the adventurers' actions. 

Play of an adventure unfolds according to this 
basic pattern: 

1. The DM describes the environment. The DM 
tells the players where their adventurers are and what's 
around them, presenting the basic scope of options 
available: how many doors lead out of a room, what's 
on a table, who's in the tavern, and so on. The players 
can ask questions to make sure they understand what 
their characters perceive. 

2. The players describe what they want to do. 
Sometimes one player speaks for the whole group, 
saying, "We'll take the east door," for example. Other 
times, different adventurers do different things. One ad- 
venturer might search a treasure chest while a second 
one examines an esoteric symbol engraved on a wall 
and a third one keeps watch for monsters. The players 
don't need to take turns, but the DM listens to every 
player and decides how to resolve those actions. 

Sometimes, resolving a task is easy. If an adventurer 
wants to walk across a room and open a door, the DM 
might just say that the door opens and describe what 
lies beyond. But the door might be locked, the floor 
might hide a deadly trap, or some other circumstance 
might make it challenging for an adventurer to com- 
plete a task. In those cases, the DM decides what hap- 
pens, often relying on the roll of a die to determine the 
results of an action. 

3. The DM narrates the results of the adventurers’ 
actions. Describing the results often leads to another 
decision point, which brings the flow of the game right 
back to step 1. 

This pattern holds whether the adventurers are cau- 
tiously exploring an ancient ruin, talking to a devious 
prince, or locked in combat against a dragon. In certain 
situations, particularly combat, the action is more struc- 
tured and the players (and DM) do take turns choosing 
and resolving actions. But most of the time, play is 
fluid, adapting to the circumstances of the adventure. 

Often the action of an adventure takes place wholly 
in the imagination of the players and DM, relying on the 
DM's verbal descriptions to set the scene. Some DMs. 
like to use music, art, or recorded sound effects to help 
set the mood, and many players and DMs alike adopt 
different voices for the various adventurers, monsters, 
and other characters they play in the game. Sometimes, 
a DM might lay out a map and use tokens or miniature 
figures to represent each creature involved in a scene 
to help the players keep track of where everyone is. 


Halving 
Round down whenever the game requires you to halve 
a number. For example, if you halve 15, you get 7. 


2 21242 
Six Abilities 
Six abilities provide a quick game description of 


every characters and monster's physical and 
mental characteristics: 


Strength, measuring physical power 
Dexterity, measuring agility 

Constitution, measuring endurance 
Intelligence, measuring reasoning and memory 
Wisdom, measuring perception and insight 
Charisma, measuring force of personality 


Is a character muscle-bound and insightful? Brilliant 
and charming? Nimble and hardy? For each of the six 
abilities, a character or monster has an ability score 
to measure it, typic. 
turer can have a score as high as 20. A monster can 
have one as high as 50. 

The most important function of an ability score is 
providing an ability modifier that usually ranges from 
-1 (for a score of 8 or 9) to *4 (for a score of 18). This 
modifier applies to ability checks, saving throws, and 
attack rolls, as explained in the next few sections. 


Ability Scores and Modifiers 


Score Modifier Score Modifier 
1 -5 16-17 +3 
2-3 -4 18-19 +4 
4-5 -3 20-21 +5 
6-7 -2 22-23 +6 
8-9 -1 24-25 +7 
10-11 +0 26-27 +8 
12-13 + 28-29 +9 


14-15 +2 30 410 


ally ranging from 3 to 18. An adven- 


The Core Rule 

Does an adventurer's sword swing hurt a dragon or 
bounce off its iron-hard scales? Does the ogre believe 
an outrageous bluff? Can a character swim across a 
raging river? Does a character avoid the main blast of 
a fireball or take full damage from the blaze? When the 
outcome of an action is uncertain, the game relies on 
the roll of a d20 to determine success or failure. Ability 
checks, attack rolls, and saving throws are the three 
main kinds of d20 rolls. For each one, you roll a d20, 
add any bonuses or penalties, and compare the total to 
a target number. If the total equals or exceeds it, you 
succeed. Here are those steps in more detail: 

1. Roll the die. Roll a d20, then add the modifier of 
the ability score used for the roll. A Dexterity saving 
throw, for instance, uses your Dexterity modifier. 

2. Apply circumstantial bonuses and penalties. 
A spell, a particular circumstance, or some other effect 
might give a bonus or penalty to the roll. 

3. Compare the total to a target number. If the 
total equals or exceeds the target number, the roll is 
a success. Otherwise, it's a failure. The target number 
for an ability check or saving throw is called a Difficulty 
Class (DC). For an attack roll, it's the Armor Class (AC) 
of the target being attacked. The DM is usually the 
one who determines target numbers and tells players 
whether their ability checks, attack rolls, and saving 
throws succeed or fail. 

Ability checks and saving throws are discussed 
in more detail below. Attack rolls are described in 
chapter 2. 


Advantage and Disadvantage 


Sometimes a special ability or spell tells you that you 
have advantage or disadvantage on a d20 roll. When 
that happens, you roll a second d20 when you make 
the roll. Use the higher of the two rolls if you have ad- 
vantage, and use the lower roll if you have disadvan- 
tage. For example, if you have disadvantage and roll a 
17 and a 5, you use the 5. If you instead have advan- 
tage and roll those numbers, you use the 17. 

If multiple situations affect a roll and each one grants 
advantage or imposes disadvantage on it, you don't 
roll more than one additional d20. If two favorable sit- 
uations grant advantage, for example, you still roll only 
one additional d20. 

If circumstances cause a roll to have both advantage 
and disadvantage, you are considered to have neither 
of them, and you roll one d20. This is true even if mul- 
tiple circumstances impose disadvantage and only one 
grants advantage or vice versa. In such a situation, you 
have neither advantage nor disadvantage. 

When you have advantage or disadvantage and some- 
thing in the game, such as the halfling's Lucky trait, lets 
you reroll the d20, you can reroll only one of the dice. 
You choose which one. For example, if a halfling has 
advantage on an ability check and rolls a 1 and a 15, 
the halfling could use the Lucky trait to reroll the 1. 


Ability Checks 


An ability check tests a character's or monster's in- 
nate talent and training in an effort to overcome a 
challenge. The DM calls for an ability check when a 
character or monster attempts an action (other than 
an attack) that has a chance of failure. A character 
might make a Strength check to force open a door, an 
Intelligence check to make sense of clues, or a Wisdom 
check to notice goblins lying in ambush along the road. 
When the outcome is uncertain, the dice determine 
the results. 

To make an ability check, roll a d20 and add the ap- 
propriate ability modifier. You use your Strength modi- 
fier for a Strength check, for example. 

If the total equals or exceeds the DC, the ability 
check is a success. Otherwise, the check is a failure, 
which means the character or monster makes no prog- 
ress toward the objective or makes progress combined 
with a setback determined by the DM. 

Often, the adventure book tells the DM what kind of 
check a character can make, the DC of the check, and 
what happens if the character succeeds or fails. Since 
characters often try unpredictable things, though, the 
adventure book also provides advice to help the DM 
decide what kind of ability check and DC to use in a 
particular situation. 


Proficiency Bonus 

You might be particularly skilled at a certain kind of 
task related to an ability check. The character sheets 
list each character's proficiencies with skills and special 
tools, and the monster statistics in appendix B show 
monsters' proficiencies. If you have proficiency in a 
skill, such as Acrobatics or Deception (explained be- 
low), you add your proficiency bonus to ability checks 
you make that use that skill. If you have proficiency 
with a certain tool, such as thieves’ tools or mason's 
tools, you add your proficiency bonus to ability checks 
you make using those tools. You never add your profi- 
ciency bonus more than once to the same d20 roll. 


Contests 

Sometimes one character's or monster's efforts are di- 
rectly opposed to another's. This can occur when both 
of them are trying to do the same thing and only one 
can succeed, such as attempting to snatch up a magic 
ring that has fallen on the floor. This situation also ap- 
plies when one of them is trying to prevent the other 
one from accomplishing a goal—for example, when a 
monster tries to force open a door that an adventurer 
is holding closed. In situations like these, the outcome 
is determined by a special form of ability check, called 
a contest. 

Both participants in a contest make ability checks ap- 
propriate to their efforts. They apply all appropriate bo- 
nuses and penalties, but instead of comparing the total 
to a DC, they compare the totals of their two checks. 

The participant with the higher check total wins the 
contest. That character or monster either succeeds at 
the action or prevents the other one from succeeding. 


If the contest results in a tie, the situation remains 
the same as it was before the contest. Thus, one con- 
testant might win the contest by default. If two charac- 
ters tie in a contest to snatch a ring off the floor, neither 
character grabs it. In a contest between a monster try- 
ing to open a door and an adventurer trying to keep the 
door closed, a tie means that the door remains shut. 


Skills 

Each ability covers a broad range of capabilities, includ- 
ing skills that a character can be proficient in. A skill 
represents a specific aspect of an ability score, and a 
character's proficiency in a skill demonstrates a focus 
on that aspect. 

A Dexterity check might, for example, reflect a char- 
acter's attempt to pull off an acrobatic stunt, to palm 
an object, or to stay hidden. Each of these aspects of 
Dexterity has an associated skill: Acrobatics, Sleight of 
Hand, and Stealth, respectively. So a character who has 
proficiency in the Stealth skill is particularly good at 
Dexterity checks related to sneaking and hiding. 

Sometimes, the DM might ask for an ability check us- 
ing a specific skill—for example, “Make a Wisdom (Per- 
ception) check.” At other times, a player might ask the 
DM if proficiency in a particular skill applies to a check. 
In either case, proficiency in a skill means a character 
can add his or her proficiency bonus to ability checks 
that use that skill. Without proficiency in the skill, the 
character makes a normal ability check. 

For example, if a character attempts to climb up a 
dangerous cliff, the Dungeon Master might ask for a 
Strength (Athletics) check. If the character is proficient 
in Athletics, the character's proficiency bonus is added 
to the Strength check. If the character lacks that profi- 
ciency, he or she just makes a Strength check. 


Strength Checks 


Strength measures bodily power, athletic training, and 
the extent to which you can exert raw physical force. 
A Strength check can model any attempt to lift, push, 
pull, or break something, to force your body through-a 
space, or to otherwise apply brute force to a situation. 
The Athletics skill reflects aptitude in certain kinds of 
Strength checks. 

Athletics. Your Strength (Athletics) check covers 
difficult situations you encounter while climbing, 
jumping, or swimming. Examples include the 
following activities: 


You attempt to climb a sheer or slippery cliff, avoid 
hazards while scaling a wall, or cling to a surface 
while something is trying to knock you off. 

You try to jump an unusually long distance or pull 
off a stunt midjump. 

You struggle to swim or stay afloat in treacherous 
currents, storm-tossed waves, or areas of thick 
seaweed. Or another creature tries to push or 

pull you underwater or otherwise interfere with 
your swimming. 


Dexterity measures physical agility, reflexes, and bal- 
ance. A Dexterity check can model any attempt to 
move nimbly, quickly, or quietly, or to keep from falling 
on tricky footing. The Acrobatics, Sleight of Hand, and 
Stealth skills reflect aptitude in certain kinds of Dexter- 
ity checks. 

Acrobatics. Your Dexterity (Acrobatics) check covers 
your attempt to stay on your feet in a tricky situation, 
such as when you're trying to run across a sheet of 
ice, balance on a tightrope, or stay upright on a rock- 
ing ship's deck. The DM might also call for a Dexterity 
(Acrobatics) check to see if you can perform acrobatic 
stunts, including dives, rolls, somersaults, and flips. 

Sleight of Hand. Whenever you attempt an act 
of legerdemain or manual trickery, such as planting 
something on someone else or concealing an object on 
your person, make a Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check. 
The DM might also call for a Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) 
check to determine whether you can lift a coin purse 
off another person or slip something out of another 
person's pocket. 

Stealth. Make a Dexterity (Stealth) check when you 
attempt to conceal yourself from enemies, slink past 
guards, slip away without being noticed, or sneak up on 
someone without being seen or heard. 


HIDING AND VISION 
The DM decidi 
Nhen you try to hi e Stealth) check. Until you 
are discovered or y 
by the Wisdom (Percer 
rches for signs of your E 
You can't hide fr 
ju make noise 
56), you give away your pc 
n, so it can al y to hide 
noticed, however, and it still t 
Passive Perception. W 
one will notice 


nether such a creature notice 
Dexterity (Stealth) check with t 


quals 10 + the 

r penalties. If the 
vantage, add 5. F Ntage, subtract 5 
For example, if a 1st-level chara: 


tion, he or she 


ry 
can see in on area, w 
In a lightly obscured c 

» foliage—creatures have disadvantage on Wisdorr 

3 heavily obscured 


in appendix ¢ 


1: HOW TO PLAY 


Constitution measures health, stamina, and vital force. 
Constitution checks are uncommon, and no skills apply 
to Constitution checks, because the endurance this 
ability represents is largely passive rather than involving 
a specific effort on the part of a character or monster. 

A Constitution check can model your attempt to push 
beyond normal limits, however. 


Intelligence measures mental acuity, strength of recall, 
and the ability to reason. An Intelligence check comes 
into play when you need to draw on logic, education, 
memory, or deductive reasoning. The Arcana, History, 
Investigation, Nature, and Religion skills reflect aptitude 
in certain kinds of Intelligence checks. 

Arcana. Your Intelligence (Arcana) check measures 
your ability to recall lore about spells, magic items, 
eldritch symbols, magical traditions, the planes of exis- 
tence, and the inhabitants of those planes. 

History. Your Intelligence (History) check measures 
your ability to recall lore about historical events, leg- 
endary people, ancient kingdoms, past disputes, recent 
wars, and lost civilizations. 

Investigation. When you look around for clues and 
make deductions based on those clues, you make an 
Intelligence (Investigation) check. You might deduce the 
location of a hidden object, discern from the appear- 
ance of a wound what kind of weapon dealt it, or deter- 
mine the weakest point in a tunnel that could cause it 
to collapse. Poring through ancient scrolls in search of 
a hidden fragment of knowledge might also call for an 
Intelligence (Investigation) check. 

Nature. Your Intelligence (Nature) check measures 
your ability to recall lore about terrain, plants and ani- 
mals, the weather, and natural cycles. 

Religion. Your Intelligence (Religion) check mea- 
sures your ability to recall lore about deities, rites 
and prayers, religious hierarchies, holy symbols, and 
the practices 
of secret cults. 


Wisdom reflects how attuned you are to the world 
around you, representing perceptiveness and intuition. 
A Wisdom check might reflect an effort to read body 
language, understand someone's feelings, notice things 
about the environment, or care for an injured person. 
The Animal Handling, Insight, Medicine, Perception, 
and Survival skills reflect aptitude in certain kinds of 
Wisdom checks. 

Animal Handling. When there is any question 
whether you can calm down a domesticated animal, 
keep a mount from getting spooked, or intuit an ani- 
mal's intentions, the DM might call for a Wisdom (An- 
imal Handling) check. You also make a Wisdom (Ani- 
mal Handling) check to control your mount when you 
attempt a risky maneuver. 

Insight. Your Wisdom (Insight) check decides 
whether you can determine the true intentions of a 
creature, such as when searching out a lie or predicting 


someone's next move. Doing so involves gleaning clues 
from body language, speech habits, and changes in 
mannerisms. 

Medicine. A Wisdom (Medicine) check lets.you try to 
stabilize a dying companion or diagnose an illness. 

Perception. Your Wisdom (Perception) check lets 
you spot, hear, or otherwise detect the presence of 
something. It measures your general awareness of 
your surroundings and the keenness of your senses. 
For example, you might try to hear a conversation 
through a closed door, eavesdrop under an open win- 
dow, or hear monsters moving stealthily in the forest. 
Or you might try to spot things that are obscured or 
easy to miss, whether they are orcs lying in ambush 
on a road, thugs hiding in the shadows of an alley, or 
candlelight under a closed secret door. 

Survival. The DM might ask you to make a Wisdom 
(Survival) check to follow tracks, hunt wild game, quide 
your group through frozen wastelands, identify signs 
that owlbears live nearby, predict the weather, or avoid 
quicksand and other natural hazards. 


Charisma Checks 


Charisma measures your ability to interact effectively 
with others. It includes such factors as confidence and 
eloquence. A Charisma check might arise when you try 
to influence or entertain others, when you try to make 
an impression or tell a convincing lie, or when you are 
navigating a tricky social situation. The Deception, In- 
timidation, Performance, and Persuasion skills reflect 
aptitude in certain kinds of Charisma checks. 

Deception. Your Charisma (Deception) check de- 
termines whether you can convincingly hide the truth, 
either verbally or through your actions. This deception 
can encompass everything from misleading others 
through ambiguity to telling outright lies. Typical sit- 
uations include trying to fast-talk a quard, con a mer- 
chant, earn money through gambling, pass yourself 
off in a disguise, dull someone's suspicions with false 
assurances, or maintain a straight face while telling a 
blatant lie. 

Intimidation. When you attempt to influence some- 
one through overt threats, hostile actions, and physical 
violence, the DM might ask you to make a Charisma 
(Intimidation) check. Examples include trying to pry in- 
formation out of a prisoner, convincing street thugs 
to back down from a confrontation, or using 
the edge of 
a broken bottle to convince a sneering vizier to recon- 
sider a decision. 

Performance. Your Charisma (Performance) check 
determines how well you can delight an audience with 
music, dance, acting, storytelling, or some other form 
of entertainment. 

Persuasion. When you attempt to influence some- 
one or a group of people with tact, social graces, or 


good nature, the DM might ask you to make a Charisma 


(Persuasion) check. Typically, you use persuasion when 
acting in good faith, to foster friendships, make cor- 

dial requests, or exhibit proper etiquette. Examples of 
persuading others include convincing a chamberlain to 


let your party see the king, negotiating peace between 
warring tribes, or inspiring a crowd of townsfolk. 


Saving Throws 


A saving throw, or save, represents an attempt to resist 
or avoid a spell, a trap, a poison, a disease, or a simi- 
lar threat. You don't normally decide to make a saving 
throw; you are forced to do so because your character 
or monster is at risk of harm. 

To make a saving throw, roll a d20 and add the appro- 
priate ability modifier. For example, you use your Dex- 
terity modifier for a Dexterity saving throw. 

A saving throw can be modified by a situational bo- 
nus or penalty and can be affected by advantage and 
disadvantage, as determined by the DM. 

A character sheet indicates a character's saving throw 
proficiencies. As with skill proficiencies, proficiency in a 
saving throw lets a character add his or her proficiency 
bonus to saving throws made using a particular ability 
score. Some monsters have saving throw proficien- 
cies as well. 

The Difficulty Class for a saving throw is determined 
by the effect that causes it. When a spell allows a 
saving throw, for instance, the DC for that save is de- 
termined by the caster's spellcasting ability and profi- 
ciency bonus. 

The result of a successful or failed saving throw is 
also detailed in the effect that forces the save. Usually, 
a successful save means that a character or monster 
suffers no harm, or reduced harm, from an effect. 


den object such as a se- 


u to make 
to find t 


ou might other: 


any chance 


Battle often erupts when adventurers face their foes, whether the enemies are savage monsters or cunning 
villains. This chapter provides the rules you need for such combat. The rules address you, the player or 
Dungeon Master. The Dungeon Master controls all the monsters and nonplayer characters involved in 
combat, and each other player controls an adventurer. "You" can also mean the character or monster that 


you control. 


The Order of Combat 


typical combat encounter is a clash between two 
sides, a flurry of weapon swings, feints, parries, foot- 
work, and spellcasting. The game organizes the chaos 
of combat into a cycle of rounds and turns. A round 
represents about 6 seconds in the game world. During 
a round, each participant in a battle takes a turn. 

The order of turns is determined at the beginning of a 
combat encounter, when yone rolls initiative. Once 
everyone has taken a turn, the fight continues to the 
next round if neither side has defeated the other. 


1. Determine surprise. The DM determines whether 
anyone involved in the combat encounter is 
surprised, 

2. Establish positions. The DM decides where all the 
characters and monsters are located. Given the ad- 
venturers’ marching order or their stated positions in 
the room or other location, the DM figures out where 
the adversaries are—how far away and in what 
direction. 

3. Roll initiative. Everyone involved rolls initiative, de- 
termining the order of combatants’ turns. 

4. Take turns. Each participant in the battle takes a 
turn in initiative order. 

5. Begin the next round. When everyone involved in 
the combat has had a turn, the round ends. Repeat 
step 4 until the fighting stops. 


Surprise 


The DM determines who might be surprised. If nei 

ther side tries to be stealthy, they automaticall 

each other. Otherwise, the DM compares the Dexterity 

(Stealth) checks of anyone hiding with the passive Wis- 
dom (Perception) score of each creature on the oppos- 

ing side. Any character or monster that doesn’t notice a 
threat ed at the start of the encoun! 

If you're s ed, you can't move or take an action 
on your first turn of the combat, and you can't take a 
reaction until that turn ends. A member of a group can 
be surprised even if the other members aren't. 


Initiative 


Initiative determines the order of turns during combat. 
When combat starts, every participant makes a Dexter 
ity check to determine their place in the initiative order. 
The DM makes one roll for an entire group of identical 
creatures, so each member of the group acts at the 
same time 

The DM ranks the combatants in order from the one 
with the highest Dexterity check total to the one with 
the lowest. This is the order (called the initiative order) 
in which they act during each round. The initiative order 
remains the same from round to round. 

If a tie occurs, the DM decides the order among tied 
DM-controlled creatures, and the players decide the 
der among their tied characters. The DM can decide the 
order if the tie is between a monster and a player char- 
acter. Optionally, the DM can have the tied characte 
and monsters each roll a d20 to determine the ord 
highest roll going first. 


Your Turn 


On your turn, you can move a distance up to your 
speed and take one action. You decide whether to 
move first or take your action first. Your speed—some- 
times called your walking 'speed—is noted on your char- 
acter sheet. 

The most common actions you can take are de- 
scribed in the "Actions in Combat" section later in this 
chapter. Many class features and other abilities provide 
additional options for your action. 

The "Movement and Position" section later in this 
chapter gives the rules for your move. 

You can forgo moving, taking an action, or doing 
anything at all on your turn. If you can't decide what to 
do on your turn, consider taking the Dodge or Ready 
action, as described in "Actions in Combat." 


Bonus Actions 
Various class features, spells, and other abilities let you 
take an additional action on your turn called a bonus 
action. The Bardic Inspiration feature, for example, 
allows a bard to take a bonus action. You can take a 
bonus action only when a special ability, spell, or other 
feature of the game allows you to do something as a 
bonus action. You otherwise don't have one to take. 

You can take only one bonus action on your turn, so 
you must choose which bonus action to use when you 
have more than one available. 

You choose when to take the bonus action during the 
turn, unless the bonus action's timing is specified. 


Other Activity on Your Turn 
Your turn can include a variety of flourishes that require 
neither your action nor your move. 

You can communicate however you are able, through 
brief utterances and gestures, as you take your turn. 

You can also interact with one object or feature of 
the environment for free, during either your move or 
your action. For example, you could open a door during 
your move as you stride toward a foe, or you could 
draw your weapon as part of the same action you use 
to attack. 

If you want to interact with a second object, you need 
to use your action. Some magic items and other special 
objects always require an action to use, as stated 
in their descriptions. 

The DM might require you to use an action for any of 
these activities when it needs special care or when it 
presents an unusual obstacle. For instance, the DM 
could reasonably expect you to use an action to open a 
stuck door or turn a crank to lower a drawbridge. 


Reactions 


Certain special abilities, spells, and situations allow you 
to take a special action called a reaction. A reaction is 
an instant response to a trigger of some kind, which 
can occur on your turn or on someone else's. The op- 
portunity attack, described later in this chapter, is the 
most common type of reaction. 


When you take a reaction, you can't take another one 
until the start of your next turn. If the reaction inter- 
rupts another creature's turn, that creature can con- 
tinue its turn right after the reaction. 


Movement and Position 


In combat, characters and monsters are in constant 
motion, often using movement and position to gain the 
upper hand. On your turn, you can move a distance up 
to your speed. You can use as much or as little of your: 
speed as you like on your turn, following the rules here. 
Your move can include jumping, climbing, and swim- 
ming, as described in chapter 3. 


Breaking Up Your Move 


You can break up your movement on your turn, using 
some of your speed both before and after your ac- 
tion. For example, if you have a speed of 50 feet, you 
can move 10 feet, search for a trap door, and then 
move 20 feet. 

Similarly, if you take an action that includes more 
than one weapon attack, you can break up your move- 
ment even further by moving between those attacks. 

If you have more than one speed, such as your walk- 
ing speed and a flying speed, you can switch back and 
forth between your speeds during your move. Whenever 
you switch, subtract the distance you've already moved 
from the new speed. The result determines how much 
farther you can move. For example, if you have a speed 
of 50 and a flying speed of 60 because a wizard cast 
the fly spell on you, you could fly 20 feet, then walk 10 
feet, and then leap into the air to fly 50 feet more. 


Difficult Terrain 


Combatants are often slowed down by difficult terrain. 
Low furniture, rubble, undergrowth, steep stairs, Snow, 
and shallow bogs are examples of difficult terrain. The 
space of another creature, whether hostile or not, also 
counts as difficult terrain. 

Every foot of movement in difficult terrain costs 1 
extra foot. This rule is true even if multiple things in a 
space count as difficult terrain. 

Being Prone 

Combatants often find themselves lying on the ground, 
either because they are knocked down or because they 
throw themselves down. In the game, they are prone, a 
condition described in appendix C. 

You can drop prone without using any of your speed. 
Standing up takes more effort; doing so costs an 
amount of movement equal to half your speed. For 
example, if your speed is 50 feet, you must spend 15 
feet of movement to stand up. You can't stand up if you 
don't have enough movement left or if your speed is 0. 

To move while prone, you must crawl or use magic 
such as teleportation. Every foot of movement while 
crawling costs 1 extra foot. Crawling 1 foot in difficult 
terrain, therefore, costs 5 feet of movement. 


Moving Around Other Creatures 
You can move through a nonhostile creature's space. 
In contrast, you can move through a hostile creature's 
space only if it is at least two sizes larger or smaller 
than you (creature sizes are detailed in appendix B). 
Whether a creature is a friend or an enemy, you can't 
willingly end your move in its space. 

If you move out of an enemy's reach, you provoke an 
opportunity attack, as explained later in the chapter. 


Actions in Combat 


When you take your action on your turn, you can take 
one of the actions presented here, an action you gained 
from your class or a special feature, or an action that 
you improvise. When you describe an action not de- 
tailed elsewhere in the rules, the DM tells you whether 
that action is possible and what kind of roll you need to 
make, if any, to determine success or failure. 


Attack 

The most common action to take in combat is the At- 
tack action, whether you are swinging a sword, firing an 
arrow from a bow, or brawling with your fists. 

With this action, you make one melee or ranged at- 
tack. See the "Making an Attack" section for the rules 
that govern attacks. 

Certain features, such as the Extra Attack feature that 
the paladin and the ranger get at 5th level, allow you to 
make more than one attack with this action. 


When you take the Dash action, you gain extra move- 
ment for the current turn. The increase equals your 
speed, after applying any modifiers. With a speed of 50 
feet, for example, you can move up to 60 feet on your 
turn if you dash. 

Any increase or decrease to your speed changes 
this additional movement by the same amount. If your 
speed of 50 feet is reduced to 15 feet, for instance, you 
can move up to 30 feet this turn if you dash. 


Disengage 
If you take the Disengage action, your movement 


doesn't provoke opportunity attacks for the rest 
of the turn. 


Dodge = 
When you take the Dodge action, you focus entirely on 
avoiding attacks. Until the start of your next turn, any 


attack roll made against you has disadvantage if you 
can see the attacker, and you make Dexterity saving 
throws with advantage. You lose this benefit if you are 
incapacitated (as explained in appendix C) or if your 
speed drops to 0. 

Help 

You can lend your aid to another creature in the com- 
pletion of a task. When you take the Help action, the 
creature you aid gains advantage on the next ability 
check it makes to perform the task you are helping 
with, provided that it makes the check before the start 
of your next turn. 

Alternatively, you can aid a friendly creature in attack- 
ing a creature within 5 feet of you. You feint, distract 
the target, or in some other way team up to make your 
ally's attack more effective. If your ally attacks the tar- 
get before your next turn, the first attack roll is made 
with advantage. 


Hide — 
When you take the Hide action, you make a Dexterity 
(Stealth) check in an attempt to hide, following the 

rules in chapter 1 for hiding. If you succeed, you gain 


certain benefits, as described in the "Unseen Attackers 
and Targets" section later in this chapter. 


Ready 


Sometimes you want to get the jump on a foe or wait 
for a particular circumstance before you act. To do 

so, you can take the Ready action on your turn, which 
lets you act using your reaction before the start of your 
next turn. 

First, you decide what perceivable circumstance will 
trigger your reaction. Then, you choose the action you 
will take in response to that trigger, or you choose to 
move up to your speed in response to it. Examples in- 
clude “If the cultist steps on the trapdoor, I'll pull the 
lever that opens it," and "If the goblin steps next to me, 
1 move away." 

When the trigger occurs, you can either take your 
reaction right after the trigger finishes or ignore 
the trigger. 

A spell must have a casting time of 1 action to be 
readied, and holding onto the spell's magic until you 
release it with your reaction requires concentration 
(explained in chapter 4). For example, if you are con- 
centrating on the hold person spell and ready magic 
missile, your hold person spell ends, and if you take 
damage before you release magic missile with your re- 
action, your concentration might be broken. 


Search 
When you take the Search action, you devote your at- 
tention to finding something. Depending on the nature 
of your search, the DM might have you make a Wis- 
dom (Perception) check or an Intelligence (Investiga- 
tion) check. 


Use an Object 


vou normally interact with an object while doing some- 
thing else, such as when you draw a sword as part of an 
attack. When an object requires your action for its use, 
you take.the Use an Object action. This action is also 
useful when you want to interact with more than one 
object on your turn. 


Making an Attack 


Whenever you make an attack roll, you're making an 
attack. Whether you're striking with a melee weapon, 
firing a weapon at range, or making an attack roll as 
part of a spell, an attack has the following structure: 


1. Choose a target. Pick a target within your attack's 
range: a creature, an object, or a location. 

2. Determine modifiers. The DM determines 
whether the target has cover and whether you have 
advantage or disadvantage against the target. In 
addition, spells, special abilities, and other effects 
can apply penalties, bonuses, advantage, or disad- 
vantage to your attack roll. 

3. Resolve the attack. You make the attack roll. On 
a hit, you roll damage, unless the particular attack 
specifies otherwise. 


Attack Rolls 


When you make an attack, your attack roll determines 
whether the attack hits or misses. To make an attack 
roll, roll a d20 and add the appropriate modifiers. If the 
total of the roll plus modifiers equals or exceeds the 
target's Armor Class (AC), the attack hits. Each char- 
acter's AC is shown on the character sheet, and each 
monster's AC is in the monster's stat block. 


Modifiers to the Roll 

When a character makes an attack roll, the two most 
common modifiers to the roll are an ability modifier 
and the character's proficiency bonus. A monster uses 
whatever modifier is provided in its stat block. 

Ability Modifier. The ability modifier used for a me- 
lee weapon attack is Strength, and the ability modifier 
used for a ranged weapon attack is Dexterity. Weapons 
that have the finesse or thrown property break this rule. 

Some spells also require an attack roll. The cleric and 
the ranger use Wisdom when making a spell attack, 
the bard and the paladin use Charisma, and the wizard 
uses Intelligence. 

Proficiency Bonus. If you are proficient with the 
weapon you are attacking with, you can add your profi- 
ciency bonus to the attack roll. 

When you make a spell attack, you add your profi- 
ciency bonus to the attack roll. 


Rolling 1 or 20 
Sometimes fate blesses or curses a combatant, causing 
the novice to hit or the veteran to miss. 

If the d20 roll for an attack is a 20, the attack hits 
regardless of any modifiers or the target's AC. In ad- 
dition, the attack is a critical hit, as explained later in 
the chapter. 


If the d20 roll for an attack is a 1, the attack misses 
regardless of any modifiers or the target's AC. 


Unseen Attackers and Targets 


Combatants often try to escape their foes’ notice 
by hiding, casting the invisibility spell, or lurking - 
in darkness. 

When you attack a target that you can't see, you have 
disadvantage on the attack roll. This is true whether 
you're guessing the target’s location or you're targeting 
a creature you can hear but not see. If the target isn't in. 
the location you targeted, you automatically miss, but 
the DM typically just says that the attack missed, not 
whether you guessed the target's location correctly. 

When a creature can't see you, you have advantage 
on attack rolls against it. 

If you are hidden—both unseen and unheard—when 
you make an attack, you give away your location when 
the attack hits or misses. 


Ranged Attacks 


When you make a ranged attack, you fire a bow or a 
crossbow, hurl a handaxe, or otherwise send projectiles 
to strike a foe at a distance. A monster might shoot 
spines from its tail. Many spells also involve making a 
ranged attack. 


Range 

You can make ranged attacks only against targets 
within a specified range. If a ranged attack, such as one 
made with a spell, has a single range, you can't attack 
a target beyond this range. Some ranged attacks, such 
as those made with a longbow or a shortbow, have two. 
ranges. The smaller number is the normal range, and 
the larger number is the long range. Your attack roll has 
disadvantage when your target is beyond normal range, 
and you can't attack a target beyond the long range. 


Ranged Attacks in Close Combat 
Aiming a ranged attack is more difficult when a foe is 
next to you. When you make a ranged attack with a 
weapon, a spell, or some other means, you have dis- 
advantage on the attack roll if you are within 5 feet of 
a hostile creature who can see you and who isn't in- 
capacitated. 


Melee Attacks 


Used in hand-to-hand combat, a melee attack allows 
you to attack a foe within your reach. Most creatures 
have a 5-foot reach and can thus attack targets within 
5 feet of them. Certain creatures (typically those larger 
than a human) have greater reach, as noted in their de- 
scriptions. 

Instead of using a weapon to make a melee weapon 
attack, you can use an unarmed strike: a punch, kick, 
head-butt, or similar forceful blow (none of which count 
as weapons). On a hit, an unarmed strike deals blud- 
geoning damage equal to 1 + your Strength modifier. 
You are proficient with your unarmed strikes. 


Opportunity Attacks 


In a fight, everyone is constantly watching for enemies 
to drop their quard. You can rarely move heedlessly 
past your foes without putting yourself in danger; doing 
So provokes an opportunity attack. 

You can make an opportunity attack when a hostile 
creature that you can see moves out of your reach. To 
make the opportunity attack, you use your reaction to 
make one melee attack against the provoking creature. 
The attack interrupts the provoking creature's move- 
ment, occurring right before it leaves your reach. 

You can avoid provoking an opportunity attack by 
taking the Disengage action. You also don't provoke 
an opportunity attack when you teleport or when 
Someone or something moves you without using your 
movement, action, or reaction. For example, you don’t 
provoke an opportunity attack if an explosion hurls 
you out of a foe's reach or if gravity causes you to fall 
past an enemy. 


Two-Weapon Fighting 


When you take the Attack action and attack with a light 
melee weapon that you're holding in one hand, you 
gain a bonus action you can use to attack with a differ- 
ent light melee weapon that you're holding in the other 
hand. You don't add your ability modifier to the damage 
of the bonus attack, unless that modifier is negative. 

If either weapon has the thrown property, you can 
throw the weapon, instead of making a melee at- 
tack with it. 


Cover 


Walls, trees, creatures, and other obstacles can provide 
cover during combat, making a target more difficult 

to harm. A target can benefit from cover only when an 
attack or other effect originates on the opposite side of 
the cover. 

There are three degrees of cover. If a target is be- 
hind multiple sources of cover, only the most pro- 
tective degree of cover applies; the degrees aren't 
added together. 

A target with half cover has a *2 bonus to AC and 
Dexterity saving throws. A target has half cover if an 
obstacle blocks at least half of its body. The obstacle 
might be a low wall, a large piece of furniture, a nar- 
row tree trunk, or a creature, whether that creature 
is an enemy 
or a friend. 

A target with three-quarters cover has a *5 bo- 
nus to AC and Dexterity saving throws. A target has 
three-quarters cover if about three-quarters of it is cov- 
ered by an obstacle. The obstacle might be a portcullis, 
an arrow slit, or a thick tree trunk. 

A target with total cover can't be targeted directly 
by an attack or a spell, although some spells can reach 
such a target by including it in an area of effect. A 
target has total cover if it is completely concealed by 
an obstacle. 


Damage and Healing 


Injury and the risk of death are constant companions of 
those who explore the worlds of D&D. 
Hit Points 
Hit points represent a combination of physical and 
mental durability, the will to live, and luck. Creatures 
with more hit points are more difficult to kill. Those 
with fewer hit points are more fragile. 
A creature's current hit points (usually just called 
hit points), can be any number from the creature's hit 
point maximum down to O. This number changes fre- 
quently as a creature takes damage or receives healing. 
Whenever a creature takes damage, that damage is 
subtracted from its hit points. The loss of hit points has 
no effect on.a creature's capabilities until the creature 
drops to 0 hit points. 


Damage Rolls 

Each weapon and spell notes the damage it deals on a 
successful attack. You roll the damage die or dice, add 
any modifiers, and apply the damage to your target. 
Magic weapons, special abilities, and other factors can 
grant a bonus to damage. In addition, certain special 
abilities give extra damage represented by bonus dice. 
With a penalty, it's possible to deal O damage, but not 
negative damage. 

When attacking with a weapon, you add your ability 
modifier—the same modifier used for the attack roll— 
to the damage. A spell tells you which dice to roll for 
damage and whether to add any modifiers. If a spell or 
other effect deals damage to more than one target at 
the same time, roll the damage once for all of them. 


Critical Hits 

When you score a critical hit, you get to roll extra dice 
for the attack's damage against the target. Roll all of 
the attack's damage dice twice and add them together. 
Then add any relevant modifiers as normal. To speed 
up play, you can roll all the damage dice at once. 

For example, if you score a critical hit with a dagger, 
roll 2d4 for the damage, rather than 1d4, and then add 
your relevant ability modifier. If the attack involves 
other damage dice, such as from the paladin's Divine 
Smite feature, you roll those dice twice as well. 


Damage Types 
Different attacks and damaging spells deal different 
types of damage. Damage types have no rules of their 
own, but other rules, such as damage resistance, rely 
on the types. 

The types are acid, bludgeoning, cold, fire, force, 
lightning, necrotic, piercing, poison, psychic, radiant, 
slashing, and thunder. 


Damage Resistance and 
Vulnerability 


Some creatures and objects are exceedingly difficult or 
unusually easy to hurt with certain types of damage. 

If a creature or an object has resistance.tó a damage 
type, damage of that type is halved against it. If a crea- 
ture or an object has vulnerability to a damage type; 
damage of that type is doubled against it. 

Resistance and then vulnerability are applied after all 
other modifiers to damage. For example, a creature has 
resistance to bludgeoning damage and is hit by an at- 
tack that deals 25 bludgeoning damage. The creature is 
also within a magical aura that reduces all damage by 
5. The 25 damage is first reduced by 5 and then halved, 
so the creature takes 10 damage. 

Multiple instances of resistance or vulnerability that 
affect the same damage type count as only one in- 
stance. For example, if a creature has resistance to fire 
damage as well as resistance to all nonmagical dam- 
age, the damage of a nonmagical fire is reduced by half 
against the creature, not reduced by three-quarters. 


Healing 

Unless it results in death, damage isn't permanent, 
and even death is reversible through powerful magic. 
Rest can restore a creature's hit points (as explained 
in chapter 5), and magical methods such as a cure 
wounds spell or a potion of healing can remove dam- 
age in an instant. 

When a creature receives healing of any kind, hit 
points regained are added to its current hit points. A 
creature's hit points can't exceed its hit point max- 
imum, so any hit points regained in excess of this 
number are lost. A creature that has died can't regain 
hit points until magic, such as a revivify spell, has re- 
stored it to life. 


Dropping to 0 Hit Points 
When you drop to 0 hit points, you either die outright or 
fall unconscious, as explained in the following sections. 
Most DMs have a monster die the instant it drops to 
O hit points, rather than having it fall unconscious and 
make death saving throws. 
Mighty villains and special nonplayer characters 
are common exceptions; the DM might have them 
fall unconscious and follow the same rules as player 
characters. 


Instant Death 

Massive damage can kill you instantly. When damage 
reduces you to O hit points and there is damage re- 
maining, you die if the remaining damage equals or 
exceeds your hit point maximum. For example, a cleric 
with a maximum of 12 hit points currently has 6 hit 
points. If she takes 18 damage from an attack, she is 
reduced to 0 hit points, but 12 damage remains. Be- 
cause the remaining damage equals her hit point maxi- 
mum, the cleric dies. 


Falling Unconscious 

If damage reduces you to 0 hit points and fails to kill 
you, you fall unconscious (see appendix C). This uncon- 
Sciousness ends if you regain any hit points. 


Death Saving Throws 

Whenever you start your turn with O hit points, you 
must make a special saving throw, called a death sav 
ing throw, to determine whether you creep closer to 
death or hang onto life. Unlike other saving throws, this: 
one isn't tied to any ability score. You are in the hands 
of fate now, aided only by spells and features that im- 
prove your chances of succeeding on a saving throw. 

Roll a d20. If the roll is 10 or higher, you succeed. 
Otherwise, you fail. A success or failure has no effect 
by itself. On your third success, you become stable (see 
below). On your third failure, you die. The successes 
and failures don't need to be consecutive; keep track 
of both until you collect three of a kind. The number of 
both is reset to zero when you regain any hit points or 
become stable. 

Rolling 1 or 20. When you make a death saving 
throw and roll a 1 on the d20, it counts as two failures. 
If you roll a 20 on the d20, you regain 1 hit point. 

Damage at 0 Hit Points. If you take any damage 
while you have O hit points, you suffer a death sav- 
ing throw failure. If the damage is from a critical hit, 
you suffer two failures instead. If the damage equals 
or exceeds your hit point maximum, you suffer in- 
stant death. 


Stabilizing a Creature 

The best way to save a creature with O hit points is to 
heal it. If healing is unavailable, the creature can at 
least be stabilized so that it isn't killed by a failed death 
saving throw. 

You can use your action to administer first aid to an 
unconscious creature and attempt to stabilize it, which 
requires a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Medicine) check. 

A stable creature doesn't make death saving throws, 
even though it has O hit points, but it does remain un- 
conscious. The creature stops being stable, and must 
start making death saving throws again, if it takes any 
damage. A stable creature that isn't healed regains 1 
hit point after 1d4 hours. 


Knocking a Creature Out 


Sometimes an attacker wants to incapacitate a foe, 
rather than deal a killing blow. When an attacker re- 
duces a creature to O hit points with a melee attack, 
the attacker can knock the creature out. The attacker 
can make this choice the instant the damage is dealt. 
The creature falls unconscious and is stable. 


CHAPTER 53 AIDWIENTURING 


Whether delving into a dungeon, trekking through wilderness, or navigating a teeming city, 
adventurers need rest, and they seek advancement and gear. This chapter gives rules for travel 
and resting, describes rewards, and details equipment that might help the characters survive. 


Over the course of an adventure, the characters might 
travel across wide areas, on trips that could take days. 
The DM can usually summarize this travel without cal- 
culating exact distances or travel times: “You travel 
through the forest and find the old ruin late in the eve- 
ning of the third day.” Characters can walk about 24 
miles in a day. 


The adventurers should establish a marching order. A 
character might occupy the front rank, a middle rank, 
or the back rank. The characters in the front and back 
rank are keeping watch for danger, while those in the 
middle might be making a map, navigating, or gath- 
ering food for the characters to eat when they make 
camp. If the group encounters monsters or other 
threats, it's important for the DM to know where each 
character is located. 


A journey overland or through a dungeon often requires 
an adventurer to jump, climb, or swim. 


When you make a long jump, you cover a number of 
feet up to your Strength score if you move at least 10 
feet on foot immediately before the jump. When you 
make a standing long jump, you can leap only half that 
distance. Either way, each foot you clear on the jump 
costs a foot of movement. In some circumstances, 
your DM might allow you to make a Strength (Athletics) 
check to jump farther than you normally can. 


CHAPTER 3: 


This rule assumes that the height of your jump 
doesn't matter, such as a jump across a stream or 
chasm. At your DM's option, you must succeed on a DC 
10 Strength (Athletics) check to clear a low obstacle (no 
taller than a quarter of the jump's distance). Otherwise, 
you hit it. 

When you land in difficult terrain, you must succeed 
on a DC 10 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check to land on your 
feet. Otherwise, you land prone. 


When you make a high jump, you leap into the air a 
number of feet equal to 3 * your Strength modifier 
(minimum of 0 feet) if you move at least 10 feet on foot 
immediately before the jump. When you make a stand- 
ing high jump, you can jump only half that distance. 
Either way, each foot you clear on the jump costs a foot 
of movement. In some circumstances, your DM might 
allow you to make a Strength (Athletics) check to jump 
higher than you normally can. 


While climbing or swimming, each foot of movement 
costs 1 extra foot (2 extra feet in difficult terrain), un- 
less a creature has a climbing or swimming speed. At 
the DM's option, climbing a slippery surface or one 
with few handholds requires a successful Strength 
(Athletics) check. Similarly, gaining any distance in 
rough water might require a successful Strength (Ath- 
letics) check. 


Resting 


Heroic as they might be, adventurers can't spend every 
hour of the day in the thick of exploration, social inter- 
action, and combat. They need rest—time to sleep and 
eat, tend their wounds, refresh their minds and spir- 
its for spellcasting; and brace themselves for further 
adventure. 

Adventurers, as well as other creatures, can take 
short rests in the midst of a day and a long rest 
to end it. 


Short Rest 


A short rest is a period of downtime, at least 1 hour 
long, during which a character does nothing more 
strenuous than eating, drinking, reading, and tending 
to wounds. 

A character can spend one or more Hit Dice during 
a short rest, up to the character's maximum number 
of Hit Dice, which is equal to the character's level (the 
character sheets show each adventurer's Hit Dice). 
For each Hit Die spent in this way, the player rolls the 
die and adds the character's Constitution modifier to 
it. The character regains hit points equal to the total 
(minimum of 0). The player can decide to spend an 
additional Hit Die after each roll. A character regains 
some spent Hit Dice upon finishing a long rest, as ex- 
plained below. 
Long Rest 
A long rest is a period of extended downtime, at least 8 
hours long, during which a character sleeps for at least 
6 hours and performs no more than 2 hours of light 
activity, such as reading, talking, eating, or standing 
watch. If the rest is interrupted by a period of strenuous 
activity—at least 1 hour of walking, fighting, casting 
spells, or similar adventuring activity—the character 
must begin the rest again to benefit from it. 

At the end of a long rest, a character regains all lost 
hit points. The character also regains spent Hit Dice, up 
to a number of dice equal to half of the character's to- 
tal number of them (minimum of one die). For example, 
if a character has eight Hit Dice, he or she can regain 
four spent Hit Dice upon finishing a long rest. 

A character can't benefit from more than one long 
rest in a 24-hour period, and a character must have 
at least 1 hit point at the start of the rest to gain 
its benefits. 


Rewards 


As characters adventure and overcome challenges, 
they're rewarded for their efforts by the treasure they 
find and the experience they earn. 

A monster's lair might contain a chest of coins, and a 
goblin raider might carry some of its ill-gotten gains. As 
characters acquire treasure, they can divide it as they 
see fit (dividing it equally among all the characters in 
the party is standard practice), and they can spend it on 
improved equipment or other supplies. 

Experience points (XP) are an abstract 
measurement of a character's learning and growth 


in the game. As characters progress through 

an adventure, they receive XP when they defeat 
monsters, complete milestones, and overcome other 
challenges. An XP-award for the party is divided 
equally among the characters. 


Experience Proficiency 
Points Level Bonus 
0 1 +2 
300 2 +2 
900 3 +2 
2,700 4 +2 
6,500 5 +3 


Once a character reaches a specified experience 
point total, he or she advances in capability. This ad- 
vancement is called gaining a level; a character goes 
from Ist level to 2nd level, and so on up to 20th level 
(this set goes to 5th level). Upon gaining a level, a char- 
acter gains additional hit points and class features, as 
shown on the character sheets included in this set. 


Equipment 


Proper equipment can mean the difference between 
life and death in a dangerous environment such as 

an ancient dungeon or untamed wilderness. Armor 
and weapons are essential in combat, and a variety of 
other tools and supplies are useful for exploring dun- 
geons, ruins, and the wilds. This section describes the 
equipment that the characters have when they start the 
adventure and additional items they can buy with the 
treasure they acquire along the way. 


Carrying Capacity — ] 
A character's Strength score determines the maximum 
weight the character can carry and still move, provided 
that the weight is distributed across the body. Multiply 
a character's Strength by 15 to determine the weight (in 
pounds) that the character can carry. A character carry- 
ing more than this weight has a speed of 0. 


Armor and Shields 


Adventurers have access to a wide range of armor 
types. Armor falls into three categories in the game: 
light armor, medium armor, and heavy armor. Many 
warriors supplement their armor with a shield. 

The adventurers presented on the character sheets 
are already equipped with armor, and each character's 
Armor Class is calculated using the information in this 
chapter. You can use this information to upgrade your 
character’s armor as you acquire treasure. 


Armor Proficiency 

Anyone can put on a suit of armor or strap a shield 

to an arm. Only those proficient with the armor know 
how to wear it effectively, however. Your class deter- 
mines what types of armor you have proficiency with: 
the cleric and the paladin can wear any armor and 

use shields, the ranger can use shields and wear any 
armor except heavy armor, the bard is limited to light 
armor, and the wizard isn't proficient with any armor or 
shields at all. 

If you wear armor that you lack proficiency with, you 
have disadvantage on any ability check, saving throw, 
or attack roll that involves Strength or Dexterity, and 
you can't cast spells. 


Armor 
Armor 
Armor Cost Class (AC) Weight 
Light Armor 
Leather 10gp me 101b. 
Studded 45 gp 12* 131b. 
leather 
Medium Armor 
Hide 10 9 (23 121b. 
Chain shirt 50 gp 13°* 20 Ib. 
Scale mail 50 gp 4 45 Ib. 
Breastplate 400 gp m“ 201b. 
Heavy Armor 
Ring mail 30gp 14 40 Ib. 
Chain mail 759p 16 551b. 
Splint 200 gp v 60 Ib. 
Shield 
Shield l0gp +2 61b. 


* You add your Dexterity modifier to your Armor Class when 
you wear this armor. 

** You aad your Dexterity modifier, to a maximum of «2, to 
your Armor Class when you wear this armor. 


Light Armor 

Light armor is favored by anyone who likes to be 
sneaky, because it lets them make the best use of their 
Dexterity and doesn't interfere with stealthy movement. 
When you wear light armor, you add your Dexterity 
modifier to the number shown on the table to deter- 
mine your Armor Class. 


Leather armor consists of chest and shoulder pro- 
tectors made of stiffened leather, with lighter and more 
flexible protection for the rest of the body. Studded 
leather is reinforced with close-set rivets or spikes. 


Medium Armor 

Medium armor offers more protection than light armor, 
but it also impairs movement more. When you wear 
medium armor, you add your Dexterity modifier, to a 
maximum of +2, to the number shown on the table to 
determine your Armor Class. If your Dexterity is 16 or 
higher, you still add only 2. 

Hide is a crude armor made from thick furs and 
pelts. A chain shirt is made from interlocking metal 
rings and commonly worn under clothing. Scale mail 
consists of a leather coat and leggings covered with 
overlapping scales of metal. You have disadvantage on 
Dexterity (Stealth) checks while wearing scale mail. A 
breastplate is a fitted metal chest piece worn with sup- 
ple leather. 


Heavy Armor 

Heavy armor offers the best protection, and it re- 
quires extensive training to master. The cleric and the 
paladin are proficient with it. When you wear heavy 
armor, you don't apply your Dexterity modifier to your 
Armor Class. You also have disadvantage on Dexterity 
(Stealth) checks. 

Ring mail is leather with heavy rings sewn into it. 
Chain mail is made of interlocking metal rings worn 
over a layer of quilted fabric. If your Strength is lower 
than 13, your speed is reduced by 10 feet while you 
wear chain mail. 

Splint armor is made of narrow vertical strips of 
metal riveted to a backing of leather that is worn 
over cloth padding. If your Strenath is lower than 
15, your speed is reduced by 10 feet while you wear 
splint armor. 


Shields 

A shield, made from wood or metal, is carried in one 
hand. Wielding a shield increases your Armor Class by 
2. You can benefit from only one shield at a time. 


Weapons 


The Weapons table shows the most common weapons 
used in the worlds of D&D, their price and weight, the 
damage they deal when they hit, and any special prop- 
erties they possess. Every weapon is classified as either 
melee or ranged. A melee weapon is used to attack a 
target within 5 feet of you, whereas a ranged weapon 
is used to attack a target at a distance. 


Weapon Proficiency 

Your class grants you proficiency with certain weapons 
or categories of weapons. The two main categories are 
simple and martial. Certain races, such as the dwarf 
race, also grant weapon proficiencies. Proficiency with a 
weapon allows you to add your proficiency bonus to the 
attack roll for any attack you make with that weapon. 


Weapons 


Name Cost Damage Weight Properties 
Simple Melee Weapons 
Club lsp 1d4 bludgeoning 21b. Light 
Dagger 2gp 1d4 piercing 11b. Finesse, light, thrown (range 20/60) 
Greatclub 2sp 1d8 bludgeoning 101b. Two-handed 
Handaxe 5gp do slashing 2Ib. Light, thrown (range 20/60) 
Javelin 5sp 1dé piercing 21b. Thrown (range 30/120) 
Light hammer 2gp 1d4 bludgeoning 2Ib. Light, thrown (range 20/60) 
Mace 5gp do bludgeoning Alb. — 
Quarterstaff 2sp 1d6 bludgeoning 4b. Versatile (1d8) 
Spear 1gp do piercing 31b. Thrown (range 20/60), versatile (1d8) 
Simple Ranged Weapons 
Crossbow, light 25gp 1d8 piercing 5Ib. Ammunition (range 80/320), loading, two-handed 
Shortbow 25gp do piercing 2b. Ammunition (range 80/320), two-handed 
Martial Melee Weapons 
Battleaxe 10 gp 1d8 slashing 4lb. Versatile (1d10) 
Greataxe 30 gp 1d12 slashing 7 Ib. Heavy, two-handed 
Greatsword 50gp 2d6 slashing 6b. Heavy, two-handed 
Longsword 15gp 1d8 slashing 3 Ib. Versatile (1d10) 
Maul 10 gp 2d6 bludgeoning 10 Ib. Heavy, two-handed 
Morningstar 15 gp 1d8 piercing 4b — 
Rapier 25gp 188 piercing 2Ib. Finesse 
Scimitar 25gp do slashing 3b. Finesse, light 
Shortsword 10gp 1d6 piercing 21b. Finesse, light 
Trident 5gp 1d6 piercing 4b Thrown (range 20/60), versatile (1d8) 
Warhammer 15gp 1d8 bludgeoning 21b. Versatile (1d10) 
Martial Ranged Weapons 
Crossbow, hand 75gp do piercing 31b. Ammunition (range 30/120), light, loading 
Crossbow, heavy 50gp 1d10 piercing 18 Ib. Ammunition (range 100/400), heavy, loading, two- 
handed 
Longbow 50gp ds piercing 21b. Ammunition (range 150/600), heavy, two-handed 


it, regardless of the number of attacks you can nor- 
mally make. 

Range. A weapon that can be used to make a ranged 
attack has a range shown in parentheses after the am- 
munition or thrown property. The range lists two num- 
bers. The first is the weapon's normal range in feet, and 
the second is the weapon's long range. When attacking 
a target beyond normal range, you have disadvantage 


Weapon Properties 
Many weapons have special properties related to their 
use, as shown in the Weapons table. 

Ammunition. You can use a weapon that has the 
ammunition property to make a ranged attack only if 
you have ammunition to fire from the weapon. Each 
time you attack with the weapon, you expend one piece 
of ammunition. At the end of the battle, you can re- 


cover half your expended ammunition by taking a min- 
ute to search the battlefield. 

If you employ such a weapon to make a melee attack, 
you use the weapon as an improvised weapon (see "Im- 
provised Weapons” later in the chapter). 

Finesse. When making an attack with a finesse 
weapon, you use your choice of your Strength or Dex- 
terity modifier for the attack and damage rolls. You 
must use the same modifier for both. 

Heavy. Small creatures, such as halflings, have dis- 
advantage on attack rolls with heavy weapons. 

Light. A light weapon is small and easy to handle, 
making it ideal for use when fighting with two weapons. 
See the rules for two-weapon fighting in chapter 2. 

Loading. Because of the time required to load this 
weapon, you can fire only one piece of ammunition 
from it when you use your action or reaction to fire 


on the attack roll. You can't attack a target beyond the 
weapon's long range. 

Thrown. |f a weapon has the thrown property, you 
can throw the weapon to make a ranged attack. If the 
weapon is a melee weapon, you use the same ability 
modifier for that attack roll and damage roll that you 
would use for a melee attack with the weapon. For ex- 
ample, if you throw a handaxe, you use your Strength, 
but if you throw a dagger, you can use either your 
Strength or your Dexterity, since the dagger has the fi- 
nesse property. 

Two-Handed. This weapon requires two hands when 
you attack with it. 

Versatile. This weapon can be used with one or 
two hands. A damage value in parentheses appears 
with the property—the damage when the weapon is 
used with two hands to make a melee attack. 


Improvised Weapons 

Sometimes characters don't have their weapons and 
have to attack with whatever is close at hand: a broken 
bottle, a table leg, a frying pan, or a wagon wheel. Most 
combatants are not proficient with such objects as 
weapons. In many cases, an improvised weapon is sim- 
ilar to an actual weapon and can be treated as such. 
For example, a table leg is akin to a club. At the DM's 
option, a character proficient with a weapon can use a 
similar object as if it were that weapon and use his or 
her proficiency bonus. 

An object that bears no resemblance to a weapon 
deals 1d4 damage (the DM assigns a damage type 
appropriate to the object). This is also the amount of 
damage dealt by a ranged weapon used as a melee 
weapon and by a melee weapon that lacks a range but 
is thrown. An improvised thrown weapon has a normal 
range of 20 feet and a long range of 60 feet. 


Miscellaneous Gear and Services 


This section describes items that have special rules. 
Candle. For | hour, a candle sheds bright light in a 
5-foot radius and dim light for an additional 5 feet. 
Component Pouch. ^ component pouch is a small, 
watertight leather belt pouch that holds all the mate- 
rial components and other special items you need to 


Adventuring Gear 


Item Cost Weight 
Ammunition 

Arrows (20) 1gp 1 lb. 

Crossbow bolts (20) 1gp T^ Ib. 
Backpack 2gp 5b. 
Bedroll lgp 7 Ib. 
Bell 1gp — 
Blanket 5sp 3 lb. 
Book 25gp 51b. 
Candle lep — 
Carpenter's tools 8gp 6b. 
Case (for map or scroll) 1gp 11b. 
Chalk (1 piece) c E 
Chest 5gp 251b. 
Clothes, common 5sp Sib. 
Clothes, fine 15 9 6b. 
Component pouch 25 90 2Ib. 
Crowbar 2gp 51b. 
Grappling hook 2gp 4b. 
Hammer 1gp 31b. 
Hammer, sledge 2gp 10 b. 
Healer's kit 5gp 31b. 
Holy symbol 5gp 1b. 
Hourglass 25 gp 11b. 
Ink (1 ounce bottle) 10gp — 
Ink pen 2cp — 
Lantern, bullseye 10 gp 2Ib. 
Lantern, hooded 5gp 21b. 
Lock 10gp lib. 


Mason's tools 10gp 81b. 


cast your spells, except for those components that 
have a specific cost. See chapter 4 for more about 
spellcasting. 

Crowbar. Using a crowbar grants advantage to 
Strength checks where the crowbar's leverage can 
be applied. 

Healer's Kit. This kit is a leather pouch containing 
bandages, salves, and splints. The kit has ten uses. As 
an action, you can expend one use of the kit to stabi- 
lize a creature that has O hit points, without needing to 
make a Wisdom (Medicine) check. 

Holy Symbol. A holy symbol is a representation of a 
god or pantheon. It might be a silver amulet depicting a 
symbol commonly used to represent a deity, the same 
symbol carefully engraved or inlaid as an emblem on 
a shield, or a tiny box holding a fragment of a sacred 
relic. The cleric and the paladin can use a holy symbol 
to replace the material components of spells, except 
for those components that have a specific cost. To use 
the symbol in this way, the caster must hold it in hand, 
wear it visibly, or bear it emblazoned on a shield. See 
chapter 4 for more about spellcasting. 

Lantern, Bullseye. A bullseye lantern casts bright 
light in a 60-foot cone and dim light for an additional 
60 feet. Once lit, it burns for 6 hours on a flask (1 
pint) of oil. 


Item Cost Weight 
Mess kit 2sp 11b. 
Mirror, steel 5gp 1/21b. 
Oil (fiask) 1sp 11b. 
Paper (one sheet) 2sp = 
Parchment (one sheet) Isp — 
Perfume (vial) 5gp — 
Pick, miner's 2gp 101b. 
Piton 5cp 1/4 1b. 
Pot, iron 2gp 101b. 
Potion of healing 50 gp 1/2 Ib. 
Playing cards 5sp = 
Pouch 5sp T Ib. 
Rations (1 day) 5sp 21b. 
Robes lgp lb. 
Rope, hempen (50 feet) 1gp 101b. 
Rope, silk (50 feet) 10 gp 51b. 
Sack lep 2b. 
Sealing wax 5sp — 
Shovel 2gp Sib. 
Signal whistle 5cp E 
Signet ring 5gp — 
Spellbook 50gp 31b. 
Spike, iron (10) 1gp 51b. 
Tent, two-person 2gp 201b. 
Thieves’ tools 25 gp 11b. 
Tinderbox 5sp lib. 
Torch lep 11b. 
Waterskin 2sp 5 Ib. (full) 
Whetstone lop 11b. 


Lantern, Hooded. A hooded lantern casts bright 
light in a 30-foot radius and dim light for an additional 
30 feet. Once lit, it burns for 6 hours on a flask (1 pint) 
of oil. As an action; you can lower the hood, reducing 
the light to dim light in a 5-foot radius. 

Lock. A creature proficient with thieves' tóols can 
pick this lock with a successful-DC 15 Dexterity check. 
Better locks are available for higher prices. 

Oil. As an action, you can splash the oil in this flask 
onto a creature within 5 feet of you or throw it up to 
20 feet, shattering it on impact. Make a ranged attack 
against a target creature or object. On a hit, the target 
is covered in oil. If the target takes any fire damage 
before the oil dries (after 1 minute), the target takes 
an additional 5 fire damage from the burning oil. You 
can also pour a flask of oil on the ground to cover a 
5-foot-square area, provided that the surface is level. 
If lit, the oil burns for 2 rounds and deals 5 fire dam- 
age to any creature that enters the area or ends its 
turn in the area. A creature can take this damage only 
once per turn. 

Playing Cards. |f you are proficient with playing 
cards, you can add your proficiency bonus to ability 
checks you make to play a game with them. 

Potion of Healing. A character who drinks the 
magic, red fluid in this vial regains 2d4 * 2 hit points. 
Drinking or administering a potion takes an action. 

Rations. Compact, dry foods suitable for ex- 
tended travel, rations include jerky, dried fruit, hard- 
tack, and nuts. 

Rope. Rope, whether made of hemp or silk, has 2 hit 
points and can be burst with a DC 17 Strength check. 
Spellbook. Essential for wizards, a spellbook is a 
leather-bound tome with 100 blank vellum pages suit- 

able for recording spells. 

Thieves' Tools. This set of tools includes a small 
file, a set of lock picks, a small mirror mounted on a 
metal handle, a set of narrow-bladed scissors, and a 
pair of pliers. Proficiency with these tools lets you add 
your proficiency bonus to any ability checks you make 
to disarm traps or open locks. 

Tinderbox. This small container holds flint, fire 
Steel, and tinder (usually dry cloth soaked in light oil) 
used to kindle a fire. Using it to light a torch—or any- 


thing else with abundant, exposed fuel—takes an ac- 
tion. Lighting any other fire takes 1 minute. 

Torch. A torch burns for I hour, providing bright light 
in a 20-foot radius and dim light for an additional 20 
feet. If you make a melee attack with a burning torch 
and hit, it deals 1 fire damage. 


Mounts and Other Animals 


nem Cost 
Donkey or mule 8gp 
Horse, draft 50 gp 
Horse, riding 759p 


Tack and Harness 
Hem 
Bit and bridle 
Feed (per day) 
Saddle 
Pack 
Riding 
Saddlebags 
Stabling (per day) 


Speed 
40 ft. 
40 ft. 
60 ft. 


Cost 


2gp 
5cp 


5gp 
10 gp 
4gp 
5sp 


Food, Drink, and Lodging 


Item 
Ale 
Gallon 
Mug 
Inn stay (per day) 
Squalid 
Poor 
Modest 
Comfortable 
Wealthy 
Aristocratic 
Meals (per day) 
Squalid 
Poor 
Modest 
Comfortable 
Wealthy 
Aristocratic 
Wine 
Common (pitcher) 
Fine (bottle) 


Cost 


2sp 
4cp 


7cp 
lsp 
5sp 
8sp 
2gp 
4gp 


3cp 
6cp 
3sp 
5sp 
8sp 
2gp 


2sp 
10 gp 


Carrying 
Capacity 
420 Ib. 
540b. 
480 Ib. 


Weight 
11b. 
101b. 


151b. 
251b. 
8 Ib, 


CHAPTER 448 SIPIEILILCASTNING: 


Magic permeates the worlds of D&D and most often appears in the form of a spell. This chapter 
provides the rules for casting spells. Bards, clerics, paladins, rangers, and wizards have distinctive 
unique ways. Regardless of its 


A spell is a discrete magical effect, a single shaping of 
the magical energies that suffuse the multiverse into a 
specific, limited expression. In casting a spell, a charac- 
ter carefully plucks at the invisible strands of raw magic 
suffusing the world, pins them in place in a particular 
pattern, sets them vibrating in a specific way, and then 
releases them to unleash the desired effect—in most 
cases, all in the span of seconds. 

Spells can be versatile tools, weapons, or protective 
wards, They can deal damage or undo it, impose or 
remove conditions (see appendix C), drain life energy 
away, and restore life to the dead. 


Every spell in this set has a level from 0 to 3. A spell's 
level is a general indicator of how powerful it is, with 
the lowly (but still impressive) magic missile at Ist 
level and the devastating fireball at 3rd. (Spells of 
higher levels, up to 9th, exist in the world but aren’t in- 
cluded in this set.) Cantrips—simple but powerful spells 
that characters can cast almost by rote—are level O. 
The higher a spell's level, the higher level a spellcaster 
must be to use that spell. 

Spell level and character level don't correspond di- 
rectly. Typically, a character has to be at least 5th level, 
not 3rd level, to cast a 5rd-level spell. 


Before a spellcaster can use a spell, he or she must have 
the spell firmly fixed in mind. Clerics, paladins, and wiz- 
ards undergo a process of preparing spells. The number 
of spells a caster can have fixed in mind at any given 
time is shown on the character sheets. 


20 CHAPTER 4: SPELLCASTING 


A cleric, paladin, or wizard can change this list of pre- 
pared spells upon finishing a long rest (see chapter 3). 
Preparing a new list of spells requires time spent in med- 
itation or study: at least 1 minute per spell level for each 
spell on the list. 


Regardless of how many spells a caster knows or pre- 
pares, he or she can cast only a limited number of spells 
before resting. Manipulating the fabric of magic and 
channeling its energy into even a simple spell is phys- 
ically and mentally taxing, and higher-level spells are 
even more so. Thus, the character sheet for a spellcaster 
includes how many spell slots of each level the charac- 
ter can use at each character level. For example, at 5rd 
level, the wizard has four Ist-level slots and two 2nd- 
level slots. 

When a character casts a spell, he or she expends 
a slot of that spell’s level or higher, effectively “filling” 
a slot with the spell. You can think of a spell slot as a 
groove of a certain size—small for a Ist-level slot, larger 
for a spell of higher level. A Ist-level spell fits into a slot 
of any size, but a 3rd-level spell fits only in a slot that is 
at least 3rd level. So when the wizard casts magic mis- 
sile, a Ist-level spell, he or she spends a Ist-level slot 
and has three remaining. 

Finishing a long rest restores any expended spell slots. 

Some monsters have special abilities that let them cast 
spells without using spell slots. 


When a spellcaster casts a spell using a slot that is a 
higher level than the spell, the spell assumes the higher 
level for that casting. For instance, if a wizard casts 


magic missile using a 2nd-level slot, that magic missile 
is 2nd level. The spell effectively expands to fill the slot. 

Some spells, such as magic missile and cure 
wounds, have more powerful effects when cast at a 
higher level, as detailed in the spell's description. 


Cantrips 

A cantrip is a spell that can be cast at will, without us- 
ing a spell slot and without being prepared in advance. 
Repeated practice has fixed the spell in the caster's 
mind and infused the caster with the magic needed 

to produce the effect over and over. A cantrip's spell 
level is O. 


Rituals 


Certain spells have a special tag: ritual. Such a spell 
can be cast following the normal rules for spellcasting, 
or the spell can be cast as a ritual. The ritual version 
of a spell takes 10 minutes longer to cast than normal, 
and it doesn't expend a spell slot. 

A bard, cleric, or wizard can cast a spell as a ritual if 
the spell has the ritual tag. To do so, a bard must know 
the spell, a cleric must have the spell prepared, and a 
wizard must merely have the spell in their spellbook. 


2 

Casting a Spell 

When a character casts any spell, the rules here apply, 

regardless of the character's class or the spell's effects. 
Each spell description in this chapter begins with a 

block of information, including the spell's name, level, 

school of magic, casting time, range, components, 

and duration. The rest of a spell entry describes the 

spell's effect. 


Casting Time 
Most spells require a single action to cast, but some 


spells require a bonus action, a reaction, or much 
more time. 


Bonus Action 

A spell cast with a bonus action is especially swift. 
You must use a bonus action on your turn to cast the 
spell, provided that you haven't already taken a bonus 
action this turn. You can't cast another spell during 
the same turn, except for a cantrip with a casting time 
of 1 action. 


Reactions 

Some spells can be cast as reactions. These spells take 
a fraction of a second to bring about and are cast in 
response to some event. If a spell can be cast as a re- 
action, the spell description tells you exactly when you 
can do so. 


Longer Casting Times 

Certain spells (including spells cast as rituals) require 
more time to cast: minutes or even hours. When you 
cast a spell with a casting time longer than a single 
action or reaction, you must spend your action each 
turn casting the spell, and you must maintain your con- 
centration while you do so (see "Concentration" below). 
If your concentration is broken, the spell fails, but you 
don't expend a spell slot. If you want to try casting the 
spell again, you must start over. 


Range 
The target of a spell must be within the spell's range. For 
a spell like magic missile, the target is a creature. For a 
spell like fireball, the target is the point in space where 
the ball of fire erupts. 

Most spells have ranges expressed in feet. Some spells 
can target only a creature (including you) that you touch. 
Other spells, such as the shield spell, affect only you. 

These spells have a range of self. 

Spells that create cones or lines of effect that originate 
from you also have a range of self, indicating that the or- 
igin point of the spell's effect must be you (see "Areas of 
Effect" later in the this chapter). 

Once a spell is cast, its effects aren't limited by its 
range, unless the spell's description says otherwise. 


Components 


A spell's components are the physical requirements you 
must meet in order to cast it. Each spell's description in- 
dicates whether it requires verbal (V), somatic (S), or ma- 
terial (M) components. If you can't provide one or more 
of a spell's components, you are unable to cast the spell. 


Verbal (V) 

Most spells require the chanting of mystic words. 

The words themselves aren't the source of the spell's 
power; rather, the particular combination of sounds, 
with specific pitch and resonance, sets the threads of 
magic in motion. Thus, a character who is gagged or in 
an area of silence, such as one created by the silence 
spell, can't cast a spell with a verbal component: 


Somatic (S) 

Spellcasting gestures might include a forceful gesticu- 

lation or an intricate set of gestures. If a spell requires 

a somatic component, the caster must have free use of 
at least one hand to perform these gestures. 


Material (M) 
Casting some spells requires particular objects, speci- 
fied in parentheses in the component entry. A compo- 
nent pouch includes all the needed material components 
to cast spells, except those that have a gold piece cost 
shown in the spell. The holy symbol of a cleric or paladin 
replaces material components, again excepting those 
with a gold piece cost. If a cost is indicated, a character 
must purchase that specific component before casting 
the spell in question. 

If a spell specifies that the material component is con- 
sumed by the spell, the caster must provide this compo- 
nent for each casting of the spell. 


A spellcaster must have a hand free to access a spell's 
material components—or to hold a spellcasting focus— 
but it can be the same hand that he or she uses to per- 
form somatic components. 


Duration 


A spell's duration is the length of time the spell per- 
sists. A duration can be expressed in rounds, minutes, 
hours, or even years. A spell might specify that its ef- 
fects last until the spell is dispelled or the effects are 
destroyed. 


Instantaneous 

Many spells are instantaneous. The spell harms, heals, 
creates, or alters a creature or an object in a way that 
can't be dispelled, because its magic exists only for 
an instant. 


Concentration 

Some spells require you to maintain concentration in or- 
der to keep their magic active. If you lose concentration, 
such a spell ends. 

If a spell must be maintained with concentration, that 
fact appears in its Duration entry, and the spell specifies 
how long you can concentrate on it. You can end con- 
centration at any time (no action required). 

Normal activity, such as moving and attacking, doesn't 
interfere with concentration. The following factors can 
break concentration: 


Casting another spell that requires concentration. 
You lose concentration on a spell if you cast another 
spell that requires concentration. You can't concen- 
trate on two spells at once. 

Taking damage. Whenever you take damage while you 
are concentrating on a spell, you must make a Con- 
stitution saving throw to maintain your concentration. 
The DC equals 10 or half the damage you take, which- 
ever number is higher. If you take damage from multi- 
ple sources, such as an arrow and a dragon's breath, 
you make a separate saving throw for each source 
of damage. 

Being incapacitated or killed. You lose concentration 
on a spell if you are incapacitated (as explained in 
appendix C) or if you die. 


A typical spell requires you to pick one or more targets 
to be affected by the spell's magic. A spell's description 
tells you whether the spell targets creatures, objects, or 
a point of origin for an area of effect (described below). 


A Clear Path to the Target 
To target something, you must have a clear path to it, 
So it can't be behind total cover. 

If you place an area of effect at a point that you can't 
see and an obstruction, such as a wall, is between you 
and that point, the point of origin comes into being on 
the near side of that obstruction. 


Targeting Yourself 
If a spell targets a creature of your choice, you can 
choose yourself, unless the creature must be hostile or 


specifically a creature other than you. If you are in the 
area of effect of a spell you cast, you can target yourself. 


Areas of Effect 


Spells such as burning hands and fireball cover an 
area, allowing them to affect multiple creatures at once. 
A spell's description specifies its area of effect, which 

typically has one of four different shapes: cone, cube, 
line, or sphere. Every area of effect has a point of origin, 
a location from which the spell's energy erupts. The 
rules for each shape specify how you position its point of 
origin. Typically, a point of origin is a point in space, but 
some spells have an area whose origin is a creature or 
an object. 

A spell's effect expands in straight lines from the point 
of origin. If no unblocked straight line extends from the 
point of origin to a location within the area of effect, that 
location isn't included in the spell's area. To block one of 
these imaginary lines, an obstruction must provide total 
cover, as explained in chapter 2. 

The point of origin of an area of effect isn't included in 
the area, unless the area is a sphere. 


Cone 

A cone extends in a direction you choose from its point 
of origin. A cone's width at a given point along its length 
is equal to that point's distance from the point of origin. 
A cone's area of effect specifies its maximum length. 


Cube 

You select a cube's point of origin, which lies anywhere 
on a face of the cubic effect. The cube's size is ex- 
pressed as the length of each side. 


Line 
A line extends from its point of origin in a straight path 
up to its length and covers an area defined by its width. 


Sphere 

You select a sphere's point of origin, and the sphere ex- 
tends outward from that point. The sphere's size is ex- 

pressed as a radius in feet that extends from the point. 


throw to avoid some or all of a spell's effects. The spell 
specifies the ability that the target uses for the save and 
what happens on a success or failure. 

The DC to resist your spells equals 8 * your spellcast- 
ing ability modifier * your proficiency bonus. This num- 
ber is on the character sheets and in the statistics for a 
monster that casts spells. 


Attack Rolls 


Some spells require the caster to make an attack roll to 
determine whether the spell hits its target. Your attack 
bonus with a spell attack equals your spellcasting abil- 
ity modifier + your proficiency bonus. 

Most spell attacks are ranged attacks. Remember that 
you have disadvantage on a ranged attack roll if you are 
within 5 feet of an enemy that can see you and that isn't 
incapacitated (see chapter 2). 


Combining Magical Effects 


The effects of different spells add together while the 
durations of those spells overlap. The effects of the 
same spell cast multiple times don't combine, however. 
Instead; the most potent effect—such as the highest 
bonus—from those castings applies while their dura- 


tions overlap. 


For example, if a cleric and a paladin cast bless on the 
same target, that character gains the spell's benefit only 
once; he or she doesn't get to roll two bonus dice. 


Spell Lists 
Bard Spells 


Cantrips (0 Level) 
Light 

Mage Hand 
Prestidigitation 
Vicious Mockery 


1st Level 

Charm Person 
Comprehend Languages 
Cure Wounds 

Detect Magic 

Healing Word 

Identify 

Longstrider 

Sleep 

Thunderwave 


2nd Level 

Hold Person 
Invisibility 

Lesser Restoration 
Silence 
Suggestion 

Zone of Truth 


3rd Level 
Dispel Magic 
Fear 

Sending 

Speak with Dead 


Cleric Spells 


Cantrips (0 Level) 
Guidance 

Light 

Resistance 

Sacred Flame 
Thaumaturgy 


Ist Level 
Bless 
Command 
Cure Wounds 
Detect Magic 
Guiding Bolt 
Healing Word 
Inflict Wounds 
Protection from 
Evil and Good 
Sanctuary 
Shield of Faith 


2nd Level 

Aid 

Augury 

Hold Person 
Lesser Restoration 
Silence 

Spiritual Weapon 
Zone of Truth 


3rd Level 

Beacon of Hope 
Dispel Magic 

Mass Healing Word 
Protection from Energy 
Revivify 

Sending 

Speak with Dead 

Spirit Guardians 


Paladin Spells 


Ist Level 
Bless 
Command 
Cure Wounds 
Detect Magic 
Protection from 
Evil and Good 
Shield of Faith 


2nd Level 

Aid 

Lesser Restoration 
Magic Weapon 
Zone of Truth 


Ist Level 
Cure Wounds 
Detect Magic 
Hunter's Mark 
Longstrider 


2nd Level 

Lesser Restoration 
Pass without Trace 
Silence 


Wizard Spells 


Cantrips (0 Level) 
Light 
Mage Hand 


Prestidigitation 2nd Level 
Ray of Frost Blur 
Shocking Grasp Flaming Sphere 
Hold Person 

Ist Level Invisibility 
Burning Hands Magic Weapon 
Charm Person Misty Step 
Comprehend Languages. Suggestion 
Detect Magic 
Identify 3rd Level 
Longstrider Dispel Magic 
Mage Armor Fear 
Magic Missile Fireball 
Protection from Fly 

Evil and Good Lightning Bolt 
Shield Protection from Energy 
Sleep Sending 
Thunderwave 


Spells 
Presented in alphabetical order, these spells are used 
by characters and monsters in this set. 

Some of the spells cause conditions, including 
charmed, deafened, frightened, invisible, paralyzed, 
prone, restrained, and unconscious. Consult appendix 
C to learn a condition’s effects in the game. 


Aid 

2nd-level abjuration 
Casting Time: | action 
Range: 50 feet 


Components: V, S, M (a tiny strip of white cloth) 
Duration: 8 hours 


Your spell bolsters your allies with toughness and re- 
solve. Choose up to three creatures within range. Each 
target’s hit point maximum and current hit points in- 
crease by 5 for the duration. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 3rd level or higher, a target's hit points in- 
crease by an additional 5 for each slot level above 2nd. 


Augury 

2nd-level divination (ritual) 

Casting Time: | minute 

Range: Self 

Components: V, S, M (specially marked sticks, 
bones, or similar tokens worth at least 25 gp) 

Duration: Instantaneous 


By casting gem-inlaid sticks, rolling dragon bones, 
laying out ornate cards, or employing some 

other divining tool, you receive an omen from an 
otherworldly entity about the results of a specific 
course of action that you plan to take within the 
next 50 minutes. The DM chooses from the following 
possible omens: 


Weal, for good results 

Woe, for bad results 

Weal and woe, for both good and bad results 

Nothing, for results that are not especially 
good or bad 


The spell doesn’t take into account any possible cir- 
cumstances that might change the outcome, such as 


the casting of additional spells or the loss or gain of a 
companion. 

If you cast the spell two or more times before com- 
pleting your next long rest, there is a cumulative 25 per- 
cent chance for each casting after the first that you get 
a false reading. The DM makes this roll in secret. 


Beacon of Hope 
Srd-level abjuration 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: 50 feet 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


This spell bestows hope and vitality. Choose any num- 
ber of creatures within range. For the duration, each 
target has advantage on Wisdom saving throws and 
death saving throws, and regains the maximum num- 
ber of hit points possible from any healing. 


Bless 
Ist-level enchantment 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: 50 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a sprinkling of holy water) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You bless up to three creatures of your choice within 
range. Whenever a target makes an attack roll or a 
saving throw before the spell ends, the target can roll 
a d4 and add the number rolled to the attack roll or 
saving throw. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, you can target one ad- 
ditional creature for each slot level above Ist. 


Blur 


2nd-level illusion 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: Self 

Components: V 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


Your body becomes blurred, shifting and wavering to 
all who can see you. For the duration, any creature has 
disadvantage on attack rolls against you. An attacker 
is immune to this effect if it doesn't rely on sight, as 
with blindsight, or can see through illusions, as with 
truesight. 


Burning Hands 
Ist-level evocation 


Casting Time: | action 
Range: Self (15-foot cone) 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


As you hold your hands with thumbs touching and fin- 
gers spread, a thin sheet of flames shoots forth from 
your outstretched fingertips. Each creature in a 15-foot 
cone must make a Dexterity saving throw. A creature 
takes 3d6 fire damage on a failed save, or half as much 
damage on a successful one. 


The fire ignites any flammable objects in the area that 
are not being worn or carried. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the damage increases 
by 1d6 for each slot level above Ist. 


Charm Person 
Ist-level enchantment 


Casting Time: | action 
Range: 50 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: | hour 


You attempt to charm a humanoid you choose within 
range. It must make a Wisdom saving throw, and does 
so with advantage if you or your companions are fight- 
ing it. If it fails the saving throw, it is charmed by you 
until the spell ends or until you or your companions do 
anything harmful to it. The charmed creature regards 
you as a friendly acquaintance. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using 
a spell slot of 2nd level or higher, you can target one 
additional creature for each slot level above Ist. The 
creatures must be within 30 feet of each other when 
you target them. 


Command 
Ist-level enchantment 


Casting Time: | action 
Range: 60 feet 
Components: V 
Duration: | round 


You speak a one-word command to a creature you can 
see within range. The target must succeed on a Wis- 
dom saving throw or follow the command on its next 
turn. The spell has no effect if the target is undead, if it 
doesn't understand your language, or if your command 
is directly harmful to it. 

Some typical commands and their effects follow. 
You might issue a command other than one described 
here. If you do so, the DM determines how the target 
behaves. If the target is prevented from following your 
command, the spell ends. 


Approach. The target moves toward you by the short- 
est and most direct route, ending its turn if it moves 
within 5 feet of you. 

Drop. The target drops whatever it is holding and 
then ends its turn. 

Flee. The target spends its turn moving away from 
you by the fastest available means. 

Grovel. The target falls prone and then ends its turn. 

Halt. The target doesn't move and takes no actions. 
A flying creature stays aloft, provided that it is able 
to do so. If it must move to stay aloft, it flies the 
minimum distance needed to remain in the air. 


At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, you can affect one ad- 
ditional creature for each slot level above Ist. The crea- 
tures must be within 50 feet of each other when you 
target them. 


Comprehend Languages 
Ist-level divination (ritual) 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: Self 

Components: V, S, M (a pinch of soot and salt) 
Duration: | hour 


For the duration, you understand the literal meaning 
of any spoken language that you hear. You also under- 
stand any written language that you see, but you must 
be touching the surface on which the words are written. 
It takes about 1 minute to read one page of text. 

This spell doesn't decode secret messages in a text 
or any glyph, such as an arcane sigil, that isn't part of a 
written language. 


Cure Wounds 
Ist-level evocation 


Casting Time: | action 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


A creature you touch regains a number of hit points 
equal to 1d8 * your spellcasting ability modifier. This 
spell has no effect on undead or constructs. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the healing increases 
by 1d8 for each slot level above Ist. 


Detect Magic 


Istlevel divination (ritual) 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: Self 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


For the duration, you sense the presence of magic 
within 30 feet of you. If you sense magic in this way, 
you can use your action to see a faint aura around any 
visible creature or object in the area that bears magic, 
and you learn its school of magic, if any. 

The spell can penetrate most barriers, but it is 
blocked by 1 foot of stone, 1 inch of common metal, a 
thin sheet of lead, or 5 feet of wood or dirt. 


Dispel Magic 
Srd-level abjuration 
Casting Time: | action 
Range: 120 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


Choose one creature, object, or magical effect within 
range. Any spell of 3rd level or lower on the target ends. 
For each spell of 4th level or higher on the target, make 
an ability check using your spellcasting ability. The DC 
equals 10 * the spell's level. On a successful check, the 
spell ends. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, you automatically end 
the effects of a spell on the target if the spell's level is 
equal to or less than the level of the spell slot you used. 


Fear 
Srd-level illusion 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: Self (50-foot cone) 

Components: V, S, M (a white feather or the 
heart of a hen) 

Duration: Concentration, up to | minute 


You project a phantasmal image of a creature’s. worst 
fears. Each creature in a 50-foot cone must succeed on 
a Wisdom saving throw or drop whatever it is holding 
and become frightened for the duration. 

While frightened by this spell, a creature must take 
the Dash action and move away from you by the safest 
available route on each of its turns, unless there is 
nowhere to move. If the creature ends its turn in a loca- 
tion where it doesn't have line of sight to you, the crea- 
ture can make a Wisdom saving throw. On a successful 
save, the spell ends for that creature. 


Fireball 


Srd-level evocation 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: 150 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a tiny ball of bat quano 
and sulfur) 

Duration: Instantaneous 


A bright streak flashes from your pointing finger to a 
point you choose within range and then blossoms with 
a low roar into an explosion of flame. Each creature 
in a 20-foot-radius sphere centered on that point must 
make a Dexterity saving throw. A target takes 8d6 fire 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. 
The fire spreads around corners. It ignites flammable 
objects in the area that aren't being worn or carried. 
At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, the damage increases 
by 1d6 for each slot level above 3rd. 


Flaming Sphere 
2nd-level conjuration 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a bit of tallow, a pinch of brim- 
stone, and a dusting of powdered iron) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


A 5-foot-diameter sphere of fire appears in an unoccu- 
pied space of your choice within range and lasts for the 
duration. Any creature that ends its turn within 5 feet 
of the sphere must make a Dexterity saving throw. The 
creature takes 2d6 fire damage on a failed save, or half 
as much damage on a successful one. 

As a bonus action, you can move the sphere up to 50 
feet. If you ram the sphere into a creature, that creature 
must make the saving throw against the sphere's dam- 
age, and the sphere stops moving this turn. 

When you move the sphere, you can direct it over 
barriers up to 5 feet tall and jump it across pits up to 
10 feet wide. The sphere ignites flammable objects not 


being worn or carried, and it sheds bright light in a 20- 
foot radius and dim light for an additional 20 feet. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 3rd level or higher, the damage increases 
by 1d6 for each slot level above 2nd. 


Fly 


Srd-level transmutation 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (a wing feather from any bird) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


You touch a willing creature. The target gains a fly- 
ing speed of 60 feet for the duration. When the spell 
ends, the target falls if it is still aloft, unless it can 
stop the fall. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 


spell slot of 4th level or higher, you can target one addi- 


tional creature for each slot level above 3rd. 


Guidance 
Divination cantrip 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You touch one willing creature. Once before the spell 
ends, the target can roll a d4 and add the number 
rolled to one ability check of its choice. It can roll the 
die before or after making the ability check. The spell 
then ends. 


Guiding Bolt 
Ist-level evocation 


Casting Time: I action 
Range: 120 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: | round 


A flash of light streaks toward a creature of your choice 
within range. Make a ranged spell attack against the 
target. On a hit, the target takes 4d6 radiant damage, 
and the next attack roll made against this target before 
the end of your next turn has advantage, thanks to the 
mystical dim light glittering on the target until thei 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the damage increases 
by 1d6 for each slot level above Ist. 


Healing Word 


Ist-level evocation 


Casting Time: | bonus action 
Range: 60 feet 
Components: V 

Duration: Instantaneous 


A creature of your choice within range regains hit 
points equal to Ida + your spellcasting ability modifier. 
This spell has no effect on undead or constructs. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the healing increases 
by 1d4 for each slot level above Ist. 


Hold Person 
2nd-level enchantment 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a small, straight piece of iron) 
Duration: Concentration, up to j minute 


Choose a humanoid that you can see within range. 
The target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw 
or be paralyzed for the duration. At the end of each of 
its turns, the target can make another Wisdom saving 
throw. On a success, the spell ends on the target. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using 
a spell slot of 3rd level or higher, you can target one 
additional humanoid for each slot level above 2nd. The 
humanoids must be within 30 feet of each other when 
you target them. 


Hunter's Mark 
Ist-level divination 


Casting Time: | bonus action 
Range: 90 feet 

Components: V 

Duration: Concentration, up to | hour 


You choose a creature you can see within range and 
mystically mark it as your quarry. Until the spell ends, 
you deal an extra 1d6 damage to the target whenever 
you hit it with a weapon attack, and you have advantage 
on any Wisdom (Perception) or Wisdom (Survival) check 
you make to find it. If the target drops to O hit points 
before this spell ends, you can use a bonus action on a 
subsequent turn of yours to mark a new creature. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 3rd or 4th level, you can maintain your con- 
centration on the spell for up to 8 hours. When you use 
a spell slot of 5th level or higher, you can maintain your 
concentration on the spell for up to 24 hours. 


Identify 


Istlevel divination (ritual) 


Casting Time: | minute 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (a pearl worth at least 100 gp 
and an owl feather) 

Duration: Instantaneous 


You choose one object that you must touch throughout 
the casting of the spell. If it is a magic item or some 
other magic-imbued object, you learn its properties 
and how to use them, whether it requires attunement 
to use, and how many charges it has, if any. You learn 
whether any spells are affecting the item and what they 
are. If the item was created by a spell, you learn which 
spell created it. 

If you instead touch a creature throughout the 
casting, you learn what spells, if any, are currently af- 
fecting it. 


Inflict Wounds 
Ist-level necromancy 


Casting Time: | action 
Range: Touch 


Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


Make a melee spell attack against a creature you can 
reach. On a hit, the target takes 5d10 necrotic damage. 
At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the damage increases 

by 1d10 for each slot level above Ist. 


Invisibility 


2nd-level illusion 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (an eyelash encased in 
gum arabic) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


A creature you touch becomes invisible until the spell 
ends. Anything the target is wearing or carrying is in- 
visible as long as it is on the target's person. The spell 
ends early for a target that attacks or casts a spell. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 5rd level or higher, you can target one addi- 
tional creature for each slot level above 2nd. 


Lesser Restoration 
2nd-level abjuration 


Casting Time: | action 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You touch a creature and can end either one disease 
or one condition afflicting it. The condition can be 
blinded, deafened, paralyzed, or poisoned. 


Light 
Evocation cantrip 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, M (a firefly or phosphorescent moss) 
Duration: | hour 


You touch one object that is no larger than 10 feet in 
any dimension. Until the spell ends, the object sheds 
bright light in a 20-foot radius and dim light for an addi- 
tional 20 feet. The light can be colored as you like, and 
covering the object with something opaque blocks the 
light. The spell ends early if you cast it again or dismiss 
it as an action. 

If you target an object held or worn by a hostile crea- 
ture, that creature must succeed on a Dexterity saving 
throw to avoid the spell. 


Lightning Bolt 


Srd-level evocation 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: Self (100-foot line) 

Components: V, S, M (a bit of fur and a rod of amber, 
crystal, or glass) 

Duration: Instantaneous 


A stroke of lightning forming a line 100 feet long and 5 
feet wide blasts out from you in a direction you choose. 
Each creature in the line must make a Dexterity sav- 
ing throw. A creature takes 8d6 lightning damage 
on a failed save, or half as much damage on a suc- 
cessful one. 

The lightning ignites flammable objects in thé area 
that are not being worn or carried. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, the.damage increases 
by 1d6 for each slot level above 3rd. 


Longstrider 
Ist-level transmutation 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (a pinch of dirt) 
Duration: | hour 


You touch a creature. The target's speed increases by 
10 feet until the spell ends. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, you can target one ad- 
ditional creature for each slot level above Ist. 


Mage Armor 
Ist-level abjuration 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (a piece of cured leather) 
Duration: 8 hours 


You touch a willing creature who isn't wearing armor, 
and a protective magical force surrounds it until the 
spell ends. The target's base AC becomes 15 + its Dex- 
terity modifier. The spell ends early if the target dons 
armor or if you dismiss the spell as an action. 


Mage Hand 


Conjuration cantrip 


Casting Time: | action 
Range: 50 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: | minute 


A spectral, floating hand appears at a point you 
choose within range. The hand lasts for the duration 
or until you dismiss it as an action. The hand vanishes 
if it is ever more than 30 feet away from you or if you 
cast this spell again. 

You can use your action to control the hand. You 
can use the hand to manipulate an object, open an 
unlocked door or container, stow or retrieve an item 
from an open container, or pour the contents out of a 
vial. You can move the hand up to 30 feet each time 
you use it. 

The hand can’t attack, activate magic items, or carry 
more than 10 pounds. 


Magic Missile 
Ist-level evocation 


Casting Time: | action 
Range: 120 feet 


Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You create three glowing darts of magical force. Each 
dart hits a creature of your choice that you can see 
within range. A dart deals 1d4 + 1 force damage to its 
target. The darts all strike simultaneously, and you can 
direct them to hit one creature or several. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the spell creates one 
more dart for each slot level above Ist. 


Magic Weapon 

2nd-level transmutation 

Casting Time: | bonus action 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


You touch a nonmagical weapon. Until the spell ends, 
that weapon becomes a magic weapon with a +1 bonus 
to attack rolls and damage rolls. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, the bonus increases to 
*2. When you use a spell slot of 6th level or higher, the 
bonus increases to +5. 


Mass Healing Word 


Srd-level evocation 


Casting Time: | bonus action 
Range: 60 feet 

Components: V 

Duration: Instantaneous 


As you Call out words of restoration, up to six creatures 
of your choice that you can see within range regain hit 
points equal to 1d4 + your spellcasting ability modifier. 
This spell has no effect on undead or constructs. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, the healing increases by 
1d4 for each slot level above 3rd. 


Misty Step 


2nd-level conjuration 


Casting Time: | bonus action 
Range: Self 

Components: V 

Duration: Instantaneous 


Briefly surrounded by silvery mist, you teleport up to 30 
feet to an unoccupied space that you can see. 


Pass without Trace 
2nd-level abjuration 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: Self 

Components: V, S, M (ashes from a burned leaf of 
mistletoe and a sprig of spruce) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


A veil of shadows and silence radiates from you, mask- 
ing you and your companions from detection. For the 
duration, each creature you choose within 30 feet 

of you (including you) has a *10 bonus to Dexterity 


(Stealth) checks and can't be tracked except by magical 
means. A creature that receives this bonus leaves be- 
hind no tracks or other traces of its passage. 


Prestidigitation 


Transmutation cantrip 


Casting Time: | action 
Range: 10 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Up to 1 hour 


This spell is a minor magical trick that novice 
spellcasters use for practice. You create one of the 
following magical effects within range: 


You create an instantaneous, harmless sensory 
effect, such as a shower of sparks, a puff of wind, 
faint musical notes, or an odd odor. 

You instantaneously light or snuff out a candle, a 
torch, or a small campfire. 

You instantaneously clean or soil an object no 
larger than 1 cubic foot. 

You chill, warm, or flavor up to 1 cubic foot of non- 
living material for 1 hour. 

You make a color, a small mark, or a symbol appear 
on an object or a surface for 1 hour. 

You create a nonmagical trinket or an illusory image 
that can fit in your hand and that lasts until the end 
of your next turn. 


If you cast this spell multiple times, you can have up to 
three of its non-instantaneous effects active at a time, 
and you can dismiss such an effect as an action. 


Protection from Energy 
Srd-level abjuration 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


For the duration, the willing creature you touch has re- 
sistance to one damage type of your choice: acid, cold, 
fire, lightning, or thunder. 


Protection from Evil and Good 
Ist-level abjuration 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (holy water or powdered silver 
and iron, which the spell consumes) 

Duration: Concentration up to 10 minutes 


Until the spell ends, one willing creature you touch is 
protected against certain types of creatures: aberra- 
tions, celestials, elementals, fey, fiends, and undead. 

The protection grants several benefits. Creatures of 
those types have disadvantage on attack rolls against 
the target. The target also can't be charmed, fright- 
ened, or possessed by them. If the target is already 
charmed, frightened, or possessed by such a creature, 
the target has advantage on any new saving throw 
against the relevant effect. 


Ray. of Frost 


Evocation cantrip 


Casting Time: | action 
Range: 60 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


A frigid beam of blue-white light streaks toward a crea- 
ture within range. Make a ranged spell attack against 
the target. On a hit, it takes 1d8 cold damage, and 
its speed is reduced by 10 feet until the start of your 
next turn, 

The spell's damage increases by 1d8 when you reach 
5th level (2d8), 11th level (548), and 17th level (4d8). 


Resistance 
Abjuration cantrip 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (a miniature cloak) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You touch one willing creature. Once before the spell 
ends, the target can roll a d4 and add the number 
rolled to one saving throw of its choice. It can roll the 
die before or after making the saving throw. The spell 
then ends. 


Revivify 

Srd-level necromancy 

Casting Time: | action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (diamonds worth 500 gp, which 
the spell consumes) 

Duration: Instantaneous 


You touch a creature that has died within the last min- 
ute. That creature returns to life with 1 hit point. This 
spell can't return to life a creature that has died of old 
age, nor can it restore any missing body parts. 


Sacred Flame 
Evocation cantrip 


Casting Time: | action 
Range: 60 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


Flame-like radiance descends on a creature that you 
can see within range. The target must succeed on a 
Dexterity saving throw or take 1d8 radiant damage. The 
target gains no benefit from cover for this saving throw. 
The spell's damage increases by 1d8 when you reach 
5th level (2d8), 11th level (3d8), and 17th level (4d8). 


Sanctuary 
Ist-level abjuration 


Casting Time: | bonus action 

Range: 50 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a small silver mirror) 
Duration: | minute 


You ward a creature within range against attack. Until 
the spell ends, any creature who targets the warded 


creature with an attack or a harmful spell must first 
make a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the 
creature must choose a new target or lose the attack 
or spell. This spell doesn’t protect the warded creature 
from area effects, such as the explosion of a fireball. 
If the warded creature makes an attack or casts a 
spell that affects an enemy creature, this spell ends. 


Sending 


Srd-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Unlimited 

Components: V, S, M (a short piece of fine 
copper wire) 

Duration: | round 


You send a short message of twenty-five words or less 
to a creature with which you are familiar. The creature 
hears the message in its mind, recognizes you as the 
sender if it knows you, and can answer in a like manner 
immediately. The spell enables creatures with Intelli- 
gence scores of at least 1 to understand the meaning of 
your message. 

You can send the message across any distance and 
even to other planes of existence, but if the target is on 
a different plane than you, there is a 5 percent chance 
that the message doesn't arrive. 


Shield 


Ist-level abjuration 


Casting Time: | reaction, which you take when 
you are hit by an attack or targeted by the magic 
missile spell 

Range: Self 

Components: V, S 

Duration: | round 


An invisible barrier of magical force appears and pro- 
tects you. Until the start of your next turn, you have a 
*5 bonus to AC, including against the triggering attack, 
and you take no damage from magic missile. 


Shield of Faith 


Ist-level abjuration 


Casting Time: | bonus action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a small parchment with a bit of 
holy text written on it) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


A shimmering field appears and surrounds a creature of 
your choice within range, granting it a *2 bonus to AC 
for the duration. 


Shocking Grasp 
Evocation cantrip 
Casting Time: | action 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


Lightning springs from your hand to deliver a shock to 
a creature you try to touch. Make a melee spell attack 
against the target. You have advantage on the attack 


roll if the target is wearing armor made of metal. On a 
hit, the target takes 1d8 lightning damaae, and it can't 
take reactions until the start of its next turn. 

The spell's damage increases by 1d8 when you reach 
5th level (2d8), 11th level (3d8), and 17th level (4d8). 


Silence 
2nd-level illusion (ritual) 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: 120 feet 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


For the duration, no sound can be created within or 
pass through a 20-foot-radius sphere centered on a 
point you choose within range. Any creature or object 
entirely inside the sphere is immune to thunder dam- 
age, and creatures are deafened while entirely inside 
it. Casting a spell that includes a verbal component is 
impossible there. 


Sleep 


Ist-level enchantment 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: 90 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a pinch of fine sand, rose pet- 
als, or a cricket) 

Duration: | minute 


This spell sends creatures into a magical slumber. Roll 
5d8; the total is how many hit points of creatures this 
spell can affect. Creatures within 20 feet of a point 
you choose within range are affected in ascending 
order of their current hit points (ignoring unconscious 
creatures). 

Starting with the creature that has the lowest current 
hit points, each creature affected by this spell falls 
unconscious until the spell ends, the sleeper takes 
damage, or someone uses an action to shake or slap 
the sleeper awake. Subtract each creature's hit points 
from the total before moving on to the creature with 
the next lowest hit points. A creature's hit points must 
be equal to or less than the remaining total for that 
creature to be affected. 

Undead and creatures immune to being charmed ar- 
en't affected by this spell. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, roll an additional 2d8 
for each slot level above Ist. 


Speak with Dead 
Srd-level necromancy 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: 10 feet 

Components: V, S, M (burning incense) 
Duration: 10 minutes 


You grant the semblance of life and intelligence to 

a corpse of your choice within range, allowing it to 
answer the questions you pose. The corpse must still 
have a mouth and can't be undead. The spell fails 


if the corpse was the target of this spell within the 
last 10 days. 

Until the spell ends, you can ask the corpse up to 
five questions. The corpse knows only what it knew 
in life, including the languages it knew. Answers are 
usually brief, cryptic, or repetitive, and the corpse is 
under no compulsion to offer a truthful answer if you 
are hostile to it or it recognizes you as an enemy. This 
spell doesn’t return the creature’s soul to its body, 
only its animating spirit. Thus, the corpse can’t learn 
new information, doesn’t comprehend anything that 
has happened since it died, and can’t speculate about 
future events. 


Spirit Guardians 
Srd-level conjuration 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: Self (15-foot radius) 

Components: V, S, M (a holy symbol) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


You call forth spirits to protect you. They flit around you 
to a distance of 15 feet for the duration. If you are good 
or neutral, their spectral form appears angelic or fey 
(your choice). If you are evil, they appear fiendish. 
When you cast this spell, you can designate any num- 
ber of creatures you can see to be unaffected by it. 
An affected creature's speed is halved in the area, and 
when the creature enters the area for the first time on 
a turn or starts its turn there, it must make a Wisdom 
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 3d8 
radiant damage (if you are good or neutral) or 5d8 ne- 
crotic damage (if you are evil). On a successful save, 
the creature takes half as much damage. 
At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, the damage increases 
by 1d8 for each slot level above 3rd. 


Spiritual Weapon 
2nd-level evocation 


Casting Time: | bonus action 
Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S 

Duration: | minute 


You create a floating, spectral weapon within range that 
lasts for the duration or until you cast this spell again. 
When you cast the spell, you can make a melee spell at- 
tack against a creature within 5 feet of the weapon. On 
a hit, the target takes force damage equal to 1d8 + your 
spellcasting ability modifier. 

As a bonus action on your turn, you can move the 
weapon up to 20 feet and repeat the attack against a 
creature within 5 feet of it. 

The weapon can take whatever form you choose. 
Clerics of deities who are associated with a particular 
weapon (as St. Cuthbert is known for his mace and 
Thor for his hammer) make this spell’s effect resemble 
that weapon. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 3rd level or higher, the damage increases 
by 1d8 for every two slot levels above the 2nd. 


Suggestion 
2nd-level enchantment 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: 50 feet 

Components: V, M (d snake's tongue and either a bit 
of honeycomb or a drop of sweet oil) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 8 hours 


You suggest a course of activity (limited to a sentence 
or two) and magically influence a creature you can see 
within range that can hear and understand you. Crea- 
tures that can't be charmed are immune to this effect. 
The suggestion must be worded in such a manner as 
to make the course of action sound reasonable. Asking 
the creature to stab itself, throw itself onto a spear, im- 
molate itself, or do some other obviously harmful act 
ends the spell. 

The target must make a Wisdom saving throw. On 
a failed save, it pursues the course of action you de- 
Scribed to the best of its ability. The suggested course 
of action can continue for the entire duration. If the 
suggested activity can be completed in a shorter time, 
the spell ends when the subject finishes what it was 
asked to do. 

You can also specify conditions that will trigger a spe- 
cial activity during the duration. For example, you might 
suggest that a knight give her warhorse to the first beg- 
gar she meets. If the condition is not met before the 
spell expires, the activity is not performed. 

If you or any of your companions damage the target, 
the spell ends. 


Thaumaturgy 


Transmutation cantrip 


Casting Time: | action 
Range: 50 feet 
Components: V 
Duration: Up to | minute 


You manifest a minor wonder, a sign of supernatural 
power, within range. You create one of the following 
magical effects within range: 


Your voice booms up to three times as loud as nor- 
mal for 1 minute. 

You cause flames to flicker, brighten, dim, or change 
color for 1 minute. 

You cause harmless tremors in the ground 

for 1 minute. 

You create an instantaneous sound that originates 
from a point of your choice within range, such as 

a rumble of thunder, the cry of a raven, or omi- 
nous whispers. 

You instantaneously cause an unlocked door or win- 
dow to fly open or slam shut. 

You alter the appearance of your eyes for 1 minute. 


If you cast this spell multiple times, you can have up to 
three of its I-minute effects active at a time, and you 
can dismiss such an effect as an action. 


Thunderwave 
Ist-level evocation 


Casting Time: | action 
Range: Self (15-foot cube) 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


A wave of thunderous force sweeps out from you. Each 
creature in a 15-foot cube originating from you must 
make a Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, a 
creature takes 2d8 thunder damage and is pushed 10 
feet away from you. On a successful save, the creature 
takes half as much damage and is not pushed. 

In addition, unsecured objects that are completely 
within the area of effect are automatically pushed 10 
feet away from you by the spell's effect, and the spell 
emits a thunderous boom audible out to 500 feet. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the damage increases 
by 1d8 for each slot level above Ist. 


Vicious Mockery 
Enchantment cantrip 
Casting Time: | action 
Range: 60 feet 
Components: V 

Duration: Instantaneous 


You unleash a string of insults laced with subtle en- 
chantments at a creature you can see within range. If 
the target can hear you (though it need not understand 
you), it must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or take 
Ida psychic damage and have disadvantage on the 
next attack roll it makes before the end of its next turn: 
This spell's damage increases by Id when you reach 
5th level (2d4), 11th level (5d4), and 17th level Ada). 


Zone of Truth 


2nd-level enchantment 


Casting Time: | action 
Range: 60 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 10 minutes 


You create a magical zone that quards against decep- 
tion in a 15-foot-radius sphere centered on a point of 
your choice within range. Until the spell ends, a crea- 
ture that enters the spell's area for the first time on a 
turn or starts its turn there must make a Charisma sav- 
ing throw. On a failed save, a creature can't speak a de- 
liberate lie while in the radius. You know whether each 
creature succeeds or fails on its saving throw. 

An affected creature is aware of the spell and can 
thus avoid answering questions to which it would 
normally respond with a lie. Such a creature can be 
evasive in its answers as long as it remains within the 
boundaries of the truth. 


AVPIPIENIDIDX As MAGIC ITEMS 


Every adventure holds the promise—but not a guaran- 
tee—of finding one or more magic items. Hunt for the 
Thessalhydra contains an assortment of magic items 
that hints at the wider variety of magic items waiting to 
be found in the worlds of D&D. See the Dungeon Mas- 
ter's Guide for many more items. 


2 2 
Using a Magic Item 

A magic item's description explains how the item 
works. Handling a magic item is enough to give a char- 
acter a sense that something is extraordinary about the 
item. Casting the identify spell on the item then reveals 
its properties. Alternatively, a character can concentrate 
on the item during a short rest, while being in physical 
contact with the item. At the end of the rest, the char- 
acter learns the item's properties. Potions are an excep- 
tion; a little taste is enough to tell the taster what the 
potion does, without activating the potion. 


Attunement 


Certain magic items require a user to attune to them 
before their magical properties can be used. Attuning 
to a magic item requires that you spend a short rest 
concentrating on it (this can't be the same short rest 
used to learn an item's properties). Depending on the 
nature of the item, this concentration can take the form 
of prayers, weapon practice, or meditation. In any case, 
the concentration period must be uninterrupted. Once 
you are attuned to an item, you can use its magical 
properties. 

An item can be attuned to only one creature at a 
time. A creature can be attuned to no more than three 
magic items at any given time, and you can attune your- 
self to only one item during a short rest. 

Your attunement to an item ends if it has been more 
than 100 feet away from you for 24 hours or if you die. 
You can also voluntarily end your attunement to an 
item with another short rest. 


Potions 


A potion must be drunk for its magic to take effect. 
Drinking a potion, or administering it to someone else, 
requires an action. Each potion can be used only once; 
if someone drinks it, it's gone. 


Item Descriptions 


*1 Armor 
The most basic form of magic armor is a superb prod- 
uct of physical and magical craft. You have a +1 bonus 
to your Armor Class while wearing this armor. 

A suit of +1 armor never rusts or deteriorates, and it 
magically resizes to fit its wearer. 


+1 Wand of the War Mage 

While holding this wand, you gain a +1 bonus to spell 
attack rolls. In addition, you ignore half cover when 
making a spell attack. You must be attuned to this 
wand to use it. 


+1 Weapon 
Magic weapons are unmistakably finer in quality than 
their ordinary counterparts. You have a +1 bonus 
to the attack rolls and damage rolls you make with 
this weapon. 

Some +/ weapons (swords in particular) have addi- 
tional properties, such as shedding light. 


Bag of Holding 

This bag has an interior space considerably larger than 
its outside dimensions, roughly 2 feet in diameter at 
the mouth and 4 feet deep. The bag can hold up to 500 
pounds, not exceeding a volume of 64 cubic feet. The 
bag weighs 15 pounds, regardless of its contents. Re- 
trieving an item from the bag requires an action. 


Boots of Elvenkind 

While you wear these boots, your steps make no sound, 
regardless of the surface you are moving across. You 
also have advantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks that 
rely on moving silently. 


Boots of Striding and Springing 

Your speed while you wear these boots becomes 30 
feet, unless your walking speed is higher, and your 
speed is not reduced if you are encumbered or wearing 
heavy armor. In addition, whenever you jump, you can 
jump three times the normal distance. 


Cloak of Protection 

You gain a bonus to your Armor Class and saving 
throws while you wear this cloak. You must be attuned 
to the cloak to gain this benefit. 


Gauntlets of Ogre Power 

While you wear these gauntlets, your Strength becomes 
19. They have no effect on you if your Strength is 19 or 
higher without them. 


Helm of Comprehending Languages 
While wearing this helm, you can use an action to cast 
the comprehend languages spell from it at will. 


Potion of Flying 

This potion gives you a flying speed equal to your 
walking speed for 1 hour. If the potion wears off while 
you're flying and nothing else is holding you aloft, you 
must use your movement to descend. If you fail to land 
before 1 minute passes, you fall. 


Potion of Healing 
When you drink this potion, you regain 2d4 * 2 
hit points. 


Potion of Invisibility 

When you drink this potion, you—along with the cloth- 
ing, armor, weapons, and other equipment on your per- 
son—become invisible for 1 hour. The invisibility ends 
if you attack or cast a spell. 


Potion of Vitality 

Drinking this potion removes any exhaustion you are 
suffering, cures any disease or poison affecting you, 

and maximizes the effect of any Hit Die you spend to 
regain hit points within the next 24 hours. 


Ring of Protection 

While you are wearing this ring and are attuned to 
it, you have a *1 bonus to your Armor Class and sav- 
ing throws. 


Spell Scroll 

A spell scroll bears the words of a single spell, written 
in a mystical cipher. If the spell is on your class's spell 
list, you can read the scroll and cast its spell without 
providing any material components. Otherwise, the 
scroll is unintelligible. Casting the spell by reading the 
scroll requires the spell's normal casting time. 

If the spell is on your class's spell list but of a higher 
level than you can normally cast, you must make an 
ability check using your spellcasting ability to deter- 
mine whether you cast it successfully. The DC equals 
10 + the spell's level. On a failed check, the spell disap- 
pears from the scroll with no other effect. 

Once the spell is cast, the words on the scroll fade, 
and it crumbles to dust. If the casting is interrupted, 
the scroll is not lost. 


Staff of Defense 

This slender, hollow staff is made of glass yet is as 
strong as oak. It weighs 5 pounds. You must be attuned 
to the staff to gain its benefits and cast its spells. 

While holding the staff, you have a *1 bonus to your 
Armor Class. 

The staff has 10 charges, which are used to fuel the 
spells within it, instead of using your spell slots. With 
the staff in hand, you can cast the following spells from 
the staff if the spell is on your class's spell list: mage 
armor (1 charge) or shield (2 charges). No components 
are required. 

The staff regains 1d6 * 4 expended charges each 
day at dawn. If you expend the staff's last charge, roll a 
d20. On a 1, the staff shatters and is destroyed, 


Wand of Magic Missiles 

This wand has 7 charges. With the wand in hand, you 

can use your action to fire the magic missile spell from 

the wand—no components required—and expend 1 to 

5 of the wand's charges. For each charge you expend 

beyond 1, the spell's level increases by 1. You can use 

this wand even if you are incapable of casting spells. 
The wand regains 1d6 + 1 expended charges each 

day at dawn. If you expend the wand's last charge, 

roll a d20. On a I, the wand crumbles into ash and is 


destroyed. 


APPENDIX Bs MONSTERS 


This section contains stat blocks and short descrip- 
tions for the creatures that appear in Hunt for the 
Thessalhydra. 


Statistics 


A creature's stat block provides the essential informa- 
tion that you, as the DM, need to run the creature. 


Size B 
Each creature takes up a different amount of space. 
The Size Categories table shows how much space a 


creature of a particular size controls in combat. Ob- 
jects sometimes use the same size categories. 


Size Categories 


Size Space 

Tiny 2 by 29h ft. 

Small 5by5ft. 

Medium 5by5ft. 

Large 10 by 10 ft. 
Space 


A creature's space is the area in feet that it effectively 
controls in combat, not an expression of its physical di- 
mensions. A typical Medium creature isn't 5 feet wide, 
for example, but it does control a space that wide. If 

a Medium hobgoblin stands in a 5-foot-wide doorway, 
other creatures can't get through unless the hobgoblin 
lets them. 


Squeezing into a Smaller Space 

A creature can squeeze through a space large enough 
for a creature one size smaller than itself. When 
squeezing through such a space, a creature must spend 
1 extra foot for every foot it moves there, and the crea- 
ture has disadvantage on attack rolls and Dexterity sav- 
ing throws. Also, attack rolls against it have advantage. 


Type 
A creature's type speaks to its fundamental nature. 


The following types of monsters can be encountered 
in this adventure: 


Aberrations. Utterly alien beings that have no place 
in the natural world. 

Beasts. Nonhumanoid creatures that, like real-world 
animals, are a normal part of the world's ecology. 

Dragons. Large, winged, reptilian creatures of an- 
cient origin and tremendous power. 

Giants. Humanoid-like creatures that tower over hu- 
mans and their kin. 

Humanoids. Bipedal peoples of the civilized and sav- 
age world, including humans and a tremendous vari- 
ety of other races, including dwarves and elves. 

Monstrosities. Frightening creatures that sometimes 
resemble beasts but that are often touched by 
magic and almost never benign. 


Oozes. Gelatinous creatures that generally have no 
fixed shape. They are mostly subterranean, dwelling 
in caves and dungeons. 

Plants. Plant creatures, as opposed to ordinary 
plants, have some degree of sentience and mobility. 

Undead. Once-living creatures brought to a horrifying 
state of undeath through the practice of necroman- 
tic magic or some unholy curse. 


Tags 

A creature might have one or more tags appended to its 
type, in parentheses. For example, an orc has the hu- 
manoid (orc) type. These parenthetical tags provide an 
additional layer of categorization for certain monsters, 
but they have no bearing on how a monster is used 

in combat. 


Alignment 


A creature's alignment provides a clue to its dispo- 
sition. For example, a chaotic evil creature might be 
difficult to reason with and might attack characters on 
sight, whereas a neutral creature might be willing to 
negotiate. Alignment indicates whether a creature leans 
toward law or chaos and good or evil or whether a crea- 
ture is neutral. 

Any Alignment. Some creatures, such as the com- 
moner, can have any alignment. In other words, you 
choose the creature's alignment. Depending on the 
creature, its alignment entry might indicate a tendency 
or aversion toward law, chaos, good, or evil. 

Unaligned. Many creatures of low intelligence have 
no comprehension of law or chaos, qood or evil. They 
don't make moral or ethical choices, but rather act on 
instinct. These creatures are unaligned, which means 
they don't have an alignment. 


Armor Class 


A creature that wears armor or carries a shield has an 
AC that takes its armor, shield, and Dexterity into ac- 
count. Otherwise, a creature's AC is based on its Dex- 
terity modifier and any natural armor or supernatural 
resilience it might possess. 

If a creature wears armor or carries a shield, the kind 
of armor it wears or shield it carries is noted in paren- 
theses after its AC value. 


Hit Points 


A creature usually dies or is destroyed when its 
hit points drop to O. For more on hit points, see 
chapter two. 


Speed 


A creature's speed tells you how far it can move on its 
turn. For more information on speed, see chapter two. 

All creatures have a walking speed; creatures that 
have no form of ground-based locomotion have a 
speed of 0 feet. Many of the creatures herein have one 
or more additional movement modes. 


Climb. A.creature that has a climbing speed can use 
all or part of its movement to move on vertical sur- 
faces. The creature doesn't need to spend extra move- 
ment to climb. 

Fly. A creature that has a flying speed can use its 
movement to fly. If a flying creature is knockéd prone; 
has its speed reduced to O, or is otherwise deprived of 
the ability to move, it falls unless it can hover or is be- 
ing held aloft by magic, such as by the fly spell. 

Swim. A creature that has a swimming speed doesn’t 
need to spend extra movement to swim. 


Abi 
Every creature has six ability scores (Strength, Dexter- 
ity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma) 
and corresponding modifiers. For more information 
on ability scores and how they're used in play, see 
chapter one. 


Saving Throws 
The Saving Throws entry is reserved for creatures 


that are particularly adept at resisting certain kinds 
of effects. 


Skills 


The Skills entry is reserved for creatures that are pro- 
ficient in one or more skills. For example, a creature 
that is very perceptive and stealthy might have high- 
er-than-normal bonuses to Wisdom (Perception) and 
Dexterity (Stealth) checks. 
Skills in a monster at block are shown with the to- 
tal modifier—the monster's ability modifier plus its pro- 
ficiency bonus. If a monster's stat block says "Stealth 
*6," roll a d20 and add 6 when the monster makes an 
y check using Stealth. 


Vulnerabilities, Resistances, 
and Immunities 


Some creatures have vulnerability, resistance, or immu- 
nity to certain types of damage. Particular creatures are 
even resistant or immune to damage from nonmagical 
attacks (a magical attack is an attack delivered by a 
spell, a magic item, or another magical source). In addi- 
tion, some creatures are immune to certain conditions. 


Senses 


The Senses entry notes a creature's passive Wisdom 
(Perception) score, as well as any special senses the 
creature might have, such as the following senses. 

Blindsight. A creature with blindsight can perceive its 
surroundings without having to rely on sight, within a 
specific radius. 


Darkvision. A creature with darkvision can see in the 
dark within a specific radius. The creature can see in 
dim light as if it were bright light and in darkness as if 
it were dim light, so areas of darkness are only lightly 
obscured as far as that creature is concerned. How- 
ever, the creature can't discern color in darkness, only, 
shades of gray. 

Truesight. A creature with truesight can see in nor? 
mal and magical darkness, see invisible creatures and 
objects, automatically detect visual illusions:and suc- 
ceed on saving throws against them, and perceive the 
original form of a shapechanger or a creature that is 
transformed by magic. Furthermore, the creature can 
see into the Ethereal Plane. 


Languages 
The languages that a creature can speak are listed in 

alphabetical order. Sometimes a creature can under- 

stand a language but not speak it, and this is noted in 
its entry. 


Challenge 
An appropriately equipped and well-rested party of four 
adventurers should be able to defeat a creature that 
has a challenge rating equal to their level without suf- 
fering any casualties. 


Monsters that are significantly weaker than Ist-level 
characters have challenge ratings lower than 1. 


Experience Points (XP) 

The number of experience points a creature is worth is 
based on its Challenge. Typically, XP is awarded for de- 
feating the monster. 


Traits — - 
Traits are special characteristics of the creature that 
are likely to be relevant in a combat encounter. 

Actions l 
When a creature takes its action, it can choose from 
the options in the "Actions" section of its stat block. 


Chapter two describes other actions available to all 
creatures. 


Melee and Ranged Attacks 

The most common actions that a creature will take in 
combat are melee and ranged attacks. These can be 
spell attacks or weapon attacks, where the "weapon" 
might be a manufactured item or a natural weapon, 
such as a claw. 

Hit. Any damage or other effects that occur as a re- 
sult of an attack hitting a target are described here. As 
the DM, you have the option of taking average damage 
or rolling the damage; for this reason, both the average 
damage and the die expression are presented. For ex- 
ample, a monster might deal 4 (148) slashing damage 
with its longsword. That notation means you can have 
the monster deal 4 damage or you can roll 1d8 to de- 
termine the damage. 


Reactions 


If a creature can do something unusual with its reac- 
tion, that information is contained here. Most creatures 
do not have special reactions, in-which case this sec- 
tion is absent. Reactions are explained in chapter two. 


Limited Usage 


Some special abilities—whether they are traits, actions, 
or reactions—have restrictions on the number of times 
they can be used. 

X/Day. The notation “X/Day” means a special ability 
can be used a certain number of times and thata mon- 
ster must finish a long rest to regain expended uses. 
For example, "1/Day" means a special ability can be 
used once and that the monster must finish a long rest 
to use it again. 

Recharge X-Y. The notation “Recharge X-Y” means 
a monster can use a special ability once and that the 
ability then has a random chance of recharging during 
each subsequent round of combat. At the start of each 
of the monster's turns, roll a d6. If the roll is one of the 
numbers in the recharge notation, the monster regains 
the use of the special ability. The ability also recharges 
when the monster finishes a short or long rest. 

For example, "Recharge 6" means a monster can use 
the special ability once. Then, at the start of the mon- 
ster's turn, it regains the use of that ability if it rolls a 
6 on a d6. 


Monster Stat Blocks 


The monsters appearing in the adventure are 
presented in this section in alphabetical order. 


BUGBEAR 


Medium humanoid (goblinoid), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 16 (hide armor, shield) 
Hit Points 27 (508 + 5) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
15602 1442) 3136) 80) 1140) 90) 


Skills Stealth +6, Survival +2 

Senses darkvision 60 ft. passive Perception 10 
Languages Common, Goblin 

Challenge | (200 XP) 


Brute. A melee weapon deals one extra die of its dam- 
age when the bugbear hits with it (included below). 


Surprise Attack. If the bugbear surprises a creature and 
hits it with an attack during the first round of combat, the 
target takes an extra 7 (2d6) damage from the attack. 


ACTIONS — 


Morningstar. Melee Weapon Attack: «4 to hit, reach 5 
ft, one target. Hit: 11 (2d8 + 2) piercing damage. 


Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: to hit, 
reach 5 ft. or range 30/120 fl. one target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) 
piercing damage in melee or 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing dam- 
age at range. 


Bugbears are cruel and unruly humanoids that live to 
bully the weak and dislike being bossed around. De- 
spite their intimidating builds, bugbears move with sur- 
prising stealth and are fond of setting ambushes. 


CULTIST 


Medium humanoid (any race), any non-good alignment 


Armor Class 12 (leather armor) 
Hit Points 9 (288) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT, WIS CHA 
160) 1264) 1040) 1060) 160) 100) 


Skills Deception +2, Religion «2 
Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Dark Devotion. The cultist has advantage on saving 
throws against being charmed or frightened 
ACTIONS — 


Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one creature. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) slashing damage. 


Cultists swear allegiance to dark powers. They conceal 
their activities to avoid being ostracized, imprisoned, or 
executed for their beliefs. 


DEMOGORGON 


Medium monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 60 (8d8 + 24) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1643) 12601 1663) 3C4 260 5C3) 


Skills Stealth «5, Perception «3 

Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 4 (1.100 XP) 


Keen Smell. The demogorgon has advantage on Wis- 
dom (Perception) checks that rely on smell. 


Blood Frenzy. Ihe demogorgon has advantage on me- 
lee attack rolls against any creature that doesn't have 
all its hit points. 


Regeneration. The demogorgon regains 10 hit points 
at the start of its turn. If the demogorgon takes acid or 
fire damage, this trait doesn't function at the start of the 
demogorgon's next turn. The demogorgon dies only if it 
starts its turn with O hit points and doesn't regenerate. 


ACTIONS 24 


Multiattack. The demogorgon makes three attacks: 
one with its bite and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft, one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft, one 
target. Hif: 12 (288 + 3) slashing damage. 


A predator of the Upside Down, the demogorgon hunts 
the dimension looking for unfortunate creatures that 
find their way there. The size and shape of an adult 
humanoid, the demogorgon's mouth encompasses its 
face and unfolds like a blossoming flower. 


DOPPELGANGER 


Medium monstrosity (shapechangern, neutral 


Armor Class 14 
Hit Points 52 (888 + 16) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
NGO 1864) 14602) NEO 1261 1462 


Skills Deception «6, Insight «3 

Condition Immunities charmed 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages Common 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


— 


Shapechanger. The doppelganger can use its action 
to polymorph into a Small or Medium humanoid it has 
seen, or back into its true form. Its statistics, other than 
its size, are the same in each form. Any equipment it is 
wearing or carrying isn't transformed. It reverts to its true 
form if it dies. 


Ambusher. In the first round of combat, the doppel- 
ganger has advantage on attack rolls against any crea- 
ture it surprised. 


Surprise Attack. If the doppelganger surprises a 
creature and hits it with an attack during the first round 
of combat, the target takes an extra 10 (346) damage 
from the attack. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The doppelganger makes two me- 
lee attacks. 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft, one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


Read Thoughts. The doppelganger magically reads the 
surface thoughis of one creature within 60 feet of it. The 
effect can penetrate barriérs, but 3 feet of wood or dirt, 
2 feet of stone, 2 inches of metal, or a thin sheet of lead 
blocks it. While the target is in range, the doppelganger 
can continue reading its thoughts, as long asthe dop- 
pelganger's concentration isn't.broken (as if concert 
trating on a spell). While reading the target's mind, the. 
doppelganger has advantage on Wisdom (Insight) and 
Charisma (Deception, Intimidation, and Persuasion) 
checks against the target. 


Doppelgangers take on the appearance of other hu- 
manoids, throwing off pursuit or luring victims to their 
doom with misdirection and disguise. 


EVIL MAGE 


Medium humanoid (human), lawful evil 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 22 (538) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
9C) 1462 NEO 1743) 126) .11 40) 


Saving Throws Int +5, Wis +3 

Skills Arcana +5, History +5 

Senses passive Perception 11 

Languages Common, Draconic, Dwarvish, Elvish 
Challenge | (200 XP) 


Spelicasting. The mage is a 4th-level spelicaster that 
uses Intelligence as its spellcasting ability (spell save DC 
13; +5 to hit with spell attacks). The mage knows the fol- 
lowing spells from the wizard's spell list: 


Cantrips (at will): light, mage hand, shocking grasp. 
Ist Level (4 slots): charm person, magic missile 
2nd Level (3 slots): hold person, misty step 


ff. one target. Hit: 3 (138 - 1) bludgeoning damage: 


Evil mages hunger for arcane power and dwell in 
isolated places, where they can perform terrible 
magical experiments without interference. 


FLAMESKULL 


Tiny undead, neutral evil 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 40 (9d4 + 18) 
Speed 0 ft., fly 40 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
1C5 1763) 1442) 1643) 1060) “11 G0) 
Puer .. ee 
Skills Arcana +5, Perception +2 
Damage Resistances lightning, necrotic, piercing 
Damage Immunities cold, fire, poison 
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, paralyzed, 
poisoned, prone 
Senses darkvision 60 ft, passive Perception 12 
Languages Common 
Challenge 4 (1.100 XP) 


Illumination. The flameskull sheds either dim light in a 
15-foot radius, or bright light in a 15-foot radius and dim 
light for an additional 15 feet. It can switch between the 
options as an action 


Magic Resistance. The flameskull has advantage on 
saving throws against spells and other magical effects. 


Rejuvenation. If the fiameskull is destroyed, it regains 
alll its hit points in 1 hour unless holy water is sprinkled 
on its remains or a dispel magic or remove curse spell is 
cast on them. 


Spellcasting. The flameskull is a 5th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 13, +5 to 
hit with spell attacks). It requires no somatic or material 
components to cast its spells. The flameskull has the fol- 
lowing wizard spells prepared: 


Cantrip (at will): mage hand 

]st level (3 slots): magic missile, shield 
2nd level (2 slots): blur, flaming sphere 
3rd level (1 slot): fireball 


ACTIONS s 


Multiattack. The flameskull uses Fire Ray twice 


Fire Ray. Ranged Spell Attack: +5 to hit, range 30 ft., one 
target. Hit: 10 (3d6) fire damage. 


Spellcasters fashion flameskulls from the remains 
of dead wizards. When the ritual is complete, green 
flames erupt from the skull to complete its ghastly 
transformation. 


GHOUL 


Medium undead, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 22 (588) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STIR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1361) 15602 1060 769 1060 6(2) 


Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Common 

Challenge | (200 XP) 


ACTIONS . ` 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) slashing damage. If the target is a 
creature other than an elf or undead, it must succeed 
on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed 

for 1 minute. The target can repeat the saving throw at 
the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on 
a success. 


Ghouls roam the night in packs, driven by an insa- 
tiable hunger for humanoid flesh. Like maggots or 
carrion beetles, they thrive in places rank with decay 
and death. 


GIANT SPIDER 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 26 (4d10 + 4) 
Speed 30 fl. climb 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1442) 1643) 126010 2c % 11¢0) 4(C3 
——— ä — 
Skills Stealth «7 
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive 
Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge ! (200 XP) 


Spider Climb. The spider can climb difficult surfaces, 
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to 
make an ability check 


Web Sense. While in contact with a web, the spider 
knows the exact location of any other creature in con- 
tact with the same web. 


Web Walker. The spider ignores movement restrictions 
caused by webbing. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 7 (138 + 3) piercing damage, and the tar- 
get must make a DC 11 Constitution saving throw, taking 
9 (288) poison damage on a failed save, or half as much 
damage"on a successful one. If the poison damage. 
reduces the target to 0 hit points, the target is stable buf 
poisoned for 1 hour, even after regaining hitpoints, and 
is paralyzed while poisoned in this way. 


Web (Recharge 5-6). Ranged Weapon Attack: «5 

to hit, range 30/60 ft., one creature. Hif: The target is 
restrained by webbing. As an action, the restrained 
target can make a DC 12 Strength check, bursting the 
webbing on a success. The webbing can also be at- 
tacked and destroyed (AC 10; hp 5; vulnerability to fire 
damage: immunity to bludgeoning, poison, and psy- 
chic damage). 


Usually found underground, the lair of a giant spider is 
often festooned with webs holding helpless victims. 


GOBLIN 


Small humanoid (goblinoid), neutral evil 


Armor Class 15 (leather armor, shield) 
Hit Points 7 (2d6) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
8(-1) 14602 1060) 1040) 8C) 86) 


Skills Stealth +6 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 
Languages Common, Goblin 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Nimble Escape. The goblin can take the Disengage or 
Hide action as a bonus action on each of its turns. 


ACTIONS 


Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: «4 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) slashing damage. 


Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 
80/320 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Goblins are black-hearted, gather in overwhelming 
numbers, and crave power, which they abuse. 


HOBGOBLIN 


Medium humanoid (goblinoid), lawful evil 


Armor Class 18 (chain mall, shield) 
Hit Points 11 (208 + 2) 
Speed 30 fl. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1336) 1260 1261 1060 1060 9¢1) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Common, Goblin 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Martial Advantage. Once per turn, the hobgoblin can 
deal an extra 7 (206) damage to a creature it hits with a 
weapon attack if that creature is within 5 feet of an ally 
of the hobgoblin that isn't incapacitated. 


ACTIONS 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 fr. 
one target. Hit: 5 (d + 1) slashing damage, or 6 (1d10+ 
1) slashing damage if used with two hands. 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range 
150/600 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d8 + 1) piercing damage. 


Hobgoblins are cunning, disciplined warriors who 
crave conquest. They impose a strict military hierar- 
chy and are often found in the company of goblins 
and bugbears. 


OCHRE JELLY 


Large ooze, unaligned 


Armor Class 8 
Hit Points 45 (6d10 + 12) 
Speed 10 ft., climb 10 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15602 62) 1442) 264) 6C2 1C5 


Damage Resistances acid 

Damage Immunities lightning, slashing 

Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, 
exhaustion, frightened, prone 

Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), passive 
Perception 8 

Languages — 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Amorphous. The jelly can move through a space as nar- 
row as 1 inch wide without squeezing. 


Spider Climb. The jelly can climb difficult surfaces, 
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to 
make an ability check. 


ACTIONS _ — 


Pseudopod. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage plus 3 
(1d6) acid damage. 


REACTIONS Bea g 


Split. When a jelly that is Medium or larger is subjected! 
to lightning or slashing damage, it splits into two new 
jellies if it has at least 10 hit points. Each new jelly has hit 
points equal to half the original jelly’s, rounded down. 
New jellies are one size smaller than the original jelly. 


Ochre jellies stalk and consume organic creatures, and 
they have enough bestial cunning to avoid large groups. 


OGRE 


Large giant, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 11 (hide armor) 
Hit Points 59 (7d10 + 21) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS . CHA 
19604) 8C) 1663 5C3 76) 72 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8 
Languages Common, Giant 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


ACTIONS = - s 
Greatclub. Melee Weapon Attack: «6 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 13 (208 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, 
reach 5 ft, or range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) 
piercing damage. 


Ogres are lazy, angry, ten-foot-tall giants that live by 
raiding and scavenging. 


ORC 


Medium humanoid (orc), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 13 (hide armor) 
Hit Points 15 (288 + 6) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR. DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1643) 1261) 1643) 7¢2) 1140) 10G0) 


Skills Intimidation +2 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Common, Orc 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Aggressive. As a bonus action, the orc can move up to 
its speed toward a hostile creature that it can see. 


ACTIONS 


Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 9 (1d12 + 3) slashing damage. 


Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, 
reach 5 ft. or range 30./120 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) 
piercing damage. 


Orcs are renowned for their barbarism. They have 
Stooped postures, low foreheads, and piglike faces with 
prominent lower canines that resemble a boar's tusks. 


OWLBEAR 


Large monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 (natural.armor) 
Hit Points 59 (7310 + 21) 
Speed 40 f 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
2065) 1260 1743) 3C4 1200 7C2 


Skills Perception «3 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Keen Sight and Smell. The owlbear has advantage on 
Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on sight or smell 


ACTIONS m 


Multiattack. The owlbear makes two attacks: one with 
its beak and one with its claws. 


Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft, one 
creature. Hit: 10 (1d10 + 5) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ff, one 
target. Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) slashing damage, 


The owlbear’s reputation for ferocity, stubbornness, 
and sheer ill temper makes it one of the most feared 
predators of the wild. There is little, if anything, that a 
hungry owlbear fears. 


SKELETON 


Medium undead, lawful evil 


Armor Class 13 (armor scraps) 
Hit Points 13 (208 + 4) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10600 1442) 1562 6C2, 8CD 5C3 


Damage Vulnerabilities bludgeoning 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities exhaustion. poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 

Languages understands languages it knew in life but 
can't speak 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


ACTIONS E 
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 
80/320 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Assemblages of bones animated by dark magic, skel- 
etons heed the summons of those who create them 
or rise of their own accord in places saturated with 
deathly magic. 


STIRGE 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 2 (d) 
Speed 10 ft., fly 40 ft. 


STR DEX- CON INT WIS. CHA 
4C3 1663 160 2¢4 8C) 6C2 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Blood Drain. Melee Weapon Attack: «5 to hit, reach 5 
ft, one creature. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage, and 
the stirge attaches to the target. While attached, the 
stirge doesn't attack. Instead, at the start of each of the 
Stirge's turns, the target loses 5 (1d4 + 3) hit points due to 
blood loss. 

The stirge can detach itself by spending 5 feet of its 
movement. It does so after it drains 10 hit points of blood 
from the target or the target dies. A creature, including 
the target, can use its action to detach the stirge. 


A stirge is a winged pest that feeds on the blood of liv- 

ing creatures, drawing sustenance through its probos- 

cis, which it uses to pierce a victim's flesh while clutch- 
ing onto its prey with hooked claws. 


THESSALHYDRA 


Huge monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 69 (6d12 + 30) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
1964 120 20605 5¢3) 10¢0) 76-2 


Skills Perception «4 

Damage Immunities acid 

Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, 
frightened, stunned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 

Languages — 

Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


ACTIONS E 


Multiattack. The thessalhydra makes one maw attack 
and one Flurry of Bites. 


Flurry of Bites. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 
10 ft, one target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) piercing damage plus 10 
(4d4) poison damage. 


Maw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: o (1d10 +4) piercing damage plus 5 (d 
acid damage. 


Tail Pincer. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., 
one target. Hit: 10 (1d12 + 4) slashing damage, and the 
target is grappled. As an action, the target can escape 


the grapple by succeeding on a DC 14 Strength (Athlet- 
ics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check (its choice). Until this 
grapple ends, the thessalhydra can't use its tail pincer 


Acid Saliva (Recharge 5-6). Ihe thessalhydra spits 

a glob of acid at a point it can see within 30 feet of it. 
Each creature within 10 feet of that point must make,a 
DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 18 (4d8) acid dam- 
age on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The thessalhydra can take 2 legendary actions, choos- 
ing from the options below. Only one legendary action 
option can be used at a time and only at the end of 
another creature's turn. The thessalhydra regains spent 
legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Detect. The thessalhydra makes a Wisdom (Perception) 
check with advantage. 
Tail Swipe. The thessalhydra makes a tail pincer attack. 


The thessalhydra is a strange and terrible creature 
with eight heads surrounding a large, circular mouth 
rimmed with jagged teeth. Its maw drips with acid, and 
its tail ends with a pair of sharp pincers. The thessalhy- 
dra is gluttonous and damaging to any environment. 


TROGLODTYE 


Medium humanoid (troglodyte), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 1] (natural armor) 
Hit Points 13 (208 + 4) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1462) 1060) 1462) 6(-2) 1060 6¢2) 


Skills Stealth «2 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Troglodyte 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Chameleon Skin. The troglodyte has advantage on 
Dexterity (Stealth) checks made to hide. 


Stench. Any creature other than a troglodyte that starts 
its turn within 5 feet of the troglodyte must succeed on a 
DC 12 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned until the 
start of the creature's next turn. On a successful saving 
throw, the creature is immune to the stench of all troglo- 
dytes for 1 hour. 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the troglodyte 
has disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The troglodyte makes three attacks: one 
with its bite and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft, one 
target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: to hit, reach 5 ft, one 
target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) slashing damage. 


TWIG BLIGHT 


Small plant, neutral evil 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 4 (136 + 1) 
Speed 20 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
6c2 1360 160 4€3 8¢1) »3¢4) 


Skills Stealth «3 

Damage Vulnerabilities fire 

Condition Immunities blinded, deafened 

Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this rodius), passive 
Perception 9 

Languages understands Common but can't speak 

Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


False Appearance. While the blight remains motionless, 
it is indistinguishable from a dead shrub. 


ACTIONS — — 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ff. one 
target. Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) piercing damage. 


This skittering creature resembles a small, leafless, 
walking plant. Twig blights hide by rooting themselves 
among ordinary plants. 


WOLF 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
120 1502 1260) 3C4 12600 6C2 


Skills Perception «3, Stealth «4 
Senses passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Keen Hearing and Smell. Ihe wolf has advantage 
on Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on hear- 
ing or smell. 


Pack Tactics. The wolf has advantage on attack 
rolls against a creature if at least one of the wolf's 
allies is within 5 feet of the creature and the ally isn't 
incapacitated. 


ACTIONS — 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) piercing damage. If the target is 
a creature, it must succeed on a DC 11 Strength saving 
throw or be knocked prone. 


Wolves are found in subarctic and temperate regions of 
the world, running in packs. 


YOUNG GREEN DRAGON 


Large dragon, lawful evil 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 136 (16d10 « 48) 
Speed 40 fl, fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
1964) 120) 1743) 1643) 1361) 1502) 


Saving Throws Dex «4, Con «6, Wis «4, Cha «5 

Skills Deception +5, Perception +7, Stealth +4 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive 
Perception 17 

Languages Common, Draconic 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with 
its bite and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft, one 
target. Hit: 15 (2d10 + 4) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) 
poison damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ff. one 
target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage. 


Poison Breath (Recharge 5-6). Ihe dragon exhales 
poisonous gas in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that 
area must make a DC 14 Constitution saving throw, tak- 
ing 42 (1286) poison damage on a failed save, or half as 
much damage on a successful one. 


Green dragons delight in corrupting the good-hearted. 
They prefer to dwell in ancient forests, 


ZOMBIE 


Medium undead, neutral evil 


Armor Class 8 
Hit Points 22 (338 + 9) 
Speed 20 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
130 62) 16¢3),°3C4) 6(¢2) 5C3 


Saving Throws Wis +0 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft, passive Perception 8 

Languages understands the languages it knew in life 
but can't speak 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Undead Fortitude. |f damage reduces the zombie to 0 
hit points, it can make a Constitution saving throw with 
a DC of 5 + the damage taken, unless the damage is 
radiant or from a critical hit. On a success, the zombie 
drops to 1 hit point instead. 


ACTIONS 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +3to hit, reach 5 ft, one 
target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) bludgeoning damage. 


Zombies are corpses imbued with a semblance of life. 


AXPIPISINDDIDX O8. CONDITIONS 


Conditions alter a creature's capabilities in a variety 
of ways.and can arise as a result of a spell, a class 
feature, a monster's attack, or other effect. Most 
conditions, such.as blinded, are impairments, but a 
few, such as invisible, can be advantageous. 

A condition lasts either until it is countered (the 
prone condition is countered by standing up, for 
example) or for a duration specified by the effect that 
imposed the condition. 

If multiple effects impose the same condition on a 
creature, each instance of the condition has its own 
duration, but the 
condition's effects don't get worse. A creature either 
has a condition or doesn't. 

The following definitions specify what happens to a 
creature while it is subjected to a condition. 


Blinded 

* A blinded creature can't see and automatically fails 
any ability check that requires sight. 

* Attack rolls against the creature have advantage, and 
the creature's attack rolls have disadvantage. 


Charmed 

* A charmed creature can't attack the charmer 
or target the charmer with harmful abilities or 
magical effects. 

* The charmer has advantage on any ability check to 
interact socially with the creature. 


Deafened 
A deafened creature can't hear and automatically 
fails any ability check that requires hearing. 


Frightened 

+ A frightened creature has disadvantage on ability 
checks and attack rolls while the source of its fear is 
within line of sight. 

* The creature can't willingly move closer to the source 
of its fear. 


Grappled 

+ A grappled creature's speed becomes 0, and it can't 
benefit from any bonus to its speed. 

The condition ends if the grappler is incapacitated 
(see the condition). 

The condition also ends if an effect removes the 
grappled creature from the reach of the grappler or 
grappling effect, such as when a creature is hurled 
away by the thunderwave spell. 


Incapacitated 
* An incapacitated creature can't take actions or 
reactions. 


Invisible 

An invisible creature is impossible to see without 
the aid of magic or a special sense. For the purpose 
of hiding, the creature is heavily obscured. The 
creature's location can be detected by any noise it 
makes or any tracks it leaves. 

Attack rolls against the creature have disadvantage, 
and the creature's attack rolls have advantage. 


Paralyzed 

* A paralyzed creature is incapacitated (see'the 
condition) and can't move or speak. 

The creature automatically fails Strength and Dexterity 
saving throws. 

Attack rolls against the creature have advantage. 

Any attack that hits the creature is a critical hit if the 
attacker is within 5 feet of the creature. 


Petrified 

+ A petrified creature is transformed, along with any 
nonmagical object it is wearing or carrying, into a 
solid inanimate substance (usually stone). Its weight 
increases by a factor of ten, and it ceases aging. 

The creature is incapacitated (see the condition), can't 
move or speak, and is unaware of its surroundings. 
Attack rolls against the creature have advantage. 

The creature automatically fails Strength and Dexterity 
saving throws. 

The creature has resistance to all damage. 

The creature is immune to poison and disease, 
although a poison or disease already in its system is 
suspended, not neutralized. 


Poisoned 
* A poisoned creature has disadvantage on attack rolls 
and ability checks. 


Prone 

* A prone creature's only movement option is to crawl, 
unless it stands up and thereby ends the condition. 

* The creature has disadvantage on attack rolls. 

* An attack roll against the creature has advantage if the 
attacker is within 5 feet of the creature. Otherwise, the 
attack roll has disadvantage. 


Restrained 

A restrained creature's speed becomes O, and it can't 
benefit from any bonus to its speed. 

* Attack rolls against the creature have advantage, and 
the creature's attack rolls have disadvantage. 

* The creature has disadvantage on Dexterity 
saving throws. 


Stunned 

+ A stunned creature is incapacitated (see the condition), 
can't move, and can speak only falteringly. 

* The creature automatically fails Strength and Dexterity 

saving throws. 

Attack rolls against the creature have advantage. 


Unconscious 

* An unconscious creature is incapacitated (see the 
condition), can't move or speak, and is unaware of its 
surroundings. 

The creature drops whatever it's holding and 

falls prone. 

The creature automatically fails Strength and Dexterity 
saving throws. 

Attack rolls against the creature have advantage. 

Any attack that hits the creature is a critical hit if the 
attacker is within 5 feet of the creature. 


€ NETFLIX 
Official Merchandise 
www.netflix.com 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, Forgotten Realms, the dragon ampersand, Player's Handbook, Monster 
Manual, Dungeon Master's Guide, all other Wizards of the Coast product names, and their respective logos are trademarks of 
Wizards of the Coast in the USA and other countries. All characters and their distinctive likenesses are property of Wizards 
of the Coast. This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or 
unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained herein is prohibited without the express written permission of Wizards 
of the Coast. ©2018 Wizards of the Coast LLC. 


€* and/or TM* & © 2018 Hasbro, Pawtucket, RI 02861-1059 USA. All Rights Reserved. TM & & denote U.S. Trademarks. 


Consumer contact: 

USA and Canada: Hasbro Games, Consumer Affairs Dept., P.O. Box 200, Pawtucket, RI 02861-1059 USA. TEL. 800-255-5516. 
Australia consumer service: auconsumercare@ap.hasbro.com 

New Zealand consumer service: nzconsumercare@hasbro.com 


NETFLIX 


ADVENTURE BOOK 
Hunt for the — 
ENED OALHY d 


-— A 


A: DEP Penes ign 


CREDITS 

Adventure: Stan!, Ben Petrisor 

Cartography: Stan! 

Rulebook: Jeremy Crawford 

Editing: Christopher Perkins, Chris Sims, Michele Carter, Scott Fitzgerald Gray, Kim Mohan, Philip Athans, Kate Welch 


D&D Lead Designers: Jeremy Crawford, Mike Mearis 
Fifth Edition D&D Design Team: Christopher Perkins, James Wyatt, Rodney Thompson, Robert J. Schwalb, Peter Lee, Steve Townshend, Bruce R. Cordell 
Additional Contributors: Greg Bilsland, Matt Sernett, Chris Dupuis, Tom LaPille, Richard Baker, Miranda Horner, Jennifer Clarke Wilkes, Steve Winter, Nina Hess 


Based on the original Dungeons & Dragons® game created by E. Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson, with Brian Blume, Rob Kuntz, James Ward, and Don Kaye 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, Forgotten Realms, the dragon ampersand, Player's Handbook, Monster Manual, Dungeon Master's Guide, all other Wizards of the Coast 
product names, and their respective logos are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast in the USA and other countries. All characters and their distinctive likenesses are property of Wizards of 
the Coast. This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained herein is prohibited 
without the express written permission of Wizards of the Coast. ©2018 Wizards of the Coast LLC. 


NOTES TO ELF (AS DUNGEON EK 


We should be able to finish this story in one night (maybe a long 
weekend if Dustin really gets caught up in the roleplaying), but 
don’t rush it. As long as everyone's having tun, let it take as long as 
necessary. It’s all about the fun. 


Describe each scene. Tell then what their characters see or hear or 
feel at the start, then just let them go. They say what the characters 
do, and | tell then what happens. But don’t take control of their 
characters. | control everything else—the monsters, the nonplayer 
characters (NPCs, like Sir Tristan), even the environment (like 
traps)—and the dice reveal how things turn out! 


All creatures written with an underline can be found in the Monsters 
section of the rulebook. 


Dont worry too much about getting the rules right or being perfect 
as a DM (that’s short for Dungeon Master). Just relax, let things 
happen naturally, and enjoy playing the game. IF things get confusing— 
especially in combat—do what seems fair and move on. 


Like the rulebook says, my job as DM is to make sure everyone has 
a good time and that the story moves along smoothly. 


THE WHOLE STORY 

The characters have been summoned by Sir Tristan, the ruler of a small 
domain in a lonely stretch of mountains. A terrible monster called a 
thessalhydra has been attacking his real. It is a strange and dreadful 
creature with eight heads surrounding 4 large circular mouth rimmed 
with jagged teeth. Its maw drips with acid, and its tail ends in a pair of 
sharp pincers. Tristan asks the characters to get rid of this menace. 


The thessalhydra was last seen going into caverns belonging to an 
unfriendly tribe of troglodytes. The characters must enter the caverns 
and deal with the stinky trogs. Following the thessalhydra’s trail leads 
them into a cursed labyrinth, where they meet the Lost Knight. He will 
help them escape only if they prove themselves worthy by solving his 
riddles. 


The way to escape trom the labyrinth is through a portal into a 
strange, dark, parallel dimension called the Upside Down. There the 
characters meet the Proud Princess, a powerful adventurer who has 
her own quest and wants nothing to do with the characters. She shows 
then the way out of the Upside Down and into the thessalhydra’s lair. 


If the characters can beat the thessalhydra And bring its heads back to 
Sir Tristan, they have successfully finished this adventure. 


AUDIENCE WITH SIR TRISTAN 

Start the adventure in Sir Tristan’s throne room. The characters have 
met Tristan before. He sponsored then on an earlier adventure and 
proved himself to be a kind ruler to his people and a good. friend to the 
characters. They can trust him 


Sir Tristan says that lately a monster called a thessalhydra appears 
out of nowhere and attacks local farus, villages, and even. Tristan’s 
castle. All his soldiers together could barely fight it off. After each 
attack, the thessalhydra disappears into the woods and leaves no trail 


Tristan can’t send his guards after the monster. They must protect 
the castle (and. they know they're not strong enough to heat 

the monster). He asks the characters to hunt down and kill the 
thessalhydra, then return with its heads. (Tristan wants then stuffed 
and mounted over his throne.) 


This scene is all about conversation. The characters are talking directly 
to Sir Tristan, but there are others here too—royal advisors, guards 
who fought the monster, and such. They treat the characters well— 
they're the heroes Sir Tristan turns to in his time of need. Give them 
confidence to take bold action (Sometimes Will needs to be reminded 
that he’s playing a character, not just himself). 


GIFTS FROM, SIR TRISTAN 

Sir Tristan offers then huge rewards to Jo on this dangerous Mission 
Begin. by offering 100 gold pieces each and let them negotiate if they 
want wore. If the group gets too greedy, Sir Tristan reminds them 
that they're old friends. 


Once the deal is struck, Sir Tristan might have a surprise for the 
group. If the characters negotiated a fair deal and respected their 
friendship with Sir Tristan, he will give them. some magic equipment that 
Will be useful in this adventure. If they were greedy or acted like they 
didn’t care about their friendship with Sir Tristan, he won't give them 
anything extra. 


He starts with two bags of holding, so that they can easily carry the 
thessalhydra’s severed heads. Then, for each character, he provides 
a ring of protection and a potion of healing. Finally, he has two 
weapons—a wand of magic missiles and this greatsword: 


Winter's Dark Bite. This greatsword is made of an unknown black 
metal. In most cases, it Works as a +t greatsword. But: when used 
against a thessalhydra, it works as a +3 greatsword. While in the 
Upside Down, it works as a +4 greatsword. 


RUMORS ON THE ROAD 

As the characters search for the thessalhydra, they meet other people 
along the way. Give then a few short roleplaying encounters. 

Some NPCs have useful info, and others are just distractions. 

But make sure the scenes are fun, or the group might ignore then 
(especially Lucas—he'll want to be all business). 


+ A merchant offers them one apple each. He says that local apples 
tasted better before the thessalhydra arrived. Thats why he’s 
sure the monster’s lair is in the apple orchards to the north 

- A traveling priest says that often lesser monsters worship bigger 

ones. There are troglodytes in a nearby set of caverns. They 

might know something about the thessalhydra. 

A woodcutter warns them that some of the caves around here are 

cursed. “Once you enter, you get lost in the twisting tunnels and 

never escape.” 

An elderly farmer doesn’t believe there is a thessalhydra. He 

thinks it’s just a big owlbear that is raiding settlements for its 

supper. “I ain’t never seen no thessalhydra, but owlbears we got 
plenty of around here!” 


When the players start getting bored with roleplaying encounters, it’s 
time for them to find the troglodyte caves. If they've. wandered off 
following false leads, just have them luckily stumble upon the right cave. 


TROGLODYTE CAVERNS 

Have one character (group's choice) make a DC i2 ability check— 
Intelligence (Nature) if they’re searching for the troglodyte caves, 
Wisdom (Survival) if they're searching for the thessalhydra’s tracks, 
or another skill that matches their actions. 


If the check succeeds, they have arrived at the troglodyte caves. Use 
the map to describe what the characters see. Let them pick in what 
order they explore the caves. When they reach a numbered area, see 
that area's description on one of the following pages. 


If the skill check fails, they still arrive at the caves, but unluckily do so 
at the save time as a returning hunting party of 8 troglodytes. They 
must defeat the hunting party before they can enter the caves. 


Area 1: Cave Entrance. A 
successful DC 15 Intelligence 
(Investigation) or Wisdom 
(Survival) check reveals that the 
cave’s mouth has recently been 
visited by about 25 troglodytes, 
the thessalhydra, and an owlbear. 


Area 2: Enpty Cave. Nothing of 
interest here. The floor becomes 
too rocky to follow footprints 


ANYMOK e. 


Area S: Trapped Hall. The cave 
is eupty, but the hall to area 

4 is trapped, which requires 4 
successful DC 10 ability check 
to detect, using Intelligence 
(Investigation), or disarm, using 
Dexterity. It triggered, the roof 
collapses. Anyone in the hall 
must make a DC 10 Dexterity 
save. Those who fail take ade 


+2 bludgeoning damage. Those 
who succeed take half as much 


damage. The hall becomes 
impassable. 


Area 4: Treasure Room. This is 
where the troglodytes keep their 
few valuable items. There are 
200 4p in coins aud gems, plus 
artwork and other valuables worth 
200 gp more. The secret door 
that connects to area 6 needs a 
successful DC 15 ability check 
to detect, using Intelligence 
(Investigation), or open, using 
Dexterity. 


Area 5: Connon Chamber. This 
is where most of the troglodytes 
sleep. Ten troglodytes are here, 
but they are terrifted and try to 
run away into area 6 as Soon as 
they see the characters. 


Area 6: Noble Chamber. This is 
where the hve troglodyte leaders 
sleep. The head trog is a fair and 
noble ruler (like a trog version of 
Sir Tristan). He’d rather talk than 
fight (unlike most trogs, he speaks 
Common). But if the group angers 
hin, all the trogs attack and fight to 
the death. If the group politely asks 
about the thessalhydra, he'll say that 
it comes in trom the woods, passes 
through the caves, and enters the 
Cursed. Labyrinth. It never travels 
the opposite way. 


Area T: False Treasure Room. This 
room is like area 4, but everything 

is broken and worthless. One vase 

is trapped, requiring a successful 
DC io Intelligence (Investigation) 
check to detect and a successtul 
DC io Dexterity check to disarm. 

if triggered, the hall to area 5 
collapses. Anyone in the hall must 
make a DC 10 Dexterity save. Those 
who fail take 2d6 + 2 bludgeoning 
damage. Those who succeed take half 
as much damage. The hall becomes 
impassable. 


Area & Guard. Post. Eight 
troglodyte guards are stationed here. 
If the characters enter or make too 
much noise in an adjoining room 

(for example, have a fight or 
argument), the  quards attack. 


Area 4: Owlbear. One owlbear is here 
and. sleeping. Characters may attempt 
Dexterity (Stealth) checks against 
its passive Perception (S). Failure 
means it wakes up and. attacks. 


Area 10: Water Pool. A natural spring 
feeds a 10-foot-deep pool of clear, 
fresh water. In the pool lives a giant 
frog, which leaps out and attacks the 
first character to touch the water. 


Area u: Shrine. This is where the 
troglodytes come to worship their 
dark god, Laogzed. There’s an altar 
and a statue of an ugly, frog Ile 
creature. On the altar are pieces of 
rotten meat and 50 gp worth of coins 
and small | GEMS. 


THE CURSED LABYRINTH 


lt seems like a normal maze with twisting, turning hallways that 
intersect, but there is no solution to this maze. Its path is completely 
random, and if you turn around to retrace your steps, you fnd that 
the path has changed behind you. 


Random Path. Use the first few hallways as shown on the map (taped 
into the book a few pages ago), but when the characters move off 
the map, use the table below to figure out what they find next. If 

the characters turn around, the maze remains the same until they go 
around. a corner or open a door. From that point on, the labyrinth 
makes a new random path. 


dzo Result 

1-2 dio map squares straight, then dead end 

3-5 ll map squares straight, then reroll 

6-8 d4 map squares straight, then turn left 

g-u Alg map squares straight, then turn right 

12-14 Special encounter (described on the next page) 

(5-16 14 map squares straight, then T intersection 

17-18 ile map squares straight, then a four-way intersection 
i9 — Kerol| but also add a door 

| 20 Reroll, but also add a secret door 


SPECIAL ENCOUNTERS 
While going through the Cursed 
Labyrinth, the characters will have 
some interesting encounters. Roll 
on the following table (if you get 


the same result twice, reroll or 


choose an encounter). 
dé Encounter 

I Damaged Walls 
2 Treasure 
Pit Trap 

4 Troglodytes 

5 Skeletons 

6 The Lost Knight 


Damaged Walls. The next hallway 
the characters enter shows signs of 
damage, like a powerful beast has 
raupaged through here. The group 
can easily tell that this damage was 
done by the thessalhydra. 


Treasure. They find the remains 
of an ancient adventurer who died 
trying to escape the labyrinth. 
The body has treasure worth 
.2d20 gold pieces. 


Pit Trap. The hallway has a pit 
trap somewhere along its length. 
Characters must make a successful 
DC A Intelligence (Investigation) 
check to detect the trap, and a 
successful DC 12 Dexterity check 
to sately move past it. Those who 
fail the Dexterity check fall in and 


take dé bludgeoning damage. Climbing 
out of the pit is easy to do. 


Troglodytes. Four troglodytes, 
members of the tribe from the 
caverns who ran into the labyrinth to 
escape the thessalhydra, have been 
trapped here for two weeks. 

They're mad with hunger and 
immediately attack. 


Skeletons. Eight skeletons, the 
undead remains of adventurers, come 
shaubling down the hallway to attack 
the characters. 


The Lost Knight. See details 
on the next page. 


THE LOST KNIGHT 


The characters encounter the Lost The frst riddle is simple. All they 
Knight—a mysterious figure dressed — have to do is catch him He runs 
in a full suit of armor who is around the corner and calls back: 
trapped in the Cursed Labyrinth, 

“kt my heels you nip in this game we. 


The knight is at the far end of play. But cursed is the maze, and 
a long hallway (60 feet trom the lost an l. So whos chasing whom? 
group). He says he knows their Oh, who’s to say? The front is the 
quest is to slay a great monster. back. Hello is goodbye.” 

He'll help them if they solve his two 

riddles. 


IÆ the characters chase hin, use the Random Path table to 
generate the hallways (reroll results of 1 and 2). Every tine they 
round 4 corner, they see him escape at the other end of the hall. 


The solution is to stop chasing the Lost Knight, turn around, 
And Jo back the way they came. Once the group goes back one 
room, they automatically fnd the Knight S second riddle. 


Second Riddle. The characters see the Lost Knight standing in 
a doorway at the far side of a large room. “You solved my fret 
riddle,” he says. “Now can you fnd the missing piece to finish 


= 
— 


2 | 


collection?” 
p Ad 
É He points to three shelves above the doorway. Then he steps 
A through the door, which closes and magically locks behind him 
= (cannot be picked or broken down). 


The first two shelves each have two 
small statues, and the third one has 
only one statue. 


Shelf | Statues. A man with a crown 
and a bag of coins. 

Shelf 2 Statues. A woman with a 
crown and a jar of honey. 

Shelf 2 Statue. A common woman 
Wearing an apron. and an empty space 
for 4 second statue. 


In the room is a large table covered 
with many small statues, including 4 
cake, a pie, a spinning wheel, a basket 
of laundry, a plate with a steak, a 
toy soldier, a sword, and twenty-four 
sculptures of crows. 


To solve the riddle, the characters 
must put the right statue trom the 
table in the empty space on shelf 3. 
If they put a wrong sculpture on the 
shelf, everyone in the room takes id4 
lightning damage. They must try again. 
lf they put the right statue there, the 


door opens. 


Solution. The basket ol laundry. 
These are the characters from the 
nursery rhyme “Sing a Song of 


Dp 


Clues: 

t. It’s based on a nursery rhyme. 

2. There are “four-and-twerty A 
statues of “black birds.” 

g. Tell them the nane of the nursery 
rhyme and let then look up the words. 


The Knight’s Prize. After the group 
solves both of the Lost Knight’s 
riddles, he congratulates them on being 
so clever. 


The knight explains that the Cursed 
Labyrinth is not in our world. It is 
built in a demiplane. The thessalhydra 
has found a way to push through it to 
a place called the Upside Down The 
Lost Knight shows the characters how 
that is done, but warns that this is a 
one-way passage—they ] have to fnd a 
different way home. 


THE UPSIDE DOWN 

The Upside Down is a kind of alternate divension—an echo of the 
Material Plane (where we all live). That means in some ways it’s very 
similar to our world, but in others it’s completely different. 


The Upside Down is a cold, dark place. It s always night there, and the 
air is always cold (like just before a snow storm). You never feel warm 
in the Upside Down. Also, characters get no natural healing while ix the 
Upside Dow: no matter how long you rest, you don’t regain any hit 
points, and you can't spend Hit Dice. Magical healing still works. 


In places where our world and the Upside Down touch each other, the 
Upside Down looks like our world—the same buildings, trees, and other 
structures—but they're always broken and ruined. These are the places 
where you can cross between planes, if you know how. 


In places where the worlds don’t touch, the Upside Down looks like a 
haunted forest. 


WINTER’S DARK BITE IN THE UPSIDE DOWN 
The sword that the characters might have received Hoy 

Sir Tristan, Winter’s Dark Bite, is made of metal mined 
from the Upside Down, so it gels even stronger when it’s 
used here. While in the Upside Down, Hinter s Dark Bite 
acts like a +4 greatsword. 


UPSIDE DOWN ENCOUNTERS 

This part of the adventure is mostly supposed. to be scary, hot 
dangerous. When the characters frst arrive in the Upside Down, make 
it in the middle of the woods (an area that doesn’t touch our world). 
Describe how lonely, dark, and desolate it is, with a cold wind blowing 
all the time. 


Let the characters explore a little. Describe sections where the Upside 
Down touches our world in places that the group has already visited, 
so they can see scary, haunted versions. Have there be strange howling 
noises on the wind, and make it feel like something is stalking then, 
lurking just out of sight in. the darkness. 


They find tracks made by the thessalhydra, but also tracks made 

by other monsters. But the tracks are impossible to follow. The tracks 
come and go. Sometimes they loop back on themselves. None of it 
makes any Sense. 


When it’s tive to move the story forward, introduce the Proud Princess. 


THE PROUD PRINCESS 

With a blast of lightning and thunder, the Proud Princess appears on a hill 
near the characters. She is strong and proud, a warrior princess, who looks 
at the characters and instantly knows that they pose no danger to her. (No 
stats for her. She’s not someone they should fight. If they insist on trying, 
they can hit her only with a critical hit, and even then she shrugs off whatever 
damage they do. Her attacks always hit them and deal 2d6 + 6 slashing 


danage.) 


The Proud Princess has a quest of her ou though she will not talk 
about the details. She warns the characters to stay out of her way, for 
their own safety. Simply to keep them away, she tells then how to fnd the 
thessalhydra. 


The thessalhydra uses the Upside Down 
as a way to return to its lair without 
being tracked. The lair is a cave where y? 
the Material Plane and the Upside Down N 
touch. A special plant grows there—a 
plant whose flowers bloom in both worlds. 
These flowers can be used to cross 
between worlds if you perform a certain 
ritual. A key component of this ritual 

is blood from a monstrosity (a type of 
creature). The thessalhydra is 

a Monstrosity, so it can use its own 
blood to open 4 gateway. 


The Proud Princess can point them to the cavern where the flowers grow, 
but if the characters want to open a gateway, they'll also need the blood of 
a monstrosity. Luckily, she knows of one that has been stalking around the 
Upside Down lately: a demogorgon! 


She tells them that the demogorgon. is attracted to the smell of blood. 

The easiest way to get its attention is to spill blood on the ground. 

But since there are so few creatures in the Upside Down, the only source is 
the characters themselves. Using a weapon. carefully, a character can. do minor 
damage (cutting their palu) causing i hp of. damage And spilling a small amount 
of blood. If the group spills a total of 3 hp worth of blood, the demogorgon 
will arrive dé minutes later, leaping trom the darkness and attacking the group. 


If the characters don’t want to spill their own blood, they can stalk the 
denogorgon, but this is very difficult. One character should try a DCs 
Wisdom (Survival) check for the group. If this is successful, they have found 
the demogorgon If it fails, the group may try again (with the same character 
or a different one making the check). If the group fails three times, the 
demogorgon has found them and attacks, but the characters are surprised 
(see chapter 2 of the rulebook for how surprise works). 


DE ORGON 

A demogorgon is a monstrosity the 
size and shape of an adult human, but 
its mouth fills its face and opens like a " Ht" 
blooming flower. One currently lives in the upside "mm MV 
and no one knows where it caue trom originally. It’s 
incredibly strong and can heal itself from damage it 
takes (even here in the Upside Dow). Like a shark, 
a demogorgon is drawn to the scent of blood, 
and goes into a frenzy when blood is near. 


The Proud Princess says that they need a few 
ounces of blood from the creature to open 

a gateway (fling an empty potion vial will 

do nicely, but let the characters solve the " Y à 
problem). If the deuogorgon. is killed, they can get the blood easily. 
But let them try other ways if they don’t want to fight to the death, 
For example, they can get blood off a sword blade immediately after it 
strikes and damages the creature (they must do this four times to get 
enough blood). 


USING DEMPGORGON BLOOD 

After the characters have gotten enough demogorgon blood, they can 
take it to the cavern with the flowers. If they pour the blood on one of 
the flowers, it bursts open violently (anyone standing next to the flower 
must succeed on De 12 Dexterity save or be knocked prone), creating 
a cross-planar gate. Stepping through leads to area i of the lair of the 
thessalhydra. 


LAIR OF THE THESSALHUDRA 


When the characters step out of an oversized flower (like the one 
they stepped into in the Upside Down), they are back in the Material 
Plane—home. In tact, they are pretty close to Sir Tristan’s castle 
(they can see the towers above the tree line). Prints in the dirt make 
it clear that the thessalhydra has come this way often and. the tracks 
lead into a nearby cave. 


Area i. Entrance to the cave. Some of the cross-planar flowers grow 
along the rocks here. 


Area 2. This cave is thick with webs trom floor to ceiling. Three giant 
spiders live here. If the characters don’t bother them, they won't 
bother the characters. 


Area 3. There’s a 20-foot-wide pit. It takes a successful DC 12 
Strength (Athletics) check to jump across. Failing a jump without a 
satety rope tied to you means you fall away into darkness and take 


dio bludgeoning damage. The pit is So feet deep. 


Nearby is a hidden passage (marked as an “S” 

on the map). It takes a successful DC 12 Wisdom 
(Perception) check to notice it. Once found, it can 
be used freely. 


Area 4. A tribe of ten troglodytes live here. 
When the thessalhydra moved in, the trogs 
began to worship it as a god. Now they 

) protect it while it sleeps. If the characters 
have already killed the thessalhydra, the trogs 
begin to worship them as their new gods. 


Area 5. At the back of this cave is an area that appears wet, like a mud 
patch or a shallow puddle, and occasionally ripples or bubbles. It c actually 
an ochre jelly. If the characters don’t bother it, it von x bother then. 


Area C. This is where the troglodytes Jo to leave offerings 
in worship of the thessalhydra. The walls are covered with small niches, 
each of which contains an offering. (See “Conclusion” below.) 


Area 7. This cavern is where the thessaludra lurks. It is here and 
sleeping. If the characters can sneak up on it, they can take the 
creature by surprise (see chapter 2 of the rulebook for how surprise works). 


CONCLUSION 


a If the characters kill the thessalhydra, they have successfully completed — 
E this adventure. When they chop off the creature’s heads and. bring then — 
sae s back to Sir Tristan, he will welcome then as conquering heroes, shower 

them with treasure, and grant each one a boon (as long as it is within x 
his power to do so). Additionally, in area 6 of the thessalhydra’s lair 
they will fnd coins, gems, and artwork worth 1,000 gold pieces, plus 
one magic item of your (the Dungeon Master s) choice from appendix A 
trom the rulebook. 


Further Adventures 

Perhaps the best reward of all is that the characters each gain a level. Use the 
information on the back of the character sheets to make them 4th level. They will then 
be ready to seek more adventure and rewards in future games of Dunceons & Dracons! 


D&D. 


© NETFLIX 
OFFICIAL MERCHANDISE 
WWW.NETFLIX.COM 


®* AND/OR TM* & © 2018 HASBRO, PAWTUCKET, RI 02861-1059 USA. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. TM & & DENOTE U.S. TRADEMARKS. ITEM # E3702 
CONSUMER CONTACT: 
USA AND CANADA: HASBRO GAMES, CONSUMER AFFAIRS DEPT., P.O. BOX 200, PAWTUCKET, RI 02861-1059 USA. TEL. 800-255-5516. 


AUSTRALIA CONSUMER SERVICE: AUCONSUMERCARE@AP.HASBRO.COM 
NEW ZEALAND CONSUMER SERVICE: NZCONSUMERCARE@HASBRO.COM 


NETFLIX 


OFFICIAL MERCHANDISE 


eet 


HASBROGAMING:.COM wr 


T Strength 


+4 Dexterity 
.*2 Constitution 
.:2 Intelligence 
+0. Wisdom 
+4 Charisma 


SAVING THROWS 


= 


Ooeeooeeooeoeoooeoe 


Ale lt le Ie lt Ie FR Je le l IR Fe Oe de lele 
$ |= |B |& [e |o |B |S fo © Jo Jo [Io [e Ko Jo Jo © [A 


Acrobatics 
Animal Handling 
Arcana ( 
Athletics 
Deception 
History 

Insight 
Intimidation 
Investigation 
Medicine 
Nature ( 
Perception 
Performance 
Persuasion (C! 
Religion ( 
Sleight of Hand 
Stealth 


Survival 


SKILLS 


Languages. Common, Dwarvish 
Proficiencies. Acrobatics, Arcana (expertise), 
battleoxe, hand crossbow, disguise kit, drum, 
handaxe, harp, horn, Investigation (expertise), 
light armor, light hammer, longsword, lute, 
Performance, rapier, shortsword, simple 
weapons, smith's tools, Stealth, warhammer 
Stonecunning. Whenever you make an 
Intelligence (History) check related to the origin 
of stonework, you are considered proficient 

in the history skill and add double your 
proficiency bonus to the check, instead of your 
normal proficency bonus. 


OTHER PROFICIENCIES & LANGUAGES 


Bard 3 
CLASS & LEVEL 


Hill Dwarf 
RACE 


M inmarive J M. Seer 


CURRENT HIT POINTS 


TEMPORARY HIT POINTS 


suns O-O-O 


HITDICE DEATH SAVES 


Dagger* 1d4 2 piercing 


Rapier 1d8 + 2 piercing 


*You can throw a dagger 20 feet, or up to 60 
feet with disadvantage on the attack roll 

Spell Slots. You have four Ist-level and two 
2nd-level spell slots. To cast a spell of Ist level or 
higher, you must expend a slot of the spell’s level 
orhigher. 

Spells Known. You know the following spells 
Cantrips—prestidigitation, vicious mockery; Ist- 
level—charm person, comprehend languages, 
detect magic, sleep; 2nd-level—invisibility, 
suggestion. Spell descriptions are in the 
rulebook 


ATTACKS & SPELLCASTING 


- Leather armor 
- Dagger 

- Rapier 

-Ink (1 ounce bottle) 
-Ink Pen 

- Map or Scroll Case (2) 
-Chest 

-Fine Clothes (2) 
-Lamp 

- Oil (flask) (2) 

- Paper (one sheet) (5) 
- Perfume (vial) 

- Sealing Wax 

-Soap 

-Drum 

-Lute 

- Disguise Kit 


EQUIPMENT 


Entertainer 
BACKGROUND 


Neutral Good 
ALIGNMENT 


PLAYER NAME 


900 
EXPERIENCE POINTS 


Spelicasting Ability. Charisma is your 
spellcasting ability for your spells. The saving 
throw DC to resist a spell you cast is 12. Your 
attack bonus when you make an attack with a 
spell is +4, See the rulebook for rules on casting 
your spells. 

Bardic Inspiration. You can inspire others 
through stirring words or music. Use a bonus 
‘action on your turn to grant one Bardic 
Inspiration die (de) to one creature other than 
yourself within 60 feet of you who can hear you. 
Once within the next 10 minutes, the creature 
oon roll the die and add the number rolled to 
one ability check, attack roll, or saving throw. 
You can use this two times. You regain expended 
uses when you finish a long rest. 

Song of Rest. You can use soothing music or 
oration to help revitalize your wounded allies 
during a short rest. You or any friendly creature. 
who spends one or more Hit Dice also regains an 
extra 1dó hit points. 

Cutting Words. You know how to use your wit 

to distract and confuse others. When a creature 
that you can see within 60 feet of you mokes 

on attack roll, an ability check, or a damage 
roll, you can use your reaction to expend one of 
your uses of Bardic Inspiration, rolling a Bardic 
Inspiration die and subtracting the number rolled 
from the creature's roll. The creature isimmune 
ifit can't hear you or if it's immune to being 
charmed. 

Darkvision. You see in dim light within a 60- 

foot radius of you os if it were bright light, and in 
darkness in that radius as if it were dim light. You 
can't discern color in darkness, only shades of gray. 
Dwarven Resilience. You have advantage on 
saving throws against poison, and you have 
resistance against poison damage. 


FEATURES & TRAITS 


PERSONALITY ans 


IDEALS 


BONDS 


FLAWS 


ersonal use. 


Dwarf 


Kingdoms rich in ancient grandeur, halls carved into the 
roots of mountains, the echoing of picks and hammers 

in mines and blazing forges, a commitment to clan and 
tradition, and hatred of goblins and orcs—these common 
threads are the heritage of every dwarf. 


Bold and hardy, dwarves are known as skilled warriors, 
miners, and workers of stone and metal. They can live to be 
more than 400 years old, so the oldest living dwarves often 
remember a very different world. 


Dwarves are solid and enduring, like the mountains they 
love, weathering the centuries with stoic endurance. 
Individual dwarves are determined and loyal, true to their 
word and committed in action, sometimes to the point of 
stubbornness. 


Dwarven Toughness. Your hit point maximum increases by 1, 
and it increases by 1 every time you gain a level (included). 


Bard 


Whether scholar, skald, or scoundrel, a bard weaves magic 
through words and music to inspire allies, demoralize 

foes, and even heal wounds. Not every minstrel singing 

in a tavern or jester cavorting in a royal court is a bard. 
Discovering the m hidden in music requires hard study 
and some measure of natural talent that most troubadours 
and jongleurs lack. A bard's life is spent wandering across 
the land gathering lore, telling stories, and living on the 
gratitude of audiences. After telling so many stories about 
heroes accomplishing mighty deeds, many bards take these 
themes to heart and assume heroic roles themselves. 


Spellcasting. You have learned to untangle and reshape 
the fabric of reality in harmony with your wishes and 
music, See chapter 4 of the rulebook for general rules of 
spelicasting. 


Jack of All Trades. You can add half your proficiency bonus, 
rounded down, to any ability check you make that doesn't 
already include your proficiency bonus (included). 


Background 


You thrive in front of an audience. You know how to 
entrance them, entertain them, and even inspire them. 
Your poetics can stir the hearts of those who hear you, 
awakening grief or joy, laughter or anger. Your music 
raises their spirits or captures their sorrow. Your dance 
steps captivate, your humor cuts to the quick. Whatever 
techniques you use, your art is your life. 


By Popular Demand. You can always find a place to 
perform, usually in an inn or tavern but possibly with a circus, 
at a theater, or even in a noble's court. At such a place, you 
receive free lodging and food of a modest or comfortable 
standard (depending on the quality of the establishment), 
as long as you perform each night. In addition, your 
performance makes you something of a local figure. 

When strangers recognize you in a town where you have 
performed, they typically take a liking to you. 


Gaining Levels 


As you adventure and overcome challenges, you goin 
experience points (XP), as explained in the rulebook. 


With each level you gain, you gain one additional Hit Die 
and add 1d8 (or 5) + 2 to your hit point maximum. 


You gain access to more spells as you gain levels. The 
Spellcasting Advancement table shows how many bard 
cantrips you know as well as how many spell slots you have 
to cast your spells of Ist level and higher. 


SPELLCASTING ADVANCEMENT 
—Speli Slots per Spell Level— 


Level  Cantrips Known Spelis Known. Ist 2nd 3rd 
3rd 2 6 4 2 — 
4th 3 7 4 3 =- 
Sth 3 8 4 3 2 


4TH LEVEL: 2,700 XP 


Spells. You learn one additional bard cantrip of your 
choice. In addition, you learn one more bard spell of your 
choice, and gain one additional 2nd-level spell slot. 
Bardic Inspiration. You can use this feature three times 
before needing to rest and regain your uses. 

Ability Score Improvement. Your Charisma increases to 16, 
which has the following effects: 

* Your Charisma modifier becomes +3. 

* Your spell saving throw DC increases to 13. 

* Your bonus for your spell attacks increases to «5. 

* Your modifier to Charisma saving throws increases by 1. 
* Your modifier to Charisma-based skills increases by 1. 


5TH LEVEL: 6,500 XP 


Spells. You learn one more bard spell of your choice. In 

addition, you can now cast 3rd-level spells and gain two 

3rd-level spell slots. 

Bardic Inspiration. The bonus granted by your Bardic 

Inspiration die changes to 138. 

Font of Inspiration. You regain all of your expended uses of 

Bardic Inspiration when you finish a short or long rest. 

Proficiency Bonus. Your proficiency bonus increases to «3, 

which has the following effects: 

* Your attack bonus increases by 1 for your spell attacks and 
for weapons you're proficient with. 

* Your spell saving throw DC increases by 1. 

* Your modifier for saving throws ond skills you're proficient in 
(indicated by a @) increases by 1. 


IMPROVING YOUR ARMOR 

As you acquire treasure, you can buy better armor to 
improve your Armor Class. The rulebook contains equipment, 
including armor. 


DUNGEONS G DRAGONS* 


J CHARACTER NAME 


+0. Strength 
+3. Dexterity 
+2_ Constitution 


+1_ Intelligence 


44 Wisdom 
+2. Charisma 


SAVING THROWS 


= 


Ooooeooeoeooeeooooo 


Acrobatics (C 


Arcana ( 
Athletics (Str) 
Deception ( 
History 
Insight 


Investigation (Int 
Medicine C 
Nature (Int 
Perception (Wis) 


Persuasion 
Religion 

Sleight of Hand (C 
Stealth (Dex) 
Survival (W 


SKILLS 


Languages. Common, Elvish, Orc, Dwarvish 


Proficiencies. Heavy armor, History, Insight, 
light armor, longbow, longsword, Medicine, 
medium armor, Perception, Religion, shields, 
shortbow, shortsword, simple weapons 


OTHER PROFICIENCIES & LANGUAGES 


Animal Handling (V 


Intimidation (Cho; 


Performance (Ct 


Cleric 3 
CLASS & LEVEL 


Wood Elf 
RACE 


CURRENT HIT POINTS 


HIT DICE 


1d8 + 3 piercing 
1d6 Bludgeoning 


1d8 + 2 force 


Cantrips. You know guidance, light, and sacred 

flame, and can cast them at will. Descriptions are 

found in the rulebook. 

Spell Slots. You have four |st-level spell slots and 

two 2nd-level spell slots you can use to cast your 

prepared spells. 

Prepared Spells. You prepare five spells of Ist 

ot 2nd level, in any combination, to make them 

available for you to cast, choosing from the cleric 

spell list in the rulebook. In addition, you always 

have four domain spells prepared: bless, cure 

wounds, lesser restoration, and spiritual weapon. 
ATTACKS & SPELLCASTING 


Spiritual Weapon +4 


- Shield 

- Chain Mail 

-Mace 

- Light Crossbow 

- Crossbow Bolts (20) 
- Backpack 

- Bedroll 

- Common Clothes 

- Mess Kit 

- Rations (1 day) (10) 
- Hempen Rope (50 feet) 
- Tinderbox 

- Torch (10) 

- Waterskin 

Amulet 

- Emblem 


EQUIPMENT 


Acolyte 
BACKGROUND 


Lawful Good 
ALIGNMENT. 


PLAYER NAME 


900 


EXPERIENCE POINTS 


ability for your spells. The saving throw DC to resist 
aspell you castis 12. Your attack bonus when you 
make an attack with a spellis +4. See the rulebook 
for rules on costing your spells. 

Disciple of Life. Your healing spells are particularly 
effective. Whenever you restore hit points to a 
creature with a spell of Ist level or higher, the 
creature regains additional hit points equal to 2 + 
the spell’s level. 

Channel Divinity. You can channel divine energy 
directly from your deity, using that energy to 

fuel one of two magical effects: Tum Undead or 
Preserve Life. Both effects require you use your 
action and present your holy symbol; you choose 
which effect to create. You must then finish a short 
‘or long rest to use your Channel Divinity again. 

Turn Undead. When you use Turn Undead, each 
undead that can see or hear you within 30 feet of 
you must make a Wisdom saving throw (DC 12). If 
the creature fails its saving throw, it s turned for 1 
minute or untilit takes damage. A turned creature 
must spend its tum trying to move as far away from 
you asit can, andit can't wilingly move to a space 
within 30 feet of you. It also can't take reactions. For 
its action, it can use only the Dash action or try to 
‘escape from an effect that prevents it from moving. 
Ifit hos nowhere it can move, the creature can use 
the Dodge action. 

Preserve Life. When you use Preserve Life, choose 
‘one or more creatures within 30 feet of you to heal, 
then distribute up to 15 hit points among them. This 
feature can restore a creature to no more than 
half of its hit point maximum. At 4th level, you con 
distribute 20 hit points, and at 5th level 25. 
Darkvision. You see in dim light within a 60- 

foot radius of you os if it were bright light, and in 
darknessin that radius asif it were dim light. You 
can't discern color in darkness, only shades of gray. 
Fey Ancestry. You have advantage on saving 
throws against being charmed, and magic can't 
put you to sleep. 

Mask of the Wild. You can attempt to hide even 
when you are only lightly obscured by foliage, 
heavy rain, falling snow, mist, and other natural 
phenomena. 


FEATURES & TRAITS 


PERSONALITY TRAITS 


IDEALS 


BONDS 


FLAWS 


ersonal use. 


Elf 


Elves are people of otherworldly grace, living in the world 
but not entirely part of it. They live in places of ethereal 
beauty, in the midst of ancient forests or in silvery spires 
glittering with faerie light, where soft music drifts through 
the air and gentle fragrances waft on the breeze. Elves love 
nature and magic, art and artistry, music and poetry. Elves 
can live over 700 years. They are more often amused than 
excited, and more likely to be curious than greedy. They 
tend to remain aloof and unfazed by petty happenstance, 
and they trust in diplomacy and compromise to resolve 
differences before they escalate to violence. 


Most elves dwell in small forest villages hidden among the 

trees. Their contact with outsiders is usually limited, though 
a few elves make a good living by trading crafted items for 
metals, which they have no interest in mining. 


Trance. Elves don't need to sleep. They meditate deeply, 
remaining semiconscious, for 4 hours a day and gain the 
same benefit a human does from 8 hours of sleep. 


Cleric 


Clerics are intermediaries between the mortal world and 
the distant planes of the gods. As varied as the gods they 
serve, Clerics strive to embody the handiwork of their deities. 
No ordinary priest or temple servant, a cleric is imbued with 
divine magic. 


Divine Domain. You draw magic from the divine domain—a 
sphere of magical influence—associated with your deity. 
Your domain lets you have certain spells, such as bless and 
cure wounds, always prepared. 


Your domain is Life, which is affiliated with many gods of 
good. Work with your DM to decide what your specific deity 
or pantheon are, and what additional details may arise from 
that. 


Background 


You have spent your life in the service of a temple to 
a specific god or pantheon of gods. You act as an 
intermediary between the realm of the holy and the mortal 
world, But you are not a cleric. 


Work with your DM to detail the nature of your religious 
service. Were you a lesser functionary in a temple, raised 
from childhood to assist the priests in the sacred rites? Or 
were you a high priest who suddenly experienced a call to 
serve your god in a different way? Perhaps you were the 
leader of a small cult outside df any established temple 
structure, or even an occult group that served a fiendish 
master that you now deny. 


Shelter of the Faithful. As an acolyte, you command 

the respect of those who share your faith, and you can 
perform the religious ceremonies of your deity. You and 
your adventuring companions can expect to receive free 
healing and care at a temple, shrine, or other established 
presence of your faith. Those who share your religion will 
support you (but only you) at a modest lifestyle. 


Elf, page 2 of 2 


Gaining Levels 


As you adventure and overcome challenges, you gain 
experience points (XP), as explained in the rulebook. 


With each level you gain, you gain one additional Hit Die 
and add 188 (or 5) + 2 to your hit point maximum. 


You gain access to more spells as you gain levels. You 
can prepare a number of spells equal to your level + 
your Wisdom modifier, as shown in the Spelicasting 
Advancement table. You also gain more spell slots. 


SPELLCASTING ADVANCEMENT 
—Spell Slots per Spell Level— 


Level Prepared Spells Ist 2nd 3rd 
3rd 5 4 2; = 
4th 7 4 3 — 
5th 8 4 3 2 


4TH LEVEL: 2,700 XP 


Spells. You learn one more cleric cantrip of your choice. In 

addition, the number of spells you can prepare increases to 

7. 

Ability Score Improvement. Your Wisdom increases to 16, 

which has the following effects: 

* Your Wisdom modifier becomes +3, 

* Your spell saving throw DC increases to 13. 

* Your bonus for your spell attacks increases to +5, 

* Your bonus damage to spiritual weapon becomes «3. 

* Your modifier to Wisdom saving throws increases by 1. 

* Your modifier to Wisdom-based skills increases by 1. 

* Because the modifier for your Perception skill increased, 
your passive Wisdom (Perception) score increases by 1. 


5TH LEVEL: 6,500 XP 


Spells. You con now prepare and cast 3rd-level spells, 

and the number of spells you can prepare increases to 8. 

In addition to the spells you chose to prepare, you always 

have two additional domain spells prepared: beacon of 

hope and revivify. 

Proficiency Bonus. Your proficiency bonus increases to «3, 

which has the following effects: 

* Your attack bonus increases by 1 for your spell attacks and 
for weapons you're proficient with. 

* You spell saving throw DC and the DC for your Turn 
Undead each increase by 1. 

* Your modifier for saving throws and skills you're proficient in 
(indicated by a @) increases by 1 

Destroy Undead. When an undead fails its saving throw 

against your Turn Undead feature, the creature is instantly 

destroyed if its challenge rating is 1/2 or lower. 


IMPROVING YOUR ARMOR 

As you acquire treasure, you can buy better armor to 
improve your Armor Class. The rulebook contains equipment, 
including armor. 


LS CHARACTER NAME 


+0. Dexterity 
2. Constitution 
+0. Intelligence 
+4 Wisdom 

+4. Charisma 


SAVING THROWS 


= 


OOoOooeoooooeeooeooo 


40. Acrobatics (Dex) 

.32. Animal Handling (W 
Arcana ( 
Athletics (Str 
Deception 
History (Int) 
Insight (Wis) 
Intimidation 
Investigation 
Medicine (' 
Nature (Int) 
Perception (Wis) 
Performance (C 
Persuasion (Cho) 
Religion (Int 
Sleight of Hand (Dex 
Stealt! 


Survival (^ 


(2) PRESE WEDOM FECE 


Languages. Elvish, Common 


Proficiencies. Athletics, dice set, heavy 
armor, Insight, Intimidation, light armor, martial 
weapons, medium armor, Persuasion, shields, 
simple weapons, vehicles (land) 


OTHER PROFICIENCIES & LANGUAGES 


Human, page 1 of 2 


o 


— RACE 


Paladin 3 
CLASS & LEVEL 


Human 


CURRENT HIT POINTS 


HIT DICE 


Javelin 45 1d6 + 3 piercing 


Longsword +5 1d8 + 3 slashing 


Divine Smite. When you hit o creature with a 
melee weapon attack, you can expend one spell 
slot to deal 2d8 radiant damage in addition to 
the weapon's damage. The damage increases 
by 108 if the target is an undead or a fiend. 
Spell Slots. You have three Ist-level spell slots you 
can use to cast your prepared spells 
Prepared Spells. You prepare three spells to 
moke them available for you to cast, choosing 
from the following list: bless, command, cure 
wounds, detect magic, heroism, and shield of 
faith. In addition, you always have two oath spells 
prepared: protection from evil and good and 
sanctuary. 

ATTACKS & SPELLCASTING 


- Chain Mail 
- Longsword 

- Javelin (6) 

- Backpack 

- Bedroll 

- Common Clothes 

- Mess Kit 

-Rations (1 day) (10) 
-Hempen Rope (50 feet) 
-Tinderbox 

-Torch (10) 

- Waterskin 


Soldier 
BACKGROUND 


Lawful Good 900 
ALIGNMENT 


PLAYER NAME 


EXPERIENCE POINTS 


awareness fo detect the presence of strong evil ond 
powerful good. Until the end of your next fum, you 
know the location of any celestial, fiend, or undead 
within 60 feet of you that is not behind total cover. 

You know the type (celestial, fiend, or undead) of any 
being whose presence you sense, but not is identity 
(the name of a particular vampire, for instance). 

Within the same radius, you also detect the presence 
of any place or object that has been consecrated or 
desecrated. You can use this feature three times, When 
you finish a long rest, you regain all expended uses. 

Lay on Hands. You have a pool of healing power that 
replenishes when you take a long rest. With that pool, 
you can restore a total of 15 hit points. As an action, you 
can touch a creature and draw power from the pool to 
restore a number of hit points to that creature, up to the 
maximum amount remaining in your pool. Alternatively, 
you can expend 5 hit points from your pool of healing 
to cure the target of one disease or neutralize one 
poison affecting it. You can cure multiple diseases and 
Neutralize multiple poisons with a single use of Lay on 
Hands, expending hit points separately for each one. 
This feature has no effect on undead and constructs. 
Spelicasting Ability. Charisma is your spelicasting 
ability for your paladin spells. The saving throw DC to 
resist a spell you cast is 12. Your attack bonus when you 
make an attack with a spellis +4. See the rulebook for 
rules on costing your spells. 

Divine Health. The divine magic flowing through you 
makes you immune to disease. 

Channel Divinity. You can channel divine energy 
directly from your deity, using that energy to 

fuel one of two magical effects: Turn Undead or 
Preserve Life. Both effects require you use your 
action and present your holy symbol; you choose 
which effect to create. You must then finish a short 
‘or long rest to use your Channel Divinity again. 


FEATURES & TRAITS 


PERSONALITY TRAITS, 


IDEALS 


BONDS 


FLAWS 


Human 


Humans are the youngest of the common races, late to 
arrive on the world scene and short-lived in comparison to 
dwarves, elves, and dragons. But they are the innovators, 
the achievers, and the pioneers of the world. 


Paladin 


Whatever their origin and their mission, paladins are united 
by their paths to stand against the forces of evil. Whether 
sworn before a god's altar and the witness of a priest, in a 
sacred glade before nature spirits and fey beings, or in a 
moment of desperation and grief with the dead as the only 
witness, a paladin's oath is a powerful bond. It is a source of 
power that turns a devout warrior into a blessed champion. 


Paladins train for years to learn the skills of combat, 
mastering a variety of weapons and armor. Even so, their 
martial skills are secondary to the magical power they wield: 
power to heal the sick and injured, to smite the wicked and 
the undead, and to protect the innocent and those who join 
them in the fight for justice. 


Spellcasting. You have learned to draw on divine magic 
through meditation and prayer to cast spells as a cleric 
does. See chapter 4 of the rulebook for general rules of 
spelicasting. 


Sacred Oath. You have sworn an Oath of Devotion. This 
binds a paladin to the loftiest ideals of justice, virtue, and 
order. Sometimes called cavaliers, white knights, or holy 
warriors, these paladins meet the ideal of the knight in 
shining armor, acting with honor in pursuit of justice and the 
greater good. They hold themselves to the highest standards 
of conduct, and some, for better or worse, hold the rest of 
the world to the same standards. 


Fighting Style (Defense). While you are wearing armor, you 
gain a +1 bonus to AC (included). 


Sacred Weapon. As an action, you can imbue one weapon 
that you are holding with positive energy. For 1 minute, 

you add your Charisma modifier to attack rolls made with 
that weapon (with a minimum bonus of +1). The weapon 
also emits bright light in a 20-foot radius and dim light 20 
feet beyond that. If the weapon is not already magical, it 
becomes magical for the duration. 


Turn the Unholy. As an action, you present your holy symbol 
and speak a prayer. Each fiend or undead that can see or 
hear you within 30 feet of you must make a Wisdom saving 
throw (DC 12). If the creature fails its saving throw, it is turned 
for 1 minute or until it takes damage. A turned creature must 
spend its turns trying to move as far away from you as it can, 
and it can't willingly move to a space within 30 feet of you. 
It also can't take reactions. For its action, it can use only the 
Dash action or try to escape from an effect that prevents it 
from moving. If there's nowhere to move, the creature can 
use the Dodge action. 


Background 


War has been your life for as long as you care to remember. 
You trained as a youth, studied the use of weapons and 
armor, learned basic survival techniques, including how 

to stay alive on the battlefield. You might have been part 

of a standing national army or a mercenary company, or 
perhaps a member of a local militia who rose to prominence 
during a recent war. 


Military Rank. You have a rank from your career as a 
soldier. Soldiers loyal to your former military organization 


Human, page 2 of 2 © NETFLIX. 


still recognize your authority and influence, and they defer 
to you if they are of a lower rank. You can invoke your rank 
to exert influence over other soldiers and requisition simple 
equipment or horses for temporary use. You can also usually 
gain access to friendly military encampments and fortresses 
where your rank is recognized. 


Gaining Levels 


As you adventure and overcome challenges, you gain 
experience points (XP), as explained in the rulebook. 


With each level you gain, you gain one additional Hit Die 
and add 1d10 (or 6) + 2 to your hit point maximum. 


You gain access to more spells as you gain levels. The 
Spelicasting Advancement table shows how many spell slots 
you have to cast your spells of Ist level and higher. 


SPELLCASTING ADVANCEMENT 
—Spell Slots per Spell Level— 


Level Ist 2nd 3rd 
3rd 3 = = 
4th 3 = — 
5th 4 2 ES 


4TH LEVEL: 2,700 XP 


Prepared Spells. The number of spells you can prepare 
increases to 5. 

Divine Sense. You can use this feature four times before 
needing to rest and regain your uses. 

Lay on Hands. The total number of hit points you can restore 
increases to 20. 

Ability Score Improvement. Your Charisma increases to 16, 
which has the following effects: 

* Your Charisma modifier becomes «3. 

* Your spell saving throw DC increases to 13. 

* Your bonus for your spell attacks increases to «5. 

* Your modifier to Charisma saving throws increases by 1. 

* Your modifier to Charisma-based skills increases by 1. 


5TH LEVEL: 6,500 XP 

Known Spells. Add the following 2nd-level paladin spells to 

the list of spells you can prepare: aid and magic weapon. 

Lay on Hands. The total number of hit points you can restore 

increases to 25. 

Divine Smite. The extra damage increases by 1d8 for each 

spell level higher than Ist, to a maximum of 508. 

Spells. You can now cast 2nd-level spells and gain one 

]st-level spell slot and two 2nd-level spell slots. In addition to 

the spells you prepare, you always have two additional oath 

spells prepared: lesser restoration and zone of truth. 

Extra Attack. You can attack twice, instead of once, 

whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. 

Proficiency Bonus. Your proficiency bonus increases to «3, 

which has the following effects: 

* Your attack bonus increases by 1 for your spell attacks and 
for weapons you're proficient with. 

* You spell saving throw DC increases by 1. 

* Your modifier for saving throws and skills you're proficient in 
(indicated by a @) increases by 1. 


IMPROVING YOUR ARMOR 

As you acquire treasure, you can buy better armor to 
improve your Armor Class. The rulebook contains equipment, 
including armor. 


st LLC. Permission opy this document for personal use. 


+4 Dexterity 
+2. Constitution 
+0. Intelligence 
.*l Wisdom 

+0 Charisma 


SAVING THROWS 


oY 


Acrobatics (Dex) 
Animal Handling 
Arcana 
Athletics 
Deception ( 
History (int 
Insight (V 
Intimidation ( 
Investigation (| 
Medicine (V 


Noture ( 


Perception 
Performance (c 
Persuasion 
Religion (int) 
Sleight of Hand ( 
Stealth (Dex 


+ j+ je j+ jt je j+ le je l es l+ je lt l+ jt s s 
© D | |ò [ò [6 le [Oo F jo IS fe jo Jo |o ò fe | 


eoooooeoooeeooeoe 


Survival (Wis) 


SKILLS 


Languages. Common, Orc, Deep Speech, Elvish 


Proficiencies. Animal Handling, Athletics, 
horn, Insight, intimidation, light armor, martial 
weapons, medium armor, Perception, shields, 
simple weapons, Survival 


OTHER PROFICIENCIES & LANGUAGES 


O 


Ranger 3 
CLASS & LEVEL 


Half-Orc 
RACE 


CURRENT HIT POINTS 


tawes OOO 


DEATH SAVES 


HIT DICE 


+6 1d8 + 2 piercing 


+5 1d6 + 3 piercing 


Colossus Slayer. Your tenacity can wear down 
the most potent foes. When you hit a creature 
with a weapon attack, the creature takes 

on extra ids damage if it's below its hit point 
maximum. You can deal this extra damage only 
once per tum 


Spell Slots. You have three ist level spell slots. 
To cast a spell, you must expend a slot of the 
spell’s level or higher. 


Spells Known. You know the following spells: cure 
wounds, hunter's mark, and longstrider. 


ATTACKS & SPELLCASTING 


- Scale Mai 
- Shortsword 

- Longbow 

- Arrows (20) 

- Backpack 

- Bedroll 

- Traveler's Clothes 
-Hunting Trap 

- Mess Kit 

-Rations (1 doy) (10) 
-Hempen Rope (50 feet) 
-Tinderbox 

-Torch (10) 

- Waterskin 

-Stoff 


EQUIPMENT. 


Outlander 
BACKGROUND 


Neutral Good 
ALIGNMENT 


PLAYER NAME 


900 


EXPERIENCE POINTS 


Favored Enemy (Monstrosities). You have significant 
‘experience studying, tracking, and hunting 
monstrosities. You have advantage on Wisdom 
(Survival checks to track monstrosities, as well os on 
Intelligence checks to recall information about them. 
Natural Explorer (Forest). You are particularly familiar 
with forests ond are adept at traveling and surviving 
in such regions. When you make an intelligence or 
Wisdom check related to forests, your proficiency bonus 
is doubled if you are using a skill you are proficient in. 
While traveling for an hour or more in a forest, you gain 
the following benefits: 

Difficult terrain doesn't slow your group's travels. 

Your group can't become lost except by magical 

means. 

Even when you are engaged in another activity 

while traveling (such os foraging, navigating, or 

tracking), you remain alert to danger. 

It you are traveling alone, you can move stealthily at 

‘anormal pace. 

When you forage. you find twice as much food os 

you normally would. 

While tracking other creatures, you also lean their 

exact number, their sizes, and how long ago they 

Passed through the area. 
Fighting Style (Archery). You gain a +2 to attack rolls 
you make with ranged weapons (included). 
Spelicasting Ability. Wisdom is your spelicasting ability 
for your ranger spells. since your magic draws on your 
attunement to nature. The saving throw DC to resist a 
spell you costis 11. Your attack bonus when you make 
an attack with a spellis +3, See the rulebook for rules on 
casting your spells. 
Primeval Awareness. You can use your action and 
expend one ranger spell slot to focus your awareness on 
the region around you. For 1 minute per level of the spell 
slot you expend, you can sense whether the following 
types of creatures are present within 1 mile of you (or up 
to6milesif you are in a forest): aberrations, celestials, 
dragons, elementals fey, fends, and undead. This 
doesn't reveal the creatures’ location or number. 
Relentless Endurance. When you are reduced to Ohit 
points but not killed outright, you can drop to 1 hit point 
instead. You con't use this feature again until you finish 
along rest, 
Savage Attacks. When you score a critical hit with 
melee weopon attack, you can roll one of the 
weapon's damage dice one additional time and add it 
to the extra damage of the critical hit, 


FEATURES & TRAITS 


PERSONALITY TRAITS 


IDEALS 


BONDS 


FLAWS 


Half-Orc. page 2 of 2 


Half-Orc 


Orc and human tribes sometimes form alliances, joining 
forces into a larger horde to the terror of civilized lands 
nearby. When these alliances are sealed by marriages, half- 
orcs are born. Some half-orcs rise to become proud chiefs of 
orc tribes, their human blood giving them an edge over their 
full-blooded orc rivals. Some venture into the world to prove 
their worth among humans and other more civilized races. 
Many of these become adventurers, achieving greatness for 
their mighty deeds and notoriety for their barbaric customs 
and savage fury. 


Half-orcs' grayish pigmentation, sloping foreheads, jutting 
jaws, prominent teeth, and towering builds make their orcish 
heritage plain for all to see. Orcs regard battle scars as 
tokens of pride and ornamental scars as things of beauty. 


Half-orcs feel emotion powerfully. Rage doesn't just quicken 
their pulse; it makes their bodies burn. An insult stings like 
acid, and sadness saps their strength. But they laugh 

loudly and heartily, and simple bodily pleasures—feasting, 
drinking, wrestling, drumming, and wild dancing—fill 

their hearts with joy. They tend to be short-tempered 

and sometimes sullen, more inclined to action than 
contemplation and to fighting than discussing. The most 
accomplished half-orcs are those with enough self-control 
to get by in a civilized land. 


Ranger 


Warriors of the wilderness, rangers specialize in hunting the 
monsters that threaten the edges of civilization. They learn 
to track their quarry as a predator does, moving stealthily 
through the wilds and hiding themselves in brush and 
rubble. Rangers focus their combat training on techniques 
that are particularly useful against their specific favored 
foes. 


Though a ranger might make a living as a hunter, a guide, 
or a tracker, a ranger's true calling is to defend the outskirts 
of civilization from the ravages of monsters and humanoid 
hordes that press in from the wild. A ranger’s talents and 
abilities are honed with deadly focus on the grim task of 
protecting the borderlands. 


Spellcasting. Thanks to their familiarity with the wilds, 
rangers acquire the ability to cast spells that harness 
nature's power, much as a druid does. Their spells, like 
their combat abilities, emphasize speed, stealth, and the 
hunt. See chapter 4 of the rulebook for general rules of 
spelicasting. 


Background 


You grew up in the wilds, far from civilization and the 
comforts of town and technology. You've witnessed the 
migration of herds larger than forests, survived weather 
more extreme than any city-dweller could comprehend, 
and enjoyed the solitude of being the only thinking creature 
for miles in any direction. The wilds are in your blood, 
whether you were a nomad, an explorer, a recluse, a hunter- 
gatherer, or even a marauder. Even in places where you 
don't know the specific features of the terrain, you know the 
ways of the wild. 


Wanderer. You have an excellent memory for maps and 
geography, and you can always recall the general layout 
of terrain, settlements, and other features around you. In 
addition, you can find food and fresh water for yourself and 
up to five other people each day, provided that the land 
offers berries, small game, water, and so forth. 


Gaining Levels 


As you adventure and overcome challenges, you gain 
experience points (XP), as explained in the rulebook. 


With each level you gain, you gain one additional Hit Die 
and add 1d10 (or 6) + 2 to your hit point maximum. 


You gain access to more spells as you gain levels. The 
Spelicasting Advancement table shows how many ranger 
spells you know as well as how many spell slots you have to 
cast your spells of 1st level and higher. 


SPELLCASTING ADVANCEMENT 
—Spell Slots per Spell Le 


Level Spells Known Ist 2nd 3rd 
3rd 3 8 E = 
4th 3 3 — — 
5th 4 4 2 = 


4TH LEVEL: 2,700 XP 


Ability Score Improvement. Your Wisdom increases to 14, 
which has the following effects: 

* Your Wisdom modifier becomes +2. 

* Your spell saving throw DC increases to 12. 

* Your bonus for your spell attacks increases to «4. 

* Your modifier to Wisdom saving throws increases by 1. 

* Your modifier to Wisdom-based skills increases by 1 


5TH LEVEL: 6,500 XP 


Spells Known: You learn one additional ranger spell. 

Add one of the following to your Spells Known list: lesser 

restoration, pass without trace, or silence. 

Spells. You can now cast 2nd-level spells and gain two 2nd- 

level spell slots. 

Extra Attack. You can attack twice, instead of once, 

whenever you take the Attack action on your turn, 

Proficiency Bonus. Your proficiency bonus increases to +3, 

which has the following effects: 

* Your attack bonus increases by | for your spell attacks and 
for weapons you're proficient with. 

* You spell saving throw DC increases by 1. 

* Your modifier for saving throws and skills you're proficient in 
(indicated by a @) increases by 1. 


IMPROVING YOUR ARMOR 

As you acquire treasure, you can buy better armor to 
improve your Armor Class. The rulebook contains equipment, 
including armor. 


2018 W 


d to photocopy this document for personal use. 


À DUNGEONS & DRAGONS* 


AF Wizard 3 Acolyte 
CLASS & LEVEL BACKGROUND PLAYER NAME 
m] Holf-EIf Neutral Good 900 


B CHARACTER NAME RACE ALIGNMENT EXPERIENCE POINTS 


Spelicasting Ability. intelligence is your 
spelicasting ability for your spells. The saving 
throw DC to resist a spell you cost is 13. Your 
attack bonus when you make an attack with a 
spell is +5. See the rulebook for rules on casting 
your spells. 

Arcane Recovery. You can regain some of your 
magical energy by studying your spellbook. Once 
per day during a short rest, you can choose to 
recover expended spell slots with a combined 
level equal to less than half your wizard level 
(rounded down). 

Darkvision. You see in dim light within a 

60-foot radius of you as if it were bright light, and 
in darkness in that radius as if it were dim light. 
You can't discern color in darkness, only shades 
of gray. 

Fey Ancestry. You have advantage on saving 
throws against being charmed, and magic can't 
put you to sleep. 

Evocation Savant. The gold and time you must 
spend to copy an evocation spell into your 
spelibook is halved. 

Sculpt Spells. When you cast an evocation spell 
that affects other creatures you can see, you 
can choose a number of them equal to 1 + the 
spell’s level, The chosen creatures automatically 
succeed on their saving throws against the spell 
and they take no damage if they would normally 
take half damage on a successful save. 


L Strength 
+2. Dexterity 
Constitution 
+5. Intelligence CURRENT HIT POINTS 
8 Wisdom 


Charisma 


TEMPORARY HIT POINTS A 
J 


Acrobatics 


c 000 
fal OOO 


Animal Handling (W 


Arcana 
HIT DICE 


DEATH SAVES 


Athletics 
Deception 


History ( 
Insight (/ Dagger 1d4 + 2piercing 


Intimidation Ray of Frost +5 1d8 cold 


Investigation 


Medicine (V Shocking Grasp +5 ds lightning 


Cantrips. You know mage hana, ray of frost, and 
shocking grasp, and can cast them at will. 
Spell Slots. You have four ist. eve spell slots and 
two 2nd-level spell slots you can use to cast your 
prepared spells. 
Prepared Spells. You prepare four Ist-level spells 
and two 2nd-level spells to make them available 
for you to cast, choosing from the spells in your 
spellbook 
Spelibook. You have a spellbook containing 
these spells: Ist-level— burning hands, detect 
magic, mage armor, magic missile, shield, sleep, 
thunderwave; 2nd-level—fiaming sphere, misty 
step. Descriptions are in the rulebook 

ATTACKS & SPELLCASTING 


Nature 
Perception 
Performance ( 
Persuasion 


Religion 


Sleight of Hand 
Stealth 


Survival 


FEATURES & TRAITS 


SKILLS 


- Dagger 

-Crystal 

- Backpack 

- Bedroll 

- Traveler's Clothes 

- Component Pouch 

- Mess Kit 

- Rations (1 day) (10) 

- Hempen Rope (50 feet) 

- Spellbook 

-Tinderbox 

-Torch (10) 
Waterskin 

- Holy Symbol 

- Prayer Book 

- Incense Sticks (5) 

- Vestments 

- Common Clothes 


PERSONALITY TRAITS 


Languages. Common, Dwarvish, Elvish, Orc, 
Deep Speech 


Proficiencies. Arcana, light crossbows, dagger, IDEALS 


dart, dice set, Insight, Investigation, Medicine, 
quarterstaff, Religion, sling, Survival 


BONDS 


FLAWS 


OTHER PROFICIENCIES & LANGUAGES EQUIPMENT 


Hol . Alt page 1 of 2 


Holt-Eif, page 2 of 2 


Half-Elf 


Walking in two worlds but truly belonging to neither, half- 
elves combine what some say are the best qualities of their 
elf and human parents: human curiosity, inventiveness, 
and ambition tempered by the refined senses, love of 
nature, and artistic tastes of the elves. Some half-elves live 
among humans, set apart by their emotional and physical 
differences, watching friends and loved ones age while time 
barely touches them. Others live with the elves, growing 
restless as they reach adulthood in the timeless elven 
realms, while their peers continue to live as children. Many 
half-elves, unable to fit into either society, choose lives of 
solitary wandering or join with other misfits and outcasts in 
the adventuring life. 


Wizard 


Wizards are supreme magic-users. Drawing on the subtle 
weave of magic that permeates the cosmos, they cast 
spells of explosive fire, arcing lightning, subtle deception, 
and brute-force mind control. The mightiest wizards learn to 
conjure elementals from other planes of existence, glimpse 
the future, or turn slain foes into zombies. 


Background 


You have spent your life in the service of a temple to 

a specific god or pantheon of gods. You act as an 
intermediary between the realm of the holy and the mortal 
world. But you are not a cleric. 


Work with your DM to detail the nature of your religious 
service. Were you a lesser functionary in a temple, raised 
from childhood to assist the priests in the sacred rites? Or 
were you a high priest who suddenly experienced a call to 
serve your god in a different way? Perhaps you were the 
leader of a small cult outside of any established temple 
structure, or even an occult group that served a fiendish 
master that you now deny. 


Shelter of the Faithful. As on acolyte, you command 

the respect of those who share your faith, and you can 
perform the religious ceremonies of your deity. You and 
your adventuring companions can expect to receive free 
healing and care at a temple, shrine, or other established 
presence of your faith. Those who share your religion will 
support you (but only you) at a modest lifestyle. 


Gaining Levels 


As you adventure and overcome challenges, you gain 
experience points (XP), as explained in the rulebook. 


With each level you gain, you gain one additional Hit Die 
and add id (or 4) + 2 to your hit point maximum. 


You gain access to more spells as you gain levels. You 
can prepare a number of spells equal to your level + 
your Intelligence modifier, as shown in the Spelicasting 
Advancement table. You also gain more spell slots 


SPELLCASTING ADVANCEMENT 
—Spell Slots per Spell Level— 


Level Prepared Spells Ist 2nd 3rd 
3rd 6 4 2 — 
4th 8 4 3 — 
Sth 2 4 3 2 


ADDING TO YOUR SPELLBOOK 


Each time you gain a wizard level, you can add two wizard 
spells of your choice to your spellbook, chosen from the 
wizard spell list in the rulebook. Each of these spells must be 
of a level for which you have spell slots. On your adventures, 
you might also find scrolls or books containing other spells 
you can add to your spellbook. 


Copying a Spell into the Book. When you find a wizard 
spell, you can add it to your spellbook if it is of a level for 
which you have spell slots and if you can spare the time to 
decipher and copy it. 


For each level of the spell, the process takes 2 hours and 
requires 50 gp. The cost represents material components you 
expend as you experiment with the spell to master it, as well 
as the fine inks you need to record it. Once you have spent 
this time and money, you can prepare the spell just like your 
other spells. 


4TH LEVEL: 2,700 XP 


Spells. You learn one more wizard cantrip of your choice. In 
addition, you gain one 2nd-level spell slot. 

Ability Score Improvement. Your Intelligence increases to 

18, which has the following effects: 

* Your Intelligence modifier becomes «4. 

* Your spell saving throw DC increases by 1. 

* Your bonus for your spell attacks increases to «6. 

* Your modifier to Intelligence saving throws increases by 1. 
* Your modifier to Intelligence-based skills increases by 1. 


5TH LEVEL: 6,500 XP 


Spells. You can prepare and cast 3rd-level spells and you 

gain two 3rd-level spell slots. 

Proficiency Bonus. Your proficiency bonus increases to «3, 

which has the following effects: 

* Your attack bonus increases by 1 for your spell attacks and 
for weapons you're proficient with. 

* You spell saving throw DC increases by 1. 

* Your modifier for saving throws and skills you're proficient in 
(indicated by a @) increases by 1. 


is document for personal use. 


Mike Wheeler from Hawkins, Indiana, has created an awesome STARTER SET RULEBOOK 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS” adventure. and now you get to play it! 


Pick your character—will you be 

Will the Wise or Dustin the Dwarf?— 
and get your fireballs ready as you 
investigate the mysterious castle 

and battle the ferocious DEMOGORGON. 


Will you make it out alive? Will you 
encounter a beast with seven heads? 
Did you pack your wrist rocket? Prepare 
yourself for anything, because 

the game just got STRANGER. 


Great for the new 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 
player! 


Contents: 
Stranger Things adventure book · rulebook · 5 Stranger Things character sheets · 
6 dice + Demogorgon figure « Paintable Demogorgon figure 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, Forgotten Realms, the dragon ampersand, Player's Handbook, Monster Manual, 
Dungeon Master's Guide, all other Wizards of the Coast product names, and their respective logos are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast 
in the USA and other countries. All characters and their distinctive likenesses are property of Wizards of the Coast. This material is protected 


under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained herein 
is prohibited without the express written permission of Wizards of the Coast. ©2018 Wizards of the Coast LLC. (FIASBROGAMINGYCOM) 


®* and/or TM* 018 Hasbro, Pawtucket, RI 02861-1059 USA. All Rights Reserved. TM & ® denote U.S. Trademarks. 
Colors and parts may vary from those pictured. Retain this information for future reference. 


HASBRO CANADA, LONGUEUIL, QC, CANADA J4G 1G2. Tu 
Les couleurs et les pieces peuvent différer de celles illustrées. Conservez cette information N ET FL | X E War 
ICIAL MEROHAN 


pour référence ultérieure. NY 
MADE IN CHINA / FABRIQUÉ EN CHINE FL 


