Y IW. 
uns GUIDE 


FFNS 


Join the guilds of Ravnica in this campaign sourcebook 
for the world’s greatest roleplaying game . "= 
, 


GUILDMASTERS GUIDE 
To RAVNICA 


CREDITS 


Lead Designers: James Wyatt, Jeremy Crawford 
Designers: Ari Levitch, Ben Petrisor, Mike Mearls, Robert J. 
Schwalb, Chris Tulach 


Managing Editor: Jeremy Crawford 
Editors: Christopher Perkins, Kim Mohan, Michele Carter, Phil 
Athans, Kate Welch 


Art Direction: Shauna Narciso, Ari Levitch 

Graphic Designer: Trish Yochum 

Additional Graphic Design: Emi Tanji 

Additional Art Direction: Jeremy Jarvis, Jeremy Cranford, Pamela 
Ansman-Wolfe, Taylor Ingvarsson, Dawn Murin, Cynthia Sheppard, 
Andrew Vallas, Mark Winters 


Cover Illustrator: Magali Villeneuve 

Interior Illustrators: Deruchenko Alexander, Even Amundsen, Steve 
Argyle, Volkan Baga, Ryan Barger, Steven Belledin, Mike Bierek, 
Johann Bodin, Zoltan Boros, Noah Bradley, John Severin Brassell, 
Filip Burburan, Dmitry Burmak, Wesley Burt, Clint Cearley, Milivoj 
Ceran, Jason Chan, Sidharth Chaturvedi, Zezhou Chen, Jedd 
Chevrier, Chippy, Cliff Childs, Sung Choi, Yongjae Choi, Jehan Choo, 
Daarken, Florian De Gesincourt, Eric Deschamps, Simon Dominic, 
Scott M. Fischer, Randy Gallegos, Lars Grant-West, Yeong-Hao 
Han, Josh Hass, Michael C. Hayes, Izzy, Tomasz Jedruszek, Jaime 
Jones, Igor Kieryluk, Mathias Kollros, Alex Konstad, Karl Kopinski, 
Lius Lasahido, Daniel Ljunggren, Todd Lockwood, Titus Lunter, 
Howard Lyon, Slawomir Maniak, Seb McKinnon, Aaron Miller, 
Victor Adame Minguez, Peter Mohrbacher, Willian Murai, Scott 


ON THE COVER 


A wizard of the Izzet League exults in the success of her latest 
experiment, while the draconic master of her guild looks on—and a 
detachment of Boros Legion angels hurries to ensure no innocents 
are harmed. Artist Magali Villeneuve has been painting Macic" 
cards since 2013. 


Disclaimer: The Living Guildpact is not responsible for the fate of those who are arrested by 
the Azorius, beaten by the Boros, dodged by the Dimir, grossed out by the Golgari, gored 
by the Gruul, imploded by the Izzet, outwitted by the Orzhov, rousted by the Rakdos, sub- 
sumed by the Selesnya, or sickened by the Simic. Join or leave a guild at your own risk, and 
get caught up in guild politics at your peril, 


620C5835000001 EN 
ISBN: 978-0-7869-6659-2 
First Printing; November 2018 


987654321 


Murphy, Winona Nelson, Terese Nielsen, Karla Ortiz, James Paick, 
David Palumbo, Ryan Pancoast, Adam Paquette, Jung Park, Martina 
Pilcerova, rk post, Livia Prima, Chris Rahn, Jason Rainville, Chris 
Rallis, David Rapoza, Jenn Ravenna, Wayne Reynolds, Grzegorz 
Rutkowski, James Ryman, Dan Scott, Bram Sels, Craig J Spearing, 
Anna Steinbauer, Zack Stella, Matt Stewart, Chase Stone, Raymond 
Swanland, Wisnu Tan, Viktor Titov, Randy Vargas, Svetlin Velinov, 
Magali Villeneuve, Johannes Voss, Kev Walker, Tyler Walpole, Jack 
Wang, Mark Winters, Richard Wright, Darek Zabrocki, Eytan Zana, 
Kirsten Zirngibl, Mark Zug 

Cartographers: Jonas De Ro, Dyson Logos 


Ravnica World Design: Doug Beyer, Sam Burley, Jeremy Cranford, 
Kelly Digges, Brady Dommermuth, Jenna Helland, Cory H. 
Herndon, Jeremy Jarvis, Kimberly Kreines, Chris L'etoile, Adam 
Lee, Ari Levitch, Alison Lührs, Shawn Main, Dawn Murin, Richard 
Whitters, Mark Winters, James Wyatt 


Producer: Dan Tovar 

Project Manager: Matt Warren 
Product Engineer: Cynda Callaway 
Imaging Technicians: Kevin Yee 

Art Administration: David Gershman 
Prepress Specialist: Jefferson Dunlap 


Other D&D Team Members: Bart Carroll, Kate Irwin, Christopher 
Lindsay, Shelly Mazzanoble, Hilary Ross, Liz Schuh, Nathan 
Stewart, Greg Tito 


Playtesters: Adrian Farmer, Alea Scheldel, Alex Loney, Alex R Clough, Alexandra Williams, 
Allen King, Amy Anne Scott, Andrew Epps, Andrew Oliver, Andrey Sarafanov, Andy 
Baker, Andy Xu, Angel Michelli, Arthur Saucier, Arthur Wright, Austin Field, Austin 
Haffke, Ben Heisler, Benjamin Cook, Bill "Grishnak" Kerney, Bruce LaClair, Bryan 
Gillispie, Caleb Zutavern, Carlos Robles, Casey Pierson, Cat Meadors, Charles Wright, 
Chase Godfrey, Chase Louviere, Chris "Waffles" Wathen, Chris Balboni, Chris Breunig, 
Christian Franz, Christian Zoltar Bellomo, Christopher Hackler, Christopher Scoggin, 
Cinzia Ceriani, Cody Helms, Colin Wheeler, Craig Domres, Curt Duval, Damião Abreu, 
Damon Liddell, Dan Masucci, Daniel Fraire, Daniel 'KBlin' Oliveira, Dario "Uzedh" 
Berto, Dave "Dbrain" Brainard, Dave "DJ" Jimenez, Dave Brainard, Dave Jimenez, 

Dave Rosser, David Balderrama, David Brainard, David Francis, David Greener, David 
He, David Jimenez, David Kovaric, Deb Berlin, Denise Franz, Doug Harrison, Dr Paige 
Leitman, Dylan Cole, Ed Kraft, Ekaterina Ryabko, Elizabeth Klitgaard, Emilie Gunderson, 
Eric Schubert, Evan Jackson, Fabio Stibiel, Flo Velasquez, Frank Fujita, Fredrick Harvey, 
Gabriel F. Machado, Gage, Gail D'Silva, Garrett Colón, Gary West, Genesis E. Martinez 
Gonzalez, Ginny Loveday, Gleb Masaltsev, Greg Parovichnikov, Greg Waters, Gregory 
Smith, Grigory Parovichnikov, Guerson Cabrera, Helano Luciano, Hugo Mendieta, lan 
Hawthorne, Jackson Lucas, Jacob Charboneau, Jacob DelMauro, Jake Keifer, Jame "J.P." 
Hunter, James Endicott, James Harrison, James Kirtley, James Sanford, James Schweiss, 
Janaina Michelli, Jared Williams, Jason Fransella, Jawsh Murdock, Jay Anderson, Jeanette 
Detwiler, Jenna Schmitt, Jeramie Cooper, Jeremey Arnold, Jeremiah Jaggers, Jeremy 
Hochhalter, Jesse Davidson, Jessica Goff, Jia Jian Tin, Jim Berrier, Jim McKay, JJ Tin, Jodo 
Eduardo Dantas, JoDee Murch, Joe Alfano, Joe Boerjes, Joe Irizarry, Joe Kelly, Joe Louie, 
Joe Maranda, Joe Mooney, Joe Reilly, Joel Thompson, Johanna Murch, John Montgomery, 
John Wilcox, Jonathan Duhrkoop, Jonathan Reitz, Jordan Brass, Joshua Hart, Julie 
Wright, Justin Faris, Justin Michelli, Justin Turner, Kai Tauri Johnson, Karen Eastman, 
Karl Resch, Katherine Arnold, Ken Beckman, Kenny Morris, Kerry Kaszak, Kevin Grigsby, 
Kevin Moore, Krupal Desai, Kurt Waldkirch, Kyle Garms, Kyle Turner, Laura Thompson, 
Laura Wiley, Lauren Smith, LeShaun Bessant Jr, Linda Pajaujis, Lou Michelli, Louis 
Gentile, Luca "Jace" Andreolli, Luciano Michelli, Lyza Bryandinskaya, Mara Kovacevic, 
Marc Soucy, Marcello De Velazquez, Mark A. Miller, Mark Denholm, Mark Detwiler, 
Mark Price, Matt Eastman, Matt Maranda, Matt Vincent, Matteo "Seriale" La Rosa, 
Matthew Pennington, Matthew Roderick, Matthew Roman, Meghan Henderson, Melanie 
Chandler, Melissa Schubert, Michael Lydon, Michael Thomas, Mike Becker, Mike Hicks, 
Miranda McFadden, Nel Pulmanco, Nick Graves, Nicole Maselli, Nikolay Sinushkin, 
Paige Miller, Patrick Beach, Paul Thomas, Peter Hopkins, Phil Davidson, Philip Koop, 
Poly Hubbard, Preston Chandler, Randall L. Shepherd, Richard Marino, Robert Alaniz, 
Robert Allison, Ron "Laronn" Franke, Ryan Conklin, Sam Jackson, Sam Robertson, 

Sarah Minkiewicz-Breunig, Scott Chipman, Scott Smith, Sean Hemmingway, Sean 
Payne, Shawn Bergseng, Sofia-Melissa But, Stephanie Jawitz, Stephen Lindberg, Sterling 
Hershey, Stuart Tindall, Tarin "Spacecase" Herron , Taylor Fisher, Teos Abadia, Terese 
Nelson, Thomas Kocanjer, Tom Duchaine, Tori Galiel, Travis Fuller, Tristan Andrews, 
Troy Sandlin, Vanessa F. Pinheiro, Victor B. Pimentel, Von Bringhurst, Walter Nau, Wes 
Farnsworth, Will DeSain, Willi Burger, Yorcho Diaz, Yosefat Nava, Zachary Pickett 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Magic: The Gathering, Magic, Wizards of the Coast, the dragon ampersand, Player's Handbook, Monster Manual, Dungeon Master's Guide, Guildmas- 
ters’ Guide to Ravnica, guild names and symbols, the planeswalker symbol, all other Wizards of the Coast product names, and their respective logos are trademarks of Wizards of the 
Coast in the USA and other countries. All characters and their distinctive likenesses are property of Wizards of the Coast. This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United 
States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained herein is prohibited without the express written permission of Wizards of the Coast. 


Printed in the USA. ©2018 Wizards of the Coast LLC, PO Box 707, Renton, WA 98037-0707, USA. Manufactured by Hasbro SA, Rue Emile-Boéchat 31, 2800 Delémont, CH. Represented 


l 


CONTENTS 


Indes OF Stat BIOCKS uunissa 4 
Welcome to Ravnica.........................— 6 
VEY OE GAINS a S ente teer veeeasa rre rep Ra SPESE 6 
History. of Ravnica nonnina naa 7 

The Gutldpaot...-.:2 oan: 7 

A Precarious Peate isisisi 7 
Lifein the Big City jossessssscesarasscerssstsaracnassonss 8 
Currency: Zibs and Zinos......................... 9 


Comforts of Civilization 
Languages: ien ipe e OP Her epi 


Chapter 1: Character Creation ............ 11 
CHOOSING a Guild... eterne 11 


|J p MEC PA 14 

Centaur.... 

Goblin ...... 

Loxodon....... 

MÁnOLSUE uosa 

STITUTE FEY DUEL Cl S ES 20 

Vedalken TN 
Classes by Guild |... eas 
Subclass OPO Nginingini 

Cleric: Order Domain....... 

Druid: Circle of Spores 


Chapter 2: Guilds of Ravnica ............... 29 
Guild Membership ....................... ee 
Guild Spells................... 
Bonds and Contacts...... 
REN OWI neerececieseszassccvs 
Styles of Membership 
Changing Guilds................ 
Azorius Senate... 
Azorius Characters 
Background: Azorius Functionary ...33 
Azorius Guild Spells ............................ 34 
Boros T. CMON override i saser eee rea iara Prou 
Boros Characters 
Background: Boros Legionnaire.......40 
Boros Guild Spells 
House Dimir ................... 


Background: Dimir Operative ........... 46 
Dimir Guild Spells. a 
Spell: Encode Thoughts ...................... 47 
(30lga si S WAM statscaiscsniscrcacsssccchssonsadtvectee 51 
Golgari Characters ................... 
Background: Golgari Agent... 
Golgari Guild Spells................. 
GUE IBID, E EA 
Griütul Characters cocer coriracons 
Background: Gruul Anarch ................ 
Gruul Guild Spells................................ 
FZZ ORISA GUE rero E E enieten 64 
Izzet Characters ......................—. 
Background: Izzet Engineer... 
Izzet Guild Spells...................... es 
Spell: Ghaos:Bolt........ entes 


Orzhov Syndicate ............ 
Orzhov Characters 
Background: Orzhov 

Representative ................... eee 
Orzhov Guild Spells... 

Cult of RakdOo8; sussoun 
Rakdos CHALACENS errserassnsinusai 79 
Background: Rakdos Cultist .... 
Rakdos Guild Spells ...... 

Selesnya Conclave............... 
Selesnya Characters .......................... 85 
Background: Selesnya Initiate........... 86 
Selesnya Guild Spells.......................... 

SSTEDHC COMC Les ancesanunrpreoss bavauaizies soppacsr oe 
Simic: Characters... ti 
Background: Simic Scientist... 
Simic Guild Spells...................... 


Chapter 3: The Tenth District.............. 
The SIX PECCIACES svarscssyesassrorernancssnesesensned 
Major Trade Ways........ 
Beneath the Streets .... 
Precinct One................. 
Precinct: TWO svisccisssscavstscestastevcsrceossttaovvaceis 

PPPSCINCUL MYCE inn e ri 109 
Precinct Four 
RECTOR IVE: cacscrsscesesistessisernnassasoseccoesasice 

Precinct Sixiusscscicscsnssassoossancsteteiacssvvsscouccss 119 


Chapter 4: Creating Adventures ....... 123 
Guild-Based Adventures........................ 123 
Choosing: Guilds nenne 124 
Involving the Characters......................«. 126 
Complications. 
Azorius Senate 
Boros Legion ........ 
House Dimir ......... 
Golgari Swarm 
Gruul Clans........... A 

HA MICE Street E eura s 

Orzhov Syndicate ..................... s 147 
Cult of Rakdos $ 
Selesnya Conclave........................ e 
Simic/CorbDIifie........ o rroroneneteeintne 
PON RO s WAY S eR RINT 


Chapter 5: Treasures ....................... 
Goins in Treasure... eere eiia 
Guild GIattfiBi uiro eeesrertetettevsnsete riore 
Magic Items... n 
Guilds and Magic Items. 
Guild Keyrune ..................... Uv 
Guid Signet idees iners encosaeo ett 
Illusionist's Bracers............................ 
Mizzium Apparatus .... ‘ 
Mizzium Armor ................. eerte 
Mizziüt MOoftár.....-— orem 
Moodmark Paint ..... 
Pariah's Shield......... 
Peregrine Mask... ia 
PYTOCONVELQOR osten riis 


Rakdos Riteknife .. 
Skyblinder Staff .... - 
Spies MUTMUL stoinn 
Sunforder snai peces o plddoxas 
Sword of the Paruns £s 
Voador SUE, aepo rece meurt 
Chapter 6: Friends and Foes .............. 183 
Creatures by Guild ........ ...183 
Bestiary inci eid o GITE ..188 
Stat Blocks by Creature Type .......... 188 
NPGs by GUIK «22 stitit 226 
Azorius NPCs 226 
Boros NPCs.... ..229 
Dimir NPCs... .232 


Golgari NPCs. 


Golgari Lairs.. .236 
Gruul NPCs.... udi 
BENE Ooooiii 240 
OTBOU NP. e oeesppeseeti aee 244 
Rakdos NPCs .... T 
Rakdos Carnival isisssscsscisssssevvcastssssevs 250 
Selesnya NPO Sicista 251 
Süme NP8.2.« ceto rere viera 254 
Sidebars 
FOTO GG IB, sspaoasosonesoncarcavanencetrecpsaenes 7 
Ravnica's Calendar ................... ss 8 
Guild Insiiriia;.-.. 2 2: iernii ieis 9 
Rule Tip: AC Calculations 
Don't StHOE ss cscssscssvesvescsnraysopiegasszocvsasnvares 18 


Rule Tip: Temporary Hit Points 

Don't Stack 
The Guildless 
T.hree:Capitals.;.. iniecta ereciecses 36 
A Proud Martial Tradition ....................... 38 
Tajic, Blade of the Legion .... 
Dark Elves of the Golgari ... 


Random Nonplayer Characters. ni 
Safe House Wards......................... 
Guildless Villains ........................... 
MZ AEDT cnececcenrseeneses 
Firemane Nevena.. 
Debts Paid........... x 
DOTLE iaaii coraa erae ek REOR ESTNE 
Winged Felidars...................—.... eec 
Orzhov Spirits T 
Winged Kraul Warriors ......................... 
Ludmilla, the Tunnel Viper ................... 
Lavinia, Steward of the Guildpact 
CXGGELPA oae erecta im creemos 

Izoni, Devkarin Matka.. 
Nikya of the Old Ways ......... 
Master Chemister Grozgrox .. 
Mizzix of the Izmagnus ....... ae 
"Tessa: KAHON ninia aa 
Judith, the Scourge Diva ........................ 
Emmara Tandis... cese 


INDEX OF STAT BLOCKS — MONSTERS AND NPCs 


APIAECH CASANA NO E E A E 239 
Archon of the Triumvirate ..................... 192 
Arcligbt PROE Kiana aa 193 
PENET a A T Y SNE E s eEU FUNT AINT NIIS 230 
Battleforce Angel .iccsic.ccssccscsssssscccestecseensss 189 
BIOMAN Certa scnsivensises iie Reeves UL sainia 256 
Bhstercoil Weird; iseseisana 207 
Blood Drinker Vampire.......................... 223 
Blood VICI, eise rotor sex ecd E 248 
Bloodfray Giant.. .. 200 
Borborygmos:.;. inei erro aee Eoo 238 
Caket riein inai 195 
Category l Krasis sssini 210 
Category 2 BLAS Suorein 211 
CuleBorw I RTAS G uaa e a 212 
Conclave Devadasan naar ee 194 
Cosmotronic Blastseeker ...................... 242 
Counterflux Blastseeker ........................ 242 
Deathpact Angel... erint 191 
Devkarin LiGhy: scsicsscnessvennieenesescacesausspecersnee 198 


Druid of the Old Ways. 
Felidar... 
Firefist.............. 

Firemane Angel .... 


Flux Blastseeker 244 
PUCHA UOT s oenocecceceroenceveseoceuseuspnuocco 208 
DIGG EIOEPOPA o eceuever Tien reta EPA eret 203 
ECAD Medie... ccarstronepsarenssossnsensnusancene 231 
Galvanic Blastseeker............................. 243 
Galvanice Weird ..................... eese 209 
GIOaIWiflg «23:22 1 actresa cre ncp ence Genuae 215 
Goblin Gang Member....................... 167 
Golgate SBAA. noori OTA iE e 236 
Guardian Aant -oraren 201 
Horncaller.... 203 
Hybrid Brute A 
Hybrid Flier..... ALT 
Heri EPOSON EE assente 217 


QUE. 


Hybrid Shockerz. ases eers 218 
Hybrids 1A OOE NA E 218 
Indentured SpIEIU errereen 206 
PS OT T ATE E EA r TOTT 227 
Jarad Vod Sawosisssiiscticssscavesersoovcscccsvbssus 235 
Kraul Death Priest... ese 214 


Master of Cruelties.... 


Mind Drinker Vampire ................... ..224 
Mind Máge..i«. entrer etian 233 
Nightveil SDect6E user records 215 
INIUSM ESO Las rer ese PERUnAUTISE SPEO IAA 241 
Nivix Cyclops: re ie eain 216 
Obzedat GLliost.. 225: aciei 245 
Otzhov Giant crescere arenas 202 
Precognitive Mage...................... eee 228 


KakdOS sristi 247 
Rakdos Lampooner ............................... 248 
Rakdos' FENOME nerona 249 
REORODO I ccoschcace sncanatveassucavisvuciontasdeopavencsiinnl 231 
Rubblebelt Stalker .......................... 239 
Scorchbringer Guard ............................. 243 
5ervitor Thrull. erectas iosi cete 221 
SHADOW BOFTOR tissosa isai 205 
Site oL INSANIY ossnsescoisecarasonoriuvacshareaxeens 197 


Skittering Horror 
Skyjek Roc ... 
Skyswimmer 


Soldier....... ..226 
Sunder Shaman. 3202 
THOU S D A AEE O SE E E 233 
AVE Len Hem HR Pene Mus Utm E 252 
Undercity Medusa sssini 222 
Winged Thrull... 5 tseetuse 221 
MUT TH TO A N E OAA 225 
PA LNN: EEE OEE E EE E E 255 


Listen up, Livin Gui ^ ory hink ou know 
A ó D pe age MMC Me Karnica, the 


You dont a pectate how delicate the balance it ANAR Meden 
Ad. 4 dE ee mildmastet decides lo makea play fer 

the tiniest scraps of extra influence, il sets offa chain reaction 

oo have fe stap Because if you dont stop th, twill grew 
ie until the whole damned city AA ad wat. 


Thecriginal Guildpact took ton distinct cud ates with their 


onn wayd fe, beti and authority structured; 
i th geet p 


Lo thetr depend wat; and forged them inde ene sociely. 


New, Like iter net; the f zá Me 
authority thal! Keeps the guilda from ove anothers zd 


and. plot that i He lures 4j OV Are ope on 
ann be te iar The people: Crery guild. derstand Liem. 


De thatlong enough, and maybe someday you desert 
the title you ale 


From: De uly Lavinia 
Ke: The Guildpact 


WELCOME TO RAVNICA 


ROM THE BACK OF HER SOARING ROC, A SKY 
knight surveys the spire-studded cityscape below. 
As the morning fog dissipates under the chill au- 


tumn sun, the city spreads out as far as she can see: 
lofty cathedrals, squat courthouses, towering apartments, 
sprawling tenements, cobblestone plazas, and broken ruins 
where once-majestic buildings have crumbled to rubble. 
She imagines the teeming masses below her: humans, elves, 
vedalken, minotaurs, goblins, loxodons, and other peoples, 
as some of them rise to greet the morning and others retire 
after a hard night of work or play. They are the reason she 
is here: sworn to protect them, she leads a flight of roc riders 
toward the fires raging in Precinct Three. Soldiers on the 
ground will put out the flames, while it's her job to deal with 
their source: the dragon she can just make out, clinging to 
the spire of a distant tower. Standing in her stirrups and 
raising her sword, she turns her mount toward the dragon, 
ready to battle once again for the sake of Raunica. 


Ravnica is a whole new world for your DUNGEONS & 
DRAGONS campaign to explore. A vast, sprawling city 
that covers the whole of the known world, Ravnica 
teems with intrigue and adventure, driven by the con- 
flicts among the ten powerful guilds that rule the city. 

Ravnica originally appeared as a setting for the 
Maaic: THE GATHERING trading card game. It has been 
the subject of eight card sets: 2005-6's Ravnica: City of 
Guilds, Guildpact, and Dissension; 2012—13's Return to 
Ravnica, Gatecrash, and Dragon’s Maze; and 2018-19's 
Guilds of Ravnica and Ravnica Allegiance. Among fans 
of Maaic, Ravnica is one of the most popular settings, in 
part because the world's ten guilds strongly support the 
way players build Maaic decks. 

As it turns out, Ravnica's ten guilds also provide a 
great framework for a DUNGEONS & DRAGONS cam- 
paign. They offer character archetypes, competing 
factions that player characters can join, and abundant 
opportunities to develop and drive a campaign driven by 
the guilds' schemes and interactions. 

This book, then, is your point of entry into Ravnica 
as a setting for your D&D campaign. It guides you 
through the process of creating characters and adven- 
tures set here. 

Chapter 1 is all about building characters. It offers 
new race and class options, reflecting the unique char- 
acter of Ravnica as a MAGIC setting, and the creatures 
and characters seen on MAGIC cards. You can also use 
this material in any other D&D setting. 


WELCOME TO RAVNICA 


Race and class are only the skeleton of a character, 
though, and chapter 2 is aimed at helping you add flesh 
to those bones in order to make a character who is an 
integrated part of Ravnica's tapestry of guilds. The 
ten guilds are detailed in chapter 2, and each section 
includes a background that reflects a character's mem- 
bership in the guild. This chapter also describes oppor- 
tunities for characters to advance in rank and position 
within their guilds by acquiring renown. 

The focus of chapter 3 is on the city itself—and par- 
ticularly on the Tenth District, which is the heart of 
Ravnica. The important precincts and neighborhoods 
of the district are described in broad overview, allowing 
you, as DM, plenty of leeway for developing the specifics 
of places and NPCs. 

Chapter 4 is all about adventures in Ravnica, expand- 
ing on the material in the Dungeon Master's Guide with 
hundreds of seeds that can grow into full-fledged adven- 
tures in the fertile ground of a DM's imagination. This 
chapter also includes a short starting adventure you can 
use to launch a Ravnica campaign. 

Chapter 5 includes magic items and other treasures 
for use as rewards in a Ravnica campaign. Many of 
these magic items are D&D interpretations of specific 
MAGIC artifact cards—not literal translations of their 
mechanics from one rules system to the other, but game 
elements inspired by the flavor and abilities of the cards. 

Chapter 6 presents new monsters and NPCs, again 
reflecting the creatures seen on MAGIC cards as well 
as the nature of each guild. The guildmaster of each 
guild is detailed in this chapter, as are a variety of 
guild members. 


CITY OF GUILDS 


In all their fantastic diversity, the cosmopolitan citizens 
of Ravnica go about their daily business in bustling mar- 
kets and shadowy back alleys. Shambling pack animals 
(mammals, reptiles, insects, and bizarre hybrids alike) 
carry their loads through the streets, while untamed 
wild things lurk in verdant greenbelts, rubble-strewn 
ruins, and sewers. And interwoven throughout it all, ten 
guilds vie for power, wealth, and influence: 


Azorius Senate. The Azorius Senate functions as the 
government of Ravnica, built on the three columns of 
a legislative, a judicial, and an executive branch under 
the leadership of Isperia, the sphinx Supreme Judge. 

Boros Legion. Led by the angel Aurelia, the Boros Le- 
gion pursues the cause of justice, not merely law en- 
forcement. Boros serves as Ravnica’s standing army. 

House Dimir. House Dimir is in the business of infor- 
mation, operating an espionage organization behind a 
facade of messengers, investigators, and archivists. Its 
enigmatic leader, Lazav, wears many faces. 


eee — D 
RANDOM GUILDS 


Sometimes you might want to choose a guild at random. 
Here's a table you can use in those situations. 


d10 Guild 

Azorius Senate 
Boros Legion 
House Dimir 
Golgari Swarm 
Gruul Clans 

Izzet League 
Orzhov Syndicate 
Cult of Rakdos 
Selesnya Conclave 
Simic Combine 


O 00-0 uU A wn — 


e 
eo 


o Oo '"-— Ó' 


Golgari Swarm. An elf lich named Jarad guides the 
Golgari Swarm's masses as they lurk in the undercity, 
where they process the city's waste and see to the new 
life that emerges from death and decay. 

Gruul Clans. Raging against civilization and its defile- 
ment of the natural world, the loose alliance of the 
Gruul Clans is led by the cyclops Borborygmos. 

Izzet League. Led by the dragon Niv-Mizzet, the Izzet 
League is a guild of scientists and engineers who 
build and sustain Ravnica's infrastructure while con- 
ducting wild experiments in magic—efforts that usu- 
ally involve barely controlled elemental energy. 

Orzhov Syndicate. A sinister combination of church, 
bank, and organized crime syndicate, the Orzhov Syn- 
dicate is controlled by the Obzedat, a cabal of ancient 
spirits often called the Ghost Council. 

Cult of Rakdos. The demonic Cult of Rakdos is the 
jester in Ravnica's culture, using satire and perfor- 
mance to skewer the powerful and embolden the 
weak. But it is a cruel and bloodthirsty jester, in the 
manner of its demonic leader, and it supplements par- 
ody and levity with blood and fire. 

Selesnya Conclave. The Selesnya Conclave is led by 
Trostani, three dryads who are fused together with 
one another and with Mat'Selesnya, a manifestation of 
the soul of the world. The guild seeks to bring nature 
and the city into balance. 

Simic Combine. Under the leadership of Prime 
Speaker Zegana, the biomancers of the Simic Com- 
bine apply magic to the life sciences. Striving to create 
a harmonious future where creatures of all kinds are 
perfectly adapted to their ever-changing environment, 
the Simic magically hasten the process of evolution 
and adaptation of life. 


These ten guilds stand as the foundation of power on 
Ravnica. Each maintains a distinctive identity and civic 
function, a diverse collection of creatures, and a sub- 
culture of its own. The guilds' history is a web of wars, 
intrigue, and political machinations stretching over the 
millennia during which they have vied for control of the 
world. Their roles were established thousands of years 
ago in a magical treaty called the Guildpact, which not 
only assigned each guild a function, but also enforced an 
uneasy peace among them. 


HisTORY OF RAVNICA 


More than ten thousand years ago, a war tore across the 
world of Ravnica. Ten armies battled for control of the 
world in a conflict that ended with the creation of a mag- 
ical contract of immense power known as the Guildpact. 
The leaders of each of the ten armies—ancient beings 
known as paruns—were the signatories to the Guild- 
pact, and they became the first guildmasters of Ravnica. 

The text of the Guildpact spelled out specific roles for 
each guild within the infrastructure of Ravnica, allow- 
ing the city to grow while the guilds coexisted in relative 
peace. But the true power of the Guildpact was the 
strength of its magically binding force, which absolutely 
prevented large-scale violence among the guilds. 

For ten millennia, the city grew and flourished under 
this structure as the guilds evolved into unique and 
powerful forces, often venturing far from their origi- 
nal purpose. 

The signing of the Guildpact marked the beginning 
of the modern Ravnican calendar. Years prior to that 
pivotal event are denoted as “Al Concordant,” or AC, and 
counted backward from 1 AC. Years after the signing 
are "Zal Concordant," ZC. The current date is 10,076 
ZC, usually referred to as '76. 


THE GUILDPACT 


During the Decamillennial Celebration of 10,000 ZC, 
commemorating a monumental anniversary of the 
Guildpact's signing, the pact was broken, the ancient 
balance was shattered, and Ravnica was thrown into 
chaos. It didn't take long for wealthy power-mongers to 
begin seizing control of elements in the city, turning the 
guilds to their service instead of the other way around. 
Eventually, the ten-thousand-year-old guild culture 

and division of duties reasserted itself. The ten guilds 
regained their dominant positions, but without the 
magically binding force of the Guildpact to maintain the 
balance among them. 

Years later, in 10,075 ZC, the Izzet guildmaster dis- 
covered that Azor, founder of the Azorius Senate, had 
created a contingency plan that would take effect if the 
magic of the Guildpact were ever broken. An intricate 
network of ley lines sprawling across the districts of 
Ravnica, called the Implicit Maze, offered a test to the 
guilds: if they could cooperate to solve the maze, they 
would secure the power of a new Guildpact. That power 
was eventually bestowed—incarnated, actually—in the 
person of Jace Beleren, who became the Living Guild- 
pact. His word became the binding law of Ravnica. Any 
law he verbally confirmed became magically unbreak- 
able, and the responsibility of keeping the guilds in bal- 
ance fell to him. 


A PRECARIOUS PEACE 


Jace is a Planeswalker, with the ability to travel from 
world to world, and his attention never remains focused 
on Ravnica for long. Thanks to his involvement with 
other Planeswalkers, he spends extended periods of 
time away from Ravnica. During his absences, Ravnica 
has to fend for itself, and that means that the guilds re- 
turn to their old habits of fighting with each other over 


WELCOME TO RAVNICA 


Gee sss 
RAVNICA’S CALENDAR 


Ravnica's year of 365 days is made up of twelve months, 
each of which has the same number of days as its 
counterpart in the Gregorian calendar. The year begins 
with 1 Seleszeni, which corresponds to March 1. 


Month Name 

Seleszeni (March) 
Dhazo (April) 

Prahz (May) 

Mokosh (June) 

Paujal (July) 

Cizarm (August) 
Tevnember (September) 
Golgar (October) 
Quaegar (November) 


w on nut wD — 


d 
e 


Xivaskir (December) 
1 Griev (January) 
12 Zuun (February) 


The annual celebration of the Guildpact begins on 28 Zuun 
and extends overnight into 1 Seleszeni. 
—R————————Ó——————————r 


the smallest scraps of influence that could tilt the bal- 
ance of power in their favor. 

These conflicts erupt in a variety of forms. Sometimes 
guilds clash violently in the streets: Boros forces try to 
quell Gruul riots, Azorius arresters raid a Rakdos mur- 
der show, or Selesnya forces come together to repel a 
Golgari incursion. More often, sinister plots unfold in se- 
cret, through infiltration, sabotage, theft, and deception. 
Schemes are hidden beneath layers of other schemes, 
making the intention behind them nearly impossible to 
discover. The guildmasters are often the source of these 
plots, but sometimes subordinates attack other guilds to 
gain more influence within their own. In the absence of 
the Guildpact, some people believe that it's only a matter 
of time until these schemes and skirmishes escalate 
into all-out war on a scale that Ravnica hasn't known for 
ten millennia. 

With the precarious peace always hanging in the 
balance, opportunities abound for adventurers to serve 
their guilds or advance their own agendas. Whether 
delving into the dungeons of the undercity, pursuing 
assassins through the bustling streets, negotiating ac- 
cords among the rich and powerful, or sniffing out cor- 
ruption in the halls of law, the characters in a Ravnica 
campaign have a world of adventure to explore. 


LIFE IN THE Bic CITY 


Ravnica is a vast city, covering the entirety of the world 
in many layers of construction, from deep sewers and 
catacombs to sky-raking spires. No single map can en- 
compass the tremendous scope of its sprawl, and its bor- 
ders (if it has any) are unknown, except possibly to those 
who live near the edges. 

The story of Ravnica focuses on its core. Sometimes 
called the city proper, this core is divided into ten dis- 
tricts, each of which is a huge urban environment in its 
own right. The districts are named in simple numerical 
order from the First to the Tenth. No correlation exists 
between the ten guilds and the ten districts; all ten 
guilds are active in all ten districts. The Tenth District, 
in particular, is a hotbed of activity where all the guilds 
maintain their primary headquarters. It is the focus of 
chapter 3. 

A huge avenue called the Transguild Promenade runs 
through all ten districts, making it the most notable 
landmark for navigation through the city's heart. Lined 
with markets, small parks, and colonnades, the Prom- 
enade is a commercial thoroughfare used to transport 
loads of cargo. On celebration days, it becomes the city's 
most popular parade route. Even when guild conflicts 
run hot, Ravnicans respect the sanctity of the Prome- 
nade as neutral ground. 

Beyond the core are an uncounted number of other 
districts, which originated as outlying cities that gradu- 
ally melded into the expanding metropolis. Well-known 
districts outside the core include the Smelting District, 
Irbitov (the mausoleum district), and Jezeru (the lake 
district). 

Districts, whether in the city proper or beyond it, are 
the fundamental configurations that define Ravnica. 
They are informally divided into various quarters, neigh- 
borhoods, and the like. Some of these areas extend 
across district boundaries. Deadbridge, for example, 
existed as a well-defined neighborhood before Ravnica 
City was formally divided into ten districts, and that di- 
vision was made without consideration of Deadbridge's 
informally acknowledged boundaries. Part of Dead- 
bridge, known as Deadbridge Chasm, occupies much 
of the Tenth District's Precinct Six, but it extends out 
into the neighboring area. Similar neighborhoods, both 
within and outside the city proper, include the Steam- 
bath Quarter, the Wrights' Quarter, and Mahovna, the 
Haven of Moss. 


a... 
GUILD INSIGNIA 
Members of Ravnica’s guilds typically carry guild insignia 
with them, though in some cases (notably House Dimir) 
the insignia might be carefully hidden. A replacement 
insignia costs 5 gp and is available only to members of 
the guild. Any character can use the insignia of their guild 
as a spellcasting focus, as described in chapter 10 of the 
Player’s Handbook. 
ug p— —Ó—————————À—r en" 


CURRENCY: ZIBS AND ZINOS 


This book uses standard D&D coinage, as detailed in 
the Player's Handbook, but in Ravnica, citizens refer to 
their money as zibs and zinos, with 100 zibs to 1 zino. 
There is no central mint, as coins are created by the 
Azorius, the Boros, and the Orzhov. The Ravnica Cur- 
rency table summarizes the various guilds' coinage and 
its value. 


RAVNICA CURRENCY 


Value Azorius Boros Orzhov 


lcp copper zib — copper alms-coin 


25cp silver 25-zib — — e 


coin 
lep electrum 50- — = 
zib coin 
lgp gold zino gold zino — 
5gp — gold 5-zino coin — 
lpp — — platinum 10-zino 
coin 
Opp — — platinum 100- 
zino coin 


COMFORTS OF CIVILIZATION 


A mixture of technological advancement and sophisti- 
cated magic offers amenities to the people of Ravnica 
that would be extraordinary to folk in most D&D worlds, 
except one like Eberron. The nicer neighborhoods of the 
city enjoy central heating and plumbing (thanks to the 
work of the Izzet League), elevators, and spacious apart- 
ments. Even poorer neighborhoods boast clean and 
smooth roads and sturdy construction. No one needs 

to go hungry in Ravnica, because the Golgari Swarm 
provides a bare minimum of sustenance to anyone who 
can't afford better food, though it is best not to think too 
much about where the thick gruel comes from. (In prac- 
tical terms, even a character who can't afford more than 
a wretched lifestyle doesn't need to go hungry.) 

The citizens of Ravnica enjoy plenty of leisure time, 
and the city offers an abundance of ways to fill it. 
Ravnica features restaurants with extensive collections 
of fine wines, cafés serving coffee and tea, street ven- 
dors offering portable meals, and bakeries that sell a 
wide variety of breads and pastries. Travelers can stay 
in luxury hotels or simple hostels, or they can rely on 
their personal or guild-related contacts to find housing. 
Diversions and entertainments abound, including rau- 
cous street-side theater (including the circus-like spec- 
tacles of the Cult of Rakdos), operas and symphonies, 
illegal fight clubs, sporting events held in vast arenas, 
throwaway popular novels, and great works of literature. 


These things are shared by the city's diverse peoples, 
who enjoy a life adorned by a variety of species, gender 
identities, and sexual orientations. 

Well-established systems undergird society, largely 
through the efforts of the guilds. The Azorius Senate 
crafts, codifies, and enforces a comprehensive (some 
would say oppressive) set of laws. The banks of the 
Orzhov Syndicate offer secure vaults and complicated 
financial arrangements. The Izzet League maintains the 
city's infrastructure, and the Golgari Swarm ensures 
that waste is disposed of (or recycled). House Dimir cou- 
riers deliver messages and parcels across the city, and 
the Simic Combine addresses issues of public health. 

Ravnica lacks any large-scale agriculture operations, 
its citizens depending on food produced in Selesnya 
gardens and underground Golgari rot farms. Few parts 
of Ravnica could be considered wilderness; the rubble- 
belts, areas where the city has decayed and been re- 
claimed by natural forces, are the only truly wild areas. 


CosMOPOLITAN CONVENIENCES 


Item Cost 
Cup of coffee 10 cp 
Newspaper 15 cp 
Pendulum clock 100-250 gp 
Spectacles 25 gp 
Spyglass 50-100 gp 
LANGUAGES 


Dozens of languages can be heard in any of Ravnica’s 
marketplaces, and every tongue has dialects and re- 
gional variations. In order for the guilds to function, the 
Common language is essential. But other languages re- 
main widely used in homes and clan gatherings. 


STANDARD LANGUAGES 


Language Typical Speakers Script 
Abyssal Demons, devils Infernal 
Celestial Angels Celestial 
Common Humans Common 
Draconic Dragons Draconic 
Elvish Elves Elvish 
Giant Ogres, giants Minotaur 
Goblin Goblins Common 
Kraul Kraul Kraul 
Loxodon Loxodons Elvish 
Merfolk Merfolk Merfolk 
Minotaur Minotaurs Minotaur 
Sphinx Sphinxes — 
Sylvan Centaurs, dryads Elvish 
Vedalken Vedalken Vedalken 


A few secret or exotic languages are used on Ravnica 
as well. Druidic exists and allows a secret communica- 
tion among druids in different guilds, such as Selesnya 
and Golgari, but such communication is rare. Thieves’ 
cant is widely used among street gangs and occasionally 
among rogues in House Dimir and the Golgari Swarm. 


WELCOME TO RAVNICA 


~ = 


CHAPTER l: CHARACTER CREATION 


HE PLAYER'S HANDBOOK DESCRIBES A STEP- 

by-step process of character creation. When 

you create a character for a Ravnica cam- 

paign, you'll go through the same steps, with 
the added step of choosing a guild. 

Creating a character begins with imagining the per- 
son you want to play. The ten guilds of Ravnica provide a 
way to jump-start your imagination and steer you toward 
certain character archetypes that can guide the rest of 
the decisions you make for your character. 


CHOOSING A GUILD 


Chapter 2 describes the ten guilds of Ravnica in detail. 
How do you decide what guild you want your character 
to belong to? You can choose one of these approaches: 


+ Look at the questionnaire, "What's Important to Me?", 
in this chapter. Let its questions and your choice of an- 
swers direct you to a guild that appeals to you or that 
sounds like a fun character to play. 

+ Read the guild descriptions in chapter 2 and choose 
one that appeals to you. 

+ Read the descriptions of races and classes in this 
chapter. Guild membership recommendations 
are provided for each race and class, should one 
catch your eye. 

- If you have access to MAGIC: THE GATHERING cards 
from a Ravnica set, find a card that appeals to you and 
build that character. 

+ If you're a Macic player and you already have a favor- 
ite guild, create a character from that guild. 


To reflect your character's membership in a guild, 
you can choose the background included in the guild's 
description instead of a background from the Player's 
Handbook or some other source. Also make a note of 
your contacts. 


GUILDLESS CHARACTERS 
You can play a character who isn't a member of a guild. 
Choose one of the character backgrounds in the Player's 
Handbook or another source instead of one of the guild 
backgrounds in chapter 2. Your guildless character can 
be of any class, race, and alignment. At the DM's option, 
you might have contacts within guilds, or the DM can 
invent contacts for you that aren't associated with the 
guilds of Ravnica in any way. 

If you want your character to join a guild at a later 
time, the same guidelines apply as if the person were 
changing guilds, as described in chapter 2. 


RACE AND CLASS 


Each guild description in chapter 2 provides suggested 
races and classes for characters belonging to that guild. 
Some races have strong traditions that direct them to- 


ward certain guilds, but exceptions exist. If you choose a 
class or a race that's not typical for your guild, you might 
have trouble finding a role in the guild—or, more accu- 
rately, your superiors might have trouble figuring out 
what to do with you—but that challenge can be an inter- 
esting facet of your character's development. An atypical 
choice can also motivate your character to adventure 
independently from the guild. 

This chapter describes new races you can choose 
from: centaurs, goblins, loxodons, minotaurs, Simic hy- 
brids, and vedalken. It also presents two new subclass 
options: the cleric's Order Domain and the druid's Circle 
of Spores. Every subclass in the Player's Handbook also 
receives a mention in this chapter, indicating the guilds 
where characters of those subclasses might find a home. 

Once you've chosen your race and class and recorded 
the benefits you get from them, you can proceed with the 
remaining steps of character creation as described in 
the Player's Handbook. 


BUILDING A PARTY 


It's possible to put together a diverse party of D&D 
characters drawn from a single guild. The guild de- 
scriptions in chapter 2 offer suggestions for what such a 
party might look like. Conversely, your party can include 
members of different guilds united by alliances or com- 
mon principles. Or they could be childhood friends who 
ended up in different guilds, or just a haphazard collec- 
tion of individuals thrown together by unforeseen cir- 
cumstances. The Party Makeup table in this section of- 
fers suggestions for how you might compose your party. 

The tables of contacts in chapter 2 can also help you 
create connections among the characters in your party. 
Those tables describe family relationships, current and 
former romantic connections, random acquaintances, 
past rivals, and many other ties that form among peo- 
ple in different guilds. Let these tables inspire you as 
you think about the circumstances that bring your 
party together. 

Although conflicts among the guilds drive much of 
the action in a Ravnica campaign, it’s important not to 
let that tension cause too much friction in a party of ad- 
venturers. The D&D game relies on cooperation among 
the players, so it’s helpful for the player characters to 
find common ground that unites them despite their dif- 
ferences in guild affiliation, ideals, and agendas. Even 
though some guild leaders (especially the villainous 
ones) might talk about exterminating or dominating 
other guilds, many guild members have family, lov- 
ers, friends, and acquaintances among other guilds. 
Those positive associations can bind an adventuring 
party together. 

The DM can also use the Common Cause table in this 
section to find a way to bring together characters who 
don’t know or trust each other. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


Party MAKEUP 
d8 Party Makeup 

1 One-Guild Party. Choose a guild and refer to its de- 
scription in chapter 2 for suggestions on building 
the party around it. 

2 Classic Party. Boros or Selesnya cleric (Life Do- 
main), Azorius or Boros fighter (Champion arche- 
type), Dimir or Golgari rogue (Thief archetype), 
Boros or Izzet wizard (School of Evocation) 

3 Law and Order Party. Boros cleric, Azorius fighter, 
Azorius wizard, Boros ranger 

4 Mad Science Party. Simic druid, Izzet fighter, Izzet 
wizard, Simic monk 

5 Skulkers Party. Golgari druid, Golgari fighter or 
ranger, Dimir rogue or monk, Dimir wizard 

6 Chaos Party. Gruul druid, Gruul barbarian, Rakdos 
warlock, Rakdos rogue 

7 Nature Party. Selesnya druid, Gruul barbarian, 
Simic wizard or Selesnya bard, Golgari rogue 

8 Benevolent Party. Selesnya cleric, Boros paladin, 
Azorius wizard, Selesnya bard 


COMMON CAUSE 
d8 Reasons for Cooperating 

1 Cellmates. The characters are prisoners in an Azo- 
rius prison, a Gruul camp, or a Rakdos cage. 

2 Greater Threat. The characters are fighting each 
other when a rampaging wurm attacks. 

3 Sudden Danger. The characters are trapped to- 
gether by a sinkhole opening, a building collapsing, 
or a laboratory exploding. 

4 Dream Team. A strange dream leads each charac- 
ter to the same destination. 

5 Lost Together. The characters are hopelessly lost in 
an unfamiliar part of the city. 

6 Detente. By order of their guilds’ leaders, the 
characters must cooperate to complete a secret 
mission. 

7 Common Foe. A villain is a common enemy to all 
the characters. 

8 Do or Die. The characters are all trying to avert the 
catastrophe of an all-out war among the guilds. 


RACES 


The people of Ravnica include members of many differ- 
ent races. Aside from humans, elves, and a smattering 
of half-elves, the races from the Player's Handbook 
are unknown on Ravnica, unless they're visiting from 
other worlds. 

This chapter provides information about the following 
common races of Ravnica, as well as racial traits for all 
of them but humans and elves: 


Humans on Ravnica are like those found on other D&D 
worlds: adaptable, ambitious, and wildly diverse. 

Elves, in their three common subraces, are strongly as- 
sociated with nature. 


CHAPTER CHARACTER CREATION 


Centaurs, the quintessential merging of human and 
horse, savor freedom and champion nature's cause. 

Goblins are small, fierce, stealthy, and some- 
times comical. 

Loxodons resemble humanoid elephants with powerful 
bodies, stoic natures, and serene wisdom. 

Minotaurs on Ravnica are sophisticated tacticians as 
well as strong and fierce warriors. 

Simic hybrids are the results of the Simic Combine’s 
Guardian Project, which magically infuses the adap- 
tive qualities of certain animal species into human, 
elf, or vedalken volunteers. 

Vedalken are tall, blue-skinned, and ingenious, with in- 
satiable curiosity and a penchant for invention. 


HEIGHT AND WEIGHT 


You can roll for your character's height and weight on 
the Random Height and Weight table. See the Player's 
Handbook for humans, elves, and half-elves. 


RANDOM HEIGHT AND WEIGHT 


Base Height Base Weight 
Race Height ^ Modifier Weight Modifier 
Centaur 6'0" +1d10 600 Ib. x (2d 12) Ib. 
Goblin 315^ *2d4 35 Ib. x 1 Ib. 
d — as humanoid base option — 
Loxodon 67" +2d10 295 |b. x (2d4) |b. 
Minotaur 54" +2d8 175 |b. x (2d6) Ib. 
Vedalken 5'4" +2d10 110 Ib. x (2d4) Ib. 


Height = Base Height + Height Modifier in inches 
Weight = (Base Weight + Height Modifier in pounds) x Weight 
Modifier 


HUMAN 


Humans are a scant majority among the peoples of 
Ravnica, dominating some guilds and barely repre- 
sented in others. As on other worlds, they are inno- 
vators, achievers, and pioneers whose daring and 
adaptability make them capable of great things—and 
great falls. 

Not one of the paruns of the ten guilds was human, 
although the Ghost Council of the Orzhov Syndicate is 
of human origin. Likewise, no current guildmaster is 
human. But humans are lieutenants, advisors, and strat- 
egists in many guilds. Their ambition and drive propel 
them toward the top, but the sheer might of beings such 
as ancient dragons, sphinxes, and demons keeps hu- 
mans one rung down from the pinnacle of power. 

The humans of Ravnica are no less physically diverse 
than those of other worlds. Similarly, they are varied in 
their inclinations: they alone are found in every guild. 


HUMAN NAMES 

One particular human tongue has triumphed over all 
others to become Ravnica's Common language, and its 
phonemes and traditions shape the names of most of 
Ravnica's humans. Humans sometimes borrow names 
from other races, but they have a rich pool of traditional 
names to draw from. 


QUESTIONNAIRE: WHAT’S IMPORTANT TO ME? 


NATURE AND SCIENCE 


IN THE 
LABORATORY 


WHERE WOULD 
YOU RATHER SPEND 
YOUR TIME? 


IN NATURE WITH 


LEARNING 
OTHER PEOPLE’S 


SECRETS AND 
KEEPING MY OWN 


WHAT’S 
House DiMIR 


THEY LIMIT OUR 
FREEDOMS BY 
THEIR NATURE 


THE GROWING 
THINGS 


E 


TINKERING WITH 


TECHNOLOGICAL 
DEVICES 


MODIFYING 
LIFE FORMS 
TO SUIT MY 
VISION 


SIMIC 
COMBINE 


IzzET 
LEAGUE 


AWAY THE 
EDIFICES OF 
CIVILIZATION 
SO NATURE 
CAN GROW 
AGAIN 


BUILDING A 
PEACEFUL 


COMMUNITY 
IN HARMONY 
WITH NATURE 
GRUUL 
CLANS 


SELESNYA 
CONCLAVE 


SMASHING 
STUFF 


' 
! 
[| 
' 
' 
Lj 
i 
L 
[j 
i 
I 
! 
1 
I 
L] 
' 
' 
! 
1 
' 
! 
' 
t 
1 
' 
r 
1 
1 
' 
' 
i 
' 
i 
t 
t 
' 
$ 
‘ 
[ 
' 
i 
' 
' 
t 


RECYCLING THE 
WASTE OF SOCIETY 
INTO NEW GROWTH 


WHAT'S YOUR 
FAVORITE WAY TO 
EXPRESS YOURSELF? 


GOLGARI 
SWARM 


RIOTOUS 
REVELS AND 
PERFORMANCES 


CULT OF 
RAKDOS 


EXPLOSIVE 
SCIENCE 
EXPERIMENTS 


SOCIETY AND 
COMMUNITY 


ATTITUDE TOWARD 
LAW AND ORDER? 


THE GOOD OF 


AZORIUS 


SENATE 


YOUR 


A COMPREHENSIVE 
SYSTEM OF LAWS 


I WANT A 
HAND IN 
STABLISHING 


A? 
doeet WHAT'S THE 


BEST WAY TO 
ESTABLISH 


SOCIETY ORDER? 


MILITARY 


MIGHT IN THE 


PURSUIT OF 
JUSTICE CONTRACTS AND 


OBLIGATIONS 


ORZHOV 
SYNDICATE 


Boros 
LEGION 


CHANNELING MY ZEAL 
FOR JUSTICE INTO 
FIGHTING 
CHAOS AND EVIL 


The use of family names seems to be a peculiarly hu- 
man custom. Family names are passed down to children 
from either parent, and sometimes children use the 
family names of both their parents. For example, Micyl 
Savod Zunich was the son of Fonn Zunich and Jarad 
Vod Savo. When other races use family names, they are 
usually derived from some connection (not necessarily a 
blood tie) to a human family. 


Male Human Names: Agmand, Agosto, Bell, Brev, 
Dars, Dobromir, Dravin, Evern, Gorev, Ivos, Janik, 
Juri, Lannos, Lucian, Micas, Nikos, Obez, Olrik, 
Osidar, Rogad, Sergiu, Sirislav, Tibor, Trigori, Tzaric, 
Uzric, Valen, Vennick, Vict, Vorimir, Vuliev, Zunak 

Female Human Names: Anksa, Aszala, Berta, Bori, 
Briska, Dahlya, Geetra, Izolda, Jozica, Lavinia, Luda, 
Lyzolda, Milana, Miotri, Nefara, Palla, Pel, Ruba, 
Strava, Sulli, Vina, Voka, Zija 

Family Names: Andon, Bara, Bejiri, Borca, Capobar, 
Forenzad, Gerava, Gharti, Golozar, Gostok, Grezar, 
Helsk, Javya, Karlaus, Kirescu, Koba, Kos, Macav, 
Migellic, Nar, Nodov, Pelerine, Pijha, Ralinu, Ringor, 
Rokiric, Sarv, Shonn, Suszat, Tandris, Trul, Tylver, 
Valenco, Vay, Vinloskarga, Wenslauv, Yaszen 


ELF 


The elves of Ravnica are as much at home in the mar- 
kets of Ivy Lane and the inns of Oak Street as their kin 
on other worlds are in ancient forests and fey castles. 
They scale the spires of cathedrals and meditate in gar- 
dens and greenbelts. They are part of the city, contribut- 
ing to its vibrant life and sprawling growth while ensur- 
ing it never strays too far from its roots in the earth. 

Elves are associated with the principles and magic of 
nature, growth, and stability. Striving to live in harmony 
with both nature and the community of Ravnica, they 
are drawn to guilds that share those ideals, particularly 
Selesnya, Golgari, and Simic. The Gruul Clans revere 
nature but set themselves in opposition to civilization, 
so they don't hold much appeal for the typical elf. 

Ravnica's elves don't share the unearthly, haunting 
presence of their kin on other worlds, perhaps because 
of the extent to which the city has rubbed off on them. 
They can easily be mistaken for human from certain 
angles, particularly if their long, pointed ears and their 
delicate facial features aren't apparent. 


ELF SUBRACES 
As on other D&D worlds, Ravnica's elves can be catego- 
rized as high elves, wood elves, and dark elves, though 
there is little physical difference among the three sub- 
races here. Elves share the traits described in the Play- 
er's Handbook for their race and subrace. 

High Elves. The high elves of Ravnica have been 
subsumed into the Simic Combine and have lost their 
original tribal name. They are more slender than other 


elves, and they tend to have angular features and pale 
skin that often verges toward greenish hues. 

Wood Elves. The wood elves of Ravnica, called the 
Silhana, are strongly associated with the Selesnya 
Conclave. Most guildless elves can also trace their an- 
cestry to the Silhana. Their coloration covers the whole 
human range, and sometimes extends to green- or cop- 
per-colored hair. 

Dark Elves. The word "drow" isn't used on Ravnica, 
but the Devkarin elves are sometimes called the elves 
of shadow. They are closely connected to the Golgari 
Swarm, and because they generally live underground, 
they share other dark elves' sensitivity to sunlight. Un- 
like the drow of other worlds, their coloration is much 
the same as that of wood elves, though their hair is usu- 
ally dark brown or black. 


ELF NAMES 

If the tradition of using child names for young elves, 
as described in the Player's Handbook, was ever prac- 
ticed on Ravnica, it has long since died out. Some 
traditional Elvish names remain in use, often modified 
by the influence of human names. Most elves don't use 
family names. 


Male Names: Alcarus, Aramin, Beryan, Carric, Ezoc, 
Gurras, Immeral, Jarad, Laucian, Mihas, Mandor, Mo- 
lander, Peren, Suniel, Theren, Varis 

Female Names: Arin, Bethrynna, Cevraya, Dainya, 
Drusilia, Elga, Emmara, Fonn, Ielenya, Iveta, Karissa, 
Kirce, Meriele, Nayine, Niszka, Svania, Veszka, Yeva 


CENTAUR 


In the sprawling city of Ravnica, where “open road” 
seems like a contradiction and “open plain” is sheer 
nonsense, centaurs nevertheless retain a love of 
wide spaces and the freedom to travel. As much as 
they can, centaurs run—in wide plazas, spacious 
parks, and expanses of rubble and ruin. They race 
the wind, hooves thundering and tails streaming 
behind them, until the next wall looms in their path 
and brings them to a stop. 


NATURE'S CAVALRY 

Centaurs have the upper bodies, down to the waist, 
of muscular humans, displaying all the human 
variety of skin tones and features. Their ears are 
slightly pointed, but their faces are wider and 
squarer than those of elves. Below the waist, they 
have the bodies of small horses, with a similar 
range of coloration—from various shades of chest- 
nut or bay to dappled or even zebra-like striped 
patterns. Most centaurs style their hair and their 
tails in a similar way. Selesnya centaurs favor long, 
flowing hair. Gruul centaurs cut their hair in rough, 
spiky styles. 

The upper bodies of centaurs are comparable to 
human torsos in size, and their lower equine bodies 
average about 4 feet tall at the withers. Though they 
are smaller than a human rider mounted on a horse, 
they fill similar roles as cavalry warriors, messen- 
gers, outriders, and scouts. 


AFFINITY FOR NATURE 
Centaurs have an affinity for the natural world. Among 
the guilds that share that affinity, centaurs favor the 
rubblebelts of the Gruul Clans and the wide plazas of 
the Selesnya Conclave over the undercity tunnels of the 
Golgari and the laboratories of the Simic. 

Centaurs celebrate life and growth, and the birth of 
a foal is always cause for festivities. At the same time, 
they revere the traditions of the past, and among both 
the Gruul and the Selesnya they are voices of memory 
and history, preserving old ways and keeping alive the 
legends of ancestral heroes. They feel a close kinship 
with wild animals, perhaps because of their own horse- 
like bodies, and delight in the feeling of running along- 
side herds and packs of other beasts. 


CLANS AND COMMUNITY 

Centaurs sense the interconnectedness of the natural 
world. Thus, they celebrate family and community as 
microcosms of that greater connection. Among the 
Gruul, they have a strong clan identity, and Selesnya 
centaurs are fiercely loyal to their individual communi- 
ties as well as the guild as a whole. Their love of history 
and tradition also means that centaurs are more likely 
than most other Ravnicans to join the same guild that 
their parents did. 


CENTAUR NAMES 

Centaurs’ given names are passed down through family 
lines. The name bestowed on a new foal is typically the 
name of the most recently deceased family member 


== 


of the same gender, keeping alive the memory—and, 
the centaurs believe, some shard of the spirit—of the 
departed. Centaurs don't use family names, but they 
wear symbols that represent their family membership. 
These symbols might include graphical representations 
of plants or animals, printed mottoes, braids and beads 
worn in the hair and tail, or even specific patterns of 
woven fabric. 


Male Names: Bonmod, Boruvo, Chodi, Drozan, Kozim, 
Milosh, Ninos, Oleksi, Orval, Radovas, Radom, Rostis, 
Svetyos, Tomis, Trijiro, Volim, Vlodim, Yarog 

Female Names: Daiva, Dunja, Elnaya, Galisnya, Irinya, 
Kotyali, Lalya, Litisia, Madya, Mira, Nedja, Nikya, 
Ostani, Pinya, Rada, Raisya, Stasolya, Tatna, Zhen- 
doya, Zoria 


CENTAUR TRAITS 

Your centaur character has the following racial traits. 
These traits are also suitable for the centaurs of other 
worlds where there are centaurs of fey origin. These 
centaurs are smaller than the non-fey centaurs that 
roam in some realms. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score in- 
creases by 2, and your Wisdom score increases by 1. 

Age. Centaurs mature and age at about the same rate 
as humans. 

Alignment. Centaurs are inclined toward neutrality. 
Those who join the Selesnya are more often neutral 
good, while those who join the Gruul are typically cha- 
otic neutral. 


Size. Centaurs stand between 6 and 7 feet tall, with 
their equine bodies reaching about 4 feet at the withers. 
Your size is Medium. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 40 feet. 

Fey. Your creature type is fey, rather than humanoid. 

Charge. If you move at least 30 feet straight toward a 
target and then hit it with a melee weapon attack on the 
same turn, you can immediately follow that attack with a 
bonus action, making one attack against the target with 
your hooves. 

Hooves. Your hooves are natural melee weapons, 
which you can use to make unarmed strikes. If you hit 
with them, you deal bludgeoning damage equal to 1d4 + 
your Strength modifier, instead of the bludgeoning dam- 
age normal for an unarmed strike. 

Equine Build. You count as one size larger when de- 
termining your carrying capacity and the weight you can 
push or drag. 

In addition, any climb that requires hands and feet is 
especially difficult for you because of your equine legs. 
When you make such a climb, each foot of movement 
costs you 4 extra feet, instead of the normal 1 extra foot. 

Survivor. You have proficiency in one of the following 
skills of your choice: Animal Handling, Medicine, Na- 
ture, or Survival. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Sylvan. Sylvan is widely spoken in the Selesnya 
Conclave, for it is rich in vocabulary to describe natural 
phenomena and spiritual forces. 


GOBLIN 


Whether sniveling in fear, cackling with mad laughter, 
or snarling in a fury, goblins are wretched and inconse- 
quential—at least in the eyes of most of Ravnica’s other 
folk. In their own minds, though, they are content to lurk 
in the shadows only until they fully come into their own 
and receive the recognition they believe they deserve. 
They are entitled to some credit for their tenacity, agility, 
crafty ingenuity, and dumb luck, all of which has en- 
abled them to survive in a world overrun with creatures 
larger and more powerful than they are. 


SMALL AND WIRY 

Standing around 3 feet tall and covered in warty green 
or red skin, goblins have huge noses and ears. Their 
wiry bodies are surprisingly strong, and their mouths 
are full of sharp, crooked teeth. 

Most goblins are bald, either by heredity or by choice, 
but a few boast shocks of red or black hair. Their arms 
and legs are elongated in proportion to their small bod- 
ies, and their fingers and toes are also long and slender. 
Many goblins prefer to go unshod to leave their toes ex- 
posed for climbing. 


UNFETTERED EMOTION 

Creatures of raw impulse, goblins are found among 
guilds that value that quality, particularly the Izzet 
(where they typically serve as attendants for research- 
ers), the Gruul (in camps that form hapless buffers 
between the clans and civilized regions), the Rakdos 
(putting their love of explosions to good use), and occa- 


sionally the Boros (if they discover a well of discipline 
and courage within themselves, or find themselves 
unable to resist the shininess of Boros weapons and ar- 
mor). Many goblins are guildless and make their way as 
members of street gangs. 

Sometimes driven by wild mood swings, goblins have 
an inclination toward destruction, which can take a play- 
ful form but is often anything but. Some goblins clobber 
things, others like to light them on fire, and many love to 
blow things up. 

Goblins have an outrageous sense of humor, usually 
expressed through mischievous pranks. The malicious 
among them find pleasure in the misfortune of others 
and tend to cackle maniacally whenever they're amused. 
They can act with apparent randomness, sometimes just 
to confuse and befuddle others. 


GOBLIN NAMES 

The Goblin language is fond of certain sounds, and gob- 
lin names tend to repeat those sounds to form what can 
sound like nonsense words. A goblin's name gives no 
indication of gender. 


Goblin Names: Azzinax, Babolax, Blixanix, Crixizix, 
Dazzaz, Estrix, Finizix, Juzba, Kaluzax, Lyzaxa, 
Mizzix, Myznar, Nixispix, Paxizaz, Ravixiz, Stixil, 
Sunnix, Tozinox, Uxivozi, Vazozav, Wexiny, Zizzix 


GOBLIN TRAITS 
Your goblin character has the following racial traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity score 
increases by 2, and your Constitution score in- 
creases by 1. 

Age. Goblins reach adulthood around age 8. They 
age noticeably faster than humans, and though few gob- 
lins live to old age, the most cautious rarely live longer 
than 60 years. 

Alignment. Most of the goblins of Ravnica are chaotic, 
with no inclination toward good or evil. 

Size. Goblins are between 3 and 4 feet tall and weigh 
between 40 and 80 pounds. Your size is Small. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60 feet 
of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if it 
were dim light. You can't discern color in darkness, only 
shades of gray. 

Fury of the Small. When you damage a creature with 
an attack or a spell and the creature's size is larger than 
yours, you can cause the attack or spell to deal extra 
damage to the creature. The extra damage equals your 
level. Once you use this trait, you can't use it again until 
you finish a short or long rest. 

Nimble Escape. You can take the Disengage or Hide 
action as a bonus action on each of your turns. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Goblin. In Ravnica, Goblin is a simplistic language 
with a limited vocabulary and fluid rules of grammar, 
unsuited for any sophisticated conversation. 


LOXODON 


The humanoid elephants called loxodons are often 
oases of calm in the busy streets of Ravnica. They 
hum or chant in sonorous tones and move slowly or 


sit in perfect stillness. If provoked to action, loxodons 
are true terrors—bellowing with rage, trumpeting and 
flapping their ears. Their serene wisdom, fierce loyalty, 
and unwavering conviction are tremendous assets to 
their guilds. 


LUMBERING GIANTS 

Loxodons tower above most other humanoids, standing 
over 7 feet tall. They have the heads—trunks, tusks, 
ears, and faces—of elephants, and hulking bipedal bod- 
ies covered by thick, leathery skin. Each of their hands 
has four thick digits, and their feet are the flat-bottomed, 
oval-shaped feet of elephants. 

Like that of an elephant, a loxodon's trunk is a useful 
appendage. In addition to providing a keen sense of 
smell, the trunk can be used to lift and carry even heavy 
objects. The trunk can be used to carry both food and 
liquid to the mouth and can even act as a snorkel. 


GIFTED STONEWORKERS 

Loxodons are tireless, patient artisans with an unri- 
valed intuition about their craft. Although they make 
nurturing spiritual leaders, their gift for stonework is so 
ingrained that they are often at a loss when they try to 
impart that knowledge to others. Among the Selesnya, 
it primarily falls to loxodons to build the guild's magnifi- 
cent, cathedral-like arboretum structures. 


RELENTLESSLY LOYAL 

Loxodons believe in the value of community and life, 
and thus are most often found in the Selesnya Conclave. 
Some find fulfillment in the cause of order by joining the 
Orzhov Syndicate or the Azorius Senate. 

Loxodons believe that the members of a group have a 
responsibility to look out for each other. Once they have 
joined a guild or bonded with other individuals in any ca- 
pacity, loxodons devote themselves to maintaining that 
bond. They coordinate their efforts and are often willing 


to sacrifice themselves for the sake of the group. They 
expect reciprocal loyalty and commitment from the 
other members of their communities and can be severe 
in their disappointment when their trust is betrayed. 

The primary difference between loxodons who join 
different guilds is their sense of the size of the commu- 
nity they belong to. For loxodons in the Selesnya Con- 
clave, their community is the world and all living beings 
in it—everything valuable, meant to live in harmony, and 
interdependent. For Azorius loxodons, community pri- 
marily means a society of different peoples who need ad- 
herence to law and order so they can function together. 
For those in the Orzhov Syndicate, community means 
the syndicate alone, with its interests taking priority 
over those of any other group. 


LOXODON NAMES 

A loxodon's name includes subtle tones, produced in a 
loxodon's resonant nasal chambers, that indicate status, 
family connection, and community role. Since most 
non-loxodons can't distinguish these underlying tones, 
let alone produce them, loxodons often translate them 
into titles, such as Hierarch, Revered, Grandmother, 
Healer, or Saint, when interacting with other races. 


Male Names: Bayul, Berov, Brooj, Chedumov, Dobrun, 
Droozh, Golomov, Heruj, Ilromov, Kel, Nikoom, On- 
dros, Radomov, Svetel, Tamuj, Throom, Vasool 

Female Names: Ajj, Boja, Dancu, Dooja, Elyuja, Fa- 
noor, Irij, Jasoo, Katrun, Lyooda, Mayja, Radu, Shuja, 
Soofya, Totoor, Verij, Vesmova, Yoolna, Zarij, Zoorja 


LoxoDoN TRAITS 
Your loxodon character has the following racial traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution score in- 
creases by 2, and your Wisdom score increases by 1. 

Age. Loxodons physically mature at the same rate 
as humans, but they live about 450 years. They highly 
value the weight of wisdom and experience and are con- 
sidered young until they reach the age of 60. 

Alignment. Most loxodons are lawful, believing in 
the value of a peaceful, ordered life. They also tend 
toward good. 

Size. Loxodons stand between 7 and 8 feet tall. Their 
massive bodies weigh between 300 and 400 pounds. 
Your size is Medium. 

Powerful Build. You count as one size larger when 
determining your carrying capacity and the weight you 
can push, drag, or lift. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Loxodon Serenity. You have advantage on saving 
throws against being charmed or frightened. 

Natural Armor. You have thick, leathery skin. When 
you aren't wearing armor, your AC is 12 * your Con- 
stitution modifier. You can use your natural armor to 
————————————— P NEG 

RULE Tip: AC CALCULATIONS DON’T STACK 

When the game gives you more than one way to calculate 

your Armor Class, you can use only one of them. You 

choose the one to use. For example, if you have the lox- 
odon’s Natural Armor trait and the monk’s Unarmored 

Defense feature, you don’t mix them together. Instead, you 

choose which one determines your AC. 


CHAPTER 1 CHARACTER CREATION 


determine your AC if the armor you wear would leave 
you with a lower AC. A shield's benefits apply as normal 
while you use your natural armor. 

Trunk. You can grasp things with your trunk, and you 
can use it as a snorkel. It has a reach of 5 feet, and it can 
lift a number of pounds equal to five times your Strength 
score. You can use it to do the following simple tasks: 
lift, drop, hold, push, or pull an object or a creature; 
open or close a door or a container; grapple someone; 
or make an unarmed strike. Your DM might allow other 
simple tasks to be added to that list of options. 

Your trunk can't wield weapons or shields or do any- 
thing that requires manual precision, such as using 
tools or magic items or performing the somatic compo- 
nents of a spell. 

Keen Smell. Thanks to your sensitive trunk, you 
have advantage on Wisdom (Perception), Wisdom 
(Survival), and Intelligence (Investigation) checks that 
involve smell. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Loxodon. 


MINOTAUR 


The minotaurs of Ravnica are strong in body, dedica- 
tion, and courage. They are at home on the battlefield, 
willing to fight for their various causes. They combine a 
burning fury in battle with keen tactics that make them 
excellent commanders as well as valuable shock troops. 


HORNS AND Hooves 

Minotaurs are barrel-chested humanoids with heads re- 
sembling those of bulls. Their horns range in size from 
about 1 foot long to great, curling weapons easily three 
times that length. They often ornament their horns with 
metal rings or sheathe them in metal to protect them 
from damage. 

Manes of shaggy fur extend down minotaurs’ necks 
and powerful backs, and males have long tufts of hair on 
their chins and cheeks. Their legs end in heavy, cloven 
hooves. Minotaurs are born with long, tufted tails, but 
minotaurs of the Ordruun clan (and some others) have 
their tails docked as part of a coming-of-age ceremony; 
they find the heavy armor of the Boros legion much 
more comfortable without a long tail in the way. 


STRENGTH AND ZEAL 

Minotaurs are zealous and love battle. They are found 
among the Gruul Clans, but the minotaurs of the 
Ordruun family line, long associated with the Boros 
Legion, are much better known and respected. Boros 
minotaurs choose the precision of the legion over the 
fury of the pack. 

Minotaurs tend to vent their outrage through violence, 
but they aren’t generally quick to anger. They are pas- 
sionate, loving their friends and partners fiercely, and 
they laugh loud and long at good jokes. 


FAMILY AND GUILD 

Minotaur legends describe a small pantheon of heroes— 
perhaps they were once thought of as gods—who estab- 
lished the minotaurs’ place in the world. Every minotaur 
in Ravnica claims descent from one of these heroes. 


The Ordruun line is the most prominent, with thou- 
sands of members descended from an ancient hero who 
is said to have taught minotaurs the arts of war. Other 
important family lines include the Kharran line (primar- 
ily associated with the Gruul Scab clan), the Drendaa 
line (found scattered among the Gruul Clans), and the 
Tazgral line (divided between the Boros and the Gruul, 
with a significant number in the Rakdos as well). 

Since each family line has so many members, mi- 
notaurs don't usually find it helpful to connect the 
name of the line to their personal names; even though 
Commander Grozdan of the Boros Legion's Kamen 
Fortress is a prominent member of the Ordruun line, he 
would never call himself Grozdan Ordruun the way a 
human would. 


MINOTAUR NAMES 

The legends that recount the deeds of ancient minotaur 
heroes are full of other names as well: those of the 
retainers, allies, lovers, servants, enemies, and others 
who played roles, however small, in the lives of the he- 
roes. Almost every minotaur name is drawn from that 
long list of minor characters of legend, so that those folk 
are never forgotten. 


Male Names: Alovnek, Brogmir, Brozhdar, Dornik, 
Drakmir, Drazhan, Grozdan, Kalazmir, Klattic, Me- 
lislek, Nirikov, Prezhlek, Radolak, Rugilar, Sarovnek, 
Svarakov, Trovik, Vraslak, Yarvem 

Female Names: Akra, Bolsa, Cica, Dakka, Drakisla, 
Eleska, Enka, Irnaya, Jaska, Kalka, Makla, Noraka, 
Pesha, Raisha, Sokali, Takyat, Vrokya, Veska, Yelka, 
Zarka, Zoka 


MINOTAUR TRAITS 
Your minotaur character has the following racial traits. 
These traits are also suitable for minotaurs in other 
D&D worlds where these people have avoided the de- 
monic influence of Baphomet. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score 
increases by 2, and your Constitution score in- 
creases by 1. 

Alignment. Most minotaurs who join the Boros 
Legion lean toward lawful alignments, while 


those associated with the Cult of Rakdos or the Gruul 
Clans tend toward chaotic alignments. 

Size. Minotaurs average over 6 feet in height, and they 
have stocky builds. Your size is Medium. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Horns. Your horns are natural melee weapons, which 
you can use to make unarmed strikes. If you hit with 
them, you deal piercing damage equal to 1d6 + your 
Strength modifier, instead of the bludgeoning damage 
normal for an unarmed strike. 

Goring Rush. Immediately after you use the Dash 
action on your turn and move at least 20 feet, you 
can make one melee attack with your horns as a bo- 
nus action. 

Hammering Horns. Immediately after you hit a crea- 
ture with a melee attack as part of the Attack action 
on your turn, you can use a bonus action to attempt 
to shove that target with your horns. The target must 
be no more than one size larger than you and within 
5 feet of you. Unless it succeeds on a Strength saving 
throw against a DC equal to 8 + your proficiency bo- 
nus + your Strength modifier, you push it up to 10 feet 
away from you. 

Imposing Presence. You have proficiency in one 
of the following skills of your choice: Intimidation or 
Persuasion. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Minotaur. 


SIMIC HYBRID 


The Simic Combine uses magic to fuse different life 
forms together. In recent years, the Simic Combine has 
extended this research to humanoid subjects, magically 
transferring the traits of various animals into humans, 
elves, and vedalken. The goal of the Guardian Project is 
to build a Simic army of soldiers perfectly adapted to a 
variety of combat situations. These hyper-evolved spec- 
imens are called Simic hybrids, though they sometimes 
refer to themselves as guardians. 


EXTENSIVE ADAPTATION 

A hybrid's biological enhancements can change its ap- 
pearance drastically, though most hybrids retain their 
basic physical form. All are augmented with character- 
istics of animals, mostly aquatic, reptilian, or amphibian 
creatures. These include crab claws, squid tentacles, 
wings or fins like those of manta rays, translucent 

or camouflaged skin, or shark-like maws filled with 
sharp teeth. 

Hybrids are the product of Simic magic. It's not im- 
possible for a hybrid to leave the Simic Combine and 
join another guild, but the Simic would consider the in- 
dividual a deserter. And the new guild might never fully 
welcome a hybrid who could easily be a Simic spy. 


Simic HYBRID NAMES 

A hybrid usually bears the name given by their human, 
elf, or vedalken parents. Some hybrids assume a new 
name after their transformation—a name chosen per- 
sonally or by those who transformed them. 


Simic HYBRID TRAITS 
Your hybrid character has the following racial traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution score in- 
creases by 2, and one other ability score of your choice 
increases by 1. 

Age. Hybrids begin their lives as adult humans, elves, 
or vedalken. They age at a slightly accelerated rate, so 
their maximum life spans are probably reduced some- 
what. The Guardian Project has not been operating long 
enough to observe the full effect of this phenomenon. 

Alignment. Most hybrids share the generally neutral 
outlook of the Simic Combine. They are more interested 
in scientific research and the standing of their guild 
than in moral or ethical questions. Those who leave the 
Combine, however, often do so because their philosoph- 
ical outlook and alignment are more in line with a differ- 
ent guild's. 

Size. Your size is Medium, within the normal range of 
your humanoid base race. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60 feet 
of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if it 
were dim light. You can’t discern color in darkness, only 
shades of gray. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and your choice of Elvish or Vedalken. 

Animal Enhancement. Your body has been altered to 
incorporate certain animal characteristics. You choose 
one animal enhancement now and a second enhance- 
ment at 5th level. 

At Ist level, choose one of the following options: 


Manta Glide. You have ray-like fins that you can use as 
wings to slow your fall or allow you to glide. When you 
fall and aren't incapacitated, you can subtract up to 
100 feet from the fall when calculating falling damage, 
and you can move up to 2 feet horizontally for every 1 
foot you descend. 

Nimble Climber. You have a climbing speed equal to 
your walking speed. 

Underwater Adaptation. You can breathe air and wa- 
ter, and you have a swimming speed equal to your 
walking speed. 


At 5th level, your body evolves further, developing new 
characteristics. Choose one of the options you didn't 
take at 1st level, or one of the following options: 


Grappling Appendages. You have two special append- 
ages growing alongside your arms. Choose whether 
they're both claws or tentacles. As an action, you can 
use one of them to try to grapple a creature. Each one 
is also a natural weapon, which you can use to make 
an unarmed strike. If you hit with it, the target takes 
bludgeoning damage equal to 1d6 your Strength 
modifier, instead of the bludgeoning damage normal 
for an unarmed strike. Immediately after hitting, you 
can try to grapple the target as a bonus action. These 
appendages can't precisely manipulate anything and 
can't wield weapons, magic items, or other specialized 
equipment. 

Carapace. Your skin in places is covered by a thick 
shell. You gain a *1 bonus to AC when you're not wear- 
ing heavy armor. 


Acid Spit. As an action, you can spray acid from glands 
in your mouth, targeting one creature or object you 
can see within 30 feet of you. The target takes 2d10 
acid damage unless it succeeds on a Dexterity saving 
throw against a DC equal to 8 + your Constitution 
modifier + your proficiency bonus. This damage in- 
creases by 1d10 when you reach 11th level (3d10) and 
17th level (4d10). You can use this trait a number of 
times equal to your Consitution modifier (minimum of 
once), and you regain all expended uses of it when you 
finish a long rest. 


VEDALKEN 


Nothing is perfect. Vedalken not only believe this fact, 
they rejoice in it. Every imperfection is a chance for im- 
provement, and progress is an endless march toward a 
state of perfection that can never be reached. This view- 
point leads vedalken to pursue their work with delighted 
enthusiasm, never deterred by setbacks and excited by 
every opportunity for improvement. 

Vedalken are tall and slender, standing almost a head 
taller than humans on average but weighing about the 
same. Their hairless skin comes in a range of shades of 
blue. Their eyes are darker shades of blue or violet. They 
lack external ears, their noses are broad and flat, and 
they are partially amphibious. 


COOL RATIONALITY 

Despite being talkative, vedalken keep their personal 
lives private, and they tend to engage more with ideas 
than with people. They form close friendships based on 
mutual interests or compelling disagreements, and their 
interactions dwell on their thoughts about those issues 
rather than their feelings about them. 

To members of other races, vedalken often seem cold, 
even emotionless. That assessment isn’t fair—they feel 
emotion every bit as intensely as other folk do, but they 
are skilled at not displaying it. Cool rationality guides 
their actions, they make and follow careful plans, and 
they are patient enough to do nothing when the ideal 
outcome relies on such inaction. 


REASONING TOWARD PERFECTION 
Their curious intellects and rational minds incline 
vedalken toward membership in the Azorius Senate, the 
Simic Combine, and (less often) the Izzet League. What- 
ever their guild affiliation, they put their intelligence to 
use in crafting and improving things, whether those 
things are laws, procedures, or magical sciences. 
Vedalken believe that the path toward the impossible 
goal of perfection is paved with bricks of education, 
careful deliberation, and controlled experimentation. 
Some vedalken direct their energy toward perfecting 
themselves, whether by means of Simic bioengineering 
or through extensive study, and others concentrate on 
perfecting society through the careful drafting and ap- 
plication of laws. 


VEDALKEN NAMES 

Vedalken are given names at birth, but usually choose 
new names for themselves as part of their transition into 
adulthood. They rarely use family names. 


Male Names: Aglar, Bellin, Dallid, Firellan, Kavin, 
Koplony, Lomar, Mathvan, Modar, Nebun, Nhillosh, 
Nitt, Otrovac, Ovlan, Pelener, Rill, Trivaz, Uldin, 
Yolov, Zataz 

Female Names: Azi, Barvisa, Brazia, Direll, Fainn, 
Griya, Hallia, Katrille, Kovel, Lilla, Mirela, Morai, 
Nedress, Ossya, Pierenn, Roya, Sestri, Triel, Uzana, 
Yaraghiya, Zlovol 


VEDALKEN TRAITS 
Your vedalken character has the following racial traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Intelligence score in- 
creases by 2, and your Wisdom score increases by 1. 

Age. Vedalken mature slower than humans do, reach- 
ing maturity around age 40. Their life span is typically 
350 years, with some living to the age of 500. 

Alignment. Vedalken are usually lawful and non-evil. 

Size. Tall and slender, Vedalken stand 6 to 6!2 feet 
tall on average and usually weigh less than 200 pounds. 
Your size is Medium. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Vedalken Dispassion. You have advantage on all In- 
telligence, Wisdom, and Charisma saving throws. 

Tireless Precision. You are proficient in one of the 
following skills of your choice: Arcana, History, Investi- 
gation, Medicine, Performance, or Sleight of Hand. You 
are also proficient with one tool of your choice. 

Whenever you make an ability check with the chosen 
skill or tool, roll a d4 and add the number rolled to the 
check’s total. 

Partially Amphibious. By absorbing oxygen through 
your skin, you can breathe underwater for up to 1 hour. 
Once you've reached that limit, you can't use this trait 
again until you finish a long rest. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common, 
Vedalken, and one other language of your choice. 


CLASSES BY GUILD 


Your character can have any class that appears in the 
Player's Handbook (or other sources, with your DM's 
permission). Certain classes and subclasses are espe- 
cially appropriate for particular guilds, reflecting the 
traditions and training of those guilds. This section can 
help you choose a guild if you already know what class 
you want to play. 


BARBARIAN 


If you want to play a barbarian, your most likely 
guild home is the Gruul Clans, but you could also put 
your rage to work in the wild spectacles of the Cult 
of Rakdos. 

Gruul barbarians of the Zhur-Taa clan often choose 
the path of the Totem Warrior and a boar totem spirit. 
The effects are the same as for a bear spirit. 


BARBARIAN 
Subclass Guild 
Path of the Ancestral Guardian* Gruul 
Path of the Berserker Gruul, Rakdos 
Path of the Storm Herald* Gruul 
Path of the Totem Warrior Gruul 


Path of the Zealot* Boros, Rakdos 


*Appears in Xanathar's Guide to Everything 


BARD 


In Ravnica, bards are commonly found among the Azo- 
rius Senate, the Cult of Rakdos, and the Selesnya Con- 
clave, serving in a variety of capacities as lore keepers 
and entertainers. 


BARD 
Subclass Guild 
College of Glamour* Selesnya 
College of Lore Azorius, Selesnya 
College of Swords* Rakdos 
College of Valor Rakdos 
College of Whispers* Dimir 


*Appears in Xanathar's Guide to Everything 


CLERIC 


Though the worship of gods isn't wide- 
spread in Ravnica, clerics dedicated to more 
abstract principles do exist, primarily within 
the Azorius Senate, the Boros Legion, the 
Gruul Clans, the Orzhov Syndicate, and the 
Selesnya Conclave. They most often use 
their guild insignia as holy symbols. 


P. 


CLERIC 
Subclass Guild 
Forge Domain* Boros 
Knowledge Domain Azorius 


Life Domain Boros, Selesnya 
Light Domain Boros 
Nature Domain Selesnya 


Order Domain** 


Azorius, Orzhov 


Tempest Domain Gruul 
Trickery Domain Dimir 
War Domain Boros 


*Appears in Xanathar's Guide to Everything 
**Appears in this chapter 


DRUID 


Druid characters are typically associated with the Gol- 
gari Swarm, the Gruul Clans, the Selesnya Conclave, 
and the Simic Combine. Druid circles do not cross guild 
boundaries; the fact that a Golgari druid and a Selesnya 
druid both belong to the Circle of the Land does not nec- 
essarily create common ground between them. 


DRUID 

Subclass Guild 
Circle of Dreams* Selesnya 
Circle of Spores** Golgari 


Subclass Guild 
Circle of the Land Golgari (forest, swamp, Under- 
dark), Selesnya (forest, grassland), 
Simic (coast, forest) 

Circle of the Moon Gruul 


Circle of the Shepherd* Selesnya 


* Appears in Xanathar's Guide to Everything 
*** Appears in this chapter 


FIGHTER 


Fighters are common in almost every guild, with Dimir 
as the notable exception. In a world where constant 

tension among the guilds often blooms into physical vio- 
lence, fighters are the core of most guilds' defenses. 


FIGHTER 
Subclass Guild 
Arcane Archer* 
Battle Master 
Cavalier* 


Selesnya 

Azorius, Boros, Orzhov, Selesnya 
Azorius, Boros 

Azorius, Boros, Golgari, Gruul, 
Orzhov, Rakdos, Selesnya, Simic 


Champion 


Eldritch Knight Azorius, Boros, Izzet, Rakdos 


*Appears in Xanathar's Guide to Everything 


MONK 


Unarmed fighting styles like those practiced by monks 


are uncommon on Ravnica, but a few guilds—House Di- 
mir, the Selesnya Conclave, and the Simic Combine—do 
have contemplative traditions that include channeling 
magic in the form of ki. 


MONK 
Subclass Guild 
Way of Shadow Dimir 


Simic (focus on water- and 
air-related disciplines) 


Way of the Four Elements 


Way of the Open Hand 
Way of the Sun Soul* Boros 


Selesnya, Simic 


*Appears in Xanathar’s Guide to Everything 


PALADIN 


The loyalty of a paladin is appreciated most by those 
guilds that value oaths of service, namely the Azorius 
Senate, the Boros Legion, and the Selesnya Conclave. 


PALADIN 
Subclass Guild 
Oath of Conquest* Orzhov 
Oath of Devotion Boros 
Oath of Redemption* Selesnya 
Oath of the Ancients Selesnya 
Oath of Vengeance Azorius 


*Appears in Xanathar's Guide to Everything 


RANGER 


Standing as a bastion between civilization and the wil- 
derness, Boros rangers scout the rubblebelts and other 
wild areas of Ravnica. Gruul rangers serve a similar 
role, though they are focused on protecting their clans 
from the encroachment of civilized forces such as the 
Boros. Selesnya and Golgari rangers are focused on 
protecting their communities. 


RANGER 


Subclass Guild 

Golgari (prefer insects and reptiles), 
Gruul (prefer fierce beasts), Selesnya 
(prefer wolves) 


Beast Master 


Gloom Stalker* Golgari 
Hunter Boros, Gruul, Selesnya 


*Appears in Xanathar's Guide to Everything 


ROGUE 


Rogues are most at home in House Dimir, the Golgari 
Swarm, and the Orzhov Syndicate. 


ROGUE 

Subclass Guild 

Arcane Trickster Dimir 

Assassin Dimir, Golgari, Orzhov 
Inquisitive* Azorius, Dimir 

Mastermind* Dimir 

Scout* Gruul 

Swashbuckler* Rakdos 

Thief Dimir, Golgari, Orzhov, Rakdos 


*Appears in Xanathar's Guide to Everything 


SORCERER 


Ravnica’s sorcerers usually attribute their magical 
power not to bloodlines or cosmic forces, but to labora- 
tory experiments—often ones gone awry. Thus, they are 
most often found among the Izzet. 

Niv-Mizzet, the guildmaster of the Izzet, is a dragon. 
Sorcerers who gain their elemental powers from labo- 
ratory incidents often claim that they have been infused 
with some of Niv-Mizzet's power. 


SORCERER 
Subclass Guild 
Divine Soul* Boros 
Draconic Bloodline Izzet 
Shadow Magic* Dimir 
Storm Sorcery* Izzet 
Wild Magic Izzet 


*Appears in Xanathar's Guide to Everything 


WARLOCK 


In a handful of guilds, service to a powerful individual 
is common among warlocks. Warlocks are most often 
found in the Cult of Rakdos and the Selesnya Conclave. 
Members of any guild who delve too deeply into forbid- 
den secrets—perhaps at the behest of their guilds' lead- 
ers, or sometimes in defiance of them—might unearth 
lore regarding the "old gods" of Ravnica. These mysteri- 
ous beings, called the Nephilim, grant warlocks the mys- 
terious and maddening powers of the Great Old One. 


WARLOCK 
Subclass Guild 
The Archfey Selesnya 
The Celestial* Boros 
The Fiend Rakdos 
The Great Old One Any 


*Appears in Xanathar's Guide to Everything 


WIZARD 


Almost every guild has wizards. Noteworthy exceptions 
include the Gruul Clans, the Cult of Rakdos, and the 
Selesnya Conclave, which are built around devotion to 
ancient ways and powerful beings. 


WIZARD 
Subclass Guild 
School of Abjuration Azorius, Orzhov 
School of Conjuration Izzet, Simic 
School of Divination Azorius, Dimir, Orzhov 


School of Enchantment Azorius, Dimir, Orzhov 


School of Evocation Boros, Izzet 
School of Illusion Dimir 

School of Necromancy Golgari, Orzhov 
School of Transmutation Izzet, Simic 
War Magic* Boros 


*Appears in Xanathar's Guide to Everything 


SUBCLASS OPTIONS 


Two classes receive subclass options in this section: the 
cleric and the druid. 

At 1st level, a cleric chooses a Divine Domain. This 
book adds the Order Domain to the options available to 
the cleric making that choice. 

At 2nd level, a druid chooses a Druid Circle. This 
book adds the Circle of Spores to the options available 
to the druid making that choice. 


CLERIC: ORDER DOMAIN 


The Order Domain represents discipline, as well as 
devotion to a society or an institution and strict obedi- 
ence to the laws governing it. On Ravnica, the domain 
is favored by clerics of the Azorius Senate, who use it to 
maintain and enforce the law, and of the Orzhov Syndi- 
cate, who exploit law and order for their personal gain. 
On other worlds, gods who grant access to this domain 
include Bane, Tyr, Majere, Erathis, Pholtus, Wee Jas, 
Aureon, Maglubiyet, Nuada, Athena, Anubis, Forseti, 
and Asmodeus. 

The ideal of order is obedience to the law above all 
else, rather than to a specific individual or the passing 
influence of emotion or popular rule. Clerics of order 
are typically concerned with how things are done, rather 
than whether an action's results are just. Following the 
law and obeying its edicts is critical, especially when it 
benefits these clerics and their guilds or deities. 

Law establishes hierarchies. Those selected by the 
law to lead must be obeyed. Those who obey must do so 
to the best of their ability. In this manner, law creates an 
intricate web of obligations that allows society to forge 
order and security in a chaotic multiverse. 


ORDER DOMAIN FEATURES 


Cleric Level Feature 
lst Domain Spells, Bonus Proficiencies, 
Voice of Authority 
2nd Channel Divinity: Order's Demand 
6th Embodiment of the Law 
8th Divine Strike 
17th Order’s Wrath 


DOMAIN SPELLS 

You gain domain spells at the cleric levels listed in the 
Order Domain Spells table. See the Divine Domain 
class feature in the Player’s Handbook for how domain 
spells work. 


ORDER DOMAIN SPELLS 


Cleric Level Spells 
lst command, heroism 
3rd hold person, zone of truth 
5th mass healing word, slow 
7th compulsion, locate creature 
9th commune, dominate person 


CHAPTER ! | CHARACTER CREATION 


BONUS PROFICIENCIES 

When you choose this domain at 1st level, you gain profi- 
ciency with heavy armor. You also gain proficiency in the 
Intimidation or Persuasion skill (your choice). 


VOICE OF AUTHORITY 
Starting at 1st level, you can invoke the power of law to 
drive an ally to attack. If you cast a spell with a spell slot 
of 1st level or higher and target an ally with the spell, 
that ally can use their reaction immediately after the 
spell to make one weapon attack against a creature of 
your choice that you can see. 

If the spell targets more than one ally, you choose the 
ally who can make the attack. 


CHANNEL DIVINITY: ORDER'S DEMAND 
Starting at 2nd level, you can use your Channel Divinity 
to exert an intimidating presence over others. 

As an action, you present your holy symbol, and each 
creature of your choice that can see or hear you within 
30 feet of you must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw 
or be charmed by you until the end of your next turn or 
until the charmed creature takes any damage. You can 
also cause any of the charmed creatures to drop what 
they are holding when they fail the saving throw. 


EMBODIMENT OF THE LAW 
At 6th level, you become remarkably adept at channeling 
magical energy to compel others. 

If you cast a spell of the enchantment school using 
a spell slot of 1st level or higher, you can change the 
spell's casting time to 1 bonus action for this casting, 
provided the spell's casting time is normally 1 action. 


You can use this feature a number of times equal to 


^ your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you re- 
gain all expended uses of it when you finish a long rest. 


DIVINE STRIKE 

At 8th level, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon 
strikes with divine energy. Once on each of your turns 
when you hit a creature with a weapon attack, you can 


. cause the attack to deal an extra 1d8 psychic damage to 


the target. When you reach 14th level, the extra damage 
increases to 2d8. 


ORDER'S WRATH 

Starting at 17th level, enemies you designate for de- 
struction wilt under the combined efforts of you and 
your allies. If you deal your Divine Strike damage to a 
creature on your turn, you can curse that creature until 
the start of your next turn. The next time one of your 
allies hits the cursed creature with an attack, the target 
also takes 2d8 psychic damage, and the curse ends. You 
can curse a creature in this way only once per turn. 


DRUID: CIRCLE OF SPORES 


Druids of the Circle of Spores find beauty in decay. They 
see within mold and other fungi the ability to trans- 
form lifeless material into abundant, albeit somewhat 
strange, life. 

These druids believe that life and death are parts of a 
grand cycle, with one leading to the other and then back 
again. Death isn’t the end of life, but instead a change of 
state that sees life shift into a new form. 

Druids of this circle have a complex relationship with 
the undead. Unlike most other druids, they see nothing 
inherently wrong with undeath, which they consider to 
be a companion to life and death. But these druids be- 
lieve that the natural cycle is healthiest when each seg- 
ment of it is vibrant and changing. Undead that seek to 
replace all life with undeath, or that try to avoid passing 
to a final rest, violate the cycle and must be thwarted. 


CIRCLE OF SPORES FEATURES 


Druid Level ^ Feature 
2nd Circle Spells, Halo of Spores, 
Symbiotic Entity 
6th Fungal Infestation 
10th Spreading Spores 
14th Fungal Body 


CIRCLE SPELLS 
Your symbiotic link to fungus and your ability to tap into 
the cycle of life and death grants you access to certain 
spells. At 2nd level, you learn the chill touch cantrip. At 
3rd, 5th, 7th, and 9th level you gain access to the spells 
listed for that level in the Circle of Spores Spells table. 
Once you gain access to one of these spells, you al- 
ways have it prepared, and it doesn't count against the 
number of spells you can prepare each day. If you gain 
access to a spell that doesn't appear on the druid spell 
list, the spell is nonetheless a druid spell for you. 


CIRCLE OF SPORES SPELLS 
Druid Level Spells 


3rd blindness/deafness, gentle repose 
5th animate dead, gaseous form 

7th blight, confusion 

9th cloudkill, contagion 


HALO OF SPORES 

Starting at 2nd level, you are surrounded by invisible, 
necrotic spores that are harmless until you unleash 
them on a creature nearby. When a creature you can see 
moves into a space within 10 feet of you or starts its turn 
there, you can use your reaction to deal 1d4 necrotic 
damage to that creature unless it succeeds on a Consti- 
tution saving throw against your spell save DC. The ne- 
crotic damage increases to 1d6 at 6th level, 1d8 at 10th 
level, and 1d10 at 14th level. 


SYMBIOTIC ENTITY 

At 2nd level, you gain the ability to channel magic into 
your spores. As an action, you can expend a use of your 
Wild Shape feature to awaken those spores, rather 
than transforming into a beast form, and you gain 4 
temporary hit points for each level you have in this 
class. While this feature is active, you gain the follow- 
ing benefits: 


* When you deal your Halo of Spores damage, roll the 
damage die a second time and add it to the total. 

* Your melee weapon attacks deal an extra 1d6 poison 
damage to any target they hit. 


These benefits last for 10 minutes, until you lose all 
these temporary hit points, or until you use your Wild 
Shape again. 


LL ——————————— 
RULE TIP: TEMPORARY Hit PoiNTS DON’T STACK 
If you have temporary hit points and receive more of them, 
you don't add them together, unless a rule says you can. 
Instead, you decide which temporary hit points to keep. 
For more information on temporary hit points, see chapter 
9 of the Player's Handbook. 

—— Pr od 


FUNGAL INFESTATION 

At 6th level, your spores gain the ability to infest a 
corpse and animate it. If a beast or a humanoid that is 
Small or Medium dies within 10 feet of you, you can use 
your reaction to animate it, causing it to stand up imme- 
diately with 1 hit point. The creature uses the zombie 
stat block in the Monster Manual. It remains animate for 
1 hour, after which time it collapses and dies. 

In combat, the zombie's turn comes immediately after 
yours. It obeys your mental commands, and the only 
action it can take is the Attack action, making one me- 
lee attack. 

You can use this feature a number of times equal to 
your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you re- 
gain all expended uses of it when you finish a long rest. 


SPREADING SPORES 
At 10th level, you gain the ability to seed an area with 
deadly spores. As a bonus action while your Symbiotic 
Entity feature is active, you can hurl spores up to 30 feet 
away, where they swirl in a 10-foot cube for 1 minute. 
The spores disappear early if you use this feature again, 
if you dismiss them as a bonus action, or if your Symbi- 
otic Entity feature is no longer active. 

Whenever a creature moves into the cube or starts 
its turn there, that creature takes your Halo of Spores 
damage, unless the creature succeeds on a Constitution 
saving throw against your spell save DC. A creature can 
take this damage no more than once per turn. 

While the cube of spores persists, you can't use your 
Halo of Spores reaction. 


FUNGAL Bopy 

At 14th level, the fungal spores in your body alter you: 
you can't be blinded, deafened, frightened, or poisoned, 
and any critical hit against you counts as a normal hit 
instead, unless you're incapacitated. 


HE TEN GUILDS ARE THE LIFEBLOOD OF 
Ravnica, making up the foundation of its 
society. They are voluntary associations led 
by guildmasters, but that’s the extent of their 
resemblance to the craft and merchant guilds found on 
most DUNGEONS & DRAGONS worlds. They include many 
different kinds of organizations: 


* A government body, the Azorius Senate 

A military force, the Boros Legion 

* An espionage network, House Dimir 

+ An association of raiders, the Gruul Clans 

* Two scientific research institutions, the Izzet League 
and the Simic Combine 

* An organized crime family, the Orzhov Syndicate 

+ Raucous performance troupes collectively known as 

the Cult of Rakdos, which bends to the whims of a 

powerful demon 

Two widely divergent groups devoted to nature, the 

Golgari Swarm and the Selesnya Conclave 


Citizens of Ravnica aren't born into guilds. An individ- 
ual can choose to belong to any guild—or no guild. Some 
guilds, such as Selesnya and Boros, actively recruit new 
members, while others simply accept those who seek 
membership. People within a family might join different 
guilds, which can lead to strong connections between 
the guilds in question or to painful animosity in families 
whose members follow different paths. 

Even though citizens can choose their guild associa- 
tions, long-standing traditions steer certain individuals 
toward a particular guild. For example, it would be 
highly unusual for a Devkarin elf (a dark elf) to join any 
guild other than the Golgari, and the Ordruun line of 
minotaurs has provided the Boros armies with gener- 
ations of offspring. Members of certain races are also 
drawn to specific guilds, as noted in the description of 
each of guild. 


GUILD MEMBERSHIP 


You establish your character's membership in a guild by 
choosing that guild's background from among those de- 
tailed in this chapter. This book assumes that you have 
chosen a guild and that you maintain your association 
with it throughout your life. As a result, your choice of 
guild can play a more significant role than most back- 
grounds do in shaping what your character does now, 
not just what you accomplished in the past. 

The backgrounds associated with guilds in this chap- 
ter work like those in the Player's Handbook, giving 
you proficiencies, languages, equipment, and suggested 
characteristics (personality traits, ideals, bonds, and 
flaws). Each guild entry also provides personal contacts; 
suggestions for your alignment, race, and class; and a 
list of spells that you can add to your spell list if you're a 
member of a spellcasting class. 


CHAPTER 2: GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


GUILD SPELLS 


The spellcasters of Ravnica's guilds have a style of 
magic specific to their guild. A guild's description in- 
cludes a list of guild spells that epitomize the type of 
magic the guild favors. The Boros Legion, for example, 
tends to prefer using spells of fire magic and holy light, 
and its guild spell list reflects that emphasis. 

If you play a character who has the Spellcasting or the 
Pact Magic class feature, your guild spells are added to 
the spell list for your class, thereby expanding the spell 
options available to you. 


BONDS AND CONTACTS 


As a benefit of your guild membership, you have con- 
tacts both inside and outside the guild. Contacts are 
useful resources in the urban environment of Ravnica, 
where a friendly face can be more valuable than gold. 
As stated in the Player’s Handbook, bonds represent 
your connections to people, places, and events in the 
world. Contacts are people you have a connection to, but 
they're not necessarily bonds. People can be bonds if 
they inspire you, motivate you, or make you act against 
your best interests. (They can represent flaws if their 
existence amounts to a weakness for you.) Contacts, in 
comparison, are simply people you know. They might be 
-- LLLLÁ———————————— 
THE GUILDLESS 
The guilds might be considered the heart and soul of 
Ravnica, but they aren’t all that makes up the city. Many 
citizens choose not to join a guild—some because they 
can’t be bothered, and others because they have philo- 
sophical objections to the very idea of guilds. The so-called 
guildless are especially common in areas that might be 
considered rural: places farther from the heart of the city 
and the larger exurban districts. But even in the city’s 
heart, some guildless citizens actively oppose the influ- 
ence of the guilds, blaming the world’s strife and suffering 
on an elite hierarchy that seeks to take control, consolidate 
wealth, and fragment a populace against itself. 
The numbers of the guildless include people engaged in 
a wide variety of trades and services that aren't managed 
and regulated by the guilds, from baking to cartography. 
University professors, guides, traders, and bartenders 
might be guildless. Criminal gangs set themselves up as 
rivals to the Orzhov, and even military forces operate inde- 
pendent of guild control, serving as neighborhood police 
forces or mercenaries for hire. 
About half of Ravnica’s population is guildless. That 
proportion is higher for some races than others: nearly 
all elves, for example, belong to the Golgari, Selesnya, 
or Simic guilds, but a majority of goblins are guildless. 
Loxodons tend to have a strong sense of community, so 
they readily join guilds. And when they don’t, they join 
groups of another sort, such as mercenary companies 
or cults. Simic hybrids are all created within the Simic 
Combine, so it’s rare for them not to be part of it. 
ni aaa ae RE" 


GHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


friends, rivals, or even family members, but their rela- 
tionship with you is rarely as strong as with a bond. 

Although the tables of contacts in this chapter de- 
scribe nonplayer characters who are members of guilds 
(your own and others), you are likely to acquire guildless 
contacts as well. NPCs such as goblin gang leaders, 
minotaur bartenders, and vedalken tailors all go about 
their lives in the shadow of the guilds but divorced from 
those groups’ intrigue and politics. 


STARTING CONTACTS 

Your character starts the game with three contacts: an 
ally in their guild, a rival in their guild, and an ally or 
rival in another guild. (House Dimir is an exception.) 
Tables in each guild section help you determine who 
these contacts are—facts that you can build on by work- 
ing with your DM to add some details. The table entries 
for contacts are written in the first person, where “I” is 
your character. 

You'll roll twice on the Contacts table for your guild, 
unless you're in House Dimir (as explained in that 
guild's section). Your first roll gives you an ally. Your sec- 
ond roll gives you a rival, who might be friendly, jealous, 
or antagonistic. (It's possible for these to be the same 
person; a single person might be generally friendly to- 
ward you and simultaneously jealous of your success, 
for example.) Then you'll roll once on the table of con- 
tacts from other guilds. That contact could be either an 
ally or a rival, or you might instead gain a third contact 
from your own guild. 


RENOWN 


As you advance the goals of your guild through your ad- 
ventures, you become an increasingly important part of 
the guild's activities. You might rise through the ranks, 
eventually taking up a position at the right hand of the 
guildmaster—or even becoming the master yourself! 

Your status in your guild is measured by your renown 
Score. As you increase that score, you gain the opportu- 
nity to advance in the ranks of the guild. 

When you join a guild as a starting character, your 
renown score with that guild is 1. Your renown score 
increases by 1 when you do something to advance 
the guild's interests, assuming that other members of 
the guild are aware of what you've done. Each guild's 
description in this chapter includes a discussion of its 
goals and your role in pursuing those goals, which your 
DM will use to judge whether you earn an increase in 
your renown score. 

The various ranks within the guilds describe the 
range of tasks you might perform, from testing experi- 
mental Izzet weaponry to leading a squad of Boros sol- 
diers into battle. When you're assigned a mission that in- 
volves an adventure—leaving behind your guild holdings 
and putting yourself in danger—and you complete that 
mission, your renown score with that guild increases by 
2. Chapter 4 includes information for the DM about mis- 
sions appropriate for your guild. 

Other tasks that don't involve adventuring can also im- 
prove your renown score. You can use the time between 
adventures to improve your renown within your guild by 
performing these tasks, as well as by socializing with 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


prominent people in the guild. After doing so for a total 
number of days equal to your current renown score mul- 
tiplied by 10, your renown score increases by 1. 

At your DM’s discretion, you might also have a re- 
nown score in a guild you don't belong to. You can't 
ever formally advance in rank within another guild, but 
a high renown score can earn you additional contacts, 
favors, and other benefits. This option can be useful 
in an intrigue-heavy campaign where the adventurers 
spend a lot of time trying to influence the leaders of vari- 
ous guilds. 


BENEFITS OF RENOWN 

As you gain renown in a guild, you gain certain benefits. 
Most benefits are guild-specific, but there are general 
benefits that apply no matter which guild you belong to: 


Renown 3 or Higher. When you have a renown score of 
at least 3 with your own guild, you are an established 
and respected member of the guild. Other members 
of the guild have a friendly attitude toward you by 
default. (Individual members of the guild might have 
reasons to dislike you despite your renown.) They pro- 
vide you with lodging and food in dire circumstances 
and pay for your funeral if needed. If you are accused 
of a crime, your guild offers legal support, as long as 
a good case can be made for your innocence or the 
crime was justifiable. 

Renown 5 or Higher. When your renown score with 
any guild reaches 5, you gain an additional contact 
within the guild. This contact might be a character you 
met during your adventures or someone who seeks 
you out because of your fame. Your DM will assign 
you a contact or have you roll on the Contacts table for 
the appropriate guild. 


Some guilds—notably Azorius, Orzhov, and Boros— 
have well-defined hierarchies that characters can as- 
cend through as they improve their renown scores. 

Other guilds have positions of honor that characters 
can apply for if their renown score is high enough. Not 
every member of the Selesnya Conclave aspires to be a 
sagittar (an archer assigned to guard an important guild 
location), but any character who meets the prerequisites 
can apply for the position. Ultimately, the DM decides 
whether a character qualifies for such a role, with a cer- 
tain renown score as a minimum requirement. 

Several guilds provide a salary among the benefits 
of renown within the guild. The salary is described as 
sufficient to maintain a lifestyle of a certain level. If you 
earn a salary, you can live at the specified lifestyle with- 
out paying the normal daily expenditure. See chapter 5 
of the Player's Handbook for more information on life- 
style expenses. 

A prominent position in a guild often allows you to 
call on the services of lower-ranking members to assist 
you in your work. When you do, they are assumed to be 
loyal followers who help you to the best of their ability. 
Some of them are assigned to help you for the duration 
of a single task or mission, while others are under your 
permanent command, staffing a laboratory, workshop, 
or garrison where you are in charge. Depending on their 
role, they might help you in dangerous situations (like 


combat) or flee from them. You might assign them to 
perform tasks in your absence, which could include un- 
dertaking research, looking for witnesses to a crime, or 
carrying out a small-scale raid, for example, depending 
on their role and capabilities. You carry the responsi- 
bility for their lives and welfare, ultimately, and if the 
guild decides that you are abusing your authority and 
mistreating the members beneath you, you might lose 
renown, lose your rank or status in the guild, or even be 
cast out of the guild. 


LOSING RENOWN 

If you commit a serious offense against your guild or its 
members, you might lose renown within the guild. The 
extent of the loss depends on the infraction and is left 
to the DM’s discretion. A character’s renown score with 
a guild can never drop below 0. If your renown score 
drops below the threshold for a rank or privilege you 
have attained, you lose that benefit. Even if you regain 
the lost renown, you might find it more difficult to again 
secure a position or rank you have previously lost. 


STYLES OF MEMBERSHIP 


As you're playing a character associated with one of the 
guilds, think about your character's relationship with 
the guild. Guild members can be grouped into four cat- 
egories, depending on their motivations and priorities: 
loyalists, opportunists, rebels, and anomalies. Which 
one of these descriptions best fits your character? 

Loyalists join a guild because they firmly believe in 
the guild’s ideals and want to advance its goals. Their 
membership in the guild is a badge of identity for them. 
They're typically of the races and classes most strongly 
associated with the guild, and their personality traits 
and ideals fall in line with the suggestions in this chap- 
ter. An idealistic human or a minotaur paladin in the 
Boros Legion is an example of a loyalist. 

Opportunists join a guild based on what they can 
gain from becoming members. Every guild offers its 
members something—whether concrete benefits such as 
opportunities for wealth or more subtle, intangible re- 
wards such as social status—and getting that something 
is the primary motivation for this type of character. Op- 
portunists often pay lip service to the ideals and goals of 
the guild, looking out for themselves first and the guild 
second (at best). A selfish human fighter who uses mem- 
bership in the Boros Legion as an excuse to bully and 
steal from others would be an opportunist. 

Rebels love the guilds they're in but don't conform to 
guild expectations. They might be good-hearted idealists 
trying to bend a shady guild toward nobler pursuits, or 
they might be selfish egotists hoping to direct the guild's 
actions toward promoting their own interests. Most reb- 
els are typical members of the guild in terms of race and 
class, but they vary from type when it comes to person- 
alities and ideals. A Boros legionnaire with tyrannical 
tendencies who thinks the Boros should enforce justice 
with an iron fist would be a rebel. 

Anomalies are individuals who join guilds contrary 
to all expectations. Their race or class (or both) is out- 
side the norm for their guild, but their personalities 
and ideals fall perfectly in line; that's why they joined. 


A vedalken paladin in the Boros Legion, or an Ordruun 
minotaur in the Orzhov Syndicate, would fall into 
this category. 


MEMBERSHIP AND INDEPENDENCE 

Some adventurers do exactly what they're told, spending 
their careers doing the bidding of their guild superiors. 
Most adventuring characters, though, prefer more inde- 
pendence. You can roll a d6 or choose from the options 
in the table below to establish a reason for the freedom 
enjoyed by your character. 


d6 Reason for Independence 


1 I’ve been around long enough that my guild lets me 
do what | want. 
2 I’ve been chosen for special assignments because I'm 


just that good. 

3  l'vebeen singled out for special assignments because 
somebody up the ranks hates me. 

4 I’m moonlighting, and I'd get in trouble if my 
superiors knew what | was up to. 

5  |'vebeen put at the disposal of another guild because 
my superiors want to help them. 

6 I've been put at the disposal of another guild because 
my superiors hope I'll fail. 


CHANGING GUILDS 


If events in your character's adventuring career war- 
rant it, you can abandon membership in one guild and 
join a different one. Once you leave a guild, you can 
rarely go back. 

Your DM decides what requirements you must meet to 
join a new guild. Some guilds welcome new recruits and 
make the process as simple as possible, while others 
require a demonstration of loyalty. 

When you change guilds, you lose all the privileges of 
membership in your original guild, including the back- 
ground feature granted to you by your original guild and 
any rank or position you have achieved in that guild. 
You also lose access to your old guild spells, unless they 
are already on your class's spell list, among your spells 
known, or in your spellbook. Except in exceptional cir- 
cumstances, your renown score with your original guild 
becomes 0. 

Your old guild expects you to return your guild insig- 
nia, and your new guild gives you one to replace it. 

You gain the privileges of membership in your new 
guild. These include the background feature granted by 
your new guild, although your DM might decide that it 
takes you a while to gain the full benefit. For example, 

a character who leaves another guild to join the Gruul 
Clans doesn't immediately know the ways of the rubble- 
belts, but has to gain that familiarity over time. You also 
gain access to your new guild spells. 

Your new guild doesn't give you any benefits that 
assume prior knowledge or experience, including profi- 
ciencies, starting equipment (except your guild insignia), 
and contacts. 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


31 


AZORIUS SENATE 


OFFICER LAVINIA STOOD BEFORE THE ENORMOUS 
double doors that led into the highest spire of New Prahv, 
the lair of the guildmaster. To look at her, nothing would 
seem out of place: her cape spilled elegantly from her of- 
ficer's armor, her sword shone like a decorative piece one 
would hang above a mantel, and her three-sided medals 
displayed her district-spanning rank. 

—Doug Beyer, Return to Raunica: The Secretist 


Bringing order from chaos—that is the mission of the 
Azorius Senate. Without the extensive legal code crafted 
and enforced by the Azorius, society would crumble, 
transforming Ravnica into a field of rubble where the 
Gruul and the Rakdos do whatever they please. The 
Azorius carry this weighty responsibility with stoic 
pride, and they perform their work of legislation, investi- 
gation, and enforcement with steely determination. 

The first guildmaster of the Azorius Senate was a 
sphinx named Azor. He was the author of the original 
Guildpact, as well as the creator of the elaborate con- 
tingency plan that resulted in the creation of the Living 
Guildpact. The Azorius Senate was meant to carry on 
his legacy by serving as the legislative body of Ravnica. 


INSIDE THE SENATE 


The Azorius Senate is supported by three branches, 
called columns, each led by an arbiter (also called a 
capital). The capitals of the three columns form the 
Triumvirate, which advises the guildmaster, Supreme 
Judge Isperia, an ancient and wise sphinx. 

The Sova Column consists of judges and the exten- 
sive legal apparatus surrounding them. It is tasked with 
adjudicating and arbitrating the effects of the law. The 
column employs legal aides, pages, librarians, experts 
on precedent, advocates for the accused, public prosecu- 
tors, and judges. 


CHAPTER 2 


GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


The Jelenn Column writes and enacts the laws of 
Ravnica, involving the efforts not just of the designated 
legislators but also a network of bureaucrats: aides, writ- 
ers, researchers, lobbyists, clerks, and so on. 

The Lyev Column enforces the law as Ravnica's 
police force. The many-leveled hierarchy of the Lyev 
Column includes arresters, investigators, officers, and 
lawmages. The Lyev Column is also venturing into the 
work of managing surveillance and precognition. Most 
adventuring characters, by their nature and because of 
their capabilities, are associated with the active work 
of the Lyev Column rather than the behind-the-scenes 
activity of the other columns. 


GOALS OF THE AZORIUS 


The Azorius Senate's ultimate goal is the perfection of 
society. They want to protect the people of Ravnica and 
foster a community of peace and harmony. A society's 
values, they contend, are reflected in the laws it creates. 
Something is good if it is lawful. To the Azorius, the 
highest virtue is a society built on stability and order, 
and the guild's elaborate system of laws is structured 

to prevent wrongdoing first and foremost, even at the 
expense of certain liberties. The Azorius can act asa 
benevolent proactive force that keeps evildoers in check, 
but it can also act as an oppressive bureaucratic force 
that stifles freedom and expression. 

In the absence of the Living Guildpact, the Azorius are 
uncertain who is supposed to maintain balance among 
the guilds. As a group, they are convinced that the sys- 
tem can't be disrupted, but they are challenged by the 
reality that the one person who is meant to hold their 
world together never seems to be around. The Azorius 
Senate is invoking emergency powers with increasing 
frequency, and the Lyev Column's enforcers are wield- 
ing an ever-growing amount of influence. 

The Azorius guild embraces the belief that Ravnican 
society has come too far to succumb to chaos. Civiliza- 
tion can be saved only through the guidance of a strong, 
safety-focused government. In the mind of the Azorius, 
the threat of chaos is imminent. They believe it is time 
to face facts and do whatever is necessary to protect the 
people and preserve the force of law. 

The Azorius, as always, see agents of disorder as 
their greatest enemies. They have cracked down on the 
Gruul Clans and imposed a variety of creatively written 
laws outlawing that guild's presence in as many public 
places as possible. The Azorius also abhor the satirical 


shows of the Rakdos (in part because the Azorius are 
frequently ridiculed by Rakdos performers) and attempt 
to curb them with new decrees about public perfor- 
mances. In response to attempts by other guilds to edge 
their way around the system, the Azorius routinely cre- 
ate new laws to support or countermand old ones. 


AZORIUS CHARACTERS 


Alignment: Usually lawful, often neutral 
Suggested Races: Human, vedalken 
Suggested Classes: Bard, cleric, fighter, paladin, wizard 


You might enjoy playing a character who belongs to the 
Azorius Senate if one or more of the following state- 
ments are true: 


* You're drawn to the idea of a hard-bitten police officer 
trying to impose order on a chaotic world. 

* You like the idea of using magic to control enemies. 

* You like playing enchanter wizards, clerics of law, or 
unbending paladins. 


JOINING THE AZORIUS SENATE 


As a recruit to the Azorius Senate, you were quickly 
immersed in the law. You might have clerked for a judge 
or a legislator, been an apprentice to a practitioner of 
law magic, studied rhetoric with diplomats, or trained to 
patrol the streets and enforce the law. As your training 
comes to an end and your adventuring career begins, 
you must decide whether to focus on law enforcement 
or to operate primarily within the bureaucracy of 

the senate. 


LAw ENFORCEMENT 

Most Azorius adventurers belong to the guild's police 
force. They are soldiers or spellcasters who patrol the 
city in teams or singly, preventing crimes or stopping 
them in progress. If you want to pursue a career in law 
enforcement, choose the path of the lawmage, the pre- 
cognitive mage, or the arrester. 

Lawmages. As a spellcaster in the Azorius Senate, 
you use your magic to compel or restrain malefactors 
and scofflaws (perhaps as a wizard specialized in the 
School of Enchantment). You might also use your magic 
to protect Azorius soldiers and innocent bystanders 
from harm (perhaps as a wizard specialized in the 
School of Abjuration or as a cleric of the Order Domain, 
which is described in chapter 1). In any case, you're 
called a lawmage, and you can aspire to the title of jus- 
ticiar and then deputy as your standing within the guild 
increases. 

Precognitive Mages. If you are a spellcaster with 
some ability to glimpse the future (perhaps a wizard 
specialized in the School of Divination or a cleric of the 
Knowledge Domain), you can use this ability to try to 
prevent crime before it occurs, serving as a precognitive 
mage. These mages occupy a small niche on the periph- 
ery of the guild, and the guild hasn't developed a bureau- 
cratic structure to accommodate them, so they advance 
through the same ranks as lawmages. 


Arresters. As a martial character, you can serve as an 
arrester in the Azorius Senate. You might be a fighter (of 
any martial archetype) or a paladin who has sworn the 
Oath of Vengeance, for example. Arresters maintain the 
peace by removing threats—both actual and potential— 
identified through regular patrols, citizen reports, and 
occasionally alerts from the precognitive mages. As you 
gain the respect of your superiors, you can be promoted 
to the rank of officer or imperator. 


BUREAUCRACY 
Bureaucracy might seem like the opposite of adventure, 
but it is possible to immerse yourself in the life of a civil 
servant in the Azorius Senate and still live an adventur- 
ous life. You might be a mild-mannered judge's clerk or 
scribe who got caught up in a whirlwind chain of events 
beyond your control, or you might moonlight as a vigi- 
lante in defiance of the law you are supposed to uphold. 
Or you could serve a diplomatic function as an elocutor. 
Elocutors. As a skilled orator and diplomat (perhaps 
a bard of the College of Lore), you can put your talents 
to use in the guild as an elocutor. The Azorius are 
known for their measured, patient speech, and the elo- 
cutors are the primary voice through which the senate 
communicates with the other guilds and the people of 
Ravnica. Thus, you might serve as an emissary from the 
Azorius to another guild, working to settle trade or ter- 
ritorial agreements, temporary alliances, and the like. 
You might have the task of securing the support of key 
senators for a particular piece of legislation or treaty. 
Well-established elocutors can be rewarded with the 
rank of scribe or emissary. 


BACKGROUND: AZORIUS 
FUNCTIONARY 


The brutes are at the gate, chaos is looming, and the 
only thing standing in the way of disaster is the founda- 
tion of law and order—as embodied in the Azorius Sen- 
ate. You're a proud member of the Azorius guild, which 
both enacts and enforces the laws that make Ravnican 
society function smoothly and safely. 


Skill Proficiencies: Insight, Intimidation 

Languages: Two of your choice 

Equipment: An Azorius insignia, a scroll containing the 
text of a law important to you, a bottle of blue ink, a 
pen, a set of fine clothes, and a belt pouch containing 
10 gp (Azorius-minted 1-zino coins) 


FEATURE: LEGAL AUTHORITY 

You have the authority to enforce the laws of Ravnica, 
and that status inspires a certain amount of respect and 
even fear in the populace. People mind their manners in 
your presence and avoid drawing your attention; they as- 
sume you have the right to be wherever you are. Show- 
ing your Azorius insignia gets you an audience with 
anyone you want to talk to (though it might cause more 
problems than it solves when you're dealing with incor- 
rigible lawbreakers). If you abuse this privilege, though, 
you can get in serious trouble with your superiors and 
even be stripped of your position. 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


22 
$5 


AZORIUS GUILD SPELLS 
Prerequisite: Spellcasting or Pact Magic class feature 


For you, the spells on the Azorius Guild Spells table are 
added to the spell list of your spellcasting class. (If you 
are a multiclass character with multiple spell lists, these 
spells are added to all of them.) 


Azorius GUILD SPELLS 


Spell Level Spells 
Cantrip friends, message 
Ist command, ensnaring strike 
2nd arcane lock, calm emotions, hold person 
3rd clairvoyance, counterspell 
4th compulsion, divination 
5th dominate person 


Your magic often takes the form of blue or golden 
runes floating and glowing in the air in circular patterns 
or of shimmering azure barriers of magical energy. If 
you cast ensnaring strike, for example, the vines created 
by the spell might appear as rune-inscribed glowing 
bands that wrap around the target and hold it in place. 


E 


SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 

Members of the Azorius Senate tend toward a demeanor 
of cold dignity and a pragmatic, orderly nature. Steeped 
in the law as they are, their ideals and priorities revolve 
around legal issues. 


PERSONALITY TRAITS 


d8 Trait 

1 | try never to let my judgment become clouded by 
emotion. 

2 Ihave infinite patience with the dolts and boors I'm 
forced to deal with every day. 
When I give an order, | expect it to be obeyed. 

4 | just want things the way | like them: neat, orderly, 


and clean. 

5 No wrongdoing can escape my watchful gaze. 

6  lalways say exactly what | mean, no matter how many 
words it takes to communicate the particular nuance | 
am attempting to convey. 


7  VImvery literal and don't appreciate metaphor or 
sarcasm. 
8 | never change my mind once it's made up. 
IDEALS 
d6 Ideal 


1 Guild. My guild is all that really matters. (Any) 

2 Order. The law is meant to ensure that the gears of 
society turn smoothly and quietly. (Lawful) 

3 Peace. The ultimate object of the law is to remove 
violence from society. (Good) 

4 Compliance. Coercion is a fine way of ensuring that 
the laws are obeyed. (Lawful) 

5 Legislation. The law embodies excellence in its 
precision and detail. (Lawful) 

6 Punishment. A public display of consequences is an 
excellent deterrent for other criminals. (Evil) 


BONDS 
d6 Bond 
1 lam beholden to an Azorius arrester who captured 


the criminal who killed my parents, saving me from 
the same fate. 


2 l|hopeone day to write the laws, not just enforce 
them. 
3  Itried and failed to prevent a murder, and | have 


sworn to find and arrest the perpetrator. 

4 | successfully prevented a murder, and the would-be 
perpetrator wants me dead. 

5 One of my parents was prominent in the guild, and | 
resent constantly being compared to that standard. 

6  l've modeled my career after a highly respected law- 
mage or arrester, but | fear that my role model might 
be involved in something illegal. 


FLAWS 


d6 Flaw 
1 I'm unable to distinguish between the letter and the 


spirit of the law. 
2  Iseem like a harsh judge to others, but | judge myself 
most harshly of all. 
| have a secret, illegal vice. 
| was traumatized by witnessing a crime as a child. 
I'm incapable of deception. 
| wish | had joined the Boros, but | fear they'd never 
accept me. 


au RU 


CONTACTS 
The Azorius Senate is a sprawling bureaucracy, and 
people in a variety of positions throughout the guild 
can pull strings to make things happen. Because of the 
guild's role in making and enforcing laws for the entire 
city, your place in the Azorius can easily bring you into 
contact with members of other guilds, for good or ill. 
Roll twice on the Azorius Contacts table (for an ally 


and a rival) and once on the Non-Azorius Contacts table. 


Azorius CONTACTS 
d8 Contact 
1 Asa teenager, | was a page for a prominent judge. 
2 One of my childhood friends is now a precognitive 
mage in service of the guild. 


d8 


Contact 

| joined the Azorius hoping to impress an arrester 
whom | admire. 

My former mentor is now a warden at Udzec, the new 
Azorius prison. 

| was second best at everything in my legal training, 
and now | work with the person who was always just a 
little bit better. 

A good friend was promoted into work they can't tell 
me about. 

| know a homunculus in the halls of New Prahv who 
can get things done behind the scenes. 

| was once summoned to the presence of Supreme 
Judge Isperia, the guildmaster of the Azorius, who 
complimented me on my work. 


Non-Azorius CONTACTS 


dio 
1 


Contact 

Roll an additional Azorius contact; you can decide if 
the contact is an ally or a rival. 

The person who recruited me into the Azorius left 
and joined the Boros. 

| have a friendship with a Dimir agent who some- 
times funnels me secrets about Azorius activities. 
A Golgari spore druid would love to see me slip up 
and break the law. 


d10 Contact 
5 Alesser Gruul chieftain seems to think | could be 
useful. 


6 The black sheep of my family is putting their maniacal 
genius to use in the Izzet. 


7  VI'mmfriends with an Orzhov advokist; we compare 
notes on different forms of law magic. 
8 Iwas ridiculed once in a Rakdos performance; the 


performer was impressed with my good humor about 
it and now does me occasional favors. 

9  |havea fanatical Selesnya cousin who keeps trying to 
recruit me and everyone else in the family. 

10 While growing up, | was bullied by a brat who's now a 
hybrid in the Simic Combine. 


How Do I Fit IN? 


As a member of the Azorius Senate, you are probably 
engaged in the work of law enforcement (even if your 
background involved the legislative or judicial aspects 
of the senate's activities). Legislative aides and judges' 
clerks find little reason to venture beyond the Azo- 
rius guildhalls, but soldiers and lawmages patrol the 
streets daily. 

An Azorius soldier or lawmage is a force for order, 
charged with fighting crime on the streets—and in the 
halls of power. You might spend your time foiling thefts, 
putting a stop to Orzhov extortion, rooting out Dimir 
spies, or hunting down Golgari assassins. Perhaps you 
take your orders from a precognitive mage (or you are 
one yourself) who receives unpredictable and cryptic 
visions of future crimes that you and your allies must try 
to prevent. 


AN AZORIUS PARTY 

An adventuring party made up entirely of Azorius mem- 
bers could be a specialized team dedicated to law en- 
forcement. A soldier (a fighter or paladin) and a lawmage 
(wizard) would form the core of the party, supported 

by a precognitive mage (cleric) who helps direct their 
missions. An elocutor (bard) could round out the party, 
serving as the group's negotiator and spokesperson. 


RANK AND RENOWN 


By gaining renown as a member of the Azorius Senate, 
you can advance within the guild. Promotion through 
the ranks requires the approval of a superior officer. 
Advancement is a reward for services rendered to the 
guild, rather than an automatic consequence of in- 
creased renown. 


RANK l: OFFICIAL 
Prerequisite: Renown 3 or higher in the Azorius Senate 


Your specific title depends on your role in the guild: 


* Ifyou are a lawmage or a precognitive mage, you 
assume the title of justiciar. 

* If you are an arrester, you become an officer. 

* If you are a bureaucrat (including an elocutor), you 
become a scribe. 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


lll ———————ÀHÓ)€——————á— Ó—— un iüÓlÓi 
THREE CAPITALS 
The heads of the three columns of the Azorius Senate are 
called arbiters or capitals. 

The arbiter of the Sova Column (the judiciary) is Leonos 
Il, a wise and kind human judge and lawmage who takes 
pains to consider all perspectives before issuing a judg- 
ment—even the perspectives of the spirits of the dead, 
with whom he can communicate. He is patient and utterly 
loyal to the guild. 

The Jelenn Column (the legislature) is led by a vedalken 
lawmage named Uzana, renowned for a nearly perfect 
memory. She has memorized every statute of Azorius law, 
and much of her speech is quotations from those statutes. 

The hussar commander Agmand Sarv is the arbiter of 
the Lyev Column, the senate's law enforcement branch. 
Despite the fact that he has never been in combat, he has 
earned a reputation as a brilliant military strategist. His 
tactical genius is unquestioned, but his lack of battle expe- 
rience did cause some controversy among the soldiers and 
lawmages of the Lyev Column when he was appointed to 
be its head. 

———Ó 


As an Azorius official, you can call on recruits (use 
the soldier stat block in chapter 6) to perform mundane 
tasks and errands for you, but they will not accompany 
you into dangerous circumstances. 

No Azorius official lives in poverty. Between adven- 
tures, you earn a salary that supports you at a modest 
lifestyle. 


RANK 2: AUTHORITY 
Prerequisite: Rank 1 and renown 10 or higher in the 
Azorius Senate 


Your new title depends on your previous role as an offi- 
cial in the Azorius Senate: 


* If you are a justiciar, you become a deputy with a 
specific title, such as Deputy of Acquittals, Deputy of 
Indictment, Deputy of Deposition, Deputy of Arraign- 
ment, or Deputy of Arbitration. 

+ Ifyou are an officer, you become an imperator. 

+ If you are a scribe, you become an emissary. 


You are recognized as an authority in your field. You 
gain an Azorius charm (described in chapter 5) at the 
start of each mission you undertake on the guild's be- 
half. At the start of any such mission, you can secure 
the assistance of a squad of 1d4 arresters (use the sol- 
dier stat block in chapter 6) plus one lawmage (also in 
chapter 6). These individuals remain with you until the 
mission ends. 

Between adventures, you earn enough money pur- 
suing your duties to support yourself at a comfortable 
lifestyle. 


RANK 3: MINISTER, JUDGE, OR SENATOR 
Prerequisite: Rank 2 and renown 25 or higher in the 
Azorius Senate 


Your new title depends on your broader interests as they 
relate to one of the three columns of the Azorius Senate, 
not on the titles you bore as an official and an authority: 


- [f your interests lie in law enforcement, you become 
a minister within the Lyev Column. You receive a 


specific title, such as Minister of Impediments or Min- 
ister of Fallacies. 

* If your interests concern the judiciary, you become a 
judge within the Sova Column. 

* If you want a position on the legislative body of the 
Jelenn Column, you become a senator. 


Regardless of your specific title, you can secure the 
aid of up to 3d4 soldiers and one or two lawmages (see 
chapter 6 for these stat blocks) whenever you set out on 
a guild-approved mission. 

Between adventures, your responsibilities to the 
guild—including supervising arresters, judging legal 
cases, or writing laws—earns you enough money to sup- 
port yourself at a wealthy lifestyle. 


RANK 4: ARBITER 
Prerequisite: Rank 3 and renown 50 or higher in the 
Azorius Senate 


As an arbiter (or capital), you serve as the head of your 
column. Only Isperia, the Supreme Judge, can appoint 


you to this position, and only if one of the three existing 
arbiters leaves her service. 

As an arbiter, all the resources of your column are at 
your disposal, and you have the ear of Isperia as a mem- 
ber of her advisory Triumvirate. You also keep the salary 
you earned as a minister, judge, or senator, sustaining a 
wealthy lifestyle between adventures. 


ENEMIES AND ALLIES 


As far as the Azorius are concerned, every other guild 
in Ravnica is hastening along the road to anarchy. Even 
other guilds that are inclined toward order (such as the 
Boros, Orzhov, and Selesnya) are ignoring or exploit- 
ing the law. 

You participate in missions to thwart the criminals of 
other guilds, from overzealous Boros vigilantes to insid- 
ious Golgari assassins. Dimir spies, Orzhov extortion- 
ists, and bloodthirsty Rakdos performers keep Azorius 
peacekeepers busy enough, without the added compli- 
cations of reckless Izzet and Simic experiments putting 
the citizenry in danger. 

Of course, whenever the members of another guild 
decide to operate within the law, they are potential allies 
for the Azorius. Even some members of the Cult of Rak- 
dos can be pragmatic enough to stifle their impulses for 
a time in order to join forces against a common enemy. 


u—————————— MÀ 
THE Azorius VIEW ON OTHER GUILDS 

Because of its authoritarian, overreaching grasp, the 

Azorius Senate's relationships with other guilds are rarely 
positive. Azorius members tend to view members of other 
guilds as dangerous threats to order, while other guild 
members see the Azorius as rigid and tyrannical. 


Boros. "Their vigilantism is tremendously dangerous with- 
out a hand to control it." 

Dimir. "A perennial thorn in our side. Though they were 
once our greatest foes, not even the masters of espio- 
nage can hide from our watchful eyes." 

Golgari. “Their underground structures break numerous 
building regulations, but at least they fulfill their duties 
as garbage collectors." 

Gruul. “The Gruul are dangerous anarchists with no inter- 
est in furthering the development of civilization. They 
serve no useful purpose.” 

Izzet. “Eccentric and occasionally explosive, but generally 
harmless, for now. In their paranoia they have enlarged 
their weapon stockpiles, but they lack the clarity of vision 
to put them to use.” 

Orzhov. “Their brazen exploitation of our laws will be their 
downfall. They are an insidious threat that could tear 
society apart from the inside.” 

Rakdos. “An absolute blight on Ravnica. They are clowns 
who know nothing of culture and exist only to torment 
the functioning members of society.” 

Selesnya. “The Conclave plays by the rules and keeps to 
itself. Until its members become too numerous, they are 
of little threat to us.” 

Simic. “The Simic experiment with matters that disobey 
the laws of nature and the laws of Ravnica. We must not 
let them gain influence.” 

D — e 


Bonos LEGION 


A BROWN-BEARDED, BROAD-CHESTED MAN CLAD IN 


massive-shouldered plate armor led a battalion of soldiers, 
the symbol of the Boros Legion emblazoned on white cloth 
draped over their armor. Their soldiers were a variety of 
races, including humans, a minotaur with a permanent 
scowl on her face, an impatient-looking goblin, and even 
some kind of humanoid fire elemental, whose Boros armor 
floated in protective positions over its animate flame. 
—Doug Beyer, Return to Ravnica: The Secretist 


Clad in shining armor and fueled by righteous zeal, the 
soldiers of the Boros Legion take up steel against the 
corruption and lawlessness that gnaw at the soul of 
Ravnica. Combining the force of law with the military 
strength to back it up, the Boros work to forge Ravnica 
into a just society, a safe and healthy community for 
all. From garrisons throughout the sprawling city, dis- 
ciplined, stalwart soldiers are dispatched to stand firm 
against Gruul raids, Dimir infiltration, Golgari corrup- 
tion, and the subtle influence of more nefarious foes. 
The archangel Razia was the original guildmaster of 
the Boros Legion, which was established to serve as 
Ravnica's standing army. Razia served as its guildmas- 
ter for almost ten thousand years. Legend says that all 
the other angels of Ravnica were created in the image of 
this semidivine figure, and her death was devastating to 
the guild. Aurelia, the current angelic guildmaster, is the 
third to hold that title. 


INSIDE THE LEGION 


Angels occupy the highest tier of the Boros hierarchy, 
from the guildmaster Aurelia down to the hosts of 
holy warriors and advisors in leadership roles. Their 
opinions and advice are deeply respected in the guild, 
though the angels aren't above engaging in the machi- 
nations of mortal politics. The angels include the wise, 


GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


strategic warleaders; the holy champions and paragons 
of war known as firemanes; and battleforce angels, who 
form the bulk of the legion's angelic warriors. 

From the perspective of the average Boros soldier, 
the angels embody the ideals the Boros hold dear. Few 
mortal soldiers gain admission into the presence of the 
warleaders and other powerful angels, but battleforce 
angels fight at the forefront of the legion's ranks, and 
they form strong friendships with mortals under such 
life-and-death circumstances. Boros paladins are the 
members most likely to converse with the angels and be 
charged with implementing their plans. 

The garrison commanders who convey the angels' 
commands are accessible to the ordinary soldier. In 
addition to Sunhome, the Boros maintain smaller garri- 
sons throughout the Tenth District, at least one in each 
of the six precincts. 


GOALS OF THE BOROS 


Wherever criminals exploit others, petty tyrants make 
grabs for power, or violence erupts and leaves devas- 
tation in its wake, Boros soldiers are there fighting to 
make things right. 

The Boros Legion is defined by the tension between 
its goal of establishing order and harmony and the fiery 
zeal that drives many of its members. The guild stands 
for peace and justice, which can be established only 
through the rule of law. Its moral stance is fundamen- 
tally good, as it strives to protect the innocent and pow- 
erless from oppression and exploitation. At the same 
time, members of the legion are passionate about their 
pursuit of justice, spurred by their righteous wrath into 
action against evil and injustice. Ironically, this means 
that individual members sometimes break the rules they 
are charged with enforcing, cleaving to the spirit of the 
law when the letter no longer serves justice. 

Because the Guildpact—the one force on Ravnica that 
can keep the guilds from destroying each other—is now 
embodied in a single, unreliable person who vanishes 
-— ———————- 

A PROUD MARTIAL TRADITION 

Minotaurs have a reputation for being both fierce warriors 

and clever strategists. Thick of muscle, stout of heart, and 

possessing a burning love of justice and the battlefield, 

they have become the steel spine of the Boros Legion. 

Generations of minotaurs of the Ordruun family line have 

served with honor and distinction, claiming more than fif- 

teen generals to their lineage. 
e Pae— pe 


for weeks or months at a time, the legion is in a height- 
ened state of vigilance. In this time of uncertainty, the 
Boros are on constant alert for military threats. They 
work to maintain their fortifications to ensure that they 
aren't overrun by Gruul marauders. Construction pro- 
ceeds on new strongholds near Gruul territories, but in 
general the Boros prepare for a military threat the same 
way they always have—by fielding the stronger army. 

The angels are also bracing for a subtler threat: the 
danger of infiltration by House Dimir. The Boros are 
becoming increasingly aware of the possibility that their 
guild could be undermined from within. Security at 
garrison buildings is vigilant, with angels watching the 
entrances at all times for spies. 


BOROS CHARACTERS 


Alignment: Usually good, often lawful 

Suggested Races: Human, goblin, minotaur 

Suggested Classes: Cleric, fighter, paladin, 
ranger, wizard 


Consider the Boros Legion for your character if one or 
more of the following sentences ring true: 


* You are drawn to the ideal of the knight in 
shining armor. 

* You like playing clerics, paladins, or 
disciplined fighters. 

+ Smiting foes with holy radiance fills you with 
righteous joy. 

* You want to protect the innocent and fight for justice. 


JOINING THE Boros LEGION 


As a new recruit to the Boros Legion, you were sent to 
the prestigious Horizon Military Academy for training. 
Your life there was tempered in the forge of Boros dis- 
cipline, devotion, and zeal. Your training regimen was 
deliberately harsh, to weed out the uncommitted. You 
lasted to the end, and now you begin your adventuring 
career ready to put everything you have learned to use 
in the legion’s service. Depending on whether you fo- 
cused on martial training, studied magic, or pursued 
both courses, your path will look somewhat different. 


MARTIAL TRAINING 

The bulk of the Boros Legion consists of human, mi- 
notaur, and goblin soldiers. If you are a fighter, ranger, 
or even a barbarian, you'll fit right in among the ranks, 
with a promising career path ahead of you—promo- 
tion through the ranks, with opportunities for special 
assignments. 

Another option is to join the swiftblades, the vanguard 
of the Boros Legion. They specialize in assault and 
occupation, and their squads often function as com- 
mandos or guerrillas. They pick off enemy archers and 
mages, softening the enemy’s front lines before the rest 
of the legion marches in. 


MAGICAL STUDY 

If you are spellcaster (perhaps a wizard specialized in 
the School of Evocation or a cleric of the Light Domain), 
you can find a place as a combat mage in the Boros 
Legion, called an embermage. These mages use spells 
of fire and light to clear the way for the legion’s com- 

bat troops. 

If you prefer healing magic over the explosive magic 
of the embermages (perhaps as a cleric of the Life or the 
Light Domain), you can become a medic. These combat 
healers are an essential part of Boros operations, using 
a combination of magic and mundane medicine to close 
wounds and restore strength. 


MILITARY MAGIC 

If you are a paladin who swears the Oath of Devotion, 

a fighter of the Eldritch Knight archetype, or a cleric of 
the War Domain, you can combine the martial training 
of a soldier with magic and call yourself a firefist. Fueled 
by a healthy dose of righteous zeal, firefists command a 
great deal of respect in the Boros Legion. 


BACKGROUND: BOROS LEGIONNAIRE 


As a member of the Boros Legion, your life is devoted 

to the service of angels and consecrated to the work of 
establishing justice and peace on the streets of Ravnica. 
You might be a true believer, inspired by the example of 
the angels, moved by the plight of the downtrodden, and 
devoted to the cause of justice. Or you could be a cynic 
in the ranks, perhaps because you reluctantly followed 
in the footsteps of a Boros parent, succumbed to the per- 
suasion of a charismatic recruiter's lofty promises, or 
were drawn in by the prospect of a life of action. 


Skill Proficiencies: Athletics, Intimidation Boros GUILD SPELLS 
Tool Proficiencies: One type of gaming set Prerequisite: Spellcasting or Pact Magic class feature 
Languages: Choose one of Celestial, Draconic, Goblin, 


For you, the spells on the Boros Guild Spells table are 
added to the spell list of your spellcasting class. (If you 
are a multiclass character with multiple spell lists, these 
spells are added to all of them.) 


or Minotaur 

Equipment: A Boros insignia, a feather from an angel’s 
wing, a tattered piece of a Boros banner (a souve- 
nir from a famous battle), a set of common clothes, 
and a belt pouch containing 2 gp (Boros-minted Boros GUILD SPELLS 


1-zino coins) 
Spell Level Spells 


FEATURE: LEGION STATION Cantrip fire bolt, sacred flame 
You have an established place in the hierarchy of the Ist guiding bolt, heroism 
Boros Legion. You can requisition simple equipment for 2nd aid, scorching ray 


temporary use, and you can gain access to any Boros 
garrison in Ravnica, where you can rest in safety and 
receive the attention of medics. You are also paid a sal- 


3rd beacon of hope, blinding smite 
4th death ward, wall of fire 


ary of 1 gp (a Boros-minted 1-zino coin) per week, which 5th flame strike 
(combined with free lodging in your garrison) enables 
you to maintain a poor lifestyle between adventures. Your magic often features dramatic bursts of flame 


or radiance. When you cast beneficial spells on your al- 
lies, they appear momentarily surrounded with halos of 
bright fire. 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 

The Boros Legion is a zealous army, full of righteous 
energy tempered with military discipline. Its members 
share its leadership's devotion to the ideals of justice, or 
they find satisfaction in the more warfare-oriented as- 
pects of the legion’s work. 


PERSONALITY TRAITS 


d8 Personality Trait 

1  lapproach every task with the same high degree of 
military precision. 
| am always the first into the fray. 
| bear any injury or indignity with stoic discipline. 
My righteous wrath is easily inflamed by the slightest 
iniquity. 

5 My honor is more important to me than my life. 
Dangerous work is best accomplished by an orderly 
group working with common purpose. 


7  ltreat my weapons, uniform, and insignia with 
reverence, for they are gifts of the angels. 
8  lpace when standing and fidget incessantly when 


forced to sit. 


IDEALS 
d6 Ideal 
Guild. My guild is all that really matters. (Any) 

2 Justice. Achieving justice requires establishing fair, 
equitable, and compassionate relationships within a 
community. (Good) 

3 Protection. It isn't right for innocents to suffer 
because of the arrogance of the powerful. (Good) 

4 Solidarity. It is most crucial to act with a single will, 
marching side by side in perfect accord. (Lawful) 

5 Order. Society functions only if people do their duty 
and respect the chain of command. (Lawful) 

6 Conviction. Anything worth doing is worth doing with 
your whole heart. (Lawful) 


BoNps 
d6 Bond 
| would lay down my life for Aurelia and the angels. 
2 lowe my life to the Boros captain who took me in 


when | was living on the streets. 
My fellow legionnaires are my family. 


4  |wield the same Boros weapon my grandparent did, 
for the honor of our family. 

5 _| ran with the Rakdos in my youth, and l'm striving to 
atone for my past misdeeds. 

6 Ido what | can to help out the spouse of a comrade 


who died in battle. 


FLaws 


d6 Flaw 

1  lact bravely when I’m in a group, but I’m a coward 
when I'm alone. 
| see everything in clear-cut black and white. 
I'm just a little fascinated by the ways of the Gruul. 
| trust the chain of command more than anything— 
more even than my closest friends. 

5  I'mslowtotrust members of other guilds. 

6 I've been known to turn a blind eye to injustice, with 
the help of a modest bribe. 


CONTACTS 
The ordered structure of the Boros Legion offers abun- 
dant opportunities to make friends—and rivals—in 
higher places. You might have close friends in other 
guilds that share the Boros emphasis on order and com- 
munity, or bitter enemies among the guilds that repre- 
sent chaos and destruction. 

Roll twice on the Boros Contacts table (for an ally and 
a rival) and once on the Non-Boros Contacts table. 


Boros CONTACTS 
d8 Contact 
1 A former comrade in arms was promoted into the 
prestigious Sunhome Guard. 
One of my parents is a ranking Boros officer. 
3  Aclose friend serves aboard the Parhelion Il, a flying 


fortress. 
| had a tangled affair with a Boros garrison captain. 
5 Ihave maintained a relationship with one of my 
instructors at Horizon Military Academy. 
6  lcompeted with a fellow student for the attention of 


a mentor at Horizon Military Academy. 

7 The person who recruited me into the legion changed 
the course of my life. 

8 A Boros angel knows my name. 


Non-Boros CONTACTS 


d10 Contact 

1 One of my siblings is an Azorius arrester. 

2 Rollan additional Boros contact; you can decide if the 
contact is an ally or a rival. 

3  Ishowed mercy to an injured, now-grateful Dimir spy. 
| suspect someone | know is a Golgari assassin, but I 
can't prove it. 

5 Anadolescent relative ran off to join the Gruul in an 
act of rebellion and has not yet returned. 

6  lonce befriended an Izzet scientist, and we're still 
cordial though the relationship ended messily. 
| owe a monetary debt to an Orzhov syndic. 

A Rakdos blood witch seems to enjoy harassing me. 


9 | tried to recruit a friend who ended up joining the 
Selesnya. 
10 | keep running into a particular Simic biomancer, and 


| enjoy the arguments that inevitably result. 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


41 


How Do I FIT IN? 


As a member of the Boros Legion, you are subject to the 
orders of your superior officers. You go where the angels 
tell you to go, and you do what they command you to do, 
to the best of your ability. If you enjoy some measure of 
independence, it's either because you have proven your- 
self capable of working without close supervision or be- 
cause you're a rebellious sort who is willing to disobey 
orders now and face the consequences later. 

As a soldier on the street, you are tasked with bring- 
ing dangerous threats like the Rakdos and the Gruul 
in line. You might contend with Rakdos performances 
gone horribly out of control, Gruul raids on outlying 
neighborhoods, shipments of rot-infested vegetation 
from the Golgari undercity, and violent uprisings among 
the guildless. At the same time, you might have to worry 
about Dimir spies infiltrating your leadership, over- 
zealous or corrupt Azorius senators abusing the law at 
the expense of justice, Izzet experiments leveling city 
blocks, and Simic creations that break out of laborato- 
ries and wreak havoc through the Tenth District. 


A Bonos PARTY 

An adventuring party drawn entirely from the ranks of 
the Boros Legion would be a small military strike force, 
probably focused on combat but also strong on social in- 
teraction. One or two soldiers (fighters), a medic (cleric), 
and an embermage (wizard) would form the core of 


Tajic, BLADE OF THE LEGION 
Tajic is a firefist who carries the exalted title of Blade of 
the Legion, putting him just below the angels in rank. He 
maintains close communication with Aurelia, though re- 
cent events in the city have set them at odds. Tajic believes 
that the Boros can trust only the Boros. He is convinced 
that any effort at peace among the guilds is doomed to 
failure without the Guildpact. The Boros, he argues, would 
be better off spending their energy to make themselves 
stronger so they can uphold the fragile balance that exists 
now—and protect the innocent when the balance tilts. 
Aurelia feels that his negative attitude runs the risk of poi- 
soning the hearts of the other Boros and undermining any 
peace efforts. For the most part, in deference to the angel, 
Tajic keeps his views to himself. 
——————Ó—— — ERE 


that strike force. A firefist (paladin) would be a strong 
addition, or might replace a fighter or a cleric. A lightly 
armored swiftblade (ranger) could help the group in situ- 
ations involving stealth or exploration. 


RANK AND RENOWN 


By gaining renown as a member of the Boros Legion, 
you can ascend through an ordered series of ranks 
within the guild. Promotion always requires the ap- 
proval of a superior officer. It is a reward for services 
rendered to the guild, rather than an automatic conse- 
quence of increased renown. 

In addition, certain positions become available to you 
when both your renown and your character level reach 
certain thresholds. 


RANK l: SERGEANT 
Prerequisite: Renown 3 or higher in the Boros Legion 


At this rank, you gain some authority over lower-rank- 
ing soldiers. When you undertake a mission on the 
guild’s behalf that requires military strength, a squad of 
1d4 soldiers (see chapter 6 for the stat block) accompa- 
nies and assists you for the duration of the mission. 
Your salary at this rank is enough to maintain a mod- 
est lifestyle, including private quarters in the garrison. 


SKYKNIGHT (SPECIAL ROLE) 
Prerequisite: Renown 5 or higher in the Boros Legion, 
5th level or higher 


Skyknights mounted on Skyjek rocs patrol the skies 
above Ravnica—a regular reminder of the Boros and 
their concern for justice. If you meet the prerequisites, 
you can become a skyknight, assuming no official ob- 
jects. You are assigned a Skyjek roc (see chapter 6 for 
the stat block) to use as a mount when carrying out your 
guild responsibilities. Using the roc for personal mat- 
ters is a significant violation of regulations. 


WoJEK (SPECIAL ROLE) 
Prerequisite: Renown 5 or higher in the Boros Legion, 
5th level or higher 


If you meet the prerequisites, you can apply to join the 
elite soldiers of the Wojek League. This special order 
serves as a combination of military police and military 
intelligence, giving it a fair degree of independence 
within the guild. Its members scout the activities of 
other guilds to assess their military strength and predict 
potential threats, and they sometimes activate squads 
to defuse threats before they grow more serious. The 
Wojeks also help the angels root out spies and leaks 
within the legion. Secondarily, the Wojek League is 
responsible for policing the ranks of the legion. When 
members get carried away by their zeal and break the 
law or abuse their authority, the Wojeks take on the 
tasks of investigating, apprehending, and punishing 
the malefactors. Similarly, if members of the 
legion disappear (involuntarily or otherwise), 
Wojek agents are typically the ones called 
to investigate. 

You can be both a skyknight and a 
member of the Wojek League, gain- 
ing the title of Skyjek. 


RANK 2: BRIGADIER 
Prerequisite: Rank 1 and renown 10 or higher in the 
Boros Legion 


As a brigadier, you are responsible for missions and 
strategies that you can't execute entirely on your own 
or with the aid of a handful of soldiers. After receiving 
goals handed down from the captain above you, it's 
your job to figure out the tactics needed to accomplish 
those goals. 

You lead a brigade that consists of six squads, each 
made up of four soldiers commanded by a sergeant (use 
the soldier stat block in chapter 6 to represent them). 

If you are also a skyknight, at least one of these squads 
is made up of other skyknights, which are soldiers 
mounted on Skyjek rocs (see chapter 6 for these stat 
blocks). You can assign these squads to tasks of your 
choosing within the area of the city where you have au- 
thority. You can also lead these soldiers into battle your- 
self, or bring one squad and its sergeant with you on a 
guild mission. 

At this rank, you gain a Boros charm (described in 
chapter 5) at the start of each mission you undertake on 
the guild's behalf. You continue to receive a salary suffi- 
cient to maintain a modest lifestyle, but your quarters in 
the garrison are more spacious. 


SUNHOME GUARD (SPECIAL ROLE) 
Prerequisite: Renown 10 or higher in the Boros Legion, 
7th level or higher 


Members of the Sunhome Guard are responsible for 
the defense of Sunhome, the Boros guildhall in the 
Tenth District. Only those who have proven themselves 
in combat are selected to join this force. If you are ac- 
cepted into the Sunhome Guard, your missions will be 
primarily defensive in nature. You might receive orders 
to find new ways to fortify the guildhall or to detect Di- 
mir agents and other spies who try to gain access. Of 
course, given these chaotic times, you could end up de- 
fending Sunhome from an all-out attack by the Gruul or 
some other enemy force. 


RANK 3: CAPTAIN 
Prerequisite: Rank 2 and renown 25 or higher in the 
Boros Legion 


As a captain in the Boros Legion, you gain command of 
a small garrison and the responsibility for maintaining 
order and protecting people in part of a city district. You 
have four brigades under your command. As described 
for rank 3, each brigade has six squads of five soldiers 
(including a sergeant) reporting to them. One additional 
squad of 2d4 soldiers is your personal retinue. 

You regularly receive communications from warleader 
angels who coordinate the efforts of the smaller garri- 
sons. They keep you informed of the goals and concerns 
of the legion's mortal and angelic leaders and can help 
you address them. You are then responsible for giving 
orders to your brigadiers, and you must answer to your 
commander for the troops' success or failure in achiev- 
ing the guild's strategic goals. 

As a captain, your salary allows you to maintain a 
comfortable lifestyle between adventures. 


RANK 4: COMMANDER 
Prerequisite: Rank 3 and renown 50 or higher in the 
Boros Legion 


As a commander, you assume the leadership of one 

of the major garrisons of the Boros Legion: Kamen 
Fortress, Horizon Military Academy, or the great flying 
garrison called Parhelion II, which moves from place to 
place to deploy reinforcements to Boros troops around 
Ravnica. If you are already a member of the Sunhome 
Guard, you could instead be placed in command of 
that elite force, leading all the non-angelic forces 

of Sunhome. 

In this role, you are advised—and ordered around—by 
angels. You are in regular communication with Guild- 
master Aurelia, who places you in charge of a major 
guild initiative. You might be tasked with improving 
recruitment, developing a plan for dealing with Dimir in- 
filtration, or collaborating with the Izzet to develop new 
weaponry for Boros soldiers. 

You continue to draw a salary sufficient to maintain a 
comfortable lifestyle. 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


SS ——— EE Ss 
THE Boros VIEW ON OTHER GUILDS 
The Boros are committed to justice and order, and they are 
convinced that virtually every other guild is just as com- 
mitted to undermining both. Therefore, the Boros rely only 
on their comrades for support and view everyone else with 
suspicion or disdain. 


Azorius. “Legalism. Arrogance. Hot air. The law in their 
hands is a bludgeon, and they use it to seize more power 
than they deserve.” 

Dimir. “Snakes lurking in the shadows. They should be 
rooted out so they can shrivel in the light.” 

Golgari. “If they limited themselves to their intended pur- 
pose, repulsive as it is, they could be allowed to survive. 
But they are growing into a dangerous menace, and we 
need to flush them out of the sewers while we still can.” 

Gruul. “They are lost in violence and savagery. Only occa- 
sionally can their energy be channeled in directions that 
benefit the greater good.” 

Izzet. “They don't understand the concept of limits. If they 
kept their spellcraft under control, they could truly ben- 
efit society.” 

Orzhov. “The Orzhov care only about the Orzhov. If it 
were up to them, all of Ravnica would follow an orderly 
process designed to funnel wealth into their grasp- 
ing hands.” 

Rakdos. “They make destruction into a spectacle, but 
they're more than blood and fire. They're termites gnaw- 
ing away at the heart and soul of Ravnica." 

Selesnya. “| almost envy the naiveté that leads them to re- 
treat into their little communes and pretend they've built 
a just society." 

Simic. "They have stepped out of their place, with all 
their experiments, their tinkering with the nature of life. 
They're a waste, a drain on Ravnica, and a danger to the 
public good." 


ENEMIES AND ALLIES 


In general, the Boros find some common ground with 
other guilds that value order and structure: Azorius, 
Selensya, and (to a lesser extent) Orzhov. The Rakdos, 
Gruul, and Izzet might share the zeal and energy of 
the Boros, but they represent the more chaotic aspect 
of those qualities, which threatens the stability of 

all Ravnica. 

The legion is dedicated to combating the influence of 
Dimir spies and infiltrators, containing the brutal chaos 
of the Rakdos, and halting the schemes of the Golgari. 
But any guild can become an enemy of Boros if its aims 
and activities lead to crime, chaos, injustice, or harm to 
the innocent citizens of Ravnica. Even the Azorius can 
become so obsessive in creating and enforcing laws that 
they overreach the bounds of justice. 

Conversely, any guild can offer you allies in your quest 
for justice. Distasteful as they might be, even the Gruul 
and the Rakdos can play a part in curtailing threats to 
the city that also impede their own interests. 


HOUSE DIMIR 


A VAMPIRE APPEARED OUT OF THE DARKNESS, AS QUIET 
as a breeze. He was stripped to the waist despite the chill 


underground, and his eyes reflected light like a cat's. He 
floated effortlessly down from the upper reaches of the 
chamber, and alighted on the chamber floor near the 
two of them. 

—Doug Beyer, Return to Ravnica: The Secretist 


House Dimir is Ravnica's dark secret: behind a facade 
of respectable messengers and reporters lurks an 
association of spies and assassins whose existence is 
barely suspected by the populace at large. Secrecy is 
both House Dimir's best weapon and its best defense, 
and much of the guild's work is hidden even from other 
members. Dimir agents leave no trace of their covert 
activities, warping the memories of witnesses to their 
crimes and even wiping their own minds to remove any 
evidence of their completed assignments. 

The first guildmaster of House Dimir was a vampire 
named Szadek, whose organization agreed to serve as 
Ravnica's couriers, information brokers, and librarians. 
But Szadek also used his guild's expertise at gathering 
information to build a vast spy network, and before long, 
the secret operations of the guild vastly outweighed its 
overt ones. Eventually the guild disappeared into the 
shadows, and most Ravnicans came to doubt its exis- 
tence. An immortal entity, Szadek ruled the guild for ten 
thousand years until he was arrested and killed in the 
turmoil of the Decamillennial Celebration. 


INSIDE THE HOUSE 


House Dimir has a clandestine aspect hidden from all 
but its most important members. The guildmaster, La- 
zav, and his direct contacts guide and manipulate the 
covert operations of the guild. Members of House Dimir 


ultimately receive their orders from this source without 
having any idea of who issued the order or why. Mes- 
sages to agents are funneled through thought strands 
(see "Spell: Encode Thoughts" later in this section) and 
telepathic couriers. 

By design, you don't have much interaction with other 
members of your guild. You might never meet your pri- 
mary guild contact face to face, instead receiving assign- 
ments and sending reports by way of secret message 
drops and codes. 


GOALS OF THE DIMIR 


House Dimir is all about secrets and misinformation, 
even where its own members are concerned. Any given 
Dimir agent knows of no more than a handful of alley- 
way contacts and dossier drop spots. One agent knows 
another only by a code name, or receives communica- 
tions only at a particular meeting spot at a specific place 
and time. Every self-proclaimed expert with an opinion 
on the matter has a theory about the guild's intentions, 
and all those guesses about Dimir's motivations and 
pursuits contradict each other, frustrating any attempt 
to get to the truth of things. The public face of Dimir 
remains inscrutable, which some interpret as the best 
evidence that the guild's true plans mean something 
dire for the Ravnican populace. 

To House Dimir, knowledge is power. The guild 
hungers to learn everything it doesn't already know, 
especially the weaknesses of its adversaries, and to ex- 
ploit those weaknesses for its own gain. Conversely, the 
house holds its own secrets tightly, because it doesn't 
want its enemies to turn the tables. The Dimir lurk in 
the shadows, methodically gathering the knowledge 
they need to remake Ravnica to their advantage. 

House Dimir's progress toward its goals depends on 
a web woven from meticulously gathered intelligence. 
Unpredictable behavior by other guilds can destabilize 
that web. When the Boros take sudden, forceful action 
inspired by an unexpected burst of zeal, the Dimir can 
be caught off guard. The Selesnya behave predictably on 
the whole, but the members of the conclave are so nu- 
merous that it can be hard for the Dimir to keep track of 
their activities. Of all the other guilds, the Izzet and the 
Gruul concern the Dimir the most; their erratic methods 
of decision-making, combined with their unflinching 
approach to danger, can quickly undermine any Dimir 
strategy designed to contain them. 


16 


DIMIR CHARACTERS 


Alignment: Usually neutral, sometimes evil 
Suggested Races: Half-elf, human 
Suggested Classes: Monk, rogue, wizard 


If the following sentences describe you, you might enjoy 
playing a character who belongs to House Dimir: 


* You love subterfuge, intrigue, and deception. 

* You like to play rogues, spies, and assassins. 

* The idea of stealing thoughts instead of treasure has a 
special appeal to you. 

* You want to deceive your fellow players without neces- 
sarily betraying them. 


JOINING House DIMIR 


You began your career in House Dimir as part of the 
legion of shopkeepers, librarians, couriers, and traders 
who maintain the deception that the guild has become 
civil and tame. Without any exposure to the guild’s more 
covert activities, you helped to discredit those who be- 
lieve that the Dimir are plotting to control the city, paint- 
ing them as delusional conspiracy theorists. But at some 
point your gifts were recognized and you were invited 
into the deeper mysteries of the guild. Your training fo- 
cused on stealth, espionage, and infiltration. As a Dimir 
spy, you might bring a variety of talents to your work. 

In your guild role, you engage in surveillance, theft, 
sabotage, infiltration, and other kinds of espionage. You 
work in a pocket or sleeper cell, unaware of the identi- 
ties of most other agents or the guild's leadership. You 
might be a rogue of the Thief, Assassin, or Arcane Trick- 
ster archetype, a monk of the Way of Shadow, or even a 
cleric of the Trickery Domain. 

If you are a spellcaster (perhaps a wizard specialized 
in the School of Divination, Enchantment, or Illusion), 
you have the skills needed to join the ranks of the most 
feared spellcasters on Ravnica: House Dimir's mind 
mages. Your basic work and role is the same as any 
other spy's, but you can learn to pull thoughts and mem- 
ories from a person's mind, use a target's own thoughts 
against them, attack your foes' psyches directly to create 
delusions, or scour enemy minds clean. 


BACKGROUND: DIMIR OPERATIVE 


You're a spy. Secrets and misinformation are your stock 
in trade. You skulk in the shadows, infiltrate other 
guilds, and steal the most precious secrets, whether 
they're written in locked journals or hidden away in 
someone's mind. Even you might not be aware of all the 
reasons behind the missions you carry out. Sometimes 
a mission's sole purpose is to conceal the motivation be- 
hind another strike performed in a different part of the 
city, or simply to spread fear. 

As part of your covert work for House Dimir, you 
maintain a false identity as a member of another guild. 
You can choose your secondary guild or roll to deter- 
mine it randomly. This secondary guild membership 
determines a portion of your starting equipment and is 
also where most of your contacts come from. You infil- 
trate your secondary guild to learn its secrets, keep tabs 
on its activities, or perhaps undermine it from within. 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


Skill Proficiencies: Deception, Stealth 

Tool Proficiencies: Disguise kit 

Languages: One of your choice 

Equipment: A Dimir insignia, three small knives, a 
set of dark-colored common clothes, and the starting 
equipment of the background described in this chap- 
ter for your secondary guild 


FEATURE: FALSE IDENTITY 
You have more than one identity. The one you wear most 
of the time makes you appear to be a member of a guild 
other than House Dimir. You have documentation, es- 
tablished acquaintances, and disguises that allow you to 
assume that persona and fit into the secondary guild. 
Whenever you choose, you can drop this identity and 
blend into the guildless masses of the city. 
Consider why you're embedded in the secondary guild. 
Create a story with your DM, inspired by rolling on the 
following table or choosing a reason that suits you. 


d8 Reason for Infiltration 
1 My parents belong to this guild, and | let them think 
I'm following in their footsteps. 
l've been assigned to track this guild's activities. 
l've been assigned to get close to an individual in this 
guild and learn their secrets. 


4 I've been assigned to recruit a new Dimir spy from 
the ranks of this guild. 
5 Iwasa member of this guild before the Dimir 


recruited me. 
6  Idon'tlike what this guild stands for and want to 
destroy it from within. 


7  Isecretly wish | could leave the Dimir and join this 
guild, but there is no escaping the Dimir. 
8 | chose this guild at random or on a lark. 


DIMIR GUILD SPELLS 

Prerequisite: Spellcasting or Pact Magic class feature 
For you, the spells on the Dimir Guild Spells table are 
added to the spell list of your spellcasting class. (If you 
are a multiclass character with multiple spell lists, these 
spells are added to all of them.) 


DiMIR GUILD SPELLS 


Spell Level Spells 
Cantrip encode thoughts, mage hand 
Ist disguise self, sleep 
2nd detect thoughts, pass without trace 
3rd gaseous form, meld into stone, nondetection 
4th arcane eye, freedom of movement 
5th modify memory 


Your magic is meant to be subtle and undetectable, but 
it might pull shadows or clouds of mist around you as 
you cast your spells. Using the encode thoughts cantrip 
described below, you can turn a creature's thoughts (in- 
cluding your own) into a thought strand that others can 
potentially read, share, or steal. These thought strands 
are treated as valuable currency among the Dimir. 


SPELL: ENCODE THOUGHTS 
Enchantment cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: Self 
Components: S 
Duration: Up to 8 hours 


Putting a finger to your head, you pulla 
memory, an idea, or a message from your 
mind and transform it into a tangible string 
of glowing energy called a thought strand, 
which persists for the duration or until you 
cast this spell again. The thought strand 
appears in an unoccupied space within 5 
feet of you as a Tiny, weightless, semisolid 
object that can be held and carried like a 
ribbon. It is otherwise stationary. 

If you cast this spell while concentrating 
on a spell or an ability that allows you to 
read or manipulate the thoughts of others 
(such as detect thoughts or modify memory), 
you can transform the thoughts or memo- 
ries you read, rather than your own, into a 
thought strand. 

Casting this spell while holding a thought strand 
allows you to instantly receive whatever memory, 


J 


idea, or message the thought strand contains. (Casting 
detect thoughts on the strand has the same effect.) 


SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 


Skilled at infiltration, disguise, and deception, members 


of House Dimir appear inscrutable. Your true personal- 
ity and ideals might never manifest, or they might mark 
you as a quirky member of your secondary guild. 


PERSONALITY TRAITS 


d8 
1 


Personality Trait 

I'm good at hiding my true thoughts and feelings. 
When I'm in doubt about revealing something, | 
assume it's a secret, and | don't share it. 


3  |liketo sound mysterious, because wisdom hidden 
grows deeper with time. 

4 Ihave no patience with people who get in my way. 

5 | love hearing about other people's nightmares. 

6 Combat is meant to be quick, clean, and one-sided. 

7  liketo stick to the shadows. 

8 ‘| never show my anger. | just plot my revenge. 

IDEALS 

d6 Ideal 

1 Guild. My true guild is all that really matters. (Any) 

2 Control. | like pulling the strings. (Lawful) 

3 Secrets. | collect secrets and never reveal them. (Any) 

4 Knowledge. | want to know as much as | can about 
this city and how it works. (Any) 

5 Independence. | value the freedom to pursue my own 
goals without interference. (Chaotic) 

6 Nihilism. | don't believe in anything, and anyone who 


does is a fool. (Neutral) 


BONDS 


d6 
1 


FLAWS 


Bond 

| discovered a secret | can't let anyone else uncover— 
including my guild superiors. 

| formed a close friendship or romance with someone 
in the guild I'm infiltrating. 

The Dimir agent who recruited me was unmasked 
and killed. My revenge on the killers will be thorough 
and painful. 

| spend as much time as | can in the Ismeri Library 
because I'm certain an information hub operates be- 
hind its facade. | want its secrets! 

I'm utterly loyal to my superior in the guild, more 
than to the guild or its guildmaster. 

Someone has discovered my true identity. 


Flaw 

| like secrets so much that I’m reluctant to share 
details of a plan even with those who need to know. 
| would let my friends die rather than reveal my true 
identity. 

| have trouble trusting anyone but myself. 

| have a particular vice that puts all my secrets at risk 
if l'm not careful. 

I'm pretty sure I've done something horrible that | 
can't remember because of the guild's mind magic. 
| put too much trust in the people who give me 
orders. 


CONTACTS 

As an agent of House Dimir working undercover, you 
have limited contacts within your guild. Your relation- 
ships within your secondary guild, in the guise of your 
false identity, are usually more extensive. 

Roll once on the Dimir Contacts table, giving you an 
ally who serves as your contact in Dimir. Then roll twice 
on the table for your secondary guild. The first roll gives 
you an ally there, and the second roll gives you a rival. 


DiMIR CONTACTS 


d8 Contact 

1  Iknowa Dimir courier who relays messages to me 
from someone higher up the chain of command. 

2 | get orders from a shapeshifter | recognize only 
through a series of code phrases we exchange. 

3  Anostentatiously wealthy vampire is my secret guild 
superior, summoning me to a luxurious estate by 
means of coded messages. 

4  lhavenever met my guild contact, but | receive 
telepathic messages, usually in my dreams. 

5 I've never met my guild contact, but | get coded mes- 
sages from a pattern of street lights and graffiti. 

6  Ididn't discover the identity of my guild contact until 
after we had begun a romantic relationship. 

7 My superior maintains an elaborate identity as a 
young street urchin... unless it's all a lie, and I'm 
being sent on ridiculous missions by a twisted child. 

8 My sibling and | both get telepathic orders from a 
mysterious contact, and I'm starting to question the 
authenticity of my sibling's orders. 


How Do I Fit IN? 


As a Dimir adventurer, you are a member of the guild's 
network of spies, thieves, assassins, and mind mages 
that lurks behind the facade of the public guild. On the 
surface, House Dimir presents the appearance of a 
network of couriers, investigators, media reporters, and 
archivists, dealing in information and spreading news. 
But you and your peers trade in secrets. You use secret 
symbols, runes, and signals to surreptitiously communi- 
cate with other Dimir agents, often in plain sight. 

Like any good spy, you have multiple identities: your 
true face as an agent of House Dimir; a guildless iden- 
tity; and a role as a member of another guild. Within 
that secondary guild, you might already be on a mission 
for House Dimir, assigned to spy on the guild, collect 
information about a person, or recruit another spy from 
the ranks of the guild. Or that guild could be a launching 
point for your real mission. Perhaps, for example, you 
were ordered to infiltrate the Azorius in hopes of gain- 
ing access to a notorious inmate in an Azorius prison. 


A DIMIR PARTY 

House Dimir might send an adventuring party on mis- 
sions focused on stealth and subterfuge. Such a team 
might be made up mostly of rogues and perhaps monks, 
with a mind mage (wizard) providing magical support. 
Potions help to offset the group's lack of healing ability. 


CHAPTER 2 GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


RANK AND RENOWN 


As you gain renown within House Dimir, you will be re- 
warded with missions of increasing importance. No for- 
mal ranks exist for you to progress through, but certain 
thresholds of renown indicate improvements in your 
standing within the guild. Perhaps most important, ac- 
cording to the philosophy of House Dimir, higher stand- 
ing brings greater knowledge of the inner workings of 
Ravnica and the guild. 

At the start of your career, your orders include step-by- 
step instructions—or they consist of just a single task. 
You receive these instructions from your guild contact. 


INDEPENDENT AGENT 
Prerequisite: Renown 3 or higher in House Dimir 


As an independent agent, you have considerable latitude 
in the way you choose to implement your mission goals. 

You acquire a spies' murmur (described in chapter 
5)—a magic device that allows you to communicate 
telepathically with other Dimir agents who wear similar 
items. If this item is lost or destroyed, it's up to you to 
secure a replacement. 


o 
S 
i 
5 
& 
n 
z 
& 
i 
N 
or 
G 


COLLECTOR OF SECRETS 
Prerequisite: Renown 10 or higher in House Dimir 


By the time you reach this level of renown in House 
Dimir, you are amassing a significant collection of se- 
crets about the people and places around you. You know 
the location of a hidden safe house where you can take 
shelter in case of dire need. At the DM's discretion, you 
might also know (or be able to find out) a secret about a 
person or group who lives or operates in a neighborhood 
you're familiar with. The secret is typically a person's 
flaw or details about a dark episode in a group's past. 
Whatever it is, the secret is a weakness that can be used 
to manipulate the person or group to assist you or your 
associates. 

In addition, you gain a Dimir charm (described in 
chapter 5) at the start of each mission you undertake on 
the guild's behalf. 


2 t 
1 
"n 
gum 
d 
ó] 
P 
E P 
d r4 
TA 
e» 
f 
x 
a 
[ ILES 


INNER CIRCLE 
Prerequisite: Renown 25 or higher in House Dimir 


At this level of renown, you are responsible for coordi- 
nating the activities of several other Dimir agents. You 
still receive orders from the usual source, but you're 
given broad goals and wide latitude in how to carry 
them out, including delegating specific tasks to other 
Dimir agents of lesser renown. You are also increasingly 
trusted with important secrets. 


GUILDMASTER'S CONFIDANT 
Prerequisite: Renown 50 or higher in House Dimir 


Few members of House Dimir ever encounter Lazav, 
and those who do are often unaware that they are deal- 
ing with the guildmaster. You have been admitted to his 
circle of confidants. He has entrusted you with a wide 
network of Dimir agents under your command, but you 
also bear tremendous responsibility for the success of 
the missions they undertake. 


r 
El 


Ce ees (C Ó(Óà» 
THE DiMIR VIEW ON OTHER GUILDS 


To House Dimir, every other guild is a potential source of 
information, its members all potential foils and patsies. 


Azorius. “They can’t be allowed to monopolize the flow of 
knowledge. Clog their networks with misinformation. To 
stop someone from discerning the truth, drown them in 
plausible untruths.” 

Boros. “Not inherently dangerous. The true danger is 
that they'll drag down all we've worked for while chas- 
ing some romantic crusade. Continue to direct their 
righteous fury toward our strongest enemy—until the 
Boros threaten to become the strongest.” 

Golgari. "We once appreciated them for their ability to 
make a corpse disappear, but we found that too many 
of our victims rose up to face us again. Now we use the 
city's fear of the swarm to keep them in their place. The 
more the Golgari try to rise from the mire of their repu- 
tation, the more we make them wallow in it.” 

Gruul. “They've always been convenient scapegoats, but 
their recent aggressiveness threatens to become a larger 
problem. We must thin their numbers—selectively and 
without confrontation. Catch them alone in the dark, and 
take them out one by one.” 

Izzet. “Even an overloaded, sizzled clock is still right twice 
a day. When Izzet experiments succeed, they can have 
unpredictable consequences for active missions. Their 
activities must be monitored at all times.” 

Orzhov. "We're amused at how well they've used their hi- 
erarchy to mask the corruption of their organization, but 
their need for the public's trust gives us an edge. They 
can be manipulated by playing on their fear of the people 
discovering their ruse.” 

Rakdos. "They've turned pointless activity into an art form, 
but their performances nevertheless make very useful 
distractions. Let them be bright and loud, drawing all 
attention, while we slip quietly through the dark." 

Selesnya. "Strength without guile is perhaps the most 
dangerous kind. One can't bluff the player who can't 
conceive of bluffing. Currently, the covert war plays to 
our strengths; we must ensure that the conclave never 
becomes conscious of the advantages they possess." 

Simic. "They are never short of intriguing surprises, so 

we know they are gearing up for something. Keep eyes 

inside their organization to see what their efforts are 
leading to—but don't be tempted to partake of their 
enhancements." 


ENEMIES AND ALLIES 


It's hard for a guild built on stealth and secrecy to main- 
tain a positive relationship with any other guild. AII 
guilds are monitored with suspicion, and they assessed 
for their current and prospective levels of threat, as 

well as for their usefulness to House Dimir's schemes. 
Each cell may foster its own relationships with the other 
guilds, but it ultimately defers to Dimir's enigmatic lead- 
ers to steer overarching strategy. 

Your missions might put you at odds with any other 
guild by calling on you to infiltrate that guild and gain 
insight into its plans, steal proprietary information from 
its guildhall, or subvert its leadership. For instance, you 
could be tasked to steal the transcript of an Azorius in- 
terrogation, the memories of Golgari spy, or the contents 
of an Orzhov ledger. 

You might cooperate with members of other guilds, 
openly or in disguise, insofar as their goals don't conflict 
with yours. Sometimes, the easiest way to assassinate 
one of your enemies is to put the forces of law on their 
trail, so joining forces with the Azorius and Boros, for 
example, can be a beneficial arrangement for everyone 
concerned. 


GOLGARI SWARM 


A SMALL CROWD OF PALE ELVES AND HUMANS STEPPED 


into the light. Bits of bone and detritus woven into their 
matted hair clicked lightly. Their chitinous armor swarmed 
with tiny, riotous insects that moved in and out of the sheen 
of moss growing on their shoulders—a bed for sprouting 
fungi. Whether it was the Golgari themselves who had made 
the chittering sound or their bugs, Ral could not be sure. 
—Doug Beyer, Return to Ravnica: The Secretist 


The teeming masses that compose the Golgari Swarm 
see themselves as pragmatic above all else, uncowed by 
the simple fact that death is part of the cycle of life. They 
believe the idea of life and death as opposing forces to 
be nothing more than naive sentimentality. They know 
everything crumbles and rots in the end, and then new 
life springs from that rot. Time inevitably passes, bring- 
ing both destruction and new creation to all things. 

The original mandate of the Golgari Swarm under 
the leadership of Svogthir, its Devkarin founder, was to 
maintain Ravnica's agriculture and manage its waste. 
But Svogthir's interest in necromancy, and his eventual 
transformation into a lich, shaped the course of the 
guild's activities and gave birth to its philosophy of em- 
bracing death as part of nature's cycle. 


INSIDE THE SWARM 


The leadership of the Golgari has undergone several 
major changes, but the nature of the swarm makes it 
easily adaptable to the churn of continuous cycles. Being 
alive isn't a prerequisite for leadership, as demonstrated 
by the rule of the current guildmaster, the elf lich Jarad 
Vod Savo. Assassination is seen as a perfectly valid 
means of effecting political change, which is how Jarad's 
sister, Savra, took control of the guild before him. Var- 
ious groups of people and monsters coexist within the 
swarm, their relative power waxing and waning with the 
years, and through it all, the guild goes on. 


The three most important power groups within the 
Golgari are the Devkarin elves, the medusas (also 
called gorgons in Ravnica), and the insectile kraul. 
Jarad is an undead representative of the Devkarin, so 
the elves claim a privileged position within the guild for 
the moment. 

Members of the Golgari Swarm live in the shadow 
of Jarad and the leaders of the individual factions. The 
machinations among elves, medusas, kraul, and other 
creatures rarely bring any significant improvement to 
the lives of the swarm's countless members, but often 
cause disruption and occasionally disaster. Most guild 
members believe it's best to keep their heads down and 
stay out of the political conflict and to avoid attracting 
the disfavor of the Ochran, the guild's order of assas- 
sins. More adventurous members might enjoy intrigue 
and politics, or might unwittingly become tangled up in 
the schemes of the guild's leaders. 

Jarad maintains a council of shamans and rogues to 
serve as a combination of advisory parliament and spy 
agency. These high chancellors rarely convene pub- 
licly, preferring to disperse themselves throughout the 
swarm to keep information flowing from the nucleus to 
every part of the organism. 


GOALS OF THE GOLGARI 


The Golgari Swarm celebrates the growth and vibrancy 

of the natural world, but gives equal attention to nature's 

facets of destruction, decay, and death. It finds allies and 

agents in the form of fungi, oozes, insects, diseases, and 

a.ll—————————————— 
Dark ELVES OF THE GOLGARI 


Also called the elves of shadow, the Devkarin are one of 
the three branches of Ravnica's elf race. Like other elves, 
the Devkarin are adept spellcasters, counting most of the 
Golgari's shamans among their number. 

After being cast out of the nascent Selesnya Conclave 
millennia ago, the Devkarin found a home amid the cor- 
rupted and overgrown places of Ravnica, and the Devkarin 
necromancer Svogthir became the founder of the Golgari 
Swarm. Since then, the Devkarin have been a major influ- 
ence in the guild, even during the times when they didn't 
hold absolute power. Regardless of who rules the guild, the 
Devkarin follow the guidance of a high priest, called the 
matka. The matka's spiritual leadership usually aligns with 
the guildmaster's temporal commands, but during times 
when the guild is ruled by a non-elf faction, the matka can 
be a significant dissenting voice. 

——————— 


CHAPTER Z GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


other unsavory aspects of nature, and it uses the power 
of nature actively toward the goal of advancing its own 
place in the world. But the Golgari have also learned 
patience from nature; they are content to work from the 
shadows, harnessing the energy that comes from decay 
while the civilization of Ravnica slowly erodes and de- 
stroys itself. 

The teeming hordes of the Golgari Swarm believe it 
is finally their time to shine. They have dwelled under 
the streets and under the sway of the other guilds for too 
long. They are convinced that Ravnica’s institutions are 
now on the verge of collapse and that the absence of the 
Living Guildpact proves it. However, the Golgari are nei- 
ther surprised nor panicked by this, for they believe that 
all things eventually rot and die, and from this decay, 
new life blooms. As such, the Golgari see the looming 
interguild conflict as a necessary final push to bring 
about a new era—their era. 

The Golgari are preparing for upheaval. They have 
sealed many of the passages leading into the undercity, 
making their territory seem like an impregnable subter- 
ranean fortress. Within it, the Golgari domain retains 
its grandeur, a mysterious and wondrous kingdom. The 
rare visitors who stumble into it are awed by its beauty 
and its aura of ancient power. Palatial architecture fills 
cavernous sewer chambers, and luminescent spores 
float through the air to shed an otherworldly light on the 
moss-covered masonry. Entering Golgari territory feels 
like stepping into a secret world of dangerous beauty. 


«OT 
GOLGARI CHARACTERS 


Alignment: Usually neutral, often evil 
Suggested Races: Human, elf (dark) 
Suggested Classes: Druid, fighter, ranger, rogue, wizard 


The Golgari Swarm might suit your character if one or 
more of the following statements are true: 


* You're drawn to the darker side of nature or the 
greener side of necromancy. 

* You are drawn to sinister, creepy, or grim characters. 

* You like elves and druids but want to explore an 
unusual direction. 


JOINING THE GOLGARI SWARM 


Similar to a swarm of insects, the Golgari collectively 
behave more like a single organism than a scattering of 
individuals. New members aren't recruited or initiated 
into the Golgari Swarm; you have been absorbed and 
incorporated, and the biological system of the swarm 
funneled you to where your talents are most needed 

to contribute to the health of the guild. Your position 
within the guild is defined by your capabilities. 

You might act as a shaman of the Golgari if you are a 
spellcaster—perhaps a wizard specialized in the School 
of Necromancy, a druid of the Circle of the Land, or a 
druid of the Circle of Spores (described in chapter 1). In 
this revered position, you teach and advise other mem- 
bers of the swarm, keeping them attuned to the natural 
cycle of death and regrowth. You might manipulate that 
natural cycle by wielding the magic of death, snuffing 


out life and reanimating the dead. Or you might wield 
your magic to spread fungal rot and noxious gases, pre- 
paring parts of the city for annexation. 

If you aren't adept at magic, the swarm still needs 
you. Golgari warriors both defend the guild's territory 
and, when necessary, take offensive action. If you are a 
fighter (typically of the Champion archetype), you can 
serve as a shock trooper, perhaps fighting alongside 
kraul and trolls on behalf of the swarm. If you are a 
ranger (likely of the Beast Master archetype) or a rogue 
(of the Thief or Assassin archetype), you are more of a 
skirmisher. Golgari rangers favor insects and reptiles as 
companions. 


BACKGROUND: GOLGARI AGENT 


You are a member of a teeming horde—one small part of 
a sprawling organism. Just as you are part of the swarm, 
the swarm is part of a larger ecosystem, a never-ending 
cycle of life, death, rot, and rebirth. You have spent your 
life in the slow churn of that ecosystem, in the dark 
places of the city where the messy parts of existence 

are on display. There is little squeamishness among the 
Golgari, no fear of death or taboo about the dead, just a 
fierce affirmation of the cycle. 


Skill Proficiencies: Nature, Survival 

Tool Proficiencies: Poisoner's kit 

Languages: Choose one of Elvish, Giant, or Kraul 

Equipment: A Golgari insignia, a poisoner's kit, a pet 
beetle or spider, a set of common clothes, and a belt 
pouch containing 10 gp worth of mixed coins 


FEATURE: UNDERCITY PATHS 

You know hidden, underground pathways that you can 
use to bypass crowds, obstacles, and observation as you 
move through the city. When you aren't in combat, you 
and companions you lead can travel between any two lo- 
cations in the city twice as fast as your speed would nor- 


mally allow. The paths of the undercity are haunted by SuGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 
dangers that rarely brave the light of the surface world, Members of the Golgari Swarm are unmistakably prod- 
so your journey isn't guaranteed to be safe. ucts of the undercity, ill at ease amid the comforts of civ- 


ilization. They bring about the same discomfort in oth- 


GOLGARI GUILD SPELLS ers by reminding them of death’s inevitable approach. 


Prerequisite: Spellcasting or Pact Magic class feature 


For you, the spells on the Golgari Guild Spells table are PERSONALITY TRAITS 
added to the spell list of your spellcasting class. (If you d8 Personality Trait 
are a multiclass character with multiple spell lists, these z ; 
1 Remember, | could kill you in your sleep. Or put 


spells are added to all of them.) Centigedex in your bedroll 


GoLGARI GUILD SPELLS 2  lliketo remind people of their inevitable demise. 
3 Sometimes give voice to the whispers ofthe rot, 


Spell Level Spells 
P P which | hear but no one else does. 


Cantrip dancing lights, spare the dying 


^ 4 Ido my best to discourage anyone from approaching 
Ist entangle, ray of sickness : 
33d i ; bi or talking to me. 
n protecion gram poison, ray of enfeeblement, 5 Ihave accepted my death. Hence, | don't fear it. 
spider climb : - 
, Like roots growing through stone, | am relentless and 
3rd animate dead, plant growth "m 4 
4th iant insect, grasping vine wedi SL ee LS ul 
E SPER CESPE 7 | put my knowledge of anatomy to use by narrating 
Sth cloudkill, insect plague 


the injuries my enemies suffer in grisly detail. 


: — : ; 8  Likea wild animal, | lash out viciously when I'm 
Golgari magic is often accompanied by a sickly green 


glow and a rotting stench provoked—and I'm easily provoked. 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


IDEALS 


d6 Ideal 

1 Guild. My guild is all that really matters. (Any) 

2 Stoicism. All of us are part of the cyclical march of na- 
ture, which will continue with or without us. (Neutral) 

3 Nature. The natural world is more important than the 
edifices of the city and civilization. (Neutral) 

4 Interdependence. We are all part of nature's web. 
(Lawful) 

5 Ambition. The time of Golgari ascendance is at hand, 
and | intend to have a prominent place in the new 
world order. (Evil) 

6  Liveand Let Live. Meddling in the affairs of other 
guilds is a great way to get squashed like a bug. 
(Neutral) 

BONDS 
dé Bond 

1  Icherish the finger of a family member who was 
petrified by a medusa. 

2  lhavean identical twin who is as different from me as 
any person could be. 

3  lwantto lead one faction of the guild to a new posi- 
tion of dominance. 

4 | love spending time in the moss-covered building 
where | took part in my first reclamation mission. 

5 | found something in the sewer that must never come 
to light. 

6 lam forever grateful to the reclaimer who found me 
floating facedown in the sewer, moments from death. 

FLAWS 
d6 Flaw 

] Death comes for us all, so you can't expect me to take 
care of someone who can't fight it off. 

2  lassume that anyone outside the Golgari looks down 


on me. 


dé Flaw 

3  lfeela need for revenge against those who enjoy the 
privilege of living above ground. 

4 | don't bother to couch my opinions in flattering 
words. 

5  Ican'thelp but pocket any trinket or coin | come 
across, no matter how worthless. 

6 I'm convinced that I’m better and stronger than 
members of other guilds, isolated as they are from 
the realities of life and death. 

CONTACTS 


To the extent that the Golgari Swarm acts like a single 
organism, you are connected to every other member 
in some way or another. Convinced that the rest of the 
world is out to get you, you find it easy to form close 
bonds with your guild mates, and harder to make mean- 
ingful connections with others. 

Roll twice on the Golgari Contacts table (for an ally 
and a rival) and once on the Non-Golgari Contacts table. 


GOLGARI CONTACTS 


d8 
1 


Contact 

One of my parents is an elite assassin, a member of 
the Ochran. 

| learned combat from a kraul. 

| know a medusa who is stationed in the guildhall. 

| had a torrid romance with a spore druid responsible 
for a large rot farm. 

There's a troll in a remote area of the undercity who 
seems to find me interesting—and who knows more 
than you'd think. 

An elf lich is determined to see me become a lich 
someday, too. 

A medusa decided it would be more fun to recruit me 
into the guild than to kill me. 

| know a findbroker who can locate just about any- 
thing, for the right price. 


Non-GOLGAR!I CONTACTS 


d10 
1 


10 


Contact 

An Azorius arrester | literally pulled out of the gutter 
will do anything for me. 

Someone joined the Gruul in a battle against the 
Boros once, and the sergeant of that Boros squad 
would love to prove that it was me. 

| had a romance with a Dimir agent whom | still feed 
secrets to. 

Roll an additional Golgari contact; you can decide if 
the contact is an ally or a rival. 

| joined the Gruul in a battle against the Boros once, 
and the chief of that small clan thanks me for turning 
the tide. 

An Izzet scientist resents that | sold a scrapped 
invention | found in the sewer. 

My undercity explorations led me into an Orzhov 
vault, and a spirit thinks | stole something valuable. 
| found a baby beast and sold it to a Rakdos wrangler 
who remains grateful to me. 

A Selesnya druid and | share an interest in the same 
garden, and we have enjoyable arguments there. 

| regularly pick up refuse from beneath a Simic lab- 
oratory, and sometimes | talk to the researcher who 
dumps it there. 


How Do I Fit IN? 


As part of the Golgari Swarm, you are a specialized 
instrument of the greater body. Your orders, when you 
have such, come from the guildmaster by way of his 
chancellors, who carry his messages throughout the 
guild. The swarm relies on you to advance the greater 
good by protecting some part, however small, of its 
teeming existence. That responsibility doesn't mean 
you're indispensable; your eventual death is part of 
your purpose and function, too, and you'll be replaced 
even as your body provides nutrients to further the 
swarm's growth. 

A classic adventuring role for a member of the Golgari 
involves crawling through dungeon-like environments— 
the sewers and ancient vaults of the undercity—in 
search of treasures left behind by the dead. Sometimes 
you might be sent to find a specific item believed lost 
in a dangerous part of the undercity. At other times, 
you could be asked to collect samples of a specific fun- 
gus, retrieve a body floating in the muck of the sewers, 
or bring back whatever booty you can to help fill the 
swarm's coffers. 

You might gain enough renown to become a member 
of the Ochran, assigned to a variety of tasks concerning 
thievery, assassination, or the protection of important 
figures in your guild. You might steal something be- 
cause the guild needs it, or because its loss will bring 
harm to another guild, hastening that group's decline. 


You could be assigned to kill an outspoken and active 
enemy of the Golgari, such as an overzealous Boros 
captain whose raids into the undercity have approached 
dangerously close to the swarm’s inner sanctum. Or you 
could serve as a bodyguard to one of Guildmaster Ja- 
rad’s high chancellors, escorting this figure through the 
undercity while being ready to intervene at a moment's 
notice if things go wrong. 

The shamans of the Golgari use their magic to accel- 
erate the cycle of decay and regrowth. You might be sent 
to spread spores throughout an area that the Golgari 
want to claim as their territory or to convince the inhab- 
itants of such a territory to abandon it. You might also 
contend with the ever-present threat of hostile monsters 
encroaching into Golgari-controlled regions. 


A GOLGARI PARTY 

An adventuring party drawn from the teeming ranks of 
the Golgari Swarm might focus on traversing the under- 
city or on stealthy missions in the streets above. A pair 
of shamans (a druid and a wizard) would form the core 
leadership of the group, supported by a warrior (fighter 
or ranger) and a stealthy member of the Ochran (rogue). 


RANK AND RENOWN 


Every member of the Golgari Swarm has its place, and 
every role is important to the proper functioning of the 
guild. Aside from a few leadership positions, the swarm 
doesn't consider different functions to be more or less 
important than others. The idea of progressing up the 
ranks is foreign to the Golgari way of thinking. That 
said, your renown within the Golgari is a direct measure 
of the guildmaster's knowledge of you, his confidence in 
your abilities, and his interest in your activities. 

At the start of your career with the Golgari, the guild- 
master and his chancellors have no way to distinguish 
you from the masses of others who perform a similar 
function. If you receive instructions from the high chan- 
cellors, the orders are directed toward you as part of a 
larger group: for example, "Reclaimers, keep your eyes 
open for an /zzet keyrune believed to be lost in this sec- 
tor of the sewers." 


AGENT 
Prerequisite: Renown 3 or higher in the Golgari Swarm 


You have distinguished yourself from the mass of your 
peers. Guildmaster Jarad might not know your name, 
but he knows that a member of your group is reliable 
and effective, and his high chancellors single you out for 
specific missions. The guild provides you with supplies 
you need to complete those missions (within reason). 


MONSTROUS FAVORS 
Prerequisite: Renown 10 or higher in the Golgari 
Swarm 


When you reach this level of renown in the Golgari 
Swarm, Jarad knows your name and appreciates that 
you can be relied on to help fulfill the guild's objectives. 
Thanks to this prominence, you can get away with beg- 
ging a favor from the guild's more monstrous members. 
You can ask an undercity medusa, a troll, or a kraul 
death priest to help you with a task that benefits the 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


Golgari Swarm. The creature is not obligated to help 
you, but it holds you in enough esteem to at least con- 
sider it—in exchange for the promise of a favor in return. 

In addition, you receive a Golgari charm (described in 
chapter 5) at the start of each mission you undertake on 
the guild's behalf. 


OCHRAN (SPECIAL ROLE) 
Prerequisite: Renown 10 or higher in the Golgari 
Swarm 


Having achieved considerable renown within the guild, 
you can choose to become a member of the Ochran. The 
Ochran often serve as stealthy bodyguards, lurking out 
of sight until some danger threatens their wards. The 
Ochran are also sent out as assassins or burglars to 
further the guild’s goals. 


ADVISOR 
Prerequisite: Renown 25 or higher in the Golgari 
Swarm 


Although you aren't yet one of Jarad's personal counsel- 
ors, your value to the guild is clear. The high chancellors 
regularly call on you to perform tasks for the guild and 
to share your insights. You can be sure that anything 
you say to a high chancellor will pass quickly to the ears 
of the guildmaster. 


HiGH CHANCELLOR 
Prerequisite: Renown 50 or higher in the Golgari 
Swarm 


Jarad seeks out the most powerful, effective, and loyal 
members of the Golgari Swarm to serve as his high 
chancellors. At this point, you certainly qualify. The 
amorphous nature of Jarad’s council means that you 
don't need to wait for a vacancy to open up; Jarad sum- 
mons you to his presence, and you are expected to 
appear and accept the new position offered to you. 

As a high chancellor, you advise Jarad in his 
decision-making, keep him informed of happenings 
throughout the guild, and convey his instructions to the 
various parts of the guild's “body.” 


MATKA (SPECIAL ROLE) 
Prerequisite: Renown 50 or higher in the Golgari 
Swarm, elf (dark), spellcasting ability 


You are eligible to fill the role of matka, the high priest 
of the Golgari elves. You can attain this position only if 
the previous matka has died or stepped down. Becom- 
ing matka requires you to claim the position and main- 
tain your title against any challengers. It isn't unusual 
for competing claims among would-be matkas to be 
resolved by combat ... or assassination. 

As matka, your status among the Devkarin is compa- 
rable to that of the guildmaster's. Even high chancellors 
who are Devkarin attempt to balance their loyalty to 
Jarad with their loyalty to you. 


AF 


ENEMIES AND ALLIES 


The Golgari Swarm shares a general philosophical 
approach with the other nature-oriented guilds—Simic, 
Gruul, and Selesnya—in its concern for the forces of life 
and growth. Under the right circumstances, a member 
of the Golgari can work well with agents of those organi- 
zations. But the Golgari's emphasis on death as part of 
the life cycle is foreign to those other guilds. 

The Golgari prefer to erode their enemies’ strength 
through a process of attrition rather than by launching 
frontal attacks. If you are called on to take direct action 
against another guild, it is probably a matter of self-pres- 
ervation against a guild that is threatening the life and 
livelihood of the Golgari. You might oppose the Azorius 
as they attempt to extend their jurisdiction into the 
undercity or strike back at the Boros to dissuade them 
from launching more attacks into Golgari territory. Oc- 
casionally, you might be assigned to assault the enemies 
of the Golgari more directly, especially if you are a mem- 
ber of the Ochran. If the death of a particular person or 
the theft of a key treasure will contribute to the decline 
and downfall of an enemy guild, even the typically pa- 
tient Golgari will try to seize that opportunity. 

You might ally with members of another guild if 
they are working—even unwittingly—toward goals you 
share. The Gruul, for example, are adept at hastening 
the decay of both humanoid populations and physical 
structures, even if they remain unaware of their full role 
in the natural cycle. If some event threatens to upset the 
balance of nature, such as a necromantic blight that kills 
all growth or a magical wildfire rampaging through the 
city, you might join other nature-oriented guilds in an 
attempt to curtail it and preserve the balance. 


THE GOLGARI VIEW ON OTHER GUILDS 


To the Golgari, the other guilds of Ravnica are shortsighted 
and inevitably doomed to collapse. 


Azorius. “Such hubris! As if all their laws could shore up 
this crumbling society. Their regulations and institutions 
are just detritus in the making.” 

Boros. “The Boros speak a language we will never un- 
derstand. Their militant dedication to empty concepts 
like ‘justice’ and ‘righteousness’ is both confusing and 
disturbing.” 

Dimir. “They collect information like trinkets, so how can 
they ever grasp the deeper truths we possess? But their 
presence in the undercity is an all-too-real threat to our 
dominion beneath the streets.” 

Gruul. “The clans serve as effective instruments of the 
natural cycle, though in their anger, they are blind to the 
extent of the role they play.” 

Izzet. "Perplexing. They are attracted to whatever flashes 
brightest and booms loudest. Their fascination with their 
toys will only hasten their own end.” 

Orzhov. “They flout the natural order and use their 
knowledge of death to resist its pull. While their bodies 
rot, their spirits persist, clinging to the fiction of mate- 
rial wealth.” 

Rakdos. “They understand the inevitability of death but 
seek to hasten its arrival for their petty ends. What the 
demon destroys, we nurse back to life again.” 

Selesnya. “Their reverence for nature is the mark of im- 
maturity and naiveté. They fear death, so they can’t 
understand life. They can be dangerous when they 
fervently cling to their narrow-minded and inadequate 
view of life.” 

Simic. “They seek patterns in the natural world, which is 
commendable enough, but they believe the search will 
lead them to find perfection through all of its flaws. They 
strive to move forward but fail to see that the path they 
tread is cyclical.” 

e—a 


58 


GRUUL CLANS 


JACE HAD NEVER SEEN, OR FOR THAT MATTER SMELLED, A 
Gruul war party at all. Their armor was made from animal 
hides and bones, and their weaponry was heavy pieces of 
scavenged city rubbish. Their skin was alive with tattoos, 
etched with a combination of magic, ink, and, Jace sup- 
posed, a considerable amount of pain. Each of them was a 
hulk of muscle, and Ruric Thar was the largest and mighti- 
est of them all. 

—Doug Beyer, Return to Ravnica: The Secretist 


The Gruul Clans are a wild people in a civilized land, 

a loose affiliation of bands that squat on the fringes of 
Ravnican society. They shun the centers of civilization, 
which they see as a source of oppression and weakness, 
and instead haunt Ravnica's alleyways, abandoned 
zones, and ruins. They want to see the edifice of civi- 
lization torn down so the world can revert to the pure 
wilderness that thrived before the city grew to cover 
everything. Then the true order of nature can be re- 
stored—an unbridled and brutal state in which only the 
strong survive and the strongest rule. 

In a world covered with city streets and towering 
buildings, the Gruul are the most out of place, the 
most ill at ease, and the most eager to topple it all and 
start fresh. Constant ritualistic warfare reverberates 
among the clans, every skirmish reinforcing their doc- 
trine of the survival of the fittest. They frequently send 
sorties into civilized areas to secure goods—and to 
wreak havoc. 

The first leader of the Gruul was Cisarzim, a cyclops 
who was purportedly the ancestor of Borborygmos, the 
current guildmaster. Cisarzim was called the Lord of 
Chaos, and his guild's original function as maintainers 
of Ravnica's natural places meant keeping his faction as 
remote as possible from the civilized parts of the world. 
The gradual expansion of the city, however, has driven 
the Gruul into smaller and smaller refuges. 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


INSIDE THE CLANS 


As a collection of disparate clans, the Gruul have no sin- 
gle leader and no headquarters. But the Gruul respect 
strength and are willing to follow a strong individual 
who points them in a direction they want to go anyway. 
For several decades, that position has been held by the 
mighty cyclops Borborygmos, chief of the Burning Tree 
clan. His nihilistic anger inspires the rest of the Gruul, 
so when he calls on the other clans to join a raid, they 
usually agree. Even the fractious Gruul can see the ben- 
efit of banding together. The clans sometimes gather at 
Skarrg, a ruined palace in the rubblebelt adjoining the 
Tenth District. Here are descriptions of the clans: 


Burning Tree Clan. The Burning Tree clan is the most 
fearsome of the Gruul Clans, as well as the largest 
and most diverse, with branches in several districts of 
Ravnica. The fear and awe inspired by Borborygmos 
unifies its diverse membership. The Ravnican popu- 
lace regards the symbol of the Burning Tree clan as 
the symbol for the entire Gruul guild. 

Ghor Clan. The Ghor clan is led by an ettin named Ru- 
ric Thar (or, perhaps more properly, Ruric and Thar, 
since the heads claim separate names). Of all the 
clans, the Ghor carry out the most frequent and sav- 
age assaults on Ravnica's citizenry. The clan is known 
for its audacity in forging encampments close to heav- 
ily populated districts. 

Scab Clan. Members of the Scab clan display scars and 
body modifications, which they view as expressions of 
the powerful rage they harbor within themselves. The 
clan has grown in influence by engulfing or destroying 
several smaller clans in recent years, but the leader of 
the Scabs, a corpulent giant known as Narbulg Nine 
Fingers, has not gone so far as to challenge the Burn- 
ing Tree clan. 

Slizt Clan. The Slizt clan is a clutch of sly, skittish war- 
riors, consisting largely of reptilian humanoids called 
viashino (use the lizardfolk stat block in the Monster 
Manual to represent them), along with a few wily hu- 
mans. This clan survives in the rubblebelts by taking 
up hiding places in high ground and ambushing its 
enemies with ranged attacks from above. Other Gruul 
regard the Slizt as skulkers and cowards, but nonethe- 
less all are cautious when entering areas with elevated 
ruins. The home ground of the Slizt clan is the Husk, 
an area at the center of a vast rubblebelt featuring 
many large, ancient structures that have remained 
standing for generations. 


ee 
ITCHING FOR A FIGHT 
Gruul goblins live in colonies scattered at the edges of 
Gruul territory and civilized neighborhoods. They fight 
fiercely when threatened, punctuating their attacks with 
hisses and growls. When battle fury takes hold of a Gruul 
raiding group, it typically starts with the goblins, and after 
the battle, the surviving goblins are still frothing at the 
mouth and looking for someone to hit. 

mr ——MÓ——á MÀ 


Gravel Hide Clan. The Gravel Hide clan believes that 
resilience is the truest measure of strength. Though 
a relatively new group, its members have already 
earned a reputation (almost certainly exaggerated) for 
shrugging off devastating attacks. The clan's leader, 

a hot-tempered goblin named Skorik Boulder Tooth, 
adorns himself with the shattered remnants of weap- 
ons that he has rent to bits with his own jaws. 

Zhur-Taa Clan. The Zhur-Taa clan advocates an ex- 
treme interpretation of the Old Ways. Central to this 
view is its belief in the imminent awakening of an 
ancient boar god—Ilharg, the Raze-Boar—who will 
lay waste to the overcivilized world. Led by a centaur 
druid called Nikya of the Old Ways, the Zhur-Taa pile 
up skulls as offerings to this god, and their druids per- 
form guttural chants before and during battle that are 
said to be in the language of the old gods. 

Zhur-Taa druids are adept at summoning and train- 
ing beasts as war-companions and mounts, and the 
clan's warriors wade into battle alongside giant boars, 
other beasts, and even wurms or hydras. 

Bolrac Clan. The most selective of all the Gruul Clans, 
the Bolrac clan denies membership to the smaller 
races. Its members are all enormous, lumbering 
brutes, primarily cyclopes, ogres, and giants. The 
clan's leadership changes frequently—sometimes 
daily, since battles for supremacy are as common as 
meals. The Bolrac clan specializes in bringing down 
massive structures using mauls and battering rams. 
The only thing the Bolrac love more than destroying 
something smaller than them is toppling, overrun- 
ning, and destroying something larger than them. 

Trogs. Some wandering hermits, known as trogs, find 
even the company of a clan to be too suffocating, 
so they spend their days alone in the wild places of 
Ravnica. These individuals are fierce, independent 
warriors who traverse the rubblebelts as apex preda- 
tors. Trogs are notoriously short-tempered and impa- 
tient around others. Occasionally, they heed the call of 
the guildmaster to join in riots or festivals, but more 
often they conduct their own ceremonies and celebra- 
tions in private. 


GOALS OF THE GRUUL 


So far as any philosophy can be said to underlie the 
Gruul way of life, it is about living in the now, with little 
concern for forethought, planning, or speculation. Im- 
pulse drives the actions of the Gruul Clans. They want 
to live their lives unimpeded, and they lash out when 
something tries to stand in their way. Emotion and 
impulsiveness drive them as they seek to do what they 
want, take what they want, and smash what they want. 


GRUUL CHARACTERS 


Alignment: Usually chaotic, often neutral 
Suggested Races: Human, centaur, goblin, minotaur 
Suggested Classes: Barbarian, cleric, druid, 

fighter, ranger 


You might enjoy playing a character who belongs to 
the Gruul Clans if one or more of the following sen- 
tences are true: 


* You enjoy playing rage-mad barbarians and sav- 
age druids. 

* You want to throw off the shackles of civilization and 
indulge your inner beast. 

* You like being a force of chaos who keeps things 
moving in your adventures. 


JOINING THE GRUUL CLANS 


You might have been born and raised among the Gruul, 
like many of the guild’s members. Or you could be an 
outcast, a refugee, or a fugitive from civilized society, 
shunned for your violent ways or for fleeing the hand 

of justice. As long as you are strong enough to survive 
among the Gruul, you are welcome, no matter what se- 
crets haunt your past. 

The Gruul “guild” is actually a collection of different, 
independent clans loosely united under one powerful 
leader. When you decide to join the Gruul, you join a 
specific clan, not the guild as a whole. You can roll a d8 
or choose from the options in the Gruul Clan Options 
table to determine your character's clan allegiance. 


GRUUL CLAN OPTIONS 
Clan 
Burning Tree clan 


a 
oo 


Ghor clan 

Scab clan 

Slizt clan 

Gravel Hide clan 
Zhur-Taa clan 
Minor or new clan 
Trog 


oN DN AUN 


The rites of becoming Gruul, whether you have come 
from outside the guild or are marking your entrance into 
adulthood, center around being buried alive. When you 
enter the shallow grave, the person you were before is 
dead. Your past wrongs and errors are forgotten, but so 
are your past accomplishments. No matter how well you 
proved yourself in battle before, when you rise from the 
earth you are untested. The clan leaders recognize you 
only when you earn glory in battle as a Gruul. 

Most of the Gruul find their place among the fierce 
warriors of their clans. If you are a fighter, ranger, or 
barbarian, this is your natural role. Gruul fighters tend 
to adopt the Champion archetype, Gruul rangers usually 
adopt the Hunter or the Beast Master archetype, and 
Gruul barbarians follow either the Path of the Totem 
Warrior or the Path of the Berserker. Whatever your 
class, as a Gruul warrior you are devoted to tearing 
down the edifices of civilization, both physical and 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 59 


institutional. You lash out at a system that you believe is 
the root of corruption and weakness. 

If you are spellcaster, such as a druid (usually of the 
Circle of the Moon) or a cleric of the Tempest Domain, 
you might adopt a more spiritual role in your clan. You 
practice what the Gruul call the Old Ways, a discipline 
that predates the foundation of civilization on Ravnica, 
to channel the primal energy that still pulses through 
the wild places of the world. 


BACKGROUND: GRUUL ANARCH 
The entire world of Ravnica is a sprawling metropolis, 
but you are a native of the wild areas that still exist—the 
abandoned districts, the rubblebelts, the overgrown 
parks, and the crumbling ruins. You are part of a savage 
society that clings desperately to the Old Ways—attuned 
to nature, full of primal rage, and given short shrift by 

a world consumed with continuing civilization’s march 
of progress. 


Skill Proficiencies: Animal Handling, Athletics 

Tool Proficiencies: Herbalism kit 

Languages: Choose one of Draconic, Giant, 
Goblin, or Sylvan 

Equipment: A Gruul insignia, a hunting trap, an herbal- 
ism kit, the skull of a boar, a beast-hide cloak, a set of 
traveler's clothes, and a belt pouch containing 10 gp 
(Azorius 1-zino coins) 


FEATURE: RUBBLEBELT REFUGE 

you are intimately familiar with areas of the city that 
most people shun: ruined neighborhoods where wurms 
rampaged, overgrown parks that no hand has tended in 
decades, and the vast, sprawling rubblebelts of broken 


terrain that civilized folk have long abandoned. You can 
find a suitable place for you and your allies to hide or 
rest in these areas. In addition, you can find food and 
fresh water in these areas for yourself and up to five 
other people each day. 


GRUUL GUILD SPELLS 
Prerequisite: Spellcasting or Pact Magic class feature 


For you, the spells on the Gruul Guild Spells table are 
added to the spell list of your spellcasting class. (If you 
are a multiclass character with multiple spell lists, these 
spells are added to all of them.) 


GRUUL GUILD SPELLS 


Spell Level Spells 
Cantrip fire bolt, produce flame 


Ist compelled duel, speak with animals, 
thunderwave 

2nd beast sense, shatter 

3rd conjure animals, conjure barrage 

4th dominate beast, stoneskin 

5th destructive wave 


Fueled by the fire of rage burning in your heart, your 
magic is almost always accompanied by fiery effects, 
such as flames smoldering behind your eyes or dancing 
over your hands. 


SuGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 


Gruul ways aren't the ways of civilized folk, and the 
Gruul have little patience for social niceties. But they do 
have cherished traditions and values, just as important 
to them as the different values held by the urban, cosmo- 
politan culture of Ravnica. 


SE a 


lae LR 


PERSONALITY TRAITS 


d8 Personality Trait 

1 Unlike people, the beasts of the wild are friends who 
won't stab me in the back. 

2 Go ahead and insult me—1 dare you. 

3  lscorn those who can't survive away from the 
comforts of the city. 
Don't tell me I'm not allowed to do something. 

5  Lawsare for people who are afraid to face their inner 
beasts. 
| smear the blood of my enemies over my skin. 
| was, in fact, raised by maaka. 
HarrRRAAGGHH! [I rarely form a coherent sentence 
and prefer to express myself by breaking things.] 


IDEALS 

dé Ideal 
Clan. My clan is all that really matters. (Any) 

2 Anarchy. No person or law or custom can tell another 
what to do. (Chaotic) 

3 Nature. We weren't born tame or domesticated, so 
we shouldn't have to live that way. (Neutral) 

4 Might. The strongest are meant to dominate the 
weak. (Evil) 

5 Rage. AAAAAARRRRggggh! [To live is to feel and ex- 
press the rage burning in your belly.] (Chaotic) 

6 Tradition. The Old Ways must be preserved and 
upheld. (Any) 


BONDS 

d6 Bond 

1 lam determined that one day | will lead my clan—or 
a new one. 

2 | would give my life for my clan chieftain. 
The chieftain of another clan has a grudge against 
me. 

4 lam devoted to a sacred site in the midst of the 
rubblebelt. 

5 My weapon is made from the first raktusk | ever 
hunted. 


6  GrrrRRAAAAGGHH! [I will do anything to prove 
myself greater than my siblings or ancestors.] 


FLAWS 
d6 Flaw 
1 If you question my courage, | will never back down. 


2 | HrrrGGGAAAARRuuuh! [My anger in battle led to the 
death of a loved one] 
I'm as stubborn as a batterboar. 

4 I'm so convinced of my superiority over soft, civilized 
people that I'll take great risks to prove it. 
I'm easily manipulated by people | find attractive. 

6 I'm not actually all that angry. 


CONTACTS 
The members of the Gruul Clans rely on each other 
even as they vie for territory and glory. Their encounters 
with members of other guilds are more often violent 
than friendly, but occasional bonds do form. 

Roll twice on the Gruul Contacts table (for an ally and 
a rival) and once on the Non-Gruul Contacts table. 


GRUUL CONTACTS 


d8 Contact 

1 One of my parents is a renowned warrior in my clan. 
2  Mysibling has the ear of the clan chief. 

3 Ihave cousins in a different clan. 

4 When we were younger, | was romantically involved 


with a prominent warrior in my clan. 
A druid in my clan believes | have a destiny to fulfill. 


nw 


The warrior who trained me remembers me for my 

exceptional potential. 

7 Myclan chief killed one of my parents, who had 
challenged the chief for leadership of the clan. Some 
combination of resentment and remorse stirs the 
clan chief to help me sometimes. 

8 | made a strong impression on Borborygmos. 


Non-GRuUL CONTACTS 
d10 Contact 

1 An Azorius arrester thinks | can be reformed. 

2 A Boros soldier gives me gifts in exchange for infor- 
mation about other clans’ movements. 
| once caught and released a Dimir spy. 

4  lconsult with a Golgari shaman for spiritual guidance 
at times. 

5 Roll an additional Gruul contact; you can decide if the 
contact is an ally or a rival. 

6 An Izzet scientist blames the Gruul for the destruc- 
tion of his life's work in a raid, but seems to think that 
I'm not like other Gruul. 

7 | foolishly borrowed money from an Orzhov syndic to 
indulge a shameful vice. 

8  Aclose friend left our clan and joined the Cult of 
Rakdos. 

9  Adistant relative is trying to recruit me into the 
Selesnya Conclave. 

10  Istopped a Simic biomancer from trapping wild 
beasts to perform vile experiments on them. 


How Do I Fit IN? 


In service of a simple goal, you have a simple part 

to play: Fight. Unleash your rage. Flatten buildings 
and defeat those who stand in your way. Be Gruul, in 
your own way. 

You will frequently be summoned to participate in a 
raid your clan is launching against the city or against a 
group of its defenders. Your clan leader might also send 
you on a special mission, though it would almost cer- 
tainly still qualify as a raid. You might join a small group 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


bI 


of Gruul warriors on a dangerous charge deep into the 
settled streets to plunder a certain location, retrieve an 
item stolen from your clan, or assault a Boros garrison. 

Sometimes your objective might be more esoteric. 
With prophecies of the return of Ilharg the Raze-Boar 
spreading like wildfire among the Gruul druids, you 
might be asked to carry out some task that the druids 
believe will speed his coming. Such a task might in- 
volve collecting a sacred relic held in an Orzhov vault or 
collecting sacrifices for a grand ceremony in the Raze- 
Boar's honor. 


A GRUUL PARTY 

A group of Gruul adventurers can serve as a raiding 
party to pursue the goals of one clan or the guild as 

a whole. The combination of anarchs and berserkers 
(fighters, rangers, and barbarians) with druids of the 
Old Ways (druids or clerics) creates a powerful mix of 
muscle and magic. Such a party lacks the capacity for 
subtlety or stealth, but Gruul missions rarely require 
such abilities. (A ranger can provide them, in the rare 
case where they are necessary.) 


RANK AND RENOWN 


Renown among the Gruul could also be called glory— 
when you prove yourself in battle, you earn the respect 
of your fellows. With glory comes acceptance of your 
leadership and warriors willing to follow you into battle. 
The Gruul have no formal holders of titles aside from 
the chieftains of clans and the guildmaster, but relative 
status within one's clan is still important. 


PROVEN 
Prerequisite: Renown 3 or higher in your clan 


With several battles under your belt, you have demon- 
strated service to your clan and earned the recognition 
of your peers. You have the right to tattoo your body to 
commemorate your triumphs in battle and demonstrate 
your loyalty to the Gruul. You don't yet have authority 
over others, but when you go into battle with your clan, 
your fellow warriors fight near you, acknowledging your 
prowess. Your clan chieftain knows your name and 
might decide to single you out, offering you an oppor- 
tunity to prove yourself by performing a special task. 
Depending on the nature of the task, the chieftain might 
send 1d4 anarchs (see chapter 6 for the stat block) 
along to help you. 


BEAST-FRIEND 
Prerequisite: Renown 10 or higher in your clan 


When you reach this level of renown, you develop a 
rapport with the beasts that haunt the rubblebelts. 
When you are in a rubblebelt area, you can summon one 
beast to be your mount: a batterboar (a giant boar as 
described in the Monster Manual), a ceratok (using the 
stat block of a rhinoceros), or a raktusk (equivalent to a 
giant elk). It doesn't fight for you unless you have magic 
or another ability that can control a beast. 

In addition, when you carry out a raid on the guild's 
behalf, a druid of your clan gives you a Gruul charm (de- 
scribed in chapter 5) at the start of the raid. 


CELEBRATED 
Prerequisite: Renown 25 or higher in your clan 


You are a hero in your clan, and your reputation extends 
to other clans as well. You can count on the aid of your 
clan in most situations. Your clan's druids cast spells 
for you, and you lead a warband that consists of 3d4 
anarchs (see chapter 6 for the stat block) plus three 
berserkers or ogres (see the Monster Manual for their 
stat blocks). 

Your chieftain keeps an eye on you, aware that you're 
a potential challenger for leadership of the clan. 


CHIEFTAIN 
Prerequisite: Renown 50 or hióher in your clan 

You can now rightfully challenge your chieftain in single 
combat for leadership of the clan or take the warriors 
loyal to you and form a new clan. 


ENEMIES AND ALLIES 


By standing in opposition to the civilized ways of the 
other guilds, the Gruul Clans have made it practically 
impossible to establish alliances with those guilds. 

Similar to the Golgari, Selesnya, and Simic, the Gruul 
respect nature and maintain a close relationship with 
animals—in the Gruul's case, the monstrous beasts that 
stalk the rubble and ruins. But the Gruul would just as 
soon smash the sewers, gardens, and laboratories of 
those other guilds than cooperate with them in an effort 
to establish nature as a larger presence within the city. 

Because they see all of the remaining guilds as cogs 
in the vast machine of civilization, the Gruul tailor their 
tactics toward breaking the machine, rather than direct- 
ing their attacks at any particular guild. Any guild can 
be the target of Gruul aggression, as the opportunity 
arises. The fiercest assaults often come against the 
guilds that take it upon themselves to combat the Gruul, 
primarily the Boros and Azorius. 

In certain circumstances, such as when some night- 
marish horror rears its head in the heart of a rubblebelt, 
you and your clan could accept the help of members of 
another guild in putting an end to the danger. Or, when 
the schemes of other guilds pit one clan against another, 
there might be some benefit to you and your clan in co- 
operating with those efforts. But your truest allies are 
other members of your clan. 


THE GRUUL VIEW ON OTHER GUILDS 


Since every other guild participates to some extent in the 
establishment and sustenance of the civilization that the 
Gruul despise, the Gruul look down on all other guilds as 
soft, corrupt, or downright abhorrent. 


Azorius. “Civilization is a disease, and the Azorius are its 
plague bearers. Once they are destroyed, Ravnica will 
reclaim its primal essence.” 

Boros. “Puppets who are all too eager to kneel at the feet 
of their angel handlers.” 

Dimir. “Skulkers, whisperers, and back-stabbers! They are 
an infestation of roaches. If they remain in the shadows, 
they will be crushed beneath the rubble of a city that we 
bring down on their heads. If they face us in open battle, 
well, then we'll have a good laugh.” 

Golgari. “Hermits and under-dwellers. They see that civili- 
zation must be brought to its knees, but they just want 
to replace it with another of their design.” 

Izzet. “Like us, they respect the powerful. But they seek it 
in their gadgets and try to contain it in jars.” 

Orzhov. “The schemers of the Orzhov are the festering 
wound on a limb that must be hacked away. They amass 
their power by preying on the weak, so how powerful 
can they be?” 

Rakdos. “The guild of fools. They waste their potential on 
acts of mockery while the real work of razing the city 
remains undone.” 

Selesnya. “The Selesnya would coddle a wolf, teach it to 
fetch sticks, and call it a dog. We prefer to starve the 
wolf, let it hunt for its food, and make it a stronger wolf.” 

Simic. “The Simic enjoy twisting nature, but they will not 
enjoy it when nature twists back.” 

be ee ee 


IZZET LEAGUE 


THE IZZET MAGES WEREN'T HARD TO FIND. AFTER A 
couple of days of observation, Jace heard an explosion and 
saw a startled flight of birds from across the district. The 
plume of blue smoke was a telltale sign of one of the Izzet's 
pyrotechnic experiments. Jace tracked the source of the 


blast and spied two mages, a human and a goblin, outfit- 
ted with alchemical gadgetry and mizzium gauntlets. They 
emerged from a disused tunnel, leaving behind charred 
bricks and a haze of smoke, and their instruments crackled 
with energy. From what Jace had gathered, this was the 
Izzet style of research: keep adding energy until something 
blows up, then observe the results. 

—Doug Beyer, Return to Ravnica: The Secretist 


The Izzet are obsessive experimenters, combining 

a keen creative intellect with a short attention span. 
The original mandate of the Izzet guild was to provide 
solutions for public works projects (sewers, boilers, 

and roadways), but their increasingly far-fetched experi- 
ments satisfy only their insatiable curiosity. Sometimes 
their experiments yield useful technological advance- 
ments; other times they produce unintended mana gey- 
sers, spatial rifts, arcane portals, or huge explosions— 
all of which can be useful in their own way. 

The league’s most grandiose experiments typically 
concern public works projects and elemental experi- 
mentation. These efforts use a methodology that relies 
on unexpected outcomes: all results are informative, 
even if they completely defy expectations. For example, 
an experiment that begins as the creation of a “hyper- 
mana focusing lens" might be renamed a "scram-range 
teleportal" once the researchers discover more prop- 
erties of what they have fashioned. Then, after a few 
goblin volunteers vanish inside it, the apparatus gains 
the designation of "universal refuse disintegrator"—until 
the goblin volunteers are discovered alive, having been 


teleported far from the workshop. This sort of adjust- 
ment is par for the course in Izzet experiments; the "fid- 
dle and find out" method is favored over any process of 
systematic scientific research. 

The Izzet League is one of the few guilds whose 
founder, the dragon Niv-Mizzet, remains its guildmaster, 
just as the guild continues to fulfill its original mission 
(even as its experiments go far beyond the guild's origi- 
nal mandate). 


INSIDE THE LEAGUE 


Niv-Mizzet, the original and current guildmaster of 
the Izzet League, is a fifteen-thousand-year-old, vain, 
temperamental, super-intelligent dragon. As he directs 
experiments throughout the guild, he values results 
over success, accepting and even anticipating that Izzet 
experiments will end in gloriously unpredictable ways. 
However, the dragon rarely concerns himself with the 
day-to-day running of the guild, preferring to craft long- 
range plans and let underlings implement the details. 
Overseeing the daily operations of the guild is the 
purview of the Izmundi, a board of directors that assem- 
bles teams from among the rank and file of the Izzet 
League to carry out research according to Niv-Mizzet's 
directions. The Izmagnus is a smaller board with five to 
seven members (some members' identities remain se- 
cret) who serve as Niv-Mizzet's closest advisors. 
al. Cn ———M——s a 
IN THE NAME OF MAGICAL SCIENCE! 
Izzet laboratories buzz with creative and often destructive 
energy, as countless researchers go about their business 
pushing the boundaries of knowledge. But the lure of dis- 
covery is anything but monolithic across the Izzet League. 

Humans, who make up the majority of the guild's 
mages, are fueled by limitless curiosity and sustained by 
their ability to approach any problem from a multitude of 
different angles. 

Goblins embody the Izzet's unrestrained enthusiasm for 
their endeavors. They epitomize the recklessness of Izzet 
mages, and some participate as subjects in hazardous ex- 
periments—even ones of their own devising. More often, 
they thrive in their role as attendants to researchers. 

Vedalken tend to be more focused, organized, and as- 
tute compared to their Izzet compatriots, and thus they 
often serve as leaders of projects in the guild's laborato- 
ries. Some vedalken are so obsessive about their work that 
they like to see to every detail themselves, rather than del- 
egating any task to underlings or assistants. This attitude 
can irritate and alienate their guild mates—and put the 
vedalken in harm’s way when an experiment goes awry. 

(RR —————— 


The Izzet League is organized into units designated as 
laboratories that specialize in certain fields of research. 
Though they all operate under the general guidance of 
the Izmundi, each laboratory is typically left alone to 
conduct its research. New fields of study emerge all the 
time, but the more established laboratories—each pop- 
ulated by hundreds of mages and their attendants—in- 
clude the following: 


The Laboratory of Pyrology has a prominent facility in 
the guildhall, Nivix. Its emphasis is on heat, fire, and 
explosion. 

The Laboratory of Storms and Electricity focuses on 
controlling the weather as well as containing and con- 
ducting electrical energy. Its headquarters is in a spire 
atop Nivix, known as the Lightning Rod. 

Research into smelting and forging, most often using 
the magical metal known as mizzium, is conducted at 
the Laboratory of Metallurgy, which has a small out- 
post in the Tenth District’s Smelting Quarter. 

The magical science of transmuting one substance to 
another is the study of the Laboratory of Alchemy. 

The Laboratory of Orientation, concerned with telepor- 
tation and spatial recombination, has multiple work- 
shops that seem to appear and disappear at random. 

The Laboratory of Mimeography studies means of 
duplication. 

The Laboratory of Continuism emphasizes the study of 
temporal manipulation. 

Research into counter-magic and redirection takes 
place in the Laboratory of Arcane Geometry, which 
has a small presence in Prism University in the 
Tenth District. 


The Laboratory of Gravitational Inversion conducts 
research on means of flight and maintains a workshop 
near Augustin Station in the Tenth District. 

The Laboratory of Plasma-Dermatology places em- 
phasis on the combining of opposing elements, with 
the purpose of creating creatures called weirds. 


Izzet laboratories function in a constant state of high 
energy that propels researchers from one experiment 
to the next. Some grand-scale experiments draw on the 
resources of an entire laboratory, while others are a lone 
visionary’s labor of love. 


GOALS OF THE IZZET 


The Izzet League thirsts for knowledge, cherishes intel- 
lect, and speculates about the secrets of the multiverse. 
It brings to its scientific pursuits a flaming passion that 
turns its search for knowledge into an insatiable hunger, 
makes its cold intellect brilliantly fruitful, and widens 
its speculation into a search for connections between 
wildly disparate objects or concepts. It is manic in its ex- 
pressions of creative energy, shifting from careful anal- 
ysis to intuitive leap seemingly for no reason, always 
thinking outside the proverbial box. As the Izzet see it, 
unpredictable action, far from being antithetical to me- 
thodical research, has experimental value. In the words 
of one researcher, “The only action worth taking is one 
with an unknown outcome.” 

As Ravnica descends into increasing turmoil, the 
Izzet have further intensified their frenetic research, 
though now their efforts are mainly directed toward one 


outcome: the development of super-weapons. The suspi- 
cion that festers in the mind of the Izzet guildmaster, the 
ancient dragon Niv-Mizzet, urges him to push his guild’s 
research toward increasingly dangerous and volatile ex- 
perimentation. 

For the rest of the guild members, the search for 
bigger and better weapons is mainly an opportunity to 
engage in all sorts of wild research while abandoning 
all outward pretense of safety or reason. Much of the 
guild’s laboratory space has been converted into testing 
grounds that are capable of withstanding great dis- 
charges of magical energy. 


IZZET CHARACTERS 


Alignment: Usually chaotic, often neutral 
Suggested Races: Human, goblin, vedalken 
Suggested Classes: Fighter, sorcerer, wizard 


You might enjoy playing a character who belongs to the 
Izzet League for any of the following reasons: 


* You like to make things happen and don't care about 
the consequences. 

* You're drawn to wild magic and dangerous explosions. 

* You want to be an innovative genius. 

+ You relish the madcap high jinks of goblins. 


JOINING THE IzzET LEAGUE 


Most Izzet recruits begin their careers as attendants. 

In the service of a more powerful mage, a crew of up 

to forty attendants engages in tasks such as recording 
and organizing information (sometimes under danger- 
ous circumstances), acquiring rare items or elements 
(usually under dangerous circumstances), or completing 
experiments (always under dangerous circumstances). 
Goblins relish this sort of work, while other folk seek 
promotion into a new position as quickly as possible. 

If you are a spellcaster, such as a sorcerer or a wizard, 
the easiest way up and out of your position is by proving 
your skill with magic. Most Izzet sorcerers get their 
magic from the Wild Magic origin, but a few claim a 
Draconic Bloodline. Izzet wizards tend to specialize in 
the School of Conjuration, Evocation, or Transmutation. 
As an Izzet spellcaster, you are probably connected to 
a particular laboratory, either one described in the "In- 
side the Izzet" section or a less prominent one focused 
on a narrower topic. You could be an independent re- 
searcher, a functionary devoted to carrying out errands 
for the guild's leadership, or a coordinator charged with 
synchronizing the efforts of different laboratories. 

Even though the work of the Izzet League is largely 
focused on magic and research, if you are a more 
martial-minded character you still have a role to play in 
the guild. Fighters with the Eldritch Knight archetype 
often serve as guards, protecting laboratories and the 
inventions contained within them, or you can aspire 
to the elite role of scorchbringer (which comes with a 
flame-throwing magic device called a pyroconverger, de- 
scribed in chapter 5). 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


BACKGROUND: IZZET ENGINEER 


Armed with an inventive intellect, a love of magical 
technology, and an unquenchable energy, you are an 
enthusiastic participant in the research work of the 
Izzet League. Though you're likely to begin your career 
as a mere attendant, you can aspire to become a skilled 
mage or alchemist, a laboratory supervisor, or even a 
flamethrower-wielding scorchbringer tasked with de- 
fending Izzet laboratories. The Izzet are obsessive, bril- 
liant, inspired, and an unpredictable force of chaos in 
Ravnica, and you epitomize all of those qualities. 


Skill Proficiencies: Arcana, Investigation 

Languages: Choose one of Draconic, Goblin, 
or Vedalken 

Tool Proficiencies: One type of artisan's tools 

Equipment: An Izzet insignia, one set of artisan's tools, 
the charred and twisted remains of a failed experi- 
ment, a hammer, a block and tackle, a set of common 
clothes, and a belt pouch containing 5 gp (Azorius 
l-zino coins) 


FEATURE: URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE 

The popular conception of the Izzet League is based 

on mad inventions, dangerous experiments, and ex- 
plosive blasts. Much of that perception is accurate, 

but the league is also involved with mundane tasks of 
construction and architecture—primarily in crafting the 
infrastructure that allows Ravnicans to enjoy running 
water, levitating platforms, and other magical and tech- 
nological wonders. 

You have a basic knowledge of the structure of build- 
ings, including the stuff behind the walls. You can also 
find blueprints of a specific building in order to learn the 
details of its construction. Such blueprints might pro- 
vide knowledge of entry points, structural weaknesses, 
or secret spaces. Your access to such information isn't 
unlimited. If obtaining or using the information gets you 
in trouble with the law, the guild can't shield you from 
the repercussions. 


IZZET GUILD SPELLS 
Prerequisite: Spellcasting or Pact Magic class feature 


For you, the spells on the Izzet Guild Spells table are 
added to the spell list of your spellcasting class. (If you 
are a multiclass character with multiple spell lists, these 
spells are added to all of them.) 


IZZET GUILD SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 


Cantrip produce flame, shocking grasp 

Ist chaos bolt, create or destroy water, 
unseen servant 

2nd heat metal, rope trick 

3rd call lightning, elemental weapon, 
glyph of warding 

4th conjure minor elementals, divination, 
Otiluke's resilient sphere 

5th animate objects, conjure elemental 


Your spells tend to be loud, flashy, or explosive, even 
when the effect is unremarkable. For example, when you 
open the portal of a rope trick spell, the portal might be 
outlined by harmless, showy sparkles. 

If you use an arcane focus, it probably takes the form 
of an intricate device that could include metal gauntlets, 
glass canisters, copper tubing, and leather straps attach- 
ing it to your body. The mizzium apparatus described in 
chapter 5 is a magical version of this gear. 

The chaos bolt spell is a favorite of Izzet spellcasters 
because of its unpredictable nature. 


SPELL: CHAOS BOLT 
Ist-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 120 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You hurl an undulating, warbling mass of chaotic energy 
at one creature in range. Make a ranged spell attack 
against the target. On a hit, the target takes 2d8 + 1d6 
damage. Choose one of the d8s. The number rolled 

on that die determines the attack's damage type, as 
shown below. 


Qa. 
oo 


Damage Type 
Acid 

Cold 

Fire 

Force 
Lightning 
Poison 
Psychic 
Thunder 


on OQ tn A Ut NS — 


If you roll the same number on both d8s, the chaotic 
energy leaps from the target to a different creature of 
your choice within 30 feet of it. Make a new attack roll 
against the new target, and make a new damage roll, 
which could cause the chaotic energy to leap again. 

A creature can be targeted only once by this casting of 
the spell. 


At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using 
a spell slot of 2nd level or higher, each target takes 
1d6 extra damage of the type rolled for each slot level 
above Ist. 


SuGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 

Members of the Izzet League embody some combination 
of chaotic, frenetic energy with intellectual curiosity, in 
varying proportions. Some are committed to academic 
pursuits, and others just like explosions. 


PERSONALITY TRAITS 


d8 
1 


Personality Trait 

| have a hard time staying focused on ... oh, and my 
brain tends to jump from one ... did | mention focus? 
| get really excited about my ideas and | can't wait to 
talk about them and start putting them into practice 
and tinkering with them and | want to tell you about 
how exciting it all is! 

It's not magic—or anything, really—if you do it only 
halfway. Whatever | do, | give it all I’ve got. 

| do what my gut tells me. 

Life's an experiment, and | can’t wait to see what 
happens. 

| pepper my speech with the incomprehensible jargon 
of my trade, like mizzium droplets inserted into a 
weird-field suspension. 

Great ideas are fine, but great results are what 
counts. 

If you can guess what I'm about to do, that means 
I’ve run out of imagination. 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 67 


68 


IDEALS 
d6 Ideal 

1 Guild. My guild is all that really matters. (Any) 

2 Creativity. Half the world's troubles come from 
stodgy thinking, stuck in the past. We need innovative 
solutions. (Chaotic) 

3 Discovery. Every experiment has the potential to 
reveal more secrets of the multiverse. (Any) 

4 Science. A rigorous application of logical principles 
and protocols will lead us toward progress more 
surely than any belief system. (Lawful) 

5  Fun.llove my job! Despite the dangerous working 
conditions, there's nothing I'd rather do. (Chaotic) 

6 Power. Someday I'll find or create the magic that will 
make me the most powerful being in Ravnica. (Evil) 


BONDS 
d6 Bond 

1 Ihave dedicated my life to finding a solution to a 
scientific problem. 

2 I'll never forget the laboratory where | learned my 
skills, or the other attendants who learned alongside 
me. 

3 I'm convinced it was sabotage that destroyed my first 


laboratory and killed many of my friends, and | seek 
revenge against whoever did it. 
4  lhavethe schematics for an invention that | hope to 
build one day, once | have the necessary resources. 
5 A fellow student and | are racing to solve the same 
scientific puzzle. 


6  Iwould do anything the guildmaster told me to do. 
FLAWS 
dé  Flaw 


1  Ifthere's a plan, I'll probably forget it. If | don't forget 
it, I'll probably ignore it. 

2  Igetbored easily, and if nothing is happening I'll 
make something happen. 

3 Nothing is ever simple, and if it seems simple, I'll find 
a way to make it complicated. 


4 | tend to ignore sleep for days when I'm conducting 
research, often at the expense of my own health and 
safety. 

5 I'm convinced there's not a soul in Ravnica, except 


maybe the great Niv-Mizzet, who can match my 
boundless intellect. 
6 — l'm incapable of admitting a flaw in my logic. 


CONTACTS 
The laboratories of the Izzet League are constantly 
starting up new projects and dissolving old ones, so it's 
easy for even the lowliest attendant to make friends (and 
enemies) in laboratories across Ravnica. 

Roll twice on the Izzet Contacts table (for an ally and a 
rival) and once on the Non-Izzet Contacts table. 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


IZZET CONTACTS 


d8 Contact 
1  Anolder relative is a member of the guild's board of 
directors. 
2  lknowa sprite who carries important messages 


among the guild’s laboratories. 

3  Asibling is the head of a laboratory doing exotic 
research. 

4 A former colleague is now an attendant in a labora- 
tory in the central guildhall. 

5  |I'minregular communication with an instructor who 
set me on the course of my life and research. 

6  lhada romance with a chemister working in the 
Blistercoils. 

7 Asan attendant, | had a fierce rivalry with another 
attendant for our supervisor's attention. 

8  Theguildmaster, Niv-Mizzet, took note of one of my 
experiments! 


NoN-IzzeT CONTACTS 


d10 Contact 
1 An Azorius inspector seems interested in my work. 
2 Iwas ready to join the Boros before | decided on 


Izzet, and | sometimes still hear from the sergeant 
who tried to recruit me. 

3 One of my former assistants turned out to be a Dimir 
spy. We're not on friendly terms anymore, but we 
have a habit of running into each other. 

4 AGolgari assassin killed a bitter rival of mine, leaving 
me with conflicted feelings. 

5  lhelped a minor Gruul chieftain acquire an Izzet 
weapon. 

6 Rollan additional Izzet contact; you can decide if the 
contact is an ally or a rival. 

7 An Orzhov banker financed my laboratory's current 
work and expects great returns. 

8  lhavea cousin in the Cult of Rakdos, and we get 
along quite well. 

9 A former attendant from the same laboratory ran off 
to join the Selesnya, and we get into a big argument 
every time we run into each other. 

10  lcompare notes and techniques with a Simic scientist 
over lunch sometimes. 


How Do I Fit IN? 


Whatever your role in the Izzet League, you are ex- 
pected to contribute to its research in some way. 

That contribution might involve participating in tests, 
whether as an assistant, a researcher, or a subject. You 
might be one of the soldiers who protects a laboratory, 
or a laborer responsible for lifting heavy pieces of equip- 
ment into place. Everyone's contribution matters, even if 
the Izzet know that some matter more than others. 


AN IZzzET PARTY 

A party made up entirely of Izzet members might be 

a mage (wizard or sorcerer) accompanied by guards 
(fighters) and attendants (any class). The structure of the 
guild generally assumes that the mage is in charge of 
steering the group, but it's possible for any of the other 
characters to be the true brains of the operation. This 
party lacks healing ability, but alchemist-crafted healing 
potions can help sustain the party in the absence of a 
dedicated healer. 


RANK AND RENOWN 


Renown within the Izzet League brings with it more 
responsibility in your chosen field of study, as well as an 
increasing ability to choose the activities that interest 
you. This greater responsibility and independence is 
reflected in a progression of ranks, from that of a mere 
attendant to a coveted position on the Izmagnus. 


RANK l: RESEARCHER 
Prerequisite: Renown 3 or higher in the Izzet League, 
Spellcasting or Pact Magic class feature 


When you have advanced the guild’s interests and sur- 
vived a few magical experiments, you graduate into a 
position where you can conduct experiments yourself. 
Only a spellcaster can craft and operate the laboratory 
equipment involved in Izzet experiments. 

As a researcher, you can request equipment for use in 
your experiments and during adventures. You can se- 
cure the aid of 1d4 barely competent attendants to assist 
you. Your attendants use the commoner stat block in 
the Monster Manual. 


When you achieve this rank, you can help create your 
own mizzium apparatus (described in chapter 5). To 
do so, you must spend 10 days of downtime in an Izzet 
workshop, assisting a more experienced researcher in 
the construction of the device. The apparatus is given 
to you at the end of this time. If your apparatus is lost or 
destroyed, you can create a replacement by spending 50 
gp and another 10 days of downtime. 


SCORCHBRINGER (SPECIAL ROLE) 
Prerequisite: Renown 3 or higher in the Izzet League 


Scorchbringers are soldiers assigned to protect Izzet 
laboratories. As a scorchbringer, you are given a pyro- 
converger (described in chapter 5) and are expected to 
use it in the defense of Izzet property. If your pyrocon- 
verger is lost or destroyed, you can get a replacement 
for 50 gp. 


RANK 2: SUPERVISOR 
Prerequisite: Renown 10 or higher in the Izzet League 


Whether you're an accomplished researcher, a commit- 
ted soldier, or even a dedicated (and skilled) attendant, 
you are eligible for promotion to a supervisor position. 
As a supervisor, you oversee your former peers. Your 
role is primarily to translate the instructions of the di- 
rector above you into concrete tasks that the people who 
report to you can accomplish. 

If your director sends you on a mission outside the lab- 
oratory, you receive an Izzet charm (described in chapter 
5) at the start of that mission. 

As a supervisor, you earn a salary sufficient to main- 
tain a modest lifestyle. 


INDEPENDENT RESEARCHER (SPECIAL ROLE) 
Prerequisite: Rank 1 and renown 10 or higher in the 
Izzet League, Spellcastiné or Pact Magic class feature 


Not every researcher chooses to advance through the 
ranks of management to become a supervisor. As an in- 
dependent researcher, you can use the resources of your 
laboratory to conduct any kind of experiment. Assisting 
you in your research are 2d6 competent attendants (use 
the commoner stat block in the Monster Manual, and 
give them proficiency in the Arcana skill). 

In addition, you can create your own Izzet charm (de- 
scribed in chapter 5), given 5 days of work and access to 
your laboratory. When you do so, any other charms you 
have created vanish. 


RANK 3: DIRECTOR 
Prerequisite: Renown 25 or higher in the Izzet League 


You oversee a laboratory and all its personnel. In addi- 
tion, as a director, you are eligible to join the Izmundi, 
the Izzet board of directors, as a representative of your 
laboratory. You must have the approval of Niv-Mizzet, 
and a position on this board usually becomes available 
only if a vacancy opens up. If you assemble your own 
laboratory, you can be added to the board as an addi- 
tional member. 

It's up to the Izmundi to assemble the correct team 
to carry out the guildmaster's directives. The Izmundi 
decides which laboratory should have primary responsi- 
bility for any given project, and the director of that labo- 
ratory is responsible for assigning people to the team. 

Within the bounds of Niv-Mizzet's directives, you 
have wide latitude in directing the activities of your 
laboratory. That means you can steer the researchers of 
your laboratory toward the creation of particular items 
or effects. 

Between adventures, you can maintain yourself at a 
comfortable lifestyle as a member of the Izmundi. 


RANK 4: ADVISOR 
Prerequisite: Rank 3 and renown 50 or higher in the 
Izzet League 


As one of the most famous members of the guild, you 
are eligible to join the ranks of the Izmagnus. The deci- 
sion to include you on this board is solely Niv-Mizzet's. 
The number of members on the board isn’t fixed, so you 
don't need to wait for a vacancy. 

As a member of the Izmagnus, you have the ear of the 
dragon guildmaster. You can never be fully aware of the 
scope of his plans, but you know more about them than 
anyone aside from the other members of the board. The 
guildmaster listens to your opinion, even though you're 
not an ancient dragon with thousands of years of accu- 
mulated knowledge and wisdom. Ultimately, Niv-Mizzet 
tells you what to do—and you (along with your peers) tell 
the rest of the guild how to do it. 

As a member of the Izmagnus, you can maintain your- 
self at a wealthy lifestyle between adventures. 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


ENEMIES AND ALLIES 


The Izzet have difficulty relating to the concerns of other 
guilds. The closest affinity they feel for another guild is 
their respect for the scientific minds of the Simic—but 
from the Izzet viewpoint, the Simic efforts lack passion. 
Conversely, the Izzet can appreciate the passion of the 
Boros, Gruul, and Rakdos, but they don't agree with the 
goals those passions are directed toward. 

The Izzet have a reputation for unprovoked aggres- 
sion, spurred by the ambition of Niv-Mizzet. From your 
perspective as a guild member, the ancient dragon has 
a good reason for everything he does. If you are sent 
to test a new weapon against a suspected Dimir safe 
house, a Gruul camp, or a deceptively peaceful Selesnya 
enclave, those must surely be dangerous foes of the 
Izzet. You are also bound to oppose the Dimir when they 
steal the secrets of your laboratory's research, the Gruul 
when they smash the delicate equipment that supports 
your life's work, and the Boros and the Azorius if they 
decide that your work presents a danger to the city or 
breaks some obscure law. 

Sometimes members of other guilds can help advance 
your research, intentionally or otherwise. The Izzet are 
intelligent enough to recognize their weaknesses, and 
adventuresome souls from other guilds can offset those 
weaknesses. The healing spells of Boros clerics can be 
an invaluable aid, and if a cyclops isn't available to lend 
its brute strength to your work, a Boros minotaur or a 
Selesnya centaur can fill the need nicely. 
LA —A———É——Á— M—— PB 

THE IZZET VIEW ON OTHER GUILDS 

To the lively intellect of the Izzet, the members of Ravnica’s 

other guilds seem slow, dull, and utterly lacking in the 

spirit of scientific inquiry and experimentation. 


Azorius. “The Azorius create regulations for everything, 
including freedom. What dull, shackled lives they lead.” 

Boros. “All too often when we're on the verge of setting off 
a little explosion or a spell that tears a hole in reality, the 
Boros show up to spoil the fun.” 

Dimir. “The less we see of the Dimir, the more we know 
they are monitoring us.” 

Golgari. “They keep to themselves and clean up our 
messes. As long as they stay out of sight, it's hard to 
view them as a threat.” 

Gruul. "They're even better at wrecking our laboratories 
than we are!” 

Orzhov. “Progress means taking risks. But when you gam- 
ble with the Orzhov, you always wager more than coin.” 

Rakdos. “Steer clear of these senseless riot-fiends. Their 
enthusiasm is best appreciated from a distance.” 

Selesnya. “These zealots run with beasts and worship fig- 
ments of the past. They would be wiser to embrace the 
wonders of the future.” 

Simic. “The Simic are inventive, but their creations are 
bereft of soul and fire. They tinker with life but lack the 
inspiration to breathe true spirit into their inventions.” 

————M ll 


ORZHOV SYNDICATE 


REPRESENTING THE ORZHOV WAS A TALL, WELL-DRESSED 


noblewoman Jace didn't recognize. The identities of the 
Orzhov knights around her were concealed by full helmets; 
instead of faces they bore only the Orzhov's black sunburst 
symbol. Small, ugly, gray-skinned servant creatures at- 
tended to their black capes. 

—Doug Beyer, Return to Ravnica: The Secretist 


Wealth is power, and you absolutely can take it with you 
if you're an undying spirit living in decadent luxury on 
the ruling council of the Orzhov Syndicate. Built on the 
crushed dreams and broken bodies of citizens deeply 
indebted to the syndicate's banks and loan sharks, 
Orzhov's elaborate hierarchy of syndics, priests, and 
oligarchs exists for the single purpose of funneling 
wealth to the top. Beneath the twin facades of religious 
hierarchy and banking operation, Orzhov is an orga- 
nized crime syndicate with its fingers in businesses 
across the city. 

The Orzhov's original function was both religious 
and financial, with the two functions closely related. 

As Ravnica's dominant church, the Orzhov continues 

to preach an oppressive message that equates sin with 
debt and promises forgiveness to those who make tithes 
and donations. As Ravnica's principal bank, it stores 
and secures the riches of the city, collecting interest 

at high rates to expand its own wealth. Its members 
truly believe that their work is necessary to the proper 
functioning of Ravnica. Although most other Ravnicans 
see the Orzhov for the corrupt organization it is, many 
people are still dazzled by the syndicate's promises of 
wealth, prestige, and longevity. 

The Ghost Council, also called the Obzedat, that leads 
the Orzhov founded the guild and signed the Guildpact, 
but it isn't clear which members of the original Obzedat 
might have faded from existence since then and which 
current members have joined since. 


INSIDE THE SYNDICATE 


The Orzhov are ruled by the iron-fisted Obzedat, a coun- 
cil consisting of the oldest and most powerful undead 
oligarchs. A vast hierarchy stretches out beneath them, 
so most of your interactions with the leadership of the 
guild are with people (or spirits) who occupy the rank 
just above yours. This hierarchy has corruption in it 
at every level, and at any time your superiors might be 
passing instructions down from on high or just using 
you to pursue their own agendas of greed and ambition. 
Orzhov churches and basilicas are scattered across 
the city, each one led by a ministrant with a staff of 
knights and syndics. These sites are centers of com- 
merce clothed in the trappings of religion, where lowly 
borrowers come to seek atonement for their sins—atone- 
ment that is given in the form of debt and obligation. 
Orzhov attorneys and advokists maintain offices near 
New Prahv and other Azorius courts. Despite their prox- 
imity to law enforcement, these offices are centers of op- 
eration for Orzhov protection rackets and other criminal 
activities. 


GOALS OF THE ORZHOV 


The Orzhov Syndicate is dedicated to the quest for 
power. It sees the value in an organized, structured, 
law-abiding community, because it is adept at exploiting 
laws and structures for its own gain. It sees itself, in a 
perfect world, as the arbiter and enforcer of a social or- 
der that keeps everyone in their place and the Orzhov in 
the highest place. 

Increasing tensions in Ravnica have led to an atmo- 
sphere of instability, and to counter this, the Orzhov 
Syndicate promises the trappings of a stable, ordered 
life amid the chaos—for a price. The Orzhov believe that 
adherence to hierarchy is the key to success, and they 
find great comfort in the rigid structure of their guild. 

To boost their declining profits in a vacillating econ- 
omy, the Orzhov have begun offering protection ser- 
vices, promising to shield their "customers" from both 
physical harm and fiscal disaster. These operations 
amount to racketeering, bringing with them the under- 
lying threat that those who refuse to pay for protection 
become targets of the Orzhov's thugs and enforcers. 

The Azorius are the greatest threat to Orzhov's opera- 
tions. In times past, the Orzhov danced along the edges 
of the law and presented an appearance of legality, but 
the combination of an ever-expanding legal code and the 
guild's move into racketeering and other explicitly illegal 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 71 


activities has made it vulnerable to Azorius enforce- 
ment. So far, the Azorius have demonstrated more inter- 
est in cracking down on the chaotic activity of the Gruul 
and the Rakdos, but Azorius arresters also routinely 
shut down Orzhov protection rackets and take enforc- 
ers into custody. To make matters worse, the Azorius 
Senate’s increasing use of precognitive magic is proving 
difficult for the Orzhov to work around. 

So far, the syndicate’s most effective tactic has been 
to increase the layers of separation between the day-to- 
day criminal operations of the guild and the leadership, 
ensuring that no matter how many street-level thugs and 
syndics are apprehended to fill the Azorius prisons, the 
guild's leadership remains intact. Contact between the 
oligarchs and lower-ranking members of the guild is 
increasingly rare in this situation, and even the pontiffs 
find it ever more difficult to arrange a hearing with their 
superiors. 


ORZHOV CHARACTERS 


Alignment: Usually lawful, often evil 
Suggested Races: Human 
Suggested Classes: Cleric, fighter, rogue, wizard 


You might enjoy playing a character who belongs 
to the Orzhov Syndicate if any of the following sen- 
tences are true: 


* You want to move through the corrupt underbelly 
of society and make respectable people squirm in 
your presence. 

* You enjoy playing fearsome or decadent characters. 

* You want to strive for wealth, lavish beauty, or both. 


JOINING THE ORZHOV SYNDICATE 


At the beginning of your association with the Orzhov, 
you are regarded as a borrower. Whether you are the 
wealthy scion of an oligarch family or a penniless citi- 
zen deep in debt to the guild, your status is functionally 
equivalent: you owe everything you have, even your life, 
to the Orzhov. Your only hope of improving your status 
is through your service to the guild. As you acquire re- 
nown, you can rise above this debased position in the 
guild hierarchy. Choose one of three parallel tracks of 
advancement, depending on your capabilities: advokist, 
enforcer, or priest. 


ADVOKIST 

If you are a spellcaster (perhaps a wizard specialized in 
the School of Abjuration, Divination, or Enchantment), 
you can aspire to be an advokist—one of the syndicate's 
lawyers, with duties that include overseeing contracts, 
representing clients in Azorius courts, and prosecuting 
those who fail to pay their debts. Some clerics of the Or- 
der Domain also choose to pursue this path. 

Many advokists draw on the power of law magic to en- 
force regulations and contracts to the advantage of the 
guild. They use their magic to draw out the truth from 
debtors and those who dare to break their contracts 
with the guild, to ensure that petitioners approach with 
the proper humility, and to punish those who offend 
them or violate their contracts. Some advokists (partic- 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


ularly specialists in the School of Abjuration) also deal 
in encrypting texts, warding vaults and secret meeting 
rooms, fortifying structures, and cloaking important 
personages in magical protections. 


ENFORCER 

Enforcers guard Orzhov property and protect the guild’s 
bureaucrats, administrators, and aristocrats. You might 
be the muscle who collects protection money and debt 
payments from the syndicate’s clients, or an assassin 
(euphemistically called a euthanist) who brings speedy 
ends to lives deemed to have gone on too long. Most 
Orzhov enforcers are fighters. Rogue enforcers typically 
emulate the Thief or Assassin archetype. 


PRIEST 

If you are cleric (most likely of the Order Domain), you 
can aspire to serve an important function in the Orzhov 
Syndicate, which continues to maintain the outward 
appearance of a religious institution. Once you earna 
position of respect in the syndicate, you will hear confes- 
sions and dole out penance (which is always of a finan- 
cial nature). Your “calling” centers on collecting mone- 
tary tithes and offerings in a wide range of forms. Your 
spellcasting ability comes from the collective power of 
the spirits that rule the guild, not from a god. 

You might even be a most unusual priest for the syndi- 
cate—one who thinks the guild’s wealth should be used 
to ease the suffering of the downtrodden. You might 
also believe in the inspiration and delight that beautiful 
pageantry can offer to the world. If you seek to distribute 
wealth and share beauty, rather than hoard them, you 
must do so discreetly to avoid the ire of the Obzedat. 


BACKGROUND: ORZHOV 
REPRESENTATIVE 


The prospect of immense wealth is the promise of 
membership in the Orzhov Syndicate. All of the guild’s 
endeavors channel wealth from Ravnican society into 
the ranks of the Orzhov—and concentrates the spoils 
at the top of the hierarchy. As a functionary in that sys- 
tem, your best hope is to claim as much as possible of 
the money that passes through your hands on its way 
up, so that you can work your way into a more promi- 
nent position. 

Regardless of your past and the wealth of your family, 
your initial status with the guild is near the bottom, until 
you have proven your value. 


Skill Proficiencies: Intimidation, Religion 

Languages: Two of your choice 

Equipment: An Orzhov insignia, a foot-long chain made 
of ten gold coins, vestments, a set of fine clothes, 
and a belt pouch containing 1 pp (an Orzhov-minted 
10-zino coin) 


FEATURE: LEVERAGE 

You can exert leverage over one or more individuals 
below you in the guild’s hierarchy and demand their 

help as needs warrant. For example, you can have a 
message carried across a neighborhood, procure a short 
carriage ride without paying, or have others clean up a 


L IC? "I 


bloody mess you left in an alley. The DM decides if your 
demands are reasonable and if there are subordinates 
available to fulfill them. As your status in the guild im- 
proves, you gain influence over more people, including 
ones in greater positions of power. 


OnzHov GUILD SPELLS 
Prerequisite: Spellcasting or Pact Magic class feature 


For you, the spells on the Orzhov Guild Spells table are 
added to the spell list of your spellcasting class. (If you 
are a multiclass character with multiple spell lists, these 
spells are added to all of them.) 


OrZHOV GUILD SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 


Cantrip friends, guidance 
lst command, illusory script 
2nd enthrall, ray of enfeeblement, zone of truth 
3rd bestow curse, speak with dead, spirit guardians 
4th blight, death ward, Leomund's secret chest 
5th geas 


Your magic tends to manifest as swirling shadows, 
brilliant light, or sometimes the momentary appearance 
of shadowy spirit forms. Your spells might draw the 


blood of your enemies, or even directly touch their souls. 


SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 

Members of the Orzhov Syndicate range from the deca- 
dent nobility at the top of the oligarchy to the debt-ridden 
wretches at the bottom. You fall somewhere between 
those extremes, so you might behave with the arrogance 
of the very rich or the humility of the impoverished. 


PERSONALITY TRAITS 


d8 Personality Trait 

1 | am always willing to act in accordance with the 
financial incentive offered. 

2 Debts are never meant to be forgiven. 

3 lam accustomed to enjoying the finest pleasures 
money can buy. 

4 Noone could doubt that | am a cut above the masses 
of pitiful peasants that infest the city. 


5 [can't stand to spend a zib more than necessary to 
purchase what | need. 

6  lhateit when people try to make light of a serious 
situation. 

7 _| want to make sure everyone is aware of how wealthy, 


powerful, and important | am. 
8 I can’t think of anything to look forward to. 


IDEALS 
d6 Ideal 

1 Guild. My guild is all that really matters. (Any) 

2 Wealth. | will do whatever it takes to become as rich 
as the oligarchs. (Evil) 

3 Power. One day, | will be the one giving orders. (Evil) 

4 Prestige. | want to be admired, respected, feared, or 
even hated for my position and wealth. (Evil) 

5 Stability. The economy functions best when chaos is 
kept under control and everyone knows their place. 
(Lawful) 

6 Eternity. | want to live forever—in the flesh as long as 
possible, and as a spirit afterward. (Any) 


BONDS 
d6 Bond 


1 The unbearable weight of my debt has driven me to 
desperation. 


2 I'm duty-bound to obey the dictates of an ancestor on 
the Ghost Council. 

3  Ivalue my worldly goods more highly than my mortal 
life. 


4  Anoligarch publicly humiliated me, and | will exact 
revenge on that whole family. 

5 My faith in the Obzedat never wavers. 

6  lwantto prove myself more worthy than an older sib- 
ling and thereby ensure that | inherit a greater share 
of my parents’ wealth. 


FLAWS 
d6 Flaw 
1 hold a scandalous secret that could ruin my family 


forever—but could also earn me the favor of the 
Ghost Council. 


2 l'm convinced that everyone | know is plotting against 
me. 

3  llbraveany risk if the monetary reward is great 
enough, 

4 lam convinced that | am far more important than 


anyone else is willing to acknowledge. 

5 Ihave little respect for anyone who isn't wealthy. 
I'll take any opportunity to steal from wealthier 
people, even for worthless trinkets. 


CONTACTS 
The Orzhov Syndicate operates according to a strict 
hierarchy built on a network of connections among old, 
wealthy families. Your family might provide import- 
ant contacts, while your family's activities in crime, 
banking, or debt collection could tie you to members of 
other guilds. 

Roll twice on the Orzhov Contacts table (for an ally 
and a rival) and once on the Non-Orzhov Contacts table. 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNIK( 


OnzHov CONTACTS 
d8 Contact 
The spirit of an ancestor has taken an interest in me. 
An older cousin has the ear of a powerful oligarch. 
| know a knight who is responsible for collecting 
debts from powerful people. 
4  Avampire pontiff tried to use me as a pawn in past 
schemes. 
A silent spirit follows me around. 
A sibling has keys to parts of Vizkopa Bank. 
A giant thinks I'm adorable. 
| regularly offer tribute to an angel, and the angel has 
been kind to me in turn. 


on O^ tin 


NoN-OnzHov CONTACTS 


d10 Contact 

1 An Azorius arrester is always snooping into my 
family’s business transactions. 

2 A Boros paladin saved my life, to my everlasting 
shame. 

3  lknow a shopkeeper who is secretly a Dimir agent 
and tries to make sure that | keep that secret hidden. 

4  I'mfascinated by the culture of the Golgari kraul, and 
| have formed a friendship with one of their death 
priests. 

5 A Gruul druid hates me but would never dare to 
touch me. 

6  Iknowan Izzet engineer who is desperate to pay off a 
debt accrued by a deceased relative. 

7 Roll an additional Orzhov contact; you can decide if 
the contact is an ally or a rival. 

8  Mychildhood friend is now a Rakdos torturer. We still 
meet for drinks occasionally. 

9 Ihave the key to a vault where a Selesnya druid is 
hiding an item of secret shame. 

10 Iwas married to a Simic bioengineer. 


How Do I Fit IN? 


The structure of the Orzhov Syndicate means that you 
are always doing the bidding of someone higher up the 
ladder than you are. Ultimately, your role in the guild is 
defined by whatever the people (and spirits) above you 
decide for you. 

For most of your career, you can expect to engage in 
some aspect of the day-to-day criminal operations of the 
guild. That can mean throwing your weight around to 
enforce the will of the guild or using religious authority 
to extort offerings from the people. But it can also mean 
doing various errands for your superiors, from bearing 
messages to carrying out assassinations. 


AN ORZHOV PARTY 

An Orzhov adventuring party might be assembled in one 
of two ways. If its primary purpose is the application of 
brute force, some number of hulking enforcers (fighters) 
form the core of the ground, perhaps supported by a 


stealthy “euthanist” (rogue) and a knight (paladin). A 
priest (cleric) could provide additional magical support. 
If the group is more focused on the political schem- 

ing of the Orzhov, involving the use of persuasion and 
coercion rather than outright force, a priest (cleric) and 
an advokist (wizard) will probably lead the group, ac- 
companied by more sophisticated bodyguards (fighters 
or rogues). 


RANK AND RENOWN 


The Orzhov adhere to a very strict power structure. Po- 
sitions open only at the bottom of the organization, and 
rising through the ranks requires utmost devotion. With 
increasing rank comes a greater degree of leverage over 
those who occupy the ranks below you. 


RANK 1: SYNDIC 
Prerequisite: Renown 3 or higher in the Orzhov 
Syndicate 


Syndics are low-ranking functionaries. At this level of 
the hierarchy, you can expect deference from borrowers, 
who will perform small favors that require no significant 
risk, effort, or cost. The bulk of your work for the guild, 
in turn, involves doing favors for those above you. 

As a priest of this rank, you can perform minor tasks 
in an Orzhov church: collecting tithes at the door, sched- 
uling appointments for the senior priests, keeping led- 
gers, and the like. As an advokist, you copy documents, 
research legal precedent, depose witnesses, and other- 
wise assist more senior guild members. As an enforcer, 
you flex your muscle to collect minor debts that are of 
little importance to the guild as a whole. 


RANK 2: KNIGHT 
Prerequisite: Rank 1 and renown 10 or higher in the 
Orzhov Syndicate 


Each knight carries a title that expresses a quality 

of character, such as Knight of Penance or Knight of 
Despair. As a knight, you have authority over syndics, 
and you are trusted—so far as anyone in the Orzhov 
Syndicate trusts anyone else—to transport large sums of 
money. You also have access to sufficient funds to main- 
tain a comfortable lifestyle between adventures. 

As a priest of this rank, you hear confessions and 
collect penance, lead rites (and take offerings), perform 
ceremonies, and offer counsel to your superiors when 
asked. As an advokist, you represent clients in court, 
draw up contracts, and put your magic to use in a variety 
of ways. As an enforcer, you are entrusted with collect- 
ing larger sums and interacting with powerful clients. 

When you're sent on a mission that poses a potential 
threat, your superior bestows on you an Orzhov charm 
(described in chapter 5). In addition, you have the au- 
thority to demand service from borrowers, including 
indentured spirits (see chapter 6 for the stat block). 

But that’s an authority you must use sparingly, since 
their service counts as credit to their debt, and it’s in the 
guild’s interest to keep borrowers in debt. 


RANK 3: MINISTRANT 

Prerequisite: Rank 2 and renown 25 or higher in the 
Orzhov Syndicate 

The rank of ministrant is the highest position anyone 
can hope to attain without being born into the guild. 
As a ministrant, you study finance, while managing the 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 75 


syndics and knights under your control. Between adven- 
tures, you can now maintain a wealthy lifestyle. 

You are given a servitor thrull (see chapter 6 for the 
stat block) that is yours to command. If it is killed, your 
pontiff gives you a new one at their discretion, possi- 
bly up to 1d4 weeks later. You also have a staff of 2d4 
knights and 4d8 syndics under your command. You can 
order them only to carry out tasks that contribute to the 
work your pontiff assigns to you. The duty of protecting 
you from physical harm is always appropriate service for 
your knights, however. Your knights can be knights or 
priests, and your syndics are either nobles or acolytes 
(stat blocks for them appear in the Monster Manual). 


RANK 4: PONTIFF 
Prerequisite: Rank 3 and renown 50 or higher in the 
Orzhov Syndicate, Orzhov birth 


As a pontiff, you are one of the executive managers in 
charge of enacting the will of the Ghost Council. For 
that purpose, you have a staff of 2d6 ministrants (use 
the mage or priest stat blocks from the Monster Manual 
to represent them), with their attendant knights and 
syndics as described for rank 3. You have access to 2d4 
servitor thrulls and winged thrulls (see chapter 6 for 
these stat blocks) at any given time, to carry messages 
and perform menial tasks for you. You also gain the 
occasional privilege of speaking with members of the 
Obzedat. Between adventures, you can maintain an aris- 
tocratic lifestyle. 


ENEMIES AND ALLIES 


A syndicate built on a foundation of exploitation and 
extortion can't rely on alliances. The Orzhov appreciate 


certain aspects of other guilds' work and missions, but 
they treat other guilds as resources to be plundered. In 
general, the Orzhov view guilds that promote order and 
stability (Azorius, Boros, and Selesnya) more kindly 
than guilds that sow chaos and destruction (such as Gol- 
gari and Rakdos). 

Sometimes adherence to order can get in the way of 
an efficient crime operation, though, and that's when the 
Orzhov part ways with the other law-and-order guilds— 
especially the Azorius. Any guild that obstructs the Or- 
zhov from amassing more wealth is an enemy, whether 
the disruption comes from horning in on Orzhov opera- 
tions or enforcing laws against racketeering. 

The best way to secure individual allies from other 
guilds is to make them owe you something. Borrowers 
seldom make friendly or especially loyal allies, but they 
can be useful pawns. You might form a genuine alliance 
with members of other guilds if you share a common en- 
emy: the overreaching Azorius or Boros, the spies of the 
Dimir or assassins of the Golgari, or the rampages and 
excesses of the Gruul and Rakdos. Alternatively, you 
might team up with members of a chaotic guild to bring 
down an opponent that is causing too much trouble for 
Orzhov operations. 
Ee 

THE ORZHOV VIEW ON OTHER GUILDS 

In the eyes of the Orzhov Syndicate, the other guilds pri- 

marily represent either opportunities for exploitation or 

dangerous threats to its way of life. 


Azorius. “Their new laws challenge everything we know 
Ravnica stands for. If they will not protect the people, 
then we will do it for them.” 

Boros. “Though their structure is reasonable, they are 
naive in their outlook on justice. What glory is there in 
risking one's life when work continues in the afterlife?” 

Dimir. "It's hard to begrudge them their love of secrets. 

As long as they stay out of our business, we will 
leave them be.” 

Golgari. “Admirably resourceful and elegant, but tragically 
unhygienic. The swarmers may persist, as long as they 
don’t try to force their aesthetic sensibilities on us.” 

Gruul. “They know nothing of order and dignity, and there- 
fore they serve little purpose as an organization.” 

Izzet. "Combative and obnoxious. Their allegiance lies with 
no one, and their naiveté isn’t worth our time.” 

Rakdos. “A necessary source of creativity and satire. Wit 
is a dangerous weapon, and their critiques speak to the 
people more than fear and surveillance ever will.” 

Selesnya. “The Selesnya are idealistic fools. Looking 
toward nature ignores the problems at hand in the civi- 
lized world.” 

Simic. “Their preoccupation with life disregards the might 

that death can provide.” 


CulT OF RAKDOS 


JACE WALKED INTO THE RAKDOS CLUB, PUSHING INTO 
a wall of scents and sounds. The ceilings were surprisingly 
high inside, draped with banners and spiked chains. An 
impish creature hooted as it dangled from a high wire while 
aman in leather chaps swallowed orbs of fire and breathed 
them back out through his snaggly teeth. Scarred, black- 
scaled drakes fought viciously in cages that swung from the 
ceiling, and the stink of sweat and singed flesh wafted from 
adjoining alcoves. Against the wall stood an enormous sen- 
try, somewhere along the spectrum between rotund man 
and compact giant, dressed in what looked like the motley 
of a harlequin jester crossed with barbed wire. 

—Doug Beyer, Return to Ravnica: The Secretist 


Tomorrow is an illusion; everything is ridiculous. Mem- 
bers of the Cult of Rakdos have witnessed the grandiose 
speeches and self-important plans of other guilds and 
concluded that their rivals take themselves far too seri- 
ously. Since death comes for everyone, and since order 
tends inevitably toward chaos, the Rakdos believe that 
unrestrained, moment-to-moment hedonism is the only 
sane way to live. Of course, few other Ravnicans would 
describe the Rakdos as sane. 

The Cult of Rakdos bears the name of the demon lord 
who founded it. As laid out in the Guildpact, the guild 
was intended to fill roles concerning entertainment, 
mining, and manual labor. Some argue that any effort 
to give a demonic cult a respectable role in society was 
doomed to failure, but the cult remains part of Ravnica’s 
social fabric nevertheless. The Guildpact prohibits the 
cult’s extermination, and its entertainments—even as 
dark and destructive as they are—hold broad appeal. 
From rowdy mobs who love to see the Rakdos skewer 
the powerful elites to decadent socialites who come to 
the Rakdos for illicit amusements, most of Ravnica’s 
people don't really want the Rakdos to go away, as much 
as they might publicly protest otherwise. 


INSIDE THE CULT 


As one of Ravnica's original guild founders, the demon 
Rakdos has been part of Ravnica for millennia. Mem- 
bers of other guilds know Rakdos through his reputa- 
tion for capricious cruelty and megalomania, but those 
who join the guild idolize him for his magnetic presence, 
which inspires art and encourages utter wantonness. 
Because Rakdos finds destruction entertaining, his cult- 
ists incorporate deadly acts into their performances in 
hopes of catching his eye and earning his favor. 

Stages for Rakdos performances appear on streets 
and plazas throughout Ravnica every night, and they're 
gone by morning—carried to and fro on the backs of 
giants. Permanent establishments that cater to dark de- 
sires are tucked away in the seediest neighborhoods of 
the city, such as the Smelting Quarter in Precinct Six of 
the Tenth District. 


GOALS OF THE RAKDOS 


The Cult of Rakdos is centered on a demon lord who ex- 
emplifies the concepts of chaos and evil. At its worst, the 
cult is driven by a lust for power, extreme selfishness, 
and a lack of compassion. Cultists take delight in caus- 
ing pain to others to make sure they know their place, 
which is subservient to the powerful adherents of this 
self-centered philosophy. 

The cult's chaotic nature fuels its passion, impulsive- 
ness, and obsession with freedom. A guild of unbridled 
hedonism, it does what it wants, driven by base desires 
and a strong streak of cruelty. 

The Cult of Rakdos was originally recognized as a 
guild as part of an effort to channel the impulses of 
demons, giants, ogres, and humans into an acceptable 
direction. That effort has never been completely suc- 
cessful. Now, as tension builds in Ravnica and several 
guilds attempt to crack down on chaos and criminal 
activity, the Rakdos cult reacts to this building pressure 
with increasing violence. 

The Cult of Rakdos already serves a megalomania- 
cal demon of chaos, so its members have no interest 
in seeing any other ambitious figure achieve supreme 
rulership over Ravnica. They fear that any other guild 
might gain enough power to overwhelm all the others 
and impose its own values on everyone. For this rea- 
son, they focus their efforts on subverting other guilds' 
schemes, by undermining popular and powerful leaders 


and interfering—often violently—with any effort to build 
a centralized concentration of authority. 

The Azorius Senate currently stands as the greatest 
threat to the Rakdos way of life. The cult targets Azorius 
senators and arresters for ridicule, harassment, and 
occasionally assassination. The Boros Legion's zeal- 
ous pursuit of order and justice poses a similar threat. 
Although Boros's attention is focused on the Gruul at 
the moment, Rakdos cultists are well aware that any 
sufficiently disruptive performance with a high enough 
body count could bring the wrath of the legion down on 
their heads. The overreaching of the Azorius and the 
self-righteous wrath of the Boros engender true fear in 
the anarchic Rakdos cultists, and the Rakdos respond 
to fear with bloodshed. 


RAKDOS CHARACTERS 


Alignment: Usually chaotic, often evil 
Suggested Races: Human, goblin 
Suggested Classes: Barbarian, bard, fighter, warlock 


You might enjoy playing a Rakdos character if any of the 
following sentences describe you: 


* You enjoy mayhem. 

* You like playing showy, dramatic characters who are 
often the center of attention. 

* You're drawn to bards or warlocks. 

+ The idea of finding a heroic way to participate in a 
demonic cult sounds like a fun challenge. 


JOINING THE CULT OF RAKDOS 


The Cult of Rakdos attracts misfits and malcontents, 
who can't abide the civilized norms of Ravnica, as well 
as wayward souls eager to idolize an ancient demon lord 
and partake in riots. However, what Ravnicans like most 
about the guild is that it has evolved into a roving circus 
that attracts hedonistic, anything-goes performers who 
really know how to put on a show. 

By the time you start your adventuring career, you no 
doubt have a great act ready to go, and you're champing 
at the spike-studded bit to get out there and show the 
world what you've got. But you must earn a place on the 
stage or in the ring, and that means first doing your part 
backstage to keep the show running. "Backstage" can 
also mean "out in the city," carrying out a variety of er- 
rands for people who have more pull than you. And with 
the Rakdos, such errands tend to look more like adven- 
tures than like shopping trips. 

What does your chosen form of performance look 
like? What skills do you aspire to learn? Spikewheel 
acrobats, lampooners, fire jugglers, puppeteers, pain 
artists, noise musicians, and hellbeast riders form the 
heart of the cult's bizarre entertainments, putting on 
shows in guild-owned dark speakeasies and on portable 
stages in the streets. Performers called uncagers tend— 
and unleash—the variety of beasts and horrors used in 
Rakdos shows. 

Other Rakdos performers are spellcasters of spec- 
tacular sort, using expressive, free-wheeling, and 
dangerous magic. These mages find inspiration in the 
responses expressed by witnesses of their magic. They 


can be equally gratified by howls of laughter or howls of 
horror—any attention, in their minds, is good attention. 
Most Rakdos performers are fighters of the Champion 
or Eldritch Knight archetype, barbarians of the Path 
of the Berserker, or rogues of the Thief or Assassin 
archetype. Spellcasting performers are often bards of 
the College of Valor or warlocks of the fiend (the demon 
lord Rakdos). 


BACKGROUND: RAKDOS CULTIST 


You're an entertainer at heart, a performer with a flair 
for the dramatic and a love of the spotlight. You've spent 
years honing your craft, mastering a demanding set 

of skills so you can perform them with panache and 
make them look easy. The wild applause, the screams of 
the crowds, the mayhem and terror spreading into the 
streets—this is what you live for. 

You're also a member of a cult devoted to an ancient 
demon who delights in violence and chaos. It just so 
happens that Rakdos loves a good show, and your high- 
est aspiration is to please the Defiler, the Lord of Riots, 
with your own performance. 


Skill Proficiencies: Acrobatics, Performance 

Languages: Choose either Abyssal or Giant 

Tool Proficiencies: One type of musical instrument 

Equipment: A Rakdos insignia, a musical instrument 
(one of your choice), a costume, a hooded lantern 
made of wrought iron, a 10-foot length of chain with 
sharply spiked links, a tinderbox, 10 torches, a set 
of common clothes, a belt pouch containing 10 gp (a 
mix of Azorius and Boros 1-zino coins), and a bottle of 
sweet, red juice 


A FLAIR FOR THE DRAMATIC 

Rakdos performance styles typically fuse standard cir- 
cus-style acrobatics with fire, wrought-iron spikes and 

hooks, and monsters. You can roll a d8 or choose from 
the options in the Performance Options table to deter- 

mine your preferred style of performance. 


PERFORMANCE OPTIONS 


Type of Performer 


Qa 
oo 


Spikewheel acrobat 
Lampooning satirist 
Fire juggler 
Marionette puppeteer 
Pain artist 

Noise musician 
Nightmare clown 


on nur UU No o— 


Master of ceremonies 


FEATURE: FEARSOME REPUTATION 

People recognize you as a member of the Cult of Rak- 
dos, and they're careful not to draw your anger or 
ridicule. You can get away with minor criminal offenses, 
such as refusing to pay for food at a restaurant or break- 
ing down a door at a local shop, if no legal authorities 
witness the crime. Most people are too daunted by you 
to report your wrongdoing to the Azorius. 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


RAKDOS GUILD SPELLS 
Prerequisite: Spellcasting or Pact Magic class feature 


For you, the spells on the Rakdos Guild Spells table are 
added to the spell list of your spellcasting class. (If you 
are a multiclass character with multiple spell lists, these 
spells are added to all of them.) 


RAKDOS GUILD SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 
Cantrip fire bolt, vicious mockery 


Ist burning hands, dissonant whispers, 
hellish rebuke 
2nd crown of madness, enthrall, flaming sphere 
3rd fear, haste 
4th confusion, wall of fire 
5th dominate person 


Your magic often produces a flashy spectacle, wreath- 
ing you or your targets in a mixture of harmless flame 
and shadowy shapes. When you manipulate an oppo- 
nent’s mind, a flaming symbol of Rakdos might momen- 
tarily appear like a mask over the target’s face. 


SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 

Members of demonic cults aren’t generally known as the 
kindest or most mentally stable individuals, so you're 
likely to have something in your nature that distin- 
guishes you from the law-abiding citizens of Ravnica. 


PERSONALITY TRAITS 


d8 Personality Trait 

1  Irevelin mayhem, the more destructive the better. 

2 When violence breaks out, | lose myself in rage, and 
it’s sometimes hard to stop. 

3 Everything is funny to me, and the most hilarious and 
bloodiest things leave me cackling with sadistic glee. 


4 | derive genuine pleasure from the pain of others. 


d8 Personality Trait 

5  lenjoytesting other people's patience. 

6 | can’t stand it when things are predictable, so | like 
to add a little chaos to every situation. 
| throw my weight around to make sure | get my way. 
| enjoy breaking delicate works of art. And fingers, 
which are sort of the same. 

IDEALS 
dé Ideal 

1 Guild. My guild is all that really matters. (Any) 

2 Hedonism. Death comes for everyone, so take as 
much pleasure as you can from every moment of life. 
(Neutral) 

3 Creativity. | strive to find more ways to express my art 
through pain—my own as well as others’. (Chaotic) 

4 Freedom. No one tells me what to do. (Chaotic) 

5 Equality. | want to see Ravnica remade, with no guilds 
and no hierarchies. (Chaotic) 

6 Spectacle. People are inspired by the greatness they 
see in art. (Any) 

BONDS 

d6 Bond 

1  Ihave belonged to the same performance troupe for 
years, and these people mean everything to me. 

2  Ablood witch told me | have a special destiny to ful- 
fill, and I'm trying to figure out what it is. 

3 I'm secretly hoping that | can change the cult from 
the inside, using my influence to help rein in the 
wanton violence. 

4  lown something that Rakdos once touched (it's 
seared black at the spot), and | cherish it. 

5  l|wantto be better at my chosen form of performance 


than any other member of my troupe. 
| am devoted to Rakdos and live to impress him. 


d6 Flaw 
1 My family is prominent in another guild. | enjoy my 
wild life, but | don't want to embarrass them. 


2 | couldn’t hide my emotions and opinions even if | 
wanted to. 
| throw caution to the wind. 


3 

4 | resent the rich and powerful. 

5 — When I'm angry, | lash out in violence. 
6 


There's no such thing as too much pleasure. 


CONTACTS 
The Cult of Rakdos is anything but organized. Individ- 
uals frequently move from one performance troupe to 
another. Almost all members of the cult know former 
castmates now in different troupes, which allows for the 
possibility of a widespread network of contacts. 

Roll twice on the Rakdos Contacts table (for an ally 


and a rival) and once on the Non-Rakdos Contacts table. 


RAKDOS CONTACTS 


d8 Contact 

1 | was part of a two-person act until my former partner 
moved to a different troupe. 

2  Mysibling and | ran away from home and joined the 
Cult of Rakdos together. We're very close. 

3  Achildhood friend of mine is an attendant in Rix 
Maadi, the Rakdos guildhall. 

4 Myparents brought me into the guild and taught me 
my trade. 

5 There’s a lesser demon in the cult who thinks he 
owes me a favor, and who am | to argue? 

6 The master of ceremonies in my troupe is well con- 
nected with other troupes. 

7 | had a romance with a pain artist in another troupe. 

8  Rakdos himself has witnessed me perform. 


Non-RAkbDos CONTACTS 


d10 Contact 
| | know an Azorius elocutor who has a very amusing 
dark side. 


A Boros captain really wants to "redeem" me. 
| think a member of my troupe is a Dimir agent. 
| once convinced a Golgari medusa to participate in a 
show. We've been on good terms ever since. 
| came from the Gruul and still have relatives there. 

6 An Izzet technician provides pyrotechnics for my 
performances. 

7 An Orzhovy oligarch has taken an interest in my 
career, like a patron of the arts. 

8 Rollan additional Rakdos contact; you can decide if 
the contact is an ally or a rival. 

9  ASelesnya healer attends my performances regularly. 

10 A Simic biomancer provides mutant monsters to add 
a taste of the bizarre to our shows. 


How Do I FIT IN? 


The Cult of Rakdos encourages independent action on 
the part of its members. Its goal is fomenting chaos, and 
it firmly believes in putting its own house in disorder 
before carrying that mission into the larger city. So your 
role is to execute your vision of grand satire and disrup- 
tive performance art, as you aspire to outdo your guild 
mates and attract the attention of Rakdos himself. 

You work as part of a troupe, with your artistic talents 
used in service to a ringmaster's vision. But your perfor- 
mance is your own, and no one expects you to follow a 
script. In fact, if you go through a performance without 
doing something you haven't done before, you're clearly 
not trying hard enough. 


CHAPTER GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


A RAKDOS PARTY 

A Rakdos adventuring party could operate as a perfor- 
mance troupe, performing a variety of activities under 
the cover of its nighttime shows. The master of cere- 
monies (bard) is the public face of the troupe, with a 
number of performers (fighters, barbarians, rogues, or 
warlocks) doing their own unique acts. A blood witch 
(warlock) might take the place of a spellcasting per- 
former or assume the role of the master of ceremonies. 


RANK AND RENOWN 


The anarchic nature of the Cult of Rakdos—aside from 
the absolute rulership of Rakdos himself—makes rank 
a meaningless concept to the members of the guild. 
Nevertheless, renown matters: performers who are well 
known within the guild also tend to be well known out- 
side the guild, which means larger audiences. Renown 
in the Cult of Rakdos is the difference between being a 
bit player in someone else's performance and being the 
ringmaster of your own show. 


EXTRA 
Prerequisite: Renown 3 or higher in the Cult of Rakdos 


You have proven yourself both useful and talented and 
have earned a place on stage. It's a small place, and a 
dangerous one—bit players like you are as likely to suf- 
fer injury or death during a Rakdos performance as au- 
dience members are. But that’s the thrill of live theater! 


CHAPTER Z GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


SIDESHOW ACT 
Prerequisite: Renown 10 or higher in the Cult of Rakdos 


You have gained a reputation both within the Cult of 
Rakdos and (to some extent) outside it, though you are 
still a long way from achieving top billing. You might 
stage performances in back alleys and abandoned ware- 
houses, with a handful of other performers helping to 
bring your vision to life. 

When you go on an adventure, you can call on 1d4 
helpers—a mix of cacklers (see chapter 6 for the stat 
block), stage hands, or extras—to help you complete it. 
Use the stat blocks of cultists and thugs from the Mon- 
ster Manual for the stage hands and extras, respectively. 

Your status also means that you can venture into the 
depths of Rix Maadi, the lair of Rakdos, to petition for 
a Rakdos charm (described in chapter 5). Rakdos can 
grant a charm with barely a thought, but your station in 
the guild doesn't guarantee safe passage to and from the 
demon's presence. 


BLoop WITCH (SPECIAL ROLE) 
Prerequisite: Renown 10 or higher in the Cult of Rakdos, 
the Spellcasting or Pact Magic class feature 


The aggressive tormentors known as blood witches 
are the closest thing the Cult of Rakdos has to ranking 
officials. You can’t personally mobilize large numbers of 
guild members, but individual performers, ogres, giants, 
and even demons are quick to obey your commands as 
long as they don't contradict the ethos of the guild or the 
will of Rakdos himself. 

When you become a blood witch, you are assigned 
to torment a particular enemy of the guild. This enemy 


can be an individual, a family, an organization, or even 
an abstract concept. Examples of blood witches include 
the Judge of the Judges, who targets the Azorius guild- 
master; the Tormentor of the Wojek, who confounds 
Boros military intelligence efforts; and the Disintegra- 
tor of Law and Order, who undermines all efforts to 
uphold law. 


STAR PERFORMER 
Prerequisite: Renown 25 or higher in the Cult of Rakdos 


At last, you have the opportunity to display your genius 
to the masses. When you perform, you're the star of the 
show, the climax of a night of revelry. The rest of the 
guild regards you with admiration and more than a little 
envy, since crowds pack whatever venues you choose 
for your shows. Rakdos himself might even come to 
watch. You can count on the support of your ringmaster, 
and you can call on the aid of other performers in your 
troupe—just be careful not to turn your back on the ones 
who would kill in return for a moment in your spotlight. 

You can bring 2d4 Rakdos performers and 1d4 Rak- 
dos lampooners (see chapter 6 for these stat blocks) 
with you when you're going on stage or heading out to 
riot on the streets. 


RINGMASTER 
Prerequisite: Renown 50 or higher in the Cult of Rakdos 


The show is yours to command. You determine what 
performers take center stage and when, and you design 
the exciting and bloody final act of the show—meaning 
that you decide who lives and who dies. You might adopt 
an ominous or overwrought title, such as Choreogra- 
pher of Flame or the Dramaturge. A troupe of 3d10 + 

20 Rakdos performers is at your service, and you can 
call on 2d4 blood witches to aid you with their magic 
(see chapter 6 for these stat blocks). You're probably also 
considered a significant public enemy by the Azorius, 
but they can't arrest you if they can't catch you. 


ENEMIES AND ALLIES 


A cult of demon worshipers doesn't make a lot of 
friends. Ideologically, the Rakdos have the most in 


common with the Gruul and the Golgari; all three 
guilds have a desire to topple the structures of power in 
Ravnica. Of course, the guilds disagree about what (or 
who) should replace the existing structures. 

Making the powerful look ridiculous lies at the heart 
of the Rakdos performance philosophy. The bulk of the 
guild's aggression is directed toward guilds that have 
power and abuse it or guilds that make blatant bids for 
power. That's particularly true when powerful guilds— 
especially the Azorius—try to use their power to sup- 
press the Rakdos. 

Making the ridiculous powerful is the flip side of the 
Rakdos philosophy. Usually, this means elevating the 
status of the Rakdos—and yourself—at the expense of 
others, but circumstances might lead you to cooperate 
with members of other guilds in pursuit of a common 
goal. For example, a power struggle in another guild can 
be an opportunity for you to install a sympathetic (or in- 
effectual) leader in that guild. Beyond that, other chaotic 
guilds have grudges against the law-enforcing guilds 
and would be happy to join your efforts to strike a blow 
against them. 

d ee 

THE RAKDOS VIEW ON OTHER GUILDS 

The Cult of Rakdos serves a demon lord who is feared, 

if not respected, by most citizens of Ravnica. Its cultists 

express their zeal through riotous, bloody, and deadly per- 

formances and revels. To other guilds, they are a fearsome 
threat to the city. To the Rakdos, the other guilds invest too 
much effort in a vain search for meaning and might. 


Azorius. “Insufferable killjoys, and every artist's eternal 
enemy. Everyone thinks we are the guild of ultimate evil, 
but we're not the ones who want to monitor, legislate, 
and control your every move." 

Boros. ^We love a parade, but their demonstrations always 
come across as stiff. They're the deserving straight man 
for our every punch line." 

Dimir. "They crave secrets, but there's nothing they can 
get by eavesdropping that we won't freely scream at the 
top of our lungs. They lurk in the shadows trying to look 
mysterious, practically inviting our mischief.” 

Golgari. “We know they're tired of being the downtrodden, 
misunderstood misfits. If they're truly ready to anger 
the powers that be rather than lick boot soles, we invite 
them to run away and join our circus.” 

Gruul. “Our well-meaning cousins in chaos! We want to 
take society down a peg, and they want to raze civiliza- 
tion to the dirt. That's practically common ground!" 

Izzet. “Every performance benefits from prop masters and 
pyrotechnicians. They can be useful backstage, but they 
lack the charisma for the spotlight.” 

Orzhov. “The more the Orzhov try to coerce free people 
to act against their desires, the easier it is for Rakdos to 
gain recruits.” 

Selesnya. “Such crowds! They would scarcely notice if they 
were missing a few by night's end. They'd make the per- 
fect audience, if only they had a better appreciation for 
bleeding-edge art.” 

Simic. “Imaginative creators who nevertheless fail to 

appreciate the meaning of their living creations—nor 

do they appreciate the tragic irony of not knowing how 
funny that is.” 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


SELESNYA CONCLAVE 


SELESNYA TROOPS POURED INTO THE STREETS, 
emptying the nature temples, wildlife preserves, and other 


green spaces controlled by the conclave. The centaurs' 
hooves clattered on the cobblestones and the wolf-rid- 
ers bounded over stone bridges. Human and elf infantry 
flooded through the arteries of the district, streaming past 
intersections and flowing around buildings. Griffons and 
their riders swooped down out of a blanket of low clouds, 
strafing past the spires. Emmara rode on the shoulder of 
a massive creature made of a snarl of marble, wood, and 
vines, her hand resting on its great head. Two more of the 
nature behemoths strode ahead of her, swinging their limbs 
in slow motion, indenting the streets with their footfalls as 
the other Selesnya troops ran between their legs. Below her, 
Captain Calomir led the Selesnya army. He rode his white 
war rhino, driving the Selesnya ranks forward, guiding 
them through the streets toward the Rakdos horde. 

—Doug Beyer, Return to Ravnica: The Secretist 


Like a thriving garden, carefully tended and abundantly 
fertile, the communities of the Selesnya Conclave are 

a harmonious union of nature and civilization. The 
members of the conclave dream of embracing all of 
Ravnica in their peaceful union. In the meantime, they 
are growing an army, preparing to resist the ambition 
and destructive impulses of the other guilds and fight to 
defend their way of life. 

At the heart of the Selesnya faith and philosophy is 
the Worldsoul, called Mat'Selesnya, which its devotees 
believe to be a manifestation of nature itself. At the 
signing of the original Guildpact, Mat'Selesnya was 
embodied in an elemental form and acted as the guild's 
first guildmaster. The current guildmaster, Trostani— 
three dryads fused together with Mat'Selesnya into a 
single being—is said to embody the will of the Worldsoul 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


in a similar way. The original mission of the conclave 
involved conservation and charity, but its focus has long 
been on expanding its community, in which all members 
are cared for and nature is preserved in harmony with 
civilization. 


INSIDE THE CONCLAVE 


The Selesnya Conclave is organized into enclaves called 
vernadi, which are communes built around central 
trees. The vernadi are smaller versions of the guildhall, 
the great city-tree Vitu-Ghazi. A dryad, called a voda, 

is called forth from that central tree to be the leader of 
the community, connecting the vernadi and its devotees 
to the Worldsoul and uniting them with the will of the 
entire conclave. 

A voda is accessible to all the guild members in her 
care. You have regular contact with your voda, who 
knows your name and has a good idea of your interests, 
goals, and strengths. And since your voda is mystically 
linked to the guildmaster, Trostani, through communion 
with the Worldsoul, it's safe to assume that Trostani 
knows who you are as well. 

In addition to the voda, military and religious leaders 
in each vernadi regularly communicate with its mem- 
bers. Ordinary members of the conclave spend a few 
hours every day training with a military instructor and 
studying with a religious teacher. 


GOALS OF THE SELESNYA 


Despite the growing tensions that now grip the world, 
in the long view of the Selesnya Conclave, not much 
has changed. Ravnica is troubled, but Ravnica has 
always been troubled. The Living Guildpact is absent, 
but the Guildpact comes and goes. The Worldsoul has 
not changed, nor has the will of Mat'Selesnya: the con- 
clave's main goal is to grow, as it has always been. Its 
strength lies in its numbers. 

The conclave clings to the ideal of a peaceful collec- 
tive in which individual desires are subordinate to the 
good of the whole group. The guild wants to see this 
beloved community grow, flourish, and thrive in peace. 
But as much as it values peace within the community, 
it displays incredible ferocity when that harmony is 
threatened. 

Selesnya's vision is centered on the idea of harmony 
between civilization and nature. To advance the cause 
of civilized society, the conclave believes in the need 
for an ordered structure that orients the group toward 


the pursuit of the common good. At the same time, the 
guild’s connection with the natural world gives the con- 
clave a fervent appreciation for the interconnectedness 
of all things. Selesnya doesn't tolerate selfishness or 
ambition, instead urging its members to put the needs of 
others ahead of their own desires and to use the power 
of nature—including nature’s wrath—to drive away those 
whose selfishness threatens the coherence of the group. 

The greatest danger that Selesnya faces lies in the 
ambitions of other guilds, which are flourishing in the 
absence of the Guildpact. Selesnya’s way of curbing this 
grasping selfishness has always been to outnumber the 
other guilds. Its members aren't naive; they fully realize 
that the ambitions of other guilds will lead to violence. 
And they aim to be prepared for that violence when 
it erupts. 

“For my seedlings to survive,” Mat'Selesnya says, “we 
must grow an army capable of overwhelming such ambi- 
tions.” Some of that army is literally grown, in the case 
of plant creatures and elementals. A great many mem- 
bers grow up in the guild from childhood and learn their 
martial skills at the guild’s training grounds. And still 
more join the guild through recruitment—especially in 
these troubling times, when rumors of war and a sense 
of imminent doom make Selesnya's message of harmo- 
nious community sound ever more appealing. 


SELESNYA CHARACTERS 


Alignment: Usually good, often neutral 

Suggested Races: Human, centaur, elf (wood), half- 
elf, loxodon 

Suggested Classes: Bard, cleric, druid, fighter, monk, 
paladin, ranger, warlock 


nadi, at least at the start of your career. Your voda helps 
you in your process of discerning the will of Mat'Sele- 
snya and your place in relation to it. 


You might enjoy playing a Selesnya Conclave character 
if one or more of the folllowing statements are true: 


* You like the idea of being part of a huge, peaceful The Selesnya Conclave is both a community of wor- 
community. shipers and a militia, and thus its leadership includes 

* You like playing druids, rangers, or spiritual monks. both military and religious figures. 

* You believe in victory through respectful teamwork, 
overwhelming numbers, or both. MILITARY ROLES 

* You want a spiritual connection to something bigger Selesnya looks from the outside like a peaceful commu- 
than just your character. nity, but it is also an army. If you are a fighter, a ranger, 

or a paladin (usually having sworn the Oath of the An- 
JOINING THE SELESNYA CONCLAVE cients), your place in the guild is a military one. Unlike 


in the Boros Legion, though, the conclave's military 
ranks aren't highly structured; each enclave has its own 
forces, with a single commander and one other layer of 
command (at most) above the troops. A variety of special 
military roles become available to you as you prove your- 
self useful to your vernadi and the conclave. You might 
aspire to be a votary standing watch over the temple 
gardens, a sagittar archer, a pegasus-riding equenaut, or 
a wolf-riding Ledev guardian. 


New initiates come to the Selesnya Conclave as chil- 
dren, to be brought up by the guild's members, or as 
recruits drawn from the guildless or the membership 
of other guilds. Regardless of the path you took to get 
here, you start out in the role of initiate. As an initiate, 
you must subsume your desires to the needs of the 
guild while finding a way (under the guidance of your 
enclave's leader) to put your talents to use in service to 
Mat' Selesnya. This effort isn't so much a process of car- 
rying out orders, but of gradually discerning the will of RELIGIOUS ROLES 
the Worldsoul and finding your place in it. 

In your search for communion with the Worldsoul, 
you are part of a worldwide community, but you are also 
part of a smaller local community—an enclave called a 
vernadi, which is led by a dryad called a voda. Your role 
in the conclave is specifically oriented toward your ver- 


If you are a druid (perhaps of the Circle of the Land), 

a cleric (of the Life or the Nature Domain), a warlock 
with the Archfey (Mat'Selesnya) as a patron, or a devout 
monk (who might follow the Way of the Open Hand), you 
might be drawn to a role of religious leadership. These 
leaders mediate the relationship between the members 


86 


of the conclave and the voice of Mat’Selesnya. A number 
of special roles will be available to you as you establish 
your place. You might hope to carry the message of the 
conclave out into the world as an evangel, and great reli- 
gious leaders are honored with the title of hierarch. 


BACKGROUND: SELESNYA INITIATE 


You are a member of a blessed community, built on the 
ideals of harmony. Here, nature and civilization coexist 
peacefully, living and growing in accordance with the 
will of the Worldsoul, Mat'Selesnya. As a member of 
the Selesnya Conclave, you are surrounded by people 
and other creatures who share your worldview and your 
longing for deeper spiritual communion with the world, 
and you have a fervent desire to share the joy you have 
experienced with Ravnica. Along with the rest of the 
conclave, you are committed to resisting the ambitions 
of the other guilds—with military force if necessary. 


Skill Proficiencies: Nature, Persuasion 

Tool Proficiencies: One type of artisan’s tools or one 
musical instrument 

Languages: Choose one of Elvish, Loxodon, or Sylvan 

Equipment: A Selesnya insignia, a healer's kit, robes, a 
set of common clothes, and a belt pouch containing 5 
gp (Azorius 1-zino coins) 


FEATURE: CONCLAVE'S SHELTER 
As a member of the Selesnya Conclave, you can count 
on your guild mates to provide shelter and aid. You and 
your companions can find a place to hide or rest in any 
Selesnya enclave in the city, unless you have proven to 
be a danger to them. The members of the enclave will 
shield you from the law or anyone else searching for 
you, though they will not risk their lives in this effort. 
In addition, as a guild member you can receive free 
healing and care at a Selesnya enclave, though you must 
provide any material components needed for spells. 


SELESNYA GUILD SPELLS 
Prerequisite: Spellcasting or Pact Magic class feature 


For you, the spells on the Selesnya Guild Spells table 
are added to the spell list of your spellcasting class. (If 
you are a multiclass character with multiple spell lists, 
these spells are added to all of them.) 


SELESNYA GUILD SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 


Cantrip —druidcraft, friends 
Ist aid, animal friendship, charm person 
2nd animal messenger, calm emotions, 
warding bond 
3rd plant growth, speak with plants 
4th aura of life, conjure minor elementals 
5th awaken, commune with nature 


Members of the Selesnya Conclave refer to their 
magic as “doruvati,” a Sylvan word meaning “gift.” 
When you use these gifts of Mat’Selesnya, graceful 
swirls of green and silver light dance in the air around 
you, and phantasmal green leaves might waft through 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


the air. A sensation of gentle warmth and the smell 
of spring flowers or autumn leaves might accompany 
your spells. 


SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 

Most members of the Selesnya Conclave are true believ- 
ers—the tight-knit community allows little room for the 
cynical or disillusioned. They are spiritual, empathetic, 
and generally peaceful—unless roused to action. Their 
flaws and bonds alike grow naturally from their close 
ties to the community. 


PERSONALITY TRAITS 
d8 Personality Trait 


1 | never raise my voice or lose my temper. 

2  lfeelthe pains and joys of everyone around me, 
friend or foe. 

3 | would rather make a friend than thwart an enemy. 


I'm always straining to peer into another reality that 
seems to be just beyond my senses. 

5 I'm uneasy if | can't see plants growing or feel soil 
beneath my feet. 
Seeing illness or injury in any creature saddens me. 

7 Ihave much to be proud of, but | am still just one 
strand in the grand, interwoven tapestry of life. 

8 Nature offers rich and abundant metaphors for 
understanding the complexities of life. 


IDEALS 

d6 Ideal 

1 Guild. My guild is all that really matters. (Any) 

2 Harmony. Nothing is more beautiful than voices and 
actions aligned in common purpose. (Good) 

3 Order. Like a well-pruned tree, society thrives when 
everything is kept in good order. (Lawful) 

4 Life. Preserving life and nature is always a worthwhile 
endeavor. (Good) 

5 Humility. Ambition and pride are the roots of strife. 
(Good) 

6 Evangelism. When all have joined the Selesnya 
Conclave, Ravnica will finally know peace. (Any) 


BONDS 

d6 Bond 

1 I would give my life in the defense of the small 
enclave where | first encountered Mat’Selesnya. 

2 Ilove beasts and plants of all kinds, and am loath to 
harm them. 
A healer nursed me to recovery from a mortal illness. 

4 I'll sing the invitation of Mat’Selesnya with my dying 
breath. 

5 I cherish a leaf from Vitu-Ghazi that changes color 


with the seasons, even though it is no longer at- 
tached to the tree, 

6 Every member of the conclave is my kin, and | would 
fight for any one of them. 


FLAWS 


d6 Flaw 

]  Imterrified of getting into a fight where my side is 
outnumbered. 

2  lassume that people mean well until they prove 
otherwise. 

3  lenjoy comfort and quiet, and prefer to avoid extra 
effort. 

4  lhavea fierce temper that doesn't reflect the inner 
calm | seek. 

5 I'm convinced that everyone else in the conclave has 
a deeper connection to the Worldsoul than | do. 

6 I’m trying to atone for the life of crime | led before | 
joined the Selesnya, but | find it hard to give up my 
bad habits. 

CONTACTS 


The Selesnya Conclave is all about connections, so its 
members cultivate contacts throughout the guild. The 
guild also engages in energetic recruitment to draw con- 
verts from other guilds, and often these new guild mem- 
bers maintain friendships with former guild mates. 

Roll twice on the Selesnya Contacts table (for an 
ally and a rival) and once on the Non-Selesnya Con- 
tacts table. 


SELESNYA CONTACTS 


d8 Contact 
1 Awise centaur trainer believed in me even though | 
was a terrible student. 
A good friend has risen to become a Ledev guardian. 
3 Ileft my former guild and joined the Selesnya along 
with a close friend. 
4 The dryad at the head of my enclave has taken an 
interest in my activities. 


d8 


Contact 

A sibling is an instructor at the guild's training 
grounds. 

One of my parents is a votary, tasked with protecting 
the temple gardens at the Vitu-Ghazi guildhall. 

| had a romance with a well-known Selesnya healer. 
Trostani, the head of the guild and the voice of 
Mat'Selesnya, once welcomed me into her presence. 


NoN-SELESNYA CONTACTS 


dio 


1 


Contact 

| left the Azorius, and a former colleague still resents 
me for that act. 

A good friend, eager for action, left the Selesnya and 
joined the Boros. 

| had a relationship with a guild mate who turned out 
to be a Dimir agent. 

| know a disgruntled Golgari assassin who is ripe for 
recruitment. 

I'm friendly with a Gruul centaur who almost joined 
us a few years back. 

| once had a heated public argument with an Izzet 
chemister, and neither of us is allowed back into that 
restaurant. 


d10 Contact 

7 | paid off my debt to the Orzhov Syndicate, but my 
good friend was not so lucky and remains indebted to 
that guild. 

8 Ata time of terrible grief in my life, a Rakdos per- 
former made a mockery of my pain, leaving me with 
mixed feelings of sadness and humor. 

9 Rollan additional Selesnya contact; you can decide if 
the contact is an ally or a rival. 

10 Ihave a sibling in the Simic Combine, and we argue 
every time we see each other. 


How Do I Fit IN? 


Although the guild teaches the importance of subjugat- 
ing the individual will to the good of the conclave, it also 
celebrates the diversity of individuals, in the same sense 
that a field that produces different crops is healthier 
than one that yields a single crop. That principle applies 
to your skills as an adventurer. As long as your efforts 
are directed toward advancing the goals of the guild 
rather than your private agenda, you're allowed to put 
your talents to work in your unique way. 

That said, you must never lose sight of the fact that 
you are part of a larger community. That includes the 
whole guild, of course, but your ties to community start 
with your vernadi (enclave) and its voda (dryad leader). 
The dryads want to know what you're doing and what 


purpose it serves, and they act to curtail your actions— 
or even expel you from the guild—if they determine that 
you aren't serving Selesnya's best interests. 


A SELESNYA PARTY 

An adventuring party is a community in itself, a symbi- 
otic group in which each individual contributes to the 
success of the whole. A fighter, a ranger, or a paladin 
provides a starting point of martial might. A druid or a 
cleric offers support and healing. A bard or a warlock 
gives additional spell support. A monk, a bard, or a 
ranger can add some measure of stealth and skill spe- 
cialties. Such a group is well equipped to help Selesnya 
grow—and to smite the guild's enemies. 


RANK AND RENOWN 


The Selesnya Conclave doesn't classify its members in a 
rigid hierarchy, because doing that would encourage in- 
dividuals to seek to rise above the rest of the community 
and put their desires above the good of the whole. Thus, 
aside from the leadership of Trostani over the whole 
guild, and each voda over her vernadi, the members of 
the conclave are distinguished mainly by the diverse 
roles they fill instead of by rank or status. 

Indeed, many Selesnya initiates never leave that ba- 
sic role. They have discerned their purpose, and it is 
to live a proper life in support of the conclave, without 
pursuing any kind of prestigious role. But if you achieve 
greater renown in the guild, a variety of special roles be- 
come available to you. 


Regardless of renown and role, members of the con- 
clave don't earn salaries. The guild cares for its own, 
however, and every member can live in a vernadi at the 
equivalent of a modest lifestyle. 


EVANGEL (SPECIAL ROLE) 
Prerequisite: Renown 3 or higher in the Selesnya 
Conclave 


Evangels extend their hands to potential converts and 
welcome new initiates into the life of the Selesnya Con- 
clave. They include fervent preachers who speak the will 
of the Worldsoul in the promenades and marketplaces, 
humble missionaries who serve among the poor in the 
darkest districts of the city, and even centaur warriors 
who evangelize in Gruul territories where words of war 
speak louder than prayers of peace. 

When you become an evangel, you gain one additional 
contact from a guild other than the Selesnya Conclave, 
which can be someone you have met in your adventures 
or chosen from the Non-Selesnya Contacts table earlier 
in this section. In your new role, you belong to a vernadi 
and can expect help and support from that community, 
but you spend your time away from it, operating with 
a great deal of independence. When you return to your 
vernadi, you teach and train new initiates. 


VoTARY (SPECIAL ROLE) 
Prerequisite: Renown 3 or higher in the Selesnya 
Conclave, proficiency with martial weapons 


Votaries are soldiers who protect the vernadi gardens 
in the area immediately around its central tree. As a 
votary, you are usually assigned to guard duty, but your 
voda might also assign you to special missions that re- 
quire strength of arms. 

While you are in the garden you're sworn to protect, 
the plants obey your word, allowing you to transform the 
foliage into 1d6 awakened shrubs or 1 awakened tree 
(both described in the Monster Manual) for as long as 
a threat to the garden persists. These awakened plants 
won't leave the garden. 


SAGITTAR (SPECIAL ROLE) 
Prerequisite: Renown 3 or higher in the Selesnya 
Conclave, proficiency with the longbow 


Sagittars are archers who defend key guild locations, 
including the guildhall at Vitu-Ghazi. Their range and 
accuracy are so great that a common saying has arisen 
among Ravnicans: “Sagittars aim their bows using 
maps.” If a conclave mission would benefit from the sup- 
port of disciplined archers, Trostani herself might call 
on sagittars to render aid. 

As a sagittar, you never have to want for arrows; the 
guild provides arrows to you at no cost. 


SELESNYA CHARM 
Prerequisite: Renown 10 or higher in the Selesnya 
Conclave 


You can request that the voda of your vernadi bestow a 
Selesnya charm (described in chapter 5) on you before 
you undertake any mission on the guild’s behalf. 


EQUENAUT (SPECIAL ROLE) 
Prerequisite: Renown 10 or higher in the Selesnya 
Conclave, proficiency in Animal Handling 


Equenauts are knights who ride pegasi and serve as 
warriors and scouts. In addition to surveilling en- 
emy forces and terrain, they are also on the lookout 
for places where a new vernadi can take root. As an 
equenaut, you are sometimes called on to take part in 
military activity, but you are free to pursue your vision of 
how to serve Mat'Selesnya—from the back of your pega- 
sus mount (see the stat block in the Monster Manual). 
Your mount effectively belongs to you, entrusted to 
your care. If it comes to harm through your negligence 
or mistreatment, you might be punished— perhaps to the 
extent of losing your position as an equenaut. 


HiERARCH (SPECIAL ROLE) 
Prerequisite: Renown 10 or higher in the Selesnya 
Conclave, Spelicasting or Pact Magic class feature 


The ranks of the Selesnya clergy aren't hierarchical, 
yet you are honored with the title of hierarch. Hierarchs 
lead rites that invoke the blessing of Mat'Selesnya, 
bringing Selesnya's initiates into closer communion 
with the Worldsoul and with each other. They are as- 
sisted in these rites by less experienced clergy. 

As a hierarch, you can call on the aid of 1d4 acolytes 
(see the stat block in the Monster Manual), even leading 
them on missions. 

You have an important voice in decision-making for 
your vernadi, and you are expected to offer advice and 
opinions to your voda when requested. 

Your position within the guild and your vernadi gives 
you access to superior food and lodging, the equivalent 
of a comfortable lifestyle. 


LEDEV GUARDIAN (SPECIAL ROLE) 
Prerequisite: Renown 25 or hióher in the Selesnya 
Conclave, 10th level or higher 


The Ledev guardians are knights who were originally 
protectors of Ravnica's roadways but now serve the 
Selesnya as champions. Their ranks include a number 
of centaurs. The humanoids among them ride dire 
wolves, which they raise from pups to forge close bonds 
between rider and mount. If you have a dire wolf mount, 
it effectively belongs to you (see the Monster Manual for 
the stat block). 


DIGNITARY (SPECIAL ROLE) 
Prerequisite: Renown 50 or higher in the Selesnya 
Conclave 


Chosen by Trostani herself, dignitaries act as emissar- 
ies in dealing with other guilds. As a dignitary, you must 
be available when Trostani has need of your service, 
but you have great latitude to pursue your vision of the 
guild’s goals. You can call on 10d10 Selesnya initiates 
to support you in your missions for Trostani, and 8d10 
initiates for a mission of your own devising. These initi- 
ates are acolytes, scouts (both described in the Monster 
Manual), or soldiers (see chapter 6 for the stat block). 
Your position gives you access to the best food and 
lodging, the equivalent of a wealthy lifestyle. 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


89 


ENEMIES AND ALLIES 


The Selesnya philosophy is one that embraces all of 
Ravnica. Everyone is a potential ally, until the moment 
they demonstrate their hostility to the conclave or the 
will of the Worldsoul. The Selesnya have difficulty with 
the riotous Rakdos, the sinister Dimir, and the chaotic 
Izzet, but their focus on ordered community and verdant 
nature gives them some amount of common ground 
with every other guild. 

Any guild can become an enemy of the conclave, 
though, if its guildmaster's ambitions—or rogue agents 
within the guild—upset the balance of power on 
Ravnica. From the other side, many other guilds see 
the Selesnya as a quiet threat and seek to diminish its 
strength before its numbers grow out of control, so as a 
member of the conclave you are duty-bound to oppose 
their operations of sabotage. The wanton plunder of 
Ravnica's natural resources can also provoke the Sele- 
snya to take action. 

When members of other guilds pursue noble aims— 
promoting peace, strengthening community, and oppos- 
ing other guilds' efforts to expand—they act as allies of 
the conclave and thus your allies. Furthermore, they are 
potential recruits into the fold, since they have demon- 
strated their sympathy for Selesnya's goals and their 
value to the community. 


aL ——M—M—— ÓÓáMá—Àá————— M— elata 
THE SELESNYA VIEW ON OTHER GUILDS 
In the Selesnya vision of a perfect Ravnica, the guilds 
would be abolished and all people would live in harmony 
with nature and each other. Until such a vision comes to 
pass, the conclave judges the other guilds against that 
standard of perfection. 


Azorius. "All their laws are meant to create a semblance of 
the unity that binds us already. If they would only be still 
and listen to the voice of Mat'Selesnya." 

Boros. "Sooner or later they will tire of their fighting, and 
when they do, the gentle embrace of the Selesnya will be 
waiting for them." 

Dimir. “Just as they hide from the light and cling to the 
shadows, they hide from life and cling to secrets. They 
see everything as a scheme, everyone a tool, instead of 
recognizing the power of unity and mutual growth." 

Golgari. “They wallow in filth and rot, too preoccupied with 
death to appreciate the bliss of life's connections." 

Gruul. “They are a desperate echo of what they should be, 
reaching blindly toward something greater. Such a waste. 
And a smelly, unreasonable, destructive one at that.” 

Izzet. "The path to unity doesn't lie in the oppressive 
control of a massive ego like the dragon's. The Izzet can 
tinker and meddle all they like, but they are doomed 
to failure.” 

Orzhov. “An endless stream of grasping hands, reaching 
for more and more, pursuing their individual ambitions 
at all costs—even from beyond the grave.” 

Rakdos. “They laugh at tragedy and wallow in pain. Even- 
tually, they will submit to Mat’Selesnya. Until then, they 
must be contained.” 

Simic. “They chart a twisted course of warping and man- 
gling life and nature. Yes, we must grow and adapt, but 
nature will take its own time in completing that task.” 


SIMIC COMBINE 


THE SIMIC REPRESENTATIVE WAS A STERN-LOOKING 
mage whose parentage appeared to be partly human and 
partly aquatic, possibly merfolk; he rode astride a creature 
that seemed the offspring of a giant, blue-carapaced crab 
and an irate squid. The Simic squad was rounded out by a 


host of mages clad in scale armor, and improbable hybrid 
fusions of scaled, finned, and shelled creatures. 
—Doug Beyer, Return to Ravnica: The Secretist 


The secrets of life are revealed in the laboratories of 
the Simic, and their research notes plumb and catalog 
nature’s wonders. Their original mission was to oversee 
issues of public health, but the Simic came to believe 
that complete health—of individuals and of society as a 
whole—depends on the mutual adaptation of nature and 
civilization to one another. Thus, biological experimen- 
tation has always been among its primary concerns. 

Historically, the guild’s approach to its mission has 
been one of incremental progress toward a utopian ideal 
of thriving biology, and it remains more aloof from poli- 
tics than other guilds. Its fundamental mission remains 
unchanged by the current political instability, and the 
isolation of its laboratories protects most Simic guild 
members from immediate harm. 

Little is known about the combine's founder, except 
that this individual's first or family name was Simic. 


INSIDE THE COMBINE 


Vast sinkholes called zonots are the primary geographic 
divisions among the Simic. Each zonot pierces layer 
upon layer of crumbled city as it descends deep below 
the surface and connects to ancient, long-forgotten 
ocean waters. A zonot is a distinct Simic habitat with its 
own culture and ecosystem, as well as a leader called 

a Speaker. The Speakers of all nine zonots form the 


Speakers' Chamber, and they elect a Prime Speaker 
from among them to serve as the Simic guildmaster. 
Zegana, the current Prime Speaker, is the Speaker of 
Zonot One, which is located in a remote, sparsely inhab- 
ited part of Ravnica far from the political activity of the 
Tenth District. 

The Simic guildhall, Zameck, is located in Zonot 
Seven within Precinct Five of Ravnica's Tenth District. 
A huge chamber just below the street serves as the 
gathering place for all the Speakers, as well as a loca- 
tion where non-Simic visitors can meet with the Prime 
Speaker or other combine emissaries. 


GOALS OF THE SIMIC 


Two philosophical principles, in tension with each 
other, combine to give the Simic Combine its unique 
approach to science and nature. In traditional Simic 
thought, these principles are called the Holdfast and the 
Upwelling. 

The Holdfast principle, named for the biological mech- 
anism that keeps kelp and sponges anchored to the sea 
floor, advises members of the Simic Combine never to 
stray so far from nature that they become "adrift." It es- 
pouses the idea that nature left undisturbed will evolve 
toward adaptive traits and increased strength. Nature 
will flourish and grow, and every creature will find its 
proper niche in the ecosystem where it can thrive. 

The Upwelling principle, named for the phenomenon 
of nutrient-rich water rising to the ocean surface, advo- 
cates that the new and enlivened should replace the old 
and depleted in an unending cycle, bringing constant re- 
freshment and renewal. This principle accounts for the 
combine's analytical bent and its emphasis on knowl- 
edge as a means of transformation. Learning the secrets 
of the universe lets you shape the world as you desire. 
The Upwelling encourages every creature to discover its 
full potential. 

The Holdfast encourages the Simic to promote nature; 
the Upwelling urges them to perfect nature. The end 
result is the same: a hastened system of evolution that 
brings out the best in every creature's nature. But differ- 
ent factions within the Simic Combine interpret these 
principles in their own ways. 

The leadership of the Simic Combine represents the 
traditional philosophy of the Utopians. Their vision is of 
an ideal world in which nature and civilization exist in 
balance, in which natural life adapts to life in the midst 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


of modern civilization and the civilized world adapts 

to accommodate these creatures. Utopians generally 
interpret the Holdfast principle as being about staying 
rooted in nature, and the Upwelling as concerned with 
slow, predictable, cyclical improvement. So they remain 
hidden in their subaquatic laboratories, pursuing their 
research while isolated from the volatile interrelation- 
ships among the other guilds. Prime Speaker Zegana 
encourages that isolationist attitude. 

At the same time, a growing faction within the Simic 
believes that an all-out war among the guilds is inevi- 
table, given the growing unrest in the city. These mem- 
bers, the Adaptationists, believe that the guilds exist in 
a fragile ecosystem in which the slightest imbalance can 
have cascading effects. With an absent Living Guild- 
pact failing to maintain the balance, only catastrophe 
can result. The Simic must change in order to survive, 
and slow, small steps in pursuit of an ideal vision aren't 
enough. The future of the guild is in imminent danger, 
and the Simic need to focus on survival. Adaptationists 
tend to interpret the Holdfast as being about defense 
and security, and the Upwelling as a call for sudden, dis- 
ruptive growth. 

As befits members of a guild of scientists, the Adap- 
tationists’ preparations for war include the creation of 
soldiers that are magically and biologically adapted. 
The Guardian Project has yielded hybrids that combine 
human, elf, or vedalken stock with the characteristics of 
crabs, fish, jellyfish, and a variety of other creatures to 
give them natural armor and weapons, gills, venomous 
stings, and other combat-focused adaptations. 


SIMIC CHARACTERS 


Alignment: Usually neutral 

Suggested Races: Human, elf (high), Simic 
hybrid, vedalken 

Suggested Classes: Druid, fighter, monk, wizard 


You might enjoy playing a character who belongs to the 
Simic Combine if one or more of the following state- 
ments are true: 


* You are drawn to the image of the mad scientist 
tinkering with the fundamental forces of life. 

* You like playing curious wizards, druids, or mutants. 

* Prying into secrets and mysteries inspires your 
curiosity. 

* You want to make the world a better place 
through research. 


JOINING THE SIMIC COMBINE 


Many paths lead people to the Simic Combine, all 

of them guided by the notion that tomorrow can be 
made better than today. All of the guild’s efforts strive 
to achieve a utopian future that they believe is within 
reach. When you join the Simic, choose one of the fol- 
lowing roles for your character. 


SCIENTIST 
If you are a spellcaster such as a wizard or a druid, you 


can find a natural home among the Simic as a scientist, 


magically manipulating the forces of life and nature 

to shift the world toward the guild's utopian ideal. 
Most Simic wizards specialize in the School of Trans- 
mutation, using their magic to alter living creatures 

or alter the natural environment. Simic druids often 
choose the Circle of the Land, putting similar magic to 
the guild’s service. Those who focus on manipulating 


life forms are known as biomancers, while those who 
focus on water, weather, and atmospheric conditions are 
called terraformers, but you can choose your own path 
of research. 


GUARDIAN 

If you are playing a Simic hybrid, you initially became 
involved in Simic research as a test subject in the 
Guardian Project. You volunteered to participate, but it’s 
possible there was some pressure on you, or you viewed 
it as the only way to be accepted in the guild. Your 
biological modifications make you ideally suited to spe- 
cific tasks, and you might come to operate as a spy, an 
infiltrator, or brute muscle. Good class options include 
fighter or rogue (of any archetype), or a monk of the Way 
of the Open Hand. 


DEEPSAGE 

You might instead choose an ascetic, contemplative life 
as a deepsage (perhaps as a wizard or monk). You would 
devote yourself to meditating on the philosophical prin- 
ciples of the Holdfast and the Upwelling, a pair of com- 
plementary ideas that describe the Simic approach to 
nature and the city. Deepsages inscribe short philosoph- 
ical riddles, bordering on paradoxes, into shells, exo- 
skeletons, and stones, and Simic guild members reflect 
on these sayings to advance their understanding of the 
combine’s role in the world. Deepsage wizards typically 
specialize in the School of Conjuration, and deepsage 
monks follow the Way of the Four Elements (focusing on 
air and water over the other two elements). 


BACKGROUND: SIMIC SCIENTIST 


Imagine a perfect world: one in which nature and civi- 
lization exist in harmony, adapted to each other; one in 
which life is shaped to match its environment and the 
environment is shaped to match life. That’s the world 
you have been trying to grow in the laboratories of the 
Simic Combine. Nature is all about adaptation, evolu- 
tion, and balance—but for it to keep up with the pace of 
advancing civilization, nature needs some help from bio- 
mancers and terraformers. If, along the way, you happen 
to create super-soldiers and mutant monsters that can 
bolster the combine’s defenses against the schemes and 
ambitions of the other guilds, so much the better. 


Skill Proficiencies: Arcana, Medicine 

Languages: Two of your choice 

Equipment: A Simic insignia, a set of commoner's 
clothes, a book of research notes, an ink pen, a bottle 
of squid ink, a flask of oil (made from blubber), a vial 
of acid (derived from digestive juices), a vial of fish 
scales, a vial of seaweed, a vial of jellyfish stingers, 
a glass bottle of unidentified slime, and a belt pouch 
containing 10 gp (Azorius 1-zino coins) 


CLADES AND PROJECTS 

As a Simic researcher, you are part of a clade—a diverse 
group of individuals combining disparate talents in pur- 
suit of a common goal—or a researcher on a specialized, 
short-term project focused on addressing an immediate 


need. You can roll a d6 or choose from the options in 
the Research Options table to determine your area 
of research. 


RESEARCH OPTIONS 

d6  Clade/Project 

1 Hull Clade, focused on protection and durability 
Fin Clade, focused on movement 

3 Gyre Clade, focused on cyclical patterns and 
metamagic 

4 Guardian Project, focused on creating guard 
monsters and super soldiers 

5 Crypsis Project, focused on intelligence and counter- 
intelligence 

6 Independent research in a new area 


FEATURE: RESEARCHER 
When you attempt to learn or recall a magical or scien- 
tific fact, if you don't know that information, you know 
where and from whom you can obtain it. Usually, this in- 
formation comes from a Simic laboratory, or sometimes 
from an Izzet facility, a library, a university, or an inde- 
pendent scholar or other learned person or creature. 
Knowing where the information can be found doesn't 
automatically enable you to learn it; you might need to 
offer bribes, favors, or other incentives to induce people 
to reveal their secrets. 

Your DM might rule that the knowledge you seek 
is secreted away in an inaccessible place, or that it 
simply can't be found. Unearthing the deepest secrets 
of the multiverse can require an adventure or even a 
whole campaign. 


SIMIC GUILD SPELLS 
Prerequisite: Spellcasting or Pact Magic class feature 


For you, the spells on the Simic Guild Spells table are 
added to the spell list of your spellcasting class. (If you 
are a multiclass character with multiple spell lists, these 
spells are added to all of them.) 


Simic GUILD SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 


Cantrip acid splash, druidcraft 
Ist detect poison and disease, expeditious retreat, 
jump 
2nd alter self, enhance ability, enlarge/reduce 
3rd gaseous form, water breathing, wind wall 
4th freedom of movement, polymorph 
5th creation 


When your magic causes physical alterations in 
yourself or others, the result often displays the charac- 
teristics of fish, amphibians, or other water-dwelling 
creatures. Blue-green eddies of magical energy some- 
times accompany your spellcasting, forming spirals that 
reflect the mathematical perfection of nature. 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 05 


94 


SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 

The bizarre science of the Simic Combine attracts a 
certain type of personality and encompasses a set of be- 
liefs about the nature of life. Simic members’ bonds and 
flaws derive from their scientific research—including 
their creation of new life forms, which they can become 
very attached to. 


PERSONALITY TRAITS 
d8 Personality Trait 


1 | can’t wait to see what | become next! 

2 lam convinced that everything inclines toward con- 
stant improvement. 

3 I’m eager to explain every detail of my most intricate 


experiments and theories to anyone who shows the 
least bit of interest. 

4  lassume that everyone needs even the most basic 
concepts explained to them. 

5  Idescribe everything that happens as if it were going 
into my research notes (and it often is). 

6  laminsatiably curious about the seemingly infinite 
forms and adaptations of life. 

7  lcan'tresist prying into anything forbidden, since it 
must be terribly interesting. 

8  lemploy a highly technical vocabulary to avoid 
imprecision and ambiguity in my communication. 


IDEALS 
dé Ideal 
Guild. My guild is all that really matters. (Any) 

2 Change. All life is meant to progress toward perfec- 
tion, and our work is to hurry it along—no matter 
what must be upended along the way. (Chaotic) 

3 Knowledge. Understanding the world is more import- 
ant than what you do with your knowledge. (Neutral) 

4 Greater Good. | want to reshape the world into higher 
forms of life so that all can enjoy evolution. (Good) 

5 Logic. It's foolish to let emotions and principles inter- 
fere with the conclusions of logic. (Lawful) 

6 Superiority. My vast intellect and strength are di- 
rected toward increasing my sway over others. (Evil) 


BONDS 
d6 Bond 
1  Ihelped create a krasis that | love like a pet and would 


carry with me everywhere ... except it's the size of a 
building, and it might eat me. 

2 In my laboratory, | discovered something that | think 
could eliminate half the life on Ravnica. 

3  Theother researchers in my clade are my family—a 
big, eccentric family including members and parts of 
many species. 

4 The laboratory where | did my research contains 
everything that is precious to me. 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


d6 Bond 

5 Iwill get revenge on the shortsighted fool who killed 
my precious krasis creation. 

6 Everything | do is an attempt to impress someone | 


love. 
FLAWS 
d6 Flaw 
1 ‘Ihave a rather embarrassing mutation that | do every- 


thing | can to keep hidden. 

2 I'm more interested in taking notes on monstrous 
anatomy than in fighting monsters. 

3 Every social situation I’m in seems to lead to my ask- 
ing rude personal questions. 

4 I'm supremely confident in my ability to adapt to any 
situation and handle any danger. 


5 I'll take any risk to earn recognition for my scientific 
brilliance. 
6 Ihave a tendency to take shortcuts in my research 


and any other tasks | have to complete. 


CONTACTS 
The fluid nature of clades, whose rosters span different 
laboratories and change as researchers discover new in- 
terests, creates abundant connections among the Simic. 
The guild members live in watery sinkholes called 
zonots, and their isolation shelters them from much con- 
tact with outsiders. Nonetheless, a fair number of Simic 
members are former members of other guilds. 

Roll twice on the Simic Contacts table (for an ally and 
a rival) and once on the Non-Simic Contacts table. 


SiMIC CONTACTS 


d8 Contact 

1  Myresearch builds on my parents’ work and takes it 
in interesting new directions. 

2  lfaserious problem confounds me, | can count on 
my mentor to provide clarity of thought. 

3  Aformer laboratory colleague went on to work on the 
Guardian Project. 

4  Aformer colleague has ventured into fields of 
research that are possibly immoral and almost cer- 
tainly illegal. 

5 A former lover is now the supervisor of a prominent 
clade. 

6  Mysibling has become an almost unrecognizable 
mutant. 

7  Anold friend has retreated into a secluded life as an 
ascetic deepsage, devoted to contemplating philo- 
sophical principles. 

8 My former clade supervisor is now engaged in field 
research studying some of the largest beasts and 
monsters on Ravnica. 


Non-Simic CONTACTS 


d10 Contact 
1 -My older sibling is upset that | didn't follow them into 
the Azorius. 


2 A Boros sergeant is always asking questions about my 
work, but | suspect they’re genuinely curious. 

3 A friend in my clade thinks | don't know they're a 
Dimir agent. 

4 | helped a Golgari spore druid with the fertilization 
and growth of their fungus field. 

5  Ican'tfathom what could have made my childhood 
friend run off and join the Gruul. 

6 Ilove comparing notes with my friend in the Izzet, 
though our fields of research are very different. 

7  lborrowed a lot of money from an Orzhov syndic to 
help finance my research. 

8 A Rakdos ringmaster has taken an interest in my 
research which, come to think of it, might make a nice 
sideshow act. 

9 | left the Selesnya—and a lover—behind when | 
joined the Simic. 

10 Roll an additional Simic contact; you can decide if the 
contact is an ally or a rival. 


How Do I FIT IN? 


As a Simic adventurer, your mission likely aligns with 
the Adaptationist philosophy; the disagreements and 
tensions among the guilds will soon erupt into open 
conflict, and your guild needs your help to ensure that 
the Simic survive. That help might come in the form of 
defending against Golgari incursions into Simic zonots 
or shielding Simic research from Azorius intrusion. It 
could also involve more subtle, diplomatic work to main- 
tain balance among the guilds, or subterfuge aimed at 
undermining another guild's grab for power. 
Self-improvement is also an important part of your 
mission. Anything you can do to make yourself more 
capable—whether learning a new spell or adopting a 
new hybridizing mutation—gives the Simic a stronger 
weapon in its arsenal. The combine must change to 


survive, and that means individual members of the guild 
must grow and adapt as well. 


A SIMIC PARTY 

An adventuring party drawn from the ranks of the Simic 
is typically formed around the nucleus of one or two 
mages, perhaps a biomancer (wizard) or a terraformer 
(druid). They might be accompanied by a soldier (proba- 
bly a Simic hybrid fighter) and a deepsage (monk). 


RANK AND RENOWN 

Tiers of responsibility and importance—functional 
ranks—create a hierarchy among the scientists of the 
Simic Combine. A scientist’s course of advancement is 
the path of increasing responsibility within a clade or 
project. Guardians and deepsages have more limited op- 
portunities for advancement, though they still gain the 
benefits of high renown scores. 


RANK 1: TECHNICIAN 
Prerequisite: Renown 3 or higher in the Simic Combine, 
Spellcasting or Pact Magic class feature 


As a technician, you can begin performing experiments, 
following the instructions of a researcher as you operate 
instruments, care for experimental subjects, extract 
samples of bodily fluids, and run errands up and down 
the zonot and out into the city. Such errands can bring 
you into contact with members of other guilds and lead 
to adventures. 

If you have any kind of pet, familiar, mount, or animal 
companion, you can add one random adaptation to it 
from the Minor Adaptations table (see the krasis section 
in chapter 6). Doing so requires 1d6 days of work (8 
hours per day) for each creature, and the work must be 
done in a Simic facility. 


RANK 2: RESEARCHER 
Prerequisite: Rank I and renown 10 or higher in the 
Simic Combine 


After doing your time as a technician, you are eligible 

to lead your own experiments. You must be associated 
with a clade or a project, and must work on experiments 
related to its primary focus under the general guidance 
of the clade or project leader. Project leaders are more 
hands-on, ensuring that your research contributes to 
reaching the immediate objective. Clade leaders check 
in from time to time, but they give you wide latitude to 
pursue your own experiments under the general aegis of 
the clade’s interests. 

If your research requires it, your project leader or 
clade leader can equip you with a Simic charm (de- 
scribed in chapter 5) before you undertake a mission or 
an experiment. In addition, you can call on a category 
1 krasis (see chapter 6 for the stat block) to assist you 
on any mission authorized by the guild. You choose the 
krasis’s two adaptations. 


LuMINARY (SPECIAL ROLE) 
Prerequisite: Renown 10 or higher in the Simic 
Combine 


As a guardian, deepsage, or other non-scientist within 
the Simic, you don't progress through ranks, but as a 
luminary you might be entrusted with the leadership of 
guerrilla or espionage missions, with other Simic hybrid 
agents under your command. Or you might be respected 
as a wise and enlightened teacher. 


If your work for the guild requires it, a project leader, 
clade leader, or other superior can equip you with a 
Simic charm (described in chapter 5) before you under- 
take a mission or an experiment on the guild's behalf. 

In addition, when you're on guild business, you can 
call on the following Simic hybrid agents to assist you: 
one hybrid brute or hybrid flier, up to two hybrid poi- 
soners or hybrid shockers, or 1d4 hybrid spies (see 
chapter 6 for these stat blocks). 


RANK 3: PROJECT LEADER 
Prerequisite: Rank 2 and renown 25 or higher in the 
Simic Combine 


A proven researcher, you are eligible to oversee your 
own project, directing the efforts of other researchers 
toward the solution of some problem facing the guild. 
The Speaker of your zonot gives you laboratory space, 
and you have a staff of 3d12 researchers (which use the 
stat blocks of commoners or merfolk from the Monster 
Manual). You can have this staff work on projects for 
you, which can include the creation of a category 2 kra- 
sis (see chapter 6 for the stat block) with adaptations of 
your choosing, which you can then bring outside the lab- 
oratory on important business, ideally under carefully 
controlled conditions. 

Hosting the work of a successful and important 
project reflects well on the Speaker of a zonot, so your 
Speaker keeps a close eye on your work. On the positive 


side, you can count on access to the considerable re- 
sources of the zonot as long as your research is going 
well. On the other hand, you can expect your Speaker to 
try to meddle in your work to ensure that your efforts re- 
main relevant to the overall goals of the Simic Combine. 


RANK 4: CLADE LEADER 
Prerequisite: Rank 2 and renown 50 or higher in the 
Simic Combine 


As a famous researcher or a successful project leader, 
you stand ready to take on a supervisory role for an en- 
tire clade. New clades rarely form, so you must wait for 
your clade leader to retire (one way or another) before a 
position exists for you to fill, except in truly exceptional 
circumstances. Similar to a project leader, you are re- 
sponsible for directing the efforts of researchers explor- 
ing a wide variety of projects related to the focus of your 
clade. Unless an experiment turns out to be especially 
interesting, these efforts can carry on without your su- 
pervision. If you need to, you can enlist the aid of 5d12 
researchers (which use the stat blocks of commoners 
or merfolk from the Monster Manual), and you can 
also request the support of hybrids, krasis, or any other 
creature associated with the Simic Combine (see the list 
in chapter 6) from the Speaker of any zonot where the 
members of your clade live and work. 

Because most clades span multiple zonots, you 
have status equal to the Speakers of the zonots. You 
have no voice on the Speakers' Chamber, unless you 
can persuade one or more of its members to speak on 
your behalf. 


SPEAKER (SPECIAL ROLE) 
Prerequisite: Renown 50 or hióher in the Simic 
Combine 


You are eligible to become the Speaker of a zonot. The 
selection of a new Speaker (in the event of an existing 
Speaker's retiring, dying, or otherwise leaving the po- 
sition) takes place through a combination of popular 
election and the input of the other eight Speakers, with 
the current Prime Speaker having the final word. If you 
emerge as the victor after this rigorous process, you as- 
sume the leadership of your zonot and are empowered 
to bring its concerns before the Speakers' Chamber. 

You are a political leader rather than a scientific one, 
so you have authority over other members of the com- 
bine only if they live and work in your zonot. If a clade 
has a laboratory in your zonot, you have the right (and 
responsibility) to supervise its activities to ensure com- 
pliance with laws and regulations, but not to interfere 
in its research beyond that point. And if the clade leader 
lives in a different zonot, you have no authority whatso- 
ever over that person. 


ENEMIES AND ALLIES 


The Simic Combine has an affinity for guilds that care 
for the forces of nature, and as such it has worked along- 
side the Selesnya, Gruul, and Golgari in the past. To a 
lesser extent, the combine also has a rapport with the 
other scientific guild, the Izzet. But overall, the Simic 
attitude toward other guilds is one of healthy caution 
bolstered by a general tendency toward isolation. 


Any guild could break the peace and send the entire 
world spiraling into war, so all the guilds are potential 
enemies— particularly if they direct their aggression at 
the Simic Combine. The Golgari Swarm has launched 
a direct attack against Zonot Four (located in the Sixth 
District), and they could expand that attack to other 
zonots at any time. Azorius arresters are prying into all 
the zonots, looking for evidence of wrongdoing. Thus, 
the Simic efforts at preparing for war are in danger, and 
the need for those efforts to be brought to fruition could 
arise at any time. 

Your most obvious allies are those who seek to re- 
strain the ambition of other guilds and maintain the 
balance of power. At various times, that category could 
include members of any other guild, particularly the 
Selesnya Conclave. Everyone (with the possible excep- 
tion of the chaotic Rakdos and Gruul) has an occasional 
interest in maintaining the status quo, no matter how 
revolutionary that notion might seem at other times. 
LL —— — À—————————————————————J. 

THE Simic View ON OTHER GUILDS 

The most insular members of the Simic Combine avoid 

interacting with other guilds entirely. No one but another 

Simic scientist could ever fully grasp or appreciate the 

work of the guild, and too many of the other guilds react 

with fear to what they don't understand. 


Azorius. "An absurd and inelegant construct, forever 
trapped in a maze of their own making. They would 
outlaw evolution if they could. And if any of them truly 
seek utopia, the rest are far too busy shuffling papers to 
notice. Avoid their attention at all costs." 

Boros. “They style themselves the agents of ‘justice.’ 

But the law is no better excuse for aggression than 
any other.” 

Dimir. “We need not compete. Let them be, and they will 
let us be—but observe them closely.” 

Golgari. "Less an organization than an infestation. They 
are nearly as adaptable as we are, and they seem intent 
on competition. More than any other guild, they pres- 
sure us to improve.” 

Gruul. “The Gruul conceive of nature only in terms of 
savagery and privation. But their ways are no less a 
response to civilization than our own. They will survive, 
barely, and perhaps one day they will understand.” 

Izzet. “The Izzet have spent ten thousand years mimicking 
the appearance of research, producing more pyrotech- 
nics than progress. Surely that is a performance to rival 
the Rakdos.” 

Orzhov. “They hoard their treasure throughout their point- 
less lives and lengthy afterlives. With such riches, we 
could swiftly bring about a future in which gold is as 
irrelevant as death.” 

Rakdos. “Camouflage, mimicry, resilience, and versatility. 
If the guilds were species, we would count the Rakdos 
among the most impressive. But they aren’t, and that 
makes the Rakdos far more erratic—and dangerous.” 

Selesnya. “Like us, they seek a synthesis between ‘natural’ 
and ‘artificial’ systems. Unlike us, they wish to achieve it 
by unconditional surrender. They are adequate partners 
in stable times, but in the present climate they have little 
to offer.” 

———————— == 


CHAPTER 2 | GUILDS OF RAVNICA 


97 


CHAPTER 3: THE TENTH DISTRICT 


HE TENTH DISTRICT IS A SPRAWLING PLACE. 
To be governed effectively, it is broken into six 
precincts, each the size of a small city. This 
chapter describes the various features you 
can find in those wondrous places. 


THE SIX PRECINCTS 


Each precinct, as well as its distinct personality, is 
explored in its own section later in this chapter. Here 
are brief descriptions of each of them to help orient you 
before your tour: 


Precinct One. This is the hub of the wealthy and 
powerful, where courtly games and espionage play 
out among visitors gawking at the impressive archi- 
tecture. The precinct is also known as the Guild- 
pact Precinct. 

Precinct Two. Many professionals live here in clean and 
orderly neighborhoods, in the shadow of New Prahv, 
while mob bosses coerce residents in order to enrich 
themselves and influence local politics. 

Precinct Three. In the Greenbelt, nature has en- 
croached into the urban environment to varying de- 
grees, and folk here provide bountiful sustenance and 
domesticated beasts for most of the district. 

Precinct Four. Constantly in a state of turmoil, the 
scarred streets of Precinct Four are a proving ground 
for soldiers and marauders alike. Visitors here had 
best be spoiling for a fight. 

Precinct Five. Precinct Five is where the learned folk 
of the Tenth District gather to discuss theory or to 
put their knowledge to practical use in the precinct's 
many schools, libraries, and laboratories. 

Precinct Six. In the hardscrabble neighborhoods of Pre- 
cinct Six, the working folk eke out a living by toiling at 
warehouses, docks, and factories controlled by callous 
employers. When night comes, the residents hide in- 
doors to avoid becoming prey to creatures that stalk 
the darkness. 


PEOPLE AND RUMORS 


Each precinct's section includes two tables that can help 
you, as DM, improvise as characters explore that part 
of the city. 

When a character wants to talk to a person on the 
street, you can roll on the People on the Street table for 
the precinct. Unless otherwise noted, these NPCs can 
be of any race. They might use the Monster Manual stat 
blocks for commoners, guards, or other creatures, at 
your discretion. 

Whenever characters are gathering information or 
talking with contacts in a precinct, you can use the Ru- 
mors table for the precinct to add some flavor to their 
interactions or to generate adventure hooks. 


MAJOR TRADE WAYS 


Two major avenues run across the whole Tenth District, 
crossing precinct lines. 

Tin Street is the longest thoroughfare in the city, a vi- 
tal center of trade, and a hub of activity day and night. In 
addition to its shopping attractions, Tin Street is also a 
popular spot for nightlife, with its many restaurants and 
theaters. Much of the street runs through the western 
part of Precinct Four, and other parts are claimed by 
goblin gangs. The prominent presence of Boros soldiers 
along the length of Tin Street helps the populace feel 
safer, but the threat of rubblebelt raiders and goblin 
thieves remains. 

The Transguild Promenade makes its way across the 
district from the edge of the rubblebelt in Precinct Four 
to the southern gates of Precinct One. The Promenade's 
northern reach is heavily patrolled by Boros soldiers, 
and caravans coming from the north employ heavily 
armed escorts to ensure their safe passage through the 
ruined areas. Markets and parks line the avenue as it 
winds through Precinct One, and parades clog the street 
on festive holidays. 


BENEATH THE STREETS 


Even though most Ravnicans think the city begins at 
ground level and stretches upward, the part of the city 
that lies beneath the streets impacts the lives of every- 
one. Immediately underground are the city works, such 
as the sewers and the transit system. Below the complex 
network of tunnels and passages that make up the city 
works lies the undercity—a realm populated by crea- 
tures that shun the surface world. 


CITY WORKS 


The Izzet League is responsible for constructing and 
maintaining public works, including sewers and other 
pipe systems. Many members of the Golgari Swarm 
live or work here, farming fungus and scavenging for 
valuable trinkets in the muck. Orzhov crypts and vaults, 
Dimir hideouts, and Simic laboratories can also be 
found in the city works. 
---————————————————- 
MILLENNIAL PLATFORM 
Anchored by enormous chains at the juncture of Precincts 
One, Three, and Four, the Millennial Platform is a floating 
observation deck that affords the best overhead view of the 
Tenth District. The most exclusive restaurant in the district 
is located here. Every citizen is given a token that can be 
redeemed for one airship ride to the platform anytime 
during the coming year, but those who want to dine at the 
Millennial Restaurant might have to make a reservation 
months in advance. 
— pÓ————— c 


CHAPTER 3| THE TENTH DISTRICT 99 


"a 


J. [Nn 


INE PRECI 


. CHAMBER OF THE GUILDPACT 
. PLAZA AVENUE 

. TENTH DISTRICT PLAZA 
. ORZHOVA 

. VIZKOPA BANK 

. AUGUSTIN STATION 

. NEW PRAHV 

. VITU-GHAZI 

. SKARRG 

. SUNHOME 

. NIVIX 

. ZONOT SEVEN 

. PRISM UNIVERSITY 

. DEADBRIDGE CHASM 

. GORE HOUSE 

. KAMEN FORTRESS 


[d 


PRECINCT THREE 


k - 
Sas TRANSGUILD PROMENADE 


SEWERS 

A vast, winding sewer network runs under the Tenth 
District, lit by continual flame spells. Some of the tun- 
nels are simply storm sewers, meant to carry rainwater 
(and the debris it washes from the streets) into great cis- 
terns, where it is purified and sent into the pipes in the 
plumbing system that serves Ravnica’s nicer neighbor- 
hoods. Others carry waste and refuse out of those neigh- 
borhoods, depositing it in different cisterns or dumping 
it into the subterranean oceans of the undercity. 


PIPE TUNNELS 

Around the sewer system, smaller tunnel networks 
carry steam, distilled magical energy, and water to 
various places throughout the city. These passages are 
large enough for a humanoid to walk through but are 
often quite uncomfortable, filled with impure air and 
stifling heat. 


TRANSIT TUNNELS 

Magically charged tracks line the floors of tube-like tun- 
nels that send vehicular constructs to major locations 
in the Tenth District and beyond. The tunnels open 

into small stations that have staircases leading up to 
the surface. 


CRYPTS 

Ancient resting places lie in secret chambers below the 
surface of Ravnica. Many of them have been magically 
warded to prevent unauthorized entry. Some of these 
sites are homes for restless undead or gathering places 
for thieves, smugglers, and other criminals. 


UNDERCITY 


Deep below the Tenth District lies a vast, thriving com- 
munity of folk who have no desire or choice to live under 
the sky. Here, the Dimir, Golgari, Rakdos, and Simic 
hold sway in the caverns, causeways, and bodies of wa- 
ter that grace the darkest depths. 


NIGHTVEIL 

The sprawling residence of many of the House Dimir 
elite, parts of Nightveil overlap the Tenth District in 
the undercity. An extensive system of natural caverns 
houses high-walled mansions and sunken crypts that 
have a grand, sinister motif. Patrolling specters and 
other incorporeal undead make it difficult for the 
unwelcome to enter. 


DUSKMANTLE 
The Dimir guildhall is protected by memory wards 
(glyphs of warding that store modify memory 
spells) to ensure that few know of its existence. 
Those who are called there never remember 


what transpired, beyond what is necessary. Most as- 
sume that the place lies somewhere within Nightveil, 
but it could lie anywhere in the undercity. 


KOROZDA 

Also called the Maze of Decay, Korozda is an arched 
subterranean cathedral surrounded by fungal hedge- 
rows and moss-encrusted ruins. In its center is a great 
amphitheater where the most important issues are 
brought to the Golgari’s attention. Penvar, the Hanging 
Keep, is a castle fixed upside down on the ceiling above 
the entrance to Korozda. Its soldiers, predominantly the 
insectoid kraul, prevent any unauthorized visitors to the 
Golgari stronghold. 


Rrx MAADI 

Known as the Dungeon Palace, this is the guildhall of 
the Cult of Rakdos, and the lava-filled lair of the demon 
himself. An immense, crumbling, red stone staircase 
called the Demon's Vestibule begins the journey from 
the Smelting District down into the depths, treating trav- 
elers to terrifying images depicted on banners as they 
descend. Farther down, the temperature rises and the 
passage eventually opens up into the Festival Grounds, 
where the bloodiest performances of the Rakdos and 
their torturous equipment are on display. 


THE UNDERSEA 

Rivers, lakes, and oceans run deep below the surface of 
Ravnica. Several of them connect to the Simic habitats 
known as zonots. They are also used as thoroughfares 
by aquatic races and monsters. 


PRECINCT ONE 


The grandeur of Precinct One is the heart of Ravnica’s 
civilization, and visitors gawk at the impressive architec- 
ture and rub shoulders with the rich and powerful. Im- 
maculately maintained avenues and manicured gardens 
create an impression of order, civility, and high culture. 
During the day, the streets are filled with tourists, gov- 
ernment officials, diplomats, and wealthy merchants and 
financiers. At night, most of Precinct One is quiet, with a 
few lit carriages drawn by constructs and well-groomed 
beasts making their way to exclusive nightclubs and 
restaurants. 

The people who live in this precinct are accustomed to 
having high-quality goods and spending a lot of leisure 
time in social engagements. Neighbors are polite and 
affable toward others of their station, but gossip is quite 
common and accepted. 


AFFILIATED GUILDS 


All the guilds have interests here. Lawyers, bureaucrats, 
and soldiers of the Azorius Senate are found throughout 
the precinct. The Orzhov Syndicate runs many of the 
clubs and restaurants here, and this is the location of 
both its guildhall, Orzhova, and its monumental Vizkopa 
Bank. The Selesnya Conclave helps to maintain the 
grounds around the plaza and is often involved as dip- 
lomatic envoys for meetings and negotiations that take 
place here. 


NEIGHBORHOODS AND LANDMARKS 


Precinct One has few permanent residents, except for 
the very wealthy and some government officials who 
live in well-appointed apartments. Buildings here are of 
modern construction and well maintained. 


TENTH DISTRICT PLAZA 

A popular place for meetings, recreation, shopping, and 
simply being seen, Tenth District Plaza is a beautiful 
oasis of calm and cleanliness. Kept perpetually clean 
through magic and constantly patrolled by Azorius ar- 
resters, the plaza is considered neutral ground for every 
guild, gang, and faction in the city. Drawing a weapon 
within the confines of the plaza is met with a swift re- 
sponse from the arresters and marks the offender as a 
person who can't be trusted. 


CHAMBER OF THE GUILDPACT 

The long promenade of Plaza Avenue connects the 
south end of Tenth District Plaza to the great meeting 
hall of the guilds. The Chamber of the Guildpact is 
accessible by a grand staircase leading up into a cav- 
ernous hall where visitors and dignitaries from all over 
Ravnica meet. The Living Guildpact has an office here, 
but he is seldom present. In his absence, various func- 
tionaries who occupy the upper levels of the chamber try 
to carry out his work of adjudicating disputes between 
guilds and maintaining a semblance of peace. 


PLAZA EAST 

This neighborhood is home to many government offi- 
cials, and it offers temporary housing for diplomats. 
Stately homes intermingle with more modest apart- 
ments. Transportation by carriage between Plaza East 
and Tenth District Plaza is readily available, especially 
in the morning and evening. 


PLAZA WEST 

The best nightclubs and restaurants, most of which 
are run by the Orzhov, are in this neighborhood. There 
are few permanent residents in Plaza West, aside from 
the very rich who reside in spacious, luxurious, multi- 
level homes. 


PLAZA SOUTH 

Derogatorily known as Downside by the nobles and 
elite, this neighborhood is the hub of commerce in 
Precinct One and has more permanent residents than 
the other neighborhoods. Specialty shops catering to 
tourists and the wealthy line the route of the Transguild 
Promenade as it runs through the area. The residents 
here tend to be well-to-do merchants and crafters, mak- 
ing their living off visitors and a few rich clients. 


ORZHOVA 

The Orzhov Syndicate's lavish guildhall, also known as 
the Church of Deals, is on the western edge of Tenth 
District Plaza. The towering spires and stained glass 
windows house the grand gatherings of the guild and 
also serve as the quarters for its most elite members, 
including the ghosts of the Obzedat. Below the cathedral 
lies the mausoleum, glittering with opulence and serv- 
ing as a resting place and a gathering point for secret 
meetings far from prying eyes and the Guildpact. 


VIZKOPA BANK 

The Orzhov-controlled main bank of Ravnica, and also 
the place where the Orzhov mint their coins, Vizkopa 
Bank is a giant, opulent structure guarded by gargoyles. 
Spirits in debt to the Orzhov float within its halls and 
around the outside of the building. 


GOODS AND SERVICES 


There are few general shops in Precinct One, but luxury 
items, grooming supplies, and fine clothing are available 
in boutiques in the area. Even practical items, such as 
backpacks and lanterns, are expensive and of the high- 
est quality, bearing artisan's flourishes. Standard adven- 
turing gear, including weapons and armor, is difficult 

to procure. 

Meals and lodging suitable for a wealthy or aristo- 
cratic lifestyle are readily available in Plaza West, and 
comfortable accommodations are the norm for the offi- 
cials in Plaza East and the merchants in Plaza South. 
Poorer people, including anyone who maintains a life- 
style as expensive as modest, might be seen as uncouth 
or undesirable. 

At the DM's discretion, adventurers who don't main- 
tain a comfortable or more expensive lifestyle might 
have disadvantage on Charisma checks when interact- 
ing with residents of Precinct One. 


CHAPTER 3 FHE TENTH DISTRICT 


LAW AND CRIME 


The privileged and wealthy people who live in Precinct 
One believe that the purpose of law enforcement is to 
serve them and keep them protected from the more 
unsavory elements of the city. Government officials here 
are more practical in their view of the law, recogniz- 

ing that Precinct One is the entry point into the Tenth 
for many visitors and thus it must keep up the best of 
appearances. Azorius law enforcement officers are 
ever-present here, with at least one arrester assigned 

to patrol each street in Precinct One. It is illegal to 
brandish a weapon here, and people who walk around 
with unconcealed weapons (even sheathed ones) draw 
attention. Minor crimes are reported as soon as they are 
witnessed or discovered. Due to enhanced monitoring 
by precognitive mages, the typical response time to 

any crime is 1d6 minutes, and the squad consists of an 
Azorius lawmage and three soldiers (see chapter 6 for 
these stat blocks). 

Very little street-level illicit activity takes place within 
Precinct One due to Azorius's constant surveillance. 
Private rooms in exclusive establishments are, however, 
sometimes used by the Orzhov and other wealthy crim- 
inals to conduct high-end black market transactions 
away from the eyes of law enforcement. 


PEOPLE AND RUMORS 


PEOPLE ON THE STREET—PRECINCT ONE 
d12 Description 


-— 


Banker, heading to a favorite restaurant 

Diplomat, heading to the Chamber of the Guildpact 
Gardener, pruning vegetation 

Ghost, looking for directions to Orzhova 
Government official, late for an appointment 
Jeweler, heading to a grooming salon 

Mob boss, leaving a nightclub 

Noble, taking in the sights 


wo won OQ un FW NY 


Opera singer, enjoying a meal outside 
10 Painter, working on a street scene 

11_ Tourist, gawking at everything 
Translator, feeding some birds 


RUMORS—PRECINCT ONE 


d6 


1 


Rumor 

“Oh, dear! Did you hear all that commotion yester- 
day evening near the opera house? It appears that a 
couple of dignitaries went missing during the perfor- 
mance." 

"| hear that Nolson has purses and handbags in his 
inventory that bear some sort of magic. They'll get 
snapped up quickly, l'Il wager.” 

"A most dreadful moaning was coming from the 
plaza today. My friend said she saw a wailing spirit 
floating over the park. | wish they'd stay in the bank." 
"Such a commotion at the Wayfinder Club last night. 
| heard the fight, but a friend told me there were 
blades drawn, and the perpetrator escaped!" 

“Can you believe the gall of some people? | saw a 
couple of dirty ruffians in my neighborhood last 
night, and they were defacing the walls of the court- 
house!" 

^| still can't believe that crazy old Orzhov syndic just 
handing out zinos near the plaza, muttering "The end 
is near.' She'll invite nothing but undesirables sniffing 
for free coin." 


PRECINCT Two 


Small houses, modest apartments, and commercial 
shops are sprinkled throughout Precinct Two, a place 
that law enforcement officers, lawyers, retired soldiers, 
and well-off working families call home. Corner shops 
cater to everyday needs, and many establishments are 
run by ex-soldiers. Streets are kept tidy, and buildings 
are maintained to be serviceable. Under the precinct's 
urbane veneer, tension simmers between law officers 
and the opportunistic crime families who call this pre- 
cinct home. 

The folk who live in this precinct believe in perform- 
ing civic duties, conforming to your role, and maintain- 
ing strong friendships and family ties. Good neighbors 
show respect to one another and enjoy competing 
among themselves to achieve greater successes. 


AFFILIATED GUILDS 


New Prahv, the Azorius Senate guildhall, is located 
at the eastern end of the precinct, and many resi- 
dents work there. Some active officers and retired 
soldiers from the Boros Legion make their homes in 
this precinct. The Orzhov Syndicate has a presence 
here through its connections to many of the small 
businesses. 


NEIGHBORHOODS AND LANDMARKS 


Most of Precinct Two is occupied by small commercial 
centers and rows of simple houses. It is populous but 
not stiflingly so. 


NEW PRAHV 
The tallest structure in the Tenth District, the austere 
New Prahv consists of three towering columns, remind- 


ing everyone of the omnipresence of the Azorius Senate. 
Each column serves as the headquarters for one of the 
three branches of the senate. Inside, spacious chambers 
on the lower floors give way to a host of offices upstairs 
where day-to-day assignments are issued and the strat- 
egy of maintaining law is continually honed. 


WHITESTONE 

Whitestone is an orderly neighborhood on the northern 
side of the precinct, named for its rows of alabaster 
stone houses. It was built up by the Azorius to serve as a 
housing zone for many who work in New Prahv. To meet 
the demands of construction, many residents of this 
section of the city had to be relocated to the much more 
densely populated Griffin Heights. 


GRIFFIN HEIGHTS 

Two-story houses are nestled in the rolling hills of this 
neighborhood in the southern section of the precinct. 
Griffin Heights is rife with corruption, and less scru- 
pulous government officials exchange information and 
money with the Orzhov in business establishments here. 
The locals are fiercely loyal to the Orzhov knights who 
watch over them, dutifully paying their protection fees. 


AUGUSTIN STATION 

The main airship station for the Tenth District, Au- 
gustin Station is located at the western end of Griffin 
Heights. Travelers from all over Ravnica are carried in 
various forms of air travel: from gondolas hung from 
giant balloons to compartments strapped to the backs 
of enormous floating beasts bred by the Simic Combine. 
Augustin Station has twenty platforms, with flights ar- 
riving and leaving at all hours. The most popular flight 
is to the Millennial Platform, a journey that costs 5 sp 
per passenger. Other flights carry passengers to smaller 


4 EKA n. 97 Si 
OS AUGUSTIN STATION Ma 
Laer 4 


E 
Ks 


stations in each precinct of the Tenth District (1 gp), to 
large stations in each other district (10 gp), and to vari- 
ous other stations around the world (1 gp per mile). 


STATUE OF AGRUS Kos 

A ten-foot-tall granite statue of a Boros Legion soldier 
stands in a small park in Whitestone, surrounded by 
weatherworn tables. During the Decamillennial Cele- 
bration seventy-six years ago, Agrus Kos became a hero 
by foiling various schemes to undermine the Guildpact. 
His statue has become a social gathering point for war 
veterans, mob contacts, and spies who talk as they play 
various strategy games. 


GOODS AND SERVICES 


Most any sort of merchandise can be acquired from 
some shop in Precinct Two. Former soldiers and 
ex-adventurers run many of the businesses here, and 
weapons and armor are commonly available in Griffin 
Heights. Meals and lodging are often of modest or com- 
fortable quality in this precinct, which has lots of board- 
ing houses instead of inns. Corner taverns are frequent 
and serve as the centers of neighborhood society. 

The people who live in Precinct Two aren't fond of 
people who don't fit in with them, and that includes 
those of both higher and lower means. People who don't 
maintain at least a modest lifestyle are viewed as lazy 
and undesirable, and those who aspire to a wealthy or 
aristocratic lifestyle are seen as arrogant snobs. At the 
DM's discretion, adventurers in either category could 
have disadvantage on Charisma checks when interact- 
ing with residents of Precinct Two. 


LAW AND CRIME 
Many citizens in Precinct Two work for the Azorius, but 
others feel stifled by the guild's intrusive presence under 
the shadow of New Prahv. Most residents respect order, 
but some rely more on Orzhov protection than on Azo- 
rius law. Almost everyone here knows someone who is 
trained in the use of weapons. The typical response to a 


reported crime is about 2d6 minutes, and the squad con- 


sists of two Azorius soldiers (see chapter 6 for the stat 
block) or 1d6 Orzhov thugs (from the Monster Manual). 

The organized crime elements of the neighborhoods 
are locked in a power struggle against law enforcement 
officials. This conflict rarely manifests in open violence, 
but often antagonists "disappear" or “have an accident.” 
Overt violent crimes sometimes involve ex-soldiers who 
have been psychologically scarred by past battles. 


PEOPLE AND RUMORS 


PEOPLE ON THE STREET—PRECINCT Two 


d12 Description 

1  Arrester, off duty and out buying produce 
Arrester, on duty and watching for trouble 
Baker, returning from a long work shift 
Carpenter, searching for a good pack animal 
Chandler, fuming after a recent argument 


nuk WwW hJ 


Government official, enjoying a day off 


d12 Description 
7 Locksmith, on the way to unlock a door 
Mob enforcer, trailing a debtor 
9 Retired soldier, heading to a chess game 
10 Shopkeeper, taking a child out for a treat 
11 Teenager, heading to a friend's house 
12 Tourist, heading to the Millennial Platform 


RUMORS—PRECINCT Two 


d6 Rumor 

1 "Can you believe the deals that Janus has this week in 
his shop? | wonder if he's in trouble, trying to move 
his merchandise so quickly." 

2  "Igotatip on some high-quality blades at Minera's. 
She's looking to find good homes for them, and she 
says some are enchanted." 

3 "Two Boros minotaurs garrisoned at Sunhome were 
meeting with old friends at Newson's Tavern last 
night. They spent most of the night telling stories 
about a madness taking hold of their ranks." 

4 "An airship docked in the middle of the night at 
Augustin Station without any people on board. No 
one knows how it got there without a crew." 

5 “This is the third person gone missing in Griffin 
Heights this week. | hear they were all gamblers and 
deep in it. Must’ve owed way too much.” 

6 “Did you hear about that lawmage who went crazy? 
They had to send two squads of arresters to bring 
him down. He kept telling them ‘A homunculus made 


me do it.’ | don’t want to know what ‘it’ is.” 


PRECINCT THREE 


Ample parks, busy stables, and large gardens combine 
to create a vibrant environment in Precinct Three. Nat- 
ural and urban life intermingle throughout the precinct, 
and the people who reside here view it as a respite from 
most other places in the Tenth District. Folk here tend 
to live simply, and generations of families have dwelt in 
the same structures for hundreds of years. During the 
day, the gardens, small pastures, and stables are tended 
by young and old. Evenings are given over to commu- 
nal gatherings, sometimes featuring performances by 
trained beasts or storytelling. 

The people of Precinct Three are comfortable with liv- 
ing around nature. They have no problems with pets or 
beastly companions sharing their space as well as resid- 
ing in multifamily structures. Good neighbors help tend 
to plants, animals, and children whenever necessary. 


AFFILIATED GUILDS 


The Selesnya Conclave’s influence on this area is 
strong, and its guildhall, the towering tree of Vitu-Ghazi, 
stands at the northern edge of the precinct. Members of 
the Gruul Clans sometimes venture into the northern 
part of the precinct, rarely with peaceful intentions. 


NEIGHBORHOODS AND LANDMARKS 


Precinct Three is made up of old stone structures 
partially reclaimed by nature, standing alongside 
well-preserved wooden buildings that have been en- 
hanced by Selesnya magic. 


ViTU-GHAZI 


The Selesnya guildhall, a towering tree that also serves 
as a cathedral to Mat'Selesnya, is the epicenter of Se- 
lesnya culture and law. Members of the conclave from 
across Ravnica make pilgrimages to Vitu-Ghazi in 
hopes of finding a spiritual connection with the heart of 
the guild. All who come without ill intent in their heart 
are welcome to visit the public areas of the tree. 


THE CANOPY 

The northern neighborhood of the precinct is covered in 
tall trees, all of which are overshadowed by Vitu-Ghazi. 
To accommodate a growing population, buildings are 
situated around the trees and on the larger branches, 
making use of a network of ladders and rope walkways. 


THE GREAT CONCOURSE 

A network of elevated roadways links many of the most 
important Selesnya communities near Vitu-Ghazi. The 
polished white stone of the roadways gleams in the sun, 
and the pathways are topped with lush trees, grasses, 
and flowers. On high holy days, its central hub, called 
the Great Concourse, serves as a gathering place for 
throngs of Selesnya devotees. On most other days, 

the Concourse is a teeming marketplace where goods 
transported across the city on the great roadways are 
bought and sold. 


CONCORDANCE 
Once known as the Old City, the eastern neighborhood 
of Concordance is the oldest section of the precinct. 


\ PTER THE TENTH DISTRICT 


Many buildings in this area were once Orzhov struc- 
tures, but they have been reclaimed by moss, shrubs, 
and other growth that make them blend in with the 
homes, parks, and the Selesnya vernadi that fill the rest 
of the neighborhood. The Great Concourse runs over- 
head through most of the neighborhood. 


BEAST HAVEN 

The western neighborhood has many small pastures 
and stables, some of which are on open, multilevel 
structures. The area is filled with the sights, sounds, 
and smells of beasts of many sorts. Here, beasts are 
trained for labor and sold to customers from across 

the city. Every so often, a beast escapes captivity and 
rampages through the neighborhood, but the tough 
residents are usually able to bring any disruption under 
control quickly. 


GOODS AND SERVICES 


The bounty of nature is plentiful in Precinct Three, 
which serves as the main source of food for the Tenth 
District. The finest steeds and livestock are raised here, 
as well as many war beasts (although they're often 
trained in Precinct Four). Unlike in most other pre- 
cincts, barter is an acceptable form of transaction here, 
and some vendors outright reject payment in coin of any 
kind. Manufactured goods are relatively hard to find, ex- 
cept in large markets such as the Great Concourse. 

Meals and lodging are widely varied, from squalid to 
comfortable, depending on the neighborhood. In gen- 
eral, the neighborhoods in Concordance tend toward 
the more expensive end of that scale, and those in 
Beast Haven more toward the other end. The residents 
of Precinct Three don’t put much stock in personal ap- 
pearance, and they're slow to pass judgment on anyone 
based on visible standards of wealth. The truly wretched 
sometimes evoke pity and sometimes scorn, and the 
very wealthy are generally disliked. 

At the DM's discretion, adventurers who maintain a 
wealthy or aristocratic lifestyle could have disadvantage 
on Charisma checks when interacting with residents of 
Precinct Three. 


LAW AND CRIME 


Most of Precinct Three is policed by its residents, occa- 
sionally supplemented by Boros troops when a serious 
threat rears its head. Each block elects a watch captain, 
who receives weapon training from Selesnya soldiers. 
The captain can call on additional citizens for support in 
case of a crisis. The typical response to a reported crime 
takes about 1d8 minutes, and the squad consists of a 
watch captain (a scout) with two guards or two wolves. 
In Concordance, it's either a knight or a Selesnya druid 
with a topiary guardian (awakened tree). See the Mon- 
ster Manual for these creatures' stat blocks. 

Crime usually takes one of two forms in Precinct 
Three. Some residents engage in outright banditry, but 
they typically target visitors or go outside the precinct 
to do their dirty work. More common are incidents of 
livestock theft, which sometimes lead to outbreaks of vi- 
olence between neighbors, particularly in Beast Haven. 


PEOPLE AND RUMORS 


PEOPLE ON THE STREET—PRECINCT THREE 


di2 


iD O00 4 OQ Un d wn — 


Description 

Beast trainer, walking an animal on a leash 
Awakened shrub, completing an errand 
Centaur, out to get the family some food 
Evangelist, trying to win Selesnya converts 
Farmer, using a healing balm after a hard day 
Guide, taking a wolf out for a stroll 

Healer, on the way to tend to someone sick 
Ledev guardian, on patrol 

Pilgrim, looking for directions to Vitu-Ghazi 
Storyteller, practicing oration out on the street 
Teamster, carrying a broken wagon wheel 
Woodcarver, whistling a familiar song 


RuMORS—PRECINCT THREE 


d6 
1 


Rumor 
“Something keeps spooking the pack animals. | won- 
der what it could be?” 

"| hear there's an old granary in the rubblebelt that's 
filled with bandit plunder. Probably worth a peek!" 
"The giant spiders above Velen's Rest have become 
aggressive as of late. | heard someone got poisoned 
by one yesterday." 

"Can you believe they're going to close Vitu-Ghazi to 
visitors tomorrow? | wonder what's going on." 
"Those rumblings that shook the ground last night 
were definitely wurms tunneling. I’m sure the 
Selesnya aren't pleased." 

"We should go find that loxodon priest and see if 
she's still having visions. I'll bet we can get her 

to tell us our future!" 


PRECINCT FOUR 


Few days or nights pass quietly in Precinct Four. The 
frequent din of battle as Boros soldiers guard against 
Gruul marauders, the strange sounds of volatile magic 
emanating from Izzet experiments, and the occasional 
explosive flare-ups of goblin gang wars keep the precinct 
a dynamic and dangerous place. Its buildings include 
ramshackle tenements damaged by conflict, impregna- 
ble fortresses and laboratories, and bustling markets 
filled with merchants ready to defend themselves and 
their wares. 

The people of Precinct Four are always ready for 
a fight. Being able to defend oneself and adapting to 
change are the most important qualities in this precinct. 
Good neighbors are your battle mates when you're fight- 
ing for your home or your life. 


AFFILIATED GUILDS 


The Boros Legion's guildhall fortress, Sunhome, is lo- 
cated here, and that guild is the heart of the precinct's 
defense against the savage forces that come from the 
northern rubblebelt. The Izzet League often likes to 

test its latest experiments in this precinct. Its guildhall, 
Nivix, towers over the south end. The Gruul Clans fre- 
quently raid into the rest of the precinct from the rubble- 
belt in the north. The Cult of Rakdos delights in sowing 
mayhem here, stoking the fires of conflict and gathering 
inspiration for future performances. 


CHAPTER THE TENTH DISTRI 


NEIGHBORHOODS AND LANDMARKS 


Precinct Four is home to a wide range of folk, most of 
whom are used to fighting for a living. Transients, sol- 
diers, goblin gang members, and hardy merchants call 
this precinct home. 


SUNHOME 

The seat of the Boros Legion's power, the guildhall 
known as Sunhome is an imposing structure that 
serves as a fortress, barracks, and spiritual center. It 
is widely believed to be impregnable and serves as a 
reminder to attackers from the north of the strength of 
Boros resolve. 


NIVIX 

One of the tallest towers in Ravnica, this impressive 
structure crackles with the wild power of the Izzet and 
serves as their guildhall. Filled with laboratories, test- 
ing facilities, and housing for their inventors, Nivix is the 
center of Izzet innovation. 


RED WASTES 

The rubblebelt to the north is a wasteland filled with 
ruins, gutted buildings, and debris-ridden streets. Aside 
from the Gruul Clans, the only citizens who live in the 
neighborhood are the ones too stubborn to move away. 
The Gruul share the space with ferocious beasts, ele- 
mentals, and other monsters. 


TT NER ES E 


A -ueum 


THE BULWARK PEOPLE AND RUMORS 
The neighborhood between Sunhome and Nivix is filled x 
with reinforced structures that serve as low-rent apart- PEOPLE ON THE STREET—PRECINCT FOUR 
ments and shops. Those who live in the Bulwark are di2 
mainly workers or professionals who see opportunity in 


Description 


supporting the Boros garrison. 1 Bounty hunter, asking about a mark 
2 Displaced merchant, looking for a new home 

SKARRG 3 Goblin messenger, anxious and impatient 
The Gruul Clans periodically converge on the gutted, A PiealericovaredinBlood 
cratered remains of a huge palace in the Red Wastes y 

: 5 Leatherworker, carrying some flowers 
where a great bonfire perpetually burns. Skarrg is the h rei 
closest thing the Gruul have to a guildhall—a place 6 Mer ial W kk ng ane 
where their clans can come together, roast giant boars, 7 Scientist, lost in thought 
boast of their exploits, and form something akin to ca- 8 Street urchin, busking for money 
maraderie before they go their separate, violent ways. 9 Soldier, on duty and eating a quick bite 
It's not neutral ground, though—old grudges frequently 10 Soldier, off duty and fixing his armor 
boil over into combat. Outsiders are never welcome. 11 Thrill seeker, hoping to see some Gruul raiders 


GOODS AND SERVICES 12 Transient, looking for a good place to sleep 
Precinct Four has a wide variation in available goods, RUMORS—PRECINCT FOUR 

depending on the neighborhood. There is little or no d6 
commerce in the Red Wastes, except for what can be 
bartered with Gruul clansfolk or scavenged. The Bul- 
wark carries many basic goods and services, with weap- 
ons and armor plentiful due to the constant threat of 


Rumor 

1 "Sergeant Uwen got hold of something even the war 
wurms of the Gruul fear. Don't know what it is, but he 
sent one of them running just by standing there." 


conflict and the nearby foundries in District Six. On Tin 2  "Ifyou're looking for the best deals on explosives, 
Street, almost anything is available for a bit of searching you should talk to one of the Shattergang Brothers. 
and the right price. They'll set you up right, no questions asked." 

The precinct offers a wide range of food and lodging, 3  "|swearl saw Niv-Mizzet's head floating above Nivix 
appropriate for lifestyles from squalid to wealthy. The last night. | wonder what it means." 
more affluent folk of the precinct are careful not to flaunt à — "Bela cost on Tin Street Just put aui same Tiew cuc 


their wealth, lest they make themselves targets for raid- 
ers from the Red Wastes. 
At the DM's discretion, adventurers who maintain 


riosities. Says they came from an expedition in the 
undercity. Could be magical." 


either a squalid or aristocratic lifestyle could have dis- 5 “My whole street's been smelling like sulfur for the 
advantage on Charisma checks when interacting with past two days now. People are starting to get sick, 
residents of Precinct Four. and the soldiers don't take it seriously." 

6  "Isawan angel and a demon having what looked like 
LAW AND CRIME = a polite conversation. | couldn’t believe my eyes!” 


Much of Precinct Four is a war zone, and mundane 
methods of law enforcement aren't always effective 

in such an environment. No one takes the constant 
patrolling of the Boros Legion as a guarantee of their 
safety, and almost all folk know how to fight to some 
degree. Typical threats include giant monsters, unstable 
elementals, and Gruul raiding parties, and a curfew 
system is often instituted when a neighborhood is beset 
by one of these dangers. The only area that is usually 
safe from external threats is Tin Street. Petty crimes 
aren't given much attention, since the soldiers are pri- 
marily concerned with curbing violence and mayhem. 
The typical response to a reported crime or a dangerous 
threat is 1d8 minutes, and the squad consists of a Boros 
Legion knight (from the Monster Manual) leading 4d4 
soldiers (see chapter 6 for the stat block). 

The Red Wastes is a lawless region mostly beyond the 
reach of Boros patrols and Azorius laws. In other parts 
of the precinct, goblin gangs shake down locals when- 
ever possible and skirmish against each other over turf. 
The Shattergang Brothers are a notorious goblin gang 
that haunts Tin Street in this precinct, dealing in weap- 
ons and explosives. 


PRECINCT FIVE 


As the home of prestigious universities, ancient librar- 
ies, and hidden laboratories, Precinct Five is the hub of 
information and learning in the Tenth District. People 
of all ages flock to this precinct to spend time learning, 
whether by poring over texts and scrolls or finding a 
mentor who will guide a student. It’s also the place to 
find information brokers, who sell specialized or secret 
knowledge available nowhere else. Multilevel buildings 
set next to each other with little regard for planning 
give way to an occasional square or open campus where 
socially minded residents congregate during daytime 
hours. At night, many continue their studies while oth- 
ers tinker with their latest creations or intellectual en- 
deavors. Taverns and pubs tend to be more urbane than 
in other parts of the district and often feature poetry 
readings, storytelling, and musical performances. 

People who live in Precinct Five have a zeal for learn- 
ing and tend to be inquisitive. Getting into a heated 
debate or touting a recent success to your neighbors is 
part of showing your worth. Good neighbors keep their 
projects and research hidden until a result can be dis- 
played; it is considered uncouth to allow others to view a 
work in progress. 


AFFILIATED GUILDS 


Zonot Seven, the home of the Simic Combine’s guild- 
hall, is located on the western edge of the precinct. 
The Izzet League maintains a network of laborato- 
ries and workshops close to Nivix (in Precinct Four). 
House Dimir agents are seen and unseen all around 


the district, and they secretly run the Ismeri Library. 
Some members of the Azorius Senate who prefer to 
study disciplines aside from the law make their homes 
here as well. 


NEIGHBORHOODS AND LANDMARKS 


Life for residents in Precinct Five is spent mostly in- 
doors, or in the case of the Simic, underwater. The pre- 
cinct’s occupants—including significant populations of 
students, instructors, researchers, scribes, and univer- 
sity staff—are crowded into dormitories and apartments 
squeezed in among laboratories, libraries, and magical 
machinery. 


ZONOT SEVEN 

The Simic Combine’s watery habitat is made up of huge 
sinkholes filled with the overflow from a subterranean 
ocean. Zonot Seven is the only zonot within Ravnica 
City proper, and it contains Zameck, the Simic guildhall. 
In contrast to the rest of the precinct, the zonot is a bus- 
tling place, with activity at all hours. A huge chamber 
just below the street surface serves as a gathering place 
for all the Simic speakers, as well as a place where 
visitors can meet with Prime Speaker Zegana or other 
Simic emissaries. A Simic researcher might invite a 
land-dwelling colleague to visit the habitat, but such an 
occurrence isn’t common. Canals lead from here farther 
into the precinct and to Precinct Six. 


CHAPTER THI ENTH DISTRICT 


THE BLISTERCOILS 
A series of gigantic waterwheels, built and operated by 
the Izzet League, turns just outside Zonot Seven in the 
north end of the precinct. The system generates magical 
energy to power public works, Simic laboratories, and, 
of course, Izzet workshops. Few outside the Izzet realize 
that the amount of energy generated in the Blistercoils 
far exceeds what is actually used, with the excess stored 
in underground batteries that could explode if they be- 
came overloaded. 

Blistercoils is also the name of the neighborhood near 
the waterwheels, which largely consists of workshops 
and private laboratories. 


HIGHTOWER 

The western end of the precinct is packed with educa- 
tional institutions of all sorts, from grand universities 
that cover a broad span of disciplines to specialized 
schools that instruct students in subjects ranging from 
theoretical metaphysics to fine arts. The neighborhood 
takes its name from the fact that most of these schools 
boast at least one tall spire among their structures. 
Students and staff live both on and off the various cam- 
puses, and several cozy pubs and small lecture halls are 
busy from afternoons through late in the night. 


PRISM UNIVERSITY 

A crystal-paned center of learning that concentrates on 
magical theory and application, Prism University draws 
potential wizards and other would-be mages who want 
to learn about all forms of magic, in contrast to the spe- 
cialized and practical applications of magic espoused by 
the guilds. Even though the school maintains a formal 
state of neutrality, it's an open secret that many guilds 
have infiltrated the university and planted agents to woo 


prospective members. Partly as a result of this influ- 
ence, many graduates of the university do go on to join 
a guild, finding a way to apply their broad experience 
to support the narrower focus of the guild. (A player 
character spellcaster might well be a graduate of the 
university, which could explain the character's ability 
to use magic that wouldn't normally be taught within 
their guild.) 


ISMERI LIBRARY 

One of the greatest libraries on all Ravnica, the Ismeri 
Library is open to all citizens at all hours. Hundreds of 
thousands of books covering every conceivable subject 
are found here. The place is also one of the centers of 
Dimir communication. Secret messages are hidden 
within its books by a variety of methods both magi- 

cal and mundane. Dimir agents might have to gather 
message fragments hidden within several different 
documents, for example, to find their next assignments 
or targets. Intricate codes and magical wards protect 
other secrets. 


GOODS AND SERVICES 


Specialty items that are commonly used by scribes, 
researchers, and inventors can be found in many small 
shops in the precinct, usually run by a tinker or aca- 
demic. Precinct Five also has the best apothecaries, al- 
chemists, and magic-mongers in the Tenth District. On 
the other hand, mundane adventuring gear, weapons, 
and armor are harder to find. 

Information is an especially valuable commodity in 
Precinct Five. In addition to holding booksellers, the 
precinct is home to a variety of people who make a living 
(or at least a sizable side income) selling information, in- 
cluding private investigators, rumormongers, and spies. 


Á 


^ 
' SS 
p 
a 
a 
T 
Aa 
4^ 
^ 


Meals and lodging of modest to wealthy quality are 
available here. Older and more experienced people— 
high-ranking Simic researchers or established schol- 
ars—tend to maintain lifestyles toward the more expen- 
sive end of that scale. 

The poor are pitied and the most affluent are envied, 
so adventurers who maintain an aristocratic, poor, 
squalid, or wretched lifestyle, at the DM's discretion, 
could have disadvantage on Charisma checks when in- 
teracting with residents of Precinct Five. 


LAW AND CRIME 


Much of the crime in Precinct Five is of a sort that is 
hard to detect: blackmail, espionage, identity theft (of 
the literal kind, perpetrated by shapechangers), and the 
like. Most of the precinct's residents spend their time 
absorbed in study, unaware that such activities might be 
happening under their noses. Only rarely does violence 
break out, and Azorius arresters try hard to keep the 
incident quiet and maintain public calm. 

The typical response to a reported crime here is 1d12 
minutes, and the force consists of two Azorius arresters 
(use the veteran stat block in the Monster Manual). 


PEOPLE AND RUMORS 


PEOPLE ON THE STREET—PRECINCT FIVE 
d12 Description 

Alchemist, reviewing an ingredient list 

Barkeep, picking up some dropped coins 

Cartographer, laden with map cases 


4 v MN — 


Engineer, reading a schematic 


12 


Description 

Homunculus, on an errand 

Librarian, going home for tea 

Poet, shopping for fresh produce 

Professor, assessing a student 

Scribe, hands stained with ink 

Student, lost in a book 

Tinker, out of breath from running 

Vampire mind drinker, heading to the library 


RUMORS—PRECINCT FIVE 


d6 
1 


Rumor 

"The latest is that the translocation device is only op- 
erating within fifty percent of tolerances. I'm certain 
that funding will be pulled any day now." 

"| don't know how Zameck does it, but they've cer- 
tainly built a better soldier. And | hear some of the 
formulas have made it outside their halls." 

"That ghost haunting the history section of the Ismeri 
Library is back. I’ve heard this time it can speak, and 
it's looking for someone." 

"Creatures of some sort of elemental composition 
were emerging from the Blistercoils this morning. 
Those things could be anywhere in the city by now." 
"| can't believe Professor Zagany let her see his re- 
search. She's going to take his findings to an informa- 
tion broker, I'm sure. He'll never work again.” 

"Sila has a new stock of exotic components. She says 
they can enhance spells in a way other components 


cannot." 


PRECINCT SIX 


Large warehouses, major thoroughfares, and nonde- 
script worker tenements make the utilitarian Precinct 
Six a hub of activity for shipping, storage, and other mer- 
cantile concerns in the Tenth District. Wide cobblestone 
streets allow for the passage of beasts and constructs 
that transport raw goods from points beyond the Tenth 
and for the shipping of manufactured materials back to 
those locations. The demands of commerce keep the 
area constantly active, and the inconspicuous nature 

of the warehouses makes them popular as rendezvous 
points for all sorts of transactions, legal and illicit. At 
night, lurking undead and the horrors of the undercity, 
coming up from Deadbridge Chasm, keep wary citizens 
indoors, while a few people who deal in sinister magic 
seek the monsters out for nefarious purposes. 

People who live in this working-class precinct are of- 
ten practical-minded and thus tolerant of some degree of 
illicit activity. Being a good neighbor means keeping to 
yourself, unless you live in the Smelting Quarter, where 
the atmosphere is much more raucous. 


AFFILIATED GUILDS 


The Orzhov Syndicate owns many of the warehouses in 
the precinct and controls much of the commerce around 
Tin Street. Members of the Golgari Swarm often crawl 
around the edges of Deadbridge Chasm, which is an 
opening to their sprawling subterranean network. The 
Boros Legion rents many of the warehouses to store 
manufactured goods from the Smelting Quarter, and 


Kamen Fortress houses a garrison to protect Boros 
interests. The Cult of Rakdos operates a number of 
pain clubs throughout the precinct, especially around 
Tin Street, and Rakdos street performances are more 
common in Precinct Six than anywhere else in the 
Tenth District. 


NEIGHBORHOODS AND LANDMARKS 


Precinct Six is home to many working-class folk, most 
packed into modest apartments near their place of work. 
It’s also home to more than its share of monsters, most 
of which are active at night. 


SMELTING QUARTER 

The heart of the manufacturing industry in the Tenth 
District is at the north end of the precinct. The Smelting 
Quarter is smoky, hot, and filled with activity day and 
night. Goblins often make their homes near the factories 
on Foundry Street, preferring the constant activity to 
sleepier neighborhoods. Standing south and east of the 
quarter, Kamen Fortress is a Boros garrison dedicated 
to keeping watch on Rakdos activity. Clashes between 
the Boros Legion, the goblins, and the Cult of Rakdos 
are common throughout this part of the precinct. 


Gore HOUSE 

A Rakdos club called the Gore House, run by a viashino 
(lizardfolk) named Nyoser, occupies a defunct factory in 
the south end of the Smelting Quarter—and also houses 
the main entrance to the Demon's Vestibule, the stair- 
way down to Rix Maadi. 


DEADBRIDGE CHASM | 


MEDORI PARK 

The western part of the precinct, Medori Park, is named 
after an Orzhov pontiff who converted a city park into 
a warehouse lot many years ago. This neighborhood is 
particularly rife with undead at night, both corporeal 
and incorporeal. Some serve dark masters and often 
guard valuables, while others pursue their own evil 
urges. The Orzhov Syndicate owns many large ware- 
houses here, and the Boros Legion maintains facilities 
to store a variety of equipment used by their soldiers, 
including valuable weapons and armor. The most im- 
portant facilities are heavily guarded—often by angels, 
whether Boros or Orzhov. 


DEADBRIDGE CHASM 

A gaping opening in the ground dominates the precinct 
and is lined with mossy stairs and fungal blooms. Dead- 
bridge Chasm serves as an entrance to the Golgari's 
undercity realm and their guildhall, Korozda. The area 
smells of decomposition, an odor that grows particularly 
intense on hot days. Many kraul make their homes in 
the walls that line the cavernous descent, and Devkarin 
elves come up to the surface through this passage to 
trade on Tin Street. 


WAYPORT 

The neighborhood of Wayport rises like a pillar from the 
midst of Deadbridge Chasm, and a number of bridges, 
large and small, connect it to the surrounding city of 
multiple vertical levels. Many goods traded with other 
districts are funneled along Tin Street, often pausing 

in Wayport's warehouses along the way. But only the 
wealthiest merchants can afford storage space here. 


BENZER's BRIDGE 

This wide bridge is a main thoroughfare for cargo 
traveling to and from districts beyond the Tenth. A 
small market is located here, complete with shops and 
restaurants, all of which close after dark. Secret pain 
clubs, hidden below the market in dark rooms inside the 
bridge itself, come alive after sunset. 


GOODS AND SERVICES 


Trade goods can easily be acquired in Precinct Six, 
along with manufactured items such as artisan's tools. 
Weapons, armor, and mounts are rarely on sale here. 
Fences deal in stolen and otherwise illicit goods. On 
Tin Street, which runs along the eastern side of the pre- 
cinct, most anything can be had for the right price. 

Meals and lodging of poor to modest quality meet 
the needs of the laborers, dock hands, and street per- 
formers of Precinct Six for a price they can afford. The 
wealthy are viewed as outsiders, and the truly impover- 
ished are generally shunned. 

At the DM’s discretion, adventurers who maintain a 
lifestyle less expensive than poor or more expensive 
than modest could have disadvantage on Charisma 
checks when interacting with residents of Precinct Six. 


LAW AND CRIME 


The folk of Precinct Six are pragmatic, not overly con- 
cerned with the welfare of others, and thus often willing 


to disregard minor crimes. Arresters from the Azorius 
Senate can often be found on patrol in and around the 
warehouses. Soldiers from the Boros Legion are com- 
mon near the warehouses and in the Smelting Quarter. 
The typical response time to a reported crime in these 
areas is 2d10 minutes, and the squad consists of two Bo- 
ros soldiers (see chapter 6 for the stat block). At night or 
in the Smelting Quarter, a response to an attack might 
instead consist of 1d4 Boros soldiers led by a sergeant 
(use the knight stat block in the Monster Manual). 
Precinct Six is a hotbed for illicit activity, particularly 
organized crime. Goblin gangs haunt the Smelting 
Quarter, most notably a large gang that claims Foundry 
Street, led by a goblin named Krenko. Vicious turf wars 
sometimes erupt in that area. Violent crimes occur with 
regularity all over the precinct, with most of the bodies 
ending up in Deadbridge Chasm. Night-lurking mon- 
sters are a particular problem in the precinct as well, 
often attacking and disappearing before help can arrive. 


PEOPLE AND RUMORS 


PEOPLE ON THE STREET—PRECINCT SIX 


d12 Description 

Actor, out getting a meal 

Carpenter, heading to the next job 
Devkarin elf (dark elf), on an errand 
Goblin cutpurse, looking for an easy mark 
Laborer, ready to head to the tavern 
Merchant, looking for a Rakdos club 
Metalsmith, grimy from a long day's work 
Performer, with a child apprentice 


O O00 4 Qu d UNUN — 


Shipwright, out buying some supplies 
10 Soldier, off duty and enjoying a walk 
11 Soldier, on duty and in a hurry 

12  Teamster, spoiling for a fight 


RUMORS—PRECINCT Six 
dé = Rumor 

1 “Something very large was lurking in the chasm last 
night, and it knocked a carriage off a bridge. The pas- 
sengers jumped out just in time!” 

2 “I heard that Krenko's gang has been trying to get 
their hands on mizzium, and are willing to pay a good 
price for it too." 

3  "Thewight of Precinct Six has struck again! This 
morning, an arrester and a cutpurse were found dead 
in an alley, drained of their life. A bystander saw it 
happen." 

4 "Did you hear those shrieking sounds out near Ben- 
zer's Bridge last night? Whatever it was, it didn't 
sound like anything I’ve ever heard before. Chilling.” 

5  "|hearRhionna is closing up her forge. She says she's 
getting sick of replacing stolen tools every week. The 
staff claims they're innocent." 

6 “One of the warehouses out in Medori Park had an 
intense red glow shining through its windows yester- 
day. Smelled of sulfur. No one wants to go near it." 


CHAPTER 3 | THE TENTH DISTRICT 


121 


HIS CHAPTER PROVIDES A TOOLBOX TO HELP 
the Dungeon Master create adventures featur- 
ing the guilds of Ravnica. The tensions among 
the guilds, a constant current of animosity, 

provide a solid foundation for building adventures. 

“Krenko’s Way,” a sample adventure at the end of this 
chapter, can be used to launch a Ravnica campaign. 

The tables and advice in this chapter expand on the 
material in chapter 3 of the Dungeon Master's Guide. 
Monsters and nonplayer characters mentioned on the 
tables can be found either in the Monster Manual or in 
chapter 6 of this book. When a creature’s name appears 
in bold type, that’s a visual cue pointing you to the crea- 
ture’s stat block in the Monster Manual. If the stat block 
appears elsewhere, the text tells you so. 


GUILD-BASED ADVENTURES 


Each guild gets a section in this chapter to help you craft 
adventures inspired by that guild. In a guild’s section, 
four basic seeds for creating adventures are provided: 
guild locations, guild villains, character objectives, and 
adventure hooks. 


GUILD LOCATIONS 


Each guild’s entry in this chapter includes a map of an 


iconic location associated with the guild. Any of these 
sites can serve as the location for an adventure. 

The description of each guild location includes a table 
that lists possible goals for an adventure based there. 
You can choose an adventure goal, or roll one randomly, 
from the table in the description of the site you've cho- 
sen. If none of those goals inspires you, choose a goal 
or roll one randomly from the Guild Location Goals 
table instead. 


GuiLD LOCATION GOALS 
d8 Adventure Goal 


1 Prevent a magical catastrophe inside the location. 

2 Find the source of strange occurrences in or near 
the location. 

3 Escape the location (and help others escape) when 


a disaster occurs inside. 
Quell a riot inside or around the location. 


5 Kill or drive out a monster that has turned the 
location into its lair. 

6 Defend the location against an external attacker. 

7 Seize control of the location. 
Infiltrate the location and report on what's happen- 
ing inside. 


^ 


CHAPTER 4: CREATING ADVENTURES 


LINKED LOCATIONS 

You can create an adventure that links two locations 
together. The Location Connections table offers broad 
suggestions for how you might lead your players from 
one adventure location to another. 


LocATION CONNECTIONS 
d6 Adventure Connection 


1 Transport a person, an object, or information 
collected at the first location safely to the second. 
2 Plant something taken from the first location 


inside the second to incriminate someone in the 
second location. 


3 Do the same thing at the second location as was 
done at the first. 

4 Uncover the source of interference encountered at 
the first location, which lies in the second. 

5 Follow a fleeing foe or trail a suspicious figure from 
the first location to the second. 

6 Follow up on information gained at the first loca- 


tion by investigating the second. 


GUILD VILLAINS 


Player characters might belong to any guild, and their 
adversaries might as well. The guild entries in this chap- 
ter offer examples of the kinds of villains and villainous 
schemes that might be connected to each guild. 

Certain kinds of goals and schemes are common to 
villains in every guild. Some generic villainous schemes 
appear on the Guild Villains table. You can also use the 
Villain's Scheme and Villain's Methods tables in chapter 
4 of the Dungeon Master's Guide to flesh out a villain's 
activities, and a guild's section in this chapter points to 
specific parts of those tables that characterize how vil- 
lains from that guild enact their plans. 


GUILD VILLAINS 
dé Villainous Activity 


1 A villain is attempting to disgrace or discredit a 
powerful person. 

2 A villain is striving for power within their guild. 

3 A villain has claimed power in their guild and 
needs to be supplanted. 

4 The villain is sending agents to infiltrate one or 
more guilds. 

5 The villain's agents are luring members away from 
another guild. 

6 The villain's agents are sabotaging the operations 


of another guild. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES 


I23 


CHARACTER OBJECTIVES 


The impetus for adventuring might come from within 
the player characters’ own guilds, rather than from ex- 
ternal guilds. Each guild entry in this chapter provides 
some examples of missions that the guild might send 
its members on. These missions can also serve as side 
quests that a character is asked to fulfill while engaged 
in a larger task that involves the whole party. 


GuiLD CHARACTER OBJECTIVES 

d8 Adventure Goal 
Find an item that is important to the guild. 
Get information from a guild member. 


wn — 


Protect or rescue a guild member in the midst of a 
catastrophe. 

Free a guild member from captivity. 

Find a missing guild member. 

Kill or capture an enemy of the guild. 

Help a guild member who's in trouble with the law. 
Recruit someone to join the guild. 


on O^ tn A 


ADVENTURE Hooks 


Each guild section includes a table of adventure hooks— 
events that might drive adventures but don't necessarily 
involve specific locations or villains. They offer a general 
description of circumstances that can lead to adventure. 


CHOOSING A GUILD 


Here are the main ways to approach the choice of guild 
for your adventure: 


* Choose a guild that has an aesthetic or a story that ex- 
cites you and that will lead to the sort of villain or type 
of adventure you want to build. The following section, 
"Adventure Types," shows how different guilds are 
natural fits for certain types of adventure. 

* Pick a guild that fits your players' tastes. The introduc- 
tion to the Dungeon Master's Guide offers some guid- 
ance for crafting adventures to please different kinds 
of players. The guild or guilds your players choose will 
also help you understand your players’ desires. It’s a 


ee €—Á— la 
Quick BuiLD 


To make a simple location-based adventure quickly, follow 
these steps: 


]. Choose a guild (or use the Guilds table in chapter 1 
if you want to choose randomly). The adventure will 
take place in that guild's location, as described in 
this chapter. 

2. Determine the adventure goal using the table associated 
with that location. 

3. Use creatures associated with the guild (shown on the 
tables in chapter 6) to populate the location. 


Optionally, you can use the Location Connections ta- 

ble in this chapter to link the location you're using to a 

second location. You can either select a location based 

on the result of that table or determine the second loca- 

tion randomly. 
eee adl 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES 


safe bet that a player who creates a Rakdos character 
is looking for mayhem and combat, while a Dimir 
player is more interested in intrigue and sabotage. 
Armed with that understanding, you can better craft 
an adventure experience aimed at your players. 

* Go with a guild that easily provides a villain to face. A 
few guilds make very straightforward villains: Gruul, 
Rakdos, Dimir, and Golgari. 

* Let a die decide the guild, using the Random Guilds 
table in this book's introduction. 


The guild you choose will provide a potential location, 
villain, mission, or adventure hook, as well as point you 
toward the type of adventure you're going to run. 


ADVENTURE TYPES 


Certain guilds lend themselves to particular types of 
adventures better than others, as shown below. If you're 
interested in running an intrigue adventure, where the 
heroes must unravel twisted plots within plots, you'll 
want to choose a different guild from what you would se- 
lect if you want to run a dungeon delve that will take the 
adventurers into the labyrinthine undercity. 


DuNGEON DELVE 

Beneath the urban environment of Ravnica is an entirely 
different city—the dark, dank undercity, where vermin 
and horrors lurk and the Golgari Swarm maintains 

its elegant courts. Indeed, thousands of years of devel- 
opment have buried countless layers of construction 
beneath the current surface streets, making the under- 
city much larger than the surface city, though much of 
it is inaccessible. But if a sinkhole or other catastrophe 
opens long-sealed vaults and exposes them to the sur- 
face again, who knows what horrors might be revealed? 


DUNGEON DELveE GuiLDS 
dl2 Guild 
1-3 House Dimir 
4-8 . Golgari Swarm 
9-10 Cult of Rakdos 
11-12 Simic Combine 


WILDERNESS 

Though the world is covered with streets and buildings, 
Ravnica also has its wilderness areas, including the 
ruined rubblebelts haunted by the Gruul and the sylvan 
wilds cultivated by the Selesnya. 


WILDERNESS GUILDS 
d6 Guild 
1-4 Gruul Clans 
5-6 X Selesnya Conclave 


PLOTS AND INTRIGUE 

Every guild has its internal politics, making it easy for 
characters to get caught up in intrigue— particularly 
within their own guilds. Certain guilds are more likely 
to involve themselves in the politics of other guilds, 
which makes them particularly good villains for in- 
trigue-based adventures. 


INTRIGUE GUILDS 
d12 Guild 
1-2 Azorius Senate 


3-6 House Dimir 

7-8 | Golgari Swarm 

9-11  Orzhov Syndicate 
12 Simic Combine 


MYSTERY 

Ravnica is rife with crime, presenting law-abiding 
adventurers with ample opportunity to put their 
mystery-solving skills to the test. Identifying a guild 
assassin, tracking a stolen treasure, or unmasking 

a corrupt bureaucrat could all fall into this category. 

Of course, the adventurers need not be virtuous or 
law-abiding themselves: the Orzhov are more apt to send 
their own enforcers after thieves than they are to turn to 
the forces of law for assistance. 


MYSTERY GUILDS 
di2 Guild 
1-4 House Dimir 
5-7 . Golgari Swarm 
8 Izzet League 
9-1]  Orzhov Syndicate 
12 Simic Combine 


DISASTER 

When a cyclonic rift sweeps through the streets, an 
uncontrolled wurm crashes through buildings, or a 
laboratory experiment goes haywire, heroes might be 
called upon to shelter the innocent, stop the disaster at 
its source, or hunt down the villain responsible. 


DISASTER GUILDS 


di2 Guild 

1-2  Golgari Swarm 
3-5 = Gruul Clans 

6-8 Izzet League 

9-10  Selesnya Conclave 
11-12 Simic Combine 


PROTECTION 

When the innocent are victimized by the powerful, he- 
roes step in. Criminal shakedowns, military raids, end- 
less riots, and more are chances for characters to prove 
their mettle and earn the adulation of the populace. 


PROTECTION GUILDS 
d12 Guild 
1-2 Boros Legion 
3-6 Gruul Clans 
7-8 | Orzhov Syndicate 
9-12 Cult of Rakdos 


GUILD VERSUS GUILD 


Interguild conflict is such a fundamental aspect of life 
on Ravnica that the player characters’ guild member- 
ship is an easy starting point for choosing an adventure 
villain. If you choose a villain from a guild that’s already 
in conflict with one or more guilds that the characters 
belong to, it’s easy to craft villainous goals that are at 
odds with the characters’ goals. 

If all the player characters belong to a single guild, 
choosing almost any other guild will provide opportu- 
nities for conflict. The natural state of the relationship 
between any two guilds is tension at best, and open 
warfare at worst. All it takes is a villain willing to upset 
the balance of power, and the characters’ guild or their 
own motivations should easily bring them into conflict 
with the villain. A party’s own guild could even provide 
a villain, given the amount of scheming and intrigue that 
exists even within the guilds. A guild official gone rogue, 
members of the same guild at odds with one another, or 
even a corrupt guildmaster can put characters in con- 
flict with their own guild. 

If the characters come from different guilds, a com- 
mon enemy provides a good reason for them to work 
together. Any guild that isn’t represented by one of the 
characters is a fine choice for a villain. 


INVOLVING THE 
CHARACTERS 


Once you've chosen an adventure seed—a villain, a 
mission, or a general hook—you need to figure out what 
gets the player characters involved in the adventure. The 
answer could be as simple as a guildmaster or other 
authority sending them on a mission, but it’s generally 
good to hook the characters in personally. What motiva- 
tion do they have to thwart the villain? 

The best answers to this question stem either from 
the adventurers’ personalities, ideals, and histories, or 
from their guild affiliations. The characters might have 
a common reason to fight the villain (especially if they 
all belong to the same guild or have been adventuring 
together for a while), or they might all oppose the villain 
for different reasons. 

For example, say your villain is a group of Gruul an- 
archs raiding in a densely populated area. A Boros char- 
acter might be assigned to protect innocent bystanders, 
or might just happen to be in the area and leap to the 
defense of the innocents. An Izzet character might be 
trying to make sure that an Izzet laboratory in the area 
isn't damaged or its secrets looted. A Dimir spy might 
leap at the opportunity to steal some Izzet secrets when 
the laboratory comes under attack. 


The Cross Purposes table can help you involve the 
characters in an adventure by suggesting ways that a 
villain’s activities might directly conflict with the player 
characters’ goals or interests. 


Cross PURPOSES 


d10 
1 


10 


The Villain’s Activities ... 

... directly target one or more characters. The ad- 
venture begins when characters are attacked by the 
villain's agents. 

... threaten a character's contact or bond. 

... challenge a character's ideal or exploit a flaw. 
The character might hear rumors of this activity, 
spurring them into action. 

... open an opportunity for a character to pursue a 
personal goal. 

... compete with a character's guild. A guild 
authority might order the character to rectify the 
situation. 

... threaten guild members or property. 

... conflict with guild goals. 

... open an opportunity for a guild to pursue its 
own agenda. 

... Catch the characters between fighting forces. 

... Cause an accident or catastrophe that traps the 
characters. 


COMPLICATIONS 


An adventure that pits player characters against a single 
guild is relatively straightforward, but adding another 
guild can make an adventure even more interesting. 

The involvement of a second guild can be as simple as 
the appearance of a bumbling innocent who needs the 
characters’ protection, or as complex as a second villain 
who pursues an entirely separate scheme. The Second- 
ary Guild Role table presents a range of options. 


SECONDARY GUILD ROLE 


d8 Secondary Guild Role 

1 A rival pursues the same goal as the adventurers, 
but is doing it “wrong.” 

2 One or more members of another guild are caught 
between the villain and the adventurers. 

3 A group of NPC adventurers from another guild 
confront the same villain for different reasons. 


4 Someone is manipulating the villain for their own 
purposes. 
5 A known rival or enemy meddles in the adventure, 


hoping the adventurers will fail. 

6 A known rival or enemy can provide essential help 
in stopping the villain. 

7 A second villain’s plot is unfolding at the same 
time but is otherwise unrelated. 

8 A second villain is in competition with the first one. 


GUILD INTRIGUE 


Intrigue in Ravnica most often involves interaction 
between two guilds, so you can use the Guild Intrigue 
table to find the nugget of a plot. The villain tables in the 
guild entries can help you determine the nature and mo- 
tivations of the individuals involved. 


GUILD INTRIGUE 


d6 Adventure Goal 

1 Guilds are vying for influence over a prominent in- 
dividual (who might be a player character). 

2 Guilds are competing for control of a key site or 
swath of territory. 

3 Guilds are locked in a deadly feud but might be 
open to a peace negotiation. 

4 Villains from two or more guilds are forming 
a dangerous alliance. 

5 A villain is trying to disrupt an alliance between two 
or more guilds. 

6 Splinter factions from two guilds are trying to 
form a new guild. 


l—— ————————————————M "i. 
RANDOM NONPLAYER CHARACTERS 
Any time you need an NPC for an adventure—for example, 
if the player characters are sent on a mission to rescue a 
member of their guild—you can use the contacts tables in 
chapter 2 to help flesh out the NPC. If you don't know the 
NPC's guild affiliation, you can roll on the Random Guilds 
table in this book's introduction to determine the guild. 
Then you can choose an appropriate stat block in chapter 
6 to represent the NPC's game statistics. 


ALLIES AND RIVALS 


A friendly contact can act as a patron, sending a char- 
acter on a mission or a side quest either as a formal 
assignment or as a favor. Friendly contacts also have 

a knack for getting into perilous situations from which 
they need to be rescued, which can sometimes force 
characters into making difficult choices between saving 
friendly nonplayer characters and capturing villainous 
ones. In extraordinary circumstances, a friendly contact 
might even join the adventuring party for a short time. 

Contacts who have a more antagonistic relationship 
with a character can hinder the adventuring party's 
efforts in a variety of ways. They might appear at incon- 
venient times to delay the party, or catch the group in 
the midst of some illegal activity. They might leak infor- 
mation to the adventure's villain, subtly aid the villain's 
efforts, or even become villains themselves. 

Contacts can complicate things even more when they 
interact with multiple player characters or with each 
other. Consider what might happen when two people 
who are friendly contacts for two different characters 
are bitter enemies of each other, or when a single NPC 
is a good friend of one character and a rival of another. 
The characters might have to navigate those complex 
relationships in order to achieve their goals. 


AZORIUS SENATE 


Adventures involving the Azorius Senate naturally re- 
volve around law enforcement. Player characters who 
find themselves on the wrong side of the law might 
be forced to confront well-meaning Azorius arresters 
as enemies, even if the characters are innocent of any 
wrongdoing. Lawful characters might also assist the 
Azorius in maintaining law and order on the mean 
streets of Ravnica. 


ARRESTER STATION 


Map 4.1 depicts an arrester station, which serves as the 


law enforcement hub for a precinct or neighborhood. 


ARRESTER STATION ADVENTURES 

Characters might be drawn to the arrester station 
because of prisoners held there, information or items 
stored there, or crimes occurring there. The Arrester 
Station Adventures table presents some possibilities. 


ARRESTER STATION ADVENTURES 
d12 Adventure Goal 

1 Break out of the holding cells. 

2 Break someone else out of the holding cells. 

3 Stop someone before they can give information to 
the arresters or testify before a judge. 
Protect a prisoner from assassins. 
Get information from or to someone in the holding 
cells. 

6 Apprehend a former prisoner who used magic to 
take over the station and drive the guards away. 

7 Retrieve something held as evidence. 
Find proof that the captain of this station is 
corrupt. 

9 Discover who helped a prisoner escape and how. 

10 Uncover a plot to discredit, blackmail, or kill the 
station commander. 


11 Steal the arresters' files about a criminal or a case. 
12 Intercept a message being sent to or from the 
station. 


ARRESTER STATION MAP 

Two separate buildings make up this station, separated 
by an elevated plaza. One end of the station includes a 
courthouse (the lower level) and a prison (upper level). 

Wide, impressive stairs lead to the main courthouse 
entrance, which opens into a large waiting room. All the 
doors leading out of the waiting room are kept locked, 
so they can be opened only from the other side. To ei- 
ther side of the waiting room are private meeting rooms, 
which lead back to an extensive area of offices for the 
large staff that keeps the place running. 

The twin courtrooms include bench seats for specta- 
tors and witnesses. The judges preside from platforms 
that hover in midair, with shallow pools of water below. 
The accused are seated on balconies that overlook the 
same pools. Doors at the back of these balconies lead to 
a central hallway that ends at a staircase that ascends to 
the prison level. 


Direct access to the prison area from outside the 
building is provided by two long, narrow staircases that 
lead up from the plaza. The stairs end at a balcony that 
is guarded at all times by archers behind arrow slits. 

A narrow hall leads through several locked doors to 
the cells—the general population on one side, where 
prisoners are allowed to mingle to some extent, and a 
high-security area on the other side, featuring smaller 
cells keeping prisoners in complete isolation. 

The opposite end of the station is a headquarters for a 
local detachment of arresters. The main level includes 
two meeting rooms, an office for the commander, and 
a break room. The upper level provides working space 
where arresters can interview suspects and complete 
paperwork, as well as space for storing evidence. The 
lower level includes a morgue and a large area where 
the whole local force can be assembled. 


AZORIUS VILLAINS 


Examples of Azorius villains appear in the Azorius 
Villains table. 


AZORIUS VILLAINS 


d8 Villain 
1 An ambitious authority figure seeks to achieve a 
higher rank by framing or defaming a rival. 
2 A venal judge's rulings are swayed by bribes and 
favors. 
3 A vengeful imperator persecutes a certain group of 


people, seeking revenge for a past wrong done by 
one of the group's members. 


4 An overzealous imperator is prepared to arrest a 
neighborhood full of people to find a stolen item. 

5 A sadistic warden tortures prisoners, ostensibly for 
the sake of law and order. 

6 A corrupt senator seeks to pass laws that favor a 


certain class of people. 
7 A precognitive mage (see chapter 6 for the stat 
block) invents visions designed to frame enemies. 
8 A cowardly bureaucrat destroys evidence to hide 
someone else's involvement in a crime. 


AZORIUS AS CAMPAIGN VILLAINS 
The Azorius become villains when they abuse the power 
of the law. A local magistrate might imprison innocent 
people, or the senate might pass oppressive legislation, 
thereby drawing the ire of the Boros and the Selesnya, 
who care about the folk who get caught in the cross- 
hairs. Arresters might decide to crack down on unsafe 
Izzet laboratory practices, illegal Rakdos performances, 
or the Gruul presence in the city. Self-righteous prison 
wardens or precinct captains might abuse their au- 
thority in the name of the law, and corrupt bureaucrats 
might use their positions to garner favors for themselves 
and their relatives. 

Low-level characters might suffer harassment at 
the hands of overzealous arresters. As the campaign 
progresses, they might be able to identify a particular 
imperator who is driving this heightened aggression, 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES 


JUDGES 


NS) 
e. L] 


— ENS 


S c 
YE >; 
PENT Saxe 


A Eda 
C WONN = 
Ç] 1 ! 


EN 


SES (SUSIE SWISS SS 
[OE 


FH 


- 


D- 
L| 


Avi 


d pus 


TINE SANIE VAIRURYARIN ES 
wir i 


— A Le 
na tbi 7 
577 = SDN SSSA GNA M 


DoD NASZE SAVAN 
| E IZ ; A 
* ^ 1 1 Ii 
as J 
NS, 


Lira 


heck 


an 


Z 


DBA LAT. 


<2 
[| 
I 


[7 


L| () d 


=f! 


N || P NIN N í n 
erre) Ere m net GER 
Courthouse VENNS 


~- = = 


NA 


rs 


ZZ 


KAAI 


A WY SLISY/ SY SAIN 


ORS 
» L] 


2 


SSAA, me 


A 


EN 
CM 


LEA] ut 
j } 
25 - 4 j 
C j i 
AN eed ^ (War 
E f) 
lepe 
- Vs EE RR Ora 
- LRL ID 
Y ` 


jj WNR AL 
UYAYNA 


Morgue Lave! aa Arrester Headquarters 


Mae 4.1: ARRESTER STATION 


SN 


Nh 


E Á E 


who then becomes something of a nemesis for them. As 
they gain experience, this imperator continues to be a 
thorn in their side and advances through the ranks of 
the senate as well, becoming a minister and eventually 
the arbiter who dictates law enforcement policy for the 
entire guild. Along the way, this villain uses every avail- 
able means to hinder the characters, probably veering 
into covert illegal activities (evil means for a good end). 
The climax of the campaign might involve a violent con- 
frontation with this arbiter and a group of arresters, or 
a tense verbal argument adjudicated by Supreme Judge 
Isperia herself. 


AZORIUS CHARACTER GOALS 


Characters who are members of the Azorius Senate 
might be sent on missions of law enforcement by their 
superiors or contacts in the guild, and trusted charac- 
ters might be tasked with apprehending criminals with- 
out killing them. The examples on the Azorius Assign- 
ments table might be side quests specific to an Azorius 
character, undertaken while a party of adventurers is 
engaged in a larger mission. 


AZORIUS ASSIGNMENTS 


d6 Adventure Goal 

1 Find and arrest a wanted fugitive. 

2 Arrest someone identified as a potential criminal 
by precognitive mages. 

Clear the name of an innocent person. 

Solve a murder by questioning suspects. 
Retrieve a stolen item. 


nu 4 UC 


Quell a riot. 


OTHER ADVENTURE HOOKS 


The Azorius Adventure Hooks table presents ideas for 
additional adventures involving the Azorius Senate. 


Azorius ADVENTURE HOOKS 
d6 Adventure Hook 

] A precognitive mage (see chapter 6 for the stat 
block) has identified the characters as future crimi- 
nals, and now there's a warrant out for their arrest. 

2 A precognitive mage (see chapter 6 for the stat 
block) has foreseen the characters’ future strug- 
gles and tries to protect them, thereby interfering 
in their next adventure. 

3 Felidars (see chapter 6 for the stat block) have 
bonded with the wrong person and now track an 
innocent citizen. 

4 Hussars—Azorius soldiers (see chapter 6 for the 
stat block) mounted on griffons—declare martial 
law in a neighborhood and enforce their harsh au- 
thority on the citizenry. 

5 An archon of the Triumvirate (see chapter 6 for the 
stat block) interprets innocent actions as illegal 
ones because its connection to the law has been 
corrupted. 

6 A missing homunculus is the sole witness to the 
murder of a judge. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES 


132 


Boros LEGION 


Adventures involving the Boros Legion might have a 
military bent, focusing on small-scale conflict between 
groups of Boros soldiers and bands of rioters or raiders. 
The legion is generally a prominent force for law and 
good in Ravnica, which makes it an appropriate home 
guild for noble-minded player characters. Its holy bent 
also makes villains drawn from its ranks particularly 
dangerous and perhaps tragic. 


LEGION GARRISON 


The Boros Legion maintains garrisons throughout 
Ravnica, ensuring that every neighborhood has a strong 
military presence. They range from towering fortresses 
to small bunkers like the one shown in map 4.2. 


LEGION GARRISON ADVENTURES 

Designed with defense foremost, a Boros garrison is 
well suited for adventures that challenge the characters 
to find a way in or fight their way out. The Legion Garri- 
son Adventures table offers a number of possibilities. 


LEGION GARRISON ADVENTURES 


d12 Adventure Goal 
Lay siege to the garrison. 
Break a siege at the garrison. 
Sabotage the building’s defenses so someone else 
can break into the garrison. 

4 Find a hidden explosive charge in the garrison 
before it detonates. 

5 Steal a magic weapon held inside the garrison. 
Discover evidence that incriminates an officer in 
the garrison. 

7 Identify a spy among the garrison's soldiers before 
the spy can escape. 

8 Help a spy get safely out of the garrison without 
being discovered. 

9 Capture a garrison officer for interrogation. 

10 Shore up the garrison's defenses before an assault. 

1 Clear out the monsters infesting a garrison that 
was abandoned years ago. 

12 Steal plans for future Boros military action. 


LEGION GARRISON MAP 

Access to the garrison is limited to a pair of 20-foot-wide 
walkways elevated above street level and protected by 
archers behind arrow slits. Two antechambers give the 
Boros soldiers and angels ample opportunity to screen 
anyone who seeks to gain entrance. Beyond them is a 
large hall where troops can be mustered. To one side of 
the mustering hall is a barracks area, with a kitchen, a 
mess, food storage, and guest quarters on the other side. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES 


An extensive array of wall niches in the lower tier (at 
street level) provides storage space for archived records 
and the like, and a basement beneath that includes food 
storage and a well for fresh water, enabling the garrison 
to withstand a long siege. 

The upper tier includes more large halls, the com- 
mander's quarters and office, and several niches—ac- 
cessible only by flying from outside the garrison—that 
serve as living quarters and watch-posts for the angels 
stationed here. Parapets on the rooftop provide cover 
for humanoid archers as well, and the broad open space 
that they surround offers room for training and spar- 
ring. Grass-covered ridges separate different training 
areas and add a contrasting touch of nature's beauty to 
the otherwise stony building. 


BOROS VILLAINS 


Examples of Boros villains appear in the Boros 
Villains table. 


Boros VILLAINS 


d8 Villain 
] Seeking to avenge a partner’s murder, a Wojek 
League officer turns to vigilantism. 
2 A Boros commander starts preemptively closing 


Izzet foundries, Simic research chambers, and 
other locations considered prone to disaster. 

3 Angered at the death of a loved one in a cer- 
tain neighborhood, a Wojek agent is inciting its 
residents to revolt, knowing that the Boros will 
respond with force. 

4 Believing that they are harboring terrorists, a Boros 
brigadier is slaughtering helpless people in tran- 
sient communities in the undercity. 


5 A squad of corrupt Boros soldiers (see chapter 6 
for the stat block) is extorting money from local 
merchants. 

6 A Boros commander under the thumb of another 


guild is turning a blind eye to the violence perpe- 
trated by that guild. 

7 An overzealous angel has risen up against innocent 
people, including the soldiers in her own garrison, 
believing that they harbor evil in their hearts. 

8 A crazed angel demands to be worshiped as a god. 


BOROS AS CAMPAIGN VILLAINS 

Not too long ago, the leaders of the Boros Legion valued 
zeal more highly than justice, believing that their mil- 
itary might made their cause right and just. Although 
the current guildmaster, Aurelia, has reversed her 
stance on the issue, some voices within the legion still 
espouse these views. Boros villains are typically intoler- 
ant, self-righteous warmongers who abuse their power 


I p d 
mG 
d 1E 


G SEE RUN =E 
whe cm SS E 


= 
Si 
d 


Mm KL 
d 
AGE 


NY 


US 


ISS 


= 


H— H H 
j MUSTERING HALL — 
Leal 


B. 
eme m Z 
== 


S= 
EU 


AR 


cae 
A 


ZA 
us 


v 
hives / Storage 


CLAN 


RAL] 


[^ 
e ir 
Sit 
ANAS EA UN 


ay 
sy 
MESA 


Map 4.2: LEGION GARRISON 


1 square = 5 feet 


134 


in pursuit of their own private visions of justice. And 
because the lower echelons of the guild are taught to 
follow orders without question, even the villains among 
the Boros can command companies of soldiers to help 
them carry out their schemes. 

Boros villains are inclined to engage in activity that 
involves pursuing one's passion, acquiring power, or 
exacting retribution. The Boros make good campaign 
antagonists if the adventurers represent the forces of 
chaos that the legion opposes—Rakdos revelers, Gruul 
raiders, Golgari corrupters, or Dimir spies. 

You could structure a campaign around the legion's 
slow progress in taking over the authority of the Azo- 
rius Senate and imposing a sort of martial law on the 
city. A campaign of this sort is particularly effective if 
the characters initially work alongside the Boros, es- 
pecially if one or more characters belong to the legion. 
They might help Boros soldiers drive off Gruul raiders 
or uproot Dimir spies—clearly fighting against evil on 
the side of the good and just. As time goes on, though, 
their Boros allies might start taking their war against 
evil too far. Innocent citizens get caught in the cross- 
fire, most punishment is cruel and excessive, and any 
resistance is met with overwhelming force, to "set an 
example" for anyone else who might consider opposing 
the legion. A Boros ally (or even a close friend) of the 
characters might become fully caught up in this fervor. 
Perhaps the characters can talk some sense into their 
old friend, but the resolution of the campaign might 
force them to take more extreme measures to curb the 
legion's excesses. 


BOROS CHARACTER GOALS 


The Boros Legion sends individuals or small parties 
on small-scale military missions, usually to help quell 
riots or protect bystanders from dangerous situations. 
Trusted characters might also be involved in internal 
investigations of suspected wrongdoing, especially if 
they're associated with the Wojek League. The Boros 
Assignments table provides examples of missions or 
side quests that Boros characters might undertake. 


Boros ASSIGNMENTS 


d6 Assignment 
1 Help quell a Rakdos riot or hold back Gruul raiders, 
or otherwise maintain the peace while protecting 
innocent bystanders. 
2 Capture or kill a Gruul chieftain who has taken 
responsibility for a series of brutal raids. 


3 Help evacuate citizens from the area of a natural or 
magical disaster. 

4 Escort an important person safely from one place 
to another. 

5 Investigate a Boros commander suspected of cul- 


tivating personal loyalty in underlings, rather than 
loyalty to the legion. 
6 Uncover a spy in the legion. 


GHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES 


OTHER ADVENTURE HOOKS 


The Boros Adventure Hooks table presents ideas for ad- 
ditional adventures themed around the Boros Legion. 


Boros ADVENTURE HOOKS 
d6 Adventure Hook 

1 A Boros officer is awaiting trial for unsanctioned 
and excessive use of force, and the officer's squad 
is planning a jailbreak. 

2 The Boros are secretly working with the Shat- 
tergang Brothers, a group of black market arms 
dealers, to develop a devastating weapon. 

3 A Boros offensive is displacing and even killing 
innocent bystanders caught in its path. 

4 Flame-kin soldiers created as part of an 
abandoned weapons project are suddenly 
reactivated and run amok. These soldiers use the 
azer stat block in the Monster Manual. 


5 A Boros parade meant as a show of strength pro- 
vokes widespread protests, some of which erupt 
into violence. 

6 A flying Boros fortress is about to crash, threaten- 


ing to devastate the neighborhood below. 


HoUsE DIMIR 


Masters of misdirection, infiltration, and espionage, Di- 
mir spies and assassins pursue their objectives behind 
layers of deception. Dimir agents make ideal villains for 
adventures involving intrigue and mystery in the shad- 
ows of dark alleys and the tunnels of the undercity. 


SAFE HOUSE 


House Dimir maintains safe houses throughout 
Ravnica, many of them tucked away in the undercity, 

for guild members who need to elude the ready reach of 
the law. These sites are protected by magical wards that 
confuse and misdirect all who approach—in particular, 
spells that make intruders forget where they are or what 
they're doing there. 

A safe house can also be used to hold prisoners for 
interrogation, with its protections equally effective in 
preventing escape and in deterring intruders. Often, a 
single site serves both purposes. 

Map 4.3 presents the floor plan of a typical Dimir 
safe house. 


SAFE HOUSE ADVENTURES 

The first task in almost any mission involving a Dimir 
safe house is to find the place. Most people who have 
been to a safe house or its environs have no memory of 
the event, thanks to Dimir mind magic. 

The Safe House Adventures table offers some reasons 
why characters might need to visit such a location. In 
addition, you could use any other guild's sample location 
as the site for a location-based adventure, with a simple 
mission: uncover a Dimir spy in that location. 


SAFE HOUSE ADVENTURES 


d12 Adventure Goal 

1 Find a fugitive hiding in the safe house. 

2 Liberate someone being held in the safe house. 

3 Retrieve a stolen item. 

4 Get information from a prisoner in the safe house 
without revealing that information to the Dimir. 

5 Acquire information from a Dimir agent to unmask 
a spy embedded in another guild. 
Escape from captivity in the safe house. 


7 Plant a magical surveillance device inside the safe 
house. 
8 Damage or destroy the safe house so the Dimir 


can't use it anymore. 

9 Prevent the creation of a horror (see chapter 6) in 
the safe house. (You can replace the horror with a 
different creature from the Monster Manual.) 

10 Find and kill a mind drinker vampire (see chapter 6 
for the stat block) or other monster that is picking 
off the safe house's inhabitants. 

1 Disable the safe house's wards and plant a beacon 
inside it so that members of another guild can find 
and raid the place. 

12 After stumbling into the safe house accidentally, 
get out with memories intact. 


p —sá— — EE 
Sare House WARDS 


You can make a Dimir safe house hard to find and hard to 
get into by using some of these options: 


+ The safe house is underground and accessible only 
through a maze of tunnels and crevices. 
* The area surrounding the house is protected by a guards 
and wards spell. Navigating the ancient underground 
corridors or the modern alleyways above ground 
becomes more complicated when intersections are 
clouded by fog, doors are hidden and magically locked, 
and magical compulsions drive visitors away. 
A glyph of warding might cast fear, phantasmal force, or 
crown of madness on a character who triggers it—or sim- 
ply explode in a blast of cold energy. 
Dimir agents might use alarm spells to ensure that they 
know when intruders are approaching the safe house. 
e a 


SAFE HOUSE MAP 
This safe house is a domed building encased in a stone 
exoskeleton characteristic of Dimir construction. The 
ground level is a comfortable living space that features 
accommodations for at least five people. It has five bed- 
rooms, abundant storage space, a central lounge, a rec- 
reation space, a dining room, a kitchen, and a pantry. 
A secret door in the back of a shared closet leads to a 
spiral staircase that descends to the basement, which 
contains three small holding cells. A watch post at the 
end of the hall allows a guard to keep an eye on the cells 
and anyone coming down the stairs. An interrogation 
room can be outfitted with equipment designed to ex- 
tract information. One-way mirrors offer a view on the 
interrogation proceedings from an observation room. 


DIMIR VILLAINS 


The Dimir can be masterfully sly villains. Example vil- 
lains appear in the Dimir Villains table. 


DIMIR VILLAINS 
d8 Villain 
A spy seeks to plunder another guild’s secrets. 

2 A mind mage (see chapter 6 for the stat block) is 
hunting down everyone who witnessed a great hu- 
miliation to expunge their memories of the event. 

3 A mind mage (see chapter 6 for the stat block) 
has implanted false memories of a crime in many 
minds in order to incriminate someone. 

4 A group of Dimir agents is plundering the minds of 
people who have knowledge of a vault that holds 
great wealth or magical power. 

5 After a Dimir spy is unmasked, a mind mage (see 
chapter 6 for the stat block) erases the memory of 
the spy’s identity from the minds of those involved. 

6 A shapeshifter has replaced a high-ranking mem- 
ber of another guild in order to provoke conflicts. 

7 A mind drinker vampire (see chapter 6 for the stat 
block) is plundering the minds of its victims. 

8 Roll on another guild’s villain table, but the villain 
is a disguised Dimir agent or someone being 
manipulated by the Dimir. 


; SLOT TS 7 
= SN SS ) XA BY 


Y +i J N 

E ea OST 

: ING SNS ERN 

E alol J iy U 
ANY 


2". 
P >] alo 


= 
MOT ae ET dd — 


: f 
1 


Se 


N 


» r I 


SSssos-s ss \ 


` 
E o9 Sos 


drap, wa 


v AX iL. A N 
aC ae 
f Eee = 


la, 


CL 


A4 


TTL 


Basement 


= 5 feet 


1 square 


Map 4.3: Sare House 


DIMIR AS CAMPAIGN VILLAINS 

Dimir villains favor schemes involving captivity and 
coercion, defamation, impersonation and disguise, mur- 
der, politics, theft, and torture. Perhaps the most insidi- 
ous technique employed by the Dimir is the erasing and 
modifying of memories. 

Because their tendrils reach into every other guild, 
Dimir villains could turn out to be the link between 
plots that initially seem to be unconnected. Even when 
individual missions might be straightforward dungeon 
crawls or battles in the streets, the campaign revolves 
around the mystery of determining the true villain. 

At low and middle levels, the characters might find 
themselves engaged in important but apparently unre- 
lated tasks. They might kill or drive off a monster that 
is lairing in an abandoned arrester station (unwittingly 
clearing the way for a Dimir agent to be placed in the 
station). They might help the Boros capture a danger- 
ous Rakdos ringleader (who is actually a Dimir agent 
working to destabilize Azorius influence). They might 
unmask a Dimir spy within one of their own guilds (who 
is an internal rival of the Dimir villain). 

As the characters advance in level, they might come 
to realize that a powerful and ambitious Azorius figure 
is going too far in spying on the populace, despite that 
guild’s great success in using precognitive mages to 
arrest evildoers—especially Dimir spies. Ultimately, the 
Azorius villain is revealed to be a high-ranking Dimir 
agent, a confidant of Lazav or even Lazav himself, who 
is trying to take over the Azorius Senate and turn it into 
a surveillance and espionage organization under the vil- 
lain’s control. 


DIMIR CHARACTER GOALS 


Characters who are members of House Dimir are spies 


and saboteurs. It’s possible to let these characters ex- 
perience all the most enjoyable tropes of the spy genre 
while skirting the more sinister aspects of House Dimir. 

The missions on the Dimir Assignments table can 
work for a team of Dimir agents or as secret missions 
for a Dimir character to pursue under the cover of the 
larger adventure plot. 


DIMIR ASSIGNMENTS 
d6 Assignment 

1 Impersonate an individual to gather information 
from that individual's contacts and associates. 

2 Make sure that a particular person (not a main 
antagonist) at an adventure site doesn't survive the 
encounter with the characters. 

3 Make sure that a particular person (not the main 
villain) survives the adventure. 

4 Get information from the main villain by magically 
extracting the villain's dying thoughts. 

5 Plant evidence to steer the other adventurers away 
from the true villain. 

6 Get information to a Dimir agent who is embedded 
in the adventure location. 


OTHER ADVENTURE HOOKS 


The Dimir Adventure Hooks table presents ideas for ad- 
ditional adventures themed around House Dimir. 


DiMIR ADVENTURE HOOKS 


d6 Adventure Hook 

1 The characters find a bundle of thought strands, 
and Dimir agents are in a rush to find them before 
they fade away. 

2 A rogue agent hunted by Dimir assassins offers 
crippling information about House Dimir in 
exchange for protection. 

3 A Dimir horror (described in chapter 6) is ran- 
domly killing people in the dark alleys of a particu- 
lar neighborhood. 

4 Word is out that someone claims to have a list of 
Dimir agents embedded in other guilds, igniting a 
furious contest to obtain the list. 


5 While prying too deeply into ancient lore, a Dimir 
agent (now deceased) released a nameless evil into 
the city. 

6 Roll on another guild's adventure hooks table, but 


the Dimir are secretly behind the situation. 


GOLGARI SWARM 


A dominant force in the undercity, the Golgari Swarm 
is ideally suited for dungeon-based adventures. The 
Golgari represent corruption and decay, counting many 
villains among their ranks even though most members 
are mainly concerned with the balance of the natural 
cycle of life and death. 


UNDERCITY MANSION 


The Golgari are a strange underground aristocracy 

in a city that mostly lacks a noble class; they are like 
throwbacks to an ancient time when one’s birth deter- 
mined one’s station. The mansion depicted in map 4.4 
is a stately relic of such a time—a grand hall that hap- 
pens to be buried hundreds of feet beneath the streets 
of Ravnica. 


UNDERCITY MANSION ADVENTURES 

The Undercity Mansion Adventures table provides some 
possible challenges based in and around the Golgari 
undercity mansion. 


UNDERCITY MANSION ADVENTURES 
d10 Adventure Goal 


1 Find the source of a noxious fog rising from the un- 
dercity and poisoning a surface neighborhood. 

2 Rescue several citizens being held hostage by 
Ochran agents. 

3 Find the daytime lair of an elusive monster that 
hunts on the surface at night. 

4 Rescue a guild member petrified by an undercity 


medusa (see chapter 6 for the stat block) that uses 
the mansion as its lair. 

5 Take shelter in the mansion to escape a horrible 

monster prowling the undercity. 

Win a bet by surviving a night inside. 

Escape from captivity here. 

Find a fugitive hiding here. 

Find and claim a treasure hidden in the mansion. 

10 Attend a masked ball held in the mansion in order 
to get information from another guest. 


wo won an 


UNDERCITY MANSION MAP 

This structure is built in a large depression, perhaps 
part of Deadbridge Chasm. A bridge crosses just above 
it, and a wide, curving stair leads down from the bridge 
to the grand ballroom on the top level of the mansion. 
The rest of the structure is built down from there, with 
the main, elegant halls and parlors on the second level. 
Notably, a wide hallway on this level connects with a 
passage leading to other areas of the undercity. A couple 
of areas on this floor have crumbled with the weight of 
the ages, but the place retains its stately grandeur. 


The bottom level might be a basement excavated in 
the floor of a chasm, or it could hang above still more 
open space like a giant stalactite. It includes living quar- 
ters for the owners, servants, and guests. 


GOLGARI VILLAINS 


Examples of Golgari villains appear in the Golgari 
Villains table. 


GOLGARI VILLAINS 
d8 Villain 

1 Armed with a powerful magic item found among 
the dead in the undercity, a Golgari shaman (see 
chapter 6 for the stat block) enacts a plan of re- 
venge against another guild. 

2 A kraul death priest (see chapter 6 for the stat 
block) is seeking a way to revive the ancient gods 
of Ravnica and destroy the world. 

3 A Devkarin lich (see chapter 6 for the stat block) is 
capturing living subjects and infecting them with 
an insidious, mind-controlling fungus. 

4 A trophy-hunting undercity medusa (see chapter 6 
for the stat block) is on a killing spree, petrifying 
victims in interesting poses. 

5 A Golgari shaman (see chapter 6 for the stat block) 
is spreading a fungal infection that transforms its 
dead victims into zombies. 

6 An elf child lures citizens into the sewers, where a 
monstrous “pet” is waiting to kill and eat them. 

7 Pursuing a personal vendetta, an Ochran assassin 
is targeting members of a certain guild and trying 
to ensure that their bodies are never found. 

8 A kraul death priest (see chapter 6 for the stat 
block), angry at the way the Golgari have treated 
the kraul in the past, is killing the elves and medu- 
sas of the guild, hoping to eventually take Jarad's 
place as guildmaster. 


GOLGARI AS CAMPAIGN VILLAINS 

Given their affinity for death, necromancy, and decay, 
the Golgari make excellent villains. Because they con- 
sider life and death as equal parts of the natural cycle, 
they have no qualms about subjecting entire neighbor- 
hoods to poisonous gas or strangling vines to achieve 
their various goals. When a Golgari assassin goes on 

a killing spree, when a patch of their vegetative growth 
begins “reclaiming” an area that isn't yet abandoned, or 
when their fungus-bearing zombies emerge from the un- 
dercity to haunt the city streets, heroes are duty bound 
to act against the threat. 

The Golgari possess a combination of ambition and 
ruthlessness that makes them extremely dangerous 
adversaries. The tension among the various factions of 
the swarm (the elves, the medusas, the kraul, and the 
rising erstwhile) adds an element of instability to the 


S3 


m 


PANN 


SLIT 


aa 


[7 pcr 751-9 edm i 
Un ERE B 
% AN ANZ 17H dale 
UNDERCITY € pd! pa 


S ka 


RA SE a a M SS LX 7 


M 


1 


enm 
+ 


- 
"m /--— 
EM = 


N 
A 
3f 
N 
7. 
Zl 
A 
Al 
Q 
/ 
4 
1 


Mae 4.4: UNDERCITY MANSION 


P. 


1 square = 5 feet 


mix. But perhaps the Golgari Swarm's most dangerous 
quality is the widespread confidence among its mem- 
bers that it will survive any catastrophe that might befall 
the surface world. This certainty means Golgari villains 
will stop at nothing in an attempt to provoke such an 
event—triggering a virulent plague, causing explosive 
plant growth, or inciting the other guilds into open war, 
for example. Over the course of a campaign, a group 

of adventurers might foil Golgari plans to accomplish 
all these things, or the characters might be constantly 
struggling against one ongoing disaster. 

For example, the characters might spend the early 
part of the campaign resolving disputes between guilds, 
unaware that the Golgari are actually the instigators of 
those conflicts. Perhaps incidental to these missions, 
they also face a spore druid who is in the early stages 
of testing a terrible plague. Then, as the campaign 
reaches higher levels, the plague breaks out again, this 
time spreading rapidly. The crisis heightens tensions 
among the other guilds, especially when food sources 
are threatened. At the climax of the campaign, the 
heroes must defuse conflict among the guilds while 
finding a way to get at the druid at the cause of it all, 
who is locked in an undercity mansion waiting out the 
catastrophe. 


GOLGARI CHARACTER GOALS 


Characters who are members of the Golgari Swarm 
might be sent on missions into the undercity, particu- 
larly jobs that involve retrieval or salvage. The secretive 
agents of the Ochran are more likely to pursue goals 
that call for theft or even assassination, while shamans 
could participate in the swarm's work of “reclamation” 
in surface neighborhoods. The Golgari Assignments 
table reflects this range of possibilities. An assignment 
can also serve as a side quest for Golgari adventurers 
to undertake while pursuing a larger goal with a mixed- 
guild party. 


GOLGARI ASSIGNMENTS 


d6 


aA Uc AUN 


Assignment 

Find a valuable item believed lost in the undercity. 
Retrieve a corpse in the undercity. 

Collect a sample of a fungus in the undercity. 

Steal something that is important to another guild. 
Kill an outspoken enemy of the Golgari. 

Position a fungus so that its spores will spread into 
a populated area and drive the inhabitants out. 


OTHER ADVENTURE HOOKS 


The Golgari Adventure Hooks table offers ideas for addi- 
tional adventures themed around the Golgari Swarm. 


GOLGAR!I ADVENTURE Hooks 


d6 
1 


Adventure Hook 

Citizens who die in a particular neighborhood 
sprout fungal growths and rise as zombies, then 
shamble toward the undercity. 

Shriekers sprout throughout a neighborhood. 
Swarms of insects under the control of a Golgari 
shaman (see chapter 6 for the stat block) terrorize 
a neighborhood. 

Poor people who subsist on Golgari food contract 
a dangerous, contagious magical infection. 

Several kraul have moved into an old tenement and 
are making their neighbors nervous. 

A beloved statue, long assumed to be the image of 
some forgotten community hero, suddenly returns 


to life after being petrified for a hundred years. 


GRUUL CLANS 


An adventure involving the Gruul Clans typically re- 
volves around combat. The Gruul provide characters 
with opportunities to fight huge monsters and vicious 
berserkers. The Gruul bring chaos and destruction with 
them wherever they go, so they can easily disrupt and 
complicate adventures involving any other guild. Any 
time an adventure needs an injection of brutal violence, 
the Gruul are a good tool for the purpose. 


RUBBLEBELT ENCAMPMENT 


The Gruul have no interest in the buildings, streets, and 
markets of Ravnica, except as targets for their raids. 
The encampment shown in map 4.5 represents a tem- 
porary shelter in the ruins, the sort of place the Gruul 
might call home for a time. 


RUBBLEBELT ENCAMPMENT ADVENTURES 
Many Gruul adventures begin with a raid into a settled 
part of the city. Adventurers might be able to follow the 
raiders back to their camp—for the sake of revenge, in 
an effort to retrieve something, or perhaps in chains. 


RUBBLEBELT ENCAMPMENT ADVENTURES 


d10 Adventure Goal 

1 Determine why the Gruul have camped so close to 
a settled neighborhood. 
Free a captive taken in a recent raid. 
Win freedom by defeating a Gruul champion in a 
duel. 
Retrieve something looted in a recent raid. 
Strike a deal with the Gruul leader to cooperate 
against a common foe. 

6 Attempt to overthrow the clan chieftain in a 
combat challenge. 

7 Strike a blow to the Gruul to ensure that they don't 
launch a raid. 

8 Free a corralled herd of violent beasts so they 
stampede through the Gruul camp before the 
Gruul can steer them toward settled areas. 

9 Interrupt a ritual intended to summon or create a 
huge elemental. 

10 Disrupt a gathering of clans that could lead to an 
alliance between them. 


RUBBLEBELT ENCAMPMENT MAP 
Built in a plaza surrounded by crumbling ruins, this 
camp offers some defensive advantages to its Gruul resi- 
dents. An old tower is the one intact structure the Gruul 
use, because it offers a good vantage point over the sur- 
rounding area. A sluiceway provides potable water, and 
a handful of scraggly trees are a reminder of nature's 
potential to grow and flourish even among the ruins. 
Otherwise, the camp is little more than a handful of 
tents around a bonfire. A trash pit serves as a means of 
waste disposal, a few makeshift cages can hold prison- 
ers, and a partially enclosed area to one side has been 
converted into a pen for the beasts used by the Gruul. 


GRUUL VILLAINS 


The Gruul are straightforward villains, employing di- 
rect action and violence to tear down civilized society. 
They aren't schemers, and they have little patience for 
political maneuvering. Their cunning is that of a hunter 
stalking its prey, and the threat they pose is rampant, ag- 
gressive destruction. Examples of Gruul villains appear 
in the Gruul Villains table. 


GRUUL VILLAINS 
d8 Villain 
1 A druid of the Old Ways (see chapter 6 for the stat 
block), spurred by visions of the end of civilization, 
plans humanoid sacrifices in the name of Ilharg the 


Raze-Boar. 

2 A druid is directing herds of beasts to run amok 
through tenement neighborhoods. 

3 A druid summons huge vines and roots to tear 
buildings down. 

4 A clan chieftain leads a raid to settle a personal 
vendetta against another guild. 

5 In a display of strength, a clan chieftain seeks to 


destroy a significant landmark. 

6 Looking for a totem of spiritual significance, a 
clanless giant wrecks anything in its path. 

7 Hoping to form a new clan, a clever centaur tries to 
break violent criminals out of jail. 

8 A druid leads a band that has begun starting fires 
around the district. 


-e 


i-r As 


Y ^ NNN 
1 S | S 
Lue 
"owe 
EY RY 


1 square = 5 feet 


q 


ry 


Map 4.5; RuBBLEBELT ENCAMPMENT 


GRUUL AS CAMPAIGN VILLAINS 

Using the Gruul Clans as the main antagonists in a cam- 
paign could be an opportunity to explore the apocalyptic 
religious beliefs of the Old Ways—the expectation of the 

return of an ancient god, Ilharg the Raze-Boar. 

At low levels, characters could be drawn into seem- 
ingly coincidental clashes with the Gruul, perhaps as 
minor events in adventures that involve other guilds. 
Only later does a pattern emerge: the raids correspond 
with certain astronomical events, the movements of 
wurms, or another sign that the druids of the Old Ways 
consider significant. As the adventurers’ power grows, 
so does that of the Gruul druids behind the trouble, and 
soon the druids are actually instigating natural disas- 
ters—earthquakes and mighty storms, for example. As 
the campaign reaches its climax, the Gruul Clans all 
come together to perform an enormous ritual meant to 
summon the Raze-Boar and bring an end to civilization 
on Ravnica—and the adventurers must stop it. 


GRUUL CHARACTER GOALS 


The goals shown on the Gruul Assignments table can 
be objectives in themselves, or side quests that a Gruul 
character pursues in the course of undertaking an ad- 
venture with a larger purpose. 


GRUUL ASSIGNMENTS 


d6 Assignment 

1 Collect a beast cub so it can be trained for battle. 
Slay a powerful monster to prove your strength. 
Destroy a laboratory, a work of engineering, or a 
similar edifice of decadent civilization. 

4 Kill someone who has been persecuting the Gruul. 
Free a captive warrior who was imprisoned during 
a recent raid. 

6 Create a disruption so the clan can raid elsewhere. 


OTHER ADVENTURE Hooks 


The Gruul Adventure Hooks table presents ideas for ad-e 


ditional adventures themed around the Gruul Clans. 


GRUUL ADVENTURE HOOKS 
d6 Adventure Hook 

1 Conflict between two feuding clans spills onto the 
streets of the city, threatening to destroy entire 
neighborhoods. 

2 Gruul anarchs (see chapter 6 for the stat block) 
deface or destroy monuments throughout the 
district. 

3 A Gruul mob riots in the streets in observance of 
Rauck-Chauv, a holiday celebrated with violence. 

4 A wurm (see chapter 6 for the stat block) breaks 
free of its Gruul controller and goes on a rampage. 

5 Swine everywhere run wild, and the Gruul interpret 
this as a sign of the Raze-Boar's return. 

6 Gruul raiders steal something from an Izzet labora- 
tory that will cause a disaster if it isn't returned. 


IZZET LEAGUE 


Adventures involving the Izzet League typically concern 
magical mishaps, dangerous inventions, and feats of 
engineering (for good or ill). Player characters might be 
called upon to help clean up in the aftermath of a mag- 
ical disaster, contain the damage, or rein in an ongoing 
danger. Or they could test or steal or destroy Izzet inven- 
tions, perhaps inadvertently causing magical catastro- 
phes in the process. 


EXPERIMENTAL WORKSHOP 


The fundamental responsibility of the Izzet League is 
building and maintaining Ravnica's infrastructure, and 
the guild's work is responsible for many of the magical- 
technological conveniences that make life in the city 
relatively safe and comfortable, from paved roadways 

to running water. Under the leadership of the draconic 
genius Niv-Mizzet, the Izzet have continued to innovate, 
taking their work far beyond the essential needs of in- 
frastructure and into the realm of wild invention. As a 
result, the workshops and laboratories of the Izzet are 
prone to magical mishaps, with results that range from 
personal injury to district-wide destruction. It is perhaps 
best for Ravnica as a whole that most of Izzet's work 
takes place in small workshops scattered throughout 
the city, rather than being concentrated in one place 
(with the guildhall of Nivix being the notable exception). 


EXPERIMENTAL WORKSHOP ADVENTURES 
Izzet workshops like the one depicted in map 4.6 are 
notable for three things: the brilliant minds at work 


1 


i 


there, the incredible inventions they produce, and the 
destructive events that can occur when things go wrong. 
Adventurers might be drawn to a workshop to steal, 
thwart, or protect any of those things. The Experimental 
Workshop Adventures table shows some examples. 


EXPERIMENTAL WORKSHOP ADVENTURES 


d12 Adventure Goal 

1 Rescue people trapped in the workshop after a 
disaster. 
Steal plans or a prototype for a new weapon. 

3 Capture an inventor for interrogation. 
Stop the spread of toxic gas or molten mizzium 
from inside the workshop. 
Shut down the operation of a dangerous device. 
Capture or kill an elemental or an Izzet weird (de- 
scribed in chapter 6) that is running amok in the 
workshop, and make sure it doesn't escape out 
into the city. 

7 Get out of the workshop before it is destroyed by a 
spreading catastrophe. 


8 Destroy the workshop in order to obliterate the 
research being done there. 
9 Destroy the workshop in order to bring down a 


different building nearby. 

10 Find a saboteur in the workshop before the traitor's 
plans can be enacted. 

n Kill an inventor whose ideas are too dangerous to 
be put into practice. 

12 Activate an invention being held in storage in the 
workshop. 


EXPERIMENTAL WORKSHOP MAP 

An Izzet workshop is a chaotic place, buzzing with en- 
ergy and activity. A mana generator in the basement fu- 
els all the experimentation and construction above. The 
generator draws power from the city infrastructure, and 
ultimately from the Blistercoils, but the construction 
depicted in map 4.6 is designed to amplify and focus the 
magical energy. The machinery is fragile, so visitors are 
strongly discouraged from entering the basement. 

Some parts of the generator extend up to the ground 
floor and the laboratory mezzanine above it, with por- 
tions of those floors open to the basement or covered 
only by metal grates. The ground level is typically clut- 
tered with devices attached to the generator below, as 
well as cast-off pieces of such devices, awaiting new 
homes in new inventions. The laboratory mezzanine 
includes three spaces where projects can be developed 
in isolation, with thick walls providing some shielding 
from potentially explosive results. Additional equipment 
related to the generator system is housed in a tower and 
on the workshop's roof, culminating in a storm siphon 
that can harness and channel atmospheric energy (in- 
cluding lightning). 

The Bizarre Magical Effects table provides sugges- 
tions for the sort of events that might result from a failed 
(or successful!) Izzet experiment, which can add spice to 
any Izzet adventure. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES 


BizARRE MAGICAL EFFECTS 


d6 Effect 

1 Every spell cast in the area triggers a wild magic 
surge. (Roll on the Wild Magic Surge table in the 
"Sorcerer" section of the Player's Handbook.) 

2 One or more objects in the area have a random 
trick effect. (Roll on the Tricks table in appendix A 
of the Dungeon Master's Guide.) 

The area is affected by a guards and wards spell. 
Rooms and chambers in the area are affected by 
random obstacles. (Roll on the Obstacles table in 
appendix A of the Dungeon Master's Guide.) 

5 One or more objects in the area have a random 
trap effect. (Roll on the Traps table in appendix A 
ofthe Dungeon Master's Guide.) 

6 Random sections of the area are affected by an 
antimagic field spell. 


IZZET VILLAINS 


The behavior that members of the Izzet League dis- 
play most often is careless disregard for safety, which 
causes frequent upheavals on both small and large 
scales. The true villains among the Izzet, though, aren't 
just accident-prone but also committed to widespread 
destruction. Out of madness or despair, they might 
plot the destruction of precincts or districts. Hungry 
for profit and power, they develop weapons capable of 
destroying large groups of people and commit crimes to 
get the resources they need to complete their research. 
The Izzet Villains table includes examples of villains 
as well as those who have less sinister intentions. 


IZZET VILLAINS 
d8 Villain 

1 A disgraced member of the Izmundi tries to embar- 
rass the guild by orchestrating a magical disaster. 

2 A team of inventors is creating a secret arsenal of 
volatile weapons. 

3 Trying to impress the guildmaster, a mage from 
the Laboratory of Storms and Electricity creates a 
device that pushes the weather from one extreme 
to another. 

4 A researcher siphons power from the Blistercoils 
to fuel experiments, causing failures in parts of the 
city's infrastructure. 

5 An obsessive researcher, trying to perfect 
an alchemical formula, causes a series of 
ever-worsening laboratory mishaps. 

6 A guild leader orchestrates a series of "accidental" 
laboratory explosions that are actually meant to 
disrupt the nearby activities of other guilds. 

7 An imprisoned spellcaster stages an explosive 
prison break using improvised materials. 

8 A suspicious spellcaster who can't trust research 
secrets to others creates clones that run amok. 


SS 
DA 


CN 


Za 


| 


X | 


Ground Level 


Le t 
:.— DELIVERY 


Laboratory Mezzanine 
: a 7/7770 
)_1 7/7 


A 
P UE 
MA Basement / Power Plant 


MSS 


L2 


i = - Q : c 


t — LADDER 
GRATING 


oum 
—] j| 7 


OQ qe 


C) MACHINERY 
pipes 


Ws 
ANS 
AINS 


Map 4.6: EXPERIMENTAL WORKSHOP 


IZZET AS CAMPAIGN VILLAINS 

A campaign involving the Izzet League could revolve 
around an Izzet researcher's efforts to gain personal 
power or greater influence for the guild through the 
wonders of modern magical science. 

At low levels, the characters might help deal with a 
small-scale mishap in an Izzet workshop that is pre- 
sumed to be an accident. Maybe something in the man- 
ner of the responsible researcher stirs up their suspi- 
cion, but there's no evidence of wrongdoing at this point. 
As the campaign progresses, the characters might con- 
tinue having run-ins with the same researcher, whose 
work seems to be growing more dangerous. Eventually, 
they discover evidence that this researcher is develop- 
ing weapons to use against the other guilds, and asa 
result the researcher has to move to a secret workshop, 
perhaps tucked away in the undercity. Or perhaps the 
guildmaster intervenes, declares this issue to be an in- 
ternal matter for the Izzet to resolve, and assures the au- 
thorities that the researcher will be properly dealt with. 
As the campaign reaches its climax, the adventurers are 
tasked with discovering the researcher’s secret labora- 
tory and disabling the super-weapon. 


IZZET CHARACTER GOALS 


Characters who are connected with the Izzet League 
might be asked to run errands for higher-ranked re- 
searchers, or to take on more difficult tasks on behalf 
of colleagues. The Izzet Assignments table provides 
examples of goals that can serve as adventure hooks for 
a party or as side quests for an Izzet character to pursue 
in the course of a larger adventure. 


İZZET ASSIGNMENTS 
d6 Assignment 
Acquire a hard-to-find metal or energy source. 
Copy a rival's research notes. 
Destroy a rival's research. 


A oU HN — 


Take measurements of an unusual object or 
location (such as spatial dimensions or readings of 
various magical levels). 

Test a new invention. 

Repair an important piece of Ravnica's infrastruc- 
ture, such as a water main or a boiler pipe, that is 
tucked away in a remote location. 


OTHER ADVENTURE Hooks 


The Izzet Adventure Hooks table presents ideas for ad- 
ditional adventures themed around the Izzet League. 


IzzET ADVENTURE Hooks 


d6 ^ Adventure Hook 
1 An Izzet experiment transforms a researcher, who 
then seeks help in returning to normal form. 


2 An escaped Izzet weird (described in chapter 6) is 
causing magical malfunctions around the district. 
3 A researcher trying to craft an antigravity alloy for a 


personal flight apparatus has created a number of 
reverse gravity effects, and is now trapped in midair 
at the top of one. 

4 After a laboratory explosion, an alchemical fire 
resistant to conventional firefighting techniques is 
spreading through several neighborhoods. 

5 A reckless researcher triggered an explosion in a 
mizzium foundry, causing a wave of molten metal 
to spill out into the surrounding streets. 


6 A researcher who claims to have traveled back in 
time warns of an impending disaster. 


ORZHOV SYNDICATE 


The Orzhov Syndicate is a sprawling network of orga- 
nized crime that operates behind a facade of legitimate 
banking, robed in the trappings of religion. Adventures 
involving the Orzhov often include some combination 
of fighting their criminal activities, interacting with 
their wealth, and dealing with the haunting spirits and 
sinister monsters that make up a significant part of the 
guild’s leadership. 


GRAND BASILICA 


Combining the guild's interests in organized crime, 
banking, and religion, Orzhov properties are ornate 
basilicas as grand as any cathedral, though the business 
conducted within them is driven by greed and lust for 
power rather than altruistic motives. Each location in- 
cludes a grand space used not for purposes of worship, 
but to ensure that petitioners feel small and abased be- 
fore the Orzhov oligarchs. Its lower level contains vaults 
to store the ill-gotten riches of its leaders, as well as 
crypts that hold the corpses of family members whose 
spirits might still be active above. 


GRAND BASILICA ADVENTURES 

An adventure in an Orzhov basilica, like the one 
shown in map 4-7, can feel like the action in a gangster 
movie, a bank heist, or the exploration of a haunted 
house. The Grand Basilica Adventures table provides 
some examples. 


GRAND BASILICA ADVENTURES 


d12 Adventure Goal 
1 Steal (or recover) a magic item from the vaults 
below the basilica. 
2 Put an end to nightly visitations by finding and 
confronting the haunting spirit in the basilica. 
3 Survive a night trapped inside the basilica. 


4 Deliver a warning to an Orzhov pontiff in the 
basilica and get out alive. 

5 Rescue a prisoner being held in the basilica’s spire 
or crypts. 

6 Escape from captivity in the basilica’s spire or 
crypts. 

7 Destroy a dangerous weapon stored in a vault 
beneath the basilica. 

8 Acquire or destroy some incriminating evidence 
held by an Orzhov blackmailer. 

9 Retrieve a precious item held as collateral by an 


Orzhov loan shark. 
10 Get information from a spirit who knew something 
important in life. 


11 Find concrete evidence of the syndicate's illegal 
activities. 
12 Discover the fate of someone who was last seen 


entering the basilica a week ago. 


ORZHOV BASILICA MAP 

The Orzhov basilica is a huge church with the primary 
function of intimidating those who come to confess, 
atone, borrow, or pay. The nave features lofty archways, 
towering statues of proud oligarchs, and a huge central 
statue that depicts the Ghost Council surrounded by 
supplicants. A pair of tall doors behind the statue leads 
to an sanctuary where minor treasures—worth more 
than most citizens will ever see in their lives, but less 
than the true treasures hidden in the vaults—are put 

on display to encourage devotion. Another statue of a 
patron oligarch (usually the basilica's founder) stands at 
the end of this room, flanked by spiral staircases leading 
up into the spire and down to the crypts. The stairs are 
secured behind ornate wrought iron gates. 

The three levels of the spire hold luxurious apart- 
ments where living oligarchs dwell. The doors can be 
locked from the outside, making them also suitable for 
holding valuable prisoners. 

The crypts and vaults below the basilica hold the 
bones of ancient oligarchs and their most cherished 
treasures. Some crypts contain just bones, others just 
valuables, and some hold both. A security station keeps 
watch on the entire level, and the guards there are typ- 
ically the only ones who have keys to open the metal 
portcullises that obstruct the hallway. 


ORZHOV VILLAINS 


Examples of Orzhov villains appear in the Orzhov 
Villains table. 


ORZHOV VILLAINS 
d8 Villain 

1 A powerful pontiff is using the spirits of dead 
relatives to intimidate members of other guilds. 

2 An angel defected from the Boros Legion, bringing 
a magic sword with her that the Boros want back. 

3 An Orzhov knight is trying to collect an overdue 
debt incurred by one of the adventurers” ancestors. 

4 A pontiff is running an extortion racket, promising 
local businesses protection from thugs that are 
also in the Orzhov’s employ. 

5 A blood drinker vampire (see chapter 6 for the stat 
block) is holding prisoners as a food supply in a 
bank vault. 

6 An advokist is exploiting legal loopholes to win the 
freedom of several criminals from Azorius prisons. 

7 A desperate spirit tries to frighten people into 
paying its debts so it can pass on. 

8 An unusually quick-witted Orzhov giant (see 
chapter 6 for the stat block) with grand visions of 
starting a criminal gang interferes with the flow of 
protection money. 


ORZHOV AS CAMPAIGN VILLAINS 

Orzhov villains often scheme to achieve immortality (if 
they are still alive and have been denied the prospect 
of becoming a spirit after death), to gain influence, and 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES 147 


a 
a IN 
n 


1 square = 5 feet 


Map 4.7: GRAND BASILICA 


- 


~ Nm 


UES 


AAS ee hy | 

I 

ca 

Re ANT EXOD. 
| l ry 


YAVA Crypts and Vaults 
LY SARC WESSE 


Sar EU 


Sy 
a 


lA 
UA 
2 d "] 


n 
i 
N 


) T 


ANUS 
I 


LN 
| 


Ae uL 

HAH Di 
AU 
Spire Level 3 


RN 
p^ 


A MEE UIAA 
HA I EA 
N 


MKRS 


~ 
Th! 
Ws 


especially to gather wealth (because too much is never 
enough). Their favorite methods include coercion, 
confidence scams (mostly relying on the fine print in 
magically binding contracts), murder, politics, theft, tor- 
ture, and vice. 

You could build a campaign around the Orzhov Syndi- 
cate’s efforts to gain control of the adventurers. Recog- 
nizing the characters as powerful agents for change, one 
or more pontiffs scheme to make sure that the syndicate 
can direct that force toward goals of their choosing. In 
typical Orzhov fashion, that generally means trying to 
force the characters into debt, either to the Orzhov in 
general or to an individual pontiff. 

At low levels, the Orzhov might be nothing more than 
a gentle force behind the scenes. If the adventurers need 
help, an Orzhov agent might appear and offer it. If they 
commit crimes, the Orzhov find out about it. The charac- 
ters’ valuables can be kept safe in an Orzhov vault, and 
Orzhov ministrants can provide healing and other cleri- 
cal magic at reasonable prices. 

As the campaign progresses and the characters ac- 
quire more influence in their guilds and in the city at 
large, the Orzhov begin trying to exert pressure. They 
call in favors in exchange for the help they have previ- 
ously offered, they make subtle threats about reporting 
the adventurers’ illegal acts, or they point to the fine 
print in agreements made with the ministrants. Initially, 
their motives might not be outwardly sinister. (The Or- 
zhov Assignments table can serve as inspiration.) But if 


the characters work against Orzhov interests, the syn- 
dicate interferes more forcefully. All the while, Orzhov 
leaders are looking for ways to trap the characters under 
their ghostly thumbs. 

As the campaign builds to a climax, the adventurers 
might be forced to make sacrifices in order to throw off 
the yoke of Orzhov debt. That turn of events could lead 
to a confrontation with an undead pontiff or even the en- 
tire Obzedat. And if a member of the adventuring party 
has died along the way, the other characters might find 
themselves fighting the spirit of their dead companion! 


ORZHOV CHARACTER GOALS 


Characters who are members of the Orzhov Syndicate, 
as well as those who are indebted to the Orzhov, might 
receive missions or errands that further the interests of 
their corrupt overlords. The Orzhov Assignments table 
includes examples of quests and side quests that such 
characters might undertake. 


ORZHOV ASSIGNMENTS 
d6 Assignment 

1 Convince a debtor to make a payment. 

2 Damage the person or property of someone who 
refuses to pay protection money. 

Distribute alms-coins to the poor. 

4 Transport a chest of coins to an Orzhov bank. 
Destroy evidence that implicates the Orzhov in a 
crime. 

6 Find information that can be used to blackmail a 
powerful person. 


OTHER ADVENTURE HOOKS 


The Orzhov Adventure Hooks table presents ideas 
for additional adventures themed around the Orzhov 
Syndicate. 


OrRZHOV ADVENTURE HOOKS 
d6 Adventure Hook 


1 Newly minted Orzhov coins are inscribed with a 
magical symbol that binds the spirit of anyone who 
uses them. 

2 Indentured spirits (see chapter 6 for the stat block) 


have been deployed to haunt a location the Orzhov 
want to keep people away from. 

3 Thrulls (described in chapter 6) that have broken 
free of Orzhov control are causing mischief. 

4 Items appear on the black market that were ob- 
viously stolen from an Orzhov vault, but no one 
admits that the theft has occurred or claims credit. 

5 Gargoyles perched on structures throughout the 
city are robbing passersby and delivering their 
stolen goods to an Orzhov basilica. 

6 An eclipse triggers violent behavior from bound 
Orzhov spirits. 


CULT OF RAKDOS 


On most worlds, a cult dedicated to an ancient demon 
lord would be an obvious villain, to be rooted out and ex- 
terminated at all costs. On Ravnica, though, the status 
of the Cult of Rakdos isn't so clear-cut. It is a guild like 
the others, and its existence is mandated by the Guild- 
pact, so exterminating it and its founder would violate 
the fundamental social order of the world. Although 

the ranks of Rakdos include outright villains who crave 
blood and mayhem, most of its members are performers 
who just want to put on a good show. Not every per- 
formance ends in violence, and even when a riot does 
break out, it's not always easy to pin the blame on the 
entertainers. 

Nonetheless, the Cult of Rakdos has more than its 
share of truly villainous members, and the guild pro- 
vides ample opportunity for adventurers to fight against 
true evil. 


CHAPTER 4 REATIN DVENT 


NOTORIOUS NIGHTCLUB 


Catering to all sorts of demented desires, nightclubs 
like the one shown in map 4.8 are permanent venues, 
in contrast to the portable tents and stages set up by 
Rakdos performers in streets and plazas every night. 
Much of what happens here would be illegal if it weren't 
consensual—and if the city's rich and powerful weren't 
as drawn to its forbidden pleasures as anyone else 

in Ravnica. 


NOTORIOUS NIGHTCLUB ADVENTURES 
Characters might be drawn to a Rakdos nightclub 

for reasons that have nothing to do with adventuring, 
but adventures unfold in these places regardless. The 
Notorious Nightclub Adventures table includes a variety 
of examples. 


NoTORIOUS NIGHTCLUB ADVENTURES 
d12 Adventure Goal 


1 Shut down a performance before the performers 
start attacking the crowd. 

2 Escape from the club once the violence starts. 

3 Protect a thrill seeker who wants to witness a 


performance close up. 

4 Rescue someone who has been abducted for use 
as an extra in a show. 

5 Find evidence that someone important was (or was 
not) killed in a previous performance here. 

6 Capture a performer who ran away from a promi- 
nent family to "join the circus." 

7 Use the distraction of a performance to hold a 
secret meeting with someone from another guild. 

8 Spy on someone who is using the distraction of a 
performance to hold a secret meeting. 

9 Acquire a magic item the Rakdos are using as part 
of a performance. 

10 Investigate rumors that the Rakdos have a wingless 
angel in their show. 

n Find an escaped convict who is rumored to be 
hiding behind Rakdos makeup. 

12 Stop a Rakdos member who is blackmailing an 
important person with embarrassing information. 


NOTORIOUS NIGHTCLUB MAP 

Security, privacy, and terror are the priorities of this 
nightclub. Visitors are channeled through a large entry 
vestibule into an upper area with tables tucked away in 
nooks. From there, they can watch the violent antics of 
ferocious beasts or performers in cages suspended from 
the ceiling. Stairs lead down to the area of the main 
stage, where headlining performances are held. Offices 
and storage areas fill the rest of the main level. 

A second stage in the lower level provides a more up- 
close experience, which often means audience members 
are showered in blood or drawn into the show. Several 
private booths surround the backstage area, with doors 
that include shuttered windows to enable those inside to 
keep an eye on the show or carry out private business. 


A AUIEST NG M 
— ENTRY — - 


E 


ESTE a 


whys} 
AANU ATLA) 


q 


a 
NN qup. 


AY 


iN 


N 


> 


i 
e 


PAV//AI MAY, 
we 
b oh S 
Fa 


777 
ARKE 


NG 
CAGES 


SS 
S 


47. | i 
G TTY -7 7AM E 7/4 V A 
SQUQunGrNAeevases 


LNG T ~~ Lower Level. | 
Hig z Yi Ss lant DAN: ANAS ANZ NS Á EJ! 
rd gem c BOD Ce DU AM 
f] BOOTHS rao ae TE " 2 or qu S i7 ah i 
M V P ] 7 - 7 fl. = NB — CALP 
R= a ESENE EAA ESSERE 
o'o T fo) | ! > 
: (il me 2C) + 7 AN 
1? 3 L| m 
Ao off o( ) | | 4d SC PRK f 
tata 2S Ba | tt HTN + 


Aso SES 
A UA " 


LA N 
" M 
AU 
“TA 


ZARN 
" "n 
Map 4.8: Noronius NIGHTCLUB => “> aS 


RAKDOS VILLAINS 


Rakdos villains range in power from demented cultists 
to sadistic demons. Most of them are driven by a desire 
for unfettered mayhem. A hunger for a certain form of 
immortality (being an artist who is remembered forever) 
often feeds that desire, and insofar as Rakdos can be 
considered the “god” of his cult, objectives related to 
magic—carrying out his wishes, offering him sacrifices, 
and rousing him into action—are also significant ob- 
jectives for some cultists. Driven as they are by selfish 
impulse and emotion, Rakdos villains also sometimes 
pursue schemes related to passion, power, or revenge. 
Specific examples appear on the Rakdos Villains table. 


RAKDOS VILLAINS 


d8 Villain 

1 A coven of blood witches (see chapter 6 for the stat 
block), seeking Rakdos's favor, uses magic to turn 
members of other guilds against their own allies. 

2 Word spreads that a retiring performer wants to go 
out with a bang, and their final performance prom- 
ises to be explosive. 

3 Mocking the absence of the Guildpact, a Rakdos 
troupe takes over the Chamber of the Guildpact 
and performs its satire before a captive audience. 

4 A demon captures people and makes a game of 
thwarting their efforts to escape. 


d8 Villain 

5 A skilled puppeteer uses skeletal marionettes 
to recreate historical acts of violence between 
guilds—which are inexplicably repeated in the real 
world within the next few days. 

6 A ringmaster has discovered magic that fills the 
whole audience with blood lust and sends them 
rampaging through the streets. 


7 A hypnotist is programming audience members to 
go into a murderous rage when a triggering event 
occurs. 

8 A crazed blood witch (see chapter 6 for the stat 


block) hopes to rouse Rakdos by driving captured 
sacrificial victims into his lair. 


RAKDOS AS CAMPAIGN VILLAINS 
You could build a campaign around the Cult of Rakdos's 
efforts to stir its demonic patron into action against the 
other guilds. The campaign might unfold amid steadily 
increasing violence, escalating to episodes of wide- 
spread rioting and rampaging demons. 

At lower levels, the adventurers might encounter 
incidental violence spilling over from Rakdos venues: 
a brawl outside a nightclub, overenthusiastic devils 
spreading fires around a street stage, or the “acciden- 
tal" death of a few performers at the climax of their act. 
As the campaign progresses, the characters might be 
drawn into combating the efforts of blood witches who 
are trying to exterminate the cult's most active enemies. 


The more they foil the cult's efforts, the more the char- 
acters themselves become targets of both ridicule and 
violent action. 

At the campaign's climax, the adventurers might have 
to interrupt a ritual performed in Rakdos's lair in order 
to prevent him from rampaging through the city—or if 
they are too late to do that, they might have to fight the 
ancient demon lord himself. 


RAKDOS CHARACTER GOALS 


Characters who are members of the Cult of Rakdos are 


expected to be self-motivated and rarely take orders 
from anyone other than Rakdos himself. The Rakdos 
Assignments table includes some suggestions for adven- 
tures or side quests that Rakdos characters might un- 
dertake on their own initiative, or perhaps at the request 
of a ringmaster or a fellow performer. 


RAKDOS ASSIGNMENTS 
d6 Assignment 


1 Acquire a flashy magic item to use as a prop in a 
performance. 

2 Try out a new performance routine in the midst of 
actual life-or-death combat. 

3 Sow distrust of an important person through satire 
or slander. 

4 Make sure a specific person is in the front row for a 
certain performance. 

5 Capture a deadly monster for use in a spectacular 
show. 

6 Interrupt a solemn ceremony or ritual being 


performed by another guild. 


OTHER ADVENTURE HOOKS 


The Rakdos Adventure Hooks table presents ideas 
for additional adventures themed around the Cult 
of Rakdos. 


RAKDOS ADVENTURE HOOKS 


d6 Adventure Hook 

1 Wild-eyed people attending a popular new club 
seem unwilling or unable to go home after several 
days of nonstop merriment. 

2 One morning, everyone who has seen a Rakdos 
performance in the past week suddenly transforms 
into a minor demon. 


3 An apparently spontaneous Rakdos-led riot has 
spread to take over an entire neighborhood. 

4 People who die in Rakdos-inspired violence stand 
back up as zombies and keep fighting. 

5 Ordinary knives and chains in homes across the 


neighborhood seem to come to life in advance of 
the start of a Rakdos show. 

6 After several mausoleums are burst open from the 
inside, people see their undead family members 
cavorting on a Rakdos stage. 


SELESNYA CONCLAVE 


The Selesnya Conclave is most likely to be involved in 
adventures as a force for good, since many of its mem- 
bers are healers, diplomats, and mediators. It is a nat- 
ural home for player characters—especially clerics and 
druids—so it might serve as a patron. Nonetheless, the 
guild has a militaristic bent, and like nature itself it isn’t 
beyond corruption. 


VERNADI CENTER 


The basic unit of the Conclave's organization is the ver- 
nadi—a community centered on a large tree and led by 
the voda of the enclave, a dryad whose spirit is linked to 
that tree. From the outside, a vernadi might resemble a 
peaceful commune, and thus seem to be an easy target 
for theft or assault. But its temple gardens are protected 
by soldiers and archers, and even the seemingly serene 
initiates have some military training. 


VERNADI CENTER ADVENTURES 

Though a vernadi lacks the defensive fortifications of, 
for example, a Boros garrison, it is still a difficult place 
to attack or infiltrate. Because of the sheer numbers of 
initiates that might be inside, stealth is probably a better 
tactic than frontal assault. The Vernadi Center Adven- 
tures table offers some suggestions. 


VERNADI CENTER ADVENTURES 


dl2 Adventure Goal 

1 Ascertain the numbers of the military forces 
housed in and around the vernadi. 

2 Find the source of pollen that is drifting through 
the neighborhood and making people placid and 
compliant. 

3 Find the source of wind-borne seeds that are drift- 
ing through the neighborhood and quickly growing 
into hostile awakened shrubs. 


4 Retrieve an initiate who was supposedly forced to 
join the guild through mind-affecting magic. 
5 Stop the vernadi, whose tree has awakened and 


escaped the control of its dryad, from trampling 
through the neighborhood. 

6 Find a way to tap into the mind, will, and knowl- 
edge of Mat'Selesnya through the vernadi's central 
tree or its dryad. 


7 Introduce a contagion into Mat'Selesnya through 
the vernadi's tree or its dryad. 
8 Capture an equenaut who has been accused of a 


crime and who has taken refuge at the vernadi. 

9 Convince or coerce a healer to tend to a sick or 
wounded person who would normally be an enemy 
of the conclave. 

10 Find a spy embedded in the vernadi community. 

1 Blend into the community to avoid pursuers. 

12 Retrieve an item that was donated to the commu- 
nity by a new initiate, but without the permission of 
the item's owner. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES 


o2 


^ WEE rr 


m C 


ilu 


Massari eer T] 


SSS Nee. 
L I 


RQ : 
‘Sa 
S 
) 
[A 
5 
d 
aS 


VIF TITLE 


fa 


wm, 


$ 
4 


LJ 
on 


1 


J DANN TM, 


77 
do 


ip 


4-33 
GIEDEL Ipaq" FAEF 
lu a ru 
| SA. 
E K = 
«Cc 
- D» s 
HES |} 
= Sy E T 
i d 
GE 
Nes 
wn VA = 
L1 NE 
> | | 
N 
NC 


= 
NNNNNNNRSMS N L UN ^ . f IN , 
: 7 Pe (9) 
GENS NI US e 
Y : 


6| 6 
V ere 


5 feet 


-EXE—SS- o 


a 
"arat 
* 


u zee 


4 
A 


1 square 


Map 4.9: VERNAD! CENTER 


VERNADI CENTER MAP 
The temple shown in map 4.9 is at the heart of the ver- 
nadi, built in and around a large tree. A circle of white 
marble with several archways surrounds the base of 
the tree, encompassing both a decorative garden where 
meetings are held and a vegetable garden that provides 
food for the vernadi. The meeting garden includes 
benches and a fountain of fresh water. Two small build- 
ings at ground level offer rustic accommodations for 
members of the vernadi or guests. 

Gracefully curving ramps sweep around the trunk 
of the tree, leading to various other small buildings. 
Several of these are open to the air, offering sheltered 
places for gatherings or quiet contemplation. Others are 
apartments where leaders of the vernadi live. Near the 
top of the tree is a large, round temple space. 


SELESNYA VILLAINS 


True evil is rare among the members of Selesnya, with 
misplaced religious zeal being the impetus that most 
commonly pushes its members into acts of villainy. 

Examples of Selesnya villains appear in the Selesnya 
Villains table. 


SELESNYA VILLAINS 


d8 
1 


Villain 

A fanatical leader disrupts building projects be- 
cause they aren't in harmony with nature. 

A Ledev guardian is leading preemptive raids on 
other guilds, believing that a full-scale attack on 
the conclave is imminent. 

A voda, feeling imperiled by the ills of society, 
causes vines to grow and seal the members of her 
vernadi inside. 

A militant leader of a splinter group harasses "un- 
believers" on the street and threatens to unleash 
elemental power on them. 

A loxodon evangel uses coercive methods to 
recruit young people into the conclave. 

An elf seeking spiritual union with Mat'Selesnya 
threatens the dryad of their own vernadi. 

A crazed prophet claims to be the incarnation 

of Mat'Selesnya and gathers an army to strike at 
other guilds. 

A horncaller (see chapter 6 for the stat block) 
steals animals that were used as pets, mounts, and 


beasts of burden throughout the neighborhood. 


SELESNYA AS CAMPAIGN VILLAINS 

You could structure a campaign around the efforts of the 
Selesnya Conclave to finally bring all of Ravnica into its 
welcoming embrace. 

At lower levels, Selesnya might be an ally to the player 
characters, offering support in the form of healing and 
other magic. By the time the characters reach middle 
levels, Selesnya emerges as a threat: perhaps it becomes 
clear that several vernadi are using magical charms 
(or other forms of coercion) to win converts, and the 
conclave might even try to coerce the player characters 
to join. Eventually, their strategy evolves toward extor- 
tion and conquest, as they unleash wurms and similar 
powerful beasts to threaten those who refuse to convert, 
and they use the might of their armies to eliminate other 
guilds and bring whole precincts under their control. 
The climax of the campaign might involve the heroes 
leading or coordinating the efforts of all nine other 
guilds to unite against the Selesnya threat. 


SELESNYA CHARACTER GOALS 


Characters who are part of the Selesnya Conclave are 
usually sent into the world to help ease suffering, make 
peace, win converts, and advance the other objectives 

of the guild. The Selesnya Assignments table includes a 
number of side quests for individual Selesnya characters 
as well as adventure hooks for a whole party. 


SELESNYA ASSIGNMENTS 

d6 Assignment 

1 Work to stop the spread of a strange illness. 

2 Tend to the victims of a catastrophe or an attack. 

3 Mediate a dispute between two other guilds. 

4 Plant a magic seed, watch it grow into a great tree, 
and defend the tree until reinforcements arrive. 

5 Bring an unruly beast under control and return it to 
the vernadi it escaped from. 

6 Lead a targeted military strike to warn another 
guild against overreaching. 


OTHER ADVENTURE HOOKS 


The Selesnya Adventure Hooks table presents ideas for 
additional adventures themed around the conclave. 


SELESNYA ADVENTURE HOOKS 


d6 Adventure Hook 
1 A sacred tree has been defiled or cut down, and an 
angry Selesnya mob is gathering to exact revenge. 
2 The Worldsoul has identified the characters as 
emblematic of their guilds' overreaching ambition. 
3 A seer of the conclave tries to convince the charac- 
ters that they are fated to save the world. 
4 Plants throughout a neighborhood develop 
carnivorous tendencies. 
5 A magic-infused stone of a Selesnya building grows 
out of control, threatening nearby buildings. 
6 A Selesnya wurm (see chapter 6 for the stat block) 
breaks free of its controller and goes on a rampage. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES 


SIMIC COMBINE 


Adventures that involve the Simic Combine delve into 
the world of weird magical science. The Simic breed the 
hybrids known as krasis, and those creations can break 
free of their controllers and rampage through the city 
streets. The Simic also infuse sapient races with animal 
features, creating hybrids with adaptations designed for 
combat and espionage. 


GROWTH CHAMBER 


Although most Simic research is concentrated in the 
nine zonots distributed all over Ravnica, mages affil- 
iated with the guild construct laboratories in various 
other locations, particularly when they are seeking a 
particular combination of environmental factors such 
as air and water temperature, humidity, and ambient 
light. Growth chambers like the one depicted in map 
4.10, built for the creation and incubation of krasis and 
hybrids, could be located anywhere, from deep in the 
undercity to the top of a tall spire. 


GROWTH CHAMBER ADVENTURES 

Adventures in a growth chamber often involve dealing 
with Simic experiments. The Growth Chamber Adven- 
tures table shows some examples. 


GROWTH CHAMBER ADVENTURES 
d12 Adventure Goal 

1 Escape from the chamber while a category 3 kra- 
sis (see chapter 6 for the stat block) runs amok 
through it after breaking out of its growth pod. 

2 Break one or more krasis (described in chapter 6) 
out of their growth pods in order to wreak havoc on 
the growth chamber. 

Stop a sinister experiment in progress. 
Spy on a research program intended to create 
superior soldiers. 


5 Subtly sabotage a research program so that it fails 
without the interference being obvious. 

6 Steal research notes from an experiment with 
broad applications. 

7 Free someone who has become the involuntary 


subject of Simic experiments. 

8 Discover the source of a form of terraforming 
magic spreading out from the chamber's location. 

9 Capture a crazed Simic scientist who is trying to 
use other scientists in the chamber for experimen- 
tal subjects. 

10 Capture a crazed Simic scientist whose own body 
has been drastically altered by their experiments. 

n Acquire the laboratory's technology so it can be 
put to use by another guild. 

12 Retrieve research notes from a flooded and aban- 
doned laboratory. 


Map 4.10: GROWTH CHAMBERS 


[4 , 


y n2 2 
Upper Level 3 7 


Lo 


A 
er Level 


2 


GROWTH CHAMBER MAP 

This structure is attached to the side of some other 
structure, much as a coral affixes itself to a solid sur- 
face. It might be built on the inside wall of a zonot or a 
chasm, or it could abut another building at street level. 
The chamber consists of a series of overlapping domes 
with large, green-tinted windows. 

The main entrance leads into a lobby with three deco- 
rative pools and three functional growth pods showcas- 
ing the most innocuous research being done here. The 
pods are glass and metal devices filled with greenish, 
vaguely glowing liquid, designed to allow life forms to 
gestate and grow until they are ready to emerge. The 
pods might be growing homunculi or category 1 krasis, 
but it would be highly unusual for the Simic to display 
the maturation of a hybrid soldier in such a public way. 
Four smaller growth pods to one side serve the same 
function. On the other side, a meeting room (containing 
one more growth pod) offers a place for researchers to 
meet with outsiders. 

The first level above the main floor is dedicated to 
living, cooking, and eating space for the researchers 
and others who live here. A single large room acts as a 
barracks for the scientists, with folding screens offering 
some degree of privacy. 

The other levels of the chamber are entirely dedicated 


to research and space to grow the laboratory's creations. 


Growth pods are found in nearly every room. 


SIMIC VILLAINS 


Examples of Simic villains appear in the Simic 
Villains table. 


SIMIC VILLAINS 


d8 
] 


Villain 

A rogue researcher is flooding parts of the under- 
city to serve as aquariums for secret experiments. 
Researchers are capturing members of the other 
guilds so they can create hybrid soldiers that take 
advantage of the weaknesses of those guilds. 
Researchers team up to surround an entire neigh- 
borhood in a plasma casing that is slowly altering 
the environment and all its inhabitants. 

A magic-wielding Simic hybrid is eluding capture 
by the authorities thanks to a combination of 
adaptations and spells. 

A researcher delves too deep into ancient lore and 
discovers mind-warping alien secrets. 

A researcher creates a moss that threatens to 
destroy much of the city's food production. 

A biomancer (see chapter 6 for the stat block) 
seeks revenge by creating a specialized krasis that 
targets a specific guild. 

A researcher turns to necromancy, exploring the 


combination of dead body parts with living tissue. 


Nee 


SIMIC AS CAMPAIGN VILLAINS 

Many Simic researchers are driven by the belief that 

the guild must adapt to the prospect of imminent war 
among the guilds. Thus, villains among their number 
are often those who seek to provoke the war they have 
foreseen, or those who go to extraordinary, unethical, or 
illegal lengths to conduct their work. 

In the early stages of the campaign, the adventurers 
might face Simic-related threats such as rogue hybrids 
and rampaging krasis, which seem to be unrelated to 
each other and more or less accidental. As the campaign 
progresses, it becomes clear that these Simic creatures 
are part of a military build-up. The wrath of the other 
guilds turns toward the combine, but this conflict is ex- 
actly what the guild has been preparing for. Ultimately, it 
falls to the characters to either prevent the war, disable 
the Simic creatures that are poised to obliterate the 
other guilds’ armies, or find another course of action 
that can maintain the balance of power in Ravnica. 


SIMIC CHARACTER GOALS 


The Simic Assignments table presents some ideas for 
missions that could drive an adventure or serve as side 
quests for a Simic character. 


Simic ASSIGNMENTS 
d6 Assignment 
1 Protect a Simic researcher who is trying to make an 
exhaustive examination of a new form of plant life. 
2 Capture a previously unknown type of creature. 
Contain an ooze or a krasis that is running loose. 


4 Observe the behavior of a new form of krasis or 
Simic hybrid in the field. 


d6 


! 
Assignment L 
Test a symbiotic magic item or life form (perhaps 
something like a living cloak of the manta ray). 
Introduce a new predator species to the area to 
prey on a smaller species that is running amok. 


OTHER ADVENTURE HOOKS 


The Simic Adventure Hooks table presents ideas for ad- 
ditional adventures themed around the Simic Combine. 


Simic ADVENTURE HOOKS 


d6 
1 


Adventure Hook 

A researcher who was hybridized with an ooze is 
accidentally spreading that effect throughout a 
neighborhood, partially liquefying the residents. 
Multiple category 3 krasis (see chapter 6 for the 
stat block) under no one’s control emerge from 
canals throughout the city. 

A Simic laboratory has sunk to the bottom of 

a zonot, and all contact has been lost with the 
researchers inside. 

A Simic airship falls to the ground, and it contains 
key research that several parties want to acquire. 
A sage of the Gyre Clade accidentally creates an 
antimagic field that slowly spreads over the neigh- 
borhood. 

People and animals near a Simic zonot develop 
spontaneous mutations. 


TW rn 


KRENKO'S WAY 


"Krenko's Way” is a short adventure for a party of four 
to six 1st-level adventurers, who might advance to 2nd 
level by the adventure’s conclusion. It is set in the Tenth 
District of Ravnica and serves as an introductory ad- 
venture to the setting. A balance of character classes 

is helpful, since the adventurers will face a variety of 
challenges. Adventurers can be affiliated with any of 
the guilds. 


STORY OVERVIEW 


Krenko is the boss of a notorious goblin mob, and he 
has made his fortune and built his reputation by mostly 
staying out of the guilds’ way. He has managed to cause 
no end of trouble for the citizens of the Tenth District, 


GUILDLESS VILLAINS 
Not every villain in a Ravnica campaign is a member of a 
guild, and not every scheme originates in the guildhalls. 
As you build your own adventures in Ravnica, you can use 
the suggestions in the Dungeon Master's Guide for creating 
villains to craft a guildless villain, one who prefers the 
independence of operating outside the guild structure or 
even seeks to undermine that structure entirely. More of- 
ten than not, though, the guilds turn out to be involved in 
the schemes of even minor villains. 
pM—Óá—Há——— 


but not without attracting the attention of the guilds. A 
cunning opportunist, Krenko has spent years consoli- 
dating goblin street rabble into his fiercely loyal gang. 
He cultivated connections among the ruthless and 
powerful, specializing in high-value theft and mayhem. 
At the apex of his influence, he got into a nasty turf war 
with the Shattergang Brothers, a rival goblin gang that 
often deals in illicit arms. Rumors swirled that Krenko 
killed Dargig, the youngest of the three brothers, after a 
weapons drop went bad. 

The remaining two brothers, Rikkig and Gardagig, 
attempted to kill Krenko in retaliation for the death of 
their kin. Before they could do the deed, Krenko was 
apprehended by the Boros Legion and thrown into 
Sawtooth Prison—near the legion's headquarters of 
Sunhome—to spend the rest of his life behind bars. 
But someone as well connected as Krenko has ways of 
shortening his own sentence. 

Inciting a riot in prison secured him a transfer to 
Udzec, a maximum-security facility in Precinct Two of 
the Tenth District, administered by the Azorius Senate. 
During the transfer, agents of a former associate of 
Krenko's created a distraction, and he was able to slip 
away to rendezvous with his gang. He now plots his 
next move as he reestablishes power over his criminal 
enterprise. 


Krenko's escape is no small matter. The Chamber of 
the Guildpact gets involved, alarmed at the possibility of 
another goblin gang war that could threaten the tenuous 
peace between the guilds. During the adventure, the 
Shattergang Brothers catch wind of Krenko's freedom, 
and are desperate to make him pay. 


RUNNING THE ADVENTURE 


This adventure requires the fifth edition D&D rulebooks 
(Player's Handbook, Dungeon Master's Guide, and 
Monster Manual). You should read the entire adventure 
before attempting to run it. If you'd prefer to play, you 
shouldn't read any farther. 


Text that appears in a box like this is meant to be read 
aloud or paraphrased for the players when their charac- 
ters first arrive at a location or under a specific circum- 
stance, as described in the text. 


The Monster Manual contains statistics for many of 
the creatures found in this adventure. When a creature's 
name appears in bold type, that's a visual cue pointing 
you to the creature's stat block in the Monster Manual. 

If the stat block appears elsewhere, the adventure's text 
tells you so. 


ADVENTURE SUMMARY 


The adventure begins at Sawtooth Prison as the party 
is summoned by Nassius Ven, an official from the 
Chamber of the Guildpact. He explains that Krenko has 
escaped during a prison transfer, and it's urgent that the 
characters locate him and bring him back to justice as 
soon as possible and with discretion. 

The characters can retrace the route of the transfer, 
interview the guards for more information, and use 
their contacts in the city to find out more about Krenko. 
If they are indiscreet in their investigation, they could 
attract the attention of the Shattergang Brothers, a 
rival gang intent on murdering Krenko. Members of 
that gang will trail the party throughout the city in an 
attempt to find the goblin mob boss's location. 

Eventually, the adventurers find Krenko's hide- 
out: a warehouse near a canal. A final show- 
down with the goblin mob boss, his retinue, 
and possible Shattergang interlopers ensues. 
Then it's merely a matter of delivering 
Krenko back to Nassius before more trou- 
ble breaks out. 


KRENKO'S PATRON 


Krenko arranged a deal with a faction 
while in prison. During his transfer, mem- 
bers of that faction struck down his escort 
and freed him. 

At the beginning of the adventure, you can 
roll a patron from the table below, or you can 


choose one (preferably a guild that isn't represented by 
an adventurer in the party). The patron affects the story 
of Krenko's escape in a specific way (as indicated fol- 
lowing the table) and, if you so choose, might influence 
future adventures. 


KRENKO'S PATRON 


d6 Guild 

1 Dimir. An impenetrable fog appeared, confusing the 
escort and obscuring their view. Krenko slipped his 
restraints and scurried off in the mist. 

2. Golgari. A swarm of centipedes burst out of a nearby 
sewer and overwhelmed the guards, knocking them 
unconscious with venomous bites. When the guards 
were revived, Krenko was gone. 

3 Gruul. A Gruul warband screamed through the 
streets, smashing anything that got in the way. The 
guards clashed with the Gruul; during the fight, one 
of them broke Krenko's bonds and the goblin fled the 
scene. 

4 Izzet. A pair of armored mages descended from the 
sky on hovering discs. They aimed devices attached 
to their arms at the guards and blasted them back 
with a concussive wave. While the guards were recov- 
ering, the mages magically dissolved Krenko’s bonds 
and he escaped. 

5 Rakdos. A troupe of performers crossed paths with 
the guards, who became transfixed by a fiery acro- 
batic street display. When the performance was over, 
Krenko had gone missing. 

6 Simic. A skyswimmer intercepted and attacked 
Krenko’s escort. It unleashed a powerful discharge 
of lightning, which knocked out all the guards. When 
they woke up, Krenko had disappeared. 


gar 


STARTING THE ADVENTURE 


Once the players are ready to begin, read or paraphrase 
the following introductory text: 


Life in the Tenth District is never dull. A hub of constant 
activity, it always offers a new opportunity, a new chal- 
lenge, a new intrigue. It is a place where a promising 
adventurer like you can find your path to glory, riches, 
or power through your allegiance to your guild. But first 
you'll need a job that will help you prove your worth. 

Today is your lucky day. This afternoon, you received a 
brief note from one of your contacts: “I heard today from 
someone who is looking for help finding something. 
Seems serious. Might be a good opportunity for you. 
Meet outside Sawtooth Prison at dusk." 

At the appointed time, you find yourself gathered with 
other like-minded individuals outside the front door to 
the functional and unremarkable Sawtooth Prison. 


Have the players introduce their characters to each 
other, if they aren't acquainted already. This might also 
be a time for the characters to identify or discover per- 
sonal connections that might link them, such as com- 
mon acquaintances or contacts, a shared background, 


or living in the same neighborhood. Once the characters 


have had a chance to get to know one another, read: 


Light rain begins to patter on the cobblestones as the 
sun sets behind the spires and towers of the city. You see 
a male vedalken in well-tailored clothes approach your 
group from around the side of the prison. His deep blue 
face bears a gentle but concerned expression. He raises 
his hand to hail you and speaks in a low tone as his eyes 
take in your group and the nearby environs. "Are you here 
to help us find something?" 


This is Nassius Ven, a vedalken noble and a proctor 
from the office of the Guildpact. While the Azorius 
and Boros help maintain the law and keep the peace, 
the office of the Guildpact tries to helps quell disputes 
between the guilds while the Living Guildpact is away. 
Nassius is here to hire the characters to track down 
Krenko because he suspects the involvement of one 
or more guilds in the goblin boss's escape but doesn't 
know who is involved. 


ROLEPLAYING NASSIUS VEN 


After receiving affirmative answers from the party, 
Nassius hands the characters a dossier from Sawtooth 
Prison with an image of a smug, tough-looking male 


goblin on it. Nassius offers up the following information, 


which can be conveyed through conversation with him: 


CREATING ADVENTURES 


“We have need of your particular skills to assist in 

the retrieval of a convict who got loose just before 
sunrise this morning. He escaped during his transfer 
to Udzec, a maximum-security prison where he would 
have spent the rest of his days." 

“His name is Krenko. He's the boss of a large gang 

of goblins that operates around Foundry Street. He 
was apprehended to answer for a long list of crimes, 
including murder. He allegedly incited a riot that led to 
the deaths of a guard and two inmates at this prison 

a week ago. The warden decided enough was enough 
and put through his transfer." 

"Krenko has made a lot of enemies, but the Shatter- 
gang Brothers are his biggest threat. They're a rival 
goblin gang specializing in illicit weapons, and they 
want Krenko dead in reprisal for the murder of one of 
their lieutenants. The dead lieutenant also happens to 
be the youngest of the three siblings that run the gang. 
They'll tear apart the neighborhood to find him once 
they know he has escaped." 

"Normally, we'd let the Azorius deal with this situa- 
tion, but we suspect that Krenko might have had help 
from one of the other guilds when he escaped. We are 
enlisting others to investigate that connection, as it 
could point to a bigger problem." 

“We need you to track down Krenko and bring him 
back alive. Then we can interrogate him and keep him 
off the streets for good." 

“I am prepared to give you ten zinos right now to cover 
any expenses you might incur during your investiga- 
tion. Upon delivery of the criminal, you'll receive one 
hundred zinos and my gratitude, which I will convey 
to your guild leaders. Under no circumstances should 
you attempt to question Krenko yourselves." 


If he is asked, Nassius provides the guards’ account of 
the circumstances of his escape (see "Krenko's Patron"). 
The guards have already been thoroughly questioned, 
and Krenko's trail has gone cold. Nassius is eager to get 
the characters started as soon as possible to prevent the 
Shattergang Brothers from learning of Krenko's escape. 

Nassius asks the party to bring Krenko to an old 
Selesnya granary that was damaged in a Gruul raid 
at the edge of the district. There, he'll take Krenko 
into custody. 

Nassius is evasive about any questions regarding why 
Krenko shouldn't be interrogated or why the characters 
should bring him to the granary. His eyes dart back and 
forth when confronted with these sorts of questions. A 
character who succeeds on a DC 15 Wisdom (Insight) 
check knows that Nassius isn't being completely forth- 
right. Even if pressed, Nassius doesn't offer up any other 
information beyond the mission objectives. 


THE SEARCH FOR KRENKO 


Once Nassius has departed, the characters can get to 
work. They can conduct their investigation however they 
choose, but time is of the essence since eventually word 
on the street gets back to the Shattergang Brothers and 
they start another turf war to flush Krenko out. 


TIMELINE OF EVENTS 


Here's a timeline of what has happened since Krenko 
escaped and what happens in the future, absent inter- 
ference. As soon as the adventurers get involved, events 
might change drastically, but the following timeline can 
still help you determine how the various NPCs involved 
in the story will react to the player characters’ actions. 


Early Morning, Day 1: Krenko escapes. 

Late Morning, Day 1: Krenko meets with his gang and 
prepares a disguise for himself. 

Noon, Day 1: Krenko and his gang secure an abandoned 
warehouse as a temporary hideout for the mob boss. 

Sunset, Day 1: The adventurers receive the mission. 

Late Evening, Day 1: Krenko places a weapons order 
with Falish, a human arms dealer. 

Noon, Day 2: Additional enforcers from Krenko's gang 
arrive at Krenko's hideout. 

Sunset, Day 2: The Shattergang Brothers hear about 
Krenko's escape and mobilize to find him. Falish 
leaves a cache of weapons at a drop point on Foundry 
Street, and a goblin carries the weapons back to 
Krenko's hideout. 

Late Evening, Day 2: Explosions rock Foundry Street 
as the Shattergang Brothers start violently coerc- 
ing citizens who are known to have dealings with 
Krenko. The Lyev Column (Azorius law enforcement) 
is dispatched to Foundry Street to investigate the 
disturbance. 

Predawn, Day 3: The Shattergang Brothers find out 
Krenko's location, and a great explosion goes off 
there, leveling the building and killing many goblins 
(Krenko survives). 

Noon, Day 3: The Foundry Street vicinity is subject to 
terrible goblin gang violence. The Boros Legion is 
called in to pacify the area. 


THE DOSSIER 


The adventurers can find the following information in 
the Sawtooth Prison dossier: 


* Krenko has been a goblin mob boss for several years. 
His turf was around Foundry Street. He has been a 
person of interest in numerous crimes befitting a mob- 
ster but managed to evade the law—until recently. 

* Krenko was brought into custody by Gideon Jura, a 
freelancer working with the Boros Legion at the time. 
Krenko was found guilty of murdering Dargig, one of 
the Shattergang Brothers, and of assault with a deadly 
weapon against Gideon Jura. 

* The weapon on his person at the time of arrest was a 
magic shiv (a prison knife). Reportedly, it could punch 
through force barriers. It isn't known how Krenko ob- 
tained the weapon. 

* Krenko's notable associates include the mysterious 
Mr. Taz (no other information provided) and a rene- 
gade Izzet weapons inventor named Falish (female 
human, seen around Tin Street). Both are also per- 
sons of interest to the Azorius. 


HITTING THE STREETS 


The characters can take several approaches to investi- 
gating Krenko's whereabouts: meeting with contacts, 
sussing out rumors, or visiting important locations. 


MEET WITH CONTACTS 

If a character has an appropriate contact to press for 
information, they can reach out to that contact for as- 
sistance. It takes 1 hour to arrange a meeting with the 
contact and 1d6 hours for the contact to find one previ- 
ously unknown piece of information, unless that contact 
would have the information on hand. 


GATHER RUMORS 

Characters can go to public gathering places to attempt 
to obtain information. After 1d6 hours, a character 
sifting through rumors makes a DC 15 Charisma (Per- 
suasion) check. On a success, they find out one previ- 
ously unknown piece of information from among those 
given below: 


* Krenko's absence has hurt his gang's reputation. 
Other gangs have been encroaching on his territory, 
and it's only a matter of time before there's another 
power struggle played out in the streets. 

* Tin Street is a bustling center of trade and the terri- 
tory of the Shattergang Brothers. They have become 
emboldened since Krenko was put away and are 
readying for war to take out his gang once and for all. 

* Foundry Street is where you'll find manufacturing fa- 
cilities for the Tenth District, and it’s Krenko's gang's 
turf. His enforcers are still squabbling over who 
should lead. For now, they all have an uneasy truce 
with each other. 

+ Some goblins were pulling up a sewer grate at a very 
early hour west of the plaza. They didn't look like 
maintenance workers and threatened anyone that 
came too close. The approximate location of this inci- 
dent is obtained. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES 


164 


Three locations important to the adventure are men- 
tioned in the information above: the sewers, Foundry 
Street, and Tin Street. Each site is described in detail 
below. The travel time (on foot) between any two of 
these locations is 30 minutes to 1 hour. 


THE SEWERS AT PLAZA WEST 


Characters heading west of the plaza on a tip they re- 
ceived earlier might look for a sewer grate that is out of 
place. It takes 1 hour and a successful DC 10 Wisdom 
(Perception) check to find a grate with scrapes from a 
crowbar on it. Alternatively, the characters can interview 
residents in the area, in which case it takes half an hour 
and a successful DC 10 Charisma (Persuasion) check to 
find the location of the grate. 

The grate can be pulled up with a successful DC 15 
Strength check. Once the grate is opened, read: 


A circular maintenance shaft plunges down into the 
darkness. An iron ladder is bolted to one side of the 
shaft. The pungent smell of the sewers wafts up to your 
nose. A faint light is visible at the bottom, illuminating 
refuse-filled water. 


There is no light source in the shaft, which continues 
down 50 feet until it ends in a folding ladder with a dan- 
gling cord. When unfolded, the ladder reaches another 
20 feet to the sewer tunnel floor. When the characters 
descend to the floor, read: 


You stand shin-deep in sewer water, in a dimly lit tunnel. 
There’s a raised walkway on either side that gets you out 
of the smelly, muck-filled water. Small lamps housing 
magical flames shed dim light. The walls are covered in 
moss and lichen. 


The tunnel is dimly lit by small continual flame bea- 
cons positioned every 30 feet or so on alternating sides 
of the 20-foot-high tunnel. The sewer tunnel is 30 feet 
wide and continues in both directions. The tunnel has 
a raised walkway 5 feet wide and 5 feet tall along both 
sides. The main passage is flowing with 1-foot-deep wa- 
ter and smelly refuse. 

Krenko and three other goblins came this way, head- 
ing to his new hideout. The characters can spot signs of 
grimy boot prints made by Small creatures on one of the 
walkways by succeeding on a DC 10 Wisdom (Percep- 
tion) check. After finding the prints, they can continue to 
track them through the sewer tunnels by succeeding on 
a DC 15 Wisdom (Survival) check. For every day since 
the goblins came through here, add 5 to the DC of the 
check. It takes 2 hours to navigate the twisting tunnels 
at normal walking speed. The tunnels are near Golgari 
territory, but above the undercity. 

For each hour the party spends in the sewers, roll a 
d20. On a 15 or higher, the party has an encounter de- 
termined by rolling on the Sewer Encounters table. 


CHAPTER 4 


CREATING ADVENTURES 


SEWER ENCOUNTERS 
d20 Encounter 
1-4  1d4cultists of Rakdos 
5-9  2d4 giant rats 


10-11 1 gray ooze 

12-14 1 kraul warrior (see chapter 6 for the stat block) 
15-18 1 swarm of insects (centipedes) 

19-20  1d4 zombies covered in fungus 


The tracks end at another maintenance shaft in the 
ceiling of the tunnel. A cord dangles down from the 
shaft; pulling on it releases a folding ladder that can 
easily be climbed. The shaft terminates in a grate, 
which can be pushed aside with a successful DC 15 
Strength check. 

The characters emerge in an alley beside an old ware- 
house on a canal dock near Foundry Street, in Precinct 
Six of the Tenth District. The tracks continue up to the 
warehouse. 


TIN STREET 


This bustling market area is busy with the flow of mer- 
chants, entertainers, shoppers, and revelers. During 
daytime hours, Tin Street is a prime destination for 
shopping and dining. At night, theaters and taverns 
come alive. 


Tin Street is one of the two avenues that traverse the 
entire Tenth District (see chapter 3). Where it passes 
through Precinct Six, the Shattergang Brothers have 
claimed much of it as their turf. They keep a keen eye 
out for Azorius arresters, rival gang members, and any- 
one who asks too many questions. 

Tin Street is also the home of Falish, a renegade Izzet 
arms dealer who, for the right price, supplies criminals 
with weapons and explosives. 


SHATTERGANG EAVESDROPPING 

If a check to gather rumors fails by 5 or more, or the 
characters are otherwise indiscreet while investigat- 
ing around Tin Street, word gets to the Shattergang 
Brothers that someone has been asking about Krenko. 
They send an unremarkably dressed, beady-eyed goblin 
named Erko to tail the characters (about 60 feet) and 
sneak up to eavesdrop on conversations. If a character's 
passive Wisdom (Perception) score equals or exceeds 
the goblin's Dexterity (Stealth) check, that character no- 
tices that they're being followed or observed. 

If Erko notices the party has seen him, he tries to run 
away, back to one of his gang's hideouts. As he makes 
his way down the busy market of Tin Street, you can 
conduct this scene as a chase, using the chase rules and 
the Urban Chase Complications table in chapter 8 of the 
Dungeon Master's Guide. 

In addition to his weapons, Erko carries a flask of 
alchemist's fire, which he hurls at the first creature that 
threatens him. See chapter 5 of the Player's Handbook 
for rules on using alchemist's fire. 


If a character interrogates Erko and succeeds on 
a DC 10 Charisma (Intimidation) check, the goblin 
reveals that he works for the Shattergang Brothers, 
and they have an interest in knowing what goes on in 
their turf. He doesn't reveal their hideout under any 
circumstances. 

If Erko tails the adventurers long enough to discover 
Krenko's location, the Shattergang Brothers arrive at 
Krenko's hideout in force 2 hours later. 


FINDING FALISH 

The renegade Izzet arms dealer Falish lives and works 
on Tin Street. Characters can ask around the neighbor- 
hood to discover the location of her secret shop, but the 
information doesn't come easy. 

Taverns. Falish is a regular at the Millstone, a seedy 
tavern that caters to the rough and rowdy. The tavern's 
owner and barkeep is Wyroon, a male minotaur with a 
cracked horn and a surly disposition. He was drummed 
out of the Boros Legion for insubordination a few years 
ago. His starting attitude is indifferent, but if a character 
succeeds on a DC 10 Charisma (Persuasion) check, he'll 
tell the characters that Falish comes down some nights 
for a drink or two. Falish stops by early in the evening of 
Day 2, without her flamethrower. 

Merchants. Very few merchants on Tin Street know 
Falish, except for a female goblin alchemist named 
Noggra, who runs an apothecary shop called Noggra's 
Remedies. Noggra often patches up injured gang mem- 
bers after their scuffles, and occasionally hides them 
from the law. She sometimes sells Falish alchemical 
substances to enhance her weapons. Her starting atti- 
tude toward the party is indifferent. If a character asks 
her about Falish and succeeds on a DC 20 Charisma 
(Intimidation or Persuasion) check, she gives up Falish's 
location. A character who offers Noggra 10 gp or more 
makes this check with advantage. 

Street Talk. Characters can simply ask around the 
neighborhood to try to find Falish. If so, use the rules for 
gathering rumors under "Hitting the Streets." 


FALISH'S WORKSHOP 
Once the characters determine Falish's location and 
travel there, read: 


Following the directions to Falish's shop, you find your- 
self in an alley behind a restaurant. Near the back door to 
the establishment is a smaller, padlocked iron door that 
looks as if it came from a vault. 


The door has a padlock that requires a successful DC 
15 Dexterity check to pick with thieves' tools, or a suc- 
cessful DC 20 Strength check to force open. Once it is 
open, read: 


Beyond the door, you see a narrow staircase that leads 
twenty feet down to a green-tinged copper door, with a 
closed sliding peephole in its center. 


This copper door is locked and requires a successful 
DC 15 Dexterity check with thieves' tools to open. It can 
also be forced open with a successful DC 20 Strength 
check. The door is trapped with a glyph of warding spell 
that triggers when a character attempts to pick the lock 
or force open the door. The triggered glyph casts s/eep 
at 3rd level, affecting 9d8 hit points of creatures. A 
character who searches the door for traps can detect the 
glyph with a successful DC 15 Intelligence (Investiga- 
tion) check. 

When the characters enter the room, read: 


The flickering glow of lanterns reveals a haphazard room 
that is thirty feet long and twenty feet wide, packed with 
equipment, tools, and materials. Hanging from the wall 
are all manner of weapons. Boxes and small crates are 
stuffed under tables that overflow with flasks. A work- 
bench is piled high with tools. There's a small living area 
with a bed and a large iron stove in the back of the room. 


This room serves as a laboratory, showroom, and liv- 
ing quarters for Falish, a human scorchbringer guard 
(see chapter 6 for the stat block). She deals in alchemi- 
cally treated weapons and explosives. A renegade who 
was expelled from the Izzet League, Falish maintains 
contacts within the guild, who provide her with the 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES 165 


materials she uses to upgrade weapons. She sells her 
wares to many of the gangs in the Tenth District. 

If characters trigger the glyph trap on the door, Falish 
grabs her gear and heads out through a secret door in 
the back of her living quarters as quickly as possible, 
closing the door behind her. The secret door opens into 
a tunnel that leads down into the sewers. When closed, 
the secret door can be found with a successful DC 15 
Wisdom (Perception) check. 

If the characters surprise Falish or manage to sneak 
in, she realizes she has no quick escape and is willing 
to cooperate to a certain extent to get the characters out 
of her home. In exchange for freedom, she reveals the 
following information: 


* Krenko contacted her to deliver some weapons, explo- 
sives, and any magic items she had to a drop point on 
Foundry Street, outside the Smokehouse Inn. She's 
supposed to make the drop at sunset on the day after 
Krenko's escape. 

* Krenko is planning on using the weapons to launch 
a preemptive attack on the Shattergang Brothers to 
reassert that he's back in power. 

* Krenko is probably hiding somewhere near the drop 
point. Falish knows that Krenko and his rescuers 
were spotted entering a sewer grate west of the plaza. 


Treasure. Falish has one of each weapon in the 
Player's Handbook with a price of no more than 25 gp 
hanging from the walls of her quarters. On her work ta- 
bles are three flasks of alchemist's fire, one vial of acid, 
alchemist's supplies, tinker's tools, a set of thieves' tools, 
and most of the components needed to assemble two 
bombs. Under one of the tables is a small, locked strong- 
box requiring thieves' tools and a successful DC 15 Dex- 
terity check to open. Inside the strongbox are 200 zinos 
(gp), 3 strips of mizzium (a durable magical metal), and 
an eversmokin$ bottle. 


FOUNDRY STREET 


Foundry Street is where a lot of the manufacturing hap- 
pens in the Tenth District. Workers toil day and night to 
make goods that Ravnicans buy in the market, and to 
supply the Boros Legion with armor and weapons. 

Goblins are common in this part of the city, and it is 
Krenko's gang's turf. Most of the gang members now 
know that Krenko has escaped, and the bickering be- 
tween his enforcers has subsided with Krenko back on 
the streets. 

Most of the folk who live around Foundry Street know 
to report any Azorius presence or nosy outsiders to a 
goblin gang member that serves as the block captain. If 
the characters conduct their investigation here, Kren- 
ko's gang learns about it within half an hour and sends 
out a crew to deal with the situation. 


WELCOMING PARTY 

Krenko's goblin gang approaches the characters. Their 
starting attitude is hostile, and they hurl insults and try 
to get the characters to leave their turf. If the adventur- 
ers don't comply, the goblins fight them. If more than 
half the goblins are defeated, the remaining gang mem- 
bers try to escape. 

The gang that approaches the groups consists of six 
goblin gang members (see the stat block). A character 
who interrogates a captured goblin and succeeds on a 
DC 20 Charisma (Intimidation) check learns Krenko's 
location. Alternatively, a character who offers the goblins 
a bribe of 10 gp or more and succeeds on a DC 20 Cha- 
risma (Persuasion) check can get the same information. 


SHATTERGANG'S RESPONSE 

Late in the evening on Day 2, the Shattergang Brothers 
blow up three of Krenko's safe houses along Foundry 
Street. The explosions attract the Azorius Senate, which 
sends twenty soldiers (see chapter 6 for the stat block) 
to secure the area and question bystanders. 

Characters who are causing trouble with the locals 
around Foundry Street during this time might be de- 
tained at the Foundry Street arrester station for ques- 
tioning. Characters are detained for 1d4 hours unless 
one of them succeeds on a DC 20 Charisma (Persua- 


sion) check, which shortens the time to 10 minutes. 


KRENKO’S HIDEOUT 


The characters can locate Krenko's hideout either by 
interrogating members of his gang, following the tracks 
from the sewer, or following a goblin back from the drop 
point where Falish leaves Krenko's weapons. Once they 
have found the warehouse, read: 


A large, soot-stained wooden building with a faded 
symbol of the Boros Legion sits at the edge of a canal, 

its timbers cracked and singed. A closed bay door faces 
north toward the water, and a wooden track runs from 
the building all the way to the edge of a pier. A similar 
bay door faces south toward the main street. On the alley 
sides of the building are two doors—a double door on 
the west side, and a single door on the east side. 


This old warehouse used to store equipment finished 
from the nearby foundries for the Boros Legion's use. It 
was badly burned in a gang war a few years ago and has 
since been abandoned by the Boros. Krenko's gang has 
used it occasionally as a secret meeting spot, and now 
Krenko is using it as his hideout. 

The warehouse is 40 feet tall, 60 feet wide, and 120 
feet long. It has no windows, but the outer walls are 
brittle and fire-damaged; a number of small holes, 1 or 2 
feet in diameter, have opened up in various places. Deal- 
ing 5 damage to a section of the wall creates an opening 
that a Medium or smaller creature can walk through. 


KRENKO’S GANG 


All members of Krenko's gang are goblin gang mem- 
bers (see the stat block). Each goblin carries a whistle 
(worn on a rope around its neck), which it can blow as 
an action to sound the alarm. A goblin might carry an- 


INT — WIS 
10 (+0) 10 (+0) 


DEX CON 


CHA 
16 (+3) 10 (+0) 


8 (-1) 8 (-1) 


Skills Stealth +5 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages Common, Goblin 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 
——EEE—————————— LLLLDDO 
Nimble Escape. The goblin can take the Disengage or Hide 
action as a bonus action on each of its turns. 


ACTIONS 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage. 


Light Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 80/320 
ft., one target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage. 


other item it obtained elsewhere, employing it in combat 
if an opportunity presents itself. You can roll or choose 
from the items on the Goblin Gang Possessions table. 
More information on these items can be found in chap- 
ter 5 of the Player’s Handbook. 


GOBLIN GANG POSSESSIONS 


d20 Item 

1-10 No additional item 
11-12 Vial of acid 
13-14  Flask of alchemist's fire 
15-16 Ball bearings 
17-18  Caltrops 
19-20 Vial of basic poison 


LOOKOUTS 


A goblin (see "Krenko's Gang” for modified statistics) is 
posted outside each door. If a guard sees one or more 
characters approaching the warehouse, it signals the 
other guards by blowing a whistle around its neck. It 
remains vigilant but doesn’t signal the others if the char- 
acters are visible on the street but don’t make their way 
to the warehouse. The goblins don’t use a light source at 
night, relying on their darkvision. 

Characters might take the time to observe the look- 
outs from afar. The rooftops of nearby buildings make 
excellent vantage points. The buildings across the 
main street are 50 feet away; those in the alleys are 20 
feet away. 


CHANGING OF THE GUARD 

Every 4 hours, new goblins from Krenko’s gang arrive 
to relieve the lookouts. During this time, they're usually 
distracted as they chat among themselves for 1d10 min- 
utes. While they're distracted, characters have advan- 
tage on any Dexterity (Stealth) checks to hide or move 
quietly in the area. 


Day 2 ARRIVALS 


At noon on the second day, four more goblins arrive. 
Two position themselves inside on the catwalk, and two 
walk the warehouse floor. 


Day 3 CHAOS 


In the small hours of the third day, the Shattergang 
Brothers finally manage to discover Krenko's where- 
abouts and send a team of ten goblins to toss bombs at 
the warehouse and its occupants. 

In addition to their normal gear, these goblins each 
carry one bomb. As an action, a goblin can light a bomb 
and throw it at a point up to 60 feet away. Each creature 
within 5 feet of that point must succeed on a DC 12 Dex- 
terity saving throw or take 10 (3d6) fire damage. 

Any survivors of Krenko's gang flee the warehouse 
and scatter into the city after this assault. 


CHAPTER 4 | GREATING ADVENTURES 


WAREHOUSE LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to map 4.11, which 
shows the interior of the warehouse. 


OFFICE 


This room is unlit. If the characters have darkvision or a 
light source, describe the room as follows: 


This room is twenty feet square and has a ten-foot-high 
ceiling. It appears to be an office and makeshift living 
quarters. A heavy wooden table stands in the center of 
the room, ringed by six chairs. Under it is an iron box. To 
the south is a cot covered in blankets. Beside it is a sack 
full of clothes and the remains of several meals served 
on fine dinnerware. A door sits in the middle of the wall 
to the east, with a large window beside it offering a view 
of the warehouse beyond. 


Krenko (see below) is holed up here—with two 
goblin bosses that serve as his enforcers—planning 
a preemptive strike on the Shattergang Brothers. In 
addition to his weapons, Krenko carries a vial of acid, a 
flask of alchemist’s fire, a bag of caltrops, a vial of basic 
poison, and the key to the iron strongbox (see “Trea- 
sure” below). 


DEX — CON INT WIS 
14(32 10(+0) 10(+0) 8 (-1) 


CHA 
M (+2) 


0 (+0) 


Skills Deception +4, Persuasion +4, Stealth +6 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 
Languages Common, Goblin 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


———M ÓÁ—"e—M— rn— MM 


Nimble Escape. Krenko can take the Disengage or Hide action 
as a bonus action on each of his turns. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. Krenko makes two attacks with his scimitar. 


Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) slashing damage plus 2 (1d4) poi- 
son damage. 


Light Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: 4 to hit, range 80/320 
ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage. 


REACTIONS 


Redirect Attack. When a creature Krenko can see targets him 
with an attack, Krenko chooses another goblin within 5 feet of 
him. The two goblins swap places, and the chosen goblin be- 
comes the target instead. 
E 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES 


TREASURE 

The iron strongbox under a desk contains funds Krenko 
was gathering to pay off Falish. It is locked and can be 
opened with the key in Krenko's possession, or with 
thieves’ tools and a successful DC 15 Dexterity check. 
Inside the box are 350 zinos (gp), two gold rings inset 
with small rubies (worth 50 gp each), and a potion of 
giant strength (hill). 


CATWALK 


A 3-foot-wide wooden catwalk is attached to the inside 
walls of the warehouse 20 feet above the floor. A creaky, 
charred, narrow, wrap-around wooden staircase near 
the center of the east wall leads up to it. 

Two goblin gang members (see the stat block) patrol 
the catwalk at all times, rotating in a similar way to the 
lookouts outside. 


WEAKENED STAIRCASE 
One of the steps of the catwalk staircase is ready to col- 
lapse. This fragile board is located 10 feet off the ground 
and can be spotted by anyone on the stairs who has a 
passive Wisdom (Perception) score of 13 or higher. A 
creature that weighs more than 100 pounds that steps 
on the board must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity saving 
throw or fall 10 feet to the ground below. The gap that 
the collapsing board creates can be easily avoided by 
other creatures walking up the stairs. 

If one side of the catwalk takes 10 or more damage, 
that side collapses. Creatures on the walkway when this 
happens fall 20 feet to the warehouse floor below. 


MAIN FLOOR 


The warehouse is lit inside by lanterns placed on hooks 
located 5 feet up on the wall every 30 feet or so, below 
the catwalk. The goblins keep this area brightly lit, since 
their darkvision only extends for 60 feet. When the char- 
acters enter, read: 


The glowing lantern light reveals a warehouse charred by 
a fire. To the north and south are large, iron-reinforced 
bay doors, operated from the ground by chains and pul- 
leys. The western wall has a square room in the center 
that fills a twenty-foot-by-twenty-foot section of the ware- 
house floor. The room has a door and window on the 
side facing the center of the warehouse floor. 

A catwalk encircles the interior twenty feet above the 
floor. Stairs lead up to it near the center of the eastern 
wall. Dozens of large boxes and crates are scattered 
around the warehouse, their integrity in question due 
to fire damage. A pair of wooden rails runs through the 
center of the room. On the rails sits a giant wooden 
wheeled cart. Towering over the cart is a ten-foot-high, 
soot-stained iron statue. It looks vaguely humanoid, with 
claw-like appendages at the ends of its arms. In place of 
its head is a cavity containing a seat with a series of le- 
vers all around it. 


: S b 
oen NR ESOL MSS EE TUER EE TESTAIESTES Se ITSNZ, MÀ FZ] 
9. ; 


a 
LITE, 


= 5 feet 


1 square 


ES ~] 


ee ee C NN ams die i B | pem 
Era 
Ye 


WN 


e. : 
we tä pt 
tet s d td 
i H $ ^ 
~~ P s^ : E 
nng M 
PLINIY > Li 


1I T "HNA AR T 


— eee 


NES LESS TE AP RSS NN 


ipw EE 


Ne ZNI ps LLL AIL AWA e [ RS 


Rete tes eee Te 
"e d ebd M LL IL. DELI 
be s > : Y : 
ds =e ett > RIN eee 


Uu ee = myo o? 
T [TWiST FS DENSI SSS SS SESS FANSISSZ ms LC z 


ES Wl: Eats 


LOADING RIG 
Large construct, unaligned 
Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 39 (6d10 + 6) 
Speed 25 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
18 (+4) 11(40) 13(4) 1(-5) 3(4 TES) 


Damage Immunities poison, psychic 
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 
frightened, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned 
Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
passive Perception 6 
Languages — 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Antimagic Susceptibility. The rig is incapacitated while in the 
area of an antimagic field. If targeted by dispel magic, the rig 
must succeed on a Constitution saving throw against the cast- 
er’s spell save DC or fall unconscious for 1 minute. 


Unstable. If the rig takes damage, it must succeed on a DC 10 
Constitution saving throw or be incapacitated with a speed of 0 
until a creature activates it with a successful DC 10 Intelligence 
(Arcana) check made as an action. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The armor makes two melee attacks. 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


EEL LL SE 


Dealing 20 damage or more to a bay door creates 
a hole that a Medium or smaller creature can walk 
through. A character can use an action to open a bay 
door using its pulley system. 

Charred and cracked wooden containers are scat- 
tered around the room. Nothing of value remains in 
any of them. 

Resting on the rails that run through the center of the 
room is a Large cart. The north and south walls of the 
cart can be lowered to create ramps leading up to the 
cart’s bed. 

Near the cart is a loading rig (see the stat block) cov- 
ered in soot and currently inactive. A seat cavity built 
into the top the rig contains a series of small plates and 
levers. A creature in the seat can attempt a DC 10 In- 
telligence (Arcana) check to figure out how to press the 
plates in the correct sequence to activate or deactivate 
the rig. Pressing the plates requires an action. Once the 
rig is activated, a creature in the seat can pilot it using 
the levers. The rig moves as its controller directs it, and 
the controller can use an action to direct the rig to take 
the Dash, Disengage, or Dodge action, or the Multiat- 
tack or Slam actions as given in its stat block. 

A creature with tinker's tools can try to repair damage 
to the rig. After spending 1 hour making repairs, the 
creature makes a DC 15 Intelligence (Arcana) check. If 
the check succeeds, the rig regains 1d6 hit points. 


CONFRONTING KRENKO 


Krenko tries to escape if he is reduced to half his hit 
points or fewer, ordering his goblin enforcers cover him 
as he makes his getaway. He runs to the loading rig on 
the warehouse floor and activates it in an effort to fight 
his way out and flee. If he can get outside, he makes his 
way to the dock and jumps into the canal to swim away. 

If Krenko is captured, he tries to convince the adven- 
turers that bringing him to justice isn't in the best inter- 
est of the city. He might make any or all of the following 
arguments in his defense: 


* Without his leadership, the goblin gangs have been 
thrown into chaos, and the only thing keeping the 
Shattergang Brothers from blowing things up is his 
gang—with him leading it. 

* He is emphatic that his killing of Dargig was an act 
of self-defense and that he was framed by the Boros 
Legion, which he suspects is in league with the Shat- 
tergang Brothers. Characters who succeed on a DC 16 
Wisdom (Insight) check sense he’s lying, as he subtly 
looks past them while making his plea. 

* Krenko is willing to offer the party a deal. He'll give 
them everything in his office strongbox if they tell 
Nassius they didn't find him. 

+ Krenko warns the party that Nassius isn't all he ap- 
pears to be. Krenko suspects that Nassius is in some- 
one's pocket but doesn't know who that someone is. 


Krenko doesn't offer up any information on the allies 
that aided him in his escape, but he identifies them if 
pressed. He also remains tight-lipped on the subject of 
Mr. Taz, offering only the following if a character makes 
a successful DC 20 Charisma (Persuasion) check: "Mr. 
Taz gave me a nice shiv as a present for a job once, and 
I'd love to get my mitts on another one someday. 


THE HANDOFF 


When the characters reach the meeting point that Nas- 
sius specified, read the following: 


As the rain intensifies into a downpour, you head to the 
outskirts of the Tenth District. You're directed to the old 
granary that Nassius picked as the rendezvous point. The 
wet, crumbling clay building sits out in an untended field 
and is overgrown with all manner of vegetation, almost 
completely reclaimed by the wild. Nassius steps out of 
the entryway into the field, holding a small purse and 
flanked by two heavily armed guards. 


Nassius has asked for Azorius assistance but has also 
brought two human veterans wearing no obvious guild 
identifiers to help take Krenko into custody. Six Azorius 
soldiers (see chapter 6 for the stat block) are hidden in 
various spots between 50 and 100 feet of the front of the 
granary, ready to subdue characters who make a wrong 
move, or to take down Krenko if he tries to flee. 


Nassius wants the characters to complete the ex- 
change without a fuss and head home. He asks them if 
they questioned Krenko, and to recount what the goblin 
said to them. Krenko attempts to call out Nassius as a 
liar and a corrupt official, but Nassius’s veterans move to 
gag Krenko to stop him from talking. 

Nassius doesn’t answer any questions about where 
he’s taking Krenko, nor does he address the veracity of 
any claims of corruption. He remarks that he serves the 
office of the Guildpact, and he’s taking Krenko in for the 
good of the city. The Shattergang Brothers might still 
take over the turf of Krenko’s gang, but probably without 
a destructive gang war. 


NASSIUS’S PATRON 


Krenko was right about one thing: Nassius Ven has 
been using his position to keep himself wealthy and pro- 
tected. A patron approached Nassius and made a deal to 
have Krenko delivered to them instead of to his rightful 
place in his new cell at Udzec. Nassius was assured 

that Krenko would eventually make his way back to the 
prison alive, but the patron wanted to have a few words 
with him first. 

To determine whom Nassius Ven cut a deal with, you 
can roll to determine a patron from the table below, or 
you can choose one. If the patron is a guild, you should 
select a guild that isn’t represented by an adventurer in 
the party. The patron might influence future dealings 
with both Nassius Ven and Krenko. 


Nassius’s PATRON 


d6 Patron 

Azorius Senate 
Boros Legion 

Mr. Taz 

Orzhov Syndicate 
Shattergang Brothers 
Selesnya Conclave 


THE END? 


The characters earn 1 renown in their guild if they de- 
liver Krenko to Nassius. 

In addition to the adventure seeds in the first part of 
this chapter, you can build on the events of this adven- 
ture to chart a course for the party's next adventures. 
Consider these questions: 


Qt RUN — 


* Who were Krenko's and Nassius's allies? How might 
they respond to the characters' actions? 

+ What's the balance of power between Krenko's gang 
and the Shattergang Brothers? Is either gang likely to 
take revenge on the characters for what they did? Or 
did the characters earn the gratitude of either gang? 

+ How might Nassius, Krenko, Falish, and other NPCs 
interact with the adventurers in the future? Could one 
of them ask for the characters' help with a new crisis, 
or turn into a dangerous antagonist? 

- Did the characters use any of their contacts to gather 
information? Might those individuals' involvement 
cause them trouble that could involve the adventurers? 


GHAPTER 4 | CREATING ADVENTURES 


d T ca 
TV 


HOSE WHO ARE BOLD OR CUNNING ENOUGH 
can find treasures aplenty to reward their 
exploits in Ravnica. Coins change hands in 
back alleys, chests of riches are laden onto 

beasts of burden, and fine objects of art stand on display 

in museums and galleries. Obscene wealth lies secreted 

away in Orzhov vaults, the Azorius Senate’s payroll is a 

bureaucratic tangle, and House Dimir greases countless 

palms with an apparently endless fortune. And items of 
magic lure adventurers and thieves with the promise of 
greater power. 


COINS IN TREASURE 


When you use the treasure tables in chapter 7 of the 
Dungeon Master's Guide, you can change the type of 
coinage found if you'd like to associate the coins with a 
particular guild. For more information about coinage in 
Ravnica, see the "Currency: Zibs and Zinos" section in 
this book's introduction. 

Copper pieces encountered in treasure are either 
standard Azorius zibs or Orzhov alms-coins. A pouch 
of alms-coins might belong to someone who has been 
impoverished—or someone who makes a habit of rob- 
bing from the poor. A chest full of alms-coins could be 
an Orzhov lockbox used to hold the coins before they are 
distributed to the poor. 

Silver coins minted by the Azorius Senate are worth 
25 cp, so they might be found in smaller numbers than 
the standard silver pieces mentioned on the treasure ta- 
bles. They are common currency, so they're found in the 
coin purses of virtually everyone in Ravnica. A hoard of 
silver coins might be amassed by a miser or stored in a 
bank vault (or stolen from such places). 

Electrum pieces found in treasure are Azorius 50-zib 
coins. These coins are more common than electrum 
pieces are on most other D&D worlds, and they serve 
a function very similar to the silver 25-zib coins. You 
might reflect this fact by turning some silver pieces 
found as treasure into electrum pieces. 

Gold coins in treasure translate directly to 1-zino 
coins, which could be the standard coins of Azorius 
mint or Boros coins (which might have been used as the 
weekly pay of a soldier in the Legion). A treasure might 
include Boros 5-zino coins, representing the salary of 
an officer or a payment made from the Legion to an- 
other guild. 

Platinum pieces found in treasure are Orzhov 10-zino 
coins. They might have originally belonged to an Orzhov 
pontiff. Perhaps they were withdrawn from an account 
in an Orzhov bank—which suggests someone wealthy 
and powerful, possibly with criminal connections. A 
significant treasure find might include a stash of Orzhov 
100-zino coins (one-tenth the number of platinum pieces 
found on the treasure table), which almost certainly be- 
longs to a powerful Orzhov scion who wants it back. 


CHAPTER 5: TREASURES 


GUILD CHARMS 


A guild charm is a magical effect placed on an otherwise 
mundane item. Charms are often given to favored mem- 
bers of the guild—those whose renown scores with their 
guilds have reached 10 or higher—or those entrusted 
with important missions. A charm typically manifests as 
the guild’s symbol emblazoned on an item that is worn 
or carried by the chosen creature. 

A guild charm can be used only a certain number of 
times before it vanishes, and only by the creature upon 
which it was bestowed. If you use a charm to cast a 
spell, you can do so without expending a spell slot or 
providing any components. The spell’s save DC is 15, its 
attack bonus is +7, and the spellcasting ability modifier 
for any spell effects is +4. 

A charm can't be used in the area created by an anti- 
magic field spell or a similar effect. The guildmaster of 
the charm's guild can revoke the charm as an action, but 
otherwise the charm can't be removed from the object 
on which it was placed by anything short of divine inter- 
vention or a wish spell. 

The charms associated with each guild are de- 
scribed below. 


AZORIUS CHARM 

When you activate this charm, you can cast the hold per- 
son (3rd-level version), command, or counterspell spell. 
The charm vanishes after you activate it. 


Boros CHARM 

When you activate this charm, you can cast the crusad- 
er's mantle or haste spell. Alternatively, you can cast the 
guiding bolt spell, and if it hits, you regain a number of 
hit points equal to the damage it deals. The charm van- 
ishes after you activate it. 


DIMIR CHARM 

When you activate this charm, you can cast the blink or 
sleep (3rd-level version) spell. Alternatively, when you 
take damage, you can use your reaction to turn invisible 
and teleport up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space you 
can see. You remain invisible until the start of your next 
turn or until you attack or cast a spell. The charm van- 
ishes after you activate it. 


GOLGARI CHARM 

When you activate this charm, you can cast the dispel 
magic, false life (3rd-level version), or stinking cloud 
spell. The charm vanishes after you activate it. 


GRUUL CHARM 

When you activate this charm, you can cast the heroism 
or thunderwave spell (3rd-level versions). Alternatively, 
as a reaction when you miss with a weapon attack, you 
can make another attack against the target you missed. 
The charm vanishes after you activate it. 


CHAPTER 5 | TREASURES 


/35 


IzzET CHARM 

When you activate this charm, you can cast the dispel 
magic or lightning bolt spell. Alternatively, as an action, 
you can regain one expended spell slot of 3rd level or 
lower. The charm vanishes after you activate it. 


ORZHOV CHARM 

When you activate this charm, you can cast the bestow 
curse or fear spell. Alternatively, when a creature you 
can see within 30 feet of you is reduced to 0 hit points, 
you can use your reaction to have it drop to 1 hit point 
instead. The charm vanishes after you activate it. 


RAKDOS CHARM 

When you activate this charm, you can cast the crown 
of madness, hellish rebuke, or shatter spell. The charm 
vanishes after you activate it. 


SELESNYA CHARM 

When you activate this charm, you can cast the aura 

of vitality or conjure animals spell. Alternatively, as an 
action, you can give up to three creatures of your choice 
within 30 feet of you resistance to bludgeoning, piercing, 
and slashing damage until the end of your next turn. 
The charm vanishes after you activate it. 


SIMIC CHARM 

When you activate this charm, you can cast the enhance 
ability (3rd-level version), enlarge/reduce, or gaseous 
form spell. The charm vanishes after you activate it. 


Rakoos CHARM 


MAGIC ITEMS 


Magic items are abundant on Ravnica. Izzet workshops 
and foundries create a plethora of wild and often dan- 
gerous items, and spellcasters from every guild craft 
items for their own use and that of their guild mates. 
More powerful items are created in grand experiments 
or by angelic blessings, or they find their way out of hid- 
den vaults and ancient underground ruins. 


GUILDS AND MAGIC ITEMS 


Each of Ravnica’s guilds has an affinity for certain 
magic items. This section identifies the magic items 
most likely to be created, used, or valued by each guild. 
The lists include the magic items in this book (referred 
to as GGR) and in the Dungeon Master’s Guide (DMG) 
that are particularly appropriate for the guilds. 

The guild lists are by no means comprehensive; the 
guilds are happy to use whatever resources become 
available to them, magical or otherwise. But the items 
shown here are particularly prized and even coveted by 
the guilds. Word of the discovery of a holy avenger, for 
example, can mobilize a whole Boros garrison to search 
for it and claim it for the legion’s use. And if such an 
item is stolen from the Boros, the legion will go to equal 
lengths to reclaim it and punish the thieves. 

Some items created on Ravnica are prized by all the 
guilds; they are listed on the General Items table. 


GENERAL ITEMS 


Rarity Item Source 
Uncommon  Skyblinder staff GGR 
Very rare Illusionist's bracers GGR 
Very rare Peregrine mask GGR 
Very rare Sword of the paruns GGR 


Voyager staff GGR 


Very rare 


AZORIUS ITEMS 

The members of the Azorius Senate use, and sometimes 
craft, magic items that help them subdue and dominate 
wrongdoers. Items that heighten the user’s vigilance are 
also highly valued among the guild's arresters. 


Azorius ITEMS 


Rarity Item Source 
Uncommon Guild signet GGR 
Uncommon Lantern of revealing DMG 
Uncommon Weapon of warning DMG 
Rare Bead of force DMG 
Rare Dimensional shackles DMG 
Rare Guild keyrune GGR 
Rare Iron bands of Bilarro DMG 
Rare Rope of entanglement DMG 
Rare Wand of binding DMG 
Very rare Rod of alertness DMG 
Very rare Rod of security DMG 
Legendary Defender DMG 
Legendary Rod of lordly might DMG 


Boros ITEMS 

Weapons of war and items imbued with the holiness 

of the angels are the favored magic items of the Boros 
Legion. Some of these items are created by the blessing 
of Aurelia herself, while others are relics dating back to 
the legion’s founder, Razia, or other venerated figures 
of the past. 


Boros ITEMS 


Rarity Item Source 
Uncommon Guild signet GGR 
Uncommon Sentinel shield DMG 
Rare Daern's instant fortress DMG 
Rare Guild keyrune GGR 
Rare or Horn of Valhalla DMG 
greater 

Rare Pariah's shield GGR 
Rare Sun blade DMG 
Rare Sunforger GGR 
Very rare Spellguard shield DMG 
Legendary Holy avenger DMG 


DIMIR ITEMS 

Anything that enhances stealth or facilitates spying is 
precious to House Dimir. Agents of the guild disguise 

themselves, turn invisible, and shield their own minds 
while they pry into the minds of others. 


Dimir ITEMS 
Rarity Item Source 
Uncommon Amulet of proof against detection DMG 
and location 
Uncommon Guild signet GGR 
Uncommon Hat of disguise DMG 
Uncommon Medallion of thoughts DMG 


Rarity Item Source 
Uncommon Ring of mind shielding DMG 
Uncommon Spies’ murmur GGR 
Veryrareor Crystal ball DMG 
greater 

Very rare Guild keyrune GGR 
Legendary Cloak of invisibility DMG 
Legendary Ring of invisibility DMG 


GOLGARI ITEMS 

The members of the Golgari Swarm are scavengers who 
retrieve lost items from the undercity, which means that 
Golgari agents could conceivably end up in possession 
of any magic item of any origin. The items the Golgari 
prefer often involve stealth, insects, or poison. 


GoLGARI ITEMS 


Rarity Item Source 
Common Moodmark paint GGR 
Uncommon Boots of elvenkind DMG 
Uncommon Cloak of elvenkind DMG 
Uncommon Guild signet GGR 
Uncommon Pipes of the sewers DMG 
Rare Dagger of venom DMG 
Rare Staff of swarming insects DMG 
Very rare Cloak of arachnida DMG 
Very rare Guild keyrune GGR 
Very rare Ring of regeneration DMG 


GRUUL ITEMS 

The members of the Gruul Clans are as likely to destroy 
magic items as they are to use them, but certain weap- 
ons and strength-enhancing items are well suited to 
their tastes. 


GRUUL ITEMS 


Rarity Item Source 
Uncommon Gauntlets of ogre power DMG 
Uncommon Guild signet GGR 
Rare or Belt of giant strength DMG 
greater 

Rare Berserker axe DMG 
Rare Guild keyrune GGR 
Rare Horn of blasting DMG 
Rare Ring of the ram DMG 
Rare Stone of controlling earth elementals DMG 
Legendary Ring of spell turning DMG 


IzzET ITEMS 

The Izzet League is the most prolific creator of magic 
items in Ravnica. Its inventions can be unpredictable 
and downright dangerous, but they can also be useful 
tools, weapons, and implements of magical manipula- 
tion. Izzet researchers are prone to giving their magic 
items special names, so what one person might call a 
staff of thunder and lightning might be an electrosonic 
field manipulator to its Izzet wielder. 


HAPTER 5 | TREASURES 


176 


IZZET ITEMS 


Rarity Item Source 
Uncommon Alchemy jug DMG 
Uncommon Elemental gem DMG 
Uncommon Guild signet GGR 
Uncommon Headband of intellect DMG 
Uncommon  Mizzium apparatus GGR 
Uncommon  Pyroconverger GGR 
Rare Bowl of commanding water DMG 
elementals 
Rare Brazier of commanding fire DMG 
elementals 
Rare Censer of controlling air elementals DMG 
Rare Guild keyrune GGR 
Rare Mizzium armor GGR 
Rare Mizzium mortar GGR 
Rare Wand of wonder DMG 
Very rare Manual of golems DMG 
Very rare Staff of thunder and lightning DMG 
Legendary Apparatus of Kwalish DMG 
Legendary Ring of elemental command DMG 
Legendary Staff of the magi DMG 


ORZHOV ĪTEMS 

The oligarchs and pontiffs of the Orzhov Syndicate view 
possession of magic items as a mark of status, whether 
those items are ostentatiously on display or hidden 

away in a vault. Items that the guild creates are often 
extremely ornate; Orzhov-made wings of flying, for ex- 
ample, might have the appearance of bird wings where 
every feather looks like colorful stained glass. Items that 
magically increase the wearer's imposing presence and 
authority are especially coveted in the syndicate. 


ORZHOV ITEMS 


Rarity Item Source 
Uncommon Eyes of charming DMG 
Uncommon Guild signet GGR 
Rare Guild keyrune GGR 
Rare Rod of rulership DMG 
Rare Wings of flying DMG 
Very rare Mirror of life trapping DMG 
Very rare Tome of leadership and influence DMG 
Legendary Sphere of annihilation DMG 


RAKDOS ITEMS 

Fire, pain, spectacle, and just enough random destruc- 
tion to make life enjoyable—that's all Rakdos cultists 
want out of their magic items. Items that magically cre- 
ate fire, leave lingering wounds, instill fear, or randomly 
devour objects put inside them are all sources of delight 
for members of the Cult of Rakdos. 


GHAPTER 5 | TREASURES 


RAKDOS ITEMS 


Rarity Item Source 
Uncommon Deck of illusions DMG 
Uncommon Guild keyrune GGR 
Uncommon Guild signet GGR 
Uncommon Potion of fire breath DMG 
Rare Cape of the mountebank DMG 
Rare Flame tongue DMG 
Rare Mace of terror DMG 
Rare Necklace of fireballs DMG 
Rare Sword of wounding DMG 
Rare Wand of fear DMG 
Rare Wand of fireballs DMG 
Very rare Bag of devouring DMG 
Very rare Dancing sword DMG 
Very rare Demon armor DMG 
Very rare Nine lives stealer DMG 
Very rare Staff of fire DMG 
Very rare Sword of sharpness DMG 
Legendary Iron flask DMG 
Legendary ^ Rakdos riteknife GGR 


SELESNYA ITEMS 

Members of the Selesnya Conclave cherish magic items 
that heal and protect, items that call on the forces of na- 
ture (and the will of Mat'Selesnya), and weapons of fine 
elven elegance. Such items are often made from natural 
materials such as wood and leather and might incorpo- 
rate leaves and vines. 


SELESNYA ITEMS 


Rarity Item Source 
Uncommon Bag of tricks DMG 
Uncommon Bracers of archery DMG 
Uncommon Guild signet GGR 
Uncommon Instrument of the bards DMG 
or greater 

Uncommon  Periapt of health DMG 
Uncommon  Periapt of wound closure DMG 
Rare Elixir of health DMG 
Rare Guild keyrune GGR 
Rare Periapt of proof against poison DMG 
Rare Ring of animal influence DMG 
Rare Staff of healing DMG 
Rare Staff of the woodlands DMG 
Very rare Oathbow DMG 
Very rare Staff of thunder and lightning DMG 
Legendary Rod of resurrection DMG 


Simic ITEMS 

The Simic Combine spends more of its time altering 
the biological processes of living creatures than it 

does working on magic items. Its preferred items ei- 
ther facilitate physical transformation or are creatures 
themselves—symbiotic life forms engineered to provide 
Simic researchers and soldiers with new capabilities. 


Lose 


Simic ITEMS 


Rarity Item Source 
Uncommon Cap of water breathing DMG 
Uncommon Cloak of the manta ray DMG 
‘Uncommon  Decanter of endless water DMG 
Uncommon Guild keyrune GGR 
Uncommon Guild signet GGR 
Uncommon Necklace of adaptation DMG 
Uncommon Ring of swimming DMG 
Uncommon Trident of fish command DMG 
Rare Cloak of the bat DMG 
Very rare Manual of bodily health DMG 
Very rare Wand of polymorph DMG 


MAGIC ITEM DESCRIPTIONS 


This section presents an assortment of magic items in 
alphabetical order. See the Dungeon Master's Guide for 
the rules on magic items. 


GUILD KEYRUNE 
Wondrous item, rarity by keyrune (requires attunement 
by a member of the relevant guild) 


Associated with a particular guild, a guild keyrune is a 
ceremonial, stylized key, about 1 foot long, made from 
carved stone. Not a literal key, the item is a badge of 
authority that gives its bearer access to privileged places 
in its guild's headquarters and outposts. At the DM's 
discretion, a character might be given a keyrune upon 
attaining a renown score of 25 in their guild. 

When you use an action to speak the item’s command 
word and place the keyrune on the ground in an unoccu- 
pied space within 5 feet of you, the keyrune transforms 
into a creature. If there isn't enough space for the crea- 
ture, the keyrune doesn't transform. See the Monster 
Manual for the creature's stat block—the name of which 
is given in bold in the keyrune's description—unless 
you're directed to chapter 6 of this book instead. 

The creature is friendly to you, your companions, and 
other members of your guild (unless those guild mem- 
bers are hostile to you). It understands your languages 
and obeys your spoken commands. If you issue no com- 
mands, the creature takes the Dodge action and moves 
to avoid danger. 

The creature exists for a duration specific to each key- 
rune. At the end of the duration, the creature reverts to 
its keyrune form. It reverts early if it drops to 0 hit points 
or if you use an action to speak the command word 
again while touching it. When the creature reverts to its 
keyrune form, it can't transform again until 36 hours 
have passed. 

Azorius Keyrune (Rare). This keyrune is carved from 
white marble and lapis lazuli to resemble a noble bird of 
prey. It can become a giant eagle for up to 1 hour. While 
the transformed eagle is within 1 mile of you, you can 
communicate with it telepathically. As an action, you 
can see through the eagle's eyes and hear what it hears 
until the start of your next turn, and you gain the bene- 
fit of its keen sight. During this time, you are deaf and 
blind with regard to your own senses. 


GOLGARI KEYRUNE 


Boros Keyrune (Rare). Carved from red sandstone 
with white granite elements to resemble a member of 
the Boros Legion, this keyrune can become a veteran 
(human) for up to 8 hours. In addition to fighting on 
your behalf, this veteran cheerfully offers tactical ad- 
vice, which is usually sound. Anyone who talks with the 
transformed keyrune or examines it closely can easily 
recognize that it is an artificial human. 

Dimir Keyrune (Very Rare). This keyrune, carved 
from black stone accented with steel, resembles a styl- 
ized horror. On command, it transforms into an intellect 
devourer that resembles the Dimir guild symbol, with 
six bladelike legs. The creature exists for up to 24 hours. 
During that time, it pursues only a single mission you 
give it—usually an assignment to take over someone's 
body, either to impersonate that person for a brief time 
or to extract secrets from their mind. When the mission 
is complete, the creature returns to you, reports its suc- 
cess, and reverts to its keyrune form. 

Golgari Keyrune (Very Rare). Made from deep green 
jade with black veins, this keyrune has an insectile 
shape. It can transform into a giant scorpion for up to 
6 hours. The scorpion has an Intelligence of 4 and can 
communicate with you telepathically while it is within 
60 feet of you, though its messages are largely limited to 
describing the passage of potential prey. 

Gruul Keyrune (Rare). This crude keyrune is cobbled 
together from bits of rubble, broken glass, bone, and an- 
imal hair. One end resembles a horned beast. On com- 
mand, the keyrune transforms into a ceratok, a horned 
creature much like a rhinoceros (and with the same 
statistics). It remains in its ceratok form for 1 hour. 

Izzet Keyrune (Rare). Formed of carved and pol- 
ished red and blue stone, the keyrune includes bits of 
cable and wire. One end resembles a humanlike head, 
suggesting the jagged elemental form of the galvanice 
weird (see chapter 6 for the stat block) that it can be- 
come for a duration of 3 hours. In this form, it will serve 
you as a bodyguard, lift and carry things for you, act as a 
test subject for your experiments, or aid you in any other 
way that its capabilities allow. 


CHAPTER 5 TREASURES 177 


Mizzium APPARATUS 


Orzhov Keyrune (Rare). This keyrune is carved from 
white marble with veins of black. The end is shaped 
like a thrull's head, with a gold faceplate affixed. On 
command, the keyrune transforms into a winged thrull 
(see chapter 6 for the stat block) for up to 2 hours. If you 
don't come from an Orzhov oligarch family, it serves you 
grudgingly, clownishly aping your movements and man- 
nerisms while carrying out your orders. 

Rakdos Keyrune (Uncommon). This dark granite 
keyrune is marbled with scarlet veins and carved with 
the leering visage of a mischievous demon. When acti- 
vated, it transforms into a cackler (see chapter 6 for the 
stat block) for up to 1 hour. 

Selesnya Keyrune (Rare). Carved from white and 
green marble in the shape of a wolf's head, this key- 
rune transforms into a dire wolf. The wolf persists for 
8 hours. Its Intelligence is 6, and it understands Elvish 
and Sylvan but can't speak those languages. While it is 
within 1 mile of you, you can communicate with each 
other telepathically. 

Simic Keyrune (Uncommon). This keyrune is as- 
sembled from coral, mother-of-pearl, and chrome and 
adorned with the spirals and curves characteristic of 
Simic ornamentation. The head resembles the shell of 
a sea creature. On command, the keyrune turns into a 
category 1 krasis (see chapter 6 for the stat block) that 
has the Grabber and Stabilizing Legs adaptations. The 
transformation lasts for up to 5 hours. 


GuiLD SIGNET 

Ring, uncommon (requires attunement) 

This ring, adorned with the symbol of a guild, allows 
you to cast one spell closely associated with that guild, 
as shown in the Guild Signet Spells table. A guild sig- 


net is sometimes awarded to a guild member whose 
renown score in that guild is 5 or higher, as a reward for 
performing special services for the guild. Aside from its 
magical properties, the ring is also an indicator of the 
guild’s recognition and favor. 

A signet has 3 charges, and it regains 1d3 expended 
charges daily at dawn. While wearing it, you can expend 
1 charge to cast the associated spell (save DC 13). 


GUILD SIGNET SPELLS 
Guild Associated Spell 


Azorius ensnaring strike 

Boros heroism 

Dimir disguise self 

Golgari entangle 

Gruul compelled duel 

Izzet chaos bolt (see chapter 2) 
Orzhov command 

Rakdos hellish rebuke 

Selesnya charm person 

Simic expeditious retreat 


ILLUSIONIST'S BRACERS 
Wondrous item, very rare (requires attunement by a 
spellcaster) 


A powerful illusionist of House Dimir originally devel- 
oped these bracers, which enabled her to create multiple 
minor illusions at once. The bracers’ power, though, 
extends far beyond illusions. 

While wearing the bracers, whenever you cast a can- 
trip, you can use a bonus action on the same turn to cast 
that cantrip a second time. 


60.0888. | 
MIZZIUM 
Mizzium is a magic-infused steel alloy used by the Izzet 
League in a tremendous variety of ways, from providing 
the physical structure of weirds to crafting the tools used 
in other manufacturing. Runic markings help to chan- 
nel and control the elemental energy that flows through 
the metal. 
The magical properties of the metal are difficult to de- 
fine succinctly. It is as hard as adamantine, except when 
it is transformed into a gaseous suspension. It has a high 
melting point, except when it is found in liquid form at 
cool autumn temperatures. Izzet chemisters can readily 
explain that mizzium helps to maximize metasteam po- 
tentials, realize fractional element-binding, and transduce 
local weird-field radicals, but no one understands what any 
of that means. 
—€«RR———————————n 


MIZZIUM APPARATUS 
Wondrous item, uncommon (requires attunement by a 
sorcerer, warlock, or wizard) 


Innovation is a dangerous pursuit, at least the way the 
mages of the Izzet League engage in it. As protection 
against the risk of an experiment going awry, they have 
developed a device to help channel and control their 
magic. This apparatus is a collection of leather straps, 
flexible tubing, glass cylinders, and plates, bracers, 
and fittings made from a magic-infused metal alloy 
called mizzium, all assembled into a harness. The item 
weighs 8 pounds. 

While you are wearing the mizzium apparatus, you 
can use it as an arcane focus. In addition, you can 
attempt to cast a spell that you do not know or have 
prepared. The spell you choose must be on your class's 
spell list and of a level for which you have a spell slot, 
and you must provide the spell’s components. 

You expend a spell slot to cast the spell as normal, but 
before resolving it you must make an Intelligence (Ar- 
cana) check. The DC is 10 + twice the level of the spell 
slot you expend to cast the spell. 

On a successful check, you cast the spell as normal, 
using your spell save DC and spellcasting ability mod- 
ifier. On a failed check, you cast a different spell from 
the one you intended. Randomly determine the spell you 
cast by rolling on the table for the level of the spell slot 
you expended. If the slot is 6th level or higher, roll on the 
table for 5th-level spells. 

If you try to cast a cantrip you don't know, the DC for 
the Intelligence (Arcana) check is 10, and on a failed 
check, there is no effect. 


1sT-LEvEL SPELLS 
d6 Spell 
burning hands 
chaos bolt (see chapter 2) 
color spray 
faerie fire 
fog cloud 


thunderwave 


aA tc ow hM — 


2ND-LEVEL SPELLS 


dé Spell 
1 blur 

2 gust of wind 
3 heat metal 

4 Melf's acid arrow 
5 scorching ray 

6 shatter 


3RD-LEVEL SPELLS 
d6 Spell 
1 fear 

2 feign death 

3 fireball 

4 gaseous form 

5 sleet storm 

6 stinking cloud 


4TH-LEVEL SPELLS 


d4 Spell 
1 confusion 
2 conjure minor elementals 
3 Evard's black tentacles 
4 ice storm 


5TH-LEVEL SPELLS 


d4 Spell 

1 animate objects 
2 cloudkill 

3 cone of cold 

4 flame strike 


MIZZIUM ARMOR 
Armor (medium or heavy, but not hide), rare 


This suit of armor is reinforced with a magically en- 
hanced metal alloy called mizzium, which is made in 
Izzet foundries. While you're wearing the armor, any 
critical hit against you becomes a normal hit. In addi- 
tion, when you are subjected to a magical effect that 
allows you to make a Strength or Constitution saving 
throw to take only half damage, you instead take no 
damage if you succeed on the saving throw. 


MIZZIUM MORTAR 
Wondrous item, rare 


This short tube, about 2 feet long and 6 inches in diame- 
ter, is made from mizzium, a magically enhanced metal 
alloy forged by the Izzet League. The end that's pointed 
toward a target is open, and a glowing ball of molten 
metal can be seen at the other end as long as the mortar 
has at least 1 charge remaining. 

The mortar has 4 charges for the following properties. 
It regains 1d4 expended charges daily at dawn. 

Molten Spray. You can expend 1 charge as an action 
to loose a 30-foot cone of molten mizzium. Each crea- 
ture in the area must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving 


CHAPTER 5 | TREASURES 


throw, taking 5d4 fire damage on a failed save, or half 
as much damage on a successful one. 

Mizzium Bombard. You can expend 3 charges as 
an action to launch a hail of molten projectiles in a 
20-foot-radius, 40-foot-high cylinder centered on a point 
you can see within 60 feet of you. Each creature in the 
area must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw. A crea- 
ture takes 5d8 fire damage on a failed save, or half as 
much damage on a successful one. 


MOODMARK PAINT 
Wondrous item, common 


This thick, black paint is stored in a small jar, contain- 
ing enough paint to apply moodmarks to one creature. 
The paint is dabbed on the face in spots or markings 
that often resemble the eyes of insects or spiders. Apply- 
ing the paint in this way takes 1 minute. 

For the next 8 hours, the marks change to reflect your 
mental state. A creature that can see you and makes a 
successful DC 10 Wisdom (Insight) check can discern 
whether you are happy, sad, angry, disgusted, surprised, 
or afraid, as well as the main source of that emotion. 
For example, you might communicate fear caused by 
a monster you just saw around the corner, grief at the 
loss of a friend, or happiness derived from pride in your 
performance in combat. A dark elf has advantage on 
this check. 


PARIAH’S SHIELD 
Armor (shield), rare (requires attunement) 


Soldiers of the Boros Legion consider it an honor to 
bear this shield, even knowing that it might be the last 
honor they receive. The front of the shield is sculpted to 
depict a grieving human face. 


You gain a +1 bonus to AC for every two allies within 5 


feet of you (up to a maximum of +3) while you wield this 
shield. This bonus is in addition to the shield's normal 
bonus to AC. 

When a creature you can see within 5 feet of you 
takes damage, you can use your reaction to take 
that damage, instead of the creature tak- 
ing it. When you do so, the damage type 
changes to force. 


Moo0MARK PAINT 


PEREGRINE MASK 
Wondrous item, very rare (requires attunement) 


While wearing this winged helm, you have a flying 
speed of 60 feet. In addition, you have advantage on ini- 
tiative rolls. 


PYROCONVERGER 
Wondrous item, uncommon (requires attunement) 


A pyroconverger is an Izzet-made flamethrower. It car- 
ries a risk of malfunction each time you use it. 

As an action, you can cause the pyroconverger to 
project fire in a 10-foot cone. Each creature in that area 
must make a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw, taking 4d6 
fire damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on 
a successful one. 

Each time you use the pyroconverger, roll a d10 and 
add the number of times you have used it since your last 
long rest. If the total is 11 or higher, the pyroconverger 
malfunctions: you take 4d6 fire damage, and you can't 
use the pyroconverger again until you finish a long rest. 


RAKDOS RITEKNIFE 
Weapon (dagger), legendary (requires attunement) 


You gain a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic weapon. Its blade is cruelly serrated, 
and its hilt resembles a demonic head and wings. When- 
ever you slay a creature with an attack using the dagger, 
the creature’s soul is imprisoned inside the dagger, and 
that creature can be restored to life only by a wish spell. 
The dagger can hold a maximum of five souls. 


SKYBLINDER STAFF 


For each soul imprisoned in the dagger, your attacks 


with it deal an extra 1d4 necrotic damage on a hit. While 


the dagger is within 5 feet of you, your dreams are 
haunted by whispers from the trapped souls. 

The dagger has the following additional properties. 

Siphon Vitality. As a bonus action, you can release 
any number of stored souls from the dagger to regain 
1d10 hit points per soul released. 

Annihilation. If the dagger holds five souls, you can 
use this property: As a reaction immediately after you 
hit a creature with the dagger and deal damage to that 
target, you can release all five souls. If the target now 
has fewer than 75 hit points, it must succeed on a DC 15 
Constitution saving throw or die. If the target dies, you 
can't use this property again until you finish a long rest. 


SKYBLINDER STAFF 
Staff uncommon (requires attunement) 


You gain a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic quarterstaff. While holding it, you gain a 
+1 bonus to spell attack rolls. 

If a flying creature you can see within 30 feet of you 
makes an attack roll against you, you can use your reac- 
tion to hold the staff aloft and cause it to flare with light. 
The attacker has disadvantage on the attack roll, and it 
must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or 
be blinded until the start of its next turn. 


SPIES' MURMUR 
Wondrous item, uncommon (requires attunement) 


This headpiece, crafted from dark metal, is worn curved 
around the ear. If you know a creature wearing another 
spies’ murmur and that creature is within 1 mile of you, 
you can communicate telepathically with each other. As 
a bonus action, you can allow that creature to hear ev- 
erything you hear for 1 hour. You can end this effect as a 
bonus action, and it ends if you're incapacitated. 


SUNFORGER 
Weapon (warhammer), rare (requires attunement) 


You gain a +2 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic weapon. 

As an action, you can hurl the weapon up to 120 feet 
to a point you can see. When it reaches that point, the 
weapon vanishes in an explosion, and each creature in a 
20-foot-radius sphere centered on that point must make 
a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 6d6 fire damage 
on a failed save, or half as much damage on a success- 
ful one. Afterward, you can use an action to cause the 
weapon to reappear in your empty hand. You can’t cause 
it to explode again until you finish a short or long rest. 


— 


If you don't call the weapon back to your hand, it re- 
appears at the point where it exploded when you are no 
longer attuned to it or when 24 hours have passed. 


SwoRD OF THE PARUNS 
Weapon (longsword), very rare (requires attunement) 


You gain a *1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic weapon. Additionally, once on each of 
your turns, you can use one of the following properties if 
you're holding the sword: 


+ Immediately after you use the Attack action to at- 
tack with the sword, you can enable one creature 
within 60 feet of you to use its reaction to make one 
weapon attack. 

* Immediately after you take the Dash action, you can 
enable one creature within 60 feet of you to use its re- 
action to move up to its speed. 

+ Immediately after you take the Dodge action, you can 
enable one creature within 60 feet of you to use its re- 
action to gain the benefits of the Dodge action. 


VOYAGER STAFF 
Staff, very rare (requires attunement by a spellcaster) 


You gain a *1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic quarterstaff. While you hold it, you gain 
a +1 bonus to spell attack rolls. 

This staff has 10 charges. While holding it, you can 
use an action to expend 1 or more of the staff's charges 
to cast one of the following spells from it, using your 
spell save DC: banishment (4 charges), blink (3 charges), 
misty step (2 charges), passwall (5 charges), or teleport 
(7 charges). 

The staff regains 1d6 + 4 expended charges daily at 
dawn. If you expend the last charge, roll ad20. Ona 1, 
the staff vanishes forever. 


AVNICA IS HOME TO A GREAT VARIETY OF 
creatures, including some that are unknown 
on other worlds in DUNGEONS & DRAGONS. 
This chapter provides stat blocks for many 
of these creatures, and it concludes with a collection 
of nonplayer characters who fill the ranks of Ravni- 
ca's guilds. 

Some of the stat blocks in this book have a special 
feature: guild spells. If a stat block says its creature is a 
spellcaster of a particular guild—an Izzet spellcaster, for 
instance—that creature's spell list includes one or more 
spells from that guild’s spell list. See chapter 2 for the 
guilds’ lists. 


CREATURES BY GUILD 


This section is a list of creatures in this chapter and in 
the Monster Manual that are associated with each guild. 
Each guild’s entry includes a brief discussion of the 
monsters from the Monster Manual that could be found 
among the guild’s members, and it includes a table 
showing monsters sorted by challenge rating. 

Most of these monsters are in this book (GGR) or the 
Monster Manual (MM), but some of the monsters from 
Volo’s Guide to Monsters (VGM) and Mordenkainen's 
Tome of Foes (MTF) are also mentioned. 


AZORIUS CREATURES 


Most creatures associated with the Azorius Senate are 
humanoids (largely humans and vedalken) and various 
others that serve as familiars, pets, and mounts. Owls 
are popular familiars, since they are viewed as symbols 
of wisdom and sound judgment. Sphinxes and archons 
are the rare nonhumanoids that play a significant role in 
the leadership and operation of the guild. 

Azorius lawmages craft one-eyed homunculi to per- 
form menial tasks in Azorius buildings. These homun- 
culi use the statistics of a regular homunculus except 
that they are wingless and have no flying speed. 


SPHINXES OF JUDGMENT 

Azorius sphinxes, known as sphinxes of judgment, wield 
hieromancy—the power of law magic—with the force of 
a judge’s gavel to imprison criminals and compel truth 
from them. A sphinx of judgment is a gynosphinx, as 
described in the Monster Manual, but it is an Azorius 
spellcaster with the following wizard spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): friends, mage hand, message 

1st level (4 slots): command, ensnaring strike, shield 

2nd level (3 slots): calm emotions, hold person, 
suggestion 

3rd level (3 slots): clairvoyance, counterspell, 
dispel magic 

4th level (3 slots): banishment, divination 

5th level (1 slot): dominate person 


CHAPTER 6: FRIENDS AND FOES 


Azorius CREATURES 


Challenge Creature Source 
0 Homunculus MM 
0 Owl MM 

1/4 Giant owl MM 
1/2 Soldier GGR 
12 Warhorse MM 
1 Giant eagle MM 
2 Griffon MM 
3 Arrester (veteran or knight) MM 
3 Precognitive mage GGR 
5 Felidar GGR 
6 Lawmage GGR 
n Sphinx of judgment (gynosphinx) MM 
14 Archon of the Triumvirate GGR 
17 Androsphinx MM 
21 Isperia GGR 


BOROS CREATURES 


The Boros Legion employs many different creatures to 
swell the ranks of its soldiery. These creatures might 
serve as companions, guardians, or mounts. 


FLAME-KIN 

Flame-kin (which use the azer stat block in the Monster 
Manual) are elemental soldiers magically created and 
animated to serve the legion as scouts and shock troops. 
Fanatical and inflexible, they are relics of a time when 
the guild was more concerned with zealotry than jus- 
tice. They take the field for large military engagements. 


Boros CREATURES 


Challenge Creature Source 
1/8 Mastiff MM 
1/4 Frontline medic GGR 
12 Soldier GGR 
1/2 Viashino (lizardfolk) MM 

2 Flame-kin (azer) MM 
2 Skyjek roc GGR 
3 Knight MM 
3 Veteran MM 
4 Reckoner GGR 
5 Battleforce angel GGR 
7 Firefist GGR 
8 Guardian giant GGR 
10 Deva MM 
12 Firemane angel GGR 
16 Planetar MM 
21 Solar MM 
23 Aurelia GGR 


CHAPTER € FRIENDS AND FOES 


183 


184 


DIMIR CREATURES 


Alongside human and vampire spies and assassins, a va- 
riety of stealthy and shadowy monsters contribute to the 
work of House Dimir. Doppelgangers and invisible stalk- 
ers move unseen among the populace. Horrors—as well 
as gricks, intellect devourers, and similar monsters—are 
thought to be the fears of Ravnica’s populace given form 
by Dimir magic. And undead such as shadows, wraiths, 
and Nightveil specters keep watch over secret Dimir 
territories. 


Dimir CREATURES 


Challenge Creature Source 
1/2 Shadow MM 
1 Spy MM 
1 Thought spy GGR 
2 Grick MM 
2 Intellect devourer MM 
3 Doppelganger MM 
3 Flying horror GGR 
4 Mind drinker vampire GGR 
5 Allip MTF 
5 Mind mage GGR 
5 Wraith MM 
6 Invisible stalker MM 
7 Grick alpha MM 
8 Assassin MM 
8 Gloamwing GGR 
9 Shadow horror GGR 
10 Nightveil specter GGR 
15 Skittering horror GGR 
17 Lazav GGR 


GOLGARI CREATURES 


The Devkarin elves (drow), deadly medusas, and insec- 
tile kraul are the three most important power groups 
among the Golgari Swarm, vying for control over a 
teeming horde of lesser (or at least less ambitious) 
creatures. 


ERSTWHILE 
A significant shift in the Golgari balance of power be- 
gan when the kraul death priest Mazirek discovered an 
ancient mausoleum compound. Deep in the undercity, 
beneath the layers of civilization that had built up over 
millennia, Mazirek found a hidden network of vaults 
called Umerilek, an enormous structure that would 
have dominated a city block. Inside were hundreds of 
well-preserved corpses suffused with a latent necroman- 
tic power that Mazirek activated, bringing the corpses 
back to a shambling semblance of life. This new race of 
undead is called the Erstwhile (equivalent to the wight 
in the Monster Manual). 

In their time, the Erstwhile were aristocratic elves 
of immense wealth and opulence. They still wear their 
stately attire, despite its moldering condition, and they 
lend an air of high culture to the undercity court of 
the Golgari. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


FUNGUS 

Golgari territory is filled with creatures composed 

of fungus and detritus from the guild’s rot farms. 
Shriekers serve as sentries in Golgari tunnels, and vio- 
let fungus sprouts from the corpses of intruders. Amor- 
phous masses of dead and decaying matter can develop 
into shambling mounds in the spore-saturated environ- 
ment of the undercity. 

Some Golgari creatures are symbiotic fusions of 
fungus and living creatures. Golgari trolls are hulking 
sewer dwellers with fungus adorning their bodies like 
manes, acting as extra layers for their already tough 
hide and facilitating their regeneration. 


INSECTS AND ARACHNIDS 

Beetles, centipedes, spiders, and countless other insects 
and arachnids infest Golgari warrens. These creatures, 
often associated with decay and rebirth, are prized by 
the guild. Giant bugs serve as beasts of burden, compan- 
ions, steeds, and guardians. Among the largest of these 
is the Deadbridge goliath beetle (equivalent to the tricer- 
atops in the Monster Manual). 

Piranha beetles (best represented as a swarm of in- 
sects, from the Monster Manual) burrow through the 
soft earth and gather into swarms to overtake their vic- 
tims and strip the flesh from them. Skein spiders (as gi- 
ant spiders, from the Monster Manual) are an important 
part of Golgari reclamation work: fungus grows rapidly 
along the silken spiderwebs, expanding to engulf archi- 
tecture and hasten the Golgari annexation process. 


ZOMBIES 

The guild encourages the use and exploration of necro- 
mancy. Fungus covers the bodies of most of the undead 
that serve the guild, the majority of which are fungus 
drudges (equivalent to zombies in the Monster Man- 
ual)—mindless servants animated by the fungus that 
infests their bodies. 


GOLGARI CREATURES 


Challenge Creature Source 
0 Shrieker MM 
1/4 Drow MM 
1/4 Fungus drudge (zombie) MM 
1/4 Vegepygmy VGM 
1/4 Violet fungus MM 
1/2 Kraul warrior GGR 
1/2 Scout MM 
1/2 Piranha beetles (swarm of insects) MM 
1 Skein spider (giant spider) MM 
1 Thorny VGM 
2 Ankheg MM 
2 Ogre zombie MM 
2 Vegepygmy chief VGM 
3 Erstwhile (wight) MM 
4 Kraul death priest GGR 
5 Deadbridge goliath beetle MM 
(triceratops) 
5 Drow elite warrior MM 
5 Golgari shaman GGR 


Challenge Creature Source 

Shambling mound MM 
5 Troll MM 
6 Undercity medusa GGR 
8 Assassin MM 
8 Corpse flower MTF 
14 Devkarin lich GGR 
15 Skittering horror GGR 
22 Jarad Vod Savo GGR 


GRUUL CREATURES 


Many dangerous creatures haunt the rubblebelts and 
other places the Gruul Clans inhabit. 


BEASTS 

Gruul territory is full of beasts of all sizes. Herds of gi- 
ant boars (see the Monster Manual) called batterboars 
roam the rubblebelts; each batterboar can grow to be 
the size of a mammoth (as in the Monster Manual), and 
the passage of a herd can shake the ground and topple 
buildings. Maaka (use the saber-toothed tiger stat block 
from the Monster Manual) are territorial cats, about 15 
feet long, with six eyes. They typically keep to the rub- 
blebelts, though from time to time they are spotted amid 
tended groves and gardens. 

Any beast described in this book or in the Monster 
Manual can roam the rubblebelts. The Gruul can bring 
out the fury in these beasts, turning them into rage- 
beasts. Ragebeasts often have the Reckless and Siege 
Monster traits: 


Reckless. At the start of its turn, the ragebeast can gain advan- 
tage on all melee weapon attack rolls it makes during that turn, 
but attack rolls against it have advantage until the start of its 
next turn. 


Siege Monster. The ragebeast deals double damage to objects 
and structures. 


ELEMENTALS 

Gruul shamans channel primal energies to summon 
raging fire elementals that blaze ahead of marauding 
Gruul bands. Or they transform the rubble and detritus 
of civilization into earth elementals, twisted through 
with choking vines, that literally give new life to the ruin 
of the city. These elementals are intensely destructive, 
but they last only as long as the magic used to summon 
them persists. 


GIANTS 

Nearly all the Gruul Clans include hill giants, stone gi- 
ants, cyclopes, ogres, ettins, and fomorians among their 
number, and one clan—the Bolrac clan—is composed 
entirely of such brutes. 


HyDRAS 

Once a hydra chooses a lair and declares the surround- 
ing land its territory, it's almost impossible to drive the 
creature out. The Gruul revere these multiheaded pred- 
ators as vestiges of the ancient times before the guilds 
took over the world. They don't kill hydras for trophies, 
but pulling a spine from a hydra's neck is a mark of great 
bravery among the Gruul. 


GRUUL CREATURES 


Challenge Creature Source 
14 Anarch GGR 
1/2 Rubblebelt stalker GGR 
1/2 Viashino (lizardfolk) MM 

1 Half-ogre MM 
2 Batterboar (giant boar) MM 
2 Berserker MM 
2 Maaka (saber-toothed tiger) MM 
2 Ogre MM 
4 Ettin MM 
5 Elemental (earth or fire) MM 
5 Hill giant MM 
5 Trog (gladiator) MM 
6 Cyclops MM 
6 Huge batterboar (mammoth) MM 
7 Druid of the Old Ways GGR 
7 Stone giant MM 
8 Fomorian MM 
8 Hydra MM 
10 Sunder shaman GGR 
14 Wurm GGR 
18 Borborygmos GGR 


IZZET CREATURES 


Izzet laboratories are staffed with attendants (common- 
ers) and chemisters (mages). Pixies and sprites (called 
ratchet faeries) find employment among the Izzet work- 
ing on projects that are too small for other races. 

The Izzet League employs elementals formed from the 
combination of two or more elemental forces, including 
mephits of the smoke, steam, ice, and magma varieties. 


IZZET CREATURES 


Challenge Creature Source 
0 Attendant (commoner) MM 
1/4 Apprentice wizard VGM 
1/4 Pixie MM 
1/4 Smoke mephit MM 
1/4 Sprite MM 
1/4 Steam mephit MM 
1/2 Ice mephit MM 
1/2 Magma mephit MM 
12 Scorchbringer guard GGR 
1/2 Viashino (lizardfolk) MM 
1 Galvanice weird GGR 
2 Counterflux blastseeker GGR 
E Blistercoil weird GGR 
4 Cosmotronic blastseeker GGR 
5 Flux blastseeker GGR 
5 Galvanic blastseeker GGR 
6 Chemister (mage) MM 
y Fluxcharger GGR 
8 Nivix cyclops GGR 
12 Archmage MM 
12 Arclight phoenix GGR 
26 Niv-Mizzet GGR 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


185 


ORZHOV CREATURES 


The Orzhov Syndicate attracts and entraps beings of 
all kinds, from lowly bats and manufactured thrulls to 
brutal giants and exalted angels. Orzhov gargoyles, an- 
imated by magic that manifests as a green, smoky glow 
in their eyes and gaping mouths, keep watch over banks 
and basilicas, and bloodthirsty vampires lurk in the 
vaults and crypts below. 


ORZHOV CREATURES 


Challenge Creature Source 
0 Bat MM 
0 Commoner MM 

1/8 Guard MM 
1/8 Noble MM 
1/4 Acolyte MM 
1/4 Giant bat MM 
1/4 Servitor thrull GGR 
1/4 Swarm of bats MM 
1/2 Thug MM 
1/2 Winged thrull GGR 
1 Indentured spirit GGR 
1 Spirit (specter) MM 
2 Gargoyle MM 
2 Priest MM 
3 Knight MM 
4 Spirit (ghost) MM 
6 Mage MM 
6 Orzhov giant GGR 
8 Blood drinker vampire GGR 
8 Obzedat ghost GGR 
14 Deathpact angel GGR 


RAKDOS CREATURES 


All sorts of savage, howling beasts accompany Rakdos 
cultists. Hell hounds, nightmares, and magmins might 
perform alongside the other entertainers or accompany 
notable members of the cult as guardians and compan- 
ions. Rakdos giants, along with ogres draped in hooked 
chains and spikes, carry and set up tents and stages— 
and cause utter mayhem when blood lust seizes them. 


RAKDOS CREATURES 


Challenge Creature Source 
1/8 Bandit MM 
1/8 Cultist MM 
1/2 Cackler GGR 
1/2 Magmin MM 
1/2 Thug MM 

1 Rakdos performer GGR 
2 Berserker MM 
2 Cult fanatic MM 
2 Ogre MM 
2 Rakdos lampooner GGR 
3 Hell hound MM 
3 Nightmare MM 


Challenge Creature Source 
3 Ogre chain brute MTF 
5 Barbed devil MM 
5 Cambion MM 
6 Bloodfray giant GGR 
7 Blood witch GGR 
9 Master of cruelties GGR 
9 Shadow horror GGR 
11 Horned devil MM 
12 Sire of insanity GGR 
24 Rakdos GGR 


SELESNYA CREATURES 

The Selesnya Conclave uses its close connection to 
nature to enlist a variety of creatures to its cause. 
These supporters of the conclave take their rightful 
place in the natural order alongside its more human- 
like members. 


ELEMENTALS 

Elementals rise to the guild’s defense when the Se- 
lesnya Conclave is drawn into conflict. Most of these 
elementals are made from the roots and branches of 
trees, making them equivalent to awakened shrubs or 
awakened trees. Earth elementals incorporate building 
materials in their forms to serve as armor and weapons. 


PLANT CREATURES 


Many Selesnya buildings, temples, and paths are pro- 
tected by treants or carnivorous plants, including blights 
and shambling mounds. Some have vine-like arms that 


ensnare prey and drop it into pitcher-like bodies filled 
with acid. Others are covered with sticky glue that im- 
mobilizes and slowly digests the hapless victim. 


PEGASI 

Most often found carrying equenauts in battle, pegasi 
are ready allies who share the guild’s goals and virtues. 
Members of the guild raise them from infancy, carefully 
protecting the foals from griffons, drakes, and other ae- 
rial predators. 


SELESNYA CREATURES 


Challenge Creature Source 
0 Small nature elemental (awakened MM 
shrub) 
1/8 Twig blight MM 
1/4 Axe beak MM 
1/4 Needle blight MM 
1/2 Scout MM 
1/2 Soldier GGR 
1/2 Vine blight MM 
1 Dire wolf MM 
1 Dryad MM 
1 Horncaller GGR 
2 Druid MM 
2 Huge nature elemental (awakened MM 
tree) 
2 Pegasus MM 
2 Priest MM 
3 Archer VGM 
3 Knight MM 
3 Veteran MM 
5 Earth elemental MM 
5 Shambling mound MM 
5 Wood woad VGM 
9 Conclave dryad GGR 
9 Treant MM 
12 Archdruid VGM 
12 Wurmcaller (archmage) MM 
14 Wurm GGR 
18 Trostani GGR 


SIMIC CREATURES 


Simic scientists are interested in the ways that all life 
forms adapt to their changing environments, but they 
have a particular fascination with the largest creatures. 
In a world covered with urban construction, most of 
these creatures soar above the city or glide deep below 
it in subterranean oceans accessible only through the 
Simic zonots. 


BENTHIDS 

Simic scientists use the term “benthid” to refer to the 
leviathans of the deep. These creatures vary greatly in 
size and morphology, so they might be represented by 
the statistics for a giant octopus, plesiosaurus, killer 
whale, giant shark, dragon turtle, or kraken. 


MERFOLK 

Ravnica's merfolk are unique to the Simic. They 
emerged from the depths of the plane’s long-buried 
oceans less than a century ago and immediately took on 


leadership positions in the guild. They claim a deep con- 


nection to Ravnica’s primal oceans, which are almost 
untouched by civilization. They have the statistics of the 
merfolk in the Monster Manual, except that they speak 
Common and Merfolk, and their legs give them a walk- 
ing speed of 30 feet. 


Simic CREATURES 


Challenge Creature Source 
0 Homunculus MM 
1/8 Merfolk MM 
2 Hybrid spy GGR 
1 Category 1 krasis GGR 
1 Giant octopus MM 
1 Hybrid poisoner GGR 
1 Hybrid shocker GGR 
2 Druid MM 
2 Hybrid brute GGR 
2 Hybrid flier GGR 
2 Plesiosaurus MM 
3 Killer whale MM 
5 Giant shark MM 
6 Category 2 krasis GGR 
6 Mage MM 
10 Biomancer GGR 
13 Skyswimmer GGR 
16 Category 3 krasis GGR 
16 Zegana GGR 
7 Dragon turtle MM 
23 Kraken MM 


GUILDLESS CREATURES 


A monster that doesn’t appear on the tables in this sec- 


tion can show up in Ravnica. Other categories of crea- 
tures that exist in the world include the following: 


Undercity Denizens. Creatures that don't have clear 
guild connections, such as carrion crawlers and 
otyughs, creep and slink through the undercity. 

Undead. Orzhov spirits and Golgari zombies are not 
the extent of undead in Ravnica. Wherever people 
die, there's a chance of them returning as revenants, 
ghosts, or other forms of undead. 

The Guildless. The nonplayer characters presented in 
the Monster Manual and other sources can represent 
any of the ordinary citizens of Ravnica, whether they 
are connected to guilds or not. Commoners go about 
their daily business, bandits prey on the weak, and 
cultists lurk in shadowed shrines, either hidden from 
the guilds or beneath their notice. 

Ordinary Animals. Virtually any of the creatures that 
appear in appendix A of the Monster Manual could 
show up in Ravnica. Many such creatures are con- 
fined to small greenbelts or the ruined rubblebelts, 
but others thrive in the urban environment, including 
birds, scavengers, and sewer dwellers. 


CHAPTER 6 


FRIENDS AND FOES 


187 


DRAKES 

The winged reptiles known as drakes are a common 
sight in the skies of Ravnica. They soar above the spires 
and rooftops hunting for aerial prey. Highly trainable, 
they are favored as pets, servants, and mounts. 

The most common drakes, called wind drakes, are 
about the size of a human and use the statistics of a 
pteranodon. The smallest drakes are the size of a bird of 
prey and use the statistics of an eagle; larger ones have 
the statistics of a giant eagle. 


PACK BEASTS 

You can use stat blocks from the Monster Manual to rep- 
resent various pack beasts encountered in Ravnica, as 
indicated in the Pack Beasts table. 

Brushstrider. Destructive when confined, brushstrid- 
ers thrive when they can freely wander garden areas. 

Ceratok. A ceratok has two curving horns at the end 
of its snout. 

Dromad. A dromad is similar to a camel, but it 
lacks a hump. 

Indrik. With their long necks, indriks are common 
sights in the Tenth District. They are ornery creatures; 
an indrik without a handler to order it around usually 
goes on a rampage or flees. 

Krovod. A krovod is a slow-witted, ox-like animal. 

Raktusk. A raktusk is a bison-like creature, about 10 
feet tall at the shoulder. 


Pack BEASTS 


Beast Monster Manual Stat Block 
Brushstrider Elk 

Ceratok Rhinoceros 

Dromad Camel 

Indrik Elephant 

Krovod Mammoth 

Raktusk Giant elk 


BESTIARY 


The following pages feature stat blocks for various crea- 
tures of Ravnica, arranged in alphabetical order. For 
guidance on how to use a creature’s stat block, consult 
the introduction of the Monster Manual. 


STAT BLOCKS BY 
CREATURE TYPE 


Here are the creatures in this bestiary, as well as in the 
subsequent NPC collection, sorted by creature type. 


ABERRATIONS Counterflux blastseeker 


Flying horror 
Shadow horror 
Skittering horror 


CELESTIALS 


Archon of the Triumvirate 


Aurelia 
Battleforce angel 
Deathpact angel 
Felidar 
Firemane angel 


CONSTRUCTS 
Servitor thrull 
Winged thrull 


DRAGONS 
Niv-Mizzet 


ELEMENTALS 
Arclight phoenix 
Blistercoil weird 
Fluxcharger 
Galvanice weird 


FEY 
Conclave dryad 
Trostani 


FIENDS 

Cackler 

Master of cruelties 
Rakdos 

Sire of insanity 


GIANTS 
Bloodfray giant 
Borborygmos 
Guardian giant 
Nivix cyclops 
Orzhov giant 
Sunder shaman 


HUMANOIDS 
Anarch 
Biomancer 
Blood witch 


Cosmotronic blastseeker 


Druid of the Old Ways 
Firefist 

Flux blastseeker 
Frontline medic 
Galvanic blastseeker 
Golgari shaman 
Horncaller 

Hybrid brute 

Hybrid flier 

Hybrid poisoner 
Hybrid shocker 
Hybrid spy 

Kraul death priest 
Kraul warrior 
Lawmage 

Mind mage 
Precognitive mage 
Rakdos lampooner 
Rakdos performer 
Reckoner 
Rubblebelt stalker 
Scorchbringer guard 
Soldier 

Thought spy 
Zegana 


MONSTROSITIES 
Category 1 krasis 
Category 2 krasis 
Category 3 krasis 
Isperia 

Lazav 

Skyjek roc 
Skyswimmer 
Undercity medusa 
Wurm 


UNDEAD 

Blood drinker vampire 
Devkarin lich 
Gloamwing 
Indentured spirit 
Jarad Vod Savo 

Mind drinker vampire 
Nightveil specter 
Obzedat ghost 


(FP 


7 


ANGELS 


Ravnican angels are physical manifestations of the 
principles of justice and righteousness. Created in the 
image of the founder of the Boros Legion, Razia, they 
originally all served in the legion, but individual angels 
embody different approaches to ideals of justice, duty, 
law, and order. This diversity has caused some angels to 
leave the Boros Legion; they might join other guilds or 
remain independent, protecting the guildless. 

Angels from Ravnica appear similar to human women 
with two large feathered wings. Present-day angels have 
the full range of human height, weight, and coloration. 
Some are crowned or surrounded by a glowing nimbus 
of light, and others have hair like living flame. 

Immortal Nature. Angels don't require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


Boros ANGELS 


Angels of the Boros Legion view themselves as the 
embodiments of what their creator intended. They are 
fierce warriors devoted to justice and dedicated to pro- 
tecting the weak against evil and oppression. They are 
commanders, advisors, strategists, and soldiers. Their 
presence in battle inspires the mortal soldiers of the le- 
gion with righteous zeal. 

Most Boros soldiers assume that angels are paragons 
of goodness, wisdom, and mercy. The reality is that an- 
gels aren't immune to the temptations of corruption, and 
the necessities of political machination can compromise 
the best of them. 

Warleaders. The wisest, most visionary angels are 
responsible for forming and implementing the military 
strategy of the Boros Legion. Since they are immortal, 
their plans might span centuries, and they have been 
known to accept decades of losses as a reasonable cost 
for a more significant victory many years later. These 
warleaders have the statistics of planetars or solars (as 
presented in the Monster Manual), but their appearance 
is similar to other Boros angels. 


BATTLEFORCE ANGEL 

Battleforce angels are the radiant hosts that soar into 
combat, bathed in the light of Boros zeal. They lead 
companies of mortal soldiers from above or fly ahead of 
roc-mounted skyknights. They don't shy away from the 
blood, pain, and confusion of combat; rather, they im- 
merse themselves in the shifting tides of battle. Only by 
wading into the battle can they fulfill their responsibility 
to carry out the commands of the warleaders by adapt- 
ing their tactics to the shifting situation on the ground. 


i 


` 


1 ! 
Pp 1 L1 


BATTLEFORCE ANGEL 


Medium celestial, lawful good 


Armor Class 18 (plate) 
Hit Points 66 (12d8 + 12) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 90 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16(3) 12) 13430) (40) 17443) 18 (44) 
[ nn4-—nns————————— À——————À—— 
Saving Throws Wis +6, Cha +7 
Skills Investigation +3, Perception +6 
Damage Resistances fire, radiant 
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., truesight 120 ft., passive 
Perception 16 
Languages all 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Flyby. The angel doesn’t provoke an opportunity attack when it 
flies out of an enemy's reach. 


Magic Resistance. The angel has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The angel makes two melee attacks. It also uses 
Battlefield Inspiration. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage, or 8 (1d10 + 3) slashing 
damage if used with two hands, plus 18 (4d8) radiant damage. 
If the target is within 5 feet of any of the angel’s allies, the tar- 
get takes an extra 2 (1d4) radiant damage. 


Battlefield Inspiration. The angel chooses up to three crea- 
tures it can see within 30 feet of it. Until the end of the angel's 
next turn, each target can add a d4 to its attack rolls and sav- 
ing throws. 
[a C e —Ó 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 189 


FIREMANE ANGEL 


Medium celestial, chaotic good 


Armor Class 18 (plate) 
Hit Points 135 (18d8 + 54) 
Speed 40 ft., fly 120 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
22 (+6)  15(42) 17(43) 12(+1) 14(32) 23 (+6) 
[.LEEMEEEEMMIMMEMLGIMIGASEIOEEIGECELLILECEECEÉCELLLCLCELELLETCELEI)ZEIEEEELLLELLELELLLELELEETIZÉEÓEELTLTILIIÓIÉTIITETELIZLIEEELITI LIZOÓÍSZDOILLLIZLOOD 
Saving Throws Str +10, Wis +6, Cha +10 
Skills Insight +6, Perception +6 
Damage Resistances fire, radiant; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical attacks 
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened 
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 16 
Languages all 
Challenge 12 (8,400 XP) 
Flyby. The angel doesn’t provoke an opportunity attack when it 
flies out of an enemy’s reach. 


Innate Spellcasting. The angel's innate spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 18, +10 to hit with spell attacks). The 
angel can innately cast the following spells, requiring no mate- 
rial components: 


3/day each: compelled duel, guiding bolt (as a Sth-level spell) 
1/day each: daylight, fireball (as a 6th-level spell) 


Magic Resistance. The angel has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Relentless (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). If the angel 
takes 21 damage or less that would reduce it to 0 hit points, it 
is reduced to 1 hit point instead. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The angel makes two melee attacks. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 10 (1d8 + 6) slashing damage, or 11 (1d10 + 6) 
slashing damage if used with two hands, plus 22 (5d8) fire or 
radiant damage (angel’s choice). 
eR ee] 


190 CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


L—————M——————————— 
FIREMANE NEVENA 
Chastised by Aurelia after leading a successful assault 
against a group of guildless rebels, Nevena has distanced 
herself from the Boros Legion's leadership and inde- 
pendently pursues her own vision of justice and punish- 
ment. Nevena's willful independence is a source of tension 
among the firemanes as well as in the upper echelons of 
the legion's leadership. How much should a firemane be 
free to pursue her own agenda, given that her agenda is 
righteous and just? For now, Aurelia has decided to let 
Nevena have an unprecedented degree of freedom, but 
if she betrays any hint of corruption, she will quickly be 
brought back under close scrutiny. 
——————————e 


FIREMANE ÁNGEL 
Firemane angels are holy champions and paragons of 
war who specialize in single combat. They are powerful 
warriors who seek out the mightiest foes in any conflict, 
trusting lesser soldiers to handle lesser opponents. 
Like many other Boros angels, firemanes typically 
have red hair. In the heat of battle, a firemane's hair can 
ignite, transforming into a mane of flames cascading 
over its shoulders and down its back. 


ORZHOV ANGELS 


Few angels find anything appealing in the corruption 
and decadence embodied by the Orzhov Syndicate, 
since such a society is fundamentally antithetical to 
their natures, but disillusionment can seduce even im- 
mortal beings. When cynicism takes root in an angel's 
heart, when questions undermine devotion to the cause 
of justice, when strength becomes a tool to lord over the 
weak, the Orzhov Syndicate is there to welcome the an- 
gel with open arms, offering status, respect, and power. 

Orzhov angels might claim positions as executioners, 
commanders, or power brokers, but more often they 
carve out their own place in the guild, standing apart 
from the otherwise rigid hierarchy of the Orzhov. 


DEATHPACT ANGEL 
Deathpact angels dwell in the grandest of Orzhov cathe- 
drals, where they surround themselves with wealth and 
wretched vassals that are utterly in their thrall. 

Gift Givers. Posing as a beneficent god, a deathpact 
angel attracts petitioners who beg the angel for bless- 
ings: wealth, prestige, health, revenge, and the like. 
Imagining itself generous and merciful, the angel usu- 
ally tries to grant the petitioners what they seek by using 
its abilities, drawing from its hoard of riches, or extort- 
ing favors from other members of the guild. True to the 
spirit of the Orzhov, though, the angel doesn’t bestow 
these gifts out of kindness, but for the sake of gaining 
fanatical followers who owe it life debts. 

Debt and Indenture. Those who receive favors from a 
deathpact angel incur a debt that they carry with fervent 
devotion. They regularly bring trinkets and offerings 
to the angel, no longer asking or expecting anything in 
return, and even willingly offer up their mortal lives for 
their angelic patron. Even after death, these debtors 
continue to serve the angel and the Orzhov Syndicate as 
indentured spirits (described later in this chapter). 

I l—M—— € á— dili 

DesTs PAID 

A deathpact angel can give an indentured spirit a clause 

to escape its bound servitude: if the angel ever dies, the 

indentured spirit can sacrifice its undead existence to 

restore the angel to life. Upon seeing the angel drop to 0 

hit points, an indentured spirit can destroy itself, its debt 

discharged as it dissipates, after which the angel returns to 

life with 1 hit point. 
—€—————————————— 


DEATHPACT ANGEL 


Medium celestial, lawful evil 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 175 (27d8 + 54) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 90 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3)  18(44) 14(+2) 19(«4) 20(+5) 23 (+6) 


Saving Throws Int +9, Wis +10, Cha +11 

Skills Insight +10, Intimidation +11, Perception +10, 
Persuasion +11 

Damage Resistances necrotic, radiant; bludgeoning, piercing, 
and slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened 

Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 20 

Languages all 

Challenge 14 (11,500 XP) 


Exploitation of the Debtors. As a bonus action, the angel tar- 
gets a creature charmed by it that it can see within 30 feet of it. 
The angel deals 11 (2d10) necrotic damage to the target, and 
the angel gains temporary hit points equal to the damage dealt. 


Flyby. The angel doesn’t provoke an opportunity attack when it 
flies out of an enemy's reach. 


Innate Spellcasting. The angel's innate spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 19, +11 to hit with spell attacks). The 
angel can innately cast the following spells, requiring no mate- 
rial components: 


At will: command (as a 2nd-level spell), detect evil and good 

3/day each: charm person (as a 5th-level spell), darkness, 
suggestion 

1/day: raise dead 


Magic Resistance. The angel has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 
ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The angel makes two attacks with its scythe. It 
can substitute Chains of Obligation for one of these attacks. 


Scythe. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 9 (2d4 + 4) slashing damage plus 27 (6d8) ne- 
crotic damage. 


Chains of Obligation. The angel targets one creature charmed 

by it that it can see within 90 feet of it. The target must succeed 

on a DC 19 Charisma saving throw or become paralyzed for 1 

minute or until it takes any damage. 
See SE 


ARCHON OF THE 
‘TRIUMVIRATE 


Archons are enigmatic, supernatural embodiments of 
the harshest aspects of law and order. They espouse 

a rigid sense of justice and deal ruthless punish- 

ment to those who break the law. This nature often 
aligns them with the Azorius Senate, and they are 
commonly seen circling above the Azorius guildhall 
astride their winged felidar mounts, soaring alongside 
griffon-mounted hussars. 

An archon appears as an armored humanoid figure, 
nearly always mounted. Its face is usually shadowed 
beneath a large hood; those who have seen beneath the 
hood describe a face of celestial beauty with a stern ex- 
pression and blank white eyes. 

Eternal Riders. The bond between an archon and 
its winged felidar mount is so close that the two are 
sometimes considered a single being, acting with a 


single mind. If an archon is ever thrown from its saddle, 


it can magically return to its place astride its mount in 
an instant. 

Immortal Nature. An archon doesn’t require food, 
drink, or sleep. 


ARCHON OF THE TRIUMVIRATE 


Medium celestial, lawful neutral 


Armor Class 18 (plate) 
Hit Points 144 (17d8 + 68) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
20 (+5) 15 (+2) 19 (+4) 15 (+2) 21 (+5) 18 (+4) 


Saving Throws Con +9, Wis +10, Cha +9 

Skills Insight +10, Perception +10 

Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical attacks 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 20 

Languages all 

Challenge 14 (11,500 XP) 

 —————Xs—ÁáÀÁÀ— MÀ — 

Eye of the Law. As a bonus action, the archon can target a 

creature it can see within 120 feet of it and determine which 

laws that creature has broken in the last 24 hours. 


Innate Spellcasting. The archon's innate spellcasting ability 

is Wisdom (spell save DC 18, +10 to hit with spell attacks). 
The archon can innately cast the following spells, requiring no 
material components: 


At will: calm emotions, command, compelled duel 


Mount. If the archon isn't mounted, it can use a bonus action 
to magically teleport onto the creature serving as its mount, 
provided the archon and its mount are on the same plane of 
existence. When it teleports, the archon appears astride the 
mount along with any equipment it is wearing or carrying. 
While mounted and not incapacitated, the archon can't be 


surprised, and both it and its mount gain advantage on Dexter- 


ity saving throws. If the archon is reduced to 0 hit points while 
riding its mount, the mount is reduced to 0 hit points as well. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The archon makes two Hammer of Justice attacks. 


Hammer of Justice. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 
ft., one target. Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) bludgeoning damage plus 18 
(4d8) force damage. If the target is a creature, it must succeed 
on a DC 18 Strength saving throw or be knocked prone. 


Pacifying Presence. Each creature of the archon's choice that 
the archon can see within 120 feet of it must succeed on a DC 
18 Wisdom saving throw, or else the target drops any weapons 
it is holding, ends its concentration on any spells or other ef- 
fects, and becomes charmed by the archon for 1 minute. The 
charmed creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a 
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 
the creature is immune to the archon's Pacifying Presence for 
the next 24 hours. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The archon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The ar- 
chon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Rejoin Mount. If the archon isn't mounted, it magically tele- 
ports to its steed and mounts it as long as the archon and its 
steed are on the same plane of existence. 

Smite (Costs 2 Actions). The archon makes a Hammer of Jus- 
tice attack, and then its mount can use its reaction to make a 
melee weapon attack. 

Detention (Costs 3 Actions). The archon targets a creature it 
can see within 60 feet of it. The target must succeed on a 
DC 18 Charisma saving throw or be magically teleported to a 
harmless demiplane until the end of the archon's next turn, 
whereupon the target reappears in the space it left or the 
nearest unoccupied space if that space is occupied. 


ARCLIGHT PHOENIX 


An arclight phoenix is variously said to be a byproduct 
of a lightning strike on an aviary, a mishap in an effort 
to create a translocation device, or a successful attempt 
to create an elemental creature in the form of a ma- 
jestic bird. 

Whatever its origin, an arclight phoenix looks like a 
bird of prey formed entirely of electrical energy. Light- 
ning fans out behind it as it bolts from place to place 
through the sky, making up in speed what it lacks in 
grace and majesty. It seems happiest during natural 
thunderstorms, as it darts among the clouds, gliding 
alongside thunderbolts. 

Elemental Nature. ^n arclight phoenix doesn't 
require air, food, drink, or sleep. 


ARCLIGHT PHOENIX 


Medium elemental, chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 16 
Hit Points 142 (19d8 + 57) 
Speed 0 ft., fly 120 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WS CHA 
15 (+2) 22 (+6) 1793) 5 (-3) 12(+1) 7 (-2) 


Saving Throws Dex +10 

Damage Resistances thunder; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Damage Immunities lightning, poison 

Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed, 
petrified, poisoned, restrained, unconscious 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 

Languages — 

Challenge 12 (8,400 XP) 

(rrr 

Flyby. The arclight phoenix doesn’t provoke an opportunity at- 

tack when it flies out of an enemy's reach. 


Grounded Lightning. The first time on a turn that the arclight 
phoenix touches the ground, it takes 11 (2d10) force damage. 


Illumination. The arclight phoenix sheds bright light in a 15- 
foot radius and dim light for an additional 15 feet. 


Lightning Form. The arclight phoenix can move through a 
space as narrow as 1 inch wide without squeezing. A creature 
that touches the phoenix or hits it with a melee attack while 
within 5 feet of it takes 9 (2d8) lightning damage. In addition, 
the arclight phoenix can enter a hostile creature's space and 
stop there. The first time it enters a creature's space on a turn, 
that creature takes 9 (2d8) lightning damage. 


Crackling Death. When the arclight phoenix dies, it explodes. 
Each creature within 30 feet of it must make a DC 18 Dexterity 
saving throw, taking 36 (8d8) lightning damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. The explo- 
sion destroys the phoenix but leaves behind a Tiny, warm egg 
with a mizzium shell. 

The egg contains the embryo of a new arclight phoenix. It 
hatches when it is in the area of a spell that deals lightning 
damage, or if a creature touches the egg and expends spell 
slots whose combined levels equal 13 or more. When it 
hatches, the egg releases a new arclight phoenix that appears 
in the egg's space. 


ACTIONS 


Arclight Touch. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 27 (6d8) lightning damage, and lightning 
jumps from the target to one creature of the phoenix's choice 
that it can see within 30 feet of the target. That second creature 
must succeed on a DC 18 Dexterity saving throw or take 27 
(6d8) lightning damage. 


CONCLAVE DRYAD 


The lush forests that once grew on Ravnica are gone, 
but the dryads remain, striving to bring the sprawling 
city and the verdant green of nature into harmony. 
Dryads believe that their efforts are the will of Mat’Sele- 
snya, the soul of the world, and they spread their teach- 
ings through every Selesnya enclave. 

Thanks to their attunement to Mat’Selesnya, dryads 
serve as visionaries and spiritual intermediaries for the 
Selesnya Conclave. They hold positions of great respect 
as spiritual leaders, and also share their vision of har- 
monious construction as architects, working with stone- 
masons and woodshapers to create Selesnya enclaves. 

Summoned Mount. When leading its guild into battle, 
a dryad rides a magically summoned creature woven of 
living branches, vines, and grasses and imbued with a 
fey spirit. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The dryad makes three attacks, using its vine 


wm — staff, its longbow, or both. 
Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 143 (22d8 + 44) 


CONCLAVE DRYAD 
Medium fey, lawful good 


Vine Staff. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 


Speed 30 ft. target. Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a 
—— — creature, it must succeed on a DC 17 Dexterity saving throw or 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA become restrained by twisting vines for 1 minute. A target re- 


12 (+1) 19 (+4) 14 (+2) 19 (+4) 20 (+5) 21 (+5) strained in this way can use an action to make a DC 17 Strength 
c= (Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check, ending the effect on 
Saving Throws Int +8, Wis +9, Cha +9 itself on a success. 

Skills Arcana +8, Nature +8, Perception +9 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 19 
Languages Common, Elvish, Sylvan 
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, range 150/600 ft., 
one target. Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) piercing damage. 


Summon Mount (1/Day). The dryad magically summons a 
mount, which appears in an unoccupied space within 60 feet of 
the dryad. The mount remains for 8 hours, until it or the dryad 


Innate Spellcasting. The dryad’s innate spellcasting ability is 


Charisma (spell save DC 17). The dryad can innately cast the 
following spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: druidcraft 
3/day each: dispel magic, entangle, plant growth, spike growth 
1/day each: moonbeam, grasping vine, wall of thorns 


Magic Resistance. The dryad has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Speak with Beasts and Plants. The dryad can communi- 
cate with beasts and plants as if they and the dryad shared 
a language. 


dies, or until the dryad dismisses it as an action. The mount 
uses the stat block of an elk (see the Monster Manual) with 
these changes: it is a plant instead of a beast, it has an Intel- 
ligence of 6, and it understands Sylvan but can’t speak. While 
within 1 mile of the mount, the dryad can communicate with it 
telepathically. 


Suppress Magic (Recharge 5-6). The dryad targets one magic 
item it can see within 120 feet of it. If the magic item isn't an 
artifact, its magical properties are suppressed for 10 minutes, 
until the dryad is incapacitated or dies, or until the dryad uses 
a bonus action to end the effect. 


CSSS 


DEMONS 


Just as angels are incarnations of the ideals of justice, 
demons embody depraved impulses: selfishness, cruelty, 
hatred, greed, and lust for power. Demons are strongly 
associated with the Cult of Rakdos; in fact, the demons 
of Ravnica might have been created by Rakdos in the 
same way that angels were created by the Boros Le- 
gion’s founder. As a demon lord who has chosen to live 
in Ravnica, Rakdos claims authority over all the demons 
of this world—even if some of them, ambitious and head- 
strong as demons are, rebel against his authority. 

Demons are agents of destruction that work their acts 
of terror in plain sight under the auspices of the Cult of 
Rakdos. They exhibit their cruelty in dramatic perfor- 
mances that leave the audience members blood-soaked 
but ecstatic. They incite mob riots that raze entire city 
blocks. The only thing demons fear is Rakdos himself, 
who doesn't tolerate rivals and hates to be upstaged. 

Demonic “Devils.” The creatures called “devils” in 
Ravnica are minor demons akin to quasits. While the 
larger demons embody evil qualities such as blood lust 
and torment, these lesser demons reflect the whimsical 
and chaotic side of Rakdos and his cult. Their mischie- 
vous antics cause disorder and destruction out of pro- 
portion to the demons’ small size. 

Diabolic Demons. Many of the demons of Ravnica are 
monstrous, winged creatures of human-like form. They 
are best represented by the statistics of the nalfeshnee, 
the shadow demon, or the vrock in the Monster Manual. 
Demons associated with the Cult of Rakdos often have 
fiery attacks that make them similar to barbed devils or 
horned devils, except that they are demons. (They are 
chaotic evil, they speak Abyssal and not Infernal, and 
they lack Devil's Sight.) 


CACKLER 


Cacklers are small, jabbering jesters that spice up 
Rakdos performances with their chaotic antics. Their 
incessant cackling can inspire uncontrollable laughter 
by making everything—even the most horrifying spec- 
tacles—seem hilarious. Some cacklers excel at vocal 
mimicry and perform as impressionists; others put their 
sadistic bent to use by lurking in shadows and terrifying 
passersby. Rakdos performers enjoy dressing cacklers 
in a variety of masks, hats, and costumes to lampoon 
public figures. 


CACKLER 


Small fiend (demon), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 10 (3d6) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
9(-1)  16(3) n(0) (0) 7(2) 127) 
——eeeee————————————————— 
Skills Deception +3, Perception +0, Performance +3 
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, piercing, 
and slashing from nonmagical attacks 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities poisoned 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Abyssal, Common 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 
C—C 
Innate Spellcasting. The cackler's innate spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 11, +3 to hit with spell attacks). The 
cackler can innately cast the following spells, requiring no ma- 
terial components: 


At will: fire bolt 
1/day: Tasha's hideous laughter 


Last Laugh. When the cackler dies, it releases a dying laugh 
that scars the minds of other nearby creatures. Each creature 
within 10 feet of the cackler must succeed on a DC 11 Wisdom 
saving throw or take 2 (1d4) psychic damage. 


Mimicry. The cackler can mimic any sounds it has heard, in- 
cluding voices. A creature that hears the sounds can tell they 
are imitations with a successful DC 11 Wisdom (Insight) check. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage. 


Spiked Chain. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) slashing damage. 
a Hu ————— E 


CHAPTER £ FRIENDS AND FOES [95 


MASTER OF CRUELTIES 


When a master of cruelties steps up as ringleader of a 
Rakdos show, the audience can be assured of a perfor- 
mance they will remember for the rest of their lives— 
however brief that might be. 

The mesmerizing presence of a master of cruelties 
draws every eye to the demon and commands an audi- 
ence's full attention. With every act of depraved torment 
the demon performs, onlookers are drawn more and 
more into the blood lust. Audiences clamor for more vio- 
lence, and those who get too caught up in the revelry feel 
compelled to partake in the indiscriminate killing. 


MASTER OF CRUELTIES 


Large fiend (demon), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 18 (plate) 
Hit Points 127 (15d10 + 45) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4)  17(*3) 16(«43) 19(+4) = 16 (+3) 21(5) 


Saving Throws Con +7, Int +8, Wis +7, Cha +9 

Skills Deception +9, Intimidation +9, Performance +9, 
Persuasion +9 

Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, piercing, 
and slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 13 

Languages Abyssal, Common, telepathy 120 ft. 

Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 

rr 

Aura of Blood Lust. When any other creature starts its turn 

within 30 feet of the master, that creature must succeed ona 

DC 17 Wisdom saving throw, or it must immediately take the 

Attack action, making one melee attack against a random crea- 

ture within reach. If no creatures are within reach, it makes a 

ranged attack against a random creature within range, throwing 

its weapon if necessary. 


Feed on the Crowd. Whenever a creature within 60 feet of the 
master dies, the master gains 15 temporary hit points and has 
advantage on all attack rolls, ability checks, and saving throws 
until the end of its next turn. 


Innate Spellcasting. The master’s innate spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 17). The master can innately cast the 
following spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: charm person (as a 3rd-level spell), crown of madness 
1/day: dominate person 


\ Magic Resistance. The master has advantage on saving throws 


against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The master makes two melee attacks with 
its spear. 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage, 
or 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage if used with two hands to make 
a melee attack, plus 13 (3d8) psychic damage. 


Captivating Presence (Recharge 6). Each creature within 120 
feet of the master must succeed on a DC 17 Wisdom saving 
throw or be charmed by the master for 1 hour. While charmed 
in this way, a creature's speed is 0. If the charmed creature 
takes damage, it can repeat the saving throw, ending the effect 
on itself on a success. A target that succeeds on the saving 
throw is immune to the Captivating Presence of all masters of 
cruelties for the next 24 hours. 


— SIRE OF INSANITY 


w! Huge fiend (demon), chaotic evil 


B Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 14 


Í Aura of Mind Erosion. Any creature that starts its turn within 30 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 157 (15d12 + 60) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
23 (+6)  6(-2  19(«4 (42) 19(«4 22 (+6) 
Saving Throws Con +8, Int +6, Wis +8, Cha +10 
Skills Deception +10, Intimidation +10 
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, piercing, 
and slashing from nonmagical attacks 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities poisoned 


Languages Abyssal, Common, telepathy 120 ft. 
Challenge 12 (8,400 XP) 


Se == — 


feet of the sire must make a DC 18 Wisdom saving throw. On a 
successful save, the creature is immune to this aura for the next 
24 hours. On a failed save, the creature has disadvantage for 1 
minute on Wisdom and Charisma checks and on Wisdom and 
Charisma saves. 

At the start of each of its turns, the sire can suppress this 
aura until the start of its next turn. 


Innate Spellcasting. The sire's innate spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 18, +10 to hit with spell attacks). The 
sire can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material 
components: 


SIRE OF INSANITY 


At will: clairvoyance, crown of madness, major image, suggestion 
1/day each: confusion, mass suggestion Rakdos nightclubs, where visitors can indulge any dark 
desire and revel in sadistic spectacle, are the favored 
haunts of the demons known as sires of insanity. Lurk- 
ing in an underground vault beneath a Rakdos opera- 
tion, a sire of insanity feasts on the violence, torment, 
and depravity unfolding above. Occasionally, cultists 
bring would-be recruits to the demon's presence, and— 
true to its name—the sire of insanity breaks the new 
cultist's mind. 

A sire of insanity is a bloated demon resembling a 
bipedal lizard. It stands some thirty feet tall and weighs 


Magic Resistance. The sire has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The sire makes two attacks: one with its bite and 
one with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one crea- 
ture. Hit: 25 (3d12 6) piercing damage plus 16 (3d10) psy- 
chic damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 10 (1d8 6) slashing damage plus 9 (2d8) psychic damage. 
ELLE 


many thousands of pounds, so it tends to keep hidden 
away in its subterranean lair, working its evil from 
the shadows. 


DEVKARIN LICH 


Powerful spellcasters of the Devkarin elves, steeped in 
Golgari magic, can transcend death to become liches. , 
For them, life and death don't merely chase each other X. 
in an inevitable cycle; the two can intersect, and at that 
nexus the liches find immense power, which commands 
the awe, envy, and fear of other Golgari. 

Unlike the shambling zombies they command, liches £ g 
retain their memories, their personalities, and espe- l 
cially their ambition. They also retain the grace and 
stature of living elves, but their bodies are in a constant 
state of slow decay. Various forms of fungus grow in 
and over the rotting flesh to hold the body together. 

Undead Nature. The lich doesn’t require air, 
food, drink, or sleep. 


ege, 


STORREV 
Storrev is a lich and a leader of the Erstwhile. She is adept 
at the politics of court, and she is feared for her power to 
transform dead monsters, from ordinary beetles to the 
mightiest wurms, into fierce undead horrors. Such crea- 
tures accompany her into battle. 


2nd level (3 slots): Melf's acid arrow, ray of enfeeblement, spider 
climb, web 

3rd level (3 slots): animate dead, bestow curse, fear, vam- 
piric touch 

Ath level (3 slots): blight, Evard's black tentacles 

5th level (2 slots): cloudkill, insect plague 

6th level (1 slot): circle of death, create undead 


7th level (1 slot): finger of death m 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA E 
11 (+0)  16(433) 314(432  19(«4) 16(+3) 15 (+2) Turn Resistance. The lich has advantage on saving throws 


against any effect that turns undead. 


DEVKARIN LICH 


Medium undead, neutral evil 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 97 (15d8 + 30) 
Speed 30 ft. 


Saving Throws Con +7, Int +9, Wis +8 

Skills Arcana +14, Insight +8, Perception +8 

Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 


Undead Fortitude. If damage reduces the lich to 0 hit points, 

it must make a Constitution saving throw with a DC of 5 + the 
damage taken, unless the damage is radiant or from a critical 
hit. On a success, the lich drops to 1 hit point instead. 


paralyzed, poisoned ACTIONS 
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 18 Noxious Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
Languages Common, Elvish, Kraul creature. Hit: 14 (4d6) poison damage, and the target must 
Challenge 14 (11,500 XP) succeed on a DC 17 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned 
— MM for 1 minute. The poisoned target can repeat the saving throw 
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the lich fails a saving throw, it at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on 
can choose to succeed instead. a success. 
Regeneration. The lich regains 10 hit points at the start of its LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


turn. If the lich takes fire or radiant damage, this trait doesn’t 
function at the start of the lich’s next turn. The lich dies only if 
it starts its turn with 0 hit points and doesn’t regenerate. 


The lich can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op- 
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at 
a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The lich 
Spellcasting. The lich is a 14th-level Golgari spellcaster. regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 

Its spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 17, +9 
to hit with spell attacks). The lich has the following wizard 
spells prepared: 


Cantrip. The lich casts one of its cantrips. 
Noxious Touch (Costs 2 Actions). The lich uses Noxious Touch. 
Disrupt Life (Costs 3 Actions). Each creature within 30 feet of 


Cantrips (at will): acid splash, chill touch, mage hand, poison the lich must make a DC 17 Constitution saving throw, taking 
spray, prestidigitation 21 (6d6) necrotic damage on a failed save, or half as much 
Ist level (4 slots): chromatic orb, magic missile, ray of sickness damage on a successful one. 


CHAPTER 6 FRIENDS AND FOES 


FELIDAR 


A felidar is a celestial creature whose nature 
reflects an inherent devotion to law and order. It ` 
resembles an enormous cat with two pairs of down- 
ward-sloping horns and prominent teeth. Its blue-gray 
hide has a silvery, geometric pattern, and its thick white 
mane falls in an orderly fashion around its shoulders. 
Nearly every felidar forms a close bond with one other 
creature. Winged felidars almost always bond with 
archons, joining in their relentless pursuit of justice. 
Other felidars ally with members of the Azorius Senate 
and form bonds with high-ranking justiciars and min- 
isters, aiding them in enforcing the law and tracking 
down criminals. Some Azorius felidars form bonds 
with important prisoners in Azorius custody, ensuring 
that the felidars can track down the felons if they es- 
cape custody. 


WINGED FELIDARS 

Some felidars boast huge, feathered wings. A winged fel- 
idar uses the same stat block as an ordinary felidar, with 
the addition of a flying speed of 40 feet. 


FELIDAR 


Large celestial, lawful neutral 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 93 (11d10 + 33) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4) 16 (+3) 17(3) 10 (+0) 17(3) 14 (+2) 


Saving Throws Dex +6, Wis +6, Cha +5 

Skills Insight +6, Perception +6 

Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 16 

Languages understands Celestial and Common but can’t speak 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Bonding. The felidar can magically bond with one creature it 
can see, right after spending at least 1 hour observing that 
creature while within 30 feet of it. The bond lasts until the feli- 
dar bonds with a different creature or until the bonded creature 
dies. This bond has the following effects: 


+ The felidar and the bonded creature can communicate tele- 
pathically with each other at a distance of up to 100 feet. 


+ The felidar can sense the direction and distance to the 
bonded creature if they're on the same plane of existence. 

+ As an action, the felidar or the bonded creature can sense 
what the other sees and hears, during which time it loses its 
own sight and hearing. This effect lasts until the start of its 
next turn. 


Keen Hearing and Sight. The felidar has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or sight. 


Pounce. If the felidar moves at least 20 feet straight toward a 
creature and hits it with a claw attack on the same turn, that 
target must succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or be 
knocked prone. If the target is prone, the felidar can make one 
claw attack against it as a bonus action. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The felidar makes two attacks: one with its bite 
and one with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (3d8 + 4) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 14 (3d6 + 4) slashing damage. 


CILLL——————————— RU ——————————M— SSSI 


GIANTS 


Giants use their tremendous size and strength to ad- 
vance the cause of no less than four guilds. In the Boros 
Legion and the Orzhov Syndicate, they are cunning 
soldiers. The giants of the Cult of Rakdos and the Gruul 
Clans are no less effective but lack discipline. 


BLOODFRAY GIANT 


Giants in the Cult of Rakdos act as enforcers, bouncers, 
and sometimes even pillars, holding the mobile plat- 
forms that serve as stages for Rakdos performances. 
Like other members of the cult, giants thrill to the vio- 
lence of those shows. Though they can seem entranced 
by the horror unfolding on the stage, they react quickly 
and brutally to any interruption of the performance. 


GUARDIAN GIANT 


Most of the giants in the Boros Legion come from a sin- 
gle clan, the Skorskal, that has long been at odds with 
the Gruul Clans. These giants are guards and gatekeep- 
ers, well represented in the Sunhome Guard, as well as 
powerful muscle supporting Boros missions. 

Giants of the Skorskal clan are often assigned to 
protect Boros garrisons and forts throughout Ravnica. 
They are excellent sentinels, keen-eyed and vigilant, and 
serve as living walls to protect smaller soldiers fighting 
alongside them. Skorskal giants look much like enor- 
mous humans with huge muscles and comparatively 
small heads. 


BLOODFRAY GIANT 


Huge giant, chaotic evil 


i = — — " 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 103 (9d12 + 45) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
23(66)  9(-3) 2045) 72) 81)  9(1) 


Saving Throws Str +9, Con +8, Wis +2 
Skills Athletics +9, Perception +2 
Senses passive Perception 12 
Languages Giant 
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 
ACTIONS 

Chain. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 20 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 16 (3d6 + 6) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a 
creature, it is grappled (escape DC 17). Until the grapple ends, 
the target is restrained, and the giant can’t use this attack on 
anyone else. 


Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, range 60/240 ft., one 
target. Hit: 16 (3d6 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 


REACTIONS 


Furious Defense. After a creature the giant can see is dealt dam- 
age by a foe within 20 feet of the giant, the giant makes a chain 
attack against that foe. 


(aar eee eed 


ORZHOV GIANT 


A few giants join the ranks of the Orzhov Syndicate and 
serve as guards, executioners, and thugs—the muscle 
of the guild. The presence of Orzhov giants in markets 
and streets serves as an effective reminder for business 
owners to keep their payments up to date. 


SUNDER SHAMAN 


Gruul sunder shamans are angry giants that channel 
their rage into brutal attacks that deal overwhelming 
damage to foes and structures alike. 

These shamans sometimes lead hill giants and stone 
giants that also live among the Gruul Clans. They are 
occasionally joined by cyclopes, ettins, fomorians, and 
ogres. Like the rest of the Gruul, they hate the urban 
development that encroaches on the wilds where they 
once lived—not least because they have so much diffi- 
culty fitting inside the small structures. They delight in 
destroying such edifices, and in the heat of their rage, 
they walk through buildings, trample people underfoot, 
and generally cause as much chaos as possible. They of- 
ten armor themselves with pieces of buildings and wield 
columns or other architectural elements as clubs. 


GUARDIAN GIANT 


Huge giant, lawful neutral 


Armor Class 19 (half plate, shield) 
Hit Points 137 (11d12 + 66) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
24 (47) 17 (+3) 22(46) 10(+0) 18(+4) 12(4) 
Saving Throws Dex +6, Wis +7 
Skills Insight +7, Perception +10 
Senses passive Perception 20 
Languages Common, Giant 
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


Vigilant. The giant can’t be surprised. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The giant makes three spear attacks. 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft. 
or range 60/240 ft., one target. Hit: 17 (3d6 + 7) piercing dam- 
age, or 20 (3d8 + 7) piercing damage if used with two hands to 
make a melee attack. 


REACTIONS 


Protection. When an attacker the giant can see makes an attack 
roll against a creature within 10 feet of the giant, the giant can 
impose disadvantage on the attack roll. 


thats 
"7 ORZHOV GIANT 


B Large giant, lawful evil 
Armor Class 18 (plate) 
Hit Points 84 (8410 + 40) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12 (#1) 13(3)  8(-1 


23 (+6) 13 (+1) 21 (+5) 


Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +8, Wis +4 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages Common, Giant 
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 
Focus. As a bonus action, the giant can target a creature it can 
see within 30 feet of it and make that creature its focus. The 
target remains the giant's focus for 1 minute, or until either the 
target or the giant drops to 0 hit points. 

When the giant makes an attack roll against its focus, it adds 
a d4 to its attack roll. If the giant attacks a different target while 
it has a focus, it subtracts a d4 from its attack roll. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The giant makes two greataxe attacks. 


Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: «9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 25 (3412 + 6) slashing damage. If the Orzhov giant 
scores a critical hit, it rolls the damage dice three times, in- 
stead of twice. 


Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, range 60/240 ft., one 
target. Hit: 28 (4d10 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 
SSeS ETE IAM Y € — À—À 


SUNDER SHAMAN 
Huge giant, chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 20 (stone armor) 
Hit Points 138 (12d12 + 60) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
23 (+6) 10 (+0) 12(+1) 9(-1 


15 (+2) 21 (+5) 
Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +9, Wis +5 

Skills Athletics +10, Perception +5 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15 
Languages Giant 

Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) 


Reckless. At the start of its turn, the giant can gain advantage 
on all melee weapon attack rolls it makes during that turn, 
but attack rolls against it have advantage until the start of its 
next turn. 


Siege Monster. The giant deals double damage to objects and 
structures. 


Stone Camouflage. The giant has advantage on Dexterity 
(Stealth) checks made to hide in rocky terrain. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The giant makes two slam attacks. The first of 
those attacks that hits deals an extra 18 (4d8) damage if the 
giant has taken damage since its last turn. 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
Hit: 24 (4d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 


Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, range 60/240 ft., one 
target. Hit: 28 (4d10 + 6) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a 
creature, it must succeed on a DC 18 Strength saving throw or 
be knocked prone. 


eee SSS eee 


HORRORS 


Terrifying evils stalk, fly, and scuttle in the dark corners 


of Ravnica, from the depths of the undercity to the black- 


est parts of the night sky. Collectively, these creatures 
are called horrors—a variety of things that lurk in the 
dark and embody the deepest fears of Ravnica’s people. 
All are evil creatures with dim reason and preternatu- 
ral cunning. 

At least three guilds have been known to compel 
horrors into service. For House Dimir, horrors spread 
fear and despair in the citizenry and carry out assassi- 
nations or kidnappings against well-protected targets. 
For the Cult of Rakdos, horrors are simply one more 
weapon in an arsenal of terrifying and shock-inspiring 
creatures that might appear on stage. For the Golgari 
Swarm, horrors scavenge the sewers and protect the 
guild's territory. 

House Dimir uses all three base kinds of horrors. The 
Cult of Rakdos prefers shadow horrors, and the Golgari 
Swarm uses skittering horrors. 


HORRORS AND MADNESS 
Horrors on Ravnica are terror and madness personified. 
You can represent this reality by using the madness 
rules in the Dungeon Master's Guide. 

Whenever a character fails a saving throw against the 
flying horror's Frightening Screech, the shadow hor- 
ror's claw attack, or the skittering horror's Maddening 
Presence, note that fact. At the end of the encounter, 
have each character who failed at least one of those 
saving throws make a DC 13 Wisdom saving throw. On 
a successful save, nothing happens. On a failed save, a 
character gains a form of madness from the Dungeon 
Master's Guide, with the severity depending on how 
many of the saving throws that character failed during 
the encounter, as shown on the Madness Severity table. 


MADNESS SEVERITY 


Failed Saves Madness 
1 Short-term 
2-3 Long-term 

44 Indefinite 


FLYING HORROR 


Medium aberration, neutral evil 


Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 49 (9d8 9) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
9(-1)  20(5) 12) 2(-4 15(+2) 16 (+3) 


Skills Perception +4, Stealth +7 

Damage Vulnerabilities radiant 

Condition Immunities frightened 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 14 

Languages — 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 

EE — ——— — — — — — — — — — ——————— 
Fear Frenzy. The horror has advantage on attack rolls against 
frightened creatures. 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the horror has disadvan- 
tage on attack rolls and on Wisdom (Perception) checks that 
rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (1d6 + 5) slashing damage plus 14 (4d6) psychic damage. 


Frightening Screech (Recharge 5-6). The horror screeches. 

Each creature within 30 feet of it that can hear it must succeed 

ona DC 13 Wisdom saving throw or be frightened of it for 1 

minute. The frightened creature can repeat the saving throw 

at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a 

success. If a creature's saving throw is successful or the effect 

ends for it, the creature is immune to the horror's Frightening 

Screech for the next 24 hours. 
CLA ae 


CUSTOMIZING A HORROR 


Horrors share some common body types but vary wildly 
in other characteristics. A particular horror’s form 
might incorporate elements that resemble fiendish, 
insectile, or reptilian features. To customize a horror, 
choose a base creature (flying horror, shadow horror, 

or skittering horror), then roll once on the Primary Fea- 
tures table and once on the Secondary Features table 
(or choose an option from each table). Add those fea- 
tures to the base creature. 


PRIMARY FEATURES 


d4 Feature 

1 Avoidance. |f the horror is subjected to an effect that al- 
lows it to make a saving throw to take only half damage, 
it instead takes no damage if it succeeds on the saving 
throw, and only half damage if it fails. 

2 Damage Resistances. The horror has resistance to ne- 
crotic and psychic damage. 

3 Innate Spellcasting. The horror's innate spellcasting 
ability is Charisma (spell save DC 13 for flying horror, 
DC 16 for shadow horror, and DC 17 for skittering hor- 
ror). It can innately cast the following spells, requiring 
no material components: 


3/day: darkness 
1/day each: fear (shadow horror and skittering horror 
only), phantasmal killer (skittering horror only) 
4 Psychic Rebuke. When the horror takes damage from 
a melee attack, it can use its reaction to emit psychic 
energy within a 5-foot radius. Each creature in that area 
takes 3 (1d6) psychic damage (flying horror), 7 (2d6) 
psychic damage (shadow horror), or 10 (3d6) psychic 
damage (skittering horror). 


T 1 COMER 
^ 4 E 
LI 4 J j 


SECONDARY FEATURES 


d4 Feature 
1 


Grasping Tendrils. The horror has four tendrils. Each 
tendril can be attacked (AC 12, 10 hit points). Destroy- 
ing one deals no damage to the horror. 

As a bonus action, the horror can target one creature 
it can see within 10 feet of it. The target must succeed 
on a Dexterity saving throw or be grappled by the hor- 
ror. The DC of the saving throw and the DC to escape 
the grapple are the same: 9 for the flying horror, 13 for 
the shadow horror, and 19 for the skittering horror. Until 
the grapple ends, the horror can't use the same tendril 
to grapple another target. 

Indomitable Mind. The horror is immune to the 
charmed condition. 

Keen Senses. The horror has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight, sound, or smell. 
Mind Sight. Magical darkness doesn't impede the hor- 
ror's darkvision. 


no 


"ME SHADOW HORROR 


Large aberration, neutral evil 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 120 (16d10 32) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12 (+1) 16(3) 1(42) 2(4) V(3) 18 (+4) 

C_v 
Skills Perception +7, Stealth +11 
Damage Vulnerabilities radiant 
Condition Immunities frightened 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 17 
Languages — 
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 
—— ÍÍI] IF LE 
TW Incorporeal Movement. The horror can move through other 
A creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It takes 5 
(1d10) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object. 


Shadow Stealth. While in dim light or darkness, the horror can 
take the Hide action as a bonus action. 


Shadow Stride. As a bonus action, the horror can step into a 
shadow within 5 feet of it and magically appear in an unoccu- 
pied space within 5 feet of a second shadow that is up to 60 
feet away. Both shadows must be cast by a Small or larger crea- 
ture or object. 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the horror has disadvan- 
tage on attack rolls and on Wisdom (Perception) checks that 
rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The horror makes three attacks: one with its bite 
and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 
21 (4d8 + 3) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (3d6 + 3) slashing damage, and the target must succeed 
on a DC 16 Wisdom saving throw or be frightened of the horror 
until the end of the target’s next turn. 


Lashing Shadows (Recharge 5-6). Each creature within 60 feet 
of the horror, except other horrors, must succeed on a DC 16 
Dexterity saving throw or take 27 (6d8) necrotic damage. 

(e ee ee LIII DER 


SKITTERING HORROR 


Huge aberration, neutral evil 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 228 (24d12 + 72) 
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft. 


INT 
2 (-4) 


WIS 
14 (+2) 


CHA 
18 (+4) 


STR 
22 (+6) 


DEX 
16 (+3) 


CON 
17 (+3) 


Skills Perception +7, Stealth +8 

Damage Vulnerabilities radiant 

Condition Immunities frightened 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 17 

Languages — 

Challenge 15 (13,000 XP) 
C 
Spider Climb. The horror can climb difficult surfaces, includ- 
ing upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 
ability check. 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the horror has disadvan- 
tage on attack rolls and on Wisdom (Perception) checks that 
rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The horror can use its Maddening Presence and 
make three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 28 (4d10 + 6) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 24 (4d8 + 6) slashing damage. 


Maddening Presence. The horror targets one creature it can 

see within 30 feet of it. If the target can see or hear the horror, 

the target must make a DC 17 Wisdom saving throw. Ona 

failed saving throw, the target becomes paralyzed until the end 

of its next turn. Ifa creature’s saving throw is successful, the 

creature is immune to the horror's Maddening Presence for the 

next 24 hours. 
a | 


INDENTURED SPIRIT 


Those who die with unpaid debts to the Orzhov Syndi- 
cate don’t get a reprieve. Instead, their spirits serve the 
syndicate until they have worked off their obligation. 
Sometimes that means existing as an indentured spirit 
for years or even millennia. 

An indentured spirit is an incorporeal being draped 
in ghostly black robes and a hood that hides whatever 
face it might have. Chains are hung around its chest and 
arms as a perpetual marker of its servitude. 


lll a le 
OrZHOV SPIRITS 


For the members of the Orzhov Syndicate, life as a spirit 
after death can be a gift, or it can mean everlasting servi- 
tude. The process of separating the soul from the body is 
often willingly undergone by the heads of the oldest and 
most respected families of the Orzhov oligarchy, resulting 
in pampered spirits that think they can spend the rest 

of eternity enjoying the spoils of their decadence. These 
spirits begin their undead existence as ghosts and use the 
ghost stat block in the Monster Manual. Over time, how- 
ever, they tend to shed the nuances of their personalities 
and become caricatures of their living selves, often turning 
into specters, as described in the Monster Manual. 


NN a a 


A. 


INDENTURED SPIRIT 


Medium undead, any alignment 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 13 (3d8) 
Speed 0 ft., fly 40 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
7(-2) 13(3) 10(«0 10(+0) 12(41) 11 (40) 


Damage Resistances acid, fire, lightning, thunder; bludgeoning, 
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Damage Immunities cold, necrotic, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
grappled, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained 

Senses passive Perception 11 

Languages the languages it knew in life 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Incorporeal Movement. The spirit can move through other 
creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It takes 5 
(1d10) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object. 


ACTIONS 


Withering Touch. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 10 (3d6) necrotic damage. 
= M— 


BLISTERCOIL WEIRD 


Medium elemental, chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 45 (7d8 + 14) 
Speed 40 ft., swim 60 ft. 

STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
16 (+3) 16(+3) 15 (+2)  5(-3) 10(+0) 7 (-2) 
Damage Resistances cold, fire; bludgeoning, piercing, and 

slashing from nonmagical attacks 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed, 
petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained, unconscious 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Draconic 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 
Feed on Fire. If the weird takes fire damage from a spell or 
other magical effect, its size increases by one category. If there 
isn't enough room for the weird to increase in size, it attains 
the maximum size possible in the space available. While the 
weird is Large or bigger, it makes Strength checks and saving 
throws with advantage. 
If the weird starts its turn at Gargantuan size, the weird re- 
leases energy in an explosion. Each creature within 30 feet of 


CLÁ———————————————————————— SSS 


IzzET WEIRDS 


Weirds are the products of Izzet League experiments 
intended to combine two opposing elemental types in 
the hope of creating elementals that were more stable 
than the norm and easier to control. As commonly 
happens with Izzet experiments, the outcome was the 
exact opposite. Weirds are even wilder and more unpre- 
dictable than elementals of either of their component 
elements. Nevertheless, they can make potent guardian 
creatures and can be urged into fighting on behalf of 
their creators. 

Elemental Nature. An Izzet weird doesn't require air, 
food, drink, or sleep. 


| BLISTERCOIL WEIRD 


A blistercoil weird is an anthropomorphic brute formed 
from water and molten rock. It absorbs energy from 
magical fire, causing its oozelike body to increase in 
size. During one disastrous experiment, Izzet research- 
ers observed a blistercoil weird expanding to fill a six- 
story workshop before it released all its excess energy in 
an enormous explosion and returned to its original size. 


the weird must make a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw, taking 28 
(8d6) fire damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on 
a successful one. The explosion ignites flammable objects in 
the area that aren't being worn or carried. The weird's size then 
becomes Medium. 


Form of Fire and Water. The weird can move through a space 
as narrow as 1 inch wide without squeezing. In addition, the 
weird can enter a hostile creature's space and stop there. The 
first time the weird enters another creature's space on a turn, 
that creature takes 5 (1d10) fire damage and catches fire; until 
someone takes an action to douse the fire, the burning creature 
takes 5 (1d10) fire damage at the start of each of its turns. 


Heated Body. A creature that touches the weird or hits it 
with a melee attack while within 5 feet of it takes 5 (1d10) 
fire damage. 


Illumination. The weird sheds bright light in a 30-foot radius 
and dim light for an additional 30 feet. 


ACTIONS 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) bludgeoning damage plus 7 (2d6) fire damage, 
or 11 (2d8 + 3) bludgeoning damage plus 14 (4d6) fire damage 
if the weird is Large or bigger. 


FLUXCHARGER 


In an effort to create a weird that could be more easily 


controlled, Izzet mages tried binding elemental light- 


ning, fire, and smoke into a framework made of the mag- 


ical alloy mizzium. The experiment was partly success- 
ful: the resulting weird, a fluxcharger, doesn't explode 
like some other weirds do, but it is more intelligent and 
more headstrong than other weirds. 

A fluxcharger’s mizzium frame is suggestive of an an- 
gel. A faceplate is meant to give it some personality, but 
most people find its solemn expression and unblinking 
stare more unnerving than relatable. 


FLUXCHARGER 


Large elemental, chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 60 (8d10 + 16) 
Speed 0 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR 
15 (+2) 


DEX 
18 (+4) 


CON INT 
15 (+2) 6 (-2) 


WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 7 (-2) 


Damage Resistances thunder; bludgeoning, piercing, and | 
slashing from nonmagical attacks 


& i Damage Immunities lightning, poison 


Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed, 
petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained, unconscious 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages Draconic 

Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


Amplify Lightning. Whenever a spell that deals lightning dam- 
age includes one or more fluxchargers in its area, the spell 
deals an extra 9 (2d8) lightning damage. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The fluxcharger makes two slam attacks or uses 
Arc Lightning twice. 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage plus 10 (3d6) 
fire damage. 


Arc Lightning. Ranged Spell Attack: +7 to hit, range 30 ft., one 
target. Hit: 16 (3d10) lightning damage, and lightning jumps 
from the target to one creature of the fluxcharger's choice that 
it can see within 30 feet of the target. That second creature 
must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or take 13 
(3d8) lightning damage. Hit or Miss: The fluxcharger takes 5 
(1d10) force damage after resolving the attack. 


_GALVANICE WEIRD 


Medium elemental, chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 22 (3d8 + 9) 


Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WS CHA 
142) 10(40 173) 3(-4 10(90) 5(3 


l LPIDBDLÍÓLLZ 

Damage Resistances cold, lightning; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed, 
petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained, unconscious 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages — 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 

rr 

Death Burst. When the galvanice weird dies, it explodes in a 

burst of ice and lightning. Each creature within 10 feet of the ex- 

ploding weird must make a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw, tak- 

ing 7 (2d6) lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much 

damage on a successful one. 


ACTIONS 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage plus 5 (2d4) lightning 
damage. If the target is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 13 
Constitution saving throw or lose the ability to use reactions 
until the start of the weird's next turn. 


GALVANICE WEIRD 


Galvanice weirds seem to be the epitome of weird 
technology. Indeed, they serve willingly, with cheerful 
stupidity, as guardians and laborers in Izzet workshops. 
They combine a rigid body of elemental ice with a core 
of lightning that animates them. If a galvanice weird 

is destroyed, the ice shatters and lightning crackles 
outward in a dangerous explosion. Still, most Izzet re- 
searchers find that their usefulness outweighs this risk. 


KRASIS 


In the deep sinkholes that serve as 
laboratories and guildhalls for the 
Simic Combine, biomancers employ 
a combination of magic and scientific 
method to create novel life forms. They coax new 
morphologies from existing creatures or combine 
traits from multiple organisms into one, producing the 
creatures known as krasis. Some krasis are unique 
creatures that can’t reproduce. A few multiply and be- 
come part of the guild’s standard menagerie. 


CREATING A KRASIS 


To create a krasis, choose the appropriate stat block: 
category 1 (Medium), category 2 (Large), or category 3 
(Huge). Then roll once on the Major Adaptations table 
and once on the Minor Adaptations table (or choose 

an option from each table) to determine its additional 
characteristics. The potency of some adaptations varies 
based on the category of the krasis, as indicated in the 
descriptions of those adaptations. 

Just a few examples of krasis are the battering kra- 
sis (a fusion of hammerhead shark and a powerfully 
built beast), the crocanura (a crocodile-frog), the 
drakewing krasis (a lizard-drake), the teratosuchus (a 
crocodile-crab), the shambleshark (a shark-crab), and 
the sharktocrab (an improved shambleshark that in- 
cludes octopus elements as well). 


Major ADAPTATIONS 


d8 Major Adaptation 

1 Acidic Skin. Any creature that touches the krasis or hits 
it with a melee attack while within 5 feet of it takes 2 
(1d4) acid damage (category 1), 4 (1d8) acid damage 
(category 2), or 6 (1d12) acid damage (category 3). 

2 Armored Hide. The krasis has better natural armor 
afforded by a shell or thick scales, increasing its Armor 
Class by 4. 


CATEGORY | KRASIS 


Medium monstrosity, unaligned 
Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 19 (3d8 + 6) 
Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 15 (+2) 14 (+2)  2(-4 13(41) 8(- 


Senses passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Amphibious. The krasis can breathe air and water. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The krasis makes two attacks: one with its bite 
and one with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 8 (1d10 + 3) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage. 


o a EE 


-—— 
athe" 


Major Adaptation 
Bioluminescent Markings. The krasis has glowing 
patterns on its skin that take the shape of defensive 
runes, granting it advantage on saving throws against 
spells and other magical effects. 

Flight. The krasis has wings and gains a flying speed 
equal to its walking speed. 

Grabber. When the krasis hits a creature with its claws, 
the target is grappled (escape DC 13 for category 1, 
DC 15 for category 2, and DC 19 for category 3) by a 
specialized grasping appendage on the krasis. It can 
have only one creature grappled in this way at a time. 
Hypnotic Display (Recharge 5-6). As an action, the — 

krasis creates mesmerizing colors and shapes around CATEGORY 2 KRASIS 
itself. Each creature within 15 feet of it that can see Large monstrosity, unaligned 

it must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw (DC 12 
for category 1, DC 14 for category 2, and DC 18 for 


SS I T 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 136 (16d10 + 48) 


category 3) or be stunned for 1 minute. The stunned Speed 40 ft. 

creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each 

of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. A STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
creature that succeeds on a saving throw against this 18 (+4) 14(+2) 16(3) 2(4 8B) 8(-1) 


effect becomes immune to the Hypnotic Display of all 


krasie for 24hours. Senses passive Perception 11 


Languages — 


Venomous Sting. When the krasis hits a creature with Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 

its claws, the creature must succeed on a Constitution 

saving throw (DC 12 for category 1, DC 14 for category Amphibious. The krasis can breathe air and water. 

2, and DC 18 for category 3) or be poisoned for 1 

minute. If the krasis is a category 2 or 3, the creature ACTIONS 

is paralyzed while poisoned in this way. The poisoned Multiattack. The krasis makes two attacks: one with its bite 
creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each and one with its claws. 

of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Regeneration. The krasis regains hit points (2 fora Hit: 17 (2d12 + 4) piercing damage. 

category 15 fora category, and 10 foracategory Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
3) at the start of each of its turns if it has at least 1 hit Hit: 17 (2d12 + 4) slashing damage. 

point. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


CATEGORY 3 KRASIS 


Huge monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 287 (25d12 + 125) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
23(46 12(+1) 2165) 2(4 Bu 8(-1) 


Senses passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 16 (15,000 XP) 


Amphibious. The krasis can breathe air and water. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The krasis makes three attacks: one with its bite, 
one with its claws, and one with its tail. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one crea- 
ture. Hit: 27 (6d6 6) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 22 (3d10 « 6) slashing damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
Hit: 33 (6d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a crea- 
ture, it must succeed on a DC 19 Strength saving throw or be 
knocked prone. 

SSS eee ÉL) 


MINOR ADAPTATIONS 


d8 
1 


Minor Adaptation 


Amorphous Structure. The krasis can move through a 
space as narrow as 1 inch wide without squeezing. 


Aquatic. The krasis gains a swimming speed equal to 
its walking speed. 

Climbing Speed. The krasis gains a climbing speed 
equal to its walking speed. 

Cryptic Skin. The krasis can change color to match its 
surroundings. It has advantage on Dexterity (Stealth) 
checks made to hide. 

Heightened Awareness. The krasis can't be surprised, 
as a result of having sensitive barbels like a catfish, 
stereoscopic vision like a chameleon, a tongue 

like a snake, eye stalks like a lobster, or an array of 
several eyes. 

Ink Cloud (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). While 
underwater, the krasis can use a bonus action to expel 
a cloud of ink and then move up to its speed. The ink 
cloud is stationary and fills a 20-foot-radius sphere 
centered on a point in the krasis's space before it 
moves. The sphere is heavily obscured until the ink dis- 
perses after 1 minute. A strong current also disperses 
the ink cloud. 

Leaping Legs. With or without a running start, the 
krasis's long jump is 20 feet (category 1), 30 feet 
(category 2), or 40 feet (category 3). Its high jump is 
10 feet (category 1), 20 feet (category 2), or 30 feet 
(category 3). 

Stabilizing Legs. The krasis has several crablike legs. 
As a result, it has advantage on Strength and Dex- 
terity saving throws made against effects that would 
knock it prone. 


KRAUL 


The kraul are an ascendant power group within the 
Golgari Swarm, long content to linger at the margins of 
the undercity but now increasingly making their buzz- 
ing voices heard in the subterranean Golgari guildhall. 
These six-legged, insectile beings are hard-headed and 
literal-minded, with little grasp of metaphor or nuance. 


KRAUL WARRIOR 


Kraul society is organized into well-defined roles and 
castes. The vast majority of the kraul occupy various 
tiers of soldiery, from commanders and elite troops 
down to the lowliest infantry. 


KRAUL DEATH PRIEST 


The death priests occupy the highest roles in kraul 
society. They lead the buzzing chants of the kraul rites. 
Their inscrutable clicks and buzzing can summon crip- 
pling necromantic magic, and the presence of death 
seems to fortify them. They draw power from the defeat 
of their enemies and channel it to their followers, ensur- 
ing the continuation of the cycle. 
The current leader of the kraul is a death priest 
named Mazirek. 
> ee 
WINGED KRAUL WARRIORS 
Some kraul warriors have a flying speed of 40 feet, as a re- 
sult of possessing gossamer wings. Their wings give them 
a higher station among the kraul soldiers. Winged kraul 
warriors serve the guild as scouts and shock troops. 
G Á——Ó———— 


————————EO—————————SSSEa E: | 


KRAUL WARRIOR 


Medium humanoid (kraul), neutral evil 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 27 (5d8 + 5) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
15 (42) 12) 13(41) 100 (dà) 8(1) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 

Languages Kraul, understands Common but can’t speak it 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 
C—C 

Hive Mind. The kraul is immune to the charmed and frightened 
conditions while within 30 feet of at least one other kraul. 


Pack Tactics. The kraul has advantage on an attack roll against 
a creature if at least one of the kraul’s allies is within 5 feet of 
the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated. 


Spider Climb. The kraul can climb difficult surfaces, includ- 
ing upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 
ability check. 


ACTIONS 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage, or 
6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a 
melee attack. 

CLM—— EE 


KRAUL Death PRIEST 


bem E n 


KRAUL DEATH PRIEST 


Medium humanoid (kraul), neutral evil 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 65 (10d8 + 20) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft., fly 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 12(+1) 14(+2) 12 (#1) 15(42) 10 (+0) 


Saving Throws Con +4, Wis +4 

Skills Insight +4, Nature +3, Religion +3 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 

Languages Common, Kraul 

Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 
RS 

Feed on Death. When a creature within 30 feet of the kraul 
drops to 0 hit points, the kraul or another creature of its choice 
within 30 feet of it gains 5 (1d10) temporary hit points, pro- 
vided the kraul isn’t incapacitated. 


Hive Mind. The kraul is immune to the charmed and frightened 
conditions while within 30 feet of at least one other kraul. 


Innate Spellcasting. The kraul's innate spellcasting ability is 
Wisdom (spell save DC 12, +4 to hit with spell attacks). The 
kraul can innately cast the following spells, requiring no mate- 
rial components: 


At will: chill touch, poison spray 
3/day each: ray of enfeeblement, ray of sickness 
1/day each: animate dead, blight, vampiric touch 


Pack Tactics. The kraul has advantage on an attack roll against 
a creature if at least one of the kraul's allies is within 5 feet of 
the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


Spider Climb. The kraul can climb difficult surfaces, includ- 
ing upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 
ability check. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The kraul makes one attack with its quarterstaff 
and casts one of its spells with a casting time of 1 action. 


Quarterstaff. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage, or 7 (1d8 + 3) 
bludgeoning damage if used with two hands. 


————————————_—E EES 


ae 
NIGHTVEIL SPECTER 


The Nightveil specters of Ravnica are hooded, undead 
guardians that ride flying creatures called gloamwings. 
They are fearsome agents of House Dimir, protecting 
the territory and interests of that guild—particularly the 
neighborhood of Nightveil, from which the specters get 
their name. Their work can include driving off people 
who accidentally wander too close to a secret rooftop 
meeting, killing those who knowingly infiltrate Dimir 
property, and tracking those who have stolen guild 
secrets, then wiping those secrets from their victims’ 
minds to ensure that they are never shared. 

Limited Sentience. A Nightveil specter is created 
when the mind magic of House Dimir erases a person's 
identity, leaving a mind so broken it can no longer live. 
Thus, Nightveil specters have no memory of their previ- 
ous lives, and they are just clever enough to follow their 
orders with some amount of creativity. They pursue 
their assigned tasks with fearless determination. 

Gloamwing Mount. If a gloamwing is killed, its spec- 
ter becomes fixated on destroying those responsible. If 
the specter survives, it can create a new gloamwing over 
the course of a month, during which time the specter is 
incapacitated. 

A gloamwing's head is almost ratlike, with prominent 
teeth, and its leathery skin is stretched tight over its 
Skull, where its eyes are empty sockets. Its body is mot- 
tled with bony plates, and great wings stretch from its 
shoulders. 

Undead Nature. A Nightveil specter and its gloam- 
wing mount don't require air, food, drink, or sleep. 


NIGHTVEIL SPECTER 


Medium undead, neutral evil 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 105 (14d8 + 42) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 19(44) 16(3) 6(2) 17(43) 11 (+0) 


Saving Throws Dex +8, Wis +7 

Skills Insight +7, Perception +7, Stealth +8 

Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 17 

Languages understands Common but can't speak 

Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) 


Mount. If the specter isn't mounted, it can use a bonus action 
to magically teleport onto its gloamwing mount, provided the 
specter and the gloamwing are on the same plane of existence. 
When it teleports, the specter appears astride the gloamwing 
along with any equipment it is wearing or carrying. 

While mounted and not incapacitated, the specter can't be 
surprised, and both it and its mount gain advantage on Dexter- 
ity saving throws. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The specter makes two scythe attacks. 


Scythe. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage plus 13 (3d8) psy- 
chic damage. 


Mind Twist (Recharge 5-6). The specter magically emits psy- 
chic energy in a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that area must 
succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or take 22 (5d8) psy- 
chic damage and be stunned for 1 minute. The stunned crea- 
ture can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, 
ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Reap Memory (3/Day). The specter touches one incapacitated 
creature and chooses 1 hour from among the past 24. Unless 
the creature succeeds on a DC 15 Intelligence saving throw, the 
creature loses all memory of that hour. The creature regains the 
memory only if the specter dies within the next 24 hours. 


EES) 


GLOAMWING 


Large undead, neutral evil 


Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 136 (16d10 + 48) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
20 (+5) 16(43) 17(3) 2(-4 m(0) 6(2) 


Saving Throws Str +8, Dex +6 

Skills Perception +3, Stealth +6 

Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 13 

Languages understands Common 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


Death Link. If its specter rider is reduced to 0 hit points, the 
gloamwing is destroyed. 


Flyby. The gloamwing doesn't provoke an opportunity attack 
when it flies out of an enemy's reach. 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the gloamwing has dis- 
advantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The gloamwing makes two attacks: one with its 
bite and one with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 18 (3d8 + 5) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 15 (3d6 + 5) slashing damage. 


———————————_—_ Sea 


Nivix CYCLOPS 


Large giant, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 (half plate) 
Hit Points 115 (10d10 + 60) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS — CHA 
24(47) 9(-1) 22(6) 7(2 10(4 9(-1) 


Saving Throws Con +9, Wis +3 

Damage Immunities poison, psychic 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages Common, Giant 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


Magic Resistance. The cyclops has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The cyclops makes two slam attacks. 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 23 (3d10 + 7) bludgeoning damage. 


REACTIONS 


Spell Vitalization. Immediately after a creature casts a spell of 
Ist level or higher within 120 feet of the cyclops, the cyclops 
can move up to twice its speed without provoking opportunity 
attacks. It can then make one slam attack against a target of 


its choice. 
a E 
‘© 


NIVIX CYCLOPS 


Cyclopes like those described in the Monster Manual 
are found primarily among the Gruul Clans. They are 
forces of nature, and even though they have occasionally 
been recruited into the Boros Legion, they can never 
truly be tamed. 

Cyclopes serve the Izzet league as workshop guard- 
ians, personal protectors, and heavy laborers. They 
wear mizzium armor plating to minimize injuries from 
laboratory mishaps, piston gauntlets to increase their 
strength for lifting and punching, and telescopic helmets 
to minimize the shortcomings of their monocular vision. 
They are sometimes called monoclons or Nivix cyclo- 
pes, after the name of the Izzet guildhall. 


Hysrio FLIER 


SIMIC HYBRIDS 


The Guardian Project is a consequence of increasing 
tension within the Simic Combine as the threat of inter- 
guild conflict looms. Believing that the Simic must be 
prepared to fight for their lives when that conflict comes 
to a head, biomancers have created soldiers to help 
defend the guild. These hybrids (also called guardians, 
after the name of the project) are created from human, 
vedalken, and elf guild members who volunteer to be 
transformed. 


HYBRID BRUTE 


Medium humanoid (Simic hybrid), neutral good 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 52 (8d8 + 16) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) n1(«0)  15(42) 8(-1) 11(«0 9 (-1) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages Common plus any one language 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Amphibious. The hybrid can breathe air and water. 
ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The hybrid makes two claw attacks. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) slashing damage. 


HYBRID FLIER 


Medium humanoid (Simic hybrid), neutral good 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 39 (6d8 + 12) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12 (+1) 16 (+3) 14(42) 11 (40) 10(+0) T (40) 


Damage Resistances acid 

Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages Common plus any one language 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The hybrid makes two javelin attacks. It can re- 
place one javelin attack with Spit Acid. 


Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


Spit Acid. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 20/60 ft., one 
target. Hit: 10 (4d4) acid damage. 


HYBRID POISONER 


Medium humanoid (Simic hybrid), neutral good 


- Armor Class 14 


Hit Points 26 (4d8 + 8) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT — WIS CHA 
12(4) 194) 1462 12) 13(0) 12(0) 


Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +4 

Skills Athletics +3, Perception +3, Stealth +6 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 13 

Languages Common plus any one language 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 
eee — 
Assassinate. During its first turn, the hybrid poisoner has ad- 
vantage on attack rolls against any creature that hasn’t taken a 
turn. Any hit the hybrid scores against a surprised creature is a 
critical hit. 


Poisonous Skin. Any creature that touches the hybrid or hits it 
with a melee attack while within 5 feet of it takes 3 (1d6) poi- 
son damage. 


ACTIONS 


Toxic Touch. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 


target. Hit: 7 (2d6) bludgeoning damage, and the target must 
succeed on a DC 12 Constitution saving throw or become poi- 
soned for 1 minute. At the end of each of the poisoned target's 
turns, it must repeat the save, taking 3 (1d6) poison damage on 
a failed save, or ending the effect on itself on a successful one. 


CHAPTER ( FRIENDS AND FOES 


HYBRID SHOCKER 
Medium humanoid (Simic hybrid), neutral good 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 39 (6d8 + 12) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (41) (42  14(2) 10(4) 12) 9(-1) 


Damage Immunities lightning 

Senses passive Perception 11 

Languages Common plus any one language 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Electrified Body. Any creature that touches the hybrid or hits it 
with a melee attack while within 5 feet of it takes 5 (1d10) light- 
ning damage. 


Illumination. The hybrid sheds bright light in a 10-foot radius 
and dim light for an additional 10 feet. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The hybrid makes two attacks: one with its shock- 
ing touch and one with its tentacles. 


Shocking Touch. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 9 (2d8) lightning damage. 


Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 15 ft., one 
creature. Hit: The target is grappled (escape DC 11), and the 
hybrid pulls the target up to 15 feet straight toward it. Until this 
grapple ends, the target takes 5 (1d10) lightning damage at the 
start of each of its turns, and the hybrid shocker can't use its 
tentacles on another creature. 

— eer Um 


HYBRID SPY 


Medium humanoid (Simic hybrid), neutral good 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


CHA 
9(-1) 


wis 
14 (+2) 


STR 
11 (+0) 


DEX 
17 (+3) 


CON 
12 (+1) 


INT 
13 (+1) 


Skills Perception +4, Stealth +5 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages Common plus any one language 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Chameleon Skin. The hybrid has advantage on Dexterity 
(Stealth) checks made to hide. 


Spider Climb. The hybrid can climb difficult surfaces, includ- 
ing upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 
ability check. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The hybrid makes two shortsword attacks. 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 
ELLAS 


SKYJEK Roc 


The aerial forces of the Boros Legion—skyknights who 
fly alongside the angels—take to the air mounted on 
Skyjek rocs. These avians are named for the skyknights 
who are also part of the Wojek League, called Skyjeks. 
From the backs of their rocs, these mounted soldiers 
carry out reconnaissance missions, bombard enemies 
on the ground, and engage flying foes. 

The shape of a Skyjek roc’s body makes it relatively 
easy to saddle and ride, and it is typically equipped with 
armor plating on its head and chest. 

Skyjek rocs are headstrong and impulsive, but their 


bravery makes them ideal mounts for the Boros knights. 


SKYJEK Roc 
Large monstrosity, unaligned 
Armor Class 15 (breastplate) 
Hit Points 37 (5d10 + 10) 
Speed 20 ft., fly 90 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
20 (+5) 13(+1) 14(2) 3(-4) 10(+0) 8(-1) 


Saving Throws Dex +3, Wis +2 
Skills Perception +2 

Senses passive Perception 12 
Languages — 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 

Keen Sight. The roc has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The roc makes two attacks: one with its beak and 
one with its talons. 


Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 9 (1d8 + 5) piercing damage. 


Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 10 (2d4 + 5) slashing damage. 


SKYSWIMMER 


Skyswimmers are enormous, predatory leviathans that 
feed on drakes, rocs, griffins, and anything else they en- 
counter as they soar through the clouds above Ravnica. 


SKYSWIMMER 


Gargantuan monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 216 (16d20 + 48) 
Speed 10 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
23(46) 15(42) 16(3) 7(2) 12(+1) 6(-2 


Saving Throws Con +8 

Skills Perception +6 

Senses passive Perception 16 
Languages — 

Challenge 13 (10,000 XP) 


Amphibious. The skyswimmer can breathe air and water. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The skyswimmer makes three attacks: one with its 


bite and two with its slam. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 22 (3d10 + 6) piercing damage. If the target is a Large or 
smaller creature, it must succeed on a DC 19 Dexterity saving 
throw or be swallowed by the skyswimmer. 

A swallowed creature is blinded and restrained, it has total 
cover against attacks and other effects outside the skyswim- 
mer, and it takes 21 (6d6) acid damage at the start of each of 
the skyswimmer’s turns. 

If the skyswimmer takes 30 damage or more on a single turn 
from the swallowed creature, the skyswimmer must succeed 
on a DC 18 Constitution saving throw at the end of that turn or 
regurgitate the creature, which falls prone in a space within 10 
feet of the skyswimmer. If the skyswimmer dies, a swallowed 
creature is no longer restrained by it and can escape from the 
corpse by using 15 feet of movement, exiting prone. 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: «11 to hit, reach 30 ft., one target. 
Hit: 19 (2d12 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 


] 


‘THRULLS 


When the Orzhov Syndicate rips a 
soul from its body to create a spirit, the 
cast-off remains go to the fleshmages, who 
use their necromantic magic to liquefy the 
corpse and transform it into something useful. 
These creations become thrulls, obedient slaves that 
serve in a variety of menial roles: laborers, messen- 
gers, beasts of burden, and even fashion accessories 
for the elite. Whatever tasks they perform, they wear 
faceplates forged from devalued coinage to conceal 
their ghastly features. 

Construct Nature. A thrull doesn’t require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


SERVITOR THRULL 


The most wretched of thrulls are the servitors, small 
and slender, that serve as playthings for their Orzhov 
masters. They run trivial errands, transport small items, 
caper and dance, and keep their masters’ expensive 
robes from trailing on the dirty street. They are utterly 
loyal, lacking any concept of thinking for themselves. 


WINGED THRULL 


Winged thrulls are at once the most intelligent of Or- 
zhov thrulls (which isn’t saying much), as well as the 
smallest, most unobtrusive, and most mobile. They act 
as messengers and spies for their Orzhov masters and 
tend to mimic the mannerisms and movements of the 
oligarchs they serve. 


SERVITOR THRULL 


Small construct, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 22 (4d6 + 8) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
11 (40) B) 1902 6 (-2) 6 (-2)  3(4) 


Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8 
Languages understands Common but can't speak 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (1d8 + 1) slashing damage. 


REACTIONS 


Self-Sacrifice. When a creature within 5 feet of the thrull is hit 
by an attack, the thrull swaps places with that creature and is 
hit instead. 
a IO a) 


WINGED THRULL 


Small construct, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 31 (7d6 + 7) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT — WIS — CHA 
9G) wie 1261). sey se) EC 


Saving Throws Dex +4 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 
Languages understands Common but can’t speak 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


ACTIONS 
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) slashing damage. 


Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 20/60 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage. 


REACTIONS 


Self-Sacrifice. When a creature within 5 feet of the thrull is hit 
by an attack, the thrull swaps places with that creature and is 
hit instead. 
a A Nee ——— 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 221 


UNDERCITY MEDUSA 


Medium monstrosity, neutral evil 


Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 120 (16d8 + 48) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 18 (+4) 16 (+3) (3) 12(0) 15 (42) 


Skills Deception +5, Insight +4, Perception +4, Stealth +7 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages Common, Elvish 

Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


Innate Spellcasting. The medusa's innate spellcasting ability is 
Intelligence (spell save DC 14). The medusa can innately cast 
the following spells, requiring no material components: 


l/day each: expeditious retreat, fog cloud, misty step 


Magic Resistance. The medusa has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


UNDERCITY MEDUSA 


The medusas of Ravnica, often called gorgons, are a 
monstrous race of creatures that appear superficially 
similar to human women. In place of hair, a gorgon has 
a writhing mass of black, serpentine cables, and its 
hands are scaly claws. 

The gaze of a medusa’s glowing eyes causes living 
tissue to petrify. The transformation is rapid, leaving 
the victim as a stone statue, usually frozen in a position 
of abject fear or agony—a fine trophy for the medusa’s 
macabre collection. The medusa must exert its will to 
effect this transformation, so the gaze of a surprised or 
friendly Ravnican medusa is harmless. 

This deadly gaze attack gives medusas a degree of 
power among the Golgari that is out of proportion with 
their small numbers. Medusas command a significant 
share of the guild’s smaller cells around Ravnica, and at 
least one medusa is thought to be angling for control of 
the entire guild at the moment. 

Not all gorgons are so ambitious; some prefer to sim- 
ply stalk the endless shadows of the undercity like hun- 
gry predators. 


a EUER 
LUDMILLA, THE TUNNEL VIPER 
Ludmilla is the last surviving member of the Sisters of 
Stone Death, the trio of power-hungry medusas who slew 
Svogthir, the original guildmaster of the Golgari Swarm. 
Ludmilla no longer has the collective power of her medusa 
sisters, so she’s been forced to lurk in Ravnica’s under- 
city, surrounded by hundreds of her petrified victims. 
She dreams of one day reclaiming control of the Golgari 
Swarm, or at least causing pain to its current guildmaster, 
Jarad Vod Savo (whose own sister displaced the medusas 
from their position). 
———————À— 


Surprise Attack. During the first round of combat, the medusa 
has advantage on attack rolls against any creature that is sur- 
prised, and it deals an extra 10 (3d6) damage each time it hits 
such a creature with an attack. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The medusa makes two claw attacks. It can also 
use Petrifying Gaze before or after making these attacks. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) slashing damage. 


Petrifying Gaze. The medusa fixes its gaze on one creature 
within 60 feet of it that it can see and that can see its eyes. The 
target must make a DC 14 Constitution saving throw. If the 
saving throw fails by 5 or more, the creature is instantly petri- 
fied. Otherwise, a creature that fails the save begins to turn to 
stone and is restrained. The restrained creature must repeat 
the saving throw at the end of its next turn, becoming petrified 
on a failure or ending the effect on a success. The petrification 
lasts until the creature is freed by a greater restoration spell or 
similar magic. 


BLOOD DRINKER VAMPIRE 
Medium undead, lawful evil 
Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 90 (12d8 + 36) 
Speed 40 ft., fly 40 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 18(«4) 17(+3) 16(43) 13(+1) 19 (+4) 


WITH A GARGOYLE 


VAMPIRES 


Creatures of the night, vampires are ageless undead 
beings who subsist on the blood of the living. They are 
fierce predators who mask their ravenous thirst behind 
a facade of sophistication and sensuality. Those who 
sip blood from golden chalices are no less voracious 
than those who tear out their victims’ throats with their 
fangs; they just hide it better. 

The vampires of Ravnica differ from those in the Mon- 
ster Manual in important ways. They lack the traits and 
abilities that those other vampires boast, but also lack 
the weaknesses that hinder such vampires. What they 
have in common is an unquenchable thirst for the blood 
that sustains their undead existence. 


BLOOD DRINKER VAMPIRE 


Plenty of blood drinkers haunt Ravnica’s alleys and sew- 
ers, preying on those who are foolish enough to leave 
the relative safety of the crowds. 

Orzhov Vampires. Vampires thrive in the Orzhov 
Syndicate, where they can collect tithes and payments 
from their debtors in the form of blood. Their undead 
nature gives them the same immortality enjoyed by the 
oligarch spirits, but they remain capable of experienc- 
ing all the delights of their corporeal forms. In contrast 
to Orzhov spirits, they also retain their personalities, 
which are almost uniformly cruel. 

Blood Bond. Consuming a creature's blood creates 
a sort of empathic bond that allows the blood drinker 
vampire to exert some magical influence over its victim. 


Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +6, Wis +4 

Skills Intimidation +7, Perception +4, Stealth +7 

Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 

Languages the languages it knew in life 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The vampire makes three melee attacks, only one 
of which can be a bite attack. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one willing 
creature, or a creature that is grappled by the vampire, incapac- 
itated, or restrained. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) piercing damage plus 7 
(2d6) necrotic damage. If the target is humanoid, it must suc- 
ceed on a DC 15 Charisma saving throw or be charmed by the 
vampire for 1 minute. While charmed in this way, the target is 
infatuated with the vampire. 

The target’s hit point maximum is reduced by an amount 
equal to the necrotic damage taken, and the vampire regains hit 
points equal to that amount. The reduction lasts until the tar- 
get finishes a long rest. The target dies if its hit point maximum 
is reduced to 0. 


Rapier. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) piercing damage. 


Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) bludgeoning damage. The vampire 
can also grapple the target (escape DC 14) if it is a creature and 
the vampire has a hand free. 


REACTIONS 


Parry. The vampire adds 3 to its AC against one melee attack 
that would hit it. To do so, the vampire must see the attacker 
and be wielding a melee weapon. 

SS eee 


MIND DRINKER VAMPIRE 


When vampires join House Dimir, they can learn to si- 
phon mental energy and memories along with the blood 
of their victims. They also study the magic favored by 
Dimir mind mages, giving them a powerful combination 
of abilities ideal for espionage and infiltration. 


Szadek’s Heirs. The founder of House Dimir, Szadek, 


was the first of the so-called mind drinkers. His secrets 
are passed on only to other members of his guild, and 
mind drinkers who leave House Dimir become enemies 
of the guild—the only exceptions to a rule that prohibits 
mind drinkers from feeding on others of their kind. 
Cell Leaders. Thanks to their particular gifts, mind 
drinkers are often placed as leaders of small cells of 
covert Dimir operatives. They rarely trust their own 
agents, though, and often follow their cell members to 
make sure those members carry out missions as or- 
dered. The most suspicious vampires might even siphon 
thoughts from their subordinates to detect any hint 
of betrayal. 


! ACTIONS 


MIND DRINKER VAMPIRE 


Medium undead, neutral evil 


= —- - — -— 


Armor Class 14 


E Hit Points 55 (1048 + 10) 


Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft. (hover) 


L 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 18(+4) 12(+1) 19(+4) 13(4) 14 (42) 
Saving Throws Dex +6, Int +6, Wis +3 
Skills Deception +4, Insight +3, Perception +3, Stealth +6 
Damage Resistances necrotic 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages the languages it knew in life 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 
Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The vampire's innate spellcast- 
ing ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 14). It can innately cast 
the following spells, requiring no components: 


At will: message 


= 3/day each: charm person, hold person, mirror image, sleep 


1/day each: gaseous form, major image 


Shadow Stealth. While in dim light or darkness, the vampire 
can take the Hide action as a bonus action. 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the vampire has dis- 


B advantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom (Perception) 


checks that rely on sight. 


Multiattack. The vampire makes two attacks, only one of which 
can be a bite attack. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one willing 
creature, or a creature that is grappled by the vampire, incapac- 
itated, or restrained. Hit: 7 (1d6 4) piercing damage plus 7 
(2d6) necrotic damage. 

The target's hit point maximum is reduced by an amount 
equal to the necrotic damage taken, and the vampire regains hit 
points equal to that amount. The reduction lasts until the tar- 
get finishes a long rest. The target dies if its hit point maximum 
is reduced to 0. 


Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage. The vampire 
can also grapple the target (escape DC 13) if it is a creature and 
the vampire has a hand free. 


Mind Siphon (Recharge 5-6). The vampire targets a creature 

it can see within 30 feet of it. The target must make a DC 14 
Intelligence saving throw, with disadvantage if the vampire 

has previously consumed the target's blood. On a failed save, 
the target takes 28 (8d6) psychic damage, and the vampire 
discerns the target's surface emotions and thoughts. On a 
successful save, the target takes half as much damage, and the 
vampire discerns the target's general emotional state but not 
its thoughts. 


En 


WURM 


Wurms are huge creatures that re- 
semble limbless, wingless dragons. 
They burrow through the earth and eat 
virtually anything they come across, 
and their movement accounts for much 
of the destruction in the rubblebelt regions 
of Ravnica. 

A wurm burrows through loose earth by using deep 
sonic vibrations to liquefy the earth in front of it and 
swim through the area. The soil resolidifies and closes 
behind it. Moving through rock is slower and more diffi- 
cult, and the wurm leaves a tunnel in its wake. 

The Gruul Clans appreciate the devastation wurms 
can create, and the clans sometimes lure them into civi- 
lized areas where the destruction can be vast. 


WURM 


Huge monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 200 (16d12 + 96) 
Speed 50 ft., burrow 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
24 (+7)  10(«40 22(+6) 3(-4) 12(+1) 4(-3) 


Saving Throws Con +11, Wis +6 

Senses blindsight 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft., passive 
Perception 11 

Languages — 

Challenge 14 (11,500 XP) 


Earth Tremors. The wurm creates earth tremors as it moves 
overland or underground. Any creature that comes within 

30 feet of the moving wurm for the first time on a turn must 
succeed on a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw or take 10 (3d6) 
bludgeoning damage and fall prone. Any structure or object an- 
chored to the ground that comes within 30 feet of the moving 
wurm for the first time on a turn takes 10 (3d6) force damage. 


Siege Monster. The wurm deals double damage to objects and 
structures. 


Tunneler. The wurm can burrow through solid rock at half its 
burrow speed and leaves a 10-foot-diameter tunnel in its wake. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 


Hit: 24 (5d6 + 7) piercing damage. If the target is a Medium or 
smaller creature, it must succeed on a DC 20 Dexterity saving 
throw or be swallowed by the wurm. A swallowed creature is 
blinded and restrained, has total cover against attacks and 
other effects outside the wurm, and takes 17 (5d6) acid dam- 
age at the start of each of the wurm's turns. 

If the wurm takes 30 damage or more on a single turn from 
a creature inside it, the wurm must succeed on a DC 21 Con- 
stitution saving throw at the end of that turn or regurgitate all 
swallowed creatures, which fall prone in a space within 10 feet 
of the wurm. If the wurm dies, a swallowed creature is no lon- 
ger restrained by it and can escape from the corpse by using 20 
feet of movement, exiting prone. 


NPCs By GUILD 


This section describes various nonplayer characters 
that belong to each guild. These characters can serve 
as enemies, rivals, allies, or contacts. In addition to the 
NPCs presented here, you can customize the NPCs in 
the Monster Manual and other sources to make them 
feel like part of a particular guild. 

Also included in this chapter are statistics and de- 
scriptions of the guildmasters of Ravnica. Without 
exception, these are powerful creatures. In most cam- 
paigns, the guildmasters will come into play more often 
in negotiations and other social settings than in combat. 
Thus, each guildmaster's ideals, bonds, and flaws are 
included. As a general rule, a guildmaster's personal 
agenda is in line with the guild's goals described in 
chapter 2, so the guild entries there provide additional 
direction for roleplaying these individuals. 

Several other named guild members are highlighted 
in sidebars. 


SOLDIER 


Soldiers are found in many of Ravnica's guilds. The sol- 
dier stat block represents a typical member of the rank 
and file, though weaponry and armor can vary. 


SOLDIER 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 18 (chain mail, shield) 
Hit Points 16 (3d8 + 3) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (41) 12 (+1) 12 (41) 10(4) (40 (0) 


Skills Perception +2, Athletics +3 

Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Formation Tactics. The soldier has advantage on saving throws 
against being charmed, frightened, grappled, or restrained 
while it is within 5 feet of at least one ally. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The soldier makes two melee attacks. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) slashing damage, or 7 (1d10 + 2) slashing 
damage if used with two hands. 


LAVINIA, STEWARD OF THE GUILDPACT 


Arrester Lavinia, an Azorius arrester (use the veteran stat 
block in the Monster Manual), is straightforward and stern. 
To her, justice is a bird you have to catch, not a dog that 
willingly walks toward its master. She worked alongside 
Jace, the Living Guildpact, scheduling appointments and 
relaying messages. The work was beneath her, but Lavin- 
ia's allegiance was to the soul of her city. Jace's disappear- 
ance worries her, but she has steadfastly refused to violate 
the law of the land by stepping into his duties. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


AZORIUS NPCs 


The Azorius Senate's activities focus on maintaining 
public order. For example, the Lyev Column acts as the 
police force for all of Ravnica. The Azorius NPCs table 
summarizes key roles within this force. Statistics for 
these NPCs are found in the Monster Manual unless the 
table states otherwise. 


Azorius NPCs 


Role Appropriate Stat Block 

Arrester Knight or veteran 

Azorius soldier ^ Soldier* 

Hussar (cavalry) ^ Soldier* mounted on a warhorse or a 
griffon 


Magical support Lawmage* or precognitive mage* 


*Appears in this chapter 


SUPREME JUDGE ISPERIA 


Isperia is the current guildmaster of the Azorius Senate. 
As a sphinx, she is aloof and values solitude above all. 
However, she has been forced to give up her privacy to 
deal with the increased crime and chaos on Ravnica. 

Isperia is devoted to her guild’s belief that law is the 
ultimate bulwark against chaos, and it is her steady 
hand that guides the Azorius through these uncertain 
times. As guildmaster, Isperia serves as the supreme 
judge, a role that takes advantage of her encyclopedic 
knowledge of Ravnica's labyrinthine legal system. 

If an encounter turns violent, Isperia refrains 
from using lethal force if possible, preferring to sub- 
due a wrongdoing so that the legal system can mete 
out justice. 


ISPERIA'S TRAITS 

Ideal: "The law provides direction for every arena of life; 
it is the only compass I need." 

Bond: "I can't stand by and watch disorder spread 
through the city. Without the Azorius, Ravnica 
would collapse. In the absence of order, we must es- 
tablish it." 

Flaw: "If Ravnica didn't need me, I would prefer to live a 
life of solitude and contemplation." 


LAWMAGE 


The Azorius Senate has spellcasters who are trained to 
capture lawbreakers and bring them to justice. A law- 
mage's magic is focused on restraining criminals and on 
protecting bystanders from becoming casualties when 
arresters are pursuing malefactors. A significant propor- 
tion of the guild's vedalken are lawmages. 


PRECOGNITIVE MAGE 


Precognitive mages, a rarity among Azorius spellcast- 
ers, are capable of capturing glimpses of the future. 
They are typically employed to anticipate the actions of 
wanted criminals, thus aiding in their capture. 


ISPERIA 


Gargantuan monstrosity, lawful neutral 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 261 (18d20 + 72) 
Speed 40 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 


20 (+5) 14 (+2) 18 (+4) 23 (+6) 26(48) 20 (+5) 


Saving Throws Dex +9, Con +11, Int +13, Wis +15 

Skills: Arcana +13, History +13, Insight +15, Perception +15 

Damage Immunities psychic; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened 

Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 25 

Languages Common, Sphinx 

Challenge 21 (33,000 XP) 

[LLLI 

Innate Spellcasting. Isperia's innate spellcasting ability is Wis- 

dom (spell save DC 23). Isperia can innately cast imprisonment 

twice per day, requiring no material components. 


Inscrutable. Isperia is immune to any effect that would sense 
her emotions or read her thoughts, as well as any divination 
spell that she refuses. Wisdom (Insight) checks made to ascer- 
tain her intentions or sincerity have disadvantage. 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Isperia fails a saving throw, 
she can choose to succeed instead. 


Magic Resistance. Isperia has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Spellcasting. Isperia is a 15th-level Azorius spellcaster. Her 
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 23, +14 to hit with 
spell attacks). Isperia has the following cleric spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): guidance, light, resistance, sacred flame, 
thaumaturgy 

Ist level (4 slots): command, detect evil and good, ensnaring 
strike, sanctuary, shield of faith 


2nd level (3 slots): arcane lock, augury, calm emotions, hold per- 
son, silence, zone of truth 

3rd level (3 slots): bestow curse, clairvoyance, counterspell, dispel 
magic, tongues 

4th level (3 slots): divination, locate creature 

5th level (2 slots): dispel evil and good, scrying 

6th level (1 slot): word of recall 

7th level (1 slot): divine word 

8th level (1 slot): antimagic field 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Isperia makes two claw attacks. She can cast a 
spell with a casting time of 1 action in place of one claw attack. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 21 (3d10 + 5) slashing damage. If the target is a creature, 

it must succeed on a DC 23 Wisdom saving throw or take 14 
(4d6) psychic damage after each attack it makes against Isperia 
before the start of her next turn. 


Supreme Legal Authority. Isperia chooses up to three creatures 
she can see within 90 feet of her. Each target must succeed on 
a DC 23 Intelligence saving throw or Isperia chooses an action 
for that target: Attack, Cast a Spell, Dash, Disengage, Dodge, 
Help, Hide, Ready, Search, or Use an Object. The affected tar- 
get can't take that action for 1 minute. At the end of each of the 
target's turns, it can end the effect on itself with a successful 
DC 23 Intelligence saving throw. A target that succeeds on the 
saving throw becomes immune to Isperia's Supreme Legal Au- 
thority for 24 hours. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Isperia can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the options 
below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a time 
and only at the end of another creature's turn. Isperia regains 
spent legendary actions at the start of her turn. 


Claw Attack. Isperia makes one claw attack. 

Cast a Spell (Costs 2 Actions). Isperia casts a spell of 3rd level 
or lower from her list of prepared spells, using a spell slot 
as normal. 

Supreme Legal Authority (Costs 3 Actions). Isperia uses 
Supreme Legal Authority. 


ool ——LSo—————————————— SESE) 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


PRECOGNITIVE MAGE 


GEETRA 
Geetra is a precognitive mage who first put her gifts to 

use as a young thief on the streets of Ravnica. While still 

a teenager, she was apprehended and then pardoned in 
exchange for agreeing to use her talents in the service of 
the Azorius Senate. For decades, she worked in almost 
complete anonymity, her gifts unappreciated. But with the 
senate displaying an increased interest in the talents of 
precognitive mages, Geetra has been given a more prom- 
inent position, which she has embraced with enthusiasm. 
She worries about the impact that her guild has on the rest 
of Ravnica but believes in her heart that she is helping the 
people. Chaos can only destroy, and her visions are a tool 
to ensure that society can live in safety in all variants of 
the future. 


LAWMAGE 


Medium humanoid (any race), lawful neutral 


Armor Class 15 (breastplate) 
Hit Points 84 (13d8 + 26) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
BEJ  12(4) 14(2) 377(3) 1(2) 13(4) 


Saving Throws Int +6, Wis +5 

Skills Arcana +6, Perception +5, Persuasion +4 
Senses passive Perception 15 

Languages Common plus any one language 
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


Spellcasting. The lawmage is an 8th-level Azorius spellcaster. 
Its spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 14, +6 to 
hit with spell attacks). The lawmage has the following wizard 
spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): fire bolt, friends, light, message 

Ist level (4 slots): alarm, expeditious retreat, shield 

2nd level (3 slots): arcane lock, detect thoughts, hold person 
3rd level (3 slots): clairvoyance, dispel magic, slow 

4th level (2 slots): locate creature, stoneskin 


ACTIONS 


Quarterstaff. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 

target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) bludgeoning damage, or 5 (1d8 + 1) 

bludgeoning damage if used with two hands. 
EEEE 


PRECOGNITIVE MAGE 


Medium humanoid (any race), lawful neutral 


| Armor Class 11 (14 with mage armor) 
Hit Points 63 (14d8) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
9(-1) 13(+1) 10(40) 18(+4) H 11 (+0) 


Saving Throws Int +6, Wis +3 

Skills Perception +3 

Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages Common plus any one language 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Innate Spellcasting. The mage's innate spellcasting ability is 
Intelligence (spell save DC 14). It can cast the following spells, 
requiring no material components: 


3/day: detect thoughts, mage armor 
1/day each: clairvoyance, locate object 


ACTIONS 


Quarterstaff. Melee Weapon Attack: +1 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 2 (1d6 - 1) bludgeoning damage, or 3 (1d8 - 1) 
bludgeoning damage if used with two hands. 


Glimpse the Temporal Flood (Recharge 5-6). The mage targets 
one creature within 120 feet of it that it can see. The target 
takes 18 (4d8) psychic damage, and it must succeed on a DC 
14 Intelligence saving throw or be stunned until the end of its 
next turn. 


REACTIONS 


Precognitive Insight (3/Day). When the mage or a creature it 

can see makes an attack roll, a saving throw, or an ability check, 

the mage can cause the roll to be made with advantage or 

disadvantage. 
ee 


Boros NPCs 


The Boros Legion attracts those who believe justice 
is the highest ideal and that it’s worth fighting for on 
behalf of all Ravnica’s citizens. From its angelic com- 
manders down to its raw recruits, everyone in the 
legion wages war against corruption, exploitation, and 
lawlessness. 

The Boros Legion has its own soldiers, and the elite 
Sunhome Guard protects the legion's headquarters. The 
Boros NPCs table summarizes key roles within these 
forces. Statistics for these NPCs are found in the Mon- 
ster Manual unless the table states otherwise. 


Bonos NPCs 


Role Appropriate Stat Block 

Boros soldier Soldier* 

Magical support Firefist* or frontline medic* 
Shock trooper ^ Reckoner* 

Skyknight Knight mounted on a Skyjek roc* 
Sunhome Guard Guardian giant* or veteran 


*Appears in this chapter 


WARLEADER AURELIA 


The angel Aurelia leads the Boros Legion. During the 
years of her leadership, she has shown a strong appre- 
ciation for the ordinary citizens who are often caught in 
the middle of interguild violence. 

True justice, Aurelia argues, isn't merely the enforce- 
ment of the letter of existing laws (let the Azorius fret 
over that), but the establishment of equitable and com- 
passionate relationships among all of Ravnica's people. 
That means protecting the weak from the depredations 
of the strong, sheltering the innocents who are threat- 
ened by war, and ensuring that enforcement of the law 
doesn't become oppressive. Aurelia actively supports 
efforts to establish a lasting peace among the guilds in 
the absence of the Guildpact. 


Aurelia prefers to lead the Boros Legion from the 
front. She brings swift and unrelenting punishment to 
the wicked, and her temper is legendary. 

Immortal Nature. Aurelia doesn't require food, 
drink, or sleep. 


AURELIA'S TRAITS 

Ideal: "Justice. We must do whatever it takes to estab- 
lish fair and merciful relationships among Ravnica's 
people—through force of arms when necessary." 

Bond: “The entire legion obeys my commands, and I am 
therefore beholden to every one of my soldiers.” 

Flaw: “I charge into battle with little heed for my own 
wellbeing.” 


FIREFIST 


Boros firefists combine potent magic with peerless 
fighting ability, inspiring all who serve alongside them. 
They often act as the point of contact between the Boros 
Legion and the angelic leaders. 


FRONTLINE MEDIC 


The soldiers of the Boros Legion depend on skilled heal- 
ers to keep them on their feet. Frontline medics use a 
mix of magical healing and mundane medicine to keep 
their compatriots alive. 


RECKONER 


Boros reckoners combine physical power and magical 
prowess, serving as the shock troops of the legion. They 
are adept at breaking up mobs and organized lines of 
defense. Sometimes described as living thunderstorms, 
reckoners charge their bodies with lightning that bursts 
forth in their spells and lashes out at enemies who harm 
them. Many reckoners are minotaurs. 


" 


Tavic, BLADE OF THE LEGION, 


^ Bonos FIREFIST 


€ 
A. 


AURELIA 
Medium celestial (angel), lawful good 


Armor Class 22 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 287 (25d8 + 175) 
Speed 50 ft., fly 150 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
26 (+8) 24(4) 25(7) 17(43) 25(7) 30 (+10) 
Saving Throws Dex +14, Con +14, Cha +17 
Skills Insight +14, Perception +14 
Damage Resistances necrotic, radiant; bludgeoning, piercing, 
and slashing from nonmagical attacks 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, poisoned 
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 24 
Languages all 
Challenge 23 (50,000 XP) 
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Aurelia fails a saving throw, 
she can choose to succeed instead. 


Magic Resistance. Aurelia has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Aurelia makes three longsword attacks and uses 
Leadership. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 12 (1d8 + 8) slashing damage, or 13 (1d10 + 8) 
slashing damage when used with two hands, plus 27 (6d8) 
radiant damage. 


CHAPTER í FRIENDS AND FOES 


Leadership. Aurelia utters a few inspiring words to one creature 
she can see within 30 feet of her. If the creature can hear her, it 
can add a d10 to one attack roll or saving throw it makes before 
the start of Aurelia’s next turn. 


Warleader's Helix (Recharge 5-6). Ranged Spell Attack: +17 to 
hit, range 60 ft., one creature. Hit: 54 (12d8) radiant damage, 
and Aurelia can choose another creature she can see within 
10 feet of the target. The second creature regains 27 (6d8) 

hit points. 


REACTIONS 


Parry. Aurelia adds 7 to her AC against one melee attack that 
would hit her. To do so, Aurelia must see the attacker and be 
wielding a melee weapon. 


Unyielding. When Aurelia is subjected to an effect that would 
move her, knock her prone, or both, she can use her reaction to 
be neither moved nor knocked prone. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Aurelia can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op- 
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at 
a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. Aurelia 
regains spent legendary actions at the start of her turn. 


Command Allies. Aurelia chooses up to three creatures she 
can see within 30 feet of her. If a chosen creature can see or 
hear Aurelia, it can immediately use its reaction to make one 
weapon attack, with advantage on the attack roll. 

Longsword Attack (Costs 2 Actions). Aurelia makes one long- 
sword attack. 

Frighten Foes (Costs 3 Actions). Aurelia targets up to five 
creatures she can see within 30 feet of her. Each target must 
succeed on a DC 25 Wisdom saving throw or be frightened of 
her until the end of her next turn. Any target within 5 feet of 
Aurelia has disadvantage on the saving throw. 


FIREFIST 


Medium humanoid (any race), lawful good 


Armor Class 18 (plate) 
Hit Points 117 (18d8 + 36) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 10 (+0) 14 (+2)  11(40) 17 (+3) 13 (41) 


Saving Throws Con +5, Wis +6 

Skills Intimidation +4, Religion +3 

Senses passive Perception 13 

Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


Spellcasting. The firefist is a 9th-level Boros spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 14, +6 to hit with 
spell attacks). It has the following cleric spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): fire bolt, light, sacred flame, spare the dying 
Ist level (4 slots): guiding bolt, healing word, heroism, 

shield of faith 
2nd level (3 slots): lesser restoration, scorching ray 
3rd level (3 slots): blinding smite, crusader's mantle, revivify 
4th level (3 slots): banishment, wall of fire 
5th level (1 slot): flame strike 


ACTIONS 

Multiattack. The firefist makes two greatsword attacks. 
Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage. 

REACTIONS 


Guided Attack (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). When 
the firefist or one creature it can see within 30 feet of it makes 
an attack roll, the firefist grants a +10 bonus to that roll. 


FRONTLINE MEDIC 


Medium humanoid (any race), lawful good 


Armor Class 20 (plate, shield) 
Hit Points 19 (3d8 + 6) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15(42) 10(«0) 14(42) 10(+0) 13(+1)  12(4) 


Skills Medicine +5, Perception +3 

Senses passive Perception 13 

Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Spellcasting. The medic is a 3rd-level Boros spelicaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 11). The medic 
has the following cleric spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): mending, resistance, spare the dying 
Ist level (4 slots): cure wounds, sanctuary 
2nd level (2 slots): aid, lesser restoration 


ACTIONS 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage, or 
6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a 
melee attack. 


Medium humanoid (any race), lawful neutral 


Armor Class 18 (plate) 
Hit Points 52 (8d8 + 16) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 12(+1) 152) 15 (+2) 12(+1) 10 (+0) 


Skills Arcana +4, Intimidation +2, Perception +3 
Senses passive Perception 13 

Languages Common plus any one language 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


First Strike. The reckoner has advantage on initiative rolls. 


Spellcasting. The reckoner is a 5th-level Boros spellcaster. 
Its spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 12, +4 to 
hit with spell attacks). The reckoner has the following wizard 
spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): blade ward, light, message, shocking grasp 


Ist level (4 slots): guiding bolt, shield, thunderwave, witch bolt 
2nd level (3 slots): blur, levitate 
3rd level (2 slots): lightning bolt 


ACTIONS 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage, or 8 (1d10 + 3) slashing 
damage if used with two hands. 


REACTIONS 


Lightning Backlash (Recharge 5-6). When a creature hits the 
reckoner with an attack, the attacker takes lightning damage 
equal to half the damage dealt by the attack. 


RECKONER 


«. HAPTER 6 


FRIENDS AND FOES 


DIMIR NPCs 


The Dimir are a collection of individual agents and 
secretive cells woven subtly throughout the fabric of 
Ravnica and across all the guilds. Dimir agents excel at 


information gathering, covert operations, and assassina- 
tion. They collect secrets, relay intelligence, and sow dis- 


cord—all in obedience to the sometimes cryptic orders 
of their mysterious leaders. 

The Dimir NPCs table summarizes key roles within 
House Dimir. Statistics for these NPCs are found in the 
Monster Manual unless the table states otherwise. 


DiMiR NPCs 
Role Appropriate Stat Block 
Dimir spy Spy or thought spy* 
Duskmantle assassin Assassin 
Mind mage Mind mage* 


*Appears in this chapter 


LAZAV THE FACELESS 


Lazav is uniquely qualified to be the Dimir guildmas- 
ter: he is a shapechanger whose mysterious genius is 
informed by agents from the entire Dimir network. He 
takes on a tremendous variety of guises as his needs 
and plans require. He might step out into the Ravnican 
streets as an elderly widow to eavesdrop at the bazaar, 
become a vedalken hussar of the Azorius Senate to 
sidestep a checkpoint, or transform into a Tin Street 


LAZAV 


Medium monstrosity (shapechanger), neutral evil 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 204 (24d8 + 96) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 24 (+7) 18 (+4) 22 (+6) 20 (+5) 22 (46) 


d 


Saving Throws Dex +13, Int +12, Wis +11, Cha +12 

Skills Deception +18, Insight +11, Perception +11, Stealth +19 
Damage Resistances necrotic, psychic 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 21 

Languages Common, thieves’ cant 

Challenge 17 (18,000 XP) 
 -——MH— M Áo 


Elusive. No attack roll has advantage against Lazav unless he is 


incapacitated. 


Innate Spellcasting. Lazav's innate spellcasting ability is Intel- 
ligence (spell save DC 20). He can innately cast the following 
spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: detect thoughts, encode thoughts (see chapter 2), free- 


lur confusion, mirror image 
ify memar; Rary's i cud bond 


CHAPTER £ FRIENDS AND FOES 


merchant to deceive a passing noble. His true form 
might be that of a doppelganger or some other creature; 
no one has ever seen it. 


LAZAV'S TRAITS 

Ideal: "Knowledge. To know a thing is to have 
power over it." 

Bond: "When the time is right and my plans have come 
to fruition, all of Ravnica will be mine." 

Flaw: "I can't trust anyone." 


MIND MAGE 


Dimir mind mages are among the most feared spell- 
casters in Ravnica, thanks in large part to the aura of 
mystery that shrouds them and their work. Their ability 
to read and alter memories commands respect from the 
other members of House Dimir and makes them useful 
in the full spectrum of the guild's activities. Many mind 
mages lead cells of their own. 


THOUGHT SPY 


Thought spies form the backbone of House Dimir's 
covert operations. They are trained in stealth and infil- 
tration, tactics that they supplement with rigorously de- 
veloped mental abilities. To ensure that no secrets slip 
through Dimir’s fingers, they infiltrate rival guilds. In 
addition to traditional means of gathering intelligence, 
thought spies use their magic to spy on the thoughts of 
their targets. 


Shapechanger Savant. Lazav can use a bonus action to poly- 
morph into a Small or Medium humanoid he has seen. His 
statistics, other than his size, are the same in each form. Any 
equipment he is wearing or carrying isn’t transformed. 


Psychic Defenses. Unless Lazav is incapacitated, he is immune 
to magic that allows other creatures to read his thoughts, de- 
termine whether he is lying, know his alignment, or know his 
creature type. Creatures can telepathically communicate with 
Lazav only if he allows it. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. Lazav makes three shortsword attacks. 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 10 (1d6 + 7) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) psychic 
damage, and the target has disadvantage on the next attack roll 
it makes before Lazav’s next turn. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Lazav can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the options 
below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a time 
and only at the end of another creature's turn. Lazav regains 
spent legendary actions at the start of his turn. 


Attack. Lazav makes a weapon attack. 

Cast a Spell (Costs 2 Actions). Lazav casts one of his in- 
nate spells. 

Shifting Nightmare (Costs 3 Aron Lazav rapid 


MIND MAGE 


Medium humanoid (any race), neutral evil 


Armor Class 12 (15 with mage armor) 
Hit Points 49 (11d8) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+1) 142) 10(+0) 20(«5) 15(42) 16 (43) 


Saving Throws Int +8, Wis +5 
Skills Arcana +8, Deception +6, Insight +5, Persuasion +6 
Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages Common plus any four languages 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Special Equipment. The mage wears a spies’ murmur (see 
chapter 5). 


Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The mage's spellcasting ability is 
Intelligence (spell save DC 16). It can innately cast the following 
spells, requiring no components: 


At will: encode thoughts (see chapter 2), friends 

3/day each: charm person, detect thoughts, mage armor, sleep, 
suggestion 

1/day each: dominate person, mass suggestion, modify memory 


ACTIONS 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 
(aen eae en EUER 


THOUGHT SPY 


Medium humanoid (any race), neutral evil 


Armor Class 13 (leather armor) 
Hit Points 27 (6d8) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
11 (+0) 14(+2) 10(+0)  16(3) 13(#) 14 (+2) 


Skills Deception +6, Insight +3, Investigation +5, Perception +3, 
Sleight of Hand +4, Stealth +4 

Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 13 

Languages Common plus any one language 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 

Cunning Action. On each of its turns, the thought spy can use a 

bonus action to take the Dash, Disengage, or Hide action. 


Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The thought spy’s innate 
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 13). The 
thought spy can innately cast the following spells, requiring no 
components: 


At will: charm person, disguise self, encode thoughts (see 
chapter 2) 
1/day each: blur, detect thoughts, gaseous form 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The thought spy makes two melee attacks, or it 
makes three ranged attacks with its daggers. 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


Rapier. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage. 
a EE 


GOLGARI NPCs 


In its embrace of death and its claim over fetid, rotting 
environments, the Golgari Swarm appeals to those who 
are comfortable in a world of fungus, rot, and monsters. 

Every member of the Golgari Swarm has a func- 
tion, working together like the parts of a single, larger 
organism. At the same time, internal factions vie for 
authority. The most prominent faction is the Devkarin 
elves, whose spiritual leader, Izoni, is no friend of the 
guildmaster, Jarad. The medusas are still struggling 
to coalesce as a faction. The kraul are slowly gaining 
more influence in the guild under the leadership of the 
death priest, Mazirek. These faction leaders can serve 
as patrons for Golgari characters. They might send char- 
acters on missions to interfere with a rival or to increase 
the power and influence of their own faction. They can 
also serve as major adversaries for adventurers who op- 
pose the Golgari Swarm. 

Golgari NPCs include reclaimers, who scavenge and 
recycle corpses and other detritus, and assassins, who 
belong to a secret society called the Ochran. The Gol- 
gari NPCs table summarizes key roles within the guild. 
Statistics for these NPCs are found in the Monster Man- 
ual unless the table states otherwise. 


GoLGARI NPCs 


Role Appropriate Stat Block 
Devkarin warrior Drow or drow elite warrior 
Ochran assassin Assassin 

Reclaimer Scout 


Spiritual leader Golgari shaman* 


*Appears in this chapter 


JARAD VoD SAVO 


The Golgari guildmaster is a Devkarin necromancer 
and lich named Jarad Vod Savo. In life, Jarad was an 
archer and accomplished hunter, as well as the brother 
of the previous guildmaster, the ambitious Savra. Jarad 
mastered the ways of necromancy so he could rise as a 
lich after he sacrificed himself to save his son from the 
demon Rakdos. 

As head of the Golgari Swarm, Jarad commands elf 
and medusa assassins, legions of kraul, brutish trolls, 
and masses of undercity-dwelling creatures. Thanks to 
the necromantic power he wields—and with the support 
of his loyal guards and soldiers—he has survived a num- 
ber of assassination attempts from various upstarts. 

Undead Nature. Jarad doesn't require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


JARAD’S TRAITS 

Ideal: “Death. There’s wisdom to be gained in it, 
whether it be your own or someone else’s.” 

Bond: “Ravnica, with all its structures and institutions, 
will eventually rot away, and it will be time for the Gol- 
gari to bloom from the carcass.” 

Flaw: “I am beyond life and death and can’t be harmed.” 

ee m. 
IZONI, DEVKARIN MATKA 
The spiritual leader of the Devkarin elves holds the posi- 
tion of matka. Izoni, a Golgari shaman, has recently risen 
to her position after the suspicious death of her predeces- 
sor, Zdenia. Izoni is known for her ability to control insects 
and spiders, and she is never encountered without the 
company of one or more swarms of insects crawling over 
and around her. When she walks, she appears to glide over 
the ground. 


—PpRR€———ÁÁ———M REDE 


JARAD VoD SAvo 


Medium undead, neutral evil 


=== 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 

Hit Points 180 (24d8 + 72) 

Speed 30 ft. 

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

14 (+2)  16(43) 16(43) 20(45) 16(43) 15 (+2) 

Saving Throws Con +10, Int +12, Wis +10 

Skills Arcana +12, Insight +10, Perception +10 

Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhausted, frightened, 
paralyzed, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 20 

Languages Common, Elvish, Kraul 

Challenge 22 (41,000 XP) 


[m 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Jarad fails a saving throw, he 
can choose to succeed instead. 


Magic Resistance. Jarad has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Regeneration. Jarad regains 25 hit points at the start of his 
turn. If he takes fire or radiant damage, this trait doesn't func- 
tion at the start of his next turn. He dies only if he starts its 
turn with 0 hit points and doesn't regenerate. 


Spellcasting. Jarad is a 14th-level Golgari spellcaster. His spell- 
casting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 20, «12 to hit with 
spell attacks). Jarad has the following wizard spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): acid splash, chill touch, mage hand, poison 
spray, prestidigitation 

Ist level (4 slots): entangle, ray of sickness, sleep 

2nd level (3 slots): Melf's acid arrow, ray of enfeeblement, spider 
climb, web 

3rd level (3 slots): animate dead, plant growth, vampiric touch 

4th level (3 slots): blight, giant insect, grasping vine 

5th level (2 slots): cloudkill, insect plague 

6th level (1 slot): circle of death, create undead 

7th level (1 slot): finger of death, forcecage 


Spore Infusion. Jarad is surrounded by a cloud of spores. As a 
bonus action, he can cause the spores to deal 11 (2d10) poison 
damage to a creature he can see within 10 feet of him. 


Turn Resistance. Jarad has advantage on saving throws against 
any effect that turns undead. 


Undead Fortitude. |f damage reduces Jarad to 0 hit points, he 
must make a Constitution saving throw with a DC of 5 + the 
damage taken, unless the damage is radiant or from a critical 
hit. On a success, he drops to 1 hit point instead. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Jarad makes two attacks: one with his Noxious 
Touch and one with his Staff of Svogthir. He can cast a spell 
with a casting time of 1 action in place of one of these attacks. 


Noxious Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +12 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 28 (8d6) poison damage, and the target must 
succeed on a DC 20 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned 
for 1 minute. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end 
of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Staff of Svogthir. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) bludgeoning damage plus 13 (348) 
poison damage and 13 (3d8) necrotic damage. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Jarad can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the options 
below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a time 
and only at the end of another creature's turn. Jarad regains 
spent legendary actions at the start of his turn. 


Cantrip. Jarad casts one of his cantrips. 

Noxious Touch (Costs 2 Actions). Jarad uses Noxious Touch. 

Disrupt Life (Costs 3 Actions). Each creature within 30 feet of 
Jarad must make a DC 20 Constitution saving throw, taking 
35 (10d6) necrotic damage on a failed save, or half as much 
damage on a successful one. 


LLLA 


FRIENDS AND FOES 


GOLGARI SHAMAN 


Golgari shamans are the spiritual leaders of the Golgari 
Swarm. They teach the guild’s beliefs about the cycles of 
nature, using their necromantic magic to show how life 
sprouts from death. 

Golgari shamans paint their faces so they appear 
to have extra eyes on their cheeks and chins. They 
sometimes use magical moodmark paint (described in 
chapter 5) to allow them to communicate by means of 
these marks. They wear clothing adorned with beetle 
carapaces, spiderwebs, or shelf fungus. 


GOLGARI SHAMAN 


Medium humanoid (elf), neutral evil 


Armor Class 14 (hide armor) 
Hit Points 88 (16d8 + 16) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
11 (+0)  15(42) 12(0) 12(0) 17(3) 16 (43) 


Saving Throws Con +4, Wis +6 

Skills Arcana +4, Insight +6, Nature +4, Religion +4 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages Common, Elvish 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Fey Ancestry. The shaman has advantage on saving throws 
against being charmed, and magic can't put it to sleep. 


Spellcasting. The shaman is an 8th-level Golgari spellcaster. 
Its spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 14, +6 to 
hit with spell attacks). The shaman has the following druid 
spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): poison spray, shillelagh, thorn whip 

Ist level (4 slots): cure wounds, entangle, ray of sickness 

2nd level (3 slots): pass without trace, ray of enfeeblement, 
spike growth 

3rd level (3 slots): animate dead, dispel magic, plant growth 

4th level (2 slots): blight, giant insect 


ACTIONS 


Quarterstaff. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage, or 6 (1d8 + 2) 
bludgeoning damage if used with two hands. 


Fungal Rot. Melee Spell Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 9 (2d8) necrotic damage, and the target must make a DC 
14 Constitution saving throw, taking 18 (4d8) poison damage 
on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


REACTIONS 


Feed on Death. When a creature within 30 feet of the shaman 
drops to 0 hit points, the shaman gains 5 (1d10) temporary 
hit points. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


GOLGARI LAIRS 


Members of the Golgari Swarm have an intimate con- 
nection to their territory. When at least six Golgari 
defend their territory together, they can call on the envi- 
ronment to aid them. The group must include Jarad Vod 
Savo or at least one Golgari shaman, kraul death priest, 
undercity medusa, or Devkarin lich. When determining 
the difficulty of such an encounter, consider the lair to 
be one additional creature of challenge rating 1. 


LAIR ACTIONS 

On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the Golgari 
group takes a lair action, causing one of the follow- 

ing effects; the Golgari can't use the same effect two 
rounds in a row: 


* If the Golgari can see any sewer openings, they can 
cause sewage to overflow. Any creature within 20 feet 
of such an opening must succeed on a DC 15 Dexter- 
ity saving throw or be knocked prone and pushed up 
to 20 feet in a straight line away from the opening. 

* Spore-laden fungi release a cloud that fills a 
20-foot-radius sphere centered on a point the Golgari 
choose within 120 feet of any member of the group. 
The cloud spreads around corners and remains un- 
til one of the Golgari dismisses it as an action, the 
Golgari group uses this lair action again, or all the 
members of the Golgari group die. The area within 
the cloud is lightly obscured. Any creature in the cloud 
when it appears must make a DC 15 Constitution sav- 
ing throw, taking 10 (3d6) poison damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 
Any creature that ends its turn in the cloud takes 10 
(3d6) poison damage. 

* Tendrils of creeping fungi reach out to ensnare 
the enemies of the Golgari. The Golgari choose a 
15-foot-radius sphere centered on a point within 60 
feet of any member of the group. Each creature in 
the area that isn't allied with the Golgari group must 
succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or become 
restrained until the Golgari group uses this lair action 
again, all the members of the group are slain, or no 
member of the group is within 60 feet of the effect. A 
creature restrained in this way can use an action to 
make a DC 15 Strength check, ending the restrained 
effect on itself with a success. 


REGIONAL EFFECTS 

The region containing a Golgari lair is infested with 
mosses and strange fungi. This habitat accounts for one 
or both of the following effects in the surrounding un- 
dercity (the effects don't spread to the surface): 


* Moss, fungi, and other growth covers every under- 
ground surface within half a mile of the lair. 

* Fungal spores drifting throughout the lair have the 
power to animate corpses. Whenever a Small or Me- 
dium humanoid dies within the lair, roll a die. On an 
odd number, the dead creature rises up as a fungus 
drudge (use the zombie stat block in the Monster Man- 
ual) 1d8 hours later, unless its body is destroyed. 


If all the Golgari in the lair die, the regional effects 
fade over 1d10 days. 


GRUUL NPCs 


Like the creatures that fight alongside them, warriors 
and shamans of the Gruul Clans are wildly aggressive. 

True to their name, the Gruul Clans include a number 
of different groups with their own leaders and tradi- 
tions. Beyond the six most prominent clans (the Burning 
Tree, the Ghor, the Scab, the Slizt, the Gravel Hide, the 
Zhur-Taa, and the Bolrac), countless small clans—some 
little more than war bands—claim territories throughout 
the rubblebelts. 

Gruul NPCs fill various clan roles. The Gruul NPCs 
table summarizes key roles within the guild. Statistics 
for these NPCs are found in the Monster Manual unless 
the table states otherwise. 


GRuuL NPCs 
Role Appropriate Stat Block 
Clan member Anarch* 
Clan warrior Berserker 
Druid Druid of the Old Ways* 
Scout Rubblebelt stalker* 


Trog (Gruul hermit) Gladiator 
*Appears in this chapter 


BORBORYGMOS 


For decades, the enormous cyclops Borborygmos has 
commanded the respect and obedience of the Gruul 
Clans by defeating all who challenged him. He embod- 
ies the raging fire that the Gruul believe burns in their 
bellies, and his wrath toward the civilization of Ravnica 
knows no bounds. 

Mightiest of the Mighty. Borborygmos leads the 
Burning Tree clan, which is the largest and most di- 
verse of the Gruul Clans. He is almost always accom- 
panied by other members of his clan—not because he 
needs their protection, but because they might need his. 
His companions include creatures ranging from burly 
giants to cowering goblins. 

The Gruul follow strength, and Borborygmos holds 
his position only because he has proved stronger than 
any challenger. 


BORBORYGMOS’S TRAITS 

Ideal: “We fight!” 

Bond: “I will bring the wilds back." 
Flaw: “I don’t have to listen to anybody.” 


ANARCH 


The rank-and-file members of the Gruul Clans, called 
anarchs, despise civilization and have sworn to tear 
down both its physical structures and its institutions. 

Anarchs scavenge everything, from the hide armor 
they wear to the weapons they wield. As they pick 
through the refuse of the rubblebelts, they some- 
times come across magic items and other valuable 
treasures. 


———— ——— 
NIKYA OF THE OLD Ways 
The Zhur-Taa leader, Nikya, is a powerful centaur druid of 
the Old Ways. In fact, she considers herself to be the last 
of the true Gruul druids. Though raised to be a warrior, 
Nikya soon discovered her natural gifts with magic. She 
can summon enormous constricting vines from the an- 
cient layers of Ravnica’s crust. She has little love for Borbo- 
rygmos, and she believes that another leader—one who is 
loyal to the Old Ways—will arise among the Gruul before 
the End-Raze begins. 
——— 


DRUID OF THE OLD WAYS 


The druids of the Old Ways are the keepers of ancient 
Gruul traditions devoted to the primal ferocity of ani- 
mal gods such as Ilharg the Raze-Boar and Kashath 
the Stalker. 

The End-Raze. The druids of the Old Ways believe 
that civilization will never be eradicated by scattered 
raids and petty skirmishes. They cling to the idea of a 
coming apocalypse, the End-Raze, when Ilharg’s hoofs 
will trample every brick and stone of Ravnica's soaring 
skylines to rubble. The world will return to a state of na- 
ture in which the lawless code of muscle and savagery 
will reign once again. 


RUBBLEBELT STALKER 


Rubblebelt stalkers are scouts and skirmishers for the 
Gruul Clans. They excel at moving over challenging ter- 
rain, whether they're picking their way through treach- 
erous ruins or clambering across rooftops. They favor 
ambush tactics and avoid confrontations with stronger 
forces, relying on their superior mobility to make 

their escape. 


BORBORYGMOS 


Huge giant, chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 270 (20d12 + 140) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
24 (+7) (40 24(47) = 8 (-1) (3) 16 (+3) 
mI Sá ÉÁ à  L(—31. 9 240 ANN 
Saving Throws Str +13, Con +13, Wis +9 
Skills Athletics +13, Insight +9, Survival +9 
Damage Resistances poison, psychic 
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened 
Senses tremorsense 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages Common, Giant 
Challenge 18 (20,000 XP) 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Borborygmos fails a saving 
throw, he can choose to succeed instead. 


Poor Depth Perception. Borborygmos has disadvantage on any 
attack roll against a target more than 30 feet away. 


Siege Monster. Borborygmos deals double damage to objects 
and structures. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Borborygmos can use his Frightful Presence. 
He also makes two attacks: one with his maul and one with 
his stomp. 


Maul. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 28 (6d6 + 7) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a crea- 
ture, it must succeed on a DC 21 Strength saving throw or be 
knocked prone. 


Stomp. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 18 (2d10 + 7) bludgeoning damage. 


Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, range 30/120 ft., one 
target. Hit: 29 (4d10 + 7) bludgeoning damage. 


Frightful Presence. Each creature of Borborygmos's choice that 
is within 60 feet of him and can see or hear him must succeed 
on a DC 17 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened of him 
for 1 minute. The frightened creature can repeat the saving 
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself 
ona success. If a creature's saving throw is successful or the 
effect ends for it, the creature is immune to Borborygmos's 
Frightful Presence for the next 24 hours. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Borborygmos can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 

at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. Borbo- 
rygmos regains spent legendary actions at the start of his turn. 


Attack. Borborygmos makes a weapon attack. 

Bellow (Costs 2 Actions). Borborygmos yells menacingly at one 
creature he can see within 60 feet of him. That creature must 
succeed on a DC 17 Wisdom saving throw or become fright- 
ened of him for 1 minute. If the creature is already frightened, 
it becomes stunned instead. A creature can repeat the saving 
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on 
itself on a success. If a creature's saving throw is successful 
or the effect ends for it, the creature is immune to Borboryg- 
mos's Bellow for the next 24 hours. 

Wide Berth (Costs 3 Actions). Borborygmos moves up to half 
his speed and can move through the space of any creature 
smaller than Huge. The first time Borborygmos enters a 
creature's space during this move, the creature must make a 
DC 21 Dexterity saving throw. If the saving throw succeeds, 
the creature is pushed 5 feet away from Borborygmos. If the 
saving throw fails, that creature is knocked prone, and Borbo- 
rygmos can make a stomp attack against it. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


EE 


ANARCH 


Small or Medium humanoid (any race), chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 13 (hide armor) 
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14(32) 3) 12(94) 9(-3) (0) 10(«0) 


Skills Perception +2, Survival +2 

Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Aggressive. As a bonus action, the anarch can move up to its 
speed toward a hostile creature it can see. 


Siege Monster. The anarch deals double damage to objects and 
structures. 


ACTIONS 


Spiked Club. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 

target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage, or 7 (1d10 + 2) pierc- 

ing damage if used with two hands. 
CLAU E 


ELLLLILILMMM—M————áà 


DRUID OF THE OLD WAYS 


Medium humanoid (any race), chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 14 (hide armor) 
Hit Points 90 (12d8 + 36) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
11 (+0) 15(2) 16 (+3) 10(0) 20(45) 14(42) 


Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +6, Wis +8 
Skills Nature +3, Perception +8, Survival +8 
Senses passive Perception 18 

Languages Common, Druidic 

Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


Siege Monster. The druid deals double damage to objects and 
structures. 


Speak with Beasts and Plants. The druid can communicate with 
beasts and plants as if they shared a language. 


Spellcasting. The druid is a 12th-level Gruul spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 16, +8 to hit with 
spell attacks). It has the following druid spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): druidcraft, produce fire, resistance, thorn whip 
Ist level (4 slots): cure wounds, faerie fire, thunderwave 
2nd level (3 slots): beast sense, flame blade, pass without trace 
3rd level (3 slots): conjure animals, dispel magic, plant growth 
4th level (3 slots): dominate beast, freedom of movement, 

wall of fire 
Sth level (2 slots): commune with nature, conjure elemen- 

tal, scrying 
6th level (1 slot): transport via plants, wall of thorns 


ACTIONS 


Quarterstaff. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 3 (1d6) bludgeoning damage, or 4 (1d8) bludgeon- 
ing damage if used with two hands. 


ELM SSS) 


RUBBLEBELT STALKER 


Medium humanoid (any race), chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 14 (piecemeal armor) 
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


CHA 
8 (-1) 


STR 
10 (+0) 


DEX 
15 (+2) 


CON 
12 (+1) 


INT 
10 (+0) 


wis 
14 (+2) 


Skills Athletics +2, Perception +4, Stealth +4 
Senses passive Perception 14 

Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Ambusher. In the first round of a combat, the stalker has ad- 
vantage on attack rolls against any creature that hasn't taken 
a turn yet. 


Nimble Escape. The stalker can take the Disengage or Hide ac- 
tion as a bonus action on each of its turns. 


Ruin Dweller. The stalker has advantage on Dexterity (Stealth) 
checks made to hide in ruins, and its speed is not reduced in 
difficult terrain composed of rubble. 


Siege Monster. The stalker deals double damage to objects and 


structures. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The stalker makes three attacks with its 
shortsword. 


Shortsword. Melee Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 
5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Druid OF THE 
Oo Ways 


— 


(m 


IZZET NPCs 


Though the Izzet League officially serves the function 
of maintaining the city’s public works, most of its mem- 
bers join the guild to indulge their insatiable curiosity 
for magical knowledge. Using the guild’s extensive re- 
sources and sturdy facilities, researchers pursue their 
studies through reckless experimentation, which often 
ends in destruction of property, loss of limb, or at the 
very least, a loud boom. Nearly all Izzet members have 
some capability with magic. 

Izzet NPCs include chemisters, who work extensively 
with the magic alloy mizzium, and their attendants. The 
Izzet NPCs table summarizes key roles within the guild. 
Statistics for these NPCs are found in the Monster Man- 
ual unless the table states otherwise. 


Izzet NPCs 

Role Appropriate Stat Block 
Attendant Commoner 
Chemister Mage 

Guard Scorchbringer guard* 


Magic tester Flux blastseeker,* cosmotronic blastseeker,* 
counterflux blastseeker,* or galvanic blast- 


seeker* 


*Appears in this chapter 


Ce 
MASTER CHEMISTER GROZGROX 


Master Chemister Grozgrox is a viashino (lizardfolk) mage 
with a talent for shaping mizzium. His genius has earned 

commendations from Niv-Mizzet himself on two separate 
occasions, a fact that Grozgrox tries to work into conversa- 
tion as often as possible. 


m 


NIV-MIZZET 


Possessed of arrogance and vanity that matches his vast 
intellect and tremendous power, Niv-Mizzet is the an- 
cient dragon who founded and continues to control the 
Izzet League. From his private laboratory at the top of 
the Izzet guildhall, Niv-Mizzet directs the research and 
experiments of his countless underlings. He coordinates 
a tremendous number of apparently unrelated projects, 
working toward some mysterious end. 

There can be little doubt that this ancient dragon is 
one of the most intelligent beings on Ravnica and one 
of the world's most powerful spellcasters. He is just as 
acquisitive as any dragon, but his treasure is scientific 
and magical knowledge. His ambition is a looming 
threat in the minds of all the other guildmasters, but 
confronting him directly is almost unthinkable thanks 
to the combination of his awesome magical power and 
the sheer physical threat of a fire-breathing, sword- 
toothed dragon. 


NIV-MIZZET'S TRAITS 

Ideal: "Innovation. Don't just have an idea—have 
all of them." 

Bond: "I have spent more than ten thousand years re- 
searching the mysteries of the world around me, but 
there is much more to discover." 

Flaw: “I find it tedious to converse with simpletons who 
lack vision." 


BLASTSEEKERS 


While chemisters focus on inventing new tools, weap- 
ons, and other devices for the guild to use, the role of 
a blastseeker is to put those devices to work. Despite 
the name, not all such devices produce explosions, 
but all the most interesting ones (from the Izzet per- 
spective) do. 


COUNTERFLUX 


BuLASTSEEKER 


S 


d 


Niv-MIZZET 


Gargantuan dragon, chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 22 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 370 (19d20 + 171) 
Speed 40 ft., climb 30 ft., fly 80 ft. 


CON INT WIS CHA 
29 (+9) 30(+10) 17(+3) 25 (+7) 
—eeEeEE EEE — M 
Saving Throws Con +17, Int +18, Wis +11 
Skills Arcana +18, Insight +11, Perception +11 
Damage Resistances cold, psychic, thunder 
Damage Immunities fire, lightning 
Condition Immunities charmed 
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive 

Perception 21 
Languages Common, Draconic 
Challenge 26 (90,000 XP) 
aeaaaee 
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Niv-Mizzet fails a saving 
throw, he can choose to succeed instead. 


STR DEX 
29 (+9) 14 (+2) 


Locus of the Firemind. Niv-Mizzet can maintain concentration 
on two different spells at the same time. In addition, he has ad- 
vantage on saving throws to maintain concentration on spells. 


Magic Resistance. Niv-Mizzet has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Master Chemister. When Niv-Mizzet casts a spell that deals 
damage, he can change the spell's damage to cold, fire, force, 
lightning, or thunder. 


Spellcasting. Niv-Mizzet is a 20th-level Izzet spellcaster. His 
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 26, «18 to hit 
with spell attacks). He has the following wizard spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): fire bolt, light, prestidigitation, ray of frost, 
shocking grasp 

Ist level (4 slots): detect magic, magic missile, shield, thunder- 
wave, unseen servant 

2nd level (3 slots): blur, enlarge/reduce, flaming sphere, 
scorching ray 


! 


3rd level (3 slots): counterspell, fireball, hold person, lightning 
bolt, slow 

4th level (3 slots): confusion, dimension door, fabricate 

5th level (2 slots): conjure elemental, polymorph, wall of fire, 
wall of force 

6th level (1 slot): chain lightning, disintegrate, true seeing 

7th level (1 slot): project image, reverse gravity, teleport 

8th level (1 slot): control weather, maze, power word stun 

9th level (1 slot): prismatic wall 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Niv-Mizzet makes three attacks: one with his bite 
and two with his claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
Hit: 18 (2d8 + 9) piercing damage plus 14 (4d6) fire damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 14 (2d4 + 9) slashing damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target. 
Hit: 16 (2d6 9) bludgeoning damage. 


Fire Breath (Recharge 5-6). Niv-Mizzet exhales fire in a 90-foot 
cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 25 Dexterity 
saving throw, taking 91 (26d6) fire damage on a failed save, or 
half as much damage on a successful one. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Niv-Mizzet can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op- 
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a 

time and only at the end of another creature's turn. Niv-Mizzet 

regains spent legendary actions at the start of his turn. 


Cantrip. Niv-Mizzet casts one of his cantrips. 

Tail Attack. Niv-Mizzet makes a tail attack. 

Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). Niv-Mizzet beats his wings. 
Each creature within 15 feet of him must succeed on a DC 
25 Dexterity saving throw or take 14 (2d4 + 9) bludgeoning 
damage and be knocked prone. Niv-Mizzet can then fly up to 
half his flying speed. 

Dracogenius (Costs 3 Actions). Niv-Mizzet regains a spell slot 
of 3rd level or lower. 


CHAPTER f 


COSMOTRONIC BLASTSEEKER 


Medium humanoid (any race), chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 15 (chain shirt) 
Hit Points 37 (5d8 + 15) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14 (+2) 15(2) 16(3) 18(4) 9(-1)  12(4) 


Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +5 

Skills Arcana +6, Intimidation +3, Perception +1 
Senses passive Perception 11 

Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Empowered Spell (3/Day). When the blastseeker rolls damage 


for a spell, it can reroll up to four dice of damage. It must use 
the new dice. 


Innate Spellcasting. The blastseeker's innate spellcasting abil- 
ity is Intelligence (spell save DC 14, +6 to hit with spell attacks). 
The blastseeker can innately cast the following spells, requiring 
no components other than its Izzet gear, which doesn't func- 
tion for others: 


3/day each: scorching ray, shield, thunderwave 
2/day: fireball 


Tides of Chaos (1/Day). The blastseeker makes one attack roll, 
ability check, or saving throw with advantage. 


ACTIONS 


Warhammer. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) bludgeoning damage, or 7 (1d10 + 2) 
bludgeoning damage if used with two hands. 


COUNTERFLUX BLASTSEEKER 


Medium humanoid (any race), chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 13 (16 with mage armor) 
Hit Points 39 (6d8 + 12) 


Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (+1) 16 (+3) 15 (+2) 18 (+4) 11(40) 14 (42) 


Saving Throws Con +4, Wis +2 

Skills Arcana +6, Perception +2 

Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages Common plus any one language 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Counterflux Overcast (Recharge 5—6). The blastseeker can cre- 
ate an additional effect immediately after casting a spell. Roll a 
d6 to determine the effect: 


FLUX BLASTSEEKER 


Medium humanoid (any race), chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 12 (15 with mage armor) 
Hit Points 55 (10d8 + 10) 


Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 15 (+2) 12(41) 20(45) 9(-1) 14 (42) 


Saving Throws Dex +5, Int +8 

Skills Arcana +8, Perception +2 

Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages Common plus any one language 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Fluxbending Overcast (Recharge 5-6). The blastseeker can cre- 
ate an additional effect immediately after casting a spell. Roll a 
d6 to determine the effect: 


1-3. The blastseeker creates a 15-foot-radius invisible sphere 
centered on itself that lasts until the end of its next turn. 
Creatures in the sphere have disadvantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 

4—6. The blastseeker creates a 15-foot-radius invisible sphere 
centered on itself that lasts until the end of its next turn. 
Creatures in the sphere have advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Innate Spellcasting. The blastseeker's innate spellcasting abil- 
ity is Intelligence (spell save DC 14, +6 to hit with spell attacks). 
The blastseeker can innately cast the following spells, requiring 
no components other than its Izzet gear, which doesn't func- 
tion for others: 


3/day each: enlarge/reduce, mage armor (self only), scorching ray 
1/day each: counterspell, dispel magic, protection from energy 


ACTIONS 


Rapier. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage. 


1-3. The blastseeker teleports, swapping places with a creature 
it can see within 30 feet of it. 

4-6. The blastseeker and each creature within 10 feet of it must 
succeed on a DC 16 Constitution saving throw or take 11 
(2d10) thunder damage. 


Innate Spellcasting. The blastseeker’s innate spellcasting abil- 
ity is Intelligence (spell save DC 16, +8 to hit with spell attacks). 
The blastseeker can innately cast the following spells, requiring 
no components other than its Izzet gear, which doesn’t func- 
tion for others: 


3/day each: mage armor (self only), scorching ray 
1/day each: banishment, cone of cold, dimension door, fire- 
ball, ice storm 


ACTIONS 


Quarterstaff. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 3 (1d6) bludgeoning damage, or 4 (1d8) bludgeon- 
ing damage if used with two hands. 


CHAPTER & | FRIENDS AND FOES 


MIZZIX OF THE IZMAGNUS 
Mizzix is a goblin galvanic blastseeker who began her Izzet 
career as a lowly attendant. But she quickly earned her a 
place at her own magical forge with a squadron of atten- 
dants. Through a combination of natural talent, calculated 
political moves, and fortunate accidents, Mizzix has now 
risen to the highest position in the Izzet League's court, 
occupying a seat of the Izmagnus. 


I GALVANIC BLASTSEEKER 


| Medium humanoid (any race), chaotic neutral 


| Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 52 (8d8 « 16) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 19 (+4) 10(40) 13 (+1) 


17 (+3) 14 (+2) 


SSS ee - 


Saving Throws Dex +6 

Skills Acrobatics +6, Arcana +7, Perception +3 

Damage Resistances lightning, thunder 

Senses passive Perception 13 

Languages Common and Primordial, plus any one language 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Galvanic Overcast (Recharge 5-6). When the blastseeker casts 
lightning bolt or thunderwave, it can roll a die. On an odd num- 
ber, the blastseeker takes 9 (2d8) force damage. On an even 
number, the spell also deals 9 (2d8) lightning damage to each 
target that fails its saving throw. 


Heart of the Storm. When the blastseeker casts lightning bolt 
or thunderwave, all other creatures within 10 feet of the blast- 
seeker each take 3 lightning damage. 


Innate Spellcasting. The blastseeker’s innate spellcasting ability 
is Intelligence (spell save DC 15, +7 to hit with spell attacks). 
The blastseeker can innately cast the following spells, requiring 
no components other than its Izzet gear, which doesn’t func- 
tion for others: 


3/day each: levitate, lightning bolt, thunderwave 
l/day: stoneskin 


Gust-Propelled Leap. The blastseeker can use a bonus action to 
fly up to 10 feet without provoking opportunity attacks. 


ACTIONS 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 3 (1d6) piercing damage, or 4 
(1d8) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a me- 
lee attack. 


eee 


qe 


ScORCHBRINGER GUARO 


SCORCHBRINGER GUARD 


Medium humanoid (any race), chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 16 (breastplate) 
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (+1) 1462 12(#1) 100) 9(-1) 10 (+0) 


Senses passive Perception 9 
Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


TI = ——— 


Explosive Tank. When the guard dies, or if it rolls a 1 when 
checking whether its Scorchbringer action recharges, the tank 
on its back explodes in a 10-foot radius sphere. Each creature 
in that area must make a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw, taking 7 
(2d6) fire damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on 
a successful one. The explosion ignites flammable objects that 
aren't being worn or carried, and it destroys the scorchbringer. 


ACTIONS 


Light Hammer. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, 
reach 5 ft. or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 2) 
bludgeoning damage. 


Scorchbringer (Recharge 4-6). The guard’s scorchbringer 

spouts a stream of flame in a line that is 30 feet long and 5 feet 

wide. Each creature in the line must make a DC 12 Dexterity 

saving throw, taking 7 (2d6) fire damage on a failed save, or 

half as much damage on a successful one. 
CELL 


OrZHOV NPCs 


Every person in the Orzhov Syndicate, living or dead, 
has a place in the guild's rigid hierarchy. From the 
undead spirits that make up the ruling Obzedat to the 
lowly undead borrower spirits at the bottom, along with 
the ranks of the living in between, everyone knows 
where they stand: who is above them, who is below 
them, who owes them, and whom they owe. 

The Orzhov hierarchy includes advokists who find 
loopholes in the law to exploit, knights who enforce the 
guild's will, and indentured spirits. The Orzhov NPCs 
table summarizes key roles within the guild. Statistics 
for these NPCs are found in the Monster Manual unless 
the table states otherwise. 


OrzHov NPCs 


Role Appropriate Stat Block 
Advokist Mage 

Indentured spirit Indentured spirit* 
Knight Knight 

Oligarch Noble 


Pontiff or ministrant Priest or acolyte 


*Appears in this chapter 


OBZEDAT, THE GHOST COUNCIL 


The ghosts who make up the Obzedat are traditionally 
called patriarchs, though they can be male or female. 
They are the oldest, wealthiest, and most influential 
oligarchs of the Orzhov Syndicate. They have been dead 
for centuries, but they refuse to let go of the fortunes 
they amassed in life. Addicted to power and prestige, 
these patriarchs continue to dominate the guild and ac- 
cumulate even larger fortunes. 

Mostly Unanimous. The ghosts of the Obzedat func- 
tion as a unit, driven by their shared desire to accumu- 
late ever more wealth for the guild. In times of disagree- 
ment, the eldest of the council exerts his seniority to 
bend the council to his will. 

Grandfather Karlov. The head of the council, who 
gives final approval to its decisions and breaks ties 
within the group, is Karlov, known as Grandfather. In 
life, Karlov was the greediest of Orzhov oligarchs, and 
his many centuries as a spirit have not diminished his 
hunger for more wealth. 

Undead Nature. An Obzedat ghost doesn’t require 
air, food, drink, or sleep. 


THE GHOST COUNCIL'S TRAITS 

Ideal: “Influence is measured in power, status, and 
money, but mostly money.” 

Bond: “Gather as much as you can while you can, for 
when you die, you will take it with you.” 

Flaw: “Everyone has a price.” 


LL ——————————— e. 
TEYSA KARLOV 
Under the authority of the Obzedat, Teysa Karlov (a mage 
with access to Orzhov guild spells) formerly held the title 
of grand envoy, serving as the representative of the Orzhov 
when interaction with the leadership of other guilds was 
necessary. A defining characteristic of the Orzhov for de- 
cades was the tension between Teysa, living in the complex 
political realities of the world, and the inflexible, avaricious 
Obzedat. Teysa argued strenuously that the Obzedat's 
isolationism and their reluctance to forge alliances that 
could make them reliant on other guilds would lead to the 
syndicate's downfall. 

That tension reached its boiling point when Teysa en- 
listed the help of Tajic, Blade of the Boros Legion, in an 
attempt to seize power from the Obzedat. Her attempt 
failed, and the Obzedat imprisoned Teysa, eliminated the 
role of grand envoy, and canceled all dealings with other 
guilds. Teysa remains in prison to this day, and the Ghost 
Council extorts corrupt officials to make sure they keep her 
locked away. 


OBzEDAT GHOST 
| Medium undead, lawful evil 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) plus 1 for each other Obzedat 
ghost within 30 feet of it 

Hit Points 110 (20d8 + 20) 

Speed 0 ft., fly 30 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT — WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 10(+0) 13(+1) 18 (+4) 20(+5) 17 (+3) 


i 


Saving Throws Int +7, Wis +8 

Skills Insight +8, Perception +8 

Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning, thunder; 
bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Damage Immunities necrotic, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, grappled, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 18 

Languages Common 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 

e—a 

Council of Five. The ghost has a trait based on who it is, as 

shown below: 


Enezesku: Enfeebling Ray. Enezesku's Innate Spellcasting trait 
includes ray of enfeeblement, which he can cast at will. 


Fautomni: Undead Fortitude. If damage reduces Fautomni to 
0 hit points, he must make a Constitution saving throw with 
a DC of 5 + the damage taken, unless the damage is radiant 
or from a critical hit. On a success, Fautomni drops to 1 hit 
point instead. 


Karlov: Unnatural Vigor. When Karlov regains hit points, he has 
advantage on attack rolls he makes on his next turn. 


Vuliev: Teleportation. Vuliev's Innate Spellcasting trait includes 
misty step, which he can cast at will. 


Xil Xaxosz: Lingering Spite. When Xil Xaxosz is reduced to 0 hit 
points, his incorporeal form explodes in a burst of necrotic 
energy. Each creature within 5 feet of him must make a DC 16 
Constitution saving throw, taking 14 (4d6) necrotic damage 
on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


Ethereal Sight. The ghost can see 60 feet into the Ethereal 
Plane when it is on the Material Plane, and vice versa. 


creatures and raves as if i were dm 


(1d10) force damage if it ends its turn. inside ano 


Innate Spellcasting. The ghost's innate spellcasting. ability is 
Wisdom (spell save DC 16, +8 to hit with spell attacks). It can 
innately cast the following spells, requiring no components: 


At will: chill touch (at 5th level, and the ghost regains hit points 
equal to half the amount of damage the target takes) 
1/day each: sanctuary, spirit guardians (at 4th level) 


Legendary Resistance (1/Day). If the ghost fails a saving throw, 
it can choose to succeed instead. 


ACTIONS 


Life Drain. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 18 (4d8) necrotic damage, and the ghost regains 
hit points equal to half the amount of damage the target takes. 
The target must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw 
or its hit point maximum is reduced by an amount equal to 
the damage taken. The target dies if its hit point maximum is 
reduced to 0. This reduction to the target's hit point maximum 
lasts until the target finishes a long rest. 


Convene the Ghost Council. The ghost summons the other 
four members of the Obzedat. At the start of the ghost's next 
turn, the other members appear in unoccupied spaces within 
30 feet of the summoner. The ghosts each roll initiative when 
they appear. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


If five Obzedat ghosts are all within 30 feet of each other, they 
can collectively take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op- 
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at 

a time, and only at the end of another creature's turn. Obzedat 
ghosts regain spent legendary actions at the start of the turn of 
the ghost with the highest initiative. 


Forced Obedience. A target that all of the Obzedat ghosts can 
see must succeed on a DC 16 Wisdom saving throw or bow 
until the end of its next turn. Until this bow ends, the target 
can't take actions or reactions, and its speed is 0 and can't 
be increased. 

Indentured Spirits (Costs 3 Actions). The Obzedat ghosts con- 
jure 1d6 indentured spirits (described in this chapter) within 
60 feet of one of them. 


RAKDOS NPCs 


The Cult of Rakdos attracts thrill seekers. Some of its 
members are lured by promises of hedonistic pleasure; 
others are drawn like moths to the spectacle of the fiery 
stage. They come to join a twisted community where no 
impulse is unacceptable, no act is too vile, and all that 
matters is the excitement and pleasure of the moment. 
They come for a chance at the spotlight—some slim 
hope of fame, even if it is the infamy of going down in 
flames. And they come for fellowship, an easy compan- 
ionship without the earnest spirituality of the Selesnya, 
the regimented discipline of the Boros, or the hierarchy 
of the Orzhov. 

Not every member of the guild is a performer; some 
members simply tag along to witness the guild’s may- 
hem. The Rakdos NPCs table summarizes key roles 
within the guild. Statistics for these NPCs are found in 
the Monster Manual unless the table states otherwise. 


RAkpos NPCs 


Role Appropriate Stat Block 
Blood witch Blood witch* 
Cult member Cult fanatic or cultist 


Performer Rakdos lampooner* or Rakdos performer* 


*Appears in this chapter 


RAKDOS —À 


Rakdos, the demon for whom his cult is named, embod- 
ies hedonism. He is also the consummate entertainer, 
whose mere appearance is an act of grisly performance 
art. A monstrous figure standing thirty feet tall, spread- 
ing enormous wings, crowned with fire and swinging 

a flaming scythe, Rakdos demands the spotlight. His 
every entrance is a showstopper. 

Sometimes after his grand entrance, Rakdos crouches 
to witness the performances of those who adore him. To 
them, his opinion is the only one that matters, but he is 
a demanding spectator. He has seen thousands of years 
of circus tricks and has no patience for performers who 


don't give their all. His flaming scythe has brought more 
than one tepid show to a sudden and spectacular close. 

Jaded as he is, Rakdos attends his cult's performances 
only rarely. He often retreats into his lair below the cult's 
guildhall for months or years at a time, but his followers 
know that he might emerge at any time to witness the 
latest spectacle. 


RAKDOS'S TRAITS 

Ideal: "Everyone should pursue their greatest desire." 

Bond: "If you want my favor, show me a performance 
I've never seen before." 

Flaw: "What is joy?" 


BLoop WITCH 


Blood witches imagine themselves to be the intermedi- 
aries between Rakdos and his cult—the pinnacle of his 
priesthood, his trusted advisors, and the messengers 
who communicate his will to the scattered troupes 
and ringmasters. The Cult of Rakdos recognizes no 
authority but Rakdos, and the demon lord requires no 
advisors. Nonetheless, the blood witches are smart, 
charismatic, and powerful, so their voices do carry 
some weight. 

Blood witches strive both to protect the cult from 
external interference and to punish those who bring 
harm to the guild. They claim grandiose titles, such as 
Tormentor of the Wojek, as a way of mocking their in- 
tended victims. 


RAKDOS LAMPOONER 


One of the most effective weapons in the Rakdos cult's 
arsenal is satire, and a Rakdos lampooner is a virtuoso 
of that art. Lampooners generally reserve their mockery 
for people and guilds that have seized an outsized mea- 
sure of power, those who need to be taken down a peg, 
rather than piling further humiliation onto those who 
are already struggling. They use masks, marionettes, or 
effigies to caricature public figures, or sometimes play 
pranks on those individuals directly in the streets. 


RAKDOS PERFORMER 


By offering a place for those of many different talents, 
the Cult of Rakdos has seen its numbers swell with 
performing artists, including blade jugglers, fire eaters, 
and high wire acrobats. Performers carry the message 
of Rakdos out into the streets: cut loose, free yourself 
from the bonds of society's mores and expectations, and 
indulge your desires. 


sili —M—Óáá——— HÓ—— €— — — | 
JUDITH, THE SCOURGE Diva 
Judith appears at Rakdos clubs and street shows as a 
singer and performance artist, combining dark soliloquies 
and bizarre pain stunts. She's the grande dame of the 
Rakdos, and what she says backstage goes. 

Judith covets the adoration heaped on Rakdos by his 
cultists. She does countless performances a week, but the 
big demon gets all the praise. She has begun to assemble 
a small entourage of fans, toadies, and understudies who 
echo her complaints about the guild’s leader. 


BLooo WircH 


RAKDOS 

Huge fiend (demon), chaotic evil 

: : 

Armor Class 20 (natural armor) 

Hit Points 300 (24d12 + 144) 

Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft. 

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

26 (+8) 15(+2) 22(«6) 14(+2) 18(+4) 30 (+10) 

————— — = 

Saving Throws Str +15, Con +13, Wis +11, Cha +17 

Skills Intimidation +17, Performance +17, Persuasion +17 

Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Damage Immunities fire, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhausted, frightened, 
poisoned 

Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 14 

Languages Abyssal, Common 

Challenge 24 (62,000 XP) 

Captivating Presence. Any creature that starts its turn within 

30 feet of Rakdos must make a DC 25 Wisdom saving throw. 

On a failed save, the creature becomes charmed by Rakdos for 

1 minute or until the creature is farther than 30 feet away from 

him. On a successful save, the creature becomes immune to 

Rakdos's Captivating Presence for 24 hours. 


Cruel Entertainment. When a creature Rakdos can see within 
60 feet of him is reduced to 0 hit points, Rakdos gains 25 tem- 
porary hit points. 


Innate Spellcasting. Rakdos's spellcasting ability is Charisma 
(spell save DC 25). He can innately cast hellish rebuke (at Sth 
level) at will, requiring no material components. 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). |f Rakdos fails a saving throw, he 
can choose to succeed instead. 


LLM——————— M ——— ————— LSE 


Magic Resistance. Rakdos has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Magic Weapons. Rakdos's weapon attacks are magical. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Rakdos makes two attacks with his Curtain-Call 
Scythe or his claws. 


Curtain-Call Scythe. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 
10 ft., one target. Hit: 24 (3d10 + 8) slashing damage plus 13 
(3d8) fire damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) slashing damage. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Rakdos can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op- 
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at 
a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. Rakdos 
regains spent legendary actions at the start of his turn. 


Sadistic Revelry. Each creature within 60 feet of Rakdos that is 
his ally or is charmed by him must use its reaction to move 
up to half its speed toward the creature closest to it that it 
can see, provided it isn't already within 5 feet of that creature. 
It then must make one melee attack against that creature if it 
is able to do so. 

Scythe (Costs 2 Actions). Rakdos uses Curtain-Call Scythe. 

Touch of Pain (Costs 3 Actions). Rakdos makes a claw attack 
against one creature within 10 feet of him. The target must 
succeed on a DC 25 Constitution saving throw or be poi- 
soned for 1 minute. While poisoned in this way, the creature 
can't maintain concentration on a spell or any other effect 
that requires concentration. The poisoned creature can re- 
peat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending 
the effect on itself on a success. 


CHAPTER t€ FRIENDS AND FOES 


Rakoos LAMPOONER 


BLOOD WITCH 


Medium humanoid (any race), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 12 (15 with mage armor) 
Hit Points 78 (12d8 + 24) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS — CHA 
16 (+3) 142) 15(2) 13(41) 9(-1)  19(«4) 


Saving Throws Wis +2, Cha +7 

Skills Arcana +4, Intimidation +7, Perception +2, Stealth +5 
Damage Resistances psychic 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12 

Languages Abyssal plus any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


Blood Witch Dance. The witch can use a bonus action to con- 
trol the movement of one creature cursed by its hex spell that it 
can see within 30 feet of it. The creature must succeed on a DC 
15 Charisma saving throw or use its reaction to move up to 30 
feet in a direction of the witch’s choice. 


Devil's Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the witch's 
darkvision. 


Innate Spellcasting. The witch's innate spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 15, +7 to hit with spell attacks). The 
witch can innately cast the following spells, requiring no mate- 
rial components: 


At will: alter self, detect magic, eldritch blast (at 11th level), false 
life, levitate (self only), mage armor (self only) 

1/day each: circle of death, enthrall, suggestion 

3/day each: hellish rebuke, hex, scorching ray (at 3rd level) 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The witch makes two attacks: one with its long- 
sword and one with its shortsword. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage. 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


ER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


RAKDOS LAMPOONER 


Medium humanoid (any race), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 12 (leather armor) 
Hit Points 27 (5d8 + 5) 
Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
11(40 2e 13(3) 2e) 9(-3) 1864 
Skills Deception +6, Performance +6 
Senses passive Perception 9 
Languages Common plus any one language 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Spellcasting. The lampooner is a 4th-level Rakdos spellcaster. 
Its spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 14, +6 to hit 
with spell attacks). It knows the following bard spells: 


Cantrips (at will): dancing lights, minor illusion, vicious mockery 

Ist level (4 slots): bane, dissonant whispers, silent image, Tasha's 
hideous laughter, thunderwave 

2nd level (3 slots): crown of madness, enthrall, suggestion 


ACTIONS 


Club. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 2 (1d4) bludgeoning damage. 


ELSES Eee 


RAKDOS PERFORMER 


Medium humanoid (any race), chaotic evil 


== — 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4) 
Speed 40 ft., climb 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (+1)  7(43) 121) 10(+0) 8(-3)  15(42) 


- — E! — 


Saving Throws Dex +5, Cha +4 

Skills Acrobatics +7, Performance +4 

Senses passive Perception 9 

Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


= 


Nimble. The performer can take the Disengage action as a bo- 


nus action on each of its turns. 


Performer Type. The performer is one of the following types: 
blade juggler, fire eater, or high-wire acrobat. The performer's 
type determines its action options, presented below. 


BLADE JUGGLER ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The juggler makes three dagger attacks. 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage. 


FIRE EATER ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The fire eater makes two attacks with its 
bladed chain. 


Bladed Chain. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) slashing damage. 


Spew Flame (Recharge 4-6). The fire eater exhales flames. Each 
creature in a 15-foot cone must make a DC 13 Dexterity saving 
throw, taking 9 (2d8) fire damage on a failed save, or half as 
much damage on a successful one. 


HIGH-WirE ACROBAT ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The acrobat makes two attacks with its 
barbed pole. 


Barbed Pole. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage, and the acrobat can 
jump up to 20 feet. This movement doesn't provoke opportu- 
nity attacks. 


(ee a E r e E o a wd 


RAKDOS CARNIVAL 


As lumbering giants put up makeshift stages and cack- 
ling devils ignite the footlights, the first performers be- 
gin to gather the crowds. Exuberant music with erratic 
rhythms draws spectators from the surrounding neigh- 
borhood, and cheers of approval greet the more accom- 
plished performers—along with gasps and shrieks as 
the acts get more risky and the first blood is drawn. Ac- 
robats cavort through the streets while sword swallow- 
ers and knife throwers flash bright steel. The crowd gets 
larger and wilder, the shouts and screams get louder, the 
fires burn brighter, and blood glistens red in the torch- 
light. The spectacle is gruesome but captivating; the 
crowd hates to watch but can’t look away. Soon madness 
takes them, and they—devils and ogres, acrobats and 
spectators—are caught up in a frenzy of violence. Only 
when it is over does the horror of the event sink in. 

A Rakdos carnival is more than the sum of its per- 
formers and its audience. It is a frenzy that grips those 
present, a fiendish madness that comes on suddenly 
and departs just as quickly, leaving gore in its wake. The 
carnival, in fact, has a life of its own—and when adven- 
turers face the Cult of Rakdos in the midst of a revel, the 
carnival is one more foe arrayed against them. 

When at least six Rakdos performers perform to- 
gether in public, they can call on the carnival to aid 
them. When determining the difficulty of such an en- 
counter, consider the carnival to be one additional crea- 
ture of challenge rating 3. 


LAIR ACTIONS 

On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the car- 
nival takes a lair action, causing one of the following 
effects; the carnival can’t use the same effect two 
rounds in a row: 


Fire erupts from the ground at up to four points of the 
DM's choice in the carnival. The fire lasts for 1 minute 
or until this action is used again. Each jet of flame is 

a 20-foot-tall cylinder with a 5-foot radius. Each crea- 
ture in the cylinder when it first appears must make 

a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 10 (3d6) fire 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. Any creature that starts its turn in the 
flames must also make the saving throw. 


* Whirling blades, spiked chains, or other implements 


of agony appear for a moment to menace 1d6 random 
creatures in a 20-foot cube. Each target must succeed 
on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or take 9 (2d8) 
force damage. 

Blood splashes all creatures in a 20-foot-radius sphere 
centered on a point within the carnival. Each creature 
in that area becomes the target of a confusion spell 
(save DC 15). 


REGIONAL EFFECTS 
The carnival exerts a powerful influence over those who 
come close to the festivities: 


When a creature that is outside the carnival sees or 
hears it, the creature must succeed on a DC 15 Wis- 
dom saving throw or use its movement each round 

to move toward the carnival. It can repeat the saving 
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect 
on a success. On a successful save, the creature be- 
comes immune to this effect for 24 hours. 

If a creature attempts to leave the carnival, the crea- 
ture must make a DC 15 Charisma saving throw. On 
a failed save, the creature instead moves toward the 
center of the carnival. On a successful save, the crea- 
ture becomes immune to this effect for 24 hours. 


If all the Rakdos performers in the carnival die or 


leave its area, these effects end immediately. 


LEOEv GUARDIAN 


SELESNYA NPCs 


Those drawn to the Selesnya Conclave find the guild's 
mission of inclusion and harmony appealing. They gain 
comfort and fulfillment from the guild's peaceful coex- 
istence with civilization and untamed nature. But the 
guild's drive isn't only to draw people into a peaceable 
community: the Selesnya aim to build an army. They ar- 
en't naive; they realize that the ambitions of other guilds 
will lead to violence, and they plan to be prepared for it. 

Despite the guild's atmosphere of peaceful quietude, 
many of its members have military roles. The Selesnya 
NPCs table summarizes key roles within the guild. Sta- 
tistics for these NPCs are found in the Monster Manual 
unless the table states otherwise. 


SELESNYA NPCs 


Role Appropriate Stat Block 
Equenaut (cavalry) Scout mounted on a pegasus 

Ledev guardian (outrider) Knight mounted on a dire wolf 
Religious leader Priest or druid 
Selesnya soldier Soldier* or veteran 


Shepherd Horncaller* 


*Appears in this chapter 


Wr 
e. 


TROSTANI 


The Selesnya guildmaster is an amalgamation of three 
dryads in body, will, and soul. Each dryad's body ex- 
tends from a central trunk, so while they possess inde- 
pendent minds, they share a single name—Trostani— 
and a single life force. Usually Trostani communicates 
the will of the Worldsoul with one voice, but she retains 
three distinct personalities that embody the three parts 
of the Selesnyan ideal: order, life, and harmony. In the 
midst of increasing tensions on Ravnica, the three per- 
sonalities have recently been at odds over how best to 
navigate the conclave through such difficult times. 
Trostani spends most of her time in the towering tree 
of Vitu-Ghazi, the Selesnya guildhall. There she com- 
munes with Mat'Selesnya and with the dryads who lead 
individual Selesnya communities across Ravnica. 


TROSTANI’S TRAITS 

Ideal: “In each of us is the strength of all of us.” 

Bond: “All will come to the warm embrace of the 
Conclave.” 

Flaw: “I have nothing but anger for those who break the 
bonds of the community and leave our embrace.” 


HORNCALLER 


Specialized shamans called horncallers use their magic 
to call wild beasts to fight alongside Selesnya troops. 

In quieter times, they tend the animals associated with 
Selesnya enclaves and parks. 


TROSTANI 
Large fey, neutral good 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 252 (24d10 + 120) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+5)  14(42  20(45) 16(43) 30(+10) 25 (+7) 
l 
Saving Throws Con +11, Wis +16, Cha +13 
Skills Arcana +9, Insight +16, Nature +9, Perception +16, 
Persuasion +13 
Condition Immunities charmed, grappled 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 26 
Languages Common, Druidic, Elvish, Sylvan 
Challenge 18 (20,000 XP) 
Innate Spellcasting. Trostani’s innate spellcasting ability is 
Wisdom (spell save DC 24). She can innately cast the following 
spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: dispel magic, druidcraft 

3/day each: bless, conjure animals, giant insect, moonbeam, plant 
growth, spike growth, suggestion 

1/day each: conjure fey, mass cure wounds 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Trostani fails a saving throw, 
she can choose to succeed instead. 


Magic Resistance. Trostani has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Magic Weapons. Trostani’s weapon attacks are magical. 


Speak with Beasts and Plants. Trostani can communicate with 
beasts and plants as if they shared a language. 


Tree Stride. Once on her turn, Trostani can use 10 feet of her 
movement to step magically into one living tree within her 
reach and emerge from a second living tree within 60 feet of 
the first tree, appearing in an unoccupied space within 5 feet of 
the second tree. Both trees must be Large or bigger. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Trostani takes three actions: she uses Constrict 
and Touch of Order, and she casts a spell with a casting time 
of 1 action. 


Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 15 (3d6 + 5) bludgeoning damage, and the target 
is grappled (escape DC 19). Until this grapple ends, the target 
is restrained, Trostani can grapple no more than three targets 
at a time. 


Touch of Order. Melee Spell Attack: +16 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 23 (3d8 + 10) radiant damage, and Trostani can 
choose one magic item she can see in the target’s possession. 
Unless it's an artifact, the item's magic is suppressed until the 
start of Trostani's next turn. 


Wrath of Mat'Selesnya (Recharge 5—6). Trostani conjures a 
momentary whirl of branches and vines at a point she can see 
within 60 feet of her. Each creature in a 30-foot cube on that 
point must make a DC 24 Dexterity saving throw, taking 21 
(6d6) bludgeoning damage and 21 (6d6) slashing damage on a 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Trostani can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op- 
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at 
a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. Trostani 
regains spent legendary actions at the start of her turn. 


Voice of Harmony. Trostani makes one melee attack, with ad- 
vantage on the attack roll. 

Voice of Life. Trostani bestows 20 temporary hit points on an- 
other creature she can see within 120 feet of her. 

Voice of Order. Trostani casts dispel magic. 

Chorus of the Conclave (Costs 2 Actions). Trostani casts sugges- 
tion. This counts as one of her daily uses of the spell. 

Awaken Grove Guardians (Costs 3 Actions). Trostani animates 
one or two trees she can see within 120 feet of her, causing 
them to uproot themselves and become awakened trees (see 
the Monster Manual for their stat blocks) for 1 minute or until 
Trostani uses a bonus action to end the effect. These trees 
understand Druidic and obey Trostani's spoken commands, 
but can't speak. If she issues no commands to them, the 
trees do nothing but follow her and take the Dodge action. 


- €—Ó———HHRÓ———————Á "D — ee 


p 


HORNCALLER 


Medium humanoid (any race), lawful good 


Armor Class 13 (hide armor) 
Hit Points 39 (6d8 + 12) 
Speed 30 ft. 


— 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (+41)  12(3) 14(4) 1040) 14(42) 13 (41) 


Skills Animal Handling +4, Nature +2, Perception +4 
Senses passive Perception 14 

Languages Common plus any one language 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Innate Spellcasting. The horncaller’s innate spellcasting ability 
is Wisdom (spell save DC 14). The horncaller can innately cast 
the following spells, requiring no material components: 


1/day each: bless, conjure animals 


Speak with Beasts. The horncaller can communicate with 
beasts as if they shared a language. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The horncaller makes two melee attacks with its 
staff and uses One with the Worldsoul. 


Staff. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage, or 5 (1d8 + 1) bludgeoning 
damage if used with two hands. 


One with the Worldsoul. The horncaller chooses one beast it 

can see within 30 feet of it. If the beast can hear the horncaller, 

the beast uses its reaction to make one melee attack against a 

target that the horncaller can see. 
Re 


Oe SSS See eee ees 
EMMARA TANDRIS 


An elf priest, Emmara Tandris is committed to pursuing 
peace between the guilds with all her heart, even as Tros- 
tani hesitates in self-conflict. As a friend of Jace Beleren, 
she understands that he's never going to be able to settle 
on Ravnica, so she believes the world needs a replacement 
for the Guildpact. Emmara plays an active role in her com- 
munity, and she has many non-Selesnya friends aside from 
the Guildpact. One of the most active advocates of cooper- 
ation among the guilds, she is relying on personal connec- 
tions with members of other guilds to help that effort. 

b un 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


Simic NPCs 


Curiosity about the manifold wonders of life—as well 

as the magical science involved in modifying it—leads 
inquisitive and ambitious minds from across Ravnica to 
join the Simic Combine. Grouped together in clades and 
projects, Simic scientists look for new ways to speed the 
nature’s processes of adaptation and evolution, prepar- 
ing organisms of all kinds that can thrive in the danger- 
ous and ever-changing urban environment. 

Most Simic researchers are humans, vedalken, elves, 
and merfolk, or at least they were born that way. During 
their careers, they might give themselves such a wide 
variety of adaptations and augmentations that their her- 
itage is hard to ascertain. The Simic NPCs table sum- 
marizes key roles within the guild. Statistics for these 
NPCs are found in the Monster Manual unless the table 
states otherwise. 


Simic NPCs 


Role Appropriate Stat Block 
Biomancer (creates hybrids) Biomancer* 
Forcemage (grows flora and fauna) Druid 


Terraformer (alters environments) Druid or mage 


*Appears in this chapter 


PRIME SPEAKER ZEGANA 


The regal and reticent Prime Speaker Zegana is the 
merfolk guildmaster of the Simic Combine. She up- 
holds the traditional ways of the guild and its utopian 
philosophy, which espouses a vision of an ideal world in 
which nature and civilization coexist in perfect balance. 
Some people in the guild—members of the Adaptationist 
faction in particular—argue that her ways are outdated 
and the guild requires more practical leadership. In 
response, Zegana maintains that she serves as prime 
speaker only at the sufferance of the Speakers' Cham- 
ber, and if the other speakers wish to replace her, they 
are certainly within their rights to do so. 


ZEGANA'S TRAITS 

Ideal: "Nature's patterns are the schematics for how 
to improve." 

Bond: "I will use all the resources at my disposal to see 
that Ravnica becomes the best it can be." 

Flaw: "I can't understand how progress could ever be 
the wrong goal." 


BIOMANCER 


Nearly all the innovation and advancement in Simic bio- 
engineering comes from the work of biomancers. Spe- 
cialists in hybridizing and altering creatures through a 
mixture of science and magic, they have spawned count- 
less hybrids and krasis in search of the perfect union 
between nature and civilization. 


— EY 


ZEGANA 


Medium humanoid (merfolk), lawful neutral 


Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 130 (20d8 + 40) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
11 (+0) 14(42) 14(2) 2045) 18 (44) 16 (+3) 


Saving Throws Int +10, Wis +9 

Skills Insight +9, Nature +10, Perception +9 
Damage Resistances cold, poison 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 19 
Languages Common, Elvish, Merfolk 
Challenge 16 (15,000 XP) 


|r 
Amphibious. Zegana can breathe air and water. 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). f Zegana fails a saving throw, 
she can choose to succeed instead. 


Magic Resistance. Zegana has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Spellcasting. Zegana is a 15th-level Simic spellcaster. Her spell- 
casting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 18, +10 to hit with 
spell attacks). She has the following wizard spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): acid splash, druidcraft, ray of frost, shape water 
Ist level (4 slots): color spray, expeditious retreat, fog 
cloud, shield 
2nd level (3 slots): enlarge/reduce, gust of wind 
3rd level (3 slots): counterspell, fly, slow 
4th level (3 slots): control water, ice storm, polymorph 
5th level (2 slots): conjure elemental, creation 
6th level (1 slot): move earth, wall of ice 
7th level (1 slot): prismatic spray, teleport 
8th level (1 slot): contro! weather, dominate monster 


ACTIONS 


Prime Speaker’s Trident. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +10 
to hit, reach 5 ft. or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 12 (2d6 + 
5) piercing damage, and the trident emits a thunderous boom. 
Each creature in a 15-foot cube originating from the prongs of 
the trident must make a DC 18 Constitution saving throw. On 
a failed save, the creature takes 9 (2d8) thunder damage and is 
pushed 10 feet away from Zegana. If the creature is underwa- 
ter, the damage is increased to 13 (3d8). On a successful save, 
the creature takes half as much damage and isn't pushed. 


Deluge (Recharge 4—6). Zegana conjures a wave of water that 
crashes down on an area within 120 feet of her. The area can 
be up to 30 feet long, up to 10 feet wide, and up to 10 feet tall. 
Each creature in that area must make a DC 18 Dexterity saving 
throw. On a failed save, a creature takes 18 (4d8) bludgeoning 
damage and is knocked prone. On a successful save, a creature 
takes half as much damage and isn't knocked prone. The wa- 
ter spreads out across the ground, extinguishing unprotected 
flames it comes in contact with, and then vanishes. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Zegana can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op- 
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at 
a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. Zegana 
regains spent legendary actions at the start of her turn. 


Adaptive Skin. Zegana gains resistance to one damage type of 
her choice—acid, fire, lightning, or thunder—until the start 
of her next turn. 

Trident. Zegana makes one melee attack with the Prime Speak- 
er's Trident. 

Enlarge (Costs 2 Actions). Zegana casts enlarge/reduce on her- 
self, using the enlarge option, without expending a spell slot. 

Deluge (Costs 3 Actions). Zegana uses Deluge, if available. 


BIOMANCER 

Medium humanoid (any race), neutral good 

Armor Class 17 (splint) 

Hit Points 110 (17d8 + 34) 

Speed 30 ft. 

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 15(42) 14(42 20 (+5)  14(42  15(42) 


Saving Throws Int +9, Wis +6 

Skills Arcana +9, Nature +9 

Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages Common plus any one language 

Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) 

Bolstering Presence. The biomancer magically emanates 
life-giving energy within 30 feet of itself. Any ally of the bio- 
mancer that starts its turn there regains 5 (1d10) hit points. 


Magic Resistance. The biomancer has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


SSS eed 


Spellcasting. The biomancer is a 16th-level Simic spellcaster. 
Its spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 17, +9 to 
hit with spell attacks). The biomancer has the following wizard 
spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): acid splash, light, mending, poison spray, 
shocking grasp 

Ist level (4 slots): detect magic, grease, shield 

2nd level (3 slots): alter self, darkvision, enlarge/reduce, 
hold person 

3rd level (3 slots): counterspell, dispel magic, haste, protection 
from energy 

4th level (3 slots): confusion, conjure minor elementals, 
polymorph 

5th level (2 slots): cone of cold, creation, hold monster 

6th level (1 slot): move earth, wall of ice 

7th level (1 slot): prismatic spray 

8th level (1 slot): control weather 


ACTIONS 


Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) slashing damage. 


E 


STAND WITH 
YOUR GUILD 


The world's most popular roleplaying game meets the 
world's most popular trading card game in this campaign 
sourcebook, detailing the MaGic: THE GATHERING’ 

world of Ravnica for use in Dungeons & Dragons’. 


From deep catacombs to sky-raking spires, Ravnica is 
covered in countless layers constructed over thousands 
of years. Lofty cathedrals, hulking courthouses, towering 
apartments, sprawling tenements, and cobblestone 
plazas spread as far as the eye can see. 


In this teeming cosmopolis. ten guilds vie for power, 
wealth, and influence, held in an uneasy peace by a 
magical force called the Guildpact. But the Guildpact 
doesn't prevent the intrigue, subterfuge, and political 
machinations that are a hallmark of life in Ravnica. 


And nov the Guildpact is gone, or seems to be. What 
chaos might erupt if the ambition and rivalry of the guilds 
goes unchecked? It's up to you to choose your guild and 
shape the future of Ravnica. 


For use with the fifth edition Player's Handbook", 


Dungeon Master's Guide", and Monster Manual * 


ge 


DUNGEONSANDDRAGONS.COM 


n 


[TT] 


ap 786 9665 
US $49.95 CAN $65.95 
SA C58350000 


