; 
c 


DUNGEONS nad =. @ ы 


gud. gee 


(ЕЧИШ) Clash WIENER "gods Of mms. campaign 
7 E 0 pourcebools forjtie world’s greatest roleplaying] game: 


^ ә 


г \ 
M ri, - — m" 


MYTHIC ODYSSEYS OF 


THEROS 


CREDITS 


Lead Designers: F. Wesley Schneider, James Wyatt 

Designers: Ari Levitch, Jeremy Crawford, Kate Baker, Bill Benham, 
Orion D. Black, John Compton, Kelly Digges, James Introcaso, 
Adam Lee, Ben Petrisor, Jessica Price, Morrigan Robbins, Amber 
Scott, Greg A. Vaughn 

Rules Developers: Jeremy Crawford, Dan Dillon, Christopher 
Perkins, Ben Petrisor 


Editors: Misty Bourne, Kim Mohan, Hannah Rose, Jessica Ross 
Cultural Consultant: Demitrios Feredinos 
Lore Consultant: Jay Annelli 


Art Director: Kate Irwin 

Senior Graphic Designer: Trish Yochum 

Graphic Designer: Trystan Falcone 

Additional Art Direction: Matt Adelsperger, Jeremy Jarvis, Kelly 
Digges, Dawn Murin, Andrew Vallas 


Cover Illustrators: Jason Rainville, Kevin Tong 

Interior Illustrators: Steve Argyle, Volkan Baga, Ryan Barger, Steven 
Belledin, Noah Bradley, Christopher Burdett, Sam Burley, Jason 
Chan, Yongjae Choi, Daarken, Jonas De Ro, Bastien 1. Deharme, 
Eric Deschamps, Jesper Ejsing, Emrah Elmasli, Jason Felix, Evyn 
Fong, Lucas Graciano, Lars Grant-West, Nils Hamm, Yeong- 
Hao Han, Alex Horley-Orlandelli, Ralph Horsley, Tyler Jacobson, 
Jaime Jones, Igor Kieryluk, Mathias Kollros, Karl Kopinski, Yigit 
Koroglu, Ryan Alexander Lee, Daniel Ljunggren, Chuck Lukacs, 
Titus Lunter, Howard Lyon, Slawomir Maniak, Dimitar Marinski, 
Seb McKinnon, Victor Adame Minguez, Peter Mohrbacher, 
Willian Murai, Terese Nielsen, James Paick, David Palumbo, 
Ryan Pancoast, Adam Paquette, Jung Park, Claudio Pozas, Steve 
Prescott, Vincent Proce, Andrea Radeck, Chris Rahn, Chris Rallis, 


ON THE COVER 


The invulnerable hero, Haktos the Unscarred, leaps into battle with 
a Nyxborn hydra, taking part in the most recent telling of a myth 
repeated through the ages. Jason Rainville brings this legend to life. 


CE 


620С7893000001 EN 
ISBN: 978-0-7869-6706-3 
First Printing: June 2020 


987654321 


^. 


Brad Rigney, Sam Rowan, James Ryman, Jasper Sandner, Dan 

Scott, Cynthia Sheppard, John Stanko, Zack Stella, Matt Stewart, 

Chase Stone, Raymond Swanland, Wisnu Tan, John Thacker, Cory 

Trego-Erdner, Brian Valeza, Cyril Van Der Haegen, Svetlin Velinov, 

Magali Villeneuve, Raoul Vitale, Johannes Voss, Kev Walker, Jack 

Wang, Kieran Yanner, Ryan Yee, Min Yum, James Zapata 
Cartographers: Jonas De Ro, Dyson Logos 


Theros World Designers: Brady Dommermuth, Doug Beyer, Kelly 
Digges, Ethan Fleischer, Jenna Helland, Taylor Ingvarsson, 
Jeremy Jarvis, Adam Lee, Alison Lührs, Dawn Murin, Cynthia 
Sheppard, Andrew Vallas, Richard Whitters, James Wyatt 


Senior Producer: Dan Tovar 

Producers: Bill Benham, Robert Hawkey, Lea Heleotis 
Product Engineer: Cynda Callaway 

Imaging Technicians: Sven Bolen, Carmen Cheung, Kevin Yee 
Art Administrator: David Gershman 

Prepress Specialist: Jefferson Dunlap 


Franchise & Global Brand Strategy: Nathan Stewart 

Executive Producer: Ray Winninger 

Director of Licensing & Publishing: Liz Schuh 

Licensing Manager: Hilary Ross 

Marketing and Communications: Bart Carroll, Pelham Greene, Chris 
Lindsay, Shauna Narciso, Lysa Penrose, Emi Tanji, Greg Tito, 
Anna Vo 

D&D IP Development: Mike Mearls, Richard Whitters, Shawn Wood 

Brand Manager: Shelly Mazzanoble 


Many thanks to the hundreds of playtesters whose efforts made this 
a better book. We couldn’t have created this without you! 


^ zum p 


ON THE ALTERNATIVE COVER 


While the gods look on, the immortal struggle between Haktos 
and the hydra plays out in the stars of Nyx, a glimpse of eternity 
captured by Kevin Tong. 


Disclaimer: 


Truly, what mortal's poor striving can weather the scheming of heaven? 
Heliod reaches for rulership; Purphoros never accepts him. 
Kruphix but watches, and mortals are left to the whims of the fates, or 
Torn in the claws ofthe furies; only a hero denies them. 

—The Callapheia 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Wizards ofthe Coast, the dragon ampersand, Player's Handbook, Monster Manual, Dungeon Master's Guide, Theros, Magic: The Gathering, the 
planeswalker symbol, and all other Wizards of the Coast product names, and their respective logos are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast in the USA and other countries. All char- 
acters and their distinctive likenesses are property of Wizards of the Coast. The materials described in this statement are protected under the copyright laws of the United States of 
America and around the world under international intellectual property treaties. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the materials contained herein or artwork contained herein is 


prohibited without the express written permission of Wizards of the Coast. 


Printed in the USA. ©2020 Wizards of the Coast LLC, PO Box 707, Renton, WA 98057-0707, USA. Manufactured by Hasbro SA, Rue Emile-Boéchat 31, 2800 Delémont, CH. 


CONTENTS 


Welcome to ТҺегоз.................................... 5 
Dreams of Divinity.... eb 
TESCO MY and Mythi uns oi ааа. T 
Lang uage Sarea 9 
Ch. 1: Character Creation...................... 11 
Heroic rive ume... tenth 11 
Supernatural Gifts .................... eres 12 
Races SA ананна амана 17 

Humane... ee РТА 17 

(UCTILATIpS EE уыз ин 18 


ооз сок» ЖУО 20 


Minotaur mecs ertet or 22 
Satyr eee eee 24 
ТӨП SES ecco ente 26 
SitbelassYO pLtOnS..-........:.. eene 28 
College of Eloquence............................ 28 
Qathrofrgnya e uires 29 
Васко аал 30 
еге е ааваа 31 
Ch. 2: Gods of Тһегоѕ............................. 38 


Divine Characteristics.. 


Divine Relationships. «34 
Муй 5апаеєа б... 35 
Worship eere a НИЕ 35 
Clerics and Champions............................ 35 


ТОУ Sc Е.а 58 
КЕН ИЮ К паваенны 61 
Меш шӘ oaan сс. аа 64 
УЛЕА ЕИ E A 67 
Pharika .. „70 
Phenax ...... 279 
Purphoros . 76 
Шандуу... EI ederet 79 
Ch. 3: Realms of Gods and Mortals....83 
ео Realm -c.v 83 
Icifeunsthe Poleis.........eerre pee 83 
ДУО экес срок ОО A, 86 

Akros's Surroundings.......................... 88 


«heres Бапд»........................................- 88 
MEES tense NE .89 
Meletis's Surroundings... :9T 
Lagonna Grounds ......... .92 
SOS Se Ae e eren oer 93 
Setessa's Surroundings ...................... 94 
СаО ООС 96 
Weonin of OreskOS .............. nnne 96 
Grasslands of Oreskos ........................ 97 
Phoberos and Skophos............................ 98 
Minotaurs of Phoberos........................ 98 


City of Skophos!.... m d 99 
Badlands of РһоБегов.......................... 99 
Realms of the Returned......................... 100 
The Returned 100 


Asphodel and the Despair Lands....100 


Satyrs of the Skola Vale 
Skola Vale Revels 
Features of the Skola Vale.. 
The Katachthon Mountains .... 


Ch. 4: Creating Theros Adventures .. 
God-Based Adventures 


Divine Intervention... 
Divine Ordeals 


Nautical Adventures 
Sailing the Sea 
Mystical Islands 
Underwater Adventures ... 

Underworld Adventures... 
Living Descent 
Deathly Interludes 
Journey into Death 
Denizens of the Underworld 
Paths of Escape 
Beyond Death 

Adventure: No Silent Secret 


Ch. 5: Treasures 


Ch. 6: Friends and Foes 
Nyxborn Creatures 
Classic Monsters 


Anvilwroughts. 
Anvilwrought Raptor. 


Burnished Hart 
Gold-Forged Sentinel 


IAT CIOS е н 2212 
Archon of Falling Stars. -212 
Ashen Rider ..................... “213 
Archon Mounts. 2204 

Се Чоу d oem oe 214 
Two-Headed Cerberus ................... 214 
Underworld Cerberus .................... 214 

Chit erage tct 216 

Colossus of Akros .................. 2218 

Demons of Theros ................. .219 
Abhorrent Overlord. .219 
Eater of Hope........... ..220 
Nightmare Shepherd.. 2220 

БӨГӨӨ... ааа 222 
Flitterstep Eidolon ......................... 222 
Ghostblade Eidolon ........................ 222 

FleecemanejLion................... eet 223 

Gra nisse ee ees „224 
Doomwake Giant......... 224 
Hundred-Handed One +225) 

blaspies...-. ИЕ. 1226 
Aphemia the Dissonant Song.......226 
Віооа:ТоШ натру... 226 

Hippocamp ОО 

Hoplites:.-— Кш кл 228 
Akroan Норі е 228 
Meletian Hoplite .............. 5 5... 229 
Setessan Hoplite ............................ 229 


Typhon.. eSI ee 

Woe Striden ИИ 
Mythic Monsters 

Arasta of the Endless Web................ 248 

Hythonia the Сгие кк 77 251 

Tromokratis?. cose ee 254 
Index... i 256 


ТАМ MEDOMAI, AGELESS AND 
DEATHLESS, SEER OF ENDINGS: 
I DID FORETELL THE FALL OF ALEPHNE 
IN WATERY TERROR, 
MOCKED BY THE FOOLISH WHO SAY THAT THE 
VOICE OF THE GODS IS BUT MADNESS. 
GREAT WAS ITS RUIN, AND SLAUGHTERED WERE 
ALL WHO DID NOT HEED MY WARNING. 


BRIGHTER THE FUTURE І NOW FORETELL, 

OF BEGINNINGS, NOT ENDINGS: 

HEROES ARE COMING, WHO STRIVE AGAINST 
FATE'S STERN DECREES, AND WHO CARVE THEIR 
OWN BRIGHT PATHWAY THROUGH HISTORY, 
GREATER THAN ALL MORTAL YEARNINGS. 


WELCOME TO THEROS 


HEY WERE ALONE ON THE GLASSY BLUE 

ocean. A waterfall stretched endlessly along 

the horizon line. The water at the edge of the 

world was like a placid pond, as if enjoying a 
last few seconds of existence before cascading over the edge 
in a raging torrent of white-capped water. 

Directly in front of them was Kruphix's Tree. Two enor- 
mous trunks were separate at the base, but they arched 
toward each other and joined at the top in a single leafy 
crown. Stars glittered beyond the waterfall, but the back- 
ground was milky violet with tinges of deep blue. The sea- 
water that plummeted over the edge disappeared into the 
abyss of the stars. 

They had reached the edge of the world. 

—Jenna Helland, Godsend 


The caprice of the gods. The destiny of heroes. Great 
journeys into monster-infested wilds, and mythic odys- 
seys to the edge of the world and back. These elements 
of adventure fill the realms of Theros, a new setting for 
your DUNGEONS & DRAGONS campaign to explore. 

The roots of Theros lie in the myths of ancient Greece, 
tales dominated by gods, heroes, and monsters. This 
world was created as a setting for the МАСІС: THE GATH- 
ERING trading card game, explored in card sets begin- 
ning in 2013. The lands of Theros serve as an example 
of how to take inspiration from real-world mythology 
and adapt it into a world built from the ground up for 
fantasy adventures. 

This book is your guide to Theros, its gods, its peoples 
and their cities (or poleis), its threats, and its tales. It 
also guides you through creating characters destined to 
be legends and adventures born of this mythic setting. 

Chapter 1 covers the heroes of Theros: the races, 
class options, and backgrounds you'll need to make a 
character. It also introduces supernatural gifts available 
to starting characters—features that set Theros's adven- 
turers apart as true heroes. 

Chapter 2 introduces the gods of Theros, a squabbling 
pantheon of arrogant and powerful beings who view 
mortals as pawns in their strategic games. It also pro- 
vides rules and guidelines for characters who serve as 
champions of the gods, including divine benefits they 
can gain as rewards for their piety. 


Chapter 3 turns to the mortal world, the lands in 
which the epic adventures of Theros unfold. It covers 
the three city-states of humanity, the wild lands of leonin 
and minotaurs, the great forests and wide plains where 
satyrs revel and centaurs roam, and the seas where 
tritons dwell and titanic monsters lurk. It also offers 
glimpses into the divine realm of Nyx and the dismal 
realms of the Underworld. 

Chapter 4 builds on the guidelines in the Dungeon 
Master's Guide, highlighting adventures set in Theros. 
Maintaining a focus on the gods, it presents omens that 
might launch heroes on the road to adventure, details 
hundreds of plot hooks, includes maps of potential 
adventure locations, and presents a short introductory 
adventure you can use to launch your campaign. 

Chapter 5 details treasures of Theros, including the 
artifacts of the gods, the magical inventions of renowned 
artisans, and various other devices infused with the 
magic of the world. 

Finally, chapter 6 presents numerous inhabitants 
of Theros. An exploration of familiar beasts from the 
Monster Manual and other sources—creatures with 
their roots in Greek mythology—details their place and 
unique characteristics in the lands of Theros. Several of 
Theros's most notorious creatures, foes as legendary as 
the world's most renowned heroes, are also presented 
as mythic monsters, terrors designed to test even the 
gods' mightiest champions. 


DREAMS OF DIVINITY 


Theros possesses a unique metaphysical property: 
things believed and dreamed here eventually become 
real. The collective unconscious of mortal people has 
the literal power of creation, though the process unfolds 
over the course of countless centuries. Thus, the gods 
of Theros and their servants were believed, dreamed, 
and narrated into existence, materializing and becoming 
fully real as a result of mortal belief in their power. As 
stories were told, sacrifices made, and devotion given 
over ages, the gods formed and gained lives just as real 
as the mortals who dreamed them into being. 

Does that mean that the gods of Theros are less pow- 
erful or less divine than the gods of other worlds? Not at 
all. Once a dream or belief in Theros becomes reality, it 
is just as real as any other thing, and the gods have been 
real for a very long time. The people of Theros believe 
them to be divine, ageless, and all-powerful, and there- 
fore they are. 


Фи. 


WELCOME ТО THEROS 


3 45а. 
ТЕЧЕ 
c ^ 


A single individual can't do anything to make the gods 
less real or change the nature of a god. Threatened with 
the wrath of Heliod, for example, a mortal can't simply 
"disbelieve" the god out of existence or turn his wrath to 
kindness. It's the collective unconscious of every sapient 
being on Theros that shapes reality, and changes to that 
reality occur on the scale of ages, not moments. 

In practical terms, then, the gods of Theros are no less 
real, powerful, or important to Theros than the gods of 
other worlds are to those worlds. Notably, though, these 
gods have influence only over Theros and the two planes 
connected to it: Nyx, the starry realm of the gods, and 
the Underworld, eventual home of all die. 


GODS AND DEVOTION 


The central conflict in Theros is among gods, striving 
against each other over the devotion of mortals. Mortal 
devotion equates to divine power: when people fervently 
pray to a god, when they piously observe the god’s rites 
and sacrifices, and when they devoutly trust in the god’s 
divine might, the god becomes more powerful. 

The competition for mortal devotion isn’t necessarily 
a zero-sum game. The people of Theros don't believe 
in one particular god to the exclusion of others, and the 
most pious people pray to all the gods with equal fervor. 
But a deity's goal is to increase the number of people 
who, when faced with peril, will call on that god for help. 
It's that trust, that reliance, that faith that gives the gods 
their power, not merely ideas and concepts. 

Mortal beings—heroes and monsters alike—often 
become unwitting pawns in the contests of the gods. 
Having a powerful champion is an indication of a god's 
power—and can potentially increase the god's own 
power. A champion who acts as an agent of a god among 
other people helps increase those people's devotion to 
the god. And if a hero should happen to strike down the 
agents of a rival god along the way, all the better. 


WELCOME TO THEROS 


FATE AND DESTINY 


Two closely related concepts loom large in the way 
mortals think about their place in the world: fate 
and destiny. 

The idea of fate is that the course of each mortal's life 
is predetermined, spun out in a tapestry woven by a trio 
of semidivine women, the Fates. Gods aren't bound by 
the strands of fate, their lives and legends constantly 
changing and endlessly uncertain. In the case of most 
mortals, it's thought they plod along their predetermined 
path from beginning to end, carrying out the tasks ap- 
pointed for them until they complete their journey to the 
Underworld. 

This fairly bleak view of existence is undermined by 
the heroic ideal exemplified in myths, legends, and the 
lived experience of Theros's people. Heroes, by defini- 
tion, are people who defy the predetermined course of 
fate. They take their fate into their own hands and chart 
their own courses, striding boldly into the unknown, 
striking down supposedly invincible foes, and resisting 
the will of gods. Their proud defiance of fate is rewarded 
when they at last complete their mortal journeys; worthy 
heroes spend their afterlives in Ilysia, the fairest realm 
of the Underworld, where they finally rest from the 
struggle of their lives. In many cases, their works also 
live on, both in the stories of future generations and re- 
peating in the night sky among the stars of Nyx. 

Destiny is different. The strands of destiny are spun 
from the hair of the ancient god Klothys, but they don't 
chart a predetermined future. Destiny establishes the 
order of things, the hierarchy of being, the relationship 
between gods and mortals, the instincts and impulses 
that govern mortal behavior, and other aspects of the 
way things are. Gods and mortals alike are constrained 
by the threads of destiny. Mortals can do little to alter 
them, but more than once the arrogance and presump- 
tion of the gods have caused the strands of destiny to 
become tangled. The god Klothys enforces the bounds 
of destiny. She isn't only the spinner of destiny's strands 
but also an avenging fury, punishing the foolhardy gods 
who tangle them. 


CHUCK LUKACS 


THE VANQUISHER 


CHAMPIONS AND HEROES 


The champions of the gods number among some of the 
most influential and inspirational figures in Theros. 
These mortals have personal relationships with the 
gods, potentially serving as divine agents in the world 
or being compelled to action by immortal schemes. 
Still others were born with divine gazes set upon them, 
whether due to their remarkable abilities or the circum- 
stances of their birth. Through their lives, champions 
experience the blessings and curses of their divine 
relationships. Some might brandish incredible powers 
granted to them by the gods. Others, however, discover 
how fickle and vindictive the gods can be. How a cham- 
pion contends with the whims of a deific patron defines 
what makes them a hero, whether they seek incredible 
ways to court immortal favor or forge a path that throws 
off the bonds of destiny. Regardless of the course they 
choose, the deeds of champions influence belief in the 
gods, but even more so, they fill the hearts of Theros's 
people with hope and wonder. 

More than just for their deeds, heroes fill an important 
role among the inhabitants of Theros. Legendary heroes 
form a vast collection of well-known archetypes whose 
deeds create cultural touchstones and shape modern 
philosophies. They also embody the potential of mor- 
tals to be more than mere drops in the raging river of 
fate. Tales of heroes teach that greatness is achievable 
and that there is more to the world than what any one 
individual knows. The people of Theros see the truth 
of this in the powers of the gods and in the immortal 
constellations that fill the night sky. Even as the names 
of individual heroes might eventually fade away, their 
deeds live on as heroic archetypes—such as in the case 
of the nameless champion in the renowned epic, The 
Theriad. These archetypes teach and inspire, whether 
they’re represented in tales of journeys or creation, in 
sculptures rising above polis roofs, or in the temples of 
the gods. Throughout Theros, those who seek greatness 
typically begin by deciding what heroic archetype they 
most closely align with and letting that ideal influence 
their fate. 


THE HUNTER 


The heroes illustrated throughout this introduction 
are examples of heroic archetypes. The General, the 
Protector, the Vanquisher, the Hunter, the Provider, the 
Warrior, the Slayer, the Philosopher, and others like 
them are idealized figures who appear in narrative and 
theatrical drama—sometimes with personal names at- 
tached, but often without. Tales describe the Slayer de- 
stroying a hydra ... and a mighty cyclops, and a dragon, 
and a Nyxborn giant, and a lamia, and any number of 
other creatures. Did one Slayer do all that? No, the 
archetype has become the repository for legends about 
many different heroes, all of whom are notable primarily 
for slaying something. 

The heroes of a Theros campaign might aspire to em- 
ulate one of the great heroic archetypes, or they might 
strive to forge an entirely new mythic identity, to be re- 
membered by name in tales of glory forever. 


HISTORY AND MYTH 


When storytellers relate the history of Theros, they 
always speak in the most general terms. An event of 
just ten years past happened "many years ago," and 
the founding of Meletis in the distant past happened 
"many, many years ago." In Theros, history transforms 
into myth more quickly than it does in other worlds, 
becoming generalized, vague, and moralistic. And be- 
cause the gods are so deeply involved in mortal affairs, 
it's often impossible to distinguish between the myths 
of divine activities and the scraps of historical fact in 
these records. 

The origin and generations of the gods—from the pri- 
mordial titans to the modern pantheon now worshiped 
in Theros—are described in chapter 2. The world's 
myths also fill this book, stories that still resonate in the 
dreams and ambitions of Theros's people. These myths 
are noted in distinct sections, with the first appearing in 
chapter 1. Yet the largely agreed upon history of mortal 
folk on Theros occurred more recently and is thought to 
have unfolded as follows. 


WELCOME TO THEROS 


THE PROVIDER 


AGE OF TRAX 


Human history vaguely recalls an era just before the 
birth of modern human civilization, called the Age of 
Trax. This semi-mythical era, nestled several centuries 
back in the fog of historical memory, is marked by the 
rule of supernatural beings called archons. 

The archons of Trax are said to have come from 
unknown lands to the north and established a heavy- 
handed rule over the humanoids of Theros. Many peo- 
ples remember this as a time of oppressive servitude, 
when they were forced into the armies of the tyrant 
Agnomakhos. The archons dubiously suggested that 
their rule actually protected the weaker species—cen- 
taurs, humans, leonin, minotaurs, and satyrs—from the 
dangers of far more powerful beings. Giants, demons, 
and medusas are said to have ruled kingdoms of their 
own in those days, and tales tell of Agnomakhos leading 
his leonin soldiers to repel an invading army of giants. 
Dragons, krakens, and hydras are also said to have 
grown to even greater size in those days than they do 
now, annihilating whole nations and carving untold ca- 
tastrophes across the land. 


BIRTH OF THE POLEIS 


The end of the Age of Trax corresponds roughly with the 
rise of the fourth and latest generation of gods, whose 
interests lie in the application of more abstract princi- 
ples to the realities of mortal life. Three of these gods— 
Ephara, Iroas, and Karametra—played significant roles 
in the establishment of human civilization, in opposition 
to the archons. 

The goddess Ephara inspired and equipped two hu- 
man heroes, Kynaios and Tiro, to overthrow the archon 
Agnomakhos. Divergent tales describe their history 
following the defeat of the tyrant. Some claim that they 
warred with each other for control over the region and 
that only their eventual death paved the way for the 
peace that allowed the new polis of Meletis to flourish. 
The truth is that they ruled Meletis peacefully together, 
established its legal code, and defended it for decades. 


WELCOME TO THEROS 


THE WARRIOR 


After the fall of Agnomakhos and the other archons of 
Trax, humans and minotaurs waged a bloody war in the 
highlands. The poleis of Akros and Skophos were born 
from that bloodshed, inspired by the martial doctrines 
of Iroas and Mogis rather than the legal code of Ephara. 
Eventually the years of war settled into an uneasy peace 
with the badlands of Phoberos as a barrier separating 
the poleis from each other. 

Meletis, Akros, and Skophos perpetuated the stark 
division between civilization and nature that was inher- 
ent in the archons’ rule. While most humans (and mino- 
taurs) embraced that division, the god Karametra tried 
to teach people a new way of living in harmony with 
nature, leading to the founding of Setessa. 


AGE OF HEROES 


The uncounted centuries since the fall of the archons 
have been marked by the exploits of great heroes, many 
of which are recorded in works of epic prose and poetry. 
Three major narratives remain widely retold and stud- 
ied: The Akroan War, The Callapheia, and The Theriad. 
The epic tale of the Akroan War is only nominally a 
history of the long siege of Akros, precipitated by the 
queen of Olantin abandoning her husband and going to 
live with the Akroan king. With the war as a backdrop, a 
nameless poet spins tales of gods and heroes, victories 
and tragedies. The death of the triton queen Korinna, 
and the resulting birth of the Dakra Isles from Thassa’s 
falling tears, is a tale told incidentally, by way of compar- 
ison to the grief of the Olantian king. The tale of Phenax 
escaping from the Underworld is told to explain the 
origin of a phalanx of the Returned that comes to fight 
alongside the Olantian forces. And when the sphinx 
oracle Medomai appears and foretells the fall of Olan- 
tin, the poet tells of Medomai's earlier prophecy of the 
destruction of Alephne—a tragedy that could have been 
averted had anyone believed the sphinx’s dire warning. 
The saga of Callaphe the Mariner, told in The Calla- 
pheiea, is a more coherent narrative focused on a single 
hero and her exploits. Known as the greatest mariner 
who ever lived, Callaphe was a human trickster from 


2) а гаа а) вару) 


aaa 
THE SLAYER 


Meletis who sailed a ship called The Monsoon. She was 
the first mortal to decipher the secret patterns of the 
winds (provoking Thassa’s ire), and she sailed over the 
edge of the world and into Nyx to claim her place among 
the stars. The tales of her adventures are a mythic tour 
of the Dakra Isles and the coastlands of Theros, de- 
scribing a panoply of creatures, nations, and marvelous 
phenomena—some of which still exist as described in its 
verses, though others are lost to history or myth. 

The Theriad is a different sort of epic, closely associ- 
ated with the worship of Heliod. At a glance, it appears 
to be about a champion of Heliod who is never named 
but simply called “the Champion.” A closer read, though, 
reveals that the tales take place over the span of centu- 
ries and the identity of the Champion changes from tale 
to tale. In fact, The Theriad is a compilation of tales de- 
scribing the exploits of many different champions of the 
sun god. It is widely believed that some tales are actually 
prophecies of champions yet to come. 


RECENT MEMORY 


The Age of Heroes has not yet come to an end, and more 
epics will surely be sung and written as more heroes 
take their destinies into their own hands and chart their 
paths to the stars. The heroes of recent memory—Hak- 
tos the Unscarred, Siona and her crew on the Pyleas, 
Kytheon Iora, Elspeth and Daxos, Anax and Cymede, 
Ajani Goldmane, and countless others—are no less he- 
roic than the protagonists of age-old epics, even if their 
deeds aren't yet as widely known. Beyond individuals— 
a kraken attack on Meletis; the fall of the monstrous 
hydra Polukranos; the Nyxborn assault on Akros; Ere- 
bos's titan felled by Heliod's champion; the apotheosis 
and destruction of the mortal-turned-god Xenagos—the 
epic events of the recent past are already remembered 
and retold as mythic deeds. Many of these tales are told 
throughout this book, but they're only a fraction of the 
myths the people of Theros share. 

Like white-hot bronze on the smith's anvil, Theros is 
ready to be forged by the deeds of today's heroes and 
ushered into the next great era of its history. 


LANGUAGES 


Theros is not the most cosmopolitan of worlds, and a 
relatively small number of languages are used in its 
lands and sea. The citizens of the three human poleis 
(Meletis, Akros, and Setessa) speak their own dialects 
of the Common language, mutually intelligible but just 
different enough to identify the speaker's native land. 
Leonin and minotaurs have their own languages, and 
tritons speak the Aquan dialect of Primordial. Centaurs 
and satyrs speak distinct dialects of Sylvan, and differ- 
ent bands of centaurs even pronounce the same words 
differently. Giants and cyclopes share one language. 
Dragons and sphinxes have distinct languages rarely 
spoken among mortals of Theros, and the gods them- 
selves speak in a unique language that few beyond mor- 
tal oracles can understand. 


STANDARD LANGUAGES 


Language Typical Speakers Script 

Common Humans Common 
Giant Cyclopes, giants Minotaur 
Leonin Leonin Common 
Primordial Tritons Common 
Minotaur Minotaurs Minotaur 
Sylvan Centaurs, satyrs Elvish 


EXOTIC LANGUAGES 


Language Typical Speakers Script 
Celestial Gods Celestial 
Draconic Dragons Draconic 
Sphinx Sphinxes — 


WELCOME TO THEROS 


OGETHER BY FATE, THREE | 


* 


co түрөт урчу Cc -— 


C 6660006 xt 


A 


CHARACTER CREATION ' 


N FAIRNESS, THE GIANT HAD JUST BEEN 

awakened. Still, not everyone would be able to 

bring down a brute twice the size of a city temple, 

љ even if it was in a stupor, so I guess I am a hero. 

That's not to say I’m the greatest hero or would even be 
remembered once I fell, but I would not turn away being 
called "Aesrias, the hero." I am stronger than others of my 
age and have always been able to easily master all manner 
of weapons, although for challenge I prefer to use my own 
fists in combat. 

But I boast too much. In truth, I am one of many who 
are blessed with the might of Iroas, children of devout par- 
ents to whom the God of Victory has given the strength to 
serve and protect the people. Everyone always said I was 
born a hero. 


—Matt Knicl, "The Hero of Iroas" 


What makes a hero? Is it a quality of birth that sets 
some mortals above others? Is it a blessing from the 
gods? Is it a matter of fate, spun out in the strands of a 
divine tapestry, charting the course of a hero's life from 
miraculous birth to glorious end? 

If you're reading this, the answer is that you make a 
hero, of course. In Theros, player characters and heroes 
are synonymous, being rare individuals whose deeds 
aren't bound by fate, who willfully stray from the paths 
laid before them and chart their own courses. 

This chapter describes playable races of Theros, new 
subclass options, a new background, and their places 
in the world. It also includes a description of the super- 
natural gifts that set the heroes of Theros above the 
ordinary mortals of their world. But it begins with the 
question of what makes your character a hero. 


HEROIC DRIVE 


The defining characteristic of a hero in Theros is their 
heroic drive—the force that impels them to live a life 
worthy of great epics. Ordinary mortals across the mul- 
tiverse are driven to extraordinary deeds when they are 
called on to pursue their ideals, to protect their bonds, 
and to overcome their flaws. In Theros, heroic drive 
stems from the same sources, but the power of fate and 
myth destines every character for legend; all one must 
do is act and discover their own immortal tale. 


AMPLIFYING YOUR IDEAL 

Many characters’ ideals come directly from their service 
to a god. Each god's description in chapter 2 includes a 
table you can use to determine your hero's ideal if your 
character serves that god, instead of (or in addition to) 
an ideal derived from your background. But whether 
your character holds to one of those ideals, one from 

the Player's Handbook or another source, or one of your 
own invention, try to state your ideal in the grandest 
possible terms to express your character's heroic drive. 


LEGENDARY BONDS 
The connections and goals that serve as characters' 
bonds are powerful motivators, all the more so when 
they have supernatural origin or possess mythological 
weight. As with your character's ideal, think on a legend- 
ary scale as you define your character's bonds. 

What if a person mentioned in your bond is actually 
a god? Consider this twist on a bond from the urchin 
background in the Player's Handbook: “I owe my sur- 
vival to Phenax, god of thieves, who taught me to live on 
the streets while disguised as another mortal urchin." In 
this case, the secret divine identity of the person in the 
bond makes the bond more significant. 


TRAGIC FLAWS 

The heroes of Theros don't often conform to tidy defi- 
nitions of heroic morality and virtue, and they are often 
laid low by their own flaws. The Player's Handbook 
encourages you to think of "anything that someone 

else could exploit to bring you to ruin or cause you to 
act against your best interests." For a hero in Theros, a 
tragic flaw is something that the gods themselves might 
exploit or punish, with hubris being the classic example. 

The gods of Theros aren't so concerned about "ordi- 
nary" flaws like addiction or laziness. Rather, consider a 
tragic flaw involving something you don't want a god to 
learn or certain to provoke a god's anger. 

For example, some of the flaws listed for the out- 
lander background in the Player's Handbook could 
put a character into conflict with a god. "I remember 
every insult I've received and nurse a silent resentment 
toward anyone who's ever wronged me" could cause sig- 
nificant problems when the character nurses a grudge 
against a god. 

A tragic flaw can also be supernatural in nature. A 
hermit who harbors "dark, bloodthirsty thoughts that 
my isolation and meditation failed to quell" might have a 
sinister connection to the vicious god Mogis. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


Il 


SUPERNATURAL GIFTS 


Most heroes of Theros have some kind of supernatu- 

ral aid to help them achieve their goals. Often this aid 
comes from the gods, but some heroes might find their 
support from other beings, such as the sphinx Medomai, 
an oracle like Atris or Kydele, or a repository of mystical 
knowledge. Some heroes are born with supernatural 
power or born as a result of supernatural events. 

A character in Theros begins with one supernatural 
gift chosen from those in this section. Work with the 
DM to decide where your character’s gift came from. Is 
it tied to the god you serve? Was it the result of a fateful 
encounter with a sphinx or an oracle? Does it indicate 
the nature of your birth? Each gift’s description also 
includes a table to spark your imagination as you think 
about your character's gift. 

These supernatural gifts are intended for starting 
characters, but some might be bestowed by gods as re- 
wards for remarkable deeds. 


ANVILWROUGHT 


You were forged in the fires of Purphoros's forge. Your 
appearance bears a metallic sheen and visible joints. 
The Anvilwrought Characteristics table suggests details 
of your life or origins. Additionally, you gain the follow- 
ing traits. 
Constructed Resilience. You were created to have 
remarkable fortitude, represented by the follow- 
ing benefits: 
* You have advantage on saving throws against being 
poisoned, and you have resistance to poison damage. 
* You don't need to eat, drink, or breathe. 
* Youare immune to disease. 
* You don't need to sleep, and magic can't put 
you to sleep. 


Sentry's Rest. When you take a long rest, you must 
spend at least six hours in an inactive, motionless state, 
rather than sleeping. In this state, you appear inert, but 
it doesn't render you unconscious, and you can see and 
hear as normal. 


ANVILWROUGHT CHARACTERISTICS 

d6 Characteristic 

1 An oread who works in Purphoros's forge is the clos- 
est thing | have to a parent. 

2 Purphoros made me to serve him. 

3 Iwas created decades ago and, fearing that l'm grow- 
ing obsolete, recently fled Mount Velus. 

4 Purphoros regrets my creation and wants to reforge 
me into something better. 

5 Purphoros intended me to carry on his work by mak- 
ing even greater creations of my own. 

6 | Someone in Mount Velus implanted a terrible secret 
within me in order to smuggle it out into the world. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


———— ———————————— аа: 
NATAL OMENS 
The birth of a hero is often accompanied by signs in Nyx 
and Theros alike. You can use the Omens table in chapter 
4 to randomly determine an omen that appeared when you 
were born. It's up to you and your DM to determine the 
omen's meaning. 


HEROIC DESTINY 


Great deeds lie in your future, and it will take extraor- 
dinary effort to kill you before you accomplish those 
deeds. Choose or roll a random destiny using the Heroic 
Destiny table. Additionally, you gain the following traits. 

Defy Death. You have advantage on death sav- 
ing throws. 

Hard to Kill. When you are reduced to 0 hit points but 
not killed outright, you can drop to 1 hit point instead. 
Once you use this trait, you can't use it again until you 
finish a long rest. 


Heroic DESTINY 


d6 Destiny 

1 I'm destined to be the most skilled practitioner of a 
craft or trade. 

2 |'mdestined to earn a place among the stars of Nyx. 
I'm destined to become a god. 
I'm destined to liberate my beloved from the clutches 
of the Underworld. 

5 | was born while a kraken ravaged Meletis, and !'m 
destined to destroy that kraken. 

6 I'm destined to uncover the secret of the gods’ power. 


ICONOCLAST 


No one can deny the reality of the gods of Theros, whose 
presence and deeds are visible in the night sky and 
sometimes directly in the mortal realm. But some peo- 
ple refute the idea that the gods are worthy of reverence. 
Such iconoclasts are common among the leonin, but 
members of any culture can adopt this supernatural gift. 
The Iconoclast Characteristics table presents sugges- 
tions for why you've become an iconoclast. 

Your denial of the gods gives you supernatural power 
to resist their influence in the world. You gain the follow- 
ing traits. 

Enlightened Protection. You can cast protection from 
evil and good with this trait, targeting only yourself and 
requiring no material components. Once you do so, you 
can't cast it in this way again until you finish a long rest. 
Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for this trait. 

Reject the Gods. You can't gain or lose piety to any 
god. You instead gain the following traits at the charac- 
ter level listed in each one. Wisdom is your spellcasting 
ability for any spell that you cast through these traits. 


ICONOCLAST HERO 
5th-level Iconoclast trait 
You can cast dispel magic with this trait. Once you do 


so, you can't cast it in this way again until you finish a 
long rest. 


ere 
HEROIC FEATS 
If your campaign uses the optional feat rules from chapter 
6 of the Player’s Handbook, your Dungeon Master might 
allow you to take a feat as a variant supernatural gift. You 
gain one feat of your choice. This list suggests twelve feats 
from the Player’s Handbook, but you can choose any feat 


ICONOCLAST PARAGON 
11th-level Iconoclast trait 
You can cast dispel evil and good with this trait, requir- 


ing no material components. Once you do so, you can't 
cast it in this way again until you finish a long rest. 


In addition, when you cast dispel magic using your 
Iconoclast Hero trait, you cast it as a 4th-level spell. 


ICONOCLAST ARCHETYPE 
17th-level Iconoclast trait 
You can cast antimagic field with this trait, requiring no 
material components. Once you do so, you can’t cast it in 
this way again until you finish a long rest. 

In addition, when you cast dispel magic using your 
Iconoclast Hero trait, you cast it as a 5th-level spell. 


ICONOCLAST CHARACTERISTICS 
d6 Characteristic 
1 | blame the gods for the death of those | cared about. 
2 Multiple gods seek to use me to their ends, so | try to 
avoid all divine entanglements. 


3  It'sobvious the gods are fickle and unworthy of 
worship. 
4 | know the world's future lies with mortals, not gods. 


I’m convinced the gods want me dead. 
6  lrefuseto be a pawn in divine schemes. 


4 n 
- 


FOR CHAMPIONS LIKE THE 5E TESSAN LEADER ANTHOUSA, 


HEROISM AND DESTINY ARE INESCAPABLE FORCES, 


your DM allows: 


A snake emerged from my mouth before | took my first 
breath—an omen of my gift for deception. (Actor) 

| hear voices on the wind, warning me of danger. (Alert) 
lroas gifted me with physical prowess, intending to see 
me compete in the Iroan Games. (Athlete) 

| feel the vitality of the earth beneath my feet, and it re- 
freshes my strength when | rest on it. (Durable) 

The stars of Nyx are never hidden from my sight, reveal- 
ing their secretsto my eyes. (Keen Mind) 

| hear the echoes of the gods' speech in every mortal 
language and trace the patterns of Nyx in the written 
word. (Linguist) 

The gods smile on me, but | dread the day when they 
withdraw their favor and my luck runs out. (Lucky) 

As a child, | used to run through the woods and play 
with a giant lynx—which, | learned later, was an emissary 
of Nylea. (Mobile) 

The sun's light brings what is hidden to clear view in my 
eyes. (Observant) 

| ate a magical fruit that blessed me with extraordinary 
resilience. (Resilient) 

| studied with a supernatural tutor. (Skilled) 

| was bathed in the waters of a mystic river that left 

my skin resistant to harm—and glittering with star- 
light. (Tough) 


INSCRUTABLE 


Like a sphinx, you have a mind like a maze, impenetra- 


ble to mortal scrutiny. This might be a gift or training 
from an actual sphinx, the blessing (or curse) of a god, 
or an inexplicable talent. The Inscrutable Characteris- 
tics table suggests options for what makes you inscruta- 
ble. Additionally, you gain the following trait. 

Psychic Shield. You have resistance to psy- 
chic damage. 

Sphinx’s Shroud. You are immune to any effect that 
allows other creatures to sense your emotions or read 
your thoughts. Wisdom (Insight) checks made to ascer- 
tain your intentions or sincerity have disadvantage. 


INSCRUTABLE CHARACTERISTICS 

d6 Characteristic 

] Iwas educated by a sphinx in the Dakra Isles. 

2 lam a devout adherent to one of Meletis's schools of 
philosophy (detailed in chapter 3). 

3  lonlyspeak in the past tense, as if all things | say 
have already transpired. 

4  lhave sworn a vow to allow no living person to see 
behind the mask that covers my face at all times. 

5 Why wouldn't | phrase every statement as a question? 

6 Iwas born a sphinx, but a god cursed me into human- 
oid form and saddled me with the limits of mortal 
knowledge. | won't rest until | break the curse. 


LIFELONG COMPANION 


Behind many heroes is another hero whose greatness 
comes from the support and love they offer. Haktos had 
his beloved Perynes, Renata was accompanied by her 
servant Karados, and Siona sailed with her devoted 
crew. Like these partners, you are great and make 
others great. Consider the Companion Relationships 
table when determining your legendary connection. Any 
relationship with another player'scharacter requires 
that player's consent. Additionally, you gain the follow- 
ing traits. 

Boon Aura. Your allies within 5 feet of you have ad- 
vantage on saving throws against being frightened or 
charmed, provided you aren't incapacitated. 

Companion's Protection. When a creature you can 
see within 5 feet of you is hit by an attack roll, you can 
use your reaction to cause the attack to hit you instead. 
Once you use this trait, you can't do so again until you 
finish a long rest. 


COMPANION RELATIONSHIPS 

d6 Relationship 
Another character is my lover or dearest friend. 
Another character is my sibling. 
Another character is my parent or child. 
Another character is a champion of my god. 


л 4 UU N — 


After admiring another character from afar, I've finally 
won a position by their side. 

6 | want nothing more than for another character to 
recognize my devotion and love me in return. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


Р ---————————————————Á——————— ЧА 
MYTHS OF THEROS 


The world of Theros is alive with myths. From stories 
about the deeds of gods that explain the workings of the 
world to inspirational (or cautionary) tales of heroes, 
remarkable tales spread in countless ways, be they diver- 
sions, lessons, or songs. Just as in Theros, throughout this 
book you'll find numerous tales of great deeds, magical or- 
igins, grim tragedies, and more. In each case, such myths 
appear in sidebars like “Myth of the First Kings of Meletis.” 
These cues note the legendary places these stories occupy 
in the minds of Theros’s people and their place as tales 
that endlessly play out among the constellations of Nyx. 


NYXBORN 


Born from the minds of the gods, the creatures that pop- 
ulate the gods' realm are called Nyxborn. Nyxborn crea- 
tures resemble mortal beings, but philosophers debate 
their true character. Are they idealized forms of mortal 
beings, free from the imperfections and transience that 
causes mortals to suffer and die? Or are they hollow and 
soulless shades, lacking the authenticity and pathos that 
make mortal existence worthwhile? 

A Nyxborn is like a fragment of divinity, an idea or a 
dream that is incarnate. You embody an idea—like the 
way leaves turn toward the sun or the feeling of ocean 
sand between the toes, the way the heart stirs when the 
tide of battle changes or the sadness that lingers when 
remembering a happy moment of childhood. 

These ideas, dreams, memories, and feelings are the 
stuff Nyx is made of, and a Nyxborn is shaped from that 
raw material. You might have been specifically crafted 
by one of the gods to serve a certain purpose. Or your 
existence could be an accident caused by a confluence of 
supernatural forces. The Nyxborn Origin table offers a 
handful of suggestions that might explain how you came 
to be, and the Nyxborn Quirks table describes some spe- 
cial effects that might linger around your person. 

Additionally, you gain the following traits. 

Cloak of Stars. As an action, you wrap yourself in a 
starry cloak, appearing like a silhouette formed of the 
night sky. When you do, attack rolls have disadvantage 
against you. This cloak lasts for 1 minute, until you doff 
it (no action required), or until you die. Once you use this 
trait, you can't use it again until you finish a long rest. 

Nyxborn Resistance. You have resistance to necrotic 
and radiant damage. 


NYXBORN ORIGIN 

d6 Origin 

1 One of my parents is a nyxborn, a nymph, or some 
other supernatural creature. 

2 | was formed from Nyx by one of the gods to serve as 
a divine emissary. 

3 I'ma side effect of some other divine action. 

4 A god witnessed my birth, making me what | am. 

5 Iwas rescued from the Underworld and took on su- 
pernatural characteristics when I returned to life. 

6 I'ma song or other work of art brought to life. 


HEROES AND LIFELONG COMPANIONS, 


KvNAIOS AND TIRO FOUNDED MELETIS AND RULED AS ITS FIRST KINGS. 


NYXBORN QUIRKS 

d6  Quirk 

1 | Whenever my weapon strikes something, the weapon 
gives off a shower of starry sparks. 

2 My hair moves as if in a perpetual breeze. 

3 Муапрег smells like burning autumn leaves. 
When the sun shines on me just so, | glimmer with 
many colors. 

5 My laughter causes nearby birds to erupt in song. 

6 People who sleep near me always dream ofthe sea. 


ORACLE 


You possess a precious gift coveted not just by mortals 
but by the gods themselves: the gift of clear communica- 
tion between the mortal and divine realms. As an oracle, 
you can perceive the whims of the gods and petition 
them for glimpses of their vast insight. This gift also 
comes with a curse, though, which typically takes the 
form of dire insights. Consult the Oracle Curse table to 
determine what unwanted revelations you receive. 

The gods seek mortal oracles to act as their agents. As 
a result, most oracles devote themselves to the service 
of a single god and learn to ignore the voices of all oth- 
ers. Occasionally, two gods agree to share the services 
of an oracle. Oracles who try to remain independent 
often find themselves pursued by the agents of evil gods 
who would bind them to the god's service, if necessary. 


MYTH OF THE First KINGS OF MELETIS 

In ages past, the peoples of what would one day become 
Meletis were ruled by the archon tyrant Agnomakhos. Un- 
checked for generations, the vicious overlord carved out a 
mighty empire. Willing to endure the immortal’s cruelty no 
longer, the heroes Kynaios and Tiro—united by their love 
of freedom and one another—rose to challenge him. The 
people rallied to their cause, and through strength of arms, 
magic, and devotion, they defeated Agnomakhos. The polis 
of Meletis rose from the ruins of the archon’s empire, estab- 
lished as a beacon of freedom and enlightenment, and its 
people chose Kynaios and Tiro to be its first kings. 


You gain the following traits. 

Ears of the Oracle. You can speak, read, and write 
Celestial, the language of the gods. In addition, a god 
might deliver a message through you, and you can de- 
cide whether to use your ownvoice or to allow the god’s 
voice to come through your mouth to deliver the mes- 
sage, translated into any language you speak. 

Oracle’s Insight. The gods give you flashes of insight 
that help you bring your efforts to fruition. When you 
make an ability check, you can roll a 410 and add the 
number rolled to the check. You can wait until after you 
roll the d20 before deciding to add the d10, but you must 
decide before the DM says whether the roll succeeds or 
fails. Once you use this trait, you can’t use it again until 
you finish a short or long rest. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


16 


if 
$ 
hit 


14 
eee Ée ae be abo ёк йи юш ШШ A Uy HE ME " 
$ E EE c ng ine еен 


рр 


е S 


Oracle’s Piety. Your oracular abilities improve as your 
piety score increases. Instead of gaining the piety bene- 
fits associated with any god (as described in chapter 2), 
you gain the following traits when you reach the speci- 
fied piety score. 

Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for any spell that 
you cast through these traits. 


AUGUR 
Piety 3+ Oracle trait 


You can cast augury as a ritual with this trait. Once you 
do so, you can’t cast it in this way again until you finish 
a long rest. 


SEER 
Piety 10+ Oracle trait 


You can cast divination as a ritual with this trait. Once 
you do so, you can’t cast it in this way again until you 
finish a long rest. 


SIBYL 
Piety 25+ Oracle trait 


You can cast commune as a ritual with this trait. Once 
you do so, you can’t cast it in this way again until you 
finish a long rest. 

You also can't be surprised, provided you aren't in- 
capacitated. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


ORACLES HEAR THE VOICES OF THE GODS, A RARE GIFT 


AND SOMETIMES A CURSE. 


DIVINE ORACLE 
Piety 50+ Oracle trait 


You can increase your Intelligence or Wisdom score by 
2, as well as increasing your maximum for the chosen 
score by 2. 


ORACLE CURSE 


48 


1 


Flaw 

| know exactly how I’m going to die, and | can't do or 
say anything to prevent it. 

People who consult me for information rarely believe 
the answers | give them. 

I'm haunted by nightmares foretelling the deaths of 
people I’ve never met. 

I'm often distracted by the sights and sounds of 
things that other people can’t perceive. 

A horrible monster in Nyx watches me constantly, 
and | see it every time | venture outdoors. 

Any time | grow close to someone, | see them aged, 
dying, or dead. 

Whenever | receive a divine vision, | get an intense 
pain in my head or chest. 

One of the gods intends to use me as an oracle 
whether | want to listen or not. 


PIOUS 


Born with a particular connection to a deity, you have 
been winning favor with your god since birth. Consult 
the Pious Quirks table to determine how your faith 
might influence your personality. Additionally, you gain 
the following traits. 

Pious Protection. If you fail a saving throw, you 
can reroll it, and you must use the new roll. Once you 
use this trait, you can't do so again until you finish a 
long rest. 

Religious Study. You have advantage on any Intelli- 
gence (Religion) check pertaining to your chosen god. 

Starting Piety. You begin with a piety score of 3 with 
your chosen god. 


Pious QUIRKS 
d6 Quirk 

1  loften call people by the name of my god (or another 
god) by accident. 

2 | stay up late at night watching the stars in hopes that 
my god will share a message with me. 

3 I'm deeply jealous of my god's oracles, who seem to 
have a more intimate relationship with my god than | 
can ever hope to attain. 

4  ldream of one day entering Nyx and being granted a 
permanent place at my god's side. 

5  |have no home besides the temples of my god. 

6 сап prove it, but | suspect that my god might actu- 
ally be my parent. 


UNSCARRED 


Like the great hero Haktos, you are resistant to physical 
harm. Use the Unscarred Origin table to determine how 
you gained your legendary invulnerability. Additionally, 
you gain the following trait. 

Unscarred Resilience. When you take damage, you 
can use your reaction to roll a d12. Add your Constitu- 
tion modifier to the number rolled, and reduce the dam- 
age by that total. After you use this trait, you can't use it 
again until you finish a short or long rest. 


UNSCARRED ORIGIN 
d6 Origin 

1 | was bathed in hydra's blood as an infant, and my 
wounds close too quickly to become mortal injuries. 

2 | swallowed a magic stone that fell from Nyx, which 
made my skin hard as rock. 

3 When I was wounded as a child, a god healed me. 
Now wounds are reluctant to undo the god's work. 

4 | was rescued from the Underworld, and I'm not sure 
| fully returned to life—it's always so cold. 

5 was born on one of the Dakra Isles. All my people 
are naturally resilient, a fact | didn't realize until | lost 
my home and ventured into the world. 

6 | don't know who one or more of my parents is, but 
my resilience (and other hints) provide clues to their 
immortal identity. 


RACES 


A diverse assortment of peoples dwell among the lands 
of Theros. Aside from humans, the races in the Player's 
Handbook are unknown on Theros, unless they're visit- 
ing from other worlds. 

This chapter provides information about the following 
common playable races of Theros, as well as racial traits 
for all of them except humans: 


Humans on Theros are similar to those found on other 
D&D worlds: adaptable, ambitious, and wildly diverse. 

Centaurs employ cunning and equine strength to 
further the goals of the roaming Lagonna and 
Pheres bands. 

Leonin are proud lion-like hunters, many of whom live 
in defiance of the gods. 

Minotaurs are infamous for bloodthirstiness, a reputa- 
tion even the most peaceful struggle to escape. 

Satyrs follow their passions in the pursuit of wild revels 
and new adventures. 

Tritons are an enigmatic, sea-dwelling people with an 
endless desire to explore. 


HUMAN 


The most numerous of Theros's mortal races, humans 
embody the mortal will to carve out a place for civili- 
zation from the wilds. Although other, smaller settle- 
ments exist, the majority of humans are associated 
with one of Theros's three major poleis: Meletis, Akros, 
and Setessa. 


HUMAN NAMES 

Human names tend to honor heroes or philosophers of 
old—an aspirational nudge from parent to child in the 
hope that their offspring might one day live up to such a 
storied name. 

Family surnames are uncommon in the human poleis, 
and people with the same name must find ways to distin- 
guish themselves from one another. Some attach their 
place of birth or residence to their own names. A mer- 
chant from Meletis named Brigone, for example, would 
be Brigone of Meletis. Others link their name to their 
trade, like Ristos the Learned, or Alesta the Hunter. 

The most prestigious names however, are those 
earned through deeds or temperament. These names 
typically mark heroes, such as Hypatia of the Winged 
Horse, Kalogeros Doomhammer, or Ianthe the Bold. 


Female Names: Agathe, Alesta, Arissa, Brigone, Cal- 
laphe, Corisande, Hira, Hypatia, ladorna, Ianthe, 
Lidia, Luphea, Nymosyne, Olexa, Polyxene, Psemilla, 
Rakleia, Sophronia, Telphe, Tikaia, Vala 

Male Names: Alkmenos, Basarios, Braulios, Dra- 
sus, Eocles, Hixus, Kaliaros, Kalogeros, Kanlos, 
Kleon, Kytheon, Lanathos, Lindos, Nyklos, Phrogas, 
Prokopios, Rhexenor, Ristos, Teraklos, Uremides, 
Verenes, Zenon 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


18 


CENTAUR 


Powerful and curious, quick to act and knowledgeable 
of the wider world, centaurs seek to experience life’s 
boundless bounty. The centaurs of Theros are divided 
into two groups: members of the far-traveling Lagonna 
band and the proud raiders of the Pheres band. These 
bands occupy territories situated between the three ma- 
jor human poleis, making them common sights to those 
who travel human lands. Not ones to settle in permanent 
homes, though, centaurs might be found wherever there 
are wonders to be witnessed and adventures to be had. 


MARKINGS OF THE HERD 

Though centaurs share the same basic physiology, the 
centaur bands are commonly associated with their own 
distinct traits. 

Lagonna band centaurs tend to be sleek and muscu- 
lar, with powerful legs built for endurance rather than 
speed. They usually have coats of a single color, often 
with a shine that can look metallic in bright light. 

Pheres band centaurs typically have long, nimble legs 
and lean bodies, and are often marked with natural 
color patterns on their hide. Pheres centaurs sometimes 
paint or tattoo their upper bodies to match the patterns 
on their lower half. Occasionally, a Pheres centaur is 
born with vertical stripes on their hooves, foretelling an 
exciting and adventurous life. 


LAGONNA MERCHANT FAMILIES 
Lagonna centaurs travel in small merchant family bands 
called guri. These groups frequently trade with Meletis, 
which provides the biggest market for their wares, but 
they also do business with Setessa and smaller commu- 
nities within Akros’s lands. 

The eldest member of each guros typically leads their 
family. In times of discord, the heads of the guri gather 
to make decisions together. Other members of the guros 
work as traders, gatherers, packers, and scouts. A guros 
has several specialized roles required for success in 
travel and trade: a barterer, an omener, a courser, and 
preferably a koletra. 

A barterer negotiates deals between the guros and 
other traders. Barterers must know the customs of other 
cultures and speak several different languages. 

An omener is an oracle who reads messages from the 
gods in the natural world and reveals how the immortals 
would have the guros travel. 

A courser explores new trade territory for their guros. 
They are expert trackers and navigators, able to venture 
deep into unexplored territory and unerringly return to 
their families. 

Finally, every guros tries to travel with at least one 
koletra, one of the mighty, well-trained warriors of the 
Lagonna who are said to have the blood of the first, 
legendary centaur heroes. Koletras are said to bring 
good luck to a band, but are also usually fated to die in 
defense of their family. Not every guros has a koletra of 
its own, and guri share their best warriors among each 
other as a sign of goodwill and a way to forge bonds. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


JOURNEYS OF DISCOVERY 

When young Lagonna centaurs become adults, they 
often leave their band to travel the world on their own. 
This time of self-discovery, called a protoporos, can 
last anywhere from a few weeks to several years. The 
Lagonna believe that a protoporos helps young centaurs 
find their place in the world. An omener reads the signs 
of fortune before sending young centaurs on their way, 
guiding the first steps of their journey. While most 
centaurs return to the band eventually, some find their 
calling elsewhere. When the Lagonna tell tales of their 
greatest heroes, they often speak of centaurs who found 
their heroic destiny on a protoporos. 


PHERES RAIDERS 

The Pheres roam the wild lands between Setessa and 
Akros in small raiding herds. These herds are voluntary 
associations, in contrast to the family groups of the 
Lagonna. When necessary, several small bands join 
together in a larger herd to target particularly dangerous 
but resource-rich targets—be they humanoid traders or 
roving, greedy monsters. Bands also join together to de- 
feat common threats or to hunt for game. 

The Pheres value physical strength, speed, and prow- 
ess in both hunting and combat. Often a band is led by 
the strongest and most dominant warrior, called the 
charger. However, some bands elevate a tactician or 
strategist to this venerated position. The Pheres can be 
brutal and greedy, but they are clever as well, and under- 
stand the value of strategic leadership. 


LAGONNA BAND CENTAUR 


Other centaurs in Pheres herds work as scouts, 
archers, warriors, and foragers. In addition, most 
Pheres herds contain a caller and a tromper. 


Pheres callers are typically druids or rangers who can 


draw animal assistance to their herd. Callers often have 


one or more animal allies at their side, and can speak to 


animals to learn about the surrounding lands. 
Trompers are the most powerful and feared warriors 


of the herd. Centaur legends say that when the gods first 


fashioned humans from the red mud of the eldest river, 
Pheres trompers taught them how to corner and kill 


prey. The story tells that, to repay this debt, humans owe 
the centaurs a portion of what they catch. While humans 


don’t recall this arrangement, the Pheres often cite it as 
justification for their raids. 


PHERES RENEGADES 

Pheres band members survive by working and fighting 
together, but still some centaurs choose to strike out 
on their own. These renegades often feel like outsiders 
in their own band. They might be pacifists, wishing to 
learn about other people rather than fighting them. Or 
they might feel a restlessness in their soul that nothing 
else can soothe. Though renegades build their own life 
away from the band, most retain some connection with 
their past. Some stories tell of renegades returning to 
help their band in times of need before disappearing 
once more. 


CENTAUR NAMES 

Lagonna centaurs tend to favor names of three or four 
syllables, often borrowed from cultures they have met 
during their travels. Pheres centaurs tend to have 
shorter, sharper sounding names, often appended with 
an honorific gained in battle. 


Female Lagonna Names: Honotia, Kelitia, Lileo, Meloe 

Male Lagonna Names: Aughus, Dririos, Ormasos, 
Volien 

Female Pheres Names: Bido, Daxa, Saya, Tesia 

Male Pheres Names: Eno, Roth, Skelor, Stihl 

Pheres Honorifics: Threekills, Razorhoof, Unsleeping, 
Daggereye, Silentstep 


CENTAUR TRAITS 
Your centaur character has the following racial traits. 
Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score in- 
creases by 2, and your Wisdom score increases by 1. 
Age. Centaurs mature and age at about the same rate 
as humans. 
Alignment. Centaurs are inclined toward neutrality. 
Lagonna centaurs tend to be more lawful, while Pheres 
centaurs are more often chaotic. 


Puentes BAND CENTAUR 


Size. Centaurs stand between 6 and 7 feet tall, with 
their equine bodies reaching about 4 feet at the withers. 
Pheres centaurs tend to be slightly larger than Lagonna 
centaurs. Your size is Medium. 

Here’s how to determine your height and weight ran- 
domly, starting with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 1d10 
Height = 6 feet + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 600 + (2d12 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 40 feet. 

Fey. Your creature type is fey, rather than humanoid. 

Charge. If you move at least 30 feet straight toward a 
target and then hit it with a melee weapon attack on the 
same turn, you can immediately follow that attack with a 
bonus action, making one attack against the target with 
your hooves. 

Hooves. Your hooves are natural melee weapons, 
which you can use to make unarmed strikes. If you hit 
with them, you deal bludgeoning damage equal to 1d4 + 
your Strength modifier, instead of the bludgeoning dam- 
age normal for an unarmed strike. 

Equine Build. You count as one size larger when de- 
termining your carrying capacity and the weight you can 
push or drag. 

In addition, any climb that requires hands and feet is 
especially difficult for you because of your equine legs. 
When you make such a climb, each foot of movement 
costs you 4 extra feet instead of the normal 1 extra foot. 

Survivor. You have proficiency in one of the following 
skills of your choice: Animal Handling, Medicine, Na- i3 
ture, or Survival. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Sylvan. 


CHAPTER I | CHARACTER CREATION 


LEONIN 


The leonin guard the shining lands of Oreskos, a golden 
plain where even the gods rarely trespass. Prides of 

these nomadic, lion-like humanoids rarely interact with 
other peoples, having all they need in their shimmering 
homeland and knowing the treachery of strangers. Still, 
some leonin wonder what lies beyond Oreskos's border 
mountains and seek to test themselves in a wider world. 


NOBLE AND FIERCE 

Leonin tend to be tall compared to humans and move 
with a boldness that suggests their physical might. 
Tawny fur covers leonin bodies, and some grow thick 
manes ranging in shades from gold to black. While their 
hands prove as nimble as those of other humanoids, 
leonin have retractable feline claws, which they can ex- 
tend instantly. This, along with their ability to produce 
bone-shaking roars, gives most leonin an air that readily 
shifts between regal and fearsome. 

Leonin often act with confidence, which can come off 
as imperiousness. While this can reassure their allies, 
it can also suggest defiance in the face of what they per- 
ceive as imposed authority or unworthy experts. 


QUICK TO QUARREL 

Other peoples often perceive leonin as quick to take 
offense, intolerant of criticism, or belligerent. The truth 
is that many leonin simply enjoy fighting, whether verbal 
or physical. They take pleasure in argument, wrestling, 
sparring, and even battle, enjoying the opportunity to 
exercise their minds and bodies. 

It follows, too, that leonin aren't inclined to carry 
grudges. А warrior might react with sudden violence to 
an insult, but when the fight is over (and the leonin's su- 
periority proven), the insult is forgotten—along with the 
vanquished foe. 


PRIDE AND SELF-RELIANCE 

Few leonin devote themselves to the service ofthe gods. 
Centuries ago, the leonin worshiped the same gods that 
humans do, but after many of their prides suffered de- 
pravities at the hands of the tyrant Agnomakhos, most 
leonin rejected the gods. It's not that they deny the exis- 
tence of deities; they merely see the gods as mercurial 
and ultimately unworthy of adoration. The Leonin and 
the Gods table suggests the range of attitudes that leo- 
nin might adopt toward the gods. 


ES CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


Leonin rely on themselves and their prides. A pride is 
bound together by the experience of a shared challenge 
and, in particular, the sacred act of the hunt. See chap- 
ter 3 for more details on Oreskos and the leonin who 
call that land home. 


LEONIN AND THE GODS 


d6 
1 


Attitude 

I’m amused by the antics of the gods and their earnest, 
but ultimately deluded, mortal champions, and | feel 
smugly superior in my detachment. 

The meddling ofthe gods in mortal affairs makes me 
angry and bitter. | wish they would just leave us all 
alone! 

| view the gods as worthy adversaries—incredibly 
clever and well-prepared to play a long game but ulti- 
mately doomed to lose their games. 

I'm certain every bad thing that happens can ultimately 
be blamed on the gods, but I roll my eyes at each new 
twist of fate and try to get on with my life. 

| wish that | could be as naive as humans and other 
mortals who actually think the gods are looking out for 
them. | miss that kind of innocence. 

| don't talk about it among other leonin, but | actually 
revere the gods and tryto please them by my actions. 


LEONIN NAMES 

Along with their personal names, leonin identify them- 
selves by their pride. A member of the Flintclaw pride 
with the personal name of Ziore, for example, would 
likely style herself as Ziore of the Flintclaw. 


Female Names: Aletha, Atagone, Demne, Doxia, Ecate, 
Eriz, Gragonde, Iadma, Koila, Oramne, Seza, Ziore 

Male Names: Apto, Athoz, Baragon, Bryguz, Eremoz, 
Gorioz, Grexes, Oriz, Pyxathor, Teoz, Xemnon, Xior 

Pride Names: Embereye, Flintclaw, Goldenfield, Iron- 
mane, Starfeller, Sunguides 


LEONIN TRAITS 
Your leonin character has the following racial traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution score in- 
creases by 2, and your Strength score increases by 1. 

Age. Leonin mature and age at about the same rate 
as humans. 

Alignment. Leonin tend toward good alignments. 
Leonin who are focused on the pride lean toward 
lawful good. 

Size. Leonin are typically over 6 feet tall, with some 
standing over 7 feet. Your size is Medium. 

Here’s how to determine your height and weight ran- 
domly, starting with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d10 
Height = 5 feet + 6 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 180 + (2d6 x your size modifier) 


LEONIN MATRONS LEAD THE PRIDES OF ORESKOS, 
PROTECTING THE PLAINS FROM INTERLOPERS 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 35 feet. 

Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60 feet 
of you as if it were bright light and in darkness as if it 
were dim light. You can’t discern color in darkness, only 
shades of gray. 

Claws. Your claws are natural weapons, which you 
can use to make unarmed strikes. If you hit with them, 
you can deal slashing damage equal to 1d4 + your 
Strength modifier, instead of the bludgeoning damage 
normal for an unarmed strike. 

Hunter’s Instincts. Y ou have proficiency in one of the 
following skills of your choice: Athletics, Intimidation, 
Perception, or Survival. 

Daunting Roar. As a bonus action, you can let out 
an especially menacing roar. Creatures of your choice 
within 10 feet of you that can hear you must succeed on 
a Wisdom saving throw or become frightened of you un- 
til the end of your next turn. The DC of the save equals 
8 + your proficiency bonus + your Constitution modifier. 
Once you use this trait, you can’t use it again until you 
finish a short or long rest. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Leonin. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


21 


MINOTAUR 


The minotaurs who dwell in the badlands of Phoberos 
and the remote polis of Skophos are caught between 
two worlds. Some follow the dark god Mogis, who has 
tyrannized them for ages untold and shown them a trail 
of slaughter that is all many minotaurs have ever known. 
Others, though, have emerged from this bloody path and 
found a world that welcomes those who pursue their 
own destinies and heroic callings. 


BUILT TO SURVIVE 

Minotaurs are barrel-chested humanoids with heads re- 
sembling those of bulls. Their horns range in size from 
about 1 foot long to great, curling weapons easily three 
times that length. Theros minotaurs often carve their 
horns to sharpen their edges, etch symbols of power 
into them, or sheathe them in bronze to prevent them 
from shattering during battle. 

Thick hair extends down minotaurs' necks and pow- 
erful backs, and some have long patches of hair on 
their chins and cheeks. Their legs end in heavy, cloven 
hooves, and they have long, tufted tails. Minotaur priests 
often adorn themselves with sacred items, be they tro- 
phies from fallen foes, keepsakes from their homeland, 
or naturally occurring marks of their god's favor. 


AGES OF DARKNESS 

Although minotaurs aren't evil by nature and are free to 
worship any god, many are raised among those devoted 
to Mogis's vile whims. Myths tell that Mogis created 

the first minotaurs from his own followers, typically 


criminals and monsters of unspeakable depravity. While 
many groups of minotaurs still honor their villainous 
progenitors, others have abandoned their ancestors and 
moved beyond their crimes, seeking their fates in the 
future, not the past. 

While the inhabitants of Akros and other reaches near 
Phoberos, the homeland of most minotaur herds, have 
engaged in endless conflicts with bloodthirsty mino- 
taurs, they knowthere are those who forsake Mogis's 
depravities. The people of Meletis, Setessa, and lands 
beyond are also generally open-minded and curious 
about minotaurs who wander into their lands. Epics like 
The Callapheia also describe multiple heroic minotaurs. 
As a result, a minotaur traveling in the company of other 
non-minotaurs is likely to be accepted in any polis. 

See chapter З for more details on Phoberos, the mino- 
taur polis of Skophos, and various minotaur bands. 


PASSION AND ZEAL 

Minotaurs are known for venting their outrage through 
violence, but they aren't generally quick to anger. They 
are passionate, loving their friends and partners fiercely, 
and they laugh loud and long at good jokes. This zeal 
also extends to their faith. Those who have avoided the 
corrupting influence of Mogis gravitate toward the ser- 
vice of gods who share their bold nature, especially Ere- 
bos, Keranos, and Purphoros. Those who have rejected 
Mogis sometimes embrace his hated twin brother, Iroas. 


MINOTAUR NAMES 

In the labyrinthine polis of Skophos, the deeds of mi- 
notaur champions are carved among the winding halls. 
Minotaurs often name their children after these great 
heroes, believing that a child will inherit the strength, 
audacity, guile, or fearsomeness of a heroic namesake. 
Other minotaur parents invent their own names, though, 
believing in their child's potential to light a new constel- 
lation in Nyx with the brightness of their own soul. 

The Minotaur Namesake table suggests possible qual- 
ities or deedsthat a minotaur's namesake might have 
been known for. Your character might strive to emulate 
that quality or seek to forge a new legacy to be associ- 
ated with your name by future generations. 


Female Names: Bozzri, Dhazdoro, Erinimachis, Gha- 
lantzo, Halafoti, Kerania, Mitévra, Philoprodis, Tavro- 
miki, Ypoudoris 

Male Names: Bamvros, Fotiyinos, Halafotios, Kera- 
nios, Menetavro, Nikavros, Prodos, Rhordon, Tavro- 
stenes, Thyrogog 


MINOTAUR NAMESAKE 


d8  Ancestor's Qualities 

1  Mynamesake defeated a massive enemy. 

2 My namesake was known for fierce devotion to a god. 
3 Му namesake was a respected leader of other warriors. 
4 My namesake гап the entire breadth of Phoberos in or- 
der to warn the minotaurs of an Akroan attack. 

My namesake was famous for great magical ability. 

My namesake was a hero's devoted companion. 

My namesake is remembered for incredible generosity. 


о м C^ tn 


My namesake was a great oracle. 


MINOTAUR TRAITS 

Your minotaur character has the following racial traits. 
These traits are also suitable for minotaurs in other 
D&D worlds where these people have avoided the de- 
monic influence of Baphomet. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score in- 
creases by 2, and your Constitution score increases by 1. 

Age. Minotaurs mature and age at about the same rate 
as humans. 

Alignment. Minotaurs who leave the walls of Skophos 
have the opportunity to be free of its culture and pursue 
chaotic alignments, while those who remain within 
the polis and its tyrannical regime tend toward lawful 
alignments. 

Size. Minotaurs average over 6 feet in height, and they 
have stocky builds. Your size is Medium. 

Here’s how to determine your height and weight ran- 
domly, starting with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d8 
Height = 5 feet + 4 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 175 + (2d6 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Horns. Your horns are natural melee weapons, which 
you can use to make unarmed strikes. If you hit with 
them, you deal piercing damage equal to 1d6 + your 
Strength modifier, instead of the bludgeoning damage 
normal for an unarmed strike. 

Goring Rush. Immediately after you use the Dash 
action on your turn and move at least 20 feet, you 
can make one melee attack with your horns asa 
bonus action. 


MYTH OF MOGIS AND THE MINOTAURS 

Some legends claim that Mogis created the minotaurs, trans- 
forming his most bloodthirsty followers so that their hulking 
bodies resembled his own. However, while the tales told in 
the labyrinth-polis of Skophos affirm that Mogis rewarded his 
most devoted followers, they assert that these followers were 
already minotaurs, and all Mogis did was exalt them to an 
honored status. Among minotaurs who worship Mogis, these 
heroes are revered as spiritual if not literal ancestors. The 
moral of this story is simply that Mogis is a god who rewards 
his faithful servants. 

Minotaurs who don't follow Mogis are quick to point out 
that this myth says nothing about the nature of minotaurs. 
The worship of Mogis, they argue, is no more inherent to 
them than it is to humans, and minotaurs aren’t destined 
to a life of slaughter because of the circumstances of their 
creation. Perhaps most importantly, minotaurs aren’t an 
offshoot of humanity but a people in their own right, and nei- 
ther their nature nor their destiny is tied to a single god. 


Hammering Horns. Immediately after you hit a crea- 
ture with a melee attack as part of the Attack action 
on your turn, you can use a bonus action to attempt to 
shove that target with your horns. The target must be 
within 5 feet of youand no more than one size larger 
than you. Unless it succeeds on a Strength saving 
throw against a DC equal to 8 + your proficiency bonus 
+ your Strength modifier, you push it up to 10 feet 
away from you. 

Imposing Presence. You have proficiency in one 
of the following skills of your choice: Intimidation or 
Persuasion. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Minotaur. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


SATYR 


Satyrs have a well-earned reputation for their good spir- 


its, gregarious personalities, and love of revels. Most sa- 
tyrs are driven by simple desires, to see the world and to 
sample its every pleasure. While their spontaneity and 
whimsy sometimes put them at odds with more stoic 
peoples, satyrs rarely let the moodiness of others hinder 
their own happiness. Life is a blessing from the gods, 
after all, and the proper response to such a gift, as far as 
most satyrs are concerned, is to accept it with relish. 


BORN OF THE WILD 

In their physical forms, satyrs embody a fusion of hu- 
manoid civilization with the freedom of wild beasts. 
Generally, they look similar to humans, with a range of 
builds and features. But their goatlike horns, pointed 
ears, and furred lower bodies sharply distinguish them. 
Satyrs’ solid horns connect to their heads at the base of 
their skulls, while their legs end in sturdy hooves. Thick 
fur covers their bodies from the waist down, shorter at 
the waist and longer below the knees. Short, soft hair 
grows down their neck and spine, along their shoulders, 
and on their forearms. 


EMBRACING LIFE 

Most satyrs believe that the other peoples of Theros 

are woefully burdened with the plague of seriousness. 
Satyrs scoff at the efforts of polis-builders with their 
laws and right angles, and they poke fun at philosophers 
with their endless theories and interminable discourse. 


Satyrs feel that life is to be lived and experienced with 
all the senses. Satyrs see the world and everything in 

it as a book of delights, and they want to explore every 
page. See chapter 3 for more details on the satyr home- 
land, the Skola Vale. 


THE ART OF THE REVEL 

The humans of the poleis generally think of satyrs’ 
revels as raucous bacchanals, where anything and ev- 
erything might happen. This picture isn't wrong, but it's 
incomplete: there's more to a revel than debauchery. For 
satyrs, revelry is a way of life. It's the delight in small 
things: the song of a bird, a warm breeze, the smell of a 
tasty pie, relaxing by a river in the sunshine. Life freely 
offers these gifts, and for a satyr, they are more valuable 
than gold or glory. To revel means to forget the con- 
straints of time, to let go of the future and past, and to be 
wholly in the present moment. For satyrs, encountering 
life with all the senses honors the gods, and—most im- 
portantly—it feels really good. Driven by instinct and in- 
tuition, most satyrs prove unpredictable, following their 
sense of wonder wherever it leads. 


VERY ODD INDEED 

Satyrs are known for their eccentricities. Some people 
spend too much time worrying over why satyrs behave 
as they do. But satyrs themselves simply are as they are, 
feeling no need to understand what drives them, much 
less explain it to others. The Satyr Eccentricities table 
suggests a few tastes or proclivities your satyr character 
might possess. 


SATYR ECCENTRICITIES 
d8 Characteristic 


Т Flowers are the most amazing things ever. | want to 
pick them, wear them, and discover their silent secrets. 


2 There isn't a tree or statue that isn't fun to climb. 

3 Nothing wards off bad luck like a jolly dance. 

4 Sometimes talking to a plant really helps. 

5  Ifstumped, ! smoke a pipe. And if I'm going to smoke 
a pipe, it's going to be a splendid pipe. 

6 |imagine that my clothes are my glorious soul on dis- 


play for all the world to behold, and | dress accordingly. 
7 Having horns is the best. They are fun to decorate, and 
they can pop open an amphora, no problem. 
8 IfI have something really important to say, | always 
make sure to sing it. 


SATYR NAMES 

A satyr’s name is as playful and mischievous as they are, 
and each one is given when a satyr's personality shines 
through. Most satyrs also give each other nicknames. 


Female Names: Aliki, Avra, Chara, Dafni, Eirini, Elpida, 
Irini, Kaiti, Lia, Niki, Tasia, Xeni, Yanna, Zoi 

Male Names: Alekos, Dimi, Filippos, Ilias, Kyriakos, 
Neofytos, Omiros, Pantelis, Spyro, Takis, Zenon 

Nicknames: Bounder, Bristlechin, Clip-Clop, Dapple- 
back, Hopper, Nobblehorn, Orangebeard, Quickfoot, 

Scrufflebutt, Sunbeam, Skiphoof, Twinkle-Eyes 


SATYR TRAITS 
Your satyr character has the following racial traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma score in- 
creases by 2, and your Dexterity score increases by 1. 

Age. Satyrs mature and age at about the same rate 
as humans. 

Alignment. Satyrs delight in living a life free of the 
mantle of law. They gravitate toward being good, but 
some have devious streaks and enjoy causing dismay. 

Size. Satyrs range from just under 5 feet to about 6 
feet in height, with generally slender builds. Your size 
is Medium. 

Here’s how to determine your height and weight ran- 
domly, starting with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d8 
Height = 4 feet + 8 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 100 + (2d4 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 35 feet. 

Fey. Your creature type is fey, rather than humanoid. 

Ram. Youcan use your head and horns to make un- 
armed strikes. If you hit with them, you deal bludgeon- 
ing damage equal to 1d4 + your Strength modifier. 

Magic Resistance. You have advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


Mirthful Leaps. Whenever you make a long or high 
jump, you can roll a d8 and add the number rolled to the 
number of feet you cover, even when making a standing 
jump. This extra distance costs movement as normal. 

Reveler. You have proficiency in the Performance and 
Persuasion skills, and you have proficiency with one mu- 
sical instrument of your choice. 

Languages. Youcan speak, read, and write Common 
and Sylvan. 


" - n 
A 1 CAG) 
@ = ESESE 


MYTH OF XENAGOS THE SATYR GOD 


The satyr Xenagos savored his reputation for presiding 

over the most raucous revels his people had ever known. 
However, when fate led him to discover the nature of the 
gods and how they were beholden to mortals for their very 
existence, the whole order of the world felt like a joke—one at 
his expense. 

With immortal power no longer feeling so out of reach, 
Xenagos set into motion a plan that would propel him to 
godhood. His victory shook the pantheon, but his victory was 
short-lived. Heliod dispatched his champion, Elspeth, who 
faced many trials but ultimately killed the god-satyr by driving 
the spear, Godsend, through his heart. 

Many satyrs remember Xenagos as a satyr who lived life 
to the fullest and who played tricks that stirred up even the 
gods. Yet, he's also an example of how bitterness can turn a 
great trick nasty and how schemes that get out of hand aren't 
fun for anybody. What satyr wants the responsibility of being 
a god anyway? 


26 


TRITON 


Tritons dwell throughout the Siren Sea, exploring a 
world of coral forests and secret mountains the “dry- 
folk” of the surface world will never know. While most 
live their entire lives beneath the sea, they’re not bound 
to the deep. Following their inherent curiosity, some 
tritons venture beyond the waves, seeking to explore a 
whole world of wonders beyond their own. 


BORN OF THE SEA 

Tritons are an amphibious people, at home inthe water 
but mobile on dry land. Their bodies are covered in fine 
scales thatrange from yellowish-green through shades 
of blue to deep purple. Their heads are crowned with 
prominent crests, and fins sprout from their forearms, 
calves, and shoulders. Their digits are webbed, allowing 
them to swim as quickly as they can run. 

Well suited to life in the deep, tritons wear little cloth- 
ing unless armored for battle. They fashion most of their 
clothes and other items from materials found in the 
ocean: coral, seaweed, shells, bone, sea urchin spines, 
the shells of monstrous crustaceans, and so on. Having 
an old, well-developed civilization, tritons know much of 
how to refine these materials into garb as rich and weap- 
ons as sturdy as any found on land. 


LAND AND SEA 
For centuries, dryfolk have fished the seas of Theros 
and have used the sea's surface as a means of travel. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


МҮТН ОЕ DALAKOS AND THE KRAKEN 


Dalakos considered himself a triton like any other—curious, 
quick-minded, maybe even blessed with exceptional clever- 
ness by the gods. But he was unfocused and easily distracted, 
his potential scattered like seeds on stone. It wasn't until a 
kraken rose from the ocean's deepest depths and began a 
rampage that threatened Dalakos's community that he was 
forced to focus. As the beast drew closer, Dalakos sought 
ways to turn the monstrosity from its path. He worked day 
and night, but ultimately his plans failed. All that Dalakos 
knew was destroyed, obliterated by the might of the kraken. 
Yet the kraken carried on, moving toward a coastal human 
settlement. Amid the ruins of his home, Dalakos had a rev- 
elation. Working desperately, the triton crafted a miraculous 
device, one that ultimately laid low the kraken and saved the 
town. Today, Dalakos resides inside the kraken's shell, where 
he works day and night, his heart broken, but his mind for- 
ever focused on bringing his gifts to life. 


[ ETE EO fa ETE ЕТЕ! EAE i ET 


Many tritons interpret this as an intrusion into their 
domains. As a result, some warlike triton communities 
respond with periodic strikes against sailors and fishing 
vessels. Others believe that turnabout is fair play and so 
venture onto land to hunt for meat, steal supplies from 
coastal travelers, or raid dryfolk poleis for riches. 
Despite the tensions between tritons and the peoples 
of the surface, some tritons make their lives on land. En- 
chanted by the feeling of the winds, the rustle of leaves, 
the ingenuity of land-dwelling inventors, or any of count- 
less other surface-world charms, every triton living be- 
yond the waves does so for their own reasons. In some 
places, like the polis of Meletis, whole triton communi- 
ties flourish among dryfolk neighbors. See chapter 3 for 
more details on the tritons of Meletis and the Siren Sea. 


HAND OF THASSA 

While tritons pay respects to many gods, they tend to re- 
vere Thassa, god of the sea, above all other deities. Her 
devotees see her as the primary god of the pantheon, 
believing she will bring their people to ascendancy over 
the monsters of the sea and the poleis of the land. 


DEPTHS OF CURIOSITY 

Many tritons are intrigued by surface culture. The cu- 
rious among them venture into sunken ruins and ship- 
wrecks, sifting through the debris for whatever grabs 
their attention. Often these tritons develop collections of 
a specific kind of object or lore, trading with one another 
as they develop a sort of expertise in their field. Some 
tritons approach investigations of the dryfolk with scien- 
tific rigor. Such scholars often hold theories to go along 
with their collections, hypotheses many are eager to test 
upon meeting new dryfolk. 


TRITON NAMES 

A triton’s name is a symbol of choice. Upon reaching 
adulthood, a triton might shed the name they were given 
by their parents for one of their own choosing. Some 
opt to keep their name, but the majority select one that 
represents the adult they've become. Tritons might 

even go on to choose yet other names, as they shift 


from one phase of life to another, or after significant life 
events. Leaving a home community or transitioning to 
live among dryfolk might constitute such life changes. 
Tritons also have a fluid concept of gender and might 
switch names freely as they shift gender identities. 


Female Names: Amathe, Gnorcys, Leurybia, Margome- 
stra, Nereones, Oleia, Samathe, Saphiro, Tethene, 
Theaneia, Thectra 

Male Names: Bysseus, Cetos, Galaukus, Galiton, 
Kenessos, Odexes, Palamon, Pontreus, Rhe- 
teus, Thrasios 


TRITON TRAITS 
Your triton character has the following racial traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Strength, Constitution, 
and Charisma scores each increase by 1. 

Age. Tritons reach maturity around age 15 and can 
live up to 200 years. 

Alignment. Tritons tend toward neutrality. Their cul- 
ture encourages them to be mindful of life's currents, 
knowing when to harness fate’s tides and when to flow 
along with them. 

Size. Tritons are slightly shorter than humans, aver- 
aging about 5 feet tall. Your size is Medium. 

Here’s how to determine your height and weight ran- 
domly, starting with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2410 
Height = 4 feet + 6 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 90 + (2d4 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet, and you 
have a swimming speed of 30 feet. 

Amphibious. You can breathe air and water. 

Control Air and Water. You can cast fog cloud with 
this trait. Starting at 3rd level, you can cast gust of wind 
with it, and starting at 5th level, you can also cast 
wall of water with it (see the spell below). Once 
you cast a spell with this trait, you can’t cast 
that spell with it again until you finish a long 
rest. Charisma is your spellcasting ability 
for these spells. 

Darkvision. You can see in dim 
light within 60 feet of you as if it 
were bright light and in darkness 
as if it were dim light. You can’t 
discern color in darkness, only 
shades of gray. 

Emissary of the Sea. 
Aquatic beasts have an ex- 
traordinary affinity with 
your people. You can 


communicate simple ideas with beasts that can breathe 
water. They can understand your words, though you 
have no special ability to understand them in return. 
Guardians of the Depths. Adapted to the frigid ocean 
depths, you have resistance to cold damage. 
Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Primordial. 


SPELL: WALL OF WATER 
3rd-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a drop of water) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


You create a wall of water on the ground at a point you 
can see within range. You can make the wall up to 30 
feet long, 10 feet high, and 1 foot thick, or you can make 
a ringed wall up to 20 feet in diameter, 20 feet high, and 
1 foot thick. The wall vanishes when the spell ends. The 
wall's space is difficult terrain. 

Any ranged weapon attack that enters the wall's space 
has disadvantage on the attack roll, and fire damage 
is halved if the fire effect passes through the wall to 
reach its target. Spells that deal cold damage that pass 
through the wall cause the area of the wall they pass 
through to freeze solid (at least a 5-foot-square section is 
frozen). Each 5-foot-square frozen section has AC 5 and 
15 hit points. Reducing a frozen section to 0 hit points 
destroys it. When a section is destroyed, the wall's water 
doesn't fill it. 


28 


SUBCLASS OPTIONS 


At 3rd level, a bard chooses a Bard College and a pal- 
adin chooses a Sacred Oath. This section offers the 
College of Eloquence for bards and the Oath of Glory for 
paladins, expanding their options for that choice. 


BARD: COLLEGE OF ELOQUENCE 


Adherents of the College of Eloquence master the art 

of oratory. Persuasion is regarded as a high art, anda 
well-reasoned, well-spoken argument often proves more 
persuasive than facts. These bards wield a blend of 
logic and theatrical wordplay, winning over skeptics and 
detractors with logical arguments and plucking at heart- 
strings to appeal to the emotions of audiences. 


SILVER TONGUE 
3rd-level College of Eloquence feature 


You are a master at saying the right thing at the right 
time. When you make a Charisma (Persuasion) or Cha- 
risma (Deception) check, you can treat a d20 roll of 9 or 
lower as a 10. 


UNSETTLING WORDS 
3rd-level College of Eloquence feature 


You can spin words laced with magic that unsettle a 
creature and cause it to doubt itself. As a bonus action, 
you can expend one use of your Bardic Inspiration and 
choose one creature you can see within 60 feet of you. 
Roll the Bardic Inspiration die. The creature must sub- 
tract the number rolled from the next saving throw it 
makes before the start of your next turn. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


` 

Ды UNRIVALED ORATOR, THE CENTAUR PERISOPHIA GUIDES MELETIS 

AS A MEMBER OF THE POLIS'S RULING COUNCIL 
wies m 


THE Twelve 


wy A 


UNFAILING INSPIRATION 
6th-level College of Eloquence feature 


Your inspiring words are so persuasive that others feel 
driven to succeed. When a creature adds one of your 
Bardic Inspiration dice to its ability check, attack roll, or 
saving throw and the roll fails, the creature can keep the 
Bardic Inspiration die. 


UNIVERSAL SPEECH 
6th-level College of Eloquence feature 


You have gained the ability to make your speech intelli- 
gible to any creature. As an action, choose one or more 
creatures within 60 feet of you, up to a number equal to 
your Charisma modifier (minimum of one creature). The 
chosen creatures can magically understand you, regard- 
less of the language you speak, for 1 hour. 

Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until 
you finish a long rest, unless you expend a spell slot to 
use it again. 


INFECTIOUS INSPIRATION 
14th-level College of Eloquence feature 


When you successfully inspire someone, the power of 
your eloquence can now spread to someone else. When 
a creature within 60 feet of you adds one of your Bardic 
Inspiration dice to its ability check, attack roll, or saving 
throw and the roll succeeds, you can use your reaction 
to encourage a different creature (other than yourself) 
that can hear you within 60 feet of you, giving it a Bardic 
Inspiration die without expending any of your Bardic 
Inspiration uses. 

You can use this reaction a number of times equal to 
your Charisma modifier (minimum of once), and you re- 
gain all expended uses when you finish a long rest. 


PALADIN: OATH OF GLORY 


Paladins who take the Oath of Glory believe they and 
their companions are destined to achieve glory through 
deeds of heroism. They train diligently and encourage 
their companions so they're all ready when destiny calls. 


TENETS OF GLORY 
The tenets of the Oath of Glory drive a paladin to at- 
tempt heroics that might one day shine in legend. 
Actions over Words. Strive to be known by glorious 
deeds, not words. 
Challenges Are but Tests. Face hardships with cour- 
age, and encourage your allies to face them with you. 
Hone the Body. Like raw stone, your body must be 
worked so its potential can be realized. 
Discipline the Soul. You must marshal the discipline 
to overcome failings within yourself that threaten to dim 
the glory of you and your friends. 


OATH SPELLS 
3rd-level Oath of Glory feature 


You gain oath spells at the paladin levels listed in the 
Oath of Glory Spells table. See the Sacred Oath class 
feature for how oath spells work. 


OATH OF GLORY SPELLS 
Paladin Level Spells 


3rd guiding bolt, heroism 

5th enhance ability, magic weapon 
9th haste, protection from energy 

13th compulsion, freedom of movement 
17th commune, flame strike 


CHANNEL DIVINITY 
3rd-level Oath of Glory feature 


You gain the following two Channel Divinity options. 
See the Sacred Oath class feature for how Channel Di- 
vinity works. 

Peerless Athlete. As a bonus action, you can use your 
Channel Divinity to augment your athleticism. For the 
next 10 minutes, you have advantage on Strength (Ath- 
letics) and Dexterity (Acrobatics) checks; you can carry, 
push, drag, and lift twice as much weight as normal; and 
the distance of your long and high jumps increases by 
10 feet (this extra distance costs movement as normal). 

Inspiring Smite. Immediately after you deal damage 
to a creature with your Divine Smite feature, you can 
use your Channel Divinity as a bonus action and dis- 
tribute temporary hit points to creatures of your choice 
within 30 feet of you, which can include you. The total 
number of temporary hit points equals 2d8 + your level 
in this class, divided among the chosen creatures how- 
ever you like. 


AURA OF ALACRITY 
7th- and 18th-level Oath of Glory feature 


You emanate an aura that fills you and your companions 
with supernatural speed, allowing you to race across a 
battlefield in formation. Your walking speed increases 
by 10 feet. In addition, if you aren’t incapacitated, the 


walking speed of any ally who starts their turn within 5 
feet of you increases by 10 feet until the end of that turn. 
When you reach 18th level in this class, the range of 

the aura increases to 10 feet. 


GLORIOUS DEFENSE 
15th-level Oath of Glory feature 


You can turn defense into a sudden strike. When you or 
another creature you can see within 10 feet of you is hit 
by an attack roll, you can use your reaction to granta 
bonus to the target’s AC against that attack, potentially 
causing it to miss. The bonus equals your Charisma 
modifier (minimum of +1). If the attack misses, you can 
make one weapon attack against the attacker as part of 
this reaction, provided the attacker is within your weap- 
on’s range. 

You сап use this feature a number of times equal to 
your Charisma modifier (minimum of once), and you re- 
gain all expended uses when you finish a long rest. 


LiviNG LEGEND 
20th-level Oath of Glory feature 


You can empower yourself with the legends—whether 
true or exaggerated—of your great deeds. As a bonus ac- 
tion, you gain the following benefits for 1 minute: 


* You are blessed with an otherworldly presence, gain- 
ing advantage on all Charisma checks. 

* Once on each of your turns when you make a 
weapon attack and miss, you can cause that attack to 
hit instead. 

• Ifyou fail a saving throw, you can use your reaction to 
reroll it. You must use this new roll. 


Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until 
you finish a long rest, unless you expend a 5th-level spell 
slot to use it again. 


BACKGROUND 


Remarkable individuals from all walks of life seek their 
destinies among the lands of Theros, from devout ser- 
vants of the gods, to triumph-hungry athletes. 

While the heroes of Theros might come from any of 
the backgrounds presented in the Player's Handbook, 
the gods have a way of interceding in the lives of those 
meant for greatness. When determining your charac- 
ter’s backstory, consider how the gods have influenced 
your life. The gods are pervasive in the stories and 
cultures of Theros, and even their devout followers 
shouldn't feel bound to choose a faith-focused back- 
ground like acolyte. The gods' followers come from all 
walks of life, and any heroic soul might find themselves 
thrust into the midst of divine schemes. 

Whether or not your character is exceptionally de- 
vout, consider reviewing the deities presented in chap- 
ter 2 and see if you gravitate toward one. Perhaps this 
god has a special interest in you, is the deity your fam- 
ily has hailed as a patron for generations, or embodies 
values you hold close. Based on this, consider that 
chapter's possibilities for how you mighthave earned 
that immortal's favor (if indeed you have) and alternate 
background ideals related to their worship—along with 
other boons that might entice you into their service. 

Your character doesn't need to be a follower of any of 
the gods, but if you're not, there's likely a reason why 
you've avoided them. 

In addition to the gods, the supernatural gifts pre- 
sented earlier in this chapter might influence your 
background. Consider what story emerges from your 
combination of supernatural gift, background, and 
other choices. 

Beyond these options, the athlete background pre- 
sented here provides a new way to seek glory through 
discipline and physical prowess. 


MYTHS OF THE IROAN GAMES 


Competitors seeking a place among the athletes of legend 
endlessly push themselves to claim victory during Akros's 

46 E world-renowned annual contest, the Iroan Games. The deeds 
4 À of past victors set a high bar for those who follow. 

In recent memory, the famed wrestler Lanathos bested all 
rivals and, after a day-long struggle, a wild Akroan bull. 

When the pankratiast Nymosyne had her contest inter- 
rupted by a cyclops attack, she threw her rival at the creature, 
then snapped the brute’s neck with her bare hands. 

Perhaps most dramatically, though, was the recent victory 
of the Akroan hunter Arissa. While waiting to claim her sec- 
ond place award, Arissa witnessed a Nyxborn bat-creature 
Q snatch an infant from the crowd. The hunter threw her javelin 
an impossible distance, skewered the bat-thing, then caught 
the child as it fell. Collectively, the other assembled compet- 
itors gave Arissa their awards, and the hunter claimed her 
citizenship among the Akroan lektoi. 

Who knows what legends will unfold during next year's 
Iroan Games? 


KE ССС 


E * 
UU. 


ATHLETE 


You strive to perfect yourself physically and in execution 
of everything you do. The thrill of competition lights fire 
in your blood, and the roar of the crowd drives you for- 
ward. Tales of your exploits precede you and might open 
doors or loosen tongues. 

Whether in one of the poleis, between them, or among 
the nonhuman peoples of Theros, physical contests and 
those who pursue them command respect bordering on 
reverence. Athletes arise from all walks of life and all 
cultures and quite often cross paths with one another. 


Skill Proficiencies: Acrobatics, Athletics 

Languages: One of your choice 

Tool Proficiencies: Vehicles (land) 

Equipment: A bronze discus or leather ball, a lucky 
charm or past trophy, a set of traveler's clothes, and a 
pouch containing 10 gp 


FAVORED EVENT 

While many athletes practice various games and events, 
most excel at a single form of competition. Roll or 
choose from the options in the Favored Event table to 
determine the athletic event in which you excel. 


FAVORED EVENT 
d8 Favored Event 


2 


Long-distance running 


4 Boxing 


6  Pankration (mixed unarmed combat) 


8  Pentathlon (running, long jump, discus, javelin, 


wrestling) 


FEATURE: ECHOES OF VICTORY 

You have attracted admiration among spectators, fellow 
athletes, and trainers in the region that hosted your past 
athletic victories. When visiting any settlement within 
100 miles of where you grew up, there is a 50 percent 
chance you can find someone there who admires 

you and is willing to provide information or tempo- 

rary shelter. 

Between adventures, you might compete in athletic 
events sufficient enough to maintain a comfortable 
lifestyle, as per the "Practicing a Profession" downtime 
activity in chapter 8 of the Player's Handbook. 


SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 

Competition can forge strong bonds between teammates 
and rivals or ignite bitter feuds that burn outside the 
arena. Athletes often apply lessons from their training to 
their lives in general. 


ATHLETE PERSONALITY TRAITS 
d8 Personality Trait 


2  Idon't like to sit idle. 


4 Obstacles exist to be overcome. 


6 Ilove to trade banter and gibes. 


8 | get irritated if people praise someone else and not me. 


ATHLETE IDEALS 
d6 Ideal 


2 Triumph. The best part of winning is seeing my rivals 


brought low. (Evil) 


people: | strive to inspire my spectators. (Neutral) 


Growth. Lessons hide in victory and defeat. (Any) 


ATHLETE BONDS 
d6 Bond 


2 | will overcome a rival and prove myself their better. 


| will be the best for the honor and glory of my home. 


| strive to live up to a specific hero's example. 


ATHLETE FLAWS 
d6 Flaw 


2  I'ldo absolutely anything to win. 


| have EENE pain from old injuries. 


| must fe the captain of any group | join. 


217 a a КТ. 


ELT 


[2 
- 
* 


* 


LI А 
RESPONDING TO А SINGLE SAILOR'S SLIGHT, VENGEFUL KERANOS, GOD OF STORMS, SENDS » 
" LI LIGHTNING TO STRIKE A MELETIAN GALLEY ON THE SIREN SEA. à 
^ " 2 МЫМ. (OR ing dS m. LI 


GODS OF THEROS 


BIRD SHRIEKED AS IT TOOK FLIGHT FROM 
a branch above her. Through the gaps in the 
rustling canopy, she could see the god-forms 


~ shift in and out of focus. The night sky was 
known as m the realm of the gods. Every night, the heav- 
ens displayed fleeting visions of gods and celestial creatures. 
Some lingered for just seconds. But sometimes the pantheon 
enacted entire scenes for mortal eyes to witness. Lidia rarely 
took time to step outside her home and watch the heavens, 
but now there was no place else to rest her eyes. Tonight 

the god-forms were vivid, and her heart beat faster as she 
watched their battle unfold. 

—Jenna Helland, Godsend 


A pantheon of fifteen gods guides religious life on 
Theros. From the sun and agriculture to death and pas- 
sage into the Underworld, the gods oversee the forces 
of nature and the most important aspects of mortal life. 
These gods are quite real to the people of Theros, who 
see them moving across the sky at night and sometimes 
encounter them face to face. Thus, most people perform 
rituals and devotions that honor various gods, hoping to 
win their favor and stave off their wrath. They tell and 
retell the stories of the gods’ deeds—even as they watch 
those stories continue to play out in the vastness of the 
night sky. 

Not every mortal serves or acknowledges the gods, 
though. Some philosophers in the schools of Meletis 
teach that the gods of the pantheon are subordinate toa 
higher reality, perhaps Nyx itself. And other people, par- 
ticularly leonin, believe that the gods are undeserving of 
mortal reverence. 


DIVINE CHARACTERISTICS 


The gods of Theros are far more active than the deities 
of most D&D worlds. But that doesn’t mean they are or- 
dinary creatures—they aren't mere mortals, nor are they 
monsters that can be fought. 

Further, the gods of Theros aren't omnipotent. Al- 
though they are physically and magically powerful, 
ageless, and all but indestructible, their actions are 
bound by the decrees of Klothys. They can tangle the 
threads of destiny to a point, but they are forbidden from 
overstepping their assigned places in the pantheon. 


The god Kruphix is able to confine them to Nyx, pre- 
venting any direct interaction between the gods and the 
mortal world. 

Likewise, the gods aren't omniscient, though they see 
and hear everything that occurs inside their temples 
and before their altars. They have perfect recall of ev- 
erything they experience. Certain liminal spaces—cave 
mouths, shorelines, crossroads, forest edges, and so 
on—enable mortal voices to reach the gods as well, 
though most gods have little reason to pay attention to 
what is spoken there. 

Gods can speak directly to their oracles. They can 
appear in the dreams of mortals or manipulate natural 
phenomena to create omens. They can also create Nyx- 
born creatures to serve as messengers or emissaries. 

Gods grant their clerics the ability to cast spells, and 
they can effortlessly duplicate the effect of any spell they 
could grant (any spell on the cleric spell list, as well as 
any domain spell from their domains). They also have 
broad influence over aspects of the world associated 
with their portfolios, beyond what can be defined by 
spell effects. For example, Purphoros can make a vol- 
cano erupt, and Thassa can call up a tidal wave. Gods 
can bestow supernatural blessings on mortals, and they 
can lay terrible curses (such as when Mogis turned a 
herd of cattle into catoblepases). 

The gods can assume any form they choose. They 
most commonly appear as humanoids—the form in 
which the people of Theros most easily imagine them— 
but on an enormous scale. They often seem to be walk- 
ing across the dome of the sky, with their feet disappear- 
ing just below the horizon. Any part of a god's body that 
isn't directly lit takes on the appearance of the starry 
night sky of Nyx. The gods sometimes also appear as 
animals or magical creatures, or they manifest in insub- 
stantial forms like sunlight or wind. 

When physically present in the mortal world, a god is 
capable of devastating physical attacks. Heliod's spear 
striking the polis of Olantin caused it to sink forever into 
the sea, and an errant blow from Purphoros's hammer 
shaped the mountains. 

The power of the gods exceeds that of any mortal 
being. Even so, a god killing another god—let alone a 
mortal attempting the task—is virtually inconceivable. 
Any kind of direct confrontation against a god by mor- 
tals would require the assistance of at least one other 
god, and ideally more than one, to have any hope of 
success. A group of adventurers might try to convince 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


a bein 


JETE aa ЕЕ 


33 


34 


a group of gods to lend their aid against a god who has 
become a threat to the mortal world, hoping to get the 
gods to band together to restrain or punish the offender. 
Kruphix or Klothys might be able to force a god into a 
physical form that doesn’t fill the sky (perhaps some- 
thing similar to an empyrean or the tarrasque), which 
could enable adventurers to battle the god, especially 

if they have access to a divine weapon like the artifacts 
detailed in chapter 5. But defeating the god in that form 
would merely weaken the deity, allowing other members 
of the pantheon to capture, bind, or punish them. 


DIVINE RELATIONSHIPS 


The pantheon of Theros is a family—a large, often dys- 


functional family riven with petty jealousies and rival- 
ries but also held together by genuine affection, admira- 
tion, and cooperation. It is easiest, after all, for mortals 
to conceive of gods that are very much like themselves, 
and the gods of Theros are very humanlike in their foi- 
bles and their exploits. 

The pantheon of Theros has expanded through four 
generations of divine evolution. Some tales describe 
these as actual generations, suggesting (for example) 
that the storm god, Keranos, is the literal son of Thassa, 
god of the sea, and Purphoros, god of the forge. Others 
describe the generations in metaphorical terms, sug- 
gesting that Keranos represents the combination of 
Purphoros's creative energy and Thassa's deep knowl- 
edge, resulting in lightning-like flashes of inspiration (as 
well as the fury of a physical storm). In all their various 
forms, though, the myths agree on the basic structure of 
the pantheon's development. 

The time of the first generation precedes the presence 
of what are commonly understood to be "gods." Before 
mortals dreamed the gods into being, before they could 
even imagine beings as noble as the gods, the malleable 
dream-substance of Nyx gave shape to their fears in the 
form of the titans. 

The titans were beings of utter chaos, representing 
everything that stands against order in the mortal 


Gops or THEROS 


world, never worshiped but sometimes appeased. Myths 
recount how the gods battled and imprisoned the titans, 
sealing them in a prison beneath the Underworld. Now 
the titans are all but forgotten in mortal imagination. 
Scant mention of their names and epithets appears in 
the oldest tales, hinting at the nightmares that birthed 
them. Kroxa, Titan of Death's Hunger, embodied the 
terror of death—and its insatiable gluttony for new crea- 
tures to consume. Uro, Titan of Nature's Wrath, might 
be seen as a direct predecessor of Keranos and Thassa, 
but it was the incarnation of natural disaster, having 
none of the creativity and thoughtfulness of those gods. 
Phlage, Titan of Burning Wind, was an all-consuming 
whirlwind of fire, and Skotha, Titan of Eternal Dark, 
was the utter darkness of the starless night. 

The oldest of the gods, often imagined as siblings or 
as some kind of offshoot of the titans, are Kruphix and 
Klothys. The origin of this second divine generation is 
mysterious. Perhaps Klothys arose from a sense of inev- 
itability, a notion that the world was unfolding as it must, 
and thus the actions of mortals made little difference. 
Kruphix might have been born from a sense of mystery, 
supporting the idea that the workings of the universe 
are simply incomprehensible to mortal minds. It's also 
possible that Kruphix and Klothys are a different order 
of beings from either the titans or the other gods, and 
Klothys at least has existed for unknown ages despite 
being all but forgotten among mortal folk. 

Once mortals could imagine a world beyond the hori- 
zon and a course of destiny that left behind the trials of 
life, they could formulate the notions of principles, order, 
and natural law. Out of those ideas, the third generation 
of deities was born: sun-crowned Heliod, deep-dwelling 
Thassa, bleak-hearted Erebos, bronze-blooded Pur- 
phoros, and keen-eyed Nylea. These gods are known to 
refer to each other as "brother" and "sister," though they 
never speak of parents and almost certainly don't imag- 
ine Kruphix and Klothys in that role. 

The other eight deities, the fourth generation, repre- 
sent the application of abstract principles to the reality 


Deity Alignment Suggested Cleric Domains 
Athreos, god of passage LE Death, Grave* 

Ephara, god ofthe polis LN Knowledge, Light 
Erebos, god of the dead NE Death, Trickery 

Heliod, god of the sun LG Light 

lroas, god of victory сс War 

Karametra, god of harvests NG Life, Nature 

Keranos, god of storms CN Knowledge, Tempest 
Klothys, god of destiny N Knowledge, War 
Kruphix, god of horizons N Knowledge, Trickery 
Mogis, god of slaughter GE War 

Nylea, god of the hunt NG Nature 

Pharika, god of affliction NE Death, Knowledge, Life 
Phenax, god of deception CN Trickery 

Purphoros, god ofthe forge CN Forge,* Knowledge 
Thassa, god of the sea N Knowledge, Tempest 


* The Forge and Grave domains appear in Xanathar's Guide to Everything. 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


Common Symbol 
Crescent moon 

Urn pouring water 
Serene face 

Laurel crown 
Four-winged helmet 
Cornucopia 

Blue eye 

Drop spindle 
Eight-pointed star 
Four-horned bull's head 
Four arrows 

Snakes 

Winged golden mask 
Double crest 

Waves 


of mortal life. For example, while Heliod stands for 
universal moral precepts, Ephara is the god of laws, 

the rules and structures that govern mortal societies. 
Nylea is the god of wild nature, predatory animals, and 
the change of seasons, and at the same time Karametra 
is the god of nature tamed for human use—agriculture 
and domestication—and of the natural cycles involved in 
human life, especially childbirth. 

These gods recognize the previous generation as their 
elders but only occasionally as parents. Iroas and Mogis 
are widely considered to be brothers, but few myths de- 
scribe their parentage, and those that do contradict each 
other—in keeping with the nature of these eternally 
warring gods. 


MYTHS AND DEEDS 


Countless tales tell the history, deeds, and nature of the 


gods. Sometimes these stories play out among the con- 
stellations in the night sky. They are chanted in hymns 
during the gods’ festivals, inscribed in temple walls, told 
around campfires and hearths, and collected on scrolls. 
Some are simple fables meant to illustrate a single 

facet of a god’s character or of moral behavior. Others 
are monumental epics, most notably The Cosmogony, a 
poem by an unnamed Meletian sage that includes sev- 
eral (Sometimes conflicting) tales of the creation of the 
world and beyond. 

The people of Theros don’t balk at contradictory 
myths. Is Keranos the literal child of Thassa and Pur- 
phoros? Did he spring unbidden from Thassa’s heart 
when her rage grew too great for her to control? Or did 
he come into being when Purphoros tried to steal the 
secrets of Kruphix? To the people of Theros, it doesn’t 
matter whether these tales describe historical facts, and 
each of them is true in its own way. Each tale about Ker- 
anos expresses a truth about the god, about inspiration 
and storms and secrets. Studying each one can lead 
Keranos’s worshipers to a deeper understanding of and 
a closer relationship with their god. 

Various writings, usually organized around a central 
theme, collect myths about the gods. The Origin of 
Monsters is one such collection, notable as an attempt 
to find commonality in a number of different tales about 
the birth of dragons. It also describes how Pharika hid 
secrets in the blood of basilisks, how the spirits of great 
warriors are reincarnated in the form of manticores, 
and dozens of other tales. 

The epic poem called The Theriad is another such col- 
lection. It describes the exploits of various champions of 
Heliod, all of whom are simply called “the Champion,” 
as if they were a single individual. Because the identities 
of the heroes aren’t mentioned, the tales have more to 
say about the character of Heliod than about any cham- 
pion’s mortal deeds. 

The Callapheia, by contrast, is about the exploits of 
a single mortal hero, Callaphe the Mariner, who snuck 
into Mount Velus and stole Purphoros's tears, hid be- 
hind Phenax and wrote down his secrets, and raced 
Thassa at the edge of the world before sailing into Nyx. 
Tales of this sort highlight the gods' pettiness and vanity 
and promote the somewhat blasphemous notion that a 
mere mortal can outwit the divine. The Callapheia also 


serves as something of a gazetteer of Theros, describing 
its various lands and their inhabitants, at least as they 
existed some centuries ago. 

Finally, the deeds of the gods are sung in paeans 
during their festivals. Naturally, these hymns portray 
the gods in the most favorable light, as benevolent (or at 
least indifferent) and all-powerful. 


WORSHIP 


The idea of the existence of gods, as it grew in popu- 
larity among the mortals of Theros, didn't bring the 
gods into being by itself. Mortal reverence and worship 
turned universal ideas into deities. It wasn't until mor- 
tals trusted the gods to act on their behalf, in response 
to sacrifices and prayers, that the gods took shape from 
the dream-substance of Nyx. Worship remains crucial 
to the power of the gods, though mortals are generally 
not aware of their influence. Were a god to cease being 
worshiped, their might would dwindle. 

The most prevalent form of expressing reverence is 
the practice of libation, pouring out a splash of wine 
or water in honor of the gods. Pious people perform a 
simple rite of prayer and libation every morning and 
evening at a household altar or hearth, while the less de- 
voted might still pour out a splash of wine before drink- 
ing the rest. 

The defining feature of a Theran temple is a statue of 
a god—which the actual god can occupy and animate at 
any time. Worshipers kneel before it, touch and kiss it, 
drape it in garlands and fine cloth, and leave offerings 
before it. These acts are sometimes spontaneous out- 
pourings of love or gratitude, and sometimes petitions, 
imploring the god to cure an illness, send rain for crops, 
guarantee a safe journey, or perform any other favor re- 
lated to the god's sphere of influence. 

Most people aren't devoted to a single god, though 
many prefer some gods over others. Someone might ask 
Pharika to spare a loved one from disease, then later 
offer prayers to Karametra for a bountiful harvest or to 
Thassa for safety on a sea journey. 


CLERICS AND CHAMPIONS 


It's far more common for a hero to be devoted to an 
individual god than it is for an ordinary mortal. A cleric 
almost always worships a single god of the pantheon 
and chooses a domain appropriate to that deity for their 
Divine Domain feature. 

Often, heroes choose to devote themselves to particu- 
lar gods either out of piety or self-interest. Sometimes, 
though, the gods choose champions who might not be 
entirely willing. Heliod, for example, takes pride in se- 
lecting only the best mortals to be his champions. He 
doesn't care how the mortals feel about being chosen, 
and his demands won't be refused. 

Most heroes in a Theros campaign, and all clerics, are 
assumed to devote themselves to a god's cause, acting as 
that god's champion. All the characters in a party might 
serve the same god, but more likely, they represent the 
interests of different gods as they face the dangers of the 
world together. 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS = 
3 


Р1ЕТҮ 


Being а god’s champion carries no benefits in and of 
itself. Each god’s description in this chapter paints a 
picture of the god's typical champion, including ideas for 
how a player character might end up in that position and 
provides ideals that represent the god's interests. 

The gods do reward the devotion of their champions, 
though. The strength of your devotion to your god is 
measured by your piety score. As you increase that 
score, you gain blessings from your god. 

Piety has nothing to do with faith or belief, except 
insofar as a person’s thoughts and ideals drive them to 
action in a god’s service. Your piety score reflects the ac- 
tions you have taken in your god’s service—actions that 
the god richly rewards. 

When you choose a god to worship as a beginning 
character, your piety score related to that god is 1. Your 
piety score increases by 1 when you do something to 
advance the god’s interests or behave in accordance 
with the god’s ideals. The gods expect great deeds from 
their champions, so your piety score typically increases 
only when you accomplish a significant goal (such as the 
completion of an adventure), make a significant sacrifice 
of your own self-interest, or otherwise when the DM 
sees fit. Each god’s description in this chapter includes a 
discussion of the god’s goals and ideals, which your DM 
uses to judge whether you earn an increase in your piety 
score. As a general rule, you can expect to increase your 
piety by 1 during most sessions of play, assuming that 
you are following your god’s tenets. The DM decides the 
amount of any increase or decrease, but a single deed 
typically changes your piety score by only 1 point in ei- 
ther direction unless your action is very significant. 


BENEFITS OF PIETY 


The gods bestow favors on those who prove their de- 
votion. When your piety score crosses certain thresh- 
olds—3, 10, 25, and 50—you gain a benefit detailed in 
the sections describing the gods' champions throughout 
this chapter. If your piety score exceeds and then falls 
below one of those thresholds, you lose the benefit you 
gained at the higher tier. 


If you choose the Oracle supernatural gift, you gain 
different rewards for your piety score, instead of the 
ones normally granted by your god. This gift and its ben- 
efits are described in chapter 1. 


INSPIRATION AND PIETY 


To some extent, piety is its own reward. Behaving in 
accordance with your god's dictates and ideals inspires 
you and might enable you to succeed where you might 
otherwise fail. At your DM's discretion, whenever you in- 
crease your piety score, you might also gain inspiration, 
reflecting the improvement in the harmony between you 
and your god. 


IMPIETY 


Not every hero chooses the life of a divine champion. Le- 
onin, in particular, are known for rejecting the worship 
of gods. If you don't devote yourself to a god, you don't 
have a piety score and you gain no rewards for piety, but 
you don't suffer any negative consequences. 

The Iconoclast supernatural gift (described in chapter 
1) offers a way for characters to gain benefits similar to 
rewards for piety without being devoted to a god. 


CHANGING GODS 


If events in your character's adventuring career warrant 
doing so, you can abandon the service of one god and 
turn to a different one. Once you abandon a god's ser- 
vice, you can rarely go back without performing some 
act of contrition. 

Your DM decides whether your new god will accept 
you as a champion and what you might have to do to 
prove your commitment. 

When you change gods, you lose all the benefits 
granted by your old one, including rewards for piety and 
any other divine blessings. You no longer have a piety 
score to your old god, and your piety score to your new 
god starts at 1. 


All mortals are destined to face Athreos, the River 
Guide, when their lives come to an end. The god of pas- 
sage ferries the dead across the Tartyx River, conveying 
each mortal soul to its destiny in the Underworld. For 
most people, Athreos embodies the greatest mysteries 
of existence—the terror and wonder of life’s last moment 
and the revelation of one’s ultimate fate in the afterlife. 
Athreos is no judge, though. The veiled, silent god un- 
dergoes no deliberations and makes no exceptions. The 
River Guide reads the truth of each soul and bears it un- 
failingly to its proper place in the Underworld. There is 
no haggling and no sympathy on Athreos's skiff, the god 
having heard and denied every conceivable mortal plea. 
Athreos appears as a gaunt figure cloaked in ragged 
robes and a collection of golden masks. What little can 
be seen of his body is unsettling, its gray flesh stretched 
thin over a barely human skeleton. The River Guide 
is never without his ancient staff, Katabasis, which he 
transforms into the ferryboat he uses to ply the Rivers 
That Ring the World. Though the deity’s shrouded form 
gives no clue, many mortals consider Athreos to be 
male, but the River Guide cares for terms or labels по 
more than any other force of nature. Athreos can change 
shape but rarely, if ever, takes on other forms. 


ATHREOS'S INFLUENCE 


Most mortals focus on the River Guide's role in their 
own deaths. Countless mortal superstitions prescribe 
ways to garner Athreos's favor, but all Athreos demands 
of those he transports is payment: a single coin of 

any minting or value. The River Guide has an expan- 
sive definition of what constitutes a coin, from actual 
stamped currency and jewelry to shiny beads or opales- 
cent shells. Ultimately, he seems most concerned with 
whether a mortal has prepared for death, keeping pay- 
ment ready out of respect and as a personal memento 
mori. Those whose bodies are burned, buried, or oth- 
erwise disposed of along with valuables deliberately in- 
tended for the River Guide discover that they can make 
use of such items when trading for Athreos's services. 
Spirits that reach the shores of the Tartyx River unpre- 
pared, though, risk being stranded, as Athreos refuses 
to ferry those who can't pay. 


Athreos is also invoked as the god of passage, as well 
as the deity with dominion over borders, boundaries, 
and that which is "neither." Those who undertake jour- 
neys, especially dangerous ones, often drop a coin into 
a fountain or a body of water in apotropaic acknowledg- 
ment of the River Guide. Bridges and borders are also 
places where Athreosis commonly remembered, with 
many such sites being marked by motifs of rivers or spir- 
its. Additionally, phenomena that are neither one thing 
nor another, defying simple classification, are often con- 
sidered to be within Athreos's province—most notably 
the state between life and death, but also echoes, phan- 
tom sensations, and the feeling of déjà vu. 


ATHREOS'S GOALS 

Athreos endlessly works to maintain the balance be- 
tween Nyx, the Underworld, and the lands of the living. 
The River Guide sees himself as a servant of the mortal 
world and knows nothing of the glamor, honor, or mys- 
tery mortals often ascribe such to him. Rather, he does 
what must be done, and should some cosmological con- 
dition fall out of sorts, the River Guide and his servants 
work with silent efficiency to restore balance. 


DIVINE RELATIONSHIPS 
Athreos cares little for the dealings of the other gods. 
As long as other deities don’t impinge on the border 
between life and death, either by overstepping their 
bounds or by trying to draw the dead back into life, the 
River Guide has little to do with them. More than once, 
this isolation has put Athreos in silent conflict with 
Heliod and Erebos, both of whom subtly resent Athreos 
for limiting how much each can meddle in the other’s 
realm. At the same time, the River Guide's role as a 
buffer between the two vindictive gods actively prevents 
their grudges from exploding into divine warfare. 
Thassa bears a chilly respect for Athreos. In a time 
before reckoning, boundaries divided the god of the 
sea’s dominion from the Tartyx River. Though the god 
of the sea quietly resents sharing even a drop of water, 
she considers the River Guide to be a quiet, unobtrusive 
trespasser on her favored element and keeps her dis- 
tance. Were her respect to wane, though, Thassa would 
eagerly vie to control the Rivers That Ring the World. 


WORSHIPING ATHREOS 


Most funeral traditions include small offerings and 
words of reverence to Athreos. Predominant among 
these traditions is burying or burning the dead with a 
clay funerary mask, to “frame” the identity of the dead 
for Athreos, and with at least one coin, so a soul might 
pay Athreos to ferry them to the Underworld. Some peo- 
ple are laid to rest with large amounts of grave goods. 
Memorial practices vary widely by culture, from tearful, 
somber affairs to lively celebrations. These rituals serve 
more as catharsis for the living than as meaningful 
boons to Athreos, though. The River Guide cares only 
for the single coin he’s owed by any who board his skiff. 
During the feast of the Necrologion, which gives its 
name to the eighth month in the calendar of Meletis, 
pious souls silently spend the day reading ancient mem- 
oirs or writing messages for their own descendants. 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


37 


ATHREOS'S CHAMPIONS 


Alignment: Usually lawful, often evil 

Suggested Classes: Cleric, monk, rogue, wizard ` 

Suggested Cleric Domains: Death, Grave (described in 
Xanathar’s Guide to Everything) 

Suggested Backgrounds: Hermit, sage, sailor, urchin 


Most worshipers of Athreos believe death is a natural 
part of life, to be neither rushed toward nor run from. 
They seek to do their part in fulfilling the natural order, 
easing the passage of the living into death. Most also re- 
spect their ancestors and honor them through tradition, 
ritual, and memory. 


ATHREOS’S FAVOR 

As all mortals eventually bow before him, the River 
Guide doesn’t seek worship. When mortal agents are 
necessary, though, Athreos often seeks the descendants 
of those who impressed him during their journey to the 
Underworld. The Athreos's Favor table offers several 
suggestions for the nature of your connection to the god. 


ATHREOS’S FAVOR 


d6 Circumstance 

1 A family member died bringing you into the world. 

2 You don’t think or feel as others do, finding emotions 
messy and confusing. 

3 Ina brazen or desperate moment, you dared death to 
take you—and in a way, it has. 

4 You sent a Returned back to the Underworld, restoring 
a measure of order to the cosmos. 

5 Serving Athreos is your family tradition, a responsibil- 
ity honored for countless generations. 

6 You have died before, and in that moment, you 
glimpsed the mists that surround Athreos's skiff. 


DEVOTION TO ATHREOS 

Servants of Athreos facilitate the passage fromlife into 
death. As a follower of Athreos, consider the possibili- 
ties on the Athreos's Ideals table as alternatives to those 
suggested for your background. 


ATHREOS'S IDEALS 

d6 Ideal 

1 Devotion. My devotion to my god is more important to 
me than what he stands for. (Any) 

2 Tradition. Honor the dead through rites of respect and 
by continuing their ways. (Lawful) 

3 Dread. Mortals put their fear out of mind, but through 
me, they will remember the inevitable. (Evil or neutral) 

4  Apathy. Life is but a rehearsal for death, and it's best 
not to grow too attached to it. (Neutral) 

5  Succor. | offer balm to the dying— which, to varying 
degrees, includes all of us. (Good or neutral) 

6 Judgment. Violations against the order of life and death 
must be set right. (Lawful) 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


EARNING AND LOSING PIETY 

You increase your piety score to Athreos when you 
honor him or the cycle of life and death through acts 
such as these: 


* Providing coins and overseeing burial rites for those 
slain during a tragedy 

• Ensuring that the deeds and knowledge of someone 
who has died are preserved 

• Slaying a Returned and its associated eidolon 


Your piety score to Athreos decreases if you diminish 
the River Guide's influence in the world, impede his 
Work, or disrespect the dead through acts such as these: 


• Denying a dying person their final rites 

» Removing wealth from a corpse or defiling a tomb 

• Aiding those who seek to escape from the Under- 
world, or who already have 


ATHREOS's DEVOTEE 
Piety 3* Athreos trait 


Your life is intertwined with the fate of the dead. You can 
cast gentle repose with this trait, requiring no material 
components, a number of times equal to your Wisdom 
modifier (minimum of once). You regain all expended 
uses when you finish a long rest. Wisdom is your spell- 
casting ability for this spell. 


ATHREOS'S VOTARY 
Piety 10+ Athreos trait 


You can cast speak with dead with this trait, requiring 
no material components. Once you cast the spell in this 
Way, you can't do so again until you finish a long rest. 
Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for this spell. 


ATHREOS'S DISCIPLE 
Piety 25+ Athreos trait 


You can cast false life with this trait, requiring no mate- 
rial components. When you do so, you gain an additional 
25 temporary hit points. Once you cast the spell in this 
way, you can't do so again until you finish a long rest. 
Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for this spell. 


CHAMPION OF THE PASSAGE 
Piety 50+ Athreos trait 


You can increase your Intelligence or Wisdom score by 
2 and also increase your maximum for that score by 2. 


MyTHs OF ATHREOS 


Athreos eternally performs a remarkable labor, ferrying mor- 
tal souls to the Underworld. During the River Guide's ages of 
toil, he has inspired a number of legends. 

The Athrean Obols. Some claim that Athreos doesn’t col- 
lect coins out of greed but because he’s looking for five spe- 
cific treasures. Apocryphal writings in the Underworld library 
of Oneirrakthys say that Athreos was the first mortal to die. 
When he came to face the gods, he brought a single treasure 
as an offering to each of Theros’s five mightiest deities, hop- 
ing to receive a peaceful place among them in return. 

The gods realized what Athreos’s spirit represented: the 
first of an endless flood of mortal souls that would soon 
begin to join Athreos in death. Unwilling to spend eternity 
sorting the endless stream of dead mortals themselves, the 
other gods did give Athreos a place among them, as well as 
charging him with his impossible task. They also offered him 
a measure of hope. The gods cast Athreos's offerings back 
into the mortal world in the form of five coins. They prom- 
ised Athreos that, once he collected the coins anew, the gods 
would free the River Guide from his service and welcome him 
into their ranks. Ever since, Athreos has labored, both at fer- 
rying the dead and in search of his five lost coins, called the 
Athrean Obols. It's said that any who bring the River Guide 
one of the coins will be rewarded with a wish for anything 
Athreos can grant—even exception from death. 


Death's Denier. Some legends tell of an ancient shade 
who has tarried at the banks of the Tartyx longer than any 
other—a woman, ancient beyond years and clad only in her 
own flowing hair and sagging skin, who some passing souls 
mistake for Athreos. This figure is Solyssia, once an oracle of 
Meletis. Solyssia refuses to pay Athreos's price, or to have it 
paid for her. For untold centuries, she has harassed the newly 
dead, learning an incredible amount about the mortal world 
in the process. The only thing she's less impressed with than 
the state of the modern world is Athreos, whom she curses 
like a bitter old friend whenever the River Guide draws near. 
If any mortal has ever truly known Athreos, it is her. 

Eight Exceptions. Eight times in the course of history, Ath- 
reos has purposely allowed a mortal to delay their death or 
temporarily return from the Underworld. These individuals 
were restored as living beings (not as Returned) to complete 
particular tasks. As a record of these exceptions, Athreos 
bears a Returned-like mask of each individual. Despite cen- 
turies between bargains, though, no one who Athreos has 
made an exception for has ever returned. As a result, the 
River Guide refuses to make another exception. He might be 
convinced to do otherwise were someone to bring one of the 
eight lost souls—such as Biaas the Poison Drinker, Dianyan 
Half-Heart, or Hundred-Damned Thasmudyan—before him 
for punishment. 


40 


God of the Polis 


As god of the polis, Ephara sees herself as the founder 
of civilization. She watches over cities, protecting them 
from outside threats. She is credited with establishing 
the first code of law, which Meletis has preserved and 
the other poleis have imitated. Even more important, 
she helps cities reach their highest potential, becoming 
centers of scholarship, industry, and art. 

Ephara appears as a huge animated statue wearing a 
stone crown, resembling the capital of a column. When 
she chooses to walk about her cities at human scale, 
she often takes on the form of a human woman. In ei- 
ther form, she is always dressed in blue and white, and 
her expression is usually serious, but not unkind. She 
often carries a large urn on one shoulder, with the dark, 
star-studded sky of Nyx pouring from it and dissolving 
into mist as it hits the ground. 


EPHARA'S INFLUENCE 


Ephara's sphere of influence is the polis. Although wor- 
shiped in many places, she is most beloved in Meletis, 
whose citizens credit her with the city's founding. Many 
city walls bear Ephara's face, fashioned thus in the be- 
lief that each of her images watches over the part of the 
city it looks upon. 

Ephara is strongly affiliated with the daytime, when 
cities are awake, alive, and at work. Her followers gener- 
ally pray at midday, with the sounds of the city forming 
an appropriate backdrop to their rites, as industry itself 
is sacred to Ephara. Many aspects of city life and culture 
fall under Ephara's influence. Scholarship is closely con- 
nected to Ephara, as is art—particularly poetry, sculp- 
ture, and architecture. Ephara is also highly concerned 
with civic wisdom and justice, and many politicians and 
other leaders seek her guidance in how to rule. 


EPHARA'S GOALS 

Ephara seeks always to further cities: establishing them, 
protecting them, and seeing them grow. She supports 
those who build new cities and those who free others 
from tyranny. Ephara knows that not all threats to a city 
come from outside it, and she encourages her followers 
to watch out for tyranny and injustice from within. She 
seeks for justice to prevail in civilized lands. 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


Ephara seeks far more for her cities than mere safety. 
She drives every city to aspire toward efforts that help 
its people thrive. Civic responsibility is essential in 
Ephara's eyes, and having an engaged citizenry is im- 
portant. The pursuit of knowledge is also a vital task, 
and she encourages advances in philosophy and sci- 
ence. As the scholars in her cities obtain or derive new 
knowledge, Ephara's magic scrolls grow ever longer. 
Finally, art is of critical importance to a thriving city. 
Ephara particularly supports architecture, the creation 
of which often drives industry and sculpture, though she 
doesn't scorn other varieties of artistic expression. 


DIVINE RELATIONSHIPS 

Ephara and Heliod have aligning interests, since they 
both value structure and justice. Ephara works toward 
establishing judicial systems that enforce the laws and 
uphold the values that Heliod holds dear. 

Ephara is also on good terms with Thassa, the god 
of the sea, because Ephara recognizes the necessity of 
water for a thriving polis. She also admires Purphoros’s 
craft, realizing the essential role of the forge and other 
forms of industry to build a city. 

Ephara and Nylea are almost polar opposites, and 
there is no shortage of bad blood between the god of 
the cities and the god of the hunt. Nylea resents the 
construction of every building in a place that once held 
plants and animals, and Ephara has no patience for any 
wild creature that encroaches on a settlement. Ephara 
looks at the wilderness and sees only wasted potential, 
while Nylea looks at cities and sees only destruction. 

Ephara has a deep-seated hatred for Phenax. While 
Ephara can appreciate the perspective of most of her 
peers, she has no such understanding for those who 
would deliberately try to undermine a thriving social 
structure. Ephara opposes Phenax and what she sees as 
his utter disdain for everything she stands for. 

Her relationship with Karametra is a difficult one from 
either perspective. Ephara approves of agriculture, a key 
ingredient for the development of cities, and both gods 
are concerned with defense of settlements. Even so, 
Karametra is tied to Setessa and the wild lands, where 
Ephara is distrusted, and although Karametra and 
Nylea have their own complicated relationship, Karame- 
tra strongly favors Nylea over Ephara. 


WORSHIPING EPHARA 


To an extent, Ephara’s devout show their faith by going 
about their lives and contributing to society. Midday ser- 
vices at Ephara’s temples often feature a brief prayer, fol- 
lowed by a longer talk from an industrial or civic leader 
on atopic of general interest. Attendants often bring 
meals to eat while on a break from their jobs. 

Ephara's face is a common sight in cities. Marble 
buildings, stone walls, and similar surfaces usually 
feature a sculpture or relief of her visage. People often 
swear oaths or engage in verbal disputes in front of 
these images, believing she won't let a falsehood told in 
front of her go unpunished. Whether she actually inter- 
venes is unclear, but conflicts that play out this way are 
often resolved peacefully, without a need for the justice 
system to get involved. 


MYTHS OF EPHARA 


Ephara's deeds demonstrate her commitment to the poleis 
and those who seek their improvement. 

Founding of Meletis. The city-state of Meletis was once part 
of the archon Agnomakhos's empire. The archon ruled his 
territory with absolute cruelty. Ephara bestowed her magic 
on the subjugated populace to enable them to fight back and 
overthrow Agnomakhos. The newly freed people then estab- 
lished Meletis, as the settlement on that site is known today. 
The founding of Ephara's favored city is still celebrated today, 
both in Meletis and elsewhere among the god's followers, as 
the summer holiday of Polidrysion, which gives its name to 
the fourth month in the Meletian calendar. 

Earthquake in Meletis. The temple of Ephara in Meletis is 
the god's largest and grandest place of worship on Theros. It 
is kept in perfect repair, and worn or damaged pieces of the 
structure are quickly replaced. During an enormous earth- 
quake, many of the structures in Meletis crumbled. Ephara 
kept her temple standing throughout the mighty quake, 
making it a place for Meletians to take refuge in the following 
days during the aftershocks. After the cataclysm, she shared 
designs from her scrolls of sacred knowledge with the ar- 
chitects of Meletis so they could rebuild the city to be much 
more resistant to earthquakes. 

The Library of Glossion. The small town of Glossion boasts 
a remarkable library that according to local legend was a gift 


from Ephara. Other tales suggest that the library was actually 
founded by an ancient sage named Anatheia, but then a ter- 
rible fire destroyed the place, and along with it generations 
of collected knowledge. Once the people finished rebuilding 
the structure to start the library over, Ephara is said to have 
appeared and restored the books and scrolls the library had 
lost, copying the information from her personal scrolls of 
sacred knowledge. 

Savior of Altrisos. A kraken that escaped its sea lock once 
threatened the small seaside city of Altrisos. Recently weak- 
ened by a triton raid, the city had no defenses left and would 
be destroyed by an attack. The people prayed to Ephara, and 
the large image of her face on the city's wall came to life. The 
walls of the city grew impossibly high and strong, and the 
kraken could do no more than dash its head against the im- 
passable barrier. The monster soon returned to the ocean to 
find an easier meal. 

Trial of Aristhenes. A man named Aristhenes committed 
many murders, targeting members of the government and 
some of their family members. When he was arrested and 
put to trial, he claimed that no one could fairly judge him 
because every qualified judge was personally affected by the 
case. Ephara herself came to the city to serve as judge for the 
trial, since no one could accuse her of anything but perfect 
impartiality, and she found Aristhenes guilty. 


EPHARA’S CHAMPIONS 


Alignment: Usually lawful, often neutral 

Suggested Classes: Bard, cleric, monk, paladin, wizard 

Suggested Cleric Domains: Knowledge, Light 

Suggested Backgrounds: Acolyte, athlete, guild arti- 
san, noble, sage, sailor, soldier, urchin 


Most champions of Ephara believe cities represent the 
pinnacle of achievement and do what they can to uphold 
the law and keep society functioning. Some of the god’s 
most devout followers work as architects, artists, or phi- 
losophers, all striving to serve the public good. 


ЕРНАВА'Ѕ FAVOR 

Ephara seeks champions who will defend her cities 
fiercely, both from external threats and internal corrup- 
tion. She asks them to protect not only the people, but 
also the structures that comprise a polis. The circum- 
stances that led you to worship Ephara most likely in- 
volved the polis you call home. The Ephara's Favor table 
provides just a few possibilities. 


EPHARA’S FAVOR 


d6  Circumstance 

1 You grew up in a polis like Meletis and never feel safe 
outside one. 

2 You grew up in a home that was next to a wall or a 
building with Ephara's face on it, and you felt like she 
was always looking after you. 

3 You were part of a revolution to fight off tyrants and 
establish freedom in your city. 

4 Your family members have all been architects, going 
back several generations, and all worshiped Ephara. 

5 You are a highly skilled poet, scholar, or philosopher, 
and Ephara took notice of your talent. 

6 You are a civil servant or a city leader, taking an active 
role in the welfare of your home. 


DEVOTION TO EPHARA 

Followers of Ephara support their cities, protecting 
them while helping them thrive. As a follower of Ephara, 
consider the ideals on the Ephara's Ideals table as alter- 
natives to those suggested for your background. 


EPHARA'S IDEALS 

d6 ideal 

1 Devotion. My devotion to my god is more important to 
me than what she stands for. (Any) 

2 Justice. Laws keep society functioning, and | must see 
to itthat they are enforced. (Lawful) 

3 Community. We are stronger together, and | must im- 
prove and support my community. (Lawful or good) 

4 Scholarship. | serve my community and my god by 
learning new information or creating art. (Any) 

5 Civic Duty. It is my responsibility to serve my city. 
(Lawful) 

6 Protection. | must keep my city safe from threats both 
external and internal. (Any) 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


EARNING AND LOSING PIETY 

You increase your piety score to Ephara when you ex- 
pand the god's influence in the world in a concrete way 
through acts such as these: 


* Defending a city from a major threat 
* Defeating a tyrant who threatens a city's freedom 
* Creating a masterwork, such as a building or a poem 


Your piety score to Ephara decreases if you diminish 
Ephara's influence in the world, contradict her ideals, or 
let her down through acts such as these: 


* Betraying one's trust to commit acts of corruption 
or tyranny 

* Destroying a civic institution or sowing chaos 
within a city 

* Willfully breaking just laws for personal gain 


EPHARA’S DEVOTEE 
Piety 3+ Ephara trait 


Ephara grants you insight into how people commu- 
nicate. You can cast comprehend languages with this 
trait, requiring no material component, a number of 
times equal to your Intelligence modifier (minimum of 
once). You regain all expended uses when you finish 
along rest. Intelligence is your spellcasting ability for 
this spell. 


EPHARA'S VOTARY 

Piety 10+ Ephara trait 

You gain advantage on Charisma (Persuasion) checks 
while you are within a city. 

In addition, when you fail an Intelligence check or In- 
telligence saving throw, you can reroll the die, and you 
must use the new roll. Once you use this reroll, you can't 
do so again until you finish a long rest. 


EPHARA's DISCIPLE 

Piety 257 Ephara trait 

You can cast Mordenkainen’s private sanctum with this 
trait, requiring no material components. Once you cast 
the spell in this way, you can't do so again until you fin- 
ish a long rest. Intelligence is your spellcasting ability 
for this spell. 


CHAMPION OF THE POLIS 
Piety 50+ Ephara trait 


You can increase your Intelligence or Charisma score by 
2 and also increase your maximum for that score by 2. 


EREBOS 
God ofthe Dead 


Erebos is the god of death and the Underworld, lord of 
all that has ever lived. He presides over the bitterness, 
envy, and eventual acceptance of those who suffer mis- 
fortune. His hoarding of both souls and the treasures 
the dead carry into the Underworld see him worshiped 
by those who desire to collect and keep wealth. 

Erebos's very presence is stifling, and those who 
come face to face with him often depart in despair. He is 
jealous and tyrannical within his realm, but unlike his 
brother Heliod, he neither blusters nor tries to expand 
his influence. He waits patiently, secure in the knowl- 
edge that everything belongs to him in the end. 

Erebos most frequently appears as a slender, gray- 
skinned humanoid with two large, outward-curving 
horns, wielding an impossibly long black whip. He also 
appears in the form of a black asp, a cloud of choking 
smoke, or an animated golden idol. 


EREBOS'S INFLUENCE 


Born from Heliod's shadow and then banished to the 
Underworld, Erebos claimed dominion over that deso- 
late realm. He sees it as his duty and his right to ensure 
that those who enter his realm remain there for all time. 
Within the Underworld, only the relative paradise of 
Ilysia is sheltered from his influence. In the other four 
realms of the dead, his will is law. 

Mortals typically fear death, yet death is the inevitable 
end of each one's time in the mortal world. Erebos, hav- 
ing long ago come to terms with his own banishment, 
teaches his followers to accept the inevitability of death 
and the often unavoidable tragedies of life. 

Although Erebos forbids souls from leaving the Un- 
derworld, some escape his clutches. Generally such 
souls are beneath his notice, but he sometimes sends 
agents to retrieve those he has particular interest in. 


EREBOS’S GOALS 
Erebos wants above all to maintain his position of abso- 
lute authority over the realm of the dead. He lashes out 
at anyone who aids souls in escaping from him or other- 
wise tries to subvert the inevitability of death. 

Erebos is patient, usually willing to wait for souls to 
come to him, but he does interfere in the mortal realm 
on occasion. When the other gods displease him, he 


sends mortal agents or Nyxborn monsters to kill the 
worshipers of the offending gods and spread despair. 

Many of Erebos's schemes target those who escape 
his clutches. He regularly sends agents to retrieve the 
Returned soul or the wayward eidolon of a hero of great 
renown who has succeeded in returning to Theros. If 
any of the dead, renowned or otherwise, escape the Un- 
derworld fully intact —without identities erased—Erebos 
will spare nothing to make an example of the fugitive 
and any who provided assistance. 


DIVINE RELATIONSHIPS 

Erebos loathes Heliod, who banished him to the Under- 
world eons ago, forever severing him from the world of 
life and light. Erebos takes particular delight in profan- 
ing Heliod’s temples, defiling the raiment of his priests, 
slaughtering his worshipers, and claiming the souls of 
his champions. Erebos believes that Heliod will one day 
challenge him for control of the Underworld. He looks 
forward to that day, certain that his lesser brother can’t 
possibly prevail within Erebos’s own territory. 

Erebos holds a special grudge against Phenax. Phe- 
nax readily teaches others how to escape the Under- 
world as the Returned and even sneaks into the Under- 
world to assist them, earning him Erebos’s undying ire. 

Pharika and Karametra understand, better than many 
of the other gods, that life and death are closely inter- 
twined. Pharika’s tinctures can either extend a life or 
snuff it out, and Karametra’s planters know that reaping 
follows sowing in turn. Although he appreciates what 
these gods have in common with him, Erebos occasion- 
ally feels the need to remind them that the dead are 
his, and other gods’ acceptance of death’s inevitability 
doesn’t make them masters of it. 

Erebos has no true allies but operates closely with 
Athreos and Klothys. Athreos is one of the few beings 
Erebos trusts to be as committed as he is to ensuring 
that the passage into death is a one-way trip. Klothys, 
too, would see the dead remain dead, concerned as she 
is with the acceptance of destiny. 


WORSHIPING EREBOS 


To many mortals, Erebos is primarily concerned not 
with death, but with gold. Most of his followers down- 
play his association with death and misfortune, instead 
praying to him for material wealth. Others pray to him 
because they want to be more accepting of their misfor- 
tune. These individuals see themselves as beyond hope 
of improving their lot in life, asking only that Erebos 
grant them the strength to endure until they enter his 
realm at their predestined time. 

A smaller but more dangerous group of Erebos wor- 
shipers are those who actively glorify death. These cult- 
ists and assassins congregate in secret in communities 
across Theros, engaging in campaigns of violence. 

The only major festival dedicated to Erebos, called 
the Katabasion or “the Descent,” features a ceremony 
in which worshipers make a symbolic journey into the 
Underworld. The supplicants enter a cave, offer prayers 
and sacrifices to Erebos in utter darkness, and slowly 
make their way back to the surface just before sunrise. 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 
43 


EREBOS’S CHAMPIONS 


Alignment: Usually neutral, often evil 

Suggested Classes: Cleric, fighter, rogue, wizard’ 

Suggested Cleric Domains: Death, Trickery 

Suggested Backgrounds: Acolyte, charlatan, criminal, 
noble, urchin 


Most worshipers of Erebos seek to enforce the bound- 
ary between life and death, whether absolutely or selec- 
tively. They often find grim satisfaction in serving the 
covetous but patient god, knowing that all will ultimately 
know their patron’s embrace. 


EREBOS’S FAVOR 

As Erebos sees it, he already owns the soul of every liv- 
ing being. For him to bestow special favor or power on 
a mortal would be an act of generosity, and he expects 
to be compensated for it. Those who rise to the ranks of 
true champions of Erebos, though, embrace death and 
their inescapable destiny in the Underworld. Did you 
pledge yourself to Erebos by joining his priesthood, or 
did you come to find his favor through a prayer of quiet 
desperation? The Erebos's Favor table offers a handful 
of suggestions. 


EREBOS'S FAVOR 

d6 Circumstance 

1 You follow Erebos seeking financial success, expecting 
service to translate into rewards. 

2 ln amoment of anguish, you prayed to Erebos. He 
granted you acceptance ofyour fate and his favor. 

3 You were pledged to another god, but when you lost a 
loved one, only turning to Erebos could ease your grief. 

4 After you recovered from a mortal injury, Erebos ap- 
peared and claimed your service. 

5 Ever since the first time you saw someone die, Erebos 
has whispered in your ear. 

6 You can't bear to witness suffering, so you serve Ere- 
bos to bring peaceful ends to the unfortunate. 


DEVOTION TO EREBOS 

just as every life ends at the same destination, many 
different paths can lead a worshiper to Erebos. As a 
follower of Erebos, consider the ideals on the Erebos's 
Ideals table as alternatives to those suggested for your 
background. 


EREBOS'S IDEALS 

d6 ideal 

1 Devotion. My devotion to my god is more important to 
me than what he stands for. (Any) 

2 Mortality. | will enforce the most important law: any- 
thing that lives must one day die. (Lawful) 

3  Consolation. Everyone deserves the solace that comes 
with accepting their destiny. (Good) 

4 Acceptance. Whatever my fate, | will embrace it with 
Erebos's blessing. (Neutral) 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


d6 Ideal 

5 Wealth. Death is forever, so I’m going to get rich while 
I still can. (Neutral) 

6 Power. | relish having mastery over life and death. 
(Evil) 


EARNING AND LOSING PIETY 

You increase your piety score to Erebos when you ex- 
pand the god’s influence in the world in a concrete way 
through acts such as these: 


* Convincing a group of people to accept misfortune 

* Easing someone's death or assisting with funeral 
arrangements 

* Retrieving a prominent figure's eidolon or Re- 
turned form 

* Thwarting the schemes of Heliod 


Your piety score to Erebos decreases if you diminish 
Erebos's influence in the world, weaken his dominion 
over death, or alleviate misfortune without good cause 
through acts such as these: 


* Saving a life without securing compensation 

for Erebos 
* Forsaking your duties for personal gain or pleasure 
+ Allowing a soul to escape the Underworld 


EnEBOS'S DEVOTEE 
Piety 3+ Erebos trait 


As a devotee of Erebos, you have proven yourself an 
executor of the Underworld’s grim laws. You can call on 
Erebos's favor to cast bane with this trait, requiring no 
material components, a number of times equal to your 
Wisdom modifier (minimum of once). You regain all ex- 
pended uses when you finish a long rest. Wisdom is your 
spellcasting ability for this spell. 


EREBOS'S VOTARY 
Piety 10+ Erebos trait 


You can cast vampiric touch with this trait. Once you 
cast the spell in this way, you can't do so again until you 
finish a long rest. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for 
this spell. 


EREBOS'S DISCIPLE 

Piety 25+ Erebos trait 

When a soul is sent to its rightful place, you can draw 
on the energy of the Underworld to empower you. When 
a creature dies within 10 feet of you, you can use your 
reaction to gain a number of temporary hit points equal 
to your level. 


CHAMPION OF THE DEAD 
Piety 50+ Erebos trait 


You can increase your Constitution or Wisdom score by 
2 and also increase your maximum for that score by 2. 


Шш 


б we 


— 


—= 


ЕКТС SERENA ( 


y 


+ 


МҮТН$ OF EREBOS 

Erebos appears in many god-stories, often as a villain or a 
foil to the other gods. The stories told by his followers em- 
phasize his power, the wealth of the Underworld, and the 
inevitability of death. 

Kytheon’s Escape. Many know the story of Kytheon lora, an 
Akroan orphan who took up Heliod’s spear and attempted to 
kill Erebos himself. The tale ends in tragedy, as Kytheon was 
struck down along with his friends. Only the high priests of 
Erebos, however, know that Kytheon’s soul isn’t in the Under- 
world, having somehow escaped right before Erebos's eyes. 
Suspecting that either Heliod or Kruphix knows where Kythe- 
on’s soul went, Erebos will reward anyone who can tell him. 

Menelaia’s Song. Long ago, a master lyrist named Mene- 
laia mourned her lover, Pero. She entered the Winter Nexus, 
a cave on the edge of Setessa that leads to the Underworld, 
and played a love song to lure Pero’s soul back to the mortal 
world. When Erebos saw this, he became furious, and he 
extended his whip to draw both of the lovers back. But Me- 
nelaia was beloved of Nylea, and that god blocked Erebos's 
whip with vines. The two lovers lived long lives together. Ere- 

bos had the last word, however, tormenting both of the lov- 
ers in the Underworld. To this day, this turn of events plagues 
Nylea, who seeks a way to bring the lovers peace. 


` 
i 
»* 
= 
= 
( 


N 


C5 


AN 


~ 


The Return of Daxos. Daxos of Meletis was a powerful 
oracle who heard the voices of all the gods. Daxos tragically 
died at the hands of his lover, the champion of Heliod, Els- 
peth, through the duplicity of the satyr Xenagos. Daxos’s soul 
passed into the Underworld, and Elspeth sought Erebos’s 
help to travel into Nyx. After passing Erebos’s test for admit- 
tance, Elspeth demanded an additional reward: she would 
trade her life for Daxos’s. Erebos, always eager to claim a 
champion of the sun god, agreed. Elspeth died shortly af- 
ter her triumph over Xenagos, whereupon Erebos kept his 
word—but in a treacherous fashion, allowing Daxos's body to 
go back to the mortal world as a Returned. Bereft of memo- 
ries, he wanders aimlessly. 

A Shadowed World. Heliod’s followers maintain that their 
god gave rise to Erebos by casting a shadow in the sun’s first 
light. Followers of Erebos say that this tale is self-refuting. Be- 
fore there ever was a sun, the entire world stood in shadow, 

and the shadow was Erebos—elder to Heliod. Only with the 
first dawning was Erebos’s form diminished enough that He- 
liod could overpower him, and the god of the dead has never 
forgiven his upstart brother. The faithful of both Erebos and 
Heliod viciously argue the details of their gods’ origins, some 
risking their lives in battle over which of their gods came into 


being first. 


4 


м м. « £4 pume 


"i 


й 


46 


Ej; HELIOD file 
God of the Sun 


Heliod is the radiant god of the sun. According to myth, 
he ensures that the sun rises every day to provide light 
and warmth to the world. Every inhabitant of Theros ac- 
knowledges his dominant presence, and nearly everyone 
at least pays lip service to the idea of giving him worship 
and honor. 

Pride and self-assurance radiate from Heliod as light 
floods from the sun. He is cheerful and sociable, enjoy- 
ing the company of others and forming bonds easily. 

His friendship can be as easily lost, though, turning him 
from ally to enemy as the consequence of a single mis- 
step or perceived betrayal. 

Heliod has appeared to mortals in a variety of forms, 
but he prefers the appearance of a sun-bronzed male hu- 
man in his forties, dressed in a flowing tunic of golden 
cloth. His profile is noble, highlighted by a strong chin 
and a short beard, and he boasts the broad chest of a 
perfectly fit athlete. His hair is glossy black, and his 
head is crowned with a golden wreath. He is also fond 
of appearing as a brilliant white pegasus or a radiant 
golden stag. In any guise, he looks lit by the sun, even 
when he travels across the night sky. 


HELIOD'S INFLUENCE 


Heliod personifies the light of day, and by extension, 
he is associated with many metaphorical aspects of the 
sun’s circuit. 

As the sun rises without fail every morning, so Heliod 
values faithfulness in oaths and bonds. Courtroom tes- 
timony and marriage vows are sworn on his name, for 
he can’t tolerate the breaking of asolemn promise. He is 
the arbiter of morality, virtue, and honor. 

The sun’s nightly descent into darkness symbolizes 
bravery and self-sacrifice—the willingness to endure the 
horrors of the dark for the sake of others. Those who 
protect innocents in his name receive Heliod’s favor. 

As sunlight casts out darkness, Heliod’s justice casts 
out chaos and lawlessness. He is the god of the laws that 
govern society and the laws that punish the wicked. He 
is interested not only in punitive justice, but also in the 
establishment of fair and equitable relationships among 
people and gods, in service to the common good. He 
also takes an interest in the bonds of family—the rela- 
tionships that tie people most closely to each other. 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


HELIOD’s GOALS 

In Heliod’s mind, he is the ruler of the gods, and he 
wants merely for his rightful place to be recognized. He 
imagines Nyx rebuilt as his personal palace, where all 
can witness him in his glory. He considers himself a 
kind and beneficent ruler—a benign autocrat, not a ty- 
rant—and he doesn’t expect abject servility from anyone, 
god or mortal. He just wants everyone to defer to his will 
and carry out his orders. He believes that his decisions 
are always just and right, and that if his sovereignty 
were properly respected, there would be peace and or- 
der in Nyx and the mortal world alike. 


DIVINE RELATIONSHIPS 

Heliod’s repeated attempts to establish himself as the 
ruler of the pantheon anger Erebos and Purphoros, who 
both have a degree of the arrogance he demonstrates. 

Thassa and Nylea, by contrast, aren’t bothered by 
his efforts because they see themselves as being safely 
outside his reach. He could declare himself the ruler of 
the pantheon, they reason, but his dictates can’t alter 
the rhythms of the sea and the cycles of nature. Thassa 
and Nylea will continue as they are, as they always have 
been, whatever squabbles their brothers might have. 

Ephara, Karametra, and Iroas are closely aligned with 
Heliod in attitude and philosophy. In some ways, these 
three gods represent the principles and the abstract 
nature of Heliod made tangible and concrete through 
the lives of mortals. Heliod represents a divine, natural, 
moral law; Ephara gives those laws a concrete mani- 
festation by establishing mortal society in the poleis. 
Heliod controls the radiant sun that makes the natural 
world flourish; Karametra brings the interplay of light 
and nature to life for mortals in the practice of agricul- 
ture. And while Heliod stands for justice, Iroas actually 
fights for it, taking up arms against brutality and injus- 
tice in defense of what is good and right. 

Heliod hates and fears Erebos, his dark twin and his 
shadow. He views the god of the dead as a pathetic liar 
and coward who wallows in self-pity in his exile. 

Heliod is also plagued by a nagging suspicion that 
the true ruler of the pantheon is Kruphix, a mysterious 
being who is capable of sealing the borders between 
the mortal world and the divine realm of Nyx. Kruphix 
is perhaps the only being who canimpose limits on the 
other gods’ actions, which makes Heliod resent and fear 
the god of horizons. 


WORSHIPING HELIOD 


The brilliance of Heliod's sun is impossible to ignore. 
Thus, virtually everyone on Theros pays at least grudg- 
ing respect to the sun god in forms of worship that range 
from simple gestures to days-long celebrations. 

Some families, particularly in the polis of Meletis, 
follow a practice of bowing in the direction of dawn's 
first light—or winking, in a gesture of respect for the sun 
god's luminous "eye." More dedicated worshipers offer 
short litanies at dawn, noon, and dusk, acknowledging 
the sun's passage across the sky. 


MYTHS OF HELIOD 


Many legends about Heliod highlight his mercurial nature, 
even while acclaiming him as a god of bravery and justice. 

Battle with Purphoros. In his desire to establish himself 
as the leader of the pantheon, Heliod attempted to commis- 
sion Purphoros to rebuild Nyx in Heliod's image. Angered 
by Heliod's claim to rulership, Purphoros forged the sword 
Godsend to fight Heliod. As their conflict raged, Purphoros's 
sword cut the fabric of Nyx, opening the boundary between 
the realms of gods and mortals. As a result, the hydra 
Polukranos fell to the mortal world, but Heliod and Nylea 
joined forces to bind the hydra in the Nessian Wood. Years 
later, the hydra broke free of its bonds, and Heliod chose a 
mortal, Elspeth Tirel, to slay the hydra as his champion—us- 
ing a spear called Godsend, forged from Purphoros's sword. 

Birth of Erebos. Some myths claim that Heliod was the 
first of the gods, though most people believe that distinction 
belongs to Kruphix. These myths also say that when the light 
of Heliod's own sun fell on him, Heliod saw his shadow and 
feared it. He banished the shadow to the land beyond the 
Rivers That Ring the World, and it became Erebos, god of the 
dead and ruler of the Underworld. 

Origin of the Catoblepas. When a herder boasted that his 
cattle were the finest in Theros because Heliod and Nylea 


had created them, the gods grew angry at this falsehood. He- 


liod persuaded Mogis to curse the cattle, transforming them 


into the first catoblepases. As a result, many animal breeders 
prove excessively modest to this day, with humble-boasts 
being common and well understood among both buyers and 
sellers. Livestock that are “as Heliod intended" or "praiseless 
beasts" might be considered second to none. 

Road to the Sun. After a life in Heliod's service, the aged 
oracle Solsemon departed on a final pilgrimage: setting forth 
to visit the sun. Day after day he journeyed east, seeking the 
lands from which the sun rose. He journeyed far and was 
mocked everywhere people learned of his quest. Worse, his 
sight grew ever weaker as he spent days staring atthe sun. 
Yet still he traveled on. Even when blindness claimed Solse- 
mon's sight, the oracle continued undaunted. Finally, one 
day, Solsemon found a warm, calm place. There, a powerful 
voice he'd heard in his dreams welcomed him to his jour- 
ney's end. Praising Heliod, the oracle took his rest, and after 
several long, contented hours, peacefully died. Ever since, the 
tale of Solsemon has been argued as both a parable of deter- 
mination and a warning not to pursue that which is divine. 

Spear of Heliod. Heliod wields the spear Khrusor, which 
can strike any point on Theros, even in the depths of the 
Underworld. One tale describes how a wrathful Heliod used 
his spearto smite a human polis whose people angered him 
with their hubris: the entire city of Olantin sunk beneath the 
sea when Heliod struck it with his spear. 


HELIOD'S CHAMPIONS 


Alignment: Usually lawful, often good ' 

Suggested Classes: Cleric, fighter, monk, paladin 

Suggested Cleric Domains: Light 

Suggested Backgrounds: Acolyte, athlete, no- 
ble, soldier 


Champions of Heliod are typically either exemplars of 
light, law, and truth or conflicted heroes motivated by 
revenge and sworn vows. Most can't imagine serving 
those they consider lesser gods. 


HELIOD'S FAVOR 

Heliod seeks out champions in the mortal world be- 
cause he believes that a great champion reflects well 
on him. The ruler of the gods, as he imagines him- 
self, should have champions who represent the best 
of mortals. 

That said, the reason for his initial interest in a 
champion isn't always obvious. What made the sun god 
turn his attention to you? What sets you apart from the 
masses of people who offer him prayers and sacrifice? 
What made him think you would be a good champion? 


The Heliod's Favor table offers a handful of suggestions. 


Heliod can be a fickle god, but once you have devoted 
yourself to him as a champion, he will not desert you— 
as long as you remain faithful and your actions continue 
to reflect well on him. 


HELIOD'S FAVOR 
d6  Circumstance 

1 You were born at noon on the summer solstice—per- 
haps even in the midst of Heliod's great feast. 

2 One of your parents is also a champion of Heliod. 

3  Youonce rescued a pegasus that was trapped in a net, 
demonstrating your courage and your respect for this 
sacred creature. 

4 You proved your mettle in a dramatic contest of 
strength, charisma, or a similar quality. 

5 Calling on Heliod to witness you, you swore an oath to 
end some great evil. 

6 You have no idea why Heliod showed interest іп you, 
and you might sometimes wish he hadn't. 


DEVOTION TO HELIOD 

Following Heliod means devoting yourself to the cause 
of law and justice. In fact, champions of Heliod are 
sometimes more constant in their pursuit of those 
ideals than the god himself, who can be emotional and 
short-tempered. As a follower of Heliod, consider the 
ideals on the Heliod’s Ideals table as alternatives to 
those suggested for your background. 


HELIOD’s IDEALS 
d6 Ideal 
1 Devotion. My devotion to my god is more important to 
me than what he stands for. (Any) 
2 Honor. | behave nobly and always keep my promises. 
(Lawful) 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


d6 ideal 

3 Protection. | face the horrors of the darkness so the 
common people don't have to. (Good) 

4 Enforcement. Those who violate the laws that hold civi- 
lization together must be punished. (Lawful) 

5 Justice. The purpose of law is to establish fair and eq- 
uitable relationships among people and gods. (Lawful 
and good) 

6 Kinship. It's essential to preserve the bonds of fam- 
ily—my own family first, and others after. (Lawful) 


EARNING AND LOSING PIETY 

You increase your piety score to Heliod when you ex- 
pand the god’s influence in the world in a concrete way 
through acts such as these: 


* Carrying out punishment on a fugitive from justice 
* Exacting vengeance for a significant wrong 
done to you 
* Defending a polis from attacking monsters 
* Building or restoring a temple to Heliod 


Your piety score to Heliod decreases if you diminish 
his influence in the world, contradict his ideals, or 
make him look ridiculous or ineffectual through acts 
such as these: 


* Breaking an explicit promise or oath 
• Violating any just law 
* Putting others at risk through your own cowardice 


HELIOD’S DEVOTEE 
Piety 3+ Heliod trait 


As a devotee of Heliod, you have proven yourself a wor- 
thy champion of the sun god. You can call on Heliod’s 
favor and cast bless with this trait, requiring no material 
components. Heliod’s blessing manifests as a nimbus 
around the affected creatures, causing them to shed dim 
light in a 5-foot radius until the spell ends. You can cast 
the spell in this way a number of times equal to your 
Wisdom modifier (minimum of once). You regain all ex- 
pended uses when you finish a long rest. Wisdom is your 
spellcasting ability for this spell. 


HELIOD'S VOTARY 
Piety 10+ Heliod trait 


You can cast daylight with this trait. Once you cast the 
spell in this way, you can't do so again until you finish 
a long rest. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for 
this spell. 


HELIOD'S DISCIPLE 
Piety 25+ Heliod trait 


You grow accustomed to the blazing radiance of the 
sun; you have advantage on saving throws against being 
blinded, and you have resistance to fire damage. 


CHAMPION OF THE SUN 
Piety 50+ Heliod trait 


You can increase your Strength or Wisdom score by 2 
and also increase your maximum for that score by 2. 


"God of Victory 


Iroas is the steadfast god of honor and victory in war. 
When soldiers march to battle, his voice is the thun- 
der of their footsteps and the crash of spear on shield. 
Soldiers, mercenaries, and athletes all pray for Iroas's 
favor in securing victory. Common folk pray to Iroas for 
courage and fortitude in times of struggle, for his is the 
battle nobly fought and won. 

Bold and confident with a soldier's demeanor, Iroas 
is the pinnacle of martial pride and bearing. He is stoic 
almost to a fault, but also exhibits a wry sense of humor. 
Those who honorably shed blood in Iroas's name can 
count on his support. Cowards and oath breakers are to 
be despised, and traitors don't deserve mercy in battle. 

Iroas most often appears as a powerfully built centaur 
with a bull's body rather than a horse's, clad in gleaming 
armor and wielding a spear and shield. He speaks in a 
booming baritone that projects power, confidence, and 
courage. He has been known to appear as a burly soldier 
or a mighty bull before his followers. Whatever form he 
chooses, Iroas carries himself with precision and maj- 
esty at all times and doesn't tolerate disrespect or undue 
informality from those who would deal with him. 


IROAS'S INFLUENCE 


Iroas personifies the glory of victory, honorable combat, 
and physical competition. He is the unspoken bond 
between soldiers on the eve of battle, the courage of 

the standard bearer holding colors aloft in the midst of 
battle, and the exultation that comes after a hard-won 
victory. Iroas pushes his followers to excel in their cho- 
sen fields, particularly war and athletics, and gain honor 
through superior skill, training, and dedication. 

War is, fundamentally, a terrible experience filled with 
pain, loss, and fear. Unfortunately, as Iroas sees it, war 
is also necessary. He sees preparing for and winning 
life's essential battles as being of paramount importance 
and the highest calling one can experience. 

The true warrior fights with honor, courage, and ded- 
ication, and values training, discipline, strength, and 
esprit de corps. In Iroas's eyes, nothing is more valuable 
or honorable than a honed blade wielded by a trained 
warrior loyal to a just cause. This message is ingrained 
in the ethos of Akros, the polis that claims him as its 
patron. His precepts and codes of conduct are incorpo- 
rated in the civil and military laws of Akros. 


Iroas values strength and determination in less deadly 
pursuits, as well. He believes sports are a fine proxy for 
war, as just as in a battle, superior skill and strength 
lead to a victory. What Iroas truly loves is a winner. 

Lastly, Iroas urges his followers to blunt the advances 
of his brother, Mogis. This directive inevitably means 
combat, since Iroas knows of no other way to solve prob- 
lems. Diplomacy isn't an act of cowardice per se, but 
because it isn't an activity Iroas is prepared to engage in, 
it isn't something he expects of his followers. 


InoAs's GOALS 

Iroas sees existence as a series of glorious battles to 

be won by both him and his followers. War is a test- 

ing ground from which only the bravest and strongest 
emerge. Between battles, there are feats of endurance 
and physical prowess to perform. Iroas exhorts his fol- 
lowers to hone their bodies and minds just as they hone 
their blades. He is certain that to slacken his vigilance 
and grow lazy would guarantee his demise at the edge of 
his brother's blood-soaked axe. Iroas pushes his follow- 
ers to be ready at all times to meet conflict head-on. 


DIVINE RELATIONSHIPS 

Iroas is defined by his opposition to his twin brother, 
Mogis. Although both love battle, Iroas holds an hon- 
orable and valorous view of warfare, whereas Mogis 
lusts for carnage and butchery. Iroas firmly believes that 
mortals will always fight, whether in war or in less con- 
sequential pursuits. His charge is to ensure that war is 
waged with a code of honor and to prevent his brother's 
depravity from spreading through the world. 

Iroas holds an abiding respect for Purphoros, who 
girds his warriors in the products of his artifice. Iroas 
sees finely crafted arms as the highest form of art, sub- 
lime and deadly at once. Still, Iroas finds Purphoros's 
volatile temper and bouts of passion unbecoming of one 
with such talent at creating weapons of war. 

Iroas champions the cause of justice and thus seeks 
Heliod's guidance and counsel from time to time. 
During Heliod's piques of arrogance and temper, Iroas 
is the one who advocates restraint and calm. More often 
than not, the two deities agree where matters of justice 
and honor are concerned. 


WORSHIPING [ROAS 


Iroas is interested not in pretty words, but in great 
deeds. The faithful of Iroas show their piety by comport- 
ing themselves well in contests of athleticism or skill. 
Swearing an oath to win a battle in Iroas's name and 
failing to do so is a great shame upon a warrior, thus 
such a promise is never uttered lightly. 

The fifth month of the Meletian calendar is Thri- 
ambion, named for an annual commemoration of the 
Meletian conquest of Natumbria. This victory cemented 
Meletis's control over the entire peninsula. But in Akros, 
the month is called Iroagonion, for the Iroan Games. 
These games are the grandest display to honor Iroas. 
Toeven compete in the Iroan Games is considered note- 
worthy, as the poleis send only their finest athletes. The 
grand prize, besides a ceremonial wreath, is the oppor- 
tunity to be visited by Iroas himself. 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


49 


БО 


IROAS'S CHAMPIONS 


Alignment: Usually chaotic, often good 

Suggested Classes: Barbarian, cleric, fighter, pala- 
din, sorcerer 

Suggested Cleric Domains: War 

Suggested Backgrounds: Athlete, folk hero, soldier 


Many champions of Iroas are warriors for honor and jus- 
tice. They often seek to embody martial courage and are 
motivated by strong personal codes of honor. 


IROAS’S FAVOR 
Iroas has a soft spot in his heart for underdogs, even if 
they lack the strength to win the fight. It is easier, he be- 
lieves, to make a hero from a weakling who has a heroic 
heart than itis to turn a brute into a defender of justice. 
What's more, the victory of the strong gives them glory, 
but the victory of the weak gives glory to Iroas. 

Why did Iroas seek you out as a champion? Perhaps 
you proved your courage even when victory eluded 
your grasp, or you demonstrated a willingness to use 
your strength for good. Occasionally, Iroas's choice of a 
champion has as much to do with his enmity toward Mo- 
gis as it does with the mortal he chooses; is there some 
connection between you and the god of slaughter? The 
Iroas's Favor table offers a few suggestions. 


IROAS'S FAVOR 

d6 Circumstance 
You were born on the eve of a major battle. 
Your twin sibling is a champion of Mogis. 
You showed great courage in a losing battle. 


^ NE ~ BE 


You proved yourself in a contest of strength and skill at 

the Iroan Games. 

5 You called upon lroas to witness an oath of victory in 
battle, and he took notice. 

6 Despite having been knocked down repeatedly in life, 

you show grit and determination in all you do. 


DEVOTION TO [ROAS 

Following Iroas means making a commitment to com- 
bat in pursuit of righteous aims, not as a way of applying 
coercion or domination. It also means dedicating your- 
self to the pursuit of excellence, for the god of victory 
desires victorious champions. As a follower of Iroas, 
consider the ideals on the Iroas's Ideals table as alterna- 
tives to those suggested for your background. 


IROAS'S IDEALS 


d6 Ideal 

1 Devotion. My devotion to my god is more important to 
me than what he stands for. (Any) 

2 Courage. No fear or pain can turn me away. (Any) 
Loyalty. War forms bonds that are more real and last- 
ing than the ties of love or family. (Any) 

4 Heroism. The powerful must protect the weak. (Good) 
Liberty. The strong mustn't exploit the weak. (Chaotic) 

6 Excellence. People should look to me as an example of 
the best that mortal folk can be. (Any) 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


EARNING AND LOSING PIETY 

You increase your piety score to Iroas when you ex- 
pand the god's influence in the world in a concrete way 
through acts such as these: 


* Achieving a great victory 

* Overcoming long odds honorably 

* Defeating a skilled foe in single combat 
- Winning a great feat of strength or skill 


Your piety score to Iroas decreases if you diminish 
Iroas'sinfluence in the world, contradict his ideals, 
or make him look weak and cowardly through acts 
such as these: 


* Showing cowardice in battle 
* Besting an honorable foe through deceit 
- Harming innocents or noncombatants 


IROAS’S DEVOTEE 
Piety 3+ Iroas trait 


As a devotee of Iroas, you have earned his favor through 
victories won in his name. You can cast compelled duel 
with this trait a number of times equal to your Charisma 
modifier (minimum of once). You regain all expended 
uses when you finish a long rest. Charisma is your spell- 
casting ability for this spell. 


IROAS'S VOTARY 
Piety 10+ Iroas trait 


You can cast crusader's mantle with this trait. Once you 
cast the spell in this way, you can't do so again until you 
finish a long rest. Charisma is your spellcasting ability 
for this spell. 

In addition, you have advantage on saving throws 
against being frightened. 


InoAS's DISCIPLE 

Piety 25+ Iroas trait 

As a bonus action, you can call on Iroas’s blessing, gain- 
ing the following benefit for 1 minute or until you are 
incapacitated: creatures within 30 feet of you can't gain 
advantage on attack rolls against you. Once you use this 
trait, you can't do so again until you finish a long rest. 


CHAMPION OF VICTORY 
Piety 50+ Iroas trait 


You can increase your Strength or Charisma score by 2 
and also increase your maximum for that score by 2. 


Кт 


MYTHS or ІВОАЅ 


The myths told about lroas's deeds acclaim his valor and 
bravery as well as his inflexibility and stubbornness. Count- 
less tales tell-of him or his champions besting terrible beasts, 
enemy armies, or threats to the world. Still other stories rise 
beyond accounts of his victories. 

Bulwark of Brotherhood. iroas carries a battle-worn bronze 
shield called the Bulwark of Brotherhood. It symbolizes the 
protective bond shared by all soldiers at war and his deter- 
mination, ironically, to defeat his own brother. In the myth 
of Rygyra the Slinger, the soldier never missed when she 
launched stones from her magic sling. Yet, even so, her every 
shot bounced off the giant minotaur, Raksolcs Ravage-Soul. 
As the minotaur terror closed in on her, Rygyra whispered a 
prayer to lroas and braced her flimsy wooden shield, knowing 
it would offer no defense against the giant's strikes. Yet, when 
the blow came, the shield resounded with the barest metallic 
clang—like a pin falling on bronze. Opening her eyes, Rygyra 
discovered that her shield had transformed into a gleaming 
bulwark—lroas’s own shield. Enraged, Raksolcs beat on the 
shield, leaving not even a dent. After hours ofthis, the mino- 
taur collapsed, panting and exhausted. Only then did Rygyra 
emerge and strangle the brute with his own tongue. 

Draught of Glory. Followers of Iroas often push their phys- 
ical and emotional limits, pursuing victory above all things. 
Even as priests of Iroas coach their followers to be the best, 


i 


the most experienced religious leaders—particularly those 
who have retired from athletic competition—warn of growing 
addicted to triumph. Ultimately, they teach, only lroas can 
drink endlessly from the river of glory and suffer no ill effects. 
Mortals, though, can grow intoxicated by victory and sick- 
ened by unattainable ideas of honor or eternal praise. There- 
fore, wise competitors are encouraged to seek only their 
draught of glory—a finite amount that they might revel in 
but that allows them to experience a life beyond grasping for 
greatness. Those who don’t find themselves upon the path to 
despair, personal harm, and the temptations of Mogis. 
Kalemne, Disciple of Iroas. One of the greatest of lroas’s 
champions, Kalemne is a stone giant sworn to the service 
of the god of war. A warrior of tremendous strength and 
tactical skill, she has imposed martial discipline on the most 
unruly of troops and has led squads of giants and minotaurs 
to glorious victories. Her devotion to lroas is absolute, and 
her commitment to victory is unwavering. Countless peti- 
tioners have sought out Kalemne over the years, seeking her 
aid in righting wrongs or preventing disasters. Though she 
sympathizes with all who tell her their tragictales, Kalemne 
has committed to aiding only those who can defeat her in a 
contest of athletic skill or a test of speed. Those who do can 
count on her aid, and possibly that of her troops. Those who 
can't must seek other answers to their problems. 


i 


52 


50551 KARAMETRA | 


J 


| Сой. of Harvests 


Karametra is recognized as the serene, maternal god of 
the harvest, her arms spread wide as she offers bounty 
to her worshipers or cradles communities in her em- 
brace. Almost every human settlement contains at least 
a modest shrine to solicit her favor, and she is closely 
associated with Setessa, the center of her worship. 

Wise and even-tempered, Karametra values commu- 
nity, stability, and the balance of nature. She is the god 
of maternity, family, orphans, domestication, and agri- 
culture, as well as defense of the home and territory. 

Karametra appears to mortals as a motherly figure 
with hair made of ordered rows of leaves that shroud 
her eyes from view. She is always shown in art (and of- 
ten seen in Nyx) seated on her throne, which is formed 
from a tangle of grape vines growing out of a collection 
of jugs and amphorae that surround her. An elaborately 
carved wooden canopy extends above her, and a giant 
sable—her faithful companion—curls around the base of 
the throne at her feet. In one hand, she holds a harvest- 
er's scythe. 


KARAMETRA'S INFLUENCE 


Karametra governs nature as it comes into play in the 
lives of mortals, representing domesticated nature—a 
bounteous, nurturing provider. But she also reminds 
mortals that they are part of the natural world; they are 
animals that eat and digest and reproduce and sleep, 
and Karametra is influential in all of that, as well. 
Mortals seek her favor because the fertility of nature 
is necessary for their existence. It isn't her wrath they 
fear—she is not a god of storms or plagues—but her 
withdrawal. Without her, plants, livestock, families, and 
communities simply fail to thrive. Her goodwill is a bul- 
wark against both physical starvation and starvation of 
the spirit: despair, loneliness, and moral weakness. 
Karametra promises that spring will always come 
again, trees will always bear fruit, and flocks will always 
bear young. Children will always be born, parents will 
always care for them and be cared for in their turn. 
Great fortune or adventure might not be at hand, but 
the little joys of life—the smell of spring blossoms, the 
sweetness of ripe fruit, the flaming beauty of autumn 
leaves, the fellowship of community—can be savored. 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


In many ways, Karametra represents the essence of 
the divine relationship with mortals: fertility and pro- 
tection are the nucleus of the aid mortals have always 
sought from gods, and Karametra doesn't complicate 
these basic needs by couching them in terms of abstract 
ideals of honor or law or justice. She is the distillation 
of an ancient and primal exchange: mortal devotion in 
return for divine blessing. 


KARAMETRA'S GOALS 

Karametra doesn't engage in underhanded politicking 
or petty disputes. She seems to stand above the quarrels 
and tumultuous rivalries of other deities, and equally 
aloof from the machinations of the mortal world. Her 
fundamental concern is for the well-being of mortal folk, 
starting with their physical health but also including 
their need for security, love, and belonging. 


DIVINE RELATIONSHIPS 

Karametra might not want to wield power over other 
gods, but her position of detached compassion lends 

her significant influence to wield as she chooses. The 
other gods trust her to be impartial in their disputes and 
honest about her motivations, and they look to her for 
wisdom and even sometimes comfort. 

Karametra’s closest relationship is with Heliod. He 
respects her civilized demeanor, and she recognizes the 
vital role the sun’s brilliance plays in nurturing life. 

The relationship between Karametra and Nylea is 
respectful but strained. Nylea is disappointed by Kara- 
metra’s decision, as a nature deity, to subordinate nature 
to the needs of mortals. Karametra is frustrated by what 
she sees as Nylea’s refusal to recognize mortal folk—and 
all their civilizations—as part of the natural world. De- 
spite this tension, both gods encourage their worshipers 
to leave offerings at each other’s shrines. 

The gods who provoke Karametra's sharpest disdain 
are Iroas and Mogis, who seem devoted to the idea of 
preventing mortal life from fully flourishing. War—even 
if its couched in noble terms, as Iroas's followers like to 
do—is fundamentally an instrument of death, bringing 
a premature and pointless end to mortal life. That said, 
Karametra does recognize the need to fight in defense 
of one's life, family, and community when they come 
under attack, so she and Iroas are able to find some 
common ground in that matter—and in their shared ha- 
tred of Mogis. 


WORSHIPING KARAMETRA 


The earth's fertility is essential for mortal life to con- 
tinue. Those who live in the modern poleis might not be 
as aware of that fact as those who farm their own food, 
but even they long for children, know the pinch of hun- 
ger, and feel the turn of the seasons. 

Prayers to Karametra focus on asserting Karame- 
tra’s constancy and bounty, praising the god’s love and 
generosity. Worshipers of Karametra gather for a feast 
once a month, on the evening of the full moon, that cele- 
brates the god's role in parenthood and community. New 
parents receive gifts and blessings, and young couples 
sneak away into the woods in hopes of finding sweet 
berries and sweeter kisses. 


МҮТН$ ОЕ КАВАМЕТВА 


Karametra rarely engages in legendary undertakings. It is her 
unshakable reliability that makes her a popular deity. 

The Miraculous Field. Outside Setessa is a farm that pro- 
duces incredible fruits and grains that can heal illnesses, 
increase fertility, and stave off hunger for days. The field is 
said to be Karametra's tribute to her beloved human priest, 
Thamuzus, who died there. While many seek the farm, it is 
said that the vineyard around it is so labyrinthine that few 
have ever reached its center. 

The Old Harvest. In rare, remote settlements, high sum- 
mer ceremonies acknowledge ancient rural practices devoted 
to a less merciful vision of Karametra. These communities 
offer abundant sacrifices to the god, but also guard their 
ancient rituals from outsiders, as Karametra's organized 
clergy harshly forbids discussion of abandoned religious 
practices. However, occasionally, a centuries-old depiction of 
the goddess breaks, revealing an ancient icon inside, typically 
a primitive mud idol of a woman bearing a sheaf of grain in 
one hand and a skull in the other. 

Partners in Possibility. The fall holiday known as the 
Blessing of the Beasts (or, in Meletis, the Therimakarion) 
celebrates humans' partnership with domestic animals. 

The horses and oxen that pull plows, the cats that guard the 
granaries, and the roosters that wake families and call them 


to their work are given blessings, special treats, and a day of 
rest. Stories say that strays found on this day are servants of 
Karametra and destined for great things. Others claim that 
on this day domestic animals can speak—that is, if they have 
anything they care to say to their supposed owners. 

Striving for Perfection. Although Karametra delights in 
nature's bounty, she ever strives to tap its greater potential. 
Her followers recount legends of breeders and horticultural- 
ists who cultivated remarkable new types of plants and ani- 
mals—such as the everfruit of Dakra or the storied Oraniad 
dragon-hens. Yet, while Karametra looks on such innovations 
with delight, some other gods see them as blasphemies. 

The Years of Rage. The tales about Karametra don't specify 
what ignited the god's rage in ancient times, but they do 
record that for a year, she tore down her own temples and 
refused to let any plants grow. The mortals of the world, 
threatened with starvation, beseeched her to curb her wrath. 
In an effort led by Karametra's priests, nearly all of human- 
ity prayed for a week, neither eating nor sleeping, praising 
Karametra for her serenity and generosity. After thattime, 
she relented and produced a miraculous crop of grapes that 
cured illness and fed the people. Ever since then, her statues 
have been adorned with twining grape vines around their left 
wrists in commemoration of that event. 


KARAMETRA'S CHAMPIONS 


Alignment: Usually neutral, often good i 

Suggested Classes: Cleric, fighter, paladin, ranger 

Suggested Cleric Domains: Life, Nature 

Suggested Backgrounds: Acolyte, folk hero, guild arti- 
san, soldier, urchin 


Most champions of Karametra are advocates of commu- 
nity and family. They typically form tight-knit squads or 
surrogate families and take care of their people. 


К ARA METRA'S FAVOR 
Karametra grants her favor to champions in the mortal 
world who advance the cause of civilization and commu- 
nity. She nurtures the power and influence of those who 
provide food and care to others and has little patience 
for those who display arrogance and self-centeredness, 
instead elevating those who seek to elevate others. 
Although Karametra's demeanor is gentle, her call 
to service is nonnegotiable. She lavishes fortune and 
prosperity on those who serve her, but she will not be ig- 
nored. It is rare for her to abandon a champion, but nei- 
ther will she allow a champion to abandon their service. 
The Karametra's Favor table offers suggestions for what 
might make the god of the harvest take notice of you. 


KARAMETRA'S FAVOR 
d6  Circumstance 
1 | You were an orphan who wandered into one of Kara- 
© metra's temples seeking a meal and a safe place to 
spend the night. 
2 You are a village leader who sees caring for your neigh- 
bors as your most important job. 
You pioneered an agricultural innovation. 
Though you have no children of your own, you have 
assembled a tight-knit chosen family. 
You nearly bled to death in a farm field. 
You sought Karametra's help on behalf of your com- 
munity during a drought or natural disaster. 


DEVOTION TO KARAMETRA 

Following Karametra means dedicating yourself to car- 
ing for others, promoting civilization and community, 
and putting the needs of others above your own. After 
all, Karametra asks nothing for herself. As a follower 
of Karametra, consider the ideals on the Karametra's 
Ideals table as alternatives to those suggested for your 
background. 


KARAMETRA'S IDEALS 

d6 Ideal 

1 Devotion. My devotion to my god is more important to 
me than what she stands for. (Any) 

2 Civilization. Nature achieves its highest calling when 
human communities make use of it. (Lawful) 

3  Humility. | put the needs of others above my own and 
strive to lead through service. (Any) 

4 Protection. | devote myself to ensuring that the vulner- 
able and the innocent can live in safety. (Good) 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


d6 Ideal 

5 Bounty. | am generous and share what | have, hoping 
to improve the well-being of all around me. (Good) 

6 Community. | strive to deepen the bonds of my family, 
companions, and neighbors. (Any) 


EARNING AND LOSING PIETY 

You increase your piety score to Karametra when you 
expand the god’s influence in the world in a concrete 
way through acts such as these: 


• Turning a wild field into fertile cropland 

* Feeding those who are starving 

+ Defending a farm from monsters 

* Building or restoring a temple to Karametra 


Your piety score to Karametra decreases if you dimin- 
ish her influence in the world, contradict her ideals, 
or undermine her civilizing influence through acts 
such as these: 


- Destroying a settlement's food source 

» Releasing and scattering domestic animals 

- Diverting a water source needed for irrigation 
- Starting a fire that threatens a settlement 


KARAMETRA'S DEVOTEE 
Piety З+ Karametra trait 


As a devotee of Karametra, you have proven yourself 
a worthy potential champion of the harvest god. Asa 
bonus action, you can invoke her protection; spectral 
plants cover you, providing you with a *1 bonus to AC 
for 1 minute. Once you use this trait, you can't use it 
again until you finish a long rest. 


KARAMETRA'S VOTARY 
Piety 10+ Karametra trait 


You can cast create food and water with this trait. Once 
you cast the spell in this way, you can't do so again until 
you finish a long rest. Wisdom is your spellcasting abil- 
ity for this spell. 

In addition, you have advantage on saving throws 
against being poisoned. 


KARAMETRA'S DISCIPLE 

Piety 25* Karametra trait 

By performing an hour-long ritual, you can conjure 
enough grapes to fill three vials (4 ounces each) of wine. 
Each vial serves as a potion of healing for 24 hours, af- 
ter which it loses this property. Once you use this trait, 
you can't do so again until you finish a long rest. 


CHA MPION OF HARVESTS 
Piety 50+ Karametra trait 


You can increase your Constitution or Wisdom score by 
2 and also increase your maximum for that score by 2. 


<ERANOS 11 


God of Storms 


Keranos is the god of storms and wisdom. Merciless 
and impatient, Keranos is equally likely to strike out at 
mortals with a bolt of inspiration or a blast of lightning. 
To revere Keranos is to exult in the power of wisdom, 
clarity of purpose, and the fury of the storm. He is 
favored by tinkerers, inventors, and sailors as well as 
those seeking solutions to intractable problems. He 
doesn't tolerate the company (or the worship) of fools, 
and he despises vapidity and indecision. 

Keranos rarely appears directly to mortals, preferring 
to communicate through an epiphany or a crashing bolt 
of lightning. When he does deign to manifest in the mor- 
tal world, Keranos prefers the form of a stout, bearded, 
male human wearing a purple loincloth girdled in a 
mithral chain belt with a clasp in the form of a dragon's 
Skull. His bearing is upright and stern, with a clipped, 
brusque way of speaking. Particularly clever plans and 
observations bring a hint of a smile to his face. When 
interacting with mortals, Keranos sometimes appears 
in the form of a great horned owl with lightning strikes 
flashing in its eyes. 


KERANOS'S INFLUENCE 


Keranos is the embodiment of wisdom and insight un- 
hindered by compassion or patience. Just as the storm 
vents its fury unpredictably and without warning, so 
does Keranos deliver the wisdom he chooses to impart. 

A storm, for all its unpredictability, can still be weath- 
ered by those who apply foresight and knowledge. So it 
is when dealing with Keranos. He rewards those who 
act with forethought and decisiveness and punishes the 
reckless for their stupidity. 

Those who seek to solve enigmas and create wonders 
of art and science often invoke his name. The creative 
process is fraught with frustration, and his insights 
make short work of such hindrances as easily as the 
lightning parts a mighty oak. 

Keranos dispenses inspiration without regard for the 
morality of its application. He is just as likely to reward 
the shrewd general seeking to topple a polis as a gentle 
healer searching for a cure for a malady. Good and evil 
don't color his thinking, only action and the thrill of 
birthing new ideas into the world. Furthering the act of 
creating—be it ideas, weapons, art, or magic—is what 
matters most. 


KERANOS'S GOALS 

For good or ill, Keranos exists as a disruptive force. He 
doesn't desire authority over other gods and, in fact, 
doesn't particularly enjoy their company. Keranos finds 
satisfaction in investing bright mortals with prescient 
visions to see how they adapt. Those who prove them- 
selves decisive and intelligent, such as the missing 
Queen Cymede of Akros, earn his grudging respect and 
continued blessings of precognition. He finds satisfac- 
tion not only in granting insight, but also in expressing 
the awesome fury of the storm. Where others see only 
chaos and destruction in storms, he sees them as shap- 
ing the firmament in ways that challenge and engage 
mortals. His blasts of lightning set house and forest 
ablaze, thus rendering the soil clear for new life and new 
creations. His is a vision he alone is equipped to see. He 
is content to watch his divine kinfolk scheme and plot 
while he looks on, stern and inscrutable. 


DIVINE RELATIONSHIPS 

Keranos is neither friendly nor sociable, so his dealings 
with most of the rest of the pantheon tend to be terse, 
formal, and brief. This doesn’t mean that no interactions 
of note take place, however. 

Of all the gods, Thassa has the most cordial rela- 
tionship with Keranos. He enjoys the sea god's love of 
ancient lore, introspection, and complex patterns. The 
two sometimes talk for days at a time debating the flaws 
in ancient sophistries and discussing the meaning of the 
stars. Thassa, imperturbable and constant, makes the 
ideal counter to the wise yet temperamental Keranos. 

Another interesting relationship exists with Purpho- 
ros. The passions of the divine blacksmith run hot, 
as does the need to create. The melding of Keranos’s 
inspiration with Purphoros's passion is a formidable 
combination. This partnership resulted in the creation 
of Epiphany, Keranos's mighty javelin. 


WORSHIPING KERANOS 


Keranos's name is often invoked by those amid a storm 
who seek safety, or by someone who is faced with a par- 
ticularly difficult problem. Only the foolhardy call out to 
Keranos frivolously or in jest, since he might well smite 
the offender with a bolt from the blue. 

In Akros, where Queen Cymede actively promoted 
the worship of Keranos, elaborate ceremonies are con- 
ducted beginning just before the first summer thunder- 
storm. Intricate, open-framed sand paintings with com- 
plex geometric shapes are created by dancers in flowing 
blue silken wraps. Then, as the rains fall, the paintings 
are washed away, symbolizing the impermanence of 
genius and the power of change. Akroan oracles strive 
to predict the exact time of the first storm in hopes of 
allowing enough time to stage the celebration. A similar 
festival in Meletis, called the Lightning Festival, gives its 
name (Astrapion) to the third month of the year. 

On the last day of every month, Keranos's priests and 
laity bring offerings of fish and distilled spirits to his 
temples. The fish are cooked under a skylight open to 
the stars, with a shot of spirits thrown on the fire. 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


KERANOS’S CHAMPIONS 


Alignment: Usually chaotic, often neutral 

Suggested Classes: Barbarian, bard, cleric, druid, sor- 
cerer, wizard 

Suggested Cleric Domains: Knowledge, Tempest 

Suggested Backgrounds: Acolyte, entertainer, guild 
artisan, noble, sage, sailor 


Most champions of Keranos are calm under pressure, 
creative, and clever. They often seek to challenge the sta- 
tus quo and thrill at wielding the power of the storm. 


KERANOS’S FAVOR 

Keranos chooses champions who are deliberate and 
wise, yet able to bring the storm’s fury when needed. He 
expects his champions to be aggressive and self-reliant 
and disdains the lazy and the foolish, who deserve what- 
ever ill fortune befalls them. 

The god of storms is inscrutable at the best of times; 
thus, it can be difficult to discern why you've earned his 
favor. What prompted him to giftyou with foreknowl- 
edge of important events? How have you demonstrated 
your potential? The Keranos's Favor table offers a hand- 
ful of suggestions. 


KERANOS's FAVOR 


d6 Circumstance 

1 You were born amid a great storm that destroyed most 
of your village. 

2 One of your parents was struck by lightning. 

3  Asachild, you were favored by an oracle of great 
power who saw Keranos's spark within you. 

4 You solved a riddle, puzzle, or cipher that was previ- 
ously thought unsolvable. 

5 You were born under auspicious stars. 

6 You have no idea why Keranos grants you visions, and 
the burden weighs heavily on your soul. 


DEVOTION TO KERANOS 

Just as the storm is unpredictable and often dangerous, 
so is service to the lord of storms. Keranos's devotees 
hatch their grand designs always with an eye on the 
darkening sky. As a follower of Keranos, consider the 
ideals on the Keranos's Ideals table as alternatives to 
those suggested for your background. 


KERANOS’S IDEALS 

d6 Ideal 

1 Devotion. My devotion to my god is more important to 
me than what he stands for. (Any) 

2 Wisdom. The pursuit of knowledge and insight is the 
highest aspiration one can achieve. (Any) 

3  Foresight. Fortune favors the prepared, not so much 
the bold. (Neutral or lawful) 

4 Fury. | am the storm and will not be denied. (Chaotic) 

5 Impatience. Whatever it takes to reach an epiphany, ! 
will do it. (Chaotic) 

6 Change. There are no constants in this life. If we don't 
innovate and adapt, we are doomed. (Chaotic) 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


EARNING AND LOSING PIETY 

You increase your piety score to Keranos when you ex- 
pand the god's influence in the world in a concrete way 
through acts such as these: 


• Solving a challenging riddle or puzzle 
• Smiting the unwise and foolish in Keranos's name 
- Helping a polis successfully plan for or adapt 
to a threat 
* Building or restoring a temple to Keranos 


Your piety score to Keranos decreases if you diminish 
Keranos's influence in the world, contradict his ideals, 
or make him look ridiculous or ineffectual through acts 
such as these: 


* Jeopardizing others through rash or foolish actions 
« Willingly subverting or impeding a wise 
course of action 
~ Failing to plan appropriately for a challenge 
* Giving in to wanton fury and destruction 


KERANOS’S DEVOTEE 
Piety 3+ Keranos trait 


As a devotee of Keranos, you have proven your wisdom 
and your allegiance to the storm lord. Once on each of 
your turns when you hit a creature with a weapon at- 
tack, you can deal an extra 1d6 lightning damage to the 
target. You can use this trait a number of times equal to 
your Intelligence modifier (minimum of once). You re- 
gain all expended uses when you finish a long rest. 


KERANOS's VOTARY 

Piety 10+ Keranos trait 

When you fail an Intelligence or a Wisdom saving throw, 
you can reroll the die, and you must use the new roll. 
Once you use this trait, you can't do so again until you 
finish a long rest. 


KERANOS’S DISCIPLE 
Piety 25+ Keranos trait 


The energy of the storm fills your being, granting you 
advantage on initiative rolls. 


CHAMPION OF STORMS 
Piety 50+ Keranos trait 


You can increase your Intelligence or Wisdom score by 
2 and also increase your maximum for that score by 2. 


MYTHS ОЕ KERANOS 


The myths and legends told of Keranos’s deeds demonstrate 
his wisdom and wrath, dispensed in equal measure. 

Epiphany. The lightning bolt is a symbol of both Keranos's 
fury and his ability to inspire. Pondering this combination, 
he entreated Purphoros to create a mighty weapon, a javelin 
that strikes with the force of the storm. Keranos channeled 
his anger into a furious storm, which Purphoros then cap- 
tured and smithed into a gleaming javelin that hummed with 
power. When Keranos wants to send a message, of either 
destruction or enlightenment, Epiphany is his tool of choice. 

Font of Fortunes. In ages past, Keranos created a bronze 
font fed by a pure mountain stream that would grant great 
oracular power if one drank deeply from it. As Keranos 
wanted only the wisest and most clever mortals to gain his 
favor, the font lies at the end of a series of fierce traps and 
riddles. It exists both in and out of Nyx, hidden to all but the 
most diligent of seekers. 

Lightning Diadem. Years ago, Keranos received an ex- 
quisitely cut sapphire set in a delicate silver diadem as an 
offering. Deeply appreciative of the skill and craftsmanship 
required to create it, Keranos imbued the gem with a spark 
of divine genius. Inventors and philosophers coveted the 
diadem, for it conferred a fraction of Keranos's inspiration 
to the wearer—granting incredible insights or fracturing the 


wearer's sanity. Its last owner, the tormented genius Zexso 
the Unblinking, is said to have created a massive contraption 
to assure that the lightning diadem wouldn't shatter the 
mind of any other mortal. The inventor's machine launched 
the diadem into the heavens, where it's said to have landed 
upon a griffin-inhabited island floating in the clouds. 

Riddle of Lightning. Once, an arrogant oracle boasted of 
her infallible insight, which flowed from Keranos himself. 
Bemused, the storm lord arranged for the oracle to meet a 
particularly cunning sphinx and engage in an epic battle of 
wits. The objective set forth by Keranos was to solve the Rid- 
dle of Lightning, an enigma devised by Keranos himself. After 
days of deliberation, the oracle realized the answer, only to be 
struck down by a bolt from the heavens. Among the faithful 
nowadays, the term "Riddle of Lightning" is used to denote a 
question that one is better off not knowing the answer to. 

Silent Storm. Occasionally, Keranos seeks to make his will 
known with all the subtlety ofthe master of storms. Should 
lightning strike the same point multiple times yet never echo 
with thunder, followers of Keranos claim that is the way their 
god draws attention to secrets he wishes to share. While 
repeat lightning strikes would normally cause considerable 
damage, strikes that convey the god's will often leave a 
scorch in the shape of Keranos's symbol or no mark at all. 


wy 


58 


= i 
=- 0, = 


HE KLOTHYS | 


God of Destiny 


Believed to have sprung into existence during Theros’s 
earliest days, Klothys is the god of destiny and, along 
with Kruphix, one of the plane's original deities. She 
oversees the order of the cosmos, ensuring that all 
things remain in their proper place, knowing how easily 
the cosmic balance could be undone if she were not 
vigilant. On the heels of a near-catastrophic upset of 
the cosmic order—the rise to godhood and subsequent 
defeat of the satyr Xenagos—Klothys has emerged from 
the Underworld for the first time in mortal memory to 
untangle the strands of destiny and set the world right. 

Klothys typically appears as a woman with six curling 
horns and an impossibly long mane of pale hair that 
cascades around her horns, drapes over her eyes, and 
spools into her spear-like weapon and the various other 
spindles she carries. 

Beneath her outward calm, Klothys seethes at the 
way mortals and gods alike have pulled apart and 
rearranged the threads of destiny to feed their petty 
ambitions. Her peaceful mien falls away in the presence 
of such villains. In her rage, her red-glowing eyes come 
into view through the veil of her hair, and she wields 
burning strands of hair as a devastating weapon. 


KLOTHYS’sS INFLUENCE 


Klothys is the embodiment and enforcer of destiny. 
Largely forgotten after ages spent in the Underworld, 
Klothys has only recently emerged, brimming with si- 
lent frustration at the state of Theros. 

Each strand of Klothys's hair is part of the fabric of 
destiny, the natural order that underpins all existence. 
Her followers claim to see these strands woven into all 
things, granting them understanding of cosmic truths 
and insights into how the future should unfold. 

Klothys withdrew to the Underworld ages ago to 
keep watch over the imprisoned titans and ensure they 
couldn’t escape and destroy the order she had estab- 
lished. Due to this undertaking, she is also the god of 
secrets best kept quiet and powers best untouched. 


KLorHvs's GOALS 

Once content to oversee and preserve destiny from the 
Underworld, Klothys now endeavors to undo the cos- 
mic damage caused by Heliod, Xenagos, and ambitious 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


mortals in recent years. The ways in which they ravaged 
reality to realize their selfish dreams has threatened 
Theros, and only by untangling the strands of destiny 
can Klothys set things right. The status quo she seeks to 
restore, however, comes with a cost in mortal casualties 
and societal upheaval that would accompany this pro- 
cess. She intends to humble the same institutions that 
condoned or committed these crimes against Theros. 
When her efforts have laid low the proud, the defiant, 
and the exploitative, then Klothys will have restored the 
natural order and ensured the world’s survival. 


DIVINE RELATIONSHIPS 

Klothys views many of the gods with disdain, consid- 
ering them to be complicit in Xenagos’s theogenesis, 
Heliod’s acts of arrogance, or both. She reserves special 
contempt for Heliod and his champions, relishing every 
opportunity to teach them humility. 

Klothys also clashes with other gods associated with 
order and progress, seeing their defiance of the natural 
order as a dangerous affront. Ephara’s ravenous coloni- 
zation, Iroas’s passion for overcoming insurmountable 
odds, and Karametra's taming of nature all run the risk 
of inspiring ambitious mortals who lust for ever more 
power and strain to break away from their proper place 
in the cosmos. 

Klothys respects the other gods whose interests 
balance creation and destruction, such as Thassa, Pur- 
phoros, and Nylea, considering them better attuned to 
Theros’s needs and destiny’s myriad outcomes. Nylea 
shares Klothys's delight in the world’s natural cycles. 
Purphoros's willingness to build and demolish appeases 
Klothys—as well as the fact that he despises Heliod as 
much as she does. 

Klothys's relationships with Erebos and Athreos are 
complicated. Ages spent in the Underworld with Erebos 
have driven home for her how arrogant and tyrannical 
he is, as ready to commit the same sins as Heliod if 
given the opportunity. Even so, Erebos and Klothys 
maintain a level of mutual respect. Until recently, Klo- 
thys and Athreos were unflappable allies. But now her 
emergence from the Underworld has blurred the bor- 
ders between the realms, as she draws horrors into the 
mortal realm with her and thereby raises Athreos's ire. 

Of course, Klothys trusts no other god as much as she 
does Kruphix, who also recalls Theros's earliest hours. 
The two have a deep respect for one another. 


WORSHIPING KLOTHYS 


Klothys doesn't trace her origins to mortal devotion, and 
she has languished in obscurity for almost the whole of 
human history. Unlike the other gods (except Kruphix), 
she doesn't need worship to sustain or empower her, 
and she doesn't seek out reverence or demand it. By and 
large, mortals are irrelevant to her, except insofar as 
they have played a role in tangling the strands of destiny 
by defying nature's order. 


MYTHS OF KLOTHYS 

Klothys is barely remembered in the mortal world, having se- 
questered herself in the Underworld while human civilization 
was in its infancy. Some surviving myths speak of a personi- 
fied “destiny” in a way that vaguely suggests the possibility of 
an actual god’s involvement. 

Rage of Titans. The greatest threat to the young world of 
Theros was the godlike race of titans, born from the same 
swirling chaos as the world itself. Before any order could 
be imposed on the world, the titans had to be contained. 
Kruphix and Klothys worked together to imprison the titans 
in the deepest pits of the Underworld. Klothys voluntarily 
bound herself in the Underworld to keep the titans impris- 
oned, but that is, after all, the nature of destiny: once the nat- 
ural order of the world had been put in place and preserved, 
no further action should have been required on her part to 
maintain it. 

The Smoking Strand. Hidden far from civilized coasts 
lies a strand of Klothys’s hair that she purposefully plucked. 
Knotted in on itself, the strand appears as a seething ball 
of dense smoke. Any who touch the strand risk having it 
invade them, infecting them with a pernicious destiny that 
Klothys herself tore from the natural order. None can say 
what terrible destiny the Smoking Strand drives its possessor 


$ 
` 


toward, but the ruins within which it lies might give some 
hint—caverns burrowed deep into a mountain of petrified 
bodies, the twisted obsidian corpses of humanoids and 
animals alike. 

Twins at War. The newly formed gods Kruphix and Klothys 
emerged from opposite sides of the roiling tangle of possibil- 
ities that eventually gave birth to Theros. At first the two bat- 
tled for supremacy, but they soon realized their conflict left 
their young world vulnerable to dangers from both inside and 
out. Putting their rivalry aside, the pair agreed it was better to 
share and have something than let their struggles destroy all 
creation. 

Walkers of Woe. The nightmarish creatures known as woe 
striders are said to be products of Klothys’s punishment. 
These beings descend from an age when some mortals 
learned to unshackle themselves from the strands of des- 
tiny. To what end is a question lost to time, but Klothys put 
a quick end to these blasphemers and eradicated nearly all 
knowledge of their methods. Ever since, the shades of these 
accursed mortals have walked the Underworld as woe strid- 
ers, monstrosities endlessly seeking strands of destiny that 
they might use to replace their own discarded lots. 


„>й 


KLOTHYS’S CHAMPIONS 


Alignment: Usually neutral : 

Suggested Classes: Barbarian, cleric, ranger, warlock 

Suggested Cleric Domains: Knowledge, War 

Suggested Backgrounds: Folk hero, hermit, out- 
lander, sage 


Most champions of Klothys believe it is their destiny to 
fulfill a particular role or seek answers to omens they 
struggle to understand. They are passionate about pun- 
ishing those who violate the cosmological order. 


KLOTHYS’s FAVOR 

Klothys hasn't had a mortal champion before. Upon 
emerging from the Underworld, she created a host of 
Nyxborn agents to help her restore Theros to its proper 
path. You might be one of these so-called Agents of 
Destiny (if you choose the Nyxborn supernatural gift, de- 
scribed in chapter 1), single-minded in the purpose for 
which you were made. Or you might be among the first 
of a new cadre of followers of Klothys. The Klothys's Fa- 
vor table suggests some possible connections between 
the god and a mortal follower. 


KLOTHYS’S FAVOR 


d6  Circumstance 

Т Your family suffered during the rise of Xenagos, leaving 
you with unresolved rage. 

2 You swore yourself to Klothys, offering your service in 
exchange for reprieve from a mundane destiny. 

3 Born under an ill omen, you were victimized by your 
neighbors' superstitions before realizing that you were 
destined to serve Klothys. 

4 You lost a loved one to the upheaval that followed Klo- 
thys from the Underworld. You planned revenge, but 
were awed at the sight of her and devoted yourself to 
her service. 

5 You were a champion of Heliod until the emergence of 
Klothys showed you the danger of Heliod's hubris. 

6 You don't know why Klothys has shown interest in you. 


DEVOTION TO KLOTHYS 

To follow Klothys is to accept the natural order of the 
cosmos and your place in it. It means accepting your 
destiny even as you strive against the bonds of fate. As a 
follower of Klothys, consider the ideals on the Klothys's 
Ideals table as alternatives to those suggested for your 
background. 


KLOTHYS’S IDEALS 


d6 Ideal 

1 Devotion. My devotion to my god is more important to 
me than what she stands for. (Any) 

2 Stewardship. Preservation of the natural order super- 
sedes the needs ofcivilization. (Neutral) 

3  Humility. It is hubris to aspire to a higher place in the 
natural order than we are given. (Lawful) 

4 Vigilance. Those who defy or manipulate destiny are 
menaces that must be stopped. (Neutral) 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


d6 Ideal 

5 Fury. The world must be cleansed to make way for a 
new start. (Chaotic) 

6 Protection. When gods or mortals go mad with power, 


it's the powerless who suffer, and | mean to keep them 
safe. (Good) 


EARNING AND LOSING PIETY 

You increase your piety score to Klothys when you ex- 
pand the god's influence in the world in a concrete way 
through acts such as these: 


- Defeating a creature that has stepped out of its place 
* Repairing a significant wound dealt to destiny by the 
gods' ambitions 
* Teaching people about Klothys, her nature, and 
her return 


Your piety score to Klothys decreases if you dimin- 
ish her influence in the world, contradict her ideals, 
or threaten the integrity of destiny through acts 
such as these: 


• Undoing a deserved punishment or curse suffered by 
another creature 

• Willfully destroying a natural wonder 

* Assisting a creature in undermining the natural order 
or exploiting destiny 


KLOTHYS’S DEVOTEE 
Piety 3+ Klothys trait 


As a devotee of Klothys, you can manipulate the bonds 
of destiny that invisibly entangle every living thing. You 
can cast command with this trait a number of times 
equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once). You 
regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest. 
Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for this spell. 


KLOTHYS’s VOTARY 
Piety 10+ Klothys trait 


You can cast clairvoyance with this trait, requiring no 
material components. Once youcast the spell in this 
way, you can’t do so again until you finish a long rest. 
Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for this spell. 

In addition, you have advantage on saving throws 
against being charmed. 


KLOTHYS's DISCIPLE 

Piety 25+ Klothys trait 

You develop a second sense, allowing you to intuit the 
tug and pull of destiny. You can’t be surprised, provided 
you aren't incapacitated. 


CHAMPION OF DESTINY 
Piety 50+ Klothys trait 


You can increase your Strength or Wisdom score by 2 
and also increase your maximum for that score by 2. 


75] KRUPHIX 


Godof Horizons 


Kruphix is the enigmatic god of mysteries, horizons, 
and the passage of time. His followers claim that he 
knows not only everything that is known at present, but 
everything that has ever been known by anyone. 

Quiet surrounds Kruphix like a shroud. Standing 
apart from the other gods, he speaks rarely, even to his 
most favored followers. When he does communicate, it 
is often as a barely audible whisper. Kruphix can speak 
with a booming voice directly into the minds of all the 
other gods simultaneously, though, doing so when some- 
thing threatens the cosmic order. 

Kruphix’s true form is more abstract than that of 
any of the other gods. He appears only in star-filled 
silhouette, usually as a hooded, four-armed figure of in- 
determinate species and gender. Two of the stars in his 
“body” often shine brightly, suggesting eyes. Kruphix’s 
starry silhouette sometimes takes the form of a bird 
or a whale. 


KRUPHIX'S INFLUENCE 


Kruphix holds dominion over everything unseen or 
unknown. He is associated with the horizon—the brink 
of the unknown—and with navigation. His followers in- 
clude scholars, sages, and a handful of sailors who have 
an inclination toward the mystical. 

Perfect understanding is like the horizon: easy to 
move toward, but impossible to reach. Kruphix knows 
everything that has ever been known on Theros, so he 
and only he decides which secrets should be loosed 
upon the world, and which must be kept forever hidden. 
He has existed since before mortals occupied Theros 
and numbers among the few who understand the role 
of mortal belief in shaping the younger gods—a concept 
even most gods don't fully comprehend. 

Kruphix is the only being who has the ability to seal 
the borders between the mortal realm and Nyx. He uses 
this power to safeguard the mortal world from reck- 
less divine meddling and enforce the balance of power 
among the gods and their faithful. 

Because of his lack of followers, many mortals con- 
sider Kruphix a minor god, even obscure. To the other 
gods, however, he is a force within the pantheon, worthy 
of both respect and wariness. 


KRUPHIX'S GOALS 

More than any other god, Kruphix simply is. He seeks 
nothing but to oversee the acquisition of knowledge, 
maintain the cycles of time, and uphold the divine order. 
He views his fellow gods as petty and vengeful, and he 
opposes anyone who tries to obtain power that would 
upset the delicate balance of the pantheon. 

Kruphix is the eldest of the gods and sees it as his 
responsibility to rein in the excesses of his younger 
siblings. Unlike Heliod, Kruphix knows that he isn't 
powerful enough to impose his will unilaterally. Instead, 
he plays the other gods against one another and serves 
as a mediator in their endless disputes. He takes care to 
ensure that the other gods view him as impartial, which 
he considers essential to maintaining his authority. 


DIVINE RELATIONSHIPS 

Kruphix strives to hold himself above the disputes of 
the gods, but like any other god, he has both rivals and 
allies. Chief among the former is the sun god Heliod, 
whom Kruphix sees as an arrogant, dangerous threat to 
the balance of power among the gods. He seldom acts 
against Heliod openly, preferring to warn others about 
the sun god's efforts to seize power at their expense. 

Since every mortal soul must eventually pass beyond 
the horizon and into death, Kruphix respects both 
Erebos and Athreos. He sees Erebos as a necessary 
check on Heliod's power, and he even allowed Athreos 
to continue his vital work on the fringes of the mortal 
world when he bound all the other gods within the fabric 
of Nyx. Erebos and Kruphix blame one another for Klo- 
thys's recent emergence from the Underworld, a situa- 
tion neither seems able to control. 

Purphoros loathes Kruphix for temporarily hob- 
bling his mind following an attack against Heliod, but 
Kruphix holds no grudge against Purphoros. That 
particular punishment upset the balance too far in the 
other direction, and Kruphix is more likely to side with 
Purphoros than Heliod in the future. 

Of all the gods, only Klothys truly concerns Kruphix. 
He hoped that she would remain secret and secluded in 
the Underworld, and he doesn't know what her emer- 
gence portends. She is the only other god whose exis- 
tence predates mortal belief, and though he is unlikely 
to draw her ire by manipulating destiny, he doesn't know 
how her return will affect the pantheon. 


WORSHIPING KRUPHIX 


Many pray to Kruphix when they need to find something 
lost, but few dedicate themselves to his worship. Cults 
devoted to Kruphix fiercely guard their secrets, and 
their initiates refrain from drawing attention to them- 
selves. Some followers and champions of Kruphix travel 
the world in secret, searching for hidden truths. Many 
use secret signals to enable them to find safe lodging 
with other worshipers nearly anywhere. 

Rituals honoring Kruphix are usually performed at 
boundaries, both temporal and spatial: shorelines, riv- 
erbanks, equinoxes, and sunsets. One of the god's great- 
est festivals is the Agrypnion (“the Watching"), which 
marks the end of winter and the close of the year. 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 6 
I 


К RUPHIX’S CHAMPIONS 


Alignment: Usually neutral 
Suggested Classes: Bard, cleric, druid, monk, 
ranger, wizard 
Suggested Cleric Domains: Knowledge, Trickery 
Suggested Backgrounds: Hermit, outlander, 
sage, sailor 
Most champions of Kruphix seek to learn the secrets 
of the universe and maintain the balance of the world. 
They largely view the other gods as petty and seek to 
separate themselves from divine squabbles. 


KRUPHIX’S FAVOR 

Kruphix’s champions are less his agents than his 
charges, and he is loath to release them. Even those who 
leave his service often find themselves unwittingly aid- 
ing his agenda for years to come. How did you initially 
attract the god’s attention? The Kruphix’s Favor table 
offers a few suggestions. 


KRUPHIX’S FAVOR 


d6 Circumstance 

1 Followers of Kruphix claim you were born under a bi- 
zarre omen, but will not explain what it means. 

2 You were secretly instructed in the worship of Kruphix 
by a parent or a mentor. 

3 You uncovered a dangerous secret during your studies, 
and followers of Kruphix sought you out and recruited 
you to keep the knowledge within their ranks. 

4 Beset by strange dreams, you consulted an oracle of 
Kruphix. Since then, they've only gotten stranger. 

5 You wanted to learn truths that only Kruphix knows. 
Now you're starting to wonder if you know too much. 

6 Хои have no idea why Kruphix showed interest іп you, 
and you might sometimes wish he hadn't. 


DEVOTION TO KRUPHIX 

Kruphix doesn’t demand adherence to any philosophy, 
and the reasons to follow him are as numberless as the 
stars. As a follower of Kruphix, consider the options on 
the Kruphix’s Ideals table as alternatives to those sug- 
gested for your background. 


KRUPHIX’S IDEALS 


d6 Ideal 

1 Devotion. My devotion to my god is more important to 
me than what he stands for. (Any) 

2 Balance. Too much power in any one place is a threat 
to us all. (Lawful) 

3  Selflessness. | accept the burden of knowledge so that 
others don't have to. (Good) 

4 Knowledge. | seek out dangerous secrets so that | can 
know the nature of reality. (Neutral) 

5 Power. The best thing about knowing a secret is get- 
ting to use it against everyone else. (Evil) 

6 Mystery. The cosmos is more beautiful if its greatest 
truths remain unknown. (Any) 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


EARNING AND LOSING PIETY 

You increase your piety score to Kruphix when you ex- 
pand the god’s influence in the world in a concrete way 
through acts such as these: 


* Keeping a dangerous secret despite personal cost 
* Revealing a critical truth at an important moment 
• Mediating a major dispute or conflict 

- Aiding the weak or impeding the strong 


Your piety score to Kruphix decreases if you diminish 
Kruphix’s influence in the world, upset the balance of 
power, or make him look biased or petty through acts 
such as these: 


* Revealing a secret that should remain unknown 

• Selfishly refusing to share information 

- Showing favoritism toward any other god or group 

- Furthering the aims of another god in defiance of 
Kruphix’s will 


Kruphix doesn’t care about the righteousness of a 
cause, only about upholding impartiality in both appear- 
ance and action. This sometimes means that his follow- 
ers stay out of situations that seem morally straightfor- 
ward, such as refusing to help a squad of hoplites finish 
off a band of vicious raiders. 


KRUPHIX’S DEVOTEE 
Piety 3+ Kruphix trait 


As a devotee of Kruphix, you have proven yourself a dev- 
otee of reality's mysteries and laws. You can cast detect 
magic with this trait a number of times equal to your 
Intelligence modifier (minimum of once). You regain all 
expended uses when you finish a long rest. 

In addition, you know the mage hand cantrip. Intelli- 
gence is your spellcasting ability for these spells. 


KRUPHIX’S VOTARY 
Piety 10+ Kruphix trait 


You can cast detect thoughts with this trait, requiring 
no material components. Once you cast the spell in this 
way, you can't do so again until you finish a long rest. In- 
telligence is your spellcasting ability for this spell. 

In addition, you have advantage on saving throws 
against being charmed. 


KRUPHIX’S DISCIPLE 

Piety 25+ Kruphix trait 

Аз а true champion of Kruphix, you can use your mage 
hand cantrip to protect yourself. While your spectral 
hand is within 5 feet of you, you gain a +2 bonus to your 
AC against ranged attacks. 


CHAMPION OF HORIZONS 

Piety 50+ Kruphix trait 

You can increase your Constitution or Intelligence 
score by 2 and also increase your maximum for that 
score by 2. 


MYTHS or KRUPHIX 


Kruphix appears in stories in an ancillary role, often as the 
impartial judge who ends a conflict between gods. Initiates 
in Kruphix's mystery cult know other stories in which he plays 
a more active role, including special versions of well-known 
legends, but they seldom share these tales with others. 

The First Nyxborn. According to one tale, it was Kruphix, 
not Purphoros, who was the first to fashion living Nyxborn 
creatures from the fabric of Nyx. Kruphix created the divine 
artisan Nykthos and ordered him to build altars to the gods. 
Nykthos's story isn't widely known among mortals, but the 
Shrine to Nyx is still called Nykthos in his honor. 

Kruphix's Warning. When Purphoros attacked Heliod in a 
destructive rage, Heliod demanded that Kruphix intervene. 
Kruphix constrained the forge-god's mind and memory in 
punishment for his attack. He warned all the gods that if they 
threatened the mortal realm with their disruptive quarrels, 
he would bind them to Nyx for as long as he saw fit. As of 
yet, no god has dared to test Kruphix's threat, but there are 
certainly those among them who might try if they could see a 
way to retain their own powers. 

The Silence. When the squabbling of the gods threatened 
the world once more despite Kruphix's warning, he etched 
all their names—including his own—in the bark of his great 


е | 1 = 
: me 
аа F " " 
an w 
T к 
i j 


tree at the edge of the world. Immediately, the gods' oracles 
could no longer hear them, their blessings faded, and the 
night sky held only unmoving stars. The great Silence of the 
gods serves as the backdrop for numerous tales of heroism 
and sacrifice. Many alive today witnessed the sky go dark and 
the temples grow quiet. Most consider the Silence a terrible 
mistake that led to the rise of the usurper god Xenagos, but 
followers of Kruphix know that it was a grim necessity to pre- 
vent far worse calamity. 

Theophilian Mysteries. Some of Kruphix's worshipers don't 
identify with their inscrutable deity, but with Theophilia, a 
legendary naiad who entered Nyx and whose transcendent 
encounter with Kruphix each initiate strives to duplicate. The 
naiad's journey is celebrated in hushed chants as blindfolded 
initiates are led across a boundary—often stepping into a 
river or over a low stone wall, an act that symbolizes crossing 
the horizon. Then the blindfolds are removed as the faithful 
intone a paean to Kruphix. The hope is that Kruphix will 
choose to reveal himself at the climax of the ritual, whether 
by the appearance of some omen or in a personal epiphany. 
Such a revelation isn't always positive, though, as Kruphix 
often imparts a glimpse of cosmic truths for which mortals 
have no possible context. 


aie o --n 


64 


5] Lj 


-—— 


God of Slaughter 


Mogis is the god of slaughter, violence, and war. He is 
hatred unrestrained, empathy denied, and mercy for- 
gotten, an entity whose very presence incites mortals to 
violence. Soldiers fear succumbing to his blood lust lest 
they dishonor themselves, but the vengeful and forsaken 
call to him for the gift of his rage. He is the brother 

of Iroas, god of victory, and his antithesis in matters 

of warfare. 

The anger and malice radiating from Mogis is almost 
palpable. He exercises no control over his temper or 
his urges and lashes out at subordinates at the slightest 
provocation. Akroan soldiers are warned that to give 
in to his seductive battle rage is to risk becoming an 
androphage—a bloodthirsty killer wholly consumed by 
Mogis's fury. 

Mogis cuts a terrifying figure, appearing as a four- 
horned minotaur of incredible size clad in spiked 
bronze armor and wielding a massive ebon greataxe. He 
doesn't debase himself by appearing in other guises to 
mortals—to behold him is to behold the cruelty of war 
personified. He hungers endlessly to defeat his brother 
Iroas in combat and thus become the sole avatar of war 
among mortals. 


ModGiS's INFLUENCE 


Mogis, like his brother, governs the sphere of warfare. 
But while Iroas thrives on the glory of honorable victory, 
Mogis revels in sadism, destruction, and the utter hu- 
miliation of the vanquished. He drives warriors to acts 
of cruelty and malice in their pursuit of victory. Only 
those who have experienced the terror and violence of 
war truly understand the seductive nature of Mogis's 
power. To feel rage, to be an instrument of wrath—these 
emotions override the fear of battle. In hatred there 

is strength, and Mogis revels in this fact. But mortals 
must beware, for the price he exacts in exchange for 
this strength is the sacrifice of decency, honor, and 
compassion. 


Mocis's GOALS 

To Mogis, the world is a canvas upon which he paints in 
blood. His goals are easy to understand, thus easily ful- 
filled by his minions. Mogis wants to unmake the world 
through savagery. Let every polis fall and the works of 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


mortals burn—everything comes to ruin in time, and 
Mogis believes that time should be now. Only the most 
brutal and savage among the mortals should survive— 
his chosen few. Once the world lies in ruin with his 
brother dead at his feet, Mogis's goals will be achieved. 


DIVINE RELATIONSHIPS 

Mogis's existence is defined by his eternal struggle 
against his twin brother, Iroas. (Only a handful of con- 
tradictory myths address the parentage of these gods, 
but they are universally described as twins.) Any of Mo- 
gis's actions and endeavors contribute to undermining 
and ultimately destroying Iroas. Any divine relationships 
Mogis might enter into are born of convenience and as 

a means to the end. Mogis is incapable of loyalty and 
should be expected to break any pact or agreement once 
it has outlived its usefulness. 

Erebos appreciates Mogis's single-minded desire to 
destroy because it serves as a means to bring ever more 
souls into his realm. Also, Erebos occasionally steers 
Mogis's rampages in directions that inconvenience He- 
liod. This disruption inevitably leads to Heliod calling 
on Iroas to battle his brother, perpetuating the endless 
cycle of conflict between the twins. 

Of all his fellow gods, Mogis holds the most respect 
for Phenax. Mogis can’t help but smile at the chaos 
Phenax is able to cause and the carnage the Returned 
wreak on the world. Phenax has a talent for inciting con- 
flict, which allows Mogis to revel in the resulting strife. 

Mogis harbors an abiding disrespect, verging on ha- 
tred, for Ephara and Karametra. Ephara’s neat, orderly 
cities are a delight to destroy, especially given her fussy, 
precise adherence to rules. Likewise, Ephara’s close 
relationships with Iroas and Heliod provoke Mogis’s 
disgust. Mogis disdains Karametra because she aids 
mortals and provides succor to the weak. These are acts 
of foolishness because the weak don’t deserve aid—they 
are fodder for the strong. Setting fertile fields ablaze and 
witnessing the resulting famine is a source of enjoyment 
for Mogis, though he has been surprised more than once 
by the ferocity of Karametra’s reprisals. 


WORSHIPING MOGIS 


Mogis exhorts his followers to channel their hatred 
and rage into ever greater acts of cruelty and violence. 
He demands actions over words, making his followers 
an active and dangerous lot. From the spurned lover 
thirsting for revenge to the blood-drenched warrior on 
the battlefield, all honor Mogis with the shedding of 
blood in anger. 

Minotaurs are the most ardent worshipers of 
Mogis and regularly hold bloody rites in his honor. 
Warchanters, the minotaur clergy of Mogis, whip their 
marauders into a near-mindless frenzy before battle; the 
ensuing slaughter gives glory to Mogis's name. 

The appearance of the blood moon is a most holy 
occasion for the faithful of Mogis, since the moon 
represents his hateful crimson eye. At such times, his 
followers prepare and consume a feast of meat, either 
raw or barely cooked, along with copious amounts of 
intoxicants, followed by ritual self-mutilation—scarring 
themselves to demonstrate their devotion to Mogis. 


MYTHS ОЕ MOGIS 


The tales of Mogis's deeds exemplify his need to unmake, his 
brutality, and his desire to destroy his hated brother. 

The Endless Feud. One legend claims that Mogis and lroas 
were once a single being, the act of war personified. But the 
inherent tension between honor and brutality in combat 
led to a dichotomy of purpose too great for a single god to 
reconcile. Ripping himself apart, the god split in two, and so 
did Mogis and lroas come into existence, embodiments of 
the two aspects of war that are forever in conflict. Though no 
tales of either Mogis or Iroas's faith speak of such, whispers 
among the servants of other gods claim that there might be a 
way to piece the fractured god back together. Doing so would 
require an incredible feat, though, likely involving the cooper- 
ation of both Mogis and Iroas themselves. 

Mogis's Warhound. Mogis generally fights alone, because 
he often loses control of his temper and strikes allies as well 
as foes in the heat of battle. Still, Mogis sought a creature 
that would go before him, instilling fear in his foes before his 
mighty axe fell upon them. Mogis took a ferocious cerberus 
and bound it together with the fires of his eternal rage. This 
terrible new creation became his personal harbinger and 
battle companion. The god of slaughter didn't name his pet, 
refusing to do so until the beast had claimed a hundred thou- 
sand lives and so proved itself truly worthy of his esteem. 


( 


Origin of the Minotaur. In ages past, a warrior oftremen- 
dous strength stalked the battlefield. As a lone combatant, he 
was unbeatable, but he suffered when groups rose to oppose 
him. After one such defeat, the warrior was so filled with 
wrath that he murdered his entire village in Mogis's name. 
The god, delighted by this display, gifted the warrior with his 
own ferocity, remaking him as a reflection of Mogis's wrath 
and an engine of destruction in combat. This warrior became 
the first minotaur, and many minotaurs still worship Mogis, 
as he is their creator and they were made in his image. 

Revel in Ruin. The summer festival of the Megasphagion 
is a domesticated version of Mogis's typical rites. It involves 
the sacrifice of many cattle to avert Mogis's wrath. The meat 
is then cooked and distributed among all who attend the 
festival. The grand feast that follows tends to devolve into 
a drunken revel. In some tales, individuals or communities 
with long-held grudges find themselves incensed during the 
festival, leading them to seek violent ends to their rivalries. 

Wrathbringer. Shortly after his birth, Mogis decided to cre- 
ate a weapon with which to kill his brother. Mogis assembled 
his champions and sent them out to battlefields, where they 
collected the essences of rage, hatred, and bloodlust. Under 
a blood-red moon, Mogis used those ingredients to forge a 
black iron greataxe of manifest violence, Wrathbringer. 


) 


66 


MoGis's CHAMPIONS 


Alignment: Usually chaotic, often evil 

Suggested Classes: Barbarian, cleric, druid, 
fighter, warlock 

Suggested Cleric Domains: War 

Suggested Backgrounds: Athlete, criminal, out- 
lander, soldier 


Most champions of Mogis are antiheroes motivated by 
rage and a thirst for war. Many are tortured souls with a 
thirst for vengeance. 


MocIs’s FAVOR 

Mogis's favor isn't difficult to earn for someone who 
lacks a moral compass. Mogis demands that blood be 
spilled in his service, preferably the blood of Iroas's 
followers. Would-be champions should realize, though, 
that the god of slaughter invests in his followers with the 
expectation of receiving great returns. Those who disap- 
point, proving themselves incapable of sufficient cruelty 
or bloodshed, might find themselves on the wrong end 
of his blade. 

To Mogis, the ideal follower is one who sheds all 
moral compunctions in the course of bringing suffer- 
ing to the world. He also cultivates grievances and 
bitterness in those not ordinarily disposed to acts of 
wanton violence. Over the eons, he has found that the 
betrayed, the disgusted, and the disfavored are readily 
turned to a life of murderous service, to be discarded 
just as easily if they don't satisfy him. The Mogis's Favor 
table suggests a few ways that a mortal might come to 
Mogis's attention, or vice versa. 


Mocis’s FAVOR 


d6 Circumstance 

1 You were born under a sanguine moon, the symbol of 
Mogis’s red eye. 

2 Your twin sibling is a champion of Iroas. 

3 You successfully carried out a brutal vendetta against 
arival family. 

4 You proved yourself dramatically (and perhaps vio- 
lently) worthy in a contest of strength, a feat of endur- 
ance, or a similar accomplishment. 

5 You called on Mogis's power to settle old scores by 
becoming an instrument of his wrath. 

6 You have no idea why Mogis chose you, but his hate 
seeps into your being day by day nonetheless. 


DEVOTION TO MOGIS 

Following Mogis is a definitive rejection of ethical codes 
and adoption of bloodlust and rage. As a follower of 
Mogis, consider the ideals on the Mogis's Ideals table as 
alternatives to those suggested for your background. 


Mocis's IDEALS 
d6 Ideal 
1 Devotion. My devotion to my god is more important to 
me than what he stands for. (Any) 
2  Savagery.lexpress my rage through combat. (Chaotic) 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


d6 Ideal 

3 Hate. Hatred of my foes warms my heart and gives me 
power. (Any) 

4 Fury. My only release from life's endless grind is sur- 
rendering to my inner beast. (Evil) 

5 Ruthlessness. The ends justify the means and victory is 
to be obtained at any cost. (Evil) 

6 Pride. No one can best me in my chosen endeavor and 
woetothose who try. (Any) 


EARNING AND LOSING PIETY 

You increase your piety score to Mogis when you ex- 
pand the god's influence in the world in a concrete way 
through acts such as these: 


* Defeating a champion of Iroas 

* Takingvengeance against a powerful foe 

* Burning a polis or a settlement to the ground 

* Desecrating a temple to Iroas as an offering to Mogis 


Your piety score to Mogis decreases if you diminish 
Mogis's influence in the world, contradict his ideals, 
or make him look weak or ineffectual through acts 
such as these: 


* Failing to carry out a sworn vendetta 
• Publicly displaying weakness or compassion 
• Rejecting а duel or a challenge out of fear 


Mocis's DEVOTEE 

Piety 3+ Mogis trait 

As a devotee of Mogis, you have shown yourself to be a 
brutal combatant. You can call on Mogis's favor and cast 
wrathful smite with this trait. Mogis's blessing manifest 
as a blood-red glow around your weapon, causing it to 
shed dim light in a 5-foot radius until the spell ends. You 
can cast the spell in this way a number of times equal 

to your Constitution modifier (minimum of once). You 
regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest. 
Constitution is your spellcasting ability for this spell. 


Moais's VOTARY 

Piety 10+ Mogis trait 

You can cast blinding smite with this trait. Once you 
cast the spell in this way, you can’t do so again until you 
finish a long rest. Constitution is your spellcasting abil- 
ity for this spell. 


Moais's DISCIPLE 

Piety 25+ Mogis trait 

Countless battles and vicious visions have given you fo- 
cus. You have advantage on saving throws against being 
charmed or frightened. 


CHAMPION OF SLAUGHTER 

Piety 50+ Mogis trait 

You can increase your Strength or Constitution score by 
2 and also increase your maximum for that score by 2. 


God of the Hunt 


Nylea is the wild, carefree god of the hunt. She claims 
dominion over the whole of the natural world, particu- 
larly hunger and predation, the seasons, metamorphosis 
and rebirth, and the forest. 

Nylea is among the most gregarious of the gods, and 
can be spotted frolicking joyfully with her Nyxborn lynx, 
Halma, or her favorite nymph, Theophilia. But she also 
savors solitude, and on the hunt she is deadly serious, 
almost animalistic, in her mood. She is nearly as quick 
to anger as her brother Purphoros, enacting swift re- 
venge on those who harm the natural realm. 

Nylea usually appears as a green-skinned dryad with 
woody extremities. Her hair is made of vines and leaves 
that change with the seasons. She might also appear as 
a majestic specimen of any animal, most frequently a 
lynx or a wolf. When she desires stealth or solitude, she 
might take the form of a tree, usually an oak or an olive. 


NYLEA’S INFLUENCE 


Nylea is worshiped by hunters, but her concerns go far 
beyond humanity’s ability to subsist on the bounty of the 
natural world. She controls the turning of the seasons. 
Usually, she ushers each one in and out on schedule, 
but when angered, she might refuse to change to the 
next season, or even call upon one out of its proper time. 
Mortals pray to her to ward off unseasonable weather, 
both natural and supernatural in origin. 

Nylea is the best archer in the world, and contests of 
archery are often held in her name. Those who hunt 
their own food pray to Nylea for success, and Nylea 
blesses their natural predation. Poachers and those 
who kill for sport, however, know that she loathes such 
activity, and they try to stay hidden from her at all costs. 
Nylea has personally slain many of those who killed 
wantonly in her sacred Nessian Wood. 

Nylea’s association with metamorphosis makes her 
the target of prayers from those who seek to dramati- 
cally change their own nature or identity. She is wor- 
shiped by those who want to reform or transform society 
in ways less violent than those favored by gods such as 
Purphoros and Mogis. She is also revered by those who 
cherish the solitude and serenity of the forest. 

Birth falls under Nylea’s influence as well, and her 
priests often double as midwives in their communities, 
blessing babies as they come into the world. 


NYLEA’s GOALS 

Compared to the other gods, Nylea’s goals are mod- 

est. She wants only to keep the natural world free and 
healthy, shepherd the seasons through their yearly cycle, 
and enjoy the beauty of the land. But in her darker mo- 
ments, she realizes that the very existence of civilization 
on Theros is a mounting threat to nature—perhaps even 
an effort by the rest of the pantheon to destroy her. If it 
were up to her, she might well wipe away all the poleis 
and larger communities, leaving only scattered tribes of 
mortals to live in an enforced balance with nature. She 
isn’t out to eradicate sapient beings, blaming her fellow 
gods for the spread of civilization rather than the mor- 
tals themselves. 


DIVINE RELATIONSHIPS 
Nylea seldom comes into open conflict with the other 
gods, and she would say that all her clashes with them 
result from their encroachment on her territory. The 
most frequent targets of her irritation are the gods who 
encourage the spread of civilization. Heliod and Ephara 
brought law and ambition to mortals, persuading them 
to congregate in stone-walled cities and consider them- 
selves separate from her realm. 
Purphoros oversees some of the natural processes 
of earth and fire that help Nylea’s realm flourish, but 
he also gave mortals the gift of bronze, enabling them 
to make axes and spears. In both his destructive and 
creative guises, Purphoros might threaten what Nylea 
holds dear. As a result, she remains wary of his designs. 
Nylea is disappointed in Karametra, precisely because 
of the overlap in their spheres of influence. Karametra 
insists on transforming nature into a mockery of itself, 
yoking once-wild beasts and contorting plants through 
agriculture to feed the ever-swelling population centers. 
Iroas and Mogis are harbingers of warfare, which is 
always devastating to the natural world. Nylea is virtu- 
ally incapable of distinguishing between the “noble” and 
“brutal” aspects of their shared bailiwick, considering 
all forms of war a senseless waste of life and energy. 
Nylea acknowledges death as a crucial part of the life 
cycle, but scorns Erebos's obsession with the afterlife. 
What matters is that nature takes nourishment from the 
bodies of the deceased, not from the disposition of their 
intangible souls. She blames Erebos, Athreos, and Phe- 
nax in equal measure for the existence of the Returned, 
which she considers abominations. 


WORSHIPING NYLEA 


Mortals all over Theros pray to Nylea when they rely 

on hunting or nature’s whims for their livelihood. Her 
most ardent followers are satyrs, centaurs, humans 
(particularly those who live in Setessa and in the wilds), 
and nymphs of all kinds, especially dryads. Few leonin 
worship any of the gods, but of those who do, many favor 
Nylea with their prayers. 

Nylea blesses those who are kind to animals, consid- 
ering such acts as wordless prayers. Those who must 
kill a dangerous natural animal or cut down trees often 
pray to Nylea for forgiveness, sometimes leaving food for 
other animals or planting new trees as atonement. 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS ё 
7 


NYLEA’S CHAMPIONS 


Alignment: Usually neutral, often good | 
Suggested Classes: Barbarian, cleric, druid, ranger 
Suggested Cleric Domains: Nature 

Suggested Backgrounds: Folk hero, hermit, outlander 


Most champions of Nylea understand the cycles of na- 
ture—embracing life, death, and rebirth. They might 
commit violence when necessary but never revel in it, 
advocating for the proper treatment of animals, plants, 
and the natural world. 


NYLEA'S FAVOR 

Nylea chooses champions who will tirelessly defend the 
natural world, regardless of their mortal ties and asso- 
ciations. She cares more for consistency of actions than 
forvows of loyalty and expressions of devotion. Whether 
you are silently devoted to her or vociferous in your 
praise, it is your actions in her name that will prompt 
her to continue her support—or withdraw it. 

Because her interests are often tied to natural forces, 
Nylea's attentions can be unpredictable. What made the 
god turn her attention to you? What act of charity or feat 
of skill made her think you would be a good champion? 
The Nylea's Favor table offers a handful of suggestions. 


NYLEA's FAVOR 


d6 Circumstance 

1 You were born at dawn on the spring equinox, a sign of 
Nylea’s favor. 

2 You healed an injured wolf, which then revealed itself 
to be Nylea in disguise. 

3 You won an archery contest with a truly stunning shot, 
but afterward chastised onlookers who compared your 
skill to Nylea’s. 

4 Lostin the forest as a child, you were raised by wolves. 
Nylea intervened to teach you language and enable 
you to one day take your place in society as one of her 
champions. 

5  Aunicorn has appeared to you several times in your 
life, often after protecting animals or nature. 

6 You lived alone in the wilderness for a year. In all that 
time you never heard another mortal's voice, but Nylea 
spoke to you regularly. 


DEVOTION TO NYLEA 

Nylea calls upon her followers to defend the natural 
world and oppose those who would bring it harm 
through cruelty or greed. As a follower of Nylea, con- 
sider the ideals on the Nylea's Ideals table as alterna- 
tives to those suggested for your background. 


NYLEA'S IDEALS 


d6 Ideal 

1 Devotion. My devotion to my god is more important to 
me than what she stands for. (Any) 

2 Nature. The beauty of the natural world fills me with 
serenity. (Neutral) 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


d6 Ideal 

3 Freedom. | yearn to run wild. (Chaotic) 

4 Stewardship. We must care for the natural world as it 
cares for us. (Good) 

5  Savagery. It's eat or be eaten, and | plan to be the one 
with the full belly. (Evil) 

6 Purity. | won't sully my body or my soul with the taint 
of civilization. (Any) 


EARNING AND LOSING PIETY 

You increase your piety score to Nylea when you ex- 
pand the god's influence in the world in a concrete way 
through acts such as these: 


* Healing a sick or injured wild animal 

* Stopping those who hunt for sport or profit 
- Proving your worth in a contest of archery 

* Slaying an aberration, a fiend, or an undead 


Your piety score to Nylea decreases if you diminish 
Nylea's influence in the world, fail to defend nature, or 
offend her sensibilities through acts such as these: 


e Killing an animal for any reason other than necessity 

* Dedicating a building or making a sacrifice to any god, 
including Nylea 

* Protecting a city or farm from natural dangers 


NYLEA’S DEVOTEE 
Piety 3+ Nylea trait 


As a devotee of Nylea, you have proven yourself a guard- 
ian of the wilds. You can cast hunter's mark with this 
trait a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier 
(minimum of once). You regain all expended uses when 
you finish a long rest. Wisdom is your spellcasting abil- 
ity for this spell. 


NYLEA’S VOTARY 
Piety 10+ Nylea trait 


You can cast speak with animals with this trait a num- 
ber of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum 
of once). You regain all expended uses when you finish 
a long rest. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for 
this spell. 

In addition, you have advantage on saving throws 
against being poisoned. 


NYLEA'S DISCIPLE 

Piety 25+ Nylea trait 

When a beast is about to attack you, it must make a DC 
15 Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the creature 
must choose a different target, or the attack automati- 
cally misses you. On a successful save, the creature is 
immune to this trait for 24 hours. 


CHAMPION OF THE HUNT 
Piety 50+ Nylea trait 


You can increase your Dexterity or Wisdom score by 2 
and also increase your maximum for that score by 2. 


МҮТН$ OF NYLEA 


Most of the myths about Nylea are cautionary tales about the 
fate of mortals who profane her sacred forests. 

The First Hunt. Each spring, communities observe the 
festival of the First Hunt, the Protokynion. in ancient times, 
the festival involved hunting, but in the modern form of ob- 
servance, it is a day of picnics, outdoor games, and frolicking 
that has little to do with Nylea except that it celebrates the 
full flowering of spring. Tales tell of Nylea being passingly bit- 
ter about the celebration and, annually, visiting a First Hunt 
celebration in disguise. If she finds herself duly honored 
during the revelry, she blesses the event and might person- 
ally participate. If she finds no mention of her works, she 
curses those in attendance, sometimes sending rampaging 
beasts to disrupt the event or turning participants into game 
animals for true hunters to stalk. 

Origin of the Catoblepas, Another Perspective. When a 
herder boasted that his cattle were Theros's finest because 
Heliod and Nylea had created them, Heliod persuaded 
Mogis to curse the cattle, transforming them into the first 
catoblepases. Heliod had hoped to win Nylea’s favor by de- 
fending her honor in this way, but she was outraged to be as- 
sociated with the creation of these abominations. To this day, 
Nylea offers a boon to anyone who hunts down a catoblepas 
and brings its head to her sacred grove. 


Vv. 
£2 


The Three Hunters. Three young men from wealthy families 
were hunting for sport in the Nessian Wood. Nylea accosted 
them before they had taken any prey and gave each man a 
chance to bring her a gift that would atone for his intentions. 
The first man killed a stag and made an offering of it in her 
name, so she turned him into a stag to compensate for the 
one he had killed. The second offered wealth from his family 
coffers, so she turned him into a tree clinging to a cliff face 
by one root. The third, remorseful, threw himself on a bed 
of moss, and a cerulean butterfly came to rest on his hand. 
Carefully, he carried the butterfly back to Nylea. She not only 
spared him, but blessed his house and all his descendants. 

The Tragedy of Arasta. In ages long past, Nylea loved her 
dryad companion, Arasta, as a sister and the two spread 
wonders across Theros. One day, Phenax, envious of the pair 
and stung by some forgotten slight, transformed Arasta into 
a terrible monster to prove that the goddess's love was based 
on beauty, not true kinship. Seeing the unfamiliar creature, 
Nylea was horrified and drove her away. Shattered, Arasta 
retreated and has terrorized the gods' servants ever since. To 
this day, Nylea remains deeply pained by Arasta's loss. Know- 
ing that only Phenax can undo the curse he laid upon the 
dryad, Nylea often sends her champions to learn the secret 
of what might restore her friend. 


1 


70 


Hi 


.PHARIKA | 


' 


God of. Afflict ion 


Pharika is a god of affliction and medicine, alchemy and 
aging. In the earliest days of Theros, Pharika seeded 
the world with countless secret truths—mysteries of 
medicine, minerals with strange properties, nexuses of 
magic, and the like—which she hid among Nylea’s wilds 
and the shadows of Erebos’s Underworld, leaving clues 
where mortals might find them. It isn’t altruism that 
drives her; she studies the innovation and suffering of 
mortals, deciphering in them ever greater mysteries as 
she treats Theros as her personal laboratory. 

Pharika typically takes the form of a green-skinned 
human woman with the lower body of a snake. Her 
hands are thickly scaled and a pair of bronze-scaled 
vipers seamlessly emerge from her chest. She is never 
without her kylix, a drinking cup within which she can 
produce virtually any medicine or toxin. When her aims 
require subtlety, Pharika often takes the form of a ser- 
pent or a medusa, or sometimes an aged human. 

Little escapes Pharika’s cool gaze. Even when out- 
wardly friendly, she is cunning and calculating, watch- 
ing for the slightest sign of weakness or desire that she 
can exploit later. Those who offend her rarely recognize 
their misstep until she strikes. 


PHARIKA'S INFLUENCE 


Pharika represents the duality of life and death distilled 


into a single draught that can serve as tonic or toxin, 
depending on the dosage. She is most associated with 
affliction, whether that phenomenon takes the form of 
a disease, a venom, a drug, or the passage of years. Her 
cures are reliable but come at a cost. In some cases, that 
cost is pain as the medicine courses through the imbib- 
er's body. In other cases, she demands years of life, ei- 
ther from the patient's lifetime or the researcher's labor. 
In her oversight of life and death, Pharika acts asa 
patron of alchemists. Pharmacists offer prayers to her 
while crafting potions, as do the ill or infirm before 
imbibing a supposed remedy. Likewise, a body's slow 
transformation is sacred to her, whether it be the inevi- 
table effects of aging or the petrification of her medusa 
children's victims. 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


PHARIKA’S GOALS 

To Pharika, Theros is an ongoing experiment and mor- 
tals are her agents in carrying it out. Rather than limit 
her knowledge to what her own insights yield, she revels 
in watching mortals decipher the world's wisdom and 
unearth its hidden knowledge, and she delights in see- 
ing each sage interpret their findings in novel ways. She 
is willing to do anything to perpetuate experimentation 
and discovery, even at the cost of turning her less devout 
followers into specimens. 


DIVINE RELATIONSHIPS 

Despite her venomous reputation, Pharika has provided 
nearly every god with a cure or an otherwise essential 
tonic at a crucial moment. As a result, she’srarely in 
outright conflict with her fellow gods, yet she’s always 
willing to jeopardize peace with her peers if it means 
indulging some audacious new experiment. 

The gods of the Underworld have cordial relations 
with Pharika. She and Athreos enjoy each other’s silent 
company, and Erebos appreciates her agenda, which ul- 
timately bolsters his realm. Pharika rankles somewhat 
at the attention Erebos gets from dying mortals, chafing 
at their tendency to appeal to him when they could beg 
her for healing or for a painless death. 

Pharika and the gods of civilization cautiously ma- 
neuver around one another’s territory, with Ephara and 
Karametra recognizing Pharika’s medicinal virtues, 
and she is always seeking subtle ways to use city-states 
in her experiments without provoking her peers. She 
disdains Ephara’s and Karametra’s desire to tame the 
world rather than understand it. 

Pharika has her most complex relationships with the 
gods of knowledge. Pharika loathes that Keranos gifts 
wisdom to the undeserving, while Kruphix represents 
mysteries even she has yet to fathom. 

No god is more precious to Pharika than Nylea. She 
adores Nylea as the source of nature’s abundant bounty 
and delights in Nylea’s warmth. Anyone who threatens 
or offends Nylea is likely to also earn Pharika’s enmity. 


WORSHIPING PHARIKA 


The diseased and the dying alike often make written 
entreaties to Pharika for a remedy. Prayers are written 
on scraps of paper or shards of pottery, sealed in small 
pots, and buried in bogs, leaving them as secrets for 
others to exhume years later. Many people pray to her 
before undergoing a medical procedure, picking herbs, 
or confronting a venomous animal. Nights of a waxing 
crescent moon (roughly the first week of each month, 
when a sliver of moon lingers in the early evening) are 
sacred to Pharika and are thought to be an auspicious 
time to harvest medicinal plants. 

Pharika’s followers include members of several small 
mystery cults, which embrace varying aspects of her 
divine nature. The most infamous of these is the Cult of 
Frozen Faith, led by a medusa. Initiates receive a lethal 
dose of poison, become petrified, and then are restored 
to flesh one year later. Petitioners who have Pharika’s 
favor emerge alive and healthy; those she doesn’t care 
for fail to survive the transformation. 


MYTHS OF PHARIKA 


Tales of Pharika emphasize her secret knowledge, with many 
legends hinting at apocrypha that a listener might track down 
to discover the god's most exalted lore. 

Aestraste's Reward. So impressed was she with the deeds 
of her champion Aestraste that Pharika offered to fill her 
kylix with any draught for Aestraste to imbibe. The champion 
asked to taste the nectar of pure joy, and the god obliged. 
But when Aestraste took a sip, passion took hold of her, and 
she quaffed the entire elixir. Overwhelmed with ecstasy, the 
champion perished, having forgotten that too much of any- 
thing—even happiness—can be fatal. 

The Basilisk's Greed. In Pharika's earliest days, her mind 
overflowed with knowledge, and she retreated to a secret, 
verdant glen. There, she set to scribing her secrets into the 
garden's fruits, hiding within each a dozen deaths and their 
cures. When she retired wearily to bathe, a lizard crept into 
her grove and gobbled up much of the fruit. It's said that 
this original basilisk and its progeny are still heavy with undi- 
gested secrets, and that if basilisk blood is distilled into ink, 
it can be used to write out forgotten lore. 

Day of Affliction. During the first week of the eleventh 
month, Meletis observes Pharika's winter festival, the Chei- 
mazion. The sick and infirm sleep in the god's temples 
during this festival in hopes of receiving a miraculous cure, 


m s 


(^ 
WP 


and the truly devout imbibe near-lethal doses of poison, 
trusting Pharika to oversee their recovery. In some tales, a co- 
bra with rainbow scales appears in Pharika's temple and bites 
some incurable soul. The envenomed victim pitches and 
babbles for three days, but their disjointed words prove to be 
a font of alchemical truths, sometimes bearing the secrets to 
healing others around them. In most of these myths, the vic- 
tim expires at the end of these three days—Pharika’s price for 
sharing her secrets—but in some, the patient recovers, there- 
after exhibiting remarkable resistance to illness and poisons. 

Dragon Balm. Some texts of Pharika claim that within the 
chemical makeup of each individual dragon lies the cure to 
one specific disease or venom. Those desperate for a cure to 
a rare affliction often pray to the goddess to reveal the mon- 
ster that embodies the malady tormenting them. Such in- 
sight, though, rarely decreases the danger of dragon hunting. 

The Medusa's Curse. To seed the world with knowledge, 
Pharika gathered her medusa children and granted a hun- 
dred secrets to each, bidding them to hide their revelations 
throughout the mortal realm. Selfishly, the medusas each 
kept secrets for themselves, using these as currency to bar- 
gain with mortals. Angered that her children would hoard any 
of her secrets, Pharika cursed them, so that they could never 
after behold their own reflections without risking death. 


PHARIKA'S CHAMPIONS 


Alignment: Usually neutral, often evil | 

Suggested Classes: Cleric, druid, ranger, rogue, war- 
lock, wizard 

Suggested Cleric Domains: Death, Knowledge, Life 

Suggested Backgrounds: Criminal, guild artisan, her- 
mit, outlander, sage 


Most champions of Pharika seek to uncover the world’s 
greatest secrets through science, alchemy, and magic. 

They are often enamored with the mysteries of life and 
death, along with snakes or other venomous creatures. 


PHARIKA'S FAVOR 

Pharika craves champions who support her ongoing 
experiments, torment her enemies, and deliver cut- 
ting-edge aid to the suffering. Yet, just because someone 
serves Pharika doesn't mean they are immune to her 
whims. Why did Pharika turn her gaze upon you, and 
how did you survive long enough to earn her approval? 
The Pharika's Favor table provides several suggestions. 


PHARIKA’S FAVOR 

d6  Circumstance 

1 You were born in a plague-struck village's final days, 
ultimately being the only survivor. 

2 Exposure to a rare toxin granted you visions of Pharika, 
and you have sought her wisdom ever since. 

3 Your medical attention proved crucial to a stranger's 
survival, and now your acquaintances periodically fall 
ill, as though Pharika is testing you again and again. 

4  Asagacious serpent once offered you guidance and 
has influenced your studies ever since. 

5 You are dying. As death grows nearer, you are increas- 
ingly adept at deciphering nature's mysteries. 

6 You have no idea why Pharika showed interest in you, 
and you might sometimes wish she hadn't. 


DEVOTION TO PHARIKA 

In accepting Pharika as your patron, you entrust your 
health and your knowledge to her. As her follower, con- 
sider the ideals on the Pharika's Ideals table as alterna- 
tives to those suggested for your background. 


PHARIKA'S IDEALS 

d6 Ideal 

1 Devotion. My devotion to my god is more important to 
me than what she stands for. (Any) 

2 Scholarship. Unlocking the natural world’s secrets is a 
challenge | welcome. (Neutral) 

3 Balance. My work shall save as many lives as it takes, 
balancing the deserving and the insufferable. (Neutral) 

4  Immortality. Those who discover nature's darkest and 
direst secrets earn the right to live forever. (Evil) 

5  Fatalism. Everyone dies. As a result, і may employ their 
brief lives to further my agendas. (Evil) 

6  Tutelage. The world is a deadly classroom, and stu- 
dents need an expert guide to survive. (Neutral) 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


EARNING AND LOSING PIETY 

You increase your piety score to Pharika when you ex- 
pand the god's influence in the world in a concrete way 
through acts such as these: 


* Creating a cure for a dangerous affliction 

* Defeating a powerful foe by using poison 

* Discovering or documenting an unknown people or a 
poorly understood creature 

* Building or restoring a temple to Pharika, or a site 
that glorifies serpentine creatures 


Your piety score to Pharika decreases if you diminish 
Pharika's influence in the world, contradict her ideals, 
or make her look ridiculous or ineffectual through acts 
such as these: 


* Destroying alchemical, medical, pathological, or simi- 
lar research 

* Performing a notable act of healing without exacting a 
significant price 

• Slaying a medusa or serpent 


PHARIKA'S DEVOTEE 
Piety 3* Pharika trait 


As a devotee of Pharika, you have power over affliction. 
You can cast ray of sickness with this trait a number 

of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of 
once). You regain all expended uses when you finish 

a long rest. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for 

this spell. 


PHARIKA'S VOTARY 
Piety 10+ Pharika trait 


Pharika’s blessing shields you from most maladies. 
You have advantage on saving throws against being poi- 
soned, and you are immune to disease. 


РНАВІКА'Ѕ DISCIPLE 
Piety 25+ Pharika trait 


Pharika blesses you with Pharika’s Balm, an effect that 
can cure or enfeeble. As an action, you can touch a crea- 
ture and choose one of the following: 


The target regains hit points equal to 1d8 + your Wis- 
dom modifier, and you can cure the target of one dis- 
ease or neutralize one poison affecting it. 

The target must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution sav- 
ing throw, or for 1 minute, the target deals only half 
damage with weapon attacks. The target can repeat 
the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending 
the effect on a success. 


. 


You can use this action a number of times equal to 
your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once). You regain 
all expended uses when you finish a long rest. 


CHAMPION OF AFFLICTION 
Piety 50+ Pharika trait 


You can increase your Dexterity or Wisdom score by 2 
and also increase your maximum for that score by 2. 


КЕРЕҢ ` -— = 


HGH РНЕМАХ Ëi 


God of Deception 

Phenax is the masked patron of lies and cheats. He is 
Heliod’s ethical antithesis, governing the spheres of 
gambling, deception, and betrayal. Phenax was once 

a mortal who was trapped in the Underworld, but he 
learned how to forsake his identity to prevent Erebos 
from detecting what he was doing. He crossed back 
over the Rivers That Ring the World wrapped in the 
tattered cloak of Athreos, the River Guide, who ushers 
the dead to their final rest. Hidden by illusion as he was, 
neither Athreos nor Erebos could find Phenax and bring 
him back. 

Able to play whatever role the situation calls for, Phe- 
пах is a consummate actor. His incisive wit and cunning 
enable him to read the desires of his marks, adjusting 
his approach to suit the moment. In his rare moments of 
candor, Phenax is calm and calculating, always looking 
toward his next scheme. 

Phenax is ashadowy and mysterious figure. When ap- 
pearing before mortals, he prefers the form of a willowy 
humanoid with ashen gray skin, clad in elegant robes. 
He has also been known to appear in a variety of animal 
forms, including the shapes of asps, mockingbirds, or 
rats. Regardless of his shape, a mask forever conceals 
the blank face of the first Returned. 


PHENAX'S INFLUENCE 


Subtlety and manipulation—of mind, word, and deed— 
are the cornerstones of Phenax's power and his influ- 
ence over mortals and immortals alike. Even gods enjoy 
hearing what they prefer to hear instead of the truth, 
and Phenax is happy to give them what they want. 

He takes pleasure in finding ways to subvert or cor- 
rupt champions of law, order, and justice, turning them 
to his cause. Whether by feeding the hubris of a cham- 
pion of Heliod or subverting the moral code of a stalwart 
of Iroas, he tempts mortals by confronting them with 
seemingly inconsequential decisions, each of which of- 
fers an opportunity for the person to compromise their 
principles. One by one, these acts move the needle of 
a person's moral gauge by a small amount. Over time, 
these choices accumulate until the individual's fall from 
grace is complete. 


PHENAX’S GOALS 
Phenax doesn't want to rule Nyx. He is the perennial 
outsider, existing only to disrupt the plans of his fellow 


gods. Every lie, every betrayal, delights him as it sows 
discord in the world. He respects a well-planned and ex- 
ecuted grift or heist, sometimes rewarding able follow- 
ers with opportunities to serve as his champions. 

As the metaphorical progenitor of the Returned, Phe- 
nax also takes time to provide shelter and opportunities 
for his children to disrupt the mortal world. 


DIVINE RELATIONSHIPS 

It stands to reason that the god of secrets, deception, 
and betrayal isn’t close with the rest of the pantheon. 
This is not to say that Phenax doesn’t have active re- 
lationships with others in the pantheon, but his posi- 
tion as the patron of lies doesn’t lead to close, lasting 
friendships. 

Erebos and Athreos despise Phenax, which delights 
him to no end. Phenax revels in the fact that, as a lowly 
mortal, he was able to outwit both the Lord of the Un- 
derworld and the River Guide. Still bitter over Phenax's 
deception, Erebos concocts ways to torment the upstart 
god. Were he to discover a method to slay Phenax and 
return him to the Underworld, the god of the dead would 
pursue it over all other goals. 

Phenax finds Heliod and Iroas overbearing and insuf- 
ferable. Both represent ideologies diametrically opposed 
to Phenax's, and both have followers who regularly try 
to foil his schemes. In turn, Phenax does his best to 
upend their plans through lies and deception. After all, a 
fair fight isn't worth fighting. 

Nowhere is Phenax's commitment to upending the 
status quo and angering his fellow gods more evident 
than in his role in the rise of Xenagos, the now de- 
stroyed god of revels. Xenagos's attacks left many of the 
gods disconnected from their followers, inciting a panic 
in Nyx. Phenax, basking in the chaos of Xenagos's plot, 
found myriad ways to covertly aid him until the satyr's 
apotheosis. Helping another mortal ascend to godhood 
was, to Phenax, the ultimate subversion of authority. 


WORSHIPING PHENAX 


Every lie is an homage to Phenax. Because his most de- 
vout followers are criminals and gamblers, his influence 
is keenly felt in gambling halls and dens of thieves. But 
everyone has their own reasons to stray from the truth 
at times, and thus, they also find small ways to seek 
Phenax's favor as they go about their daily lives. 

Formal services to Phenax are conducted at night, 
with the most sacred rituals performed on nights of the 
new moon. Offerings are made to attract Phenax's favor, 
with valuables from successful robberies, parchment 
filled with lies, or loaded dice being thrown into deep 
crags or buried at crossroads. Such sacrifices often van- 
ish soon after, claimed by the god or his servants. De- 
vout criminals often offer Phenax stolen goods as part of 
their preparations for premeditated crimes. 

Phenax is worshiped openly in the necropoleis of 
Asphodel and Odunos, though the Returned who are 
loyal to Erebos's agent, Tymaret, refuse to worship the 
god they're hunting (see chapter 3). Somber ceremonies 
are intoned to bless the golden funeral masks the Re- 
turned wear. 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


73 


PHENAX’S CHAMPIONS 


Alignment: Usually chaotic, often neutral 

Suggested Classes: Bard, cleric, monk, rogue, warlock 

Suggested Cleric Domains: Trickery 

Suggested Backgrounds: Charlatan, criminal, enter- 
tainer, sailor (pirate), urchin 


Most champions of Phenax are exemplars of deceit, mo- 
tivated by greed, revenge, or a good swindle. They have 
chosen to serve a mortal who ascended to godhood, pos- 
sibly because they want to emulate him. 


PHENAX'S FAVOR 

Phenax expects his champions to be cunning and 
self-sufficient, much as he was when he escaped the 
Underworld. He has greatrespectfor a sound plan that 
is craftily executed and might offer all manner of clever 
assistance to mortals he deems worthy. 

What did you do to garner his attention? What set 
you apart in his eyes from petty schemers, grifters, and 
criminals? What made him think you would be a good 
champion? The Phenax's Favor table offers a handful of 
suggestions. 


PHENAX's FAVOR 

d6  Circumstance 
You were born at midnight under the new moon. 

2 One of your parents is a champion of Phenax. 
You pulled off a daring theft or escaped from confine- 
ment at a young age. 

4 You have proven yourself a capable liar and teller of tall 
tales. 

5 You dedicated your life to upsetting the balance of 
power in a corrupt polis. 

6 You have no idea why Phenax showed interest in you, 
and you might sometimes wish he hadn't. 


DEVOTION TO PHENAX 

Following Phenax means devoting yourself to a life of 
trickery and guile. To a champion of Phenax, a life with- 
out risk is no life at all. Some rules are meant to be bro- 
ken, some secrets meant to be shared, and order must 
be upended from time to time. As a follower of Phenax, 
consider the ideals on the Phenax's Ideals table as alter- 
natives to those suggested for your background. 


PHENAX'S IDEALS 


d6 Ideal 

1  Devotion. My devotion to my god is more important to 
me than what he stands for. (Any) 

2 Pragmatism. The ends justify the means; | do whatever 
it takes to win. (Evil) 

3  Duplicity. | lie when it suits me, which makes things so 
much easier. (Chaotic) 

4 Secrecy. All deception requires secrecy, but not all se- 
crets are meant to deceive. (Any) 

5 Luck. Want more luck? Take more chances! (Chaotic) 

6 Adaptability. Plans change, circumstances go awry. | 
must bend in response to changes, not break. (Any) 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


EARNING AND LOSING PIETY 

You increase your piety score to Phenax when you ex- 
pand the god’s influence in the world in a concrete way 
through acts such as these: 

- Helping a fugitive escape justice 

* Pulling off a daring robbery 

* Obstruct champions of other gods 

e Building or restoring a temple to Phenax 


Your piety score to Phenax decreases if you diminish 
Phenax's influence in the world, contradict his ideals, 
or make him look ridiculous or ineffectual through acts 
such as these: 


* Forthrightly assisting lawgivers in their duties 
e Swearing and then honoring an oath 
- Bringing order in times of chaos 


PHENAX'S DEVOTEE 

Piety 3+ Phenax trait 

As a devotee of Phenax, you have proven yourself 
accomplished at deception. You can call on Phenax's 
blessing and cast disguise self with this trait. While the 
spell is active, your shadow still resembles your origi- 
nal form. You can cast the spell in this way a number 
of times equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum 
of once). You regain all expended uses when you finish 
along rest. Charisma is your spellcasting ability for 
this spell. 


PHENAX'S VOTARY 
Piety 10+ Phenax trait 


Your words are inspired by Theros's greatest liar. You 
have advantage on Charisma (Deception) checks. 


PHENAX'S DISCIPLE 

Piety 25+ Phenax trait 

When you are hidden from a creature and miss it 
with an attack, making the attack doesn't reveal 
your position. 


CHAMPION OF DECEPTION 
Piety 50+ Phenax trait 


You can increase your Dexterity or Charisma score by 2 
and also increase your maximum for that score by 2. 


4 


MYTHS оғ РНЕМАХ 
The tales told of Phenax's deeds speak of his duplicity, cun- 
ning, and wit. 

The Path of Phenax. Phenax was once a mortal who, like all 
mortals, passed on to Erebos's care in the Underworld when 
his time among the living came to an end. But Phenax found 
a way to escape the Underworld by sacrificing his identity to 
the memory-draining waters therein. He was able to cross 
the Rivers That Ring the World wrapped in a shred of Athre- 
os's cloak. Since he had no identity, Athreos couldn't detect 
him, and thus Erebos couldn't use his great lash to pull Phe- 
nax back. When he emerged back into the realm of mortals, 
he did so as the first of the Returned. In time, others discov- 
ered this quandary of metaphysics, which is now known as 
the Path of Phenax. 

Black Oak of Odunos. Before Odunos became a necropolis, 
itwas a thriving city akin to Akros or Meletis. When the city 
fell before Phenax's assembled forces, some ofthe populace 
begged the god of lies to spare them the touch of Erebos's 
dread lash. Never one to miss an opportunity to cheat Ere- 
bos, Phenax made a solemn promise to those asking for his 
mercy, assuring them that they wouldn't be forced into the 
Underworld, on his honor. Soon afterward, the Returned that 
had invaded the city murdered these people to the last one— 
whereupon Phenax, true to his word, bound their bodies and 


m 


souls to a great oak, making a terrifying amalgam of undeath 
to guard Odunos and haunt the living for eternity. 

Feud with Nylea. A pair of accomplished hunters, both 
fervent followers of Nylea, had a bet with one another to 
prove who was better with a bow. After countless tests found 
them equally matched, the hunters' rivalry drew Phenax's 
attention. Assuming the form of a dryad, Phenax goaded 
and taunted the hunters. Though amusing at first, Phenax's 
words cut deep, making the hunters careless. Thus, when 
the dryad suggested a blindfolded test of marksmanship, the 
hunters agreed. Once blinded, Phenax positioned the hunt- 
ers to shoot one another. In the moment they fired, though, 
Nylea noticed Phenax's trick. She curved her hunters' arrows 
mid-flight and multiplied their number. Phenax's disguise 
shattered as he was riddled with arrows that pinned him to 
a great tree. Nylea appeared to the trapped god, mocked his 
pointless duplicity, and warned him never to threaten her 
followers again. She then left him to struggle free from the 
deeply embedded arrows, an escape that took him over a 
week. During that time, the god concocted plot after plot to 
have his revenge on Nylea. Some tales claim that this em- 
barrassment directly led to tragedy for Nylea's favorite dryad 
companion, while others warn that Phenax's revenge has 
only just begun. 


m 


E i 


76 


15] PURPHOROS ^: ^ 
God of the Forge Rie 


owe = 


Purphoros is the god of the forge, the restless earth, and 
fire. He rules the raw creative force that infuses sapient 
minds. Purphoros is also the god of artisans, obsession, 
and the cycle of creation and destruction. 

As a forge radiates heat in the area around it, Pur- 
phoros's influence provides inspiration to mortals. He 
makes exquisitely crafted objects almost constantly, 
sometimes absentmindedly working while he holds 
conversations with the other gods, only to destroy the 
finished product and begin again. Impulsive and mercu- 
rial, Purphoros is prone to bouts of either joyous produc- 
tivity or frustrated anger. He often feels constrained by 
the limits of imagination, yearning to realize ideas that 
seem just out of reach. 

Purphoros's preferred form is that of a muscular man 
whose coal-hued skin is mostly covered in mutable 
organic bronze. He might also appear in the form of a 
fiery phoenix or a bull made of cooling lava, and for that 
reason, both of those creatures are associated with him. 
When angered, he might appear as an enormous mass 
of lava, a blazing fire, or a volcanic eruption. Mortals 
who see Purphoros in one of those forms seldom live to 
tell about it. 


PURPHOROS'S INFLUENCE 


The raw creative force that Purphoros embodies is 
chaotic, but Purphoros isn't a god of unbridled chaos. 
Rather, he shows mortals how to harness that primal 
energy, shaping it through passion and labor into some- 
thing usable. 

Purphoros is primarily associated with forging, met- 
allurgy, and related activities. It was his followers who 
first brought bronze to Theros, and a few of his most fa- 
vored have begun working with a new metal—iron—said 
to come directly from their god's forge-fires. 

Though Purphoros is largely interested in physical 
craft, he has influence over all forms of creation. Ker- 
anos also inspires new ideas, but it is Purphoros who 
oversees the advancement of the craft that brings these 
ideas to life in the world. 

Purphoros is always ready to obliterate what is to 
make room for what could be, and to start the cycle 
again when what could be becomes what is. When he is 
inspired, the night sky glitters with new constellations, 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


and anvilwrought creatures appear in the countryside. 
When he is wrathful, stars vanish in molten rain, and 
his hammer blows annihilate whole mountaintops. 


PunPHOROS's GOALS 

Purphoros acts not because of grand plans or high 
ideals, but on the whims of his restless, creative mind. 
On the rareoccasions when he contemplates what he 
would do if he were ascendant in the pantheon, his most 
fervent wish is to be left alone. To Purphoros, that would 
mean spending time by himself in his forge, creating 
anything he desires. But it also would mean being free 
to uproot mountains, topple cities, and reroute rivers 
without any of the other gods interfering. 


DIVINE RELATIONSHIPS 
Purphoros has few strong relationships with his fellow 
gods, considering most of them arrogant ingrates. Ac- 
cording to legend, it was he who created the weapons of 
the gods, asking nothing in return. But his infrequent 
though memorable bouts of destructive fury have earned 
him more ill will in the pantheon than he realizes. 
Heliod despises Purphoros's unpredictable impulses 
even as he envies the forge god’s ability to create grand 
works. Purphoros resents Heliod’s attempts to impose 
laws that constrain the passion of creation. In many 
ways, the two gods represent opposing approaches to 
the contradictions and challenges of mortal life, and 
they have more than once fought titanic battles in Nyx. 
Thassa is Purphoros's closest ally in the pantheon. 
Imbued as she is with the malleable, quenching power 
of water, she knows that he can neither destroy her 
waves nor reforge them. Because she has no fear of him, 
she treats him as a friend. Purphoros frequently makes 
wondrous gifts for Thassa, and her underwater palace 
holds countless unique creations of the god of the forge. 
Purphoros holds Kruphix in contempt for hobbling 
his mind after he engaged in a particularly destructive 
battle with Heliod. The forge god spent years addled and 
incomplete. He has since recovered his faculties, but he 
mourns the things he might have made during that lost 
time. Taking revenge on Kruphix would require careful 
planning, however, and Purphoros is unlikely to under- 
take such an effort unless another god goads him into it. 
Ephara and Karametra are, like Purphoros, deeply 
involved in the project of civilization. Purphoros's desire 
to overturn the established order with violence stands in 
stark contrast to their measured ways. As a result, Pur- 
phoros stands aloof from them. 


WORSHIPING PURPHOROS 


Purphoros holds dominion over everything that springs 
from mortal ingenuity. Most artisans say a small prayer 
to him upon beginning or completing the construction of 
nearly anything, from swords to fortresses to ships. 
Naturally, Purphoros is strongly associated with the 
forge, and nearly every smithy on Theros is a sort of ad 
hoc temple to him. Charms and idols of Purphoros hang 
from the walls in such places, intended both to inspire 
the artisans and protect them against accidents. Regard- 
less of their professions, worshipers of Purphoros often 
light small fires in the god's honor, burning wooden 
crafts or drawings of their inventions to gain his favor. 


MYTHS OF PURPHOROS 


The myths about Purphoros revolve around one of two 
themes: his wonderful creations or his explosive anger. 

The Gift of Bronze. Long ago, mortals on Theros fought 
and hunted using weapons made of stone and wood. Accord- 
ing to legend, it was a satyr smith named Tecton who dis- 
covered how to refine copper ore and work it into tools and 
weapons. Purphoros, delighted, saw this as the mortals’ first 
tentative steps toward true craft. Some smiths, hastily copy- 
ing Tecton’s methods, devised a way to blend copper and 
arsenic into a crude form of bronze, but the forging method 
was dangerous and often yielded defective results. 

To reward the smith who took the first steps, Purphoros 
appeared to Tecton and granted the satyr the secret of smelt- 
ing copper and tin into true bronze. The manufacture and 
use of bronze weapons spread across Theros, launching an 
age in which heroes conquered the wilds and founded great 
civilizations. Bronze is still the most used metal on Theros— 
and will remain so, at least until Purphoros decides that 
more than a few are ready for the secret of iron. 

Purphoros's Twin. When the world was young, Purphoros 
was jealous of Iroas and Mogis and wanted a twin of his 
own. He created Petros, a Nyxborn double of himself crafted 
of divine bronze with a touch of mortal flesh. Petros aged as 
the eons passed, and Purphoros was forced to patch cracks 


(0) 
Lin 


with strips of bronze and refill the vessel of his Nyxborn twin. 
Petros lacks the spark of true life, though, and can't speak. 
He toils day and night in Purphoros's forge, making wonders 
that would shame any mortal smith but can never match Pur- 
phoros's work in beauty or originality. 

The Stone Winter. In Theros's earliest days, the people 
vociferously honored Heliod, Nylea, and Thassa for the com- 
forts of nature. Gradually, Purphoros grew bitter that mortals 
never acknowledged his flames, which kept the earth warm 
and fertile. So, Purphoros quenched the world's core. For a 
year, a lifeless winter gripped the world, with neither the sun 
nor the seasons warming the corpse-chill earth. Ultimately, 
it was the mortal engineer Chersio who brought about the 
winter's end. Instead of cursing the situation, Chersio sought 
a solution, creating a hypocaust system to bring warmth to 
her community. Delighted with the innovation, Purphoros 
waited until Chersio completed and lit her substructure fur- 
nace. When she did, the god returned warmth to the entire 
world. Today, an autumnal festival called the Kindling or the 
Forge-Lighting (the Chalcanapsion) lends its name to the 
seventh month in the Meletian calendar. During this festival, 
worshipers keep a bonfire burning from sundown to sunrise, 
acknowledging that Purphoros warms the earth and makes 
the harvest possible. 


PURPHOROS’S CHAMPIONS 


Alignment: Usually chaotic, often neutral 

Suggested Classes: Barbarian, bard, cleric, 
fighter, sorcerer 

Suggested Cleric Domains: Forge (described in Xana- 
thar's Guide to Everything), Knowledge 

Suggested Backgrounds: Acolyte, entertainer, 
guild artisan 


Most champions of Purphoros are unswerving advo- 
cates of passion and creativity who change the world by 
doing what they believe is right in the moment. 


PURPHOROS’S FAVOR 

Purphoros is notoriously impulsive, often selecting 
champions based on momentary whims. Despite this 
seemingly blasé attitude, he is dedicated to all his cham- 
pions, no matter how they came into his service. 

What made the forge god turn his attention to you? 
What set you apart from the masses of people who 
offer him prayers and sacrifice? What whim came over 
him that made you the perfect choice in the moment he 
tapped you? The Purphoros's Favor table offers a hand- 
ful of suggestions. 

Purphoros's mood is highly changeable, and having 
his favor doesn't always mean having his attention. But 
if you follow your passions and do what you believe is 
right, he will stay true to you as well. 


PURPHOROS's FAVOR 
d6  Circumstance 

1 Mount Velus erupted at the moment of your birth, sig- 
nifying Purphoros's blessing of the event. 

2 Asa young artist, you breathed the intoxicating fumes 
ofa volcano and found mystical inspiration. 

3 You are an artisan who crafted a work of such high 
quality that Purphoros took notice. 

4 After you were orphaned by a fire at your parents' 
forge, Purphoros took you under his protection. 

5 Your parent or mentor was a master artisan, and you 
also yearn to create something worthy of a god's at- 
tention. 

6  Asareckless youth, you joined a group of young artists 
and rabble-rousers who sought to tear down the estab- 
lished order in Purphoros's name. 


DEVOTION TO PURPHOROS 

Purphoros encourages freedom and self-expression, so 
it is only natural that his champions follow him for many 
different reasons. As a follower of Purphoros, consider 
the ideals on the Purphoros's Ideals table as alternatives 
to those suggested for your background. 


PuRPHOROS'Ss IDEALS 
d6 Ideal 
1  Devotion. My devotion to my god is more important to 
me than what he stands for. (Any) 
2 Passion. | will follow my heart and help others do the 
same. (Chaotic) 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


d6 Ideal 

3  Aspiration. With Purphoros's blessing, | will create 
something magnificent. (Any) 

4  Change.The old must be swept away to make room for 
the new. (Chaotic) 

5 Generosity. | want to create things that will enrich the 
world. (Good) 

6 Rage. | follow my passions, no matter how dark they 
might seem to others. (Evil) 


EARNING AND LOSING PIETY 

You increase your piety score to Purphoros when you 
expand the god's influence in the world in a concrete 
way through acts such as these: 


* Fighting against those who would rule over others 

* Taking decisive action on impulse 

* Destroying something that has outlived its usefulness 
* Creating something wondrous in Purphoros's name 


Your piety score to Purphoros decreases if you diminish 
Purphoros's influence in the world, work against free- 
dom or self-expression, or allow tyranny to take hold 
through acts such as these: 


• Following an unjust law despite your misgivings 
- Creating something shoddy ог flawed 
• Backing down from a fight or a contest 


PURPHOROS’S DEVOTEE 
Piety 3+ Purphoros trait 


As a devotee of Purphoros, you have drawn the notice 
of the forge god with your skill. You can cast shield of 
faith with this trait, requiring no material components, 
a number of times equal to your Intelligence modifier 
(minimum of once). You regain all expended uses when 
you finish a long rest. 

In addition, you know the mending cantrip. Intelli- 
gence is your spellcasting ability for these spells. 


PURPHOROS’S VOTARY 
Piety 10+ Purphoros trait 


You can cast heat metal with this trait, requiring no ma- 
terial components. Once you cast the spell in this way, 
you can't do so again until you finish a long rest. Intelli- 
gence is your spellcasting ability for this spell. 

In addition, you have advantage on saving throws 
against being knocked prone. 


PURPHOROS’S DISCIPLE 

Piety 25+ Pur phoros trait 

While you are standing and an effect would push you 1 
foot or more, you can use your reaction to not be pushed. 


CHAMPION OF THE FORGE 
Piety 50+ Purphoros trait 


You can increase your Strength or Intelligence score by 
2 and also increase your maximum for that score by 2. 


THASSA Е 
God of the Sea : 


Thassa is the god of the sea, aquatic creatures, and the 
unknown depths. She also holds sway over less tangible 
concepts such as ancient knowledge, long voyages, and 
gradual change. 

Impassive and slow to anger, Thassa is secure in the 
knowledge that there are no mortals and few gods who 
can threaten her status. Once her ire is aroused, how- 
ever, it is as unstoppable as a cresting wave. She often 
speaks in the future tense, referring to what tomorrow 
will bring. She seldom laughs, and when she does, it is 
usually out of smugness rather than genuine mirth. 

Thassa usually appears to mortals in the form of a 
female triton-like being with octopus-tentacle hair and 
a crown of crab legs. She seldom adopts the same size 
as her followers, preferring to be seen from a distance 
as she towers over the ocean. When she moves closer to 
the view of mortals, she takes many other forms, often 
shifting from one to another: a giant squid, an ocean 
storm, a school of sharks, a fog bank, or a crab, her fa- 
vored animal. She sometimes speaks out of the ocean it- 
self, in droplets hissing across the surface of the waves. 


THASSA’S INFLUENCE 


To most mortals, Thassa is the sea, and the sea is 
Thassa. The wind and waves, the tides, and the ocean's 
bounty, ranging from small fish to the enormous krak- 
ens—all these are Thassa's dominion. The sea has many 
metaphorical aspects that Thassa oversees as well: 
ancient knowledge, long-term change, introspection, 
voyaging, and repetitive patterns such as the tides. 

Thassa governs the slow changes wrought by the 
passage of time, such as the weathering of rocks and 
the erosion of beaches. Where Nylea controls the eter- 
nal cycle of the seasons and Kruphix monitors the flow 
of time, Thassa holds sway over the slow-acting but 
irresistible forces that alter the world over hundreds or 
thousands of years. 

Krakens and other behemoths of the deepest oceans 
move at Thassa's command. She is protective of what 
she calls the greatest of her children, and she usually 
keeps them out of harm's way in the darkest depths. A 
mighty kraken sighted close to shore is a sure sign of 
Thassa's displeasure. 


THAssA's GOALS 

Thassa is never satisfied with the status quo, and she 
also never advocates hasty, uncontrolled change. She 
constantly resculpts the physical world, altering coast- 
lines and upending familiar trade routes. There is no ul- 
timate goal to this ongoing transformation; the purpose 
is change itself. Thassa believes that change is essential 
to existence, and she opposes anyone who tries to estab- 
lish or maintain a permanent order to the universe. She 
aids and inspires forces of change, the rivers that wear 
down mountains and the tides that claim whole con- 
tinents. She sometimes seems disinterested in the in- 
trigues of the present, even in her own current schemes, 
as her thoughts drift toward what the future holds. 


DIVINE RELATIONSHIPS 

Thassa disdains the shortsightedness of her fellow 
gods, most of whom have convinced themselves that 
they can impose lasting order on the cosmos. At the 
same time, her realm is unassailable, and she believes 
that the changes she advocates are inevitable in the long 
term. So although Thassa frequently disagrees with the 
other gods, she doesn’t fear them. 

Heliod considers Thassa his favorite sibling, despite 
her unwillingness to agree with his plan for a perma- 
nent order. Thassa, who rules depths that have never 
seen the sun, considers most of Heliod’s schemes point- 
less and opposes them if they seem to threaten harm. 

Thassa took pity on Purphoros and aided him when 
Kruphix hobbled his mind, and Purphoros has not for- 
gotten it. The two of them agree that old things must 
make way for new things, but Purphoros’s bursts of 
destructive energy stand in sharp opposition to Thassa’s 
gradual alterations. Purphoros regularly makes gifts for 
Thassa, most recently gifting her a new spear to replace 
her lost weapon. 

Thassa has little use for the gods who oversee work 
she believes best left to mortals: Ephara with her cities, 
Karametra with her fields, Pharika with her tinctures, 
Mogis and Iroas with their armies. To Thassa’s mind, 
her peers are building castles in the sand, unaware or 
unmindful that the tide will sweep them away. 


WORSHIPING THASSA 


Most of Thassa’s dedicated worshipers are tritons, and 


the vast majority of tritons are wholly devoted to Thassa. 
Tritons spend much of their lives in Thassa’s realm, 
with their god omnipresent. They weave prayers to 
Thassa into nearly everything they do. 

Among humans, Thassa is worshiped by those who 
rely on bountiful seas for sustenance or calm waters for 
safety. Sailors, fishers, and residents of Theros's coasts 
and islands all pay her at least nominal respect and 
sacrifice. Her center of worship on land is in the coastal 
polis of Meletis, where sailors and philosophers pray to 
her for guidance. The week-long Lyokymion festival (the 
Feast of the Melting Swell) marks the start of the new 
year by celebrating the bounty of the sea. 

Thassa’s most fervent human worshipers offer prayers 
at high and low tide. If possible, they do so at the water’s 
edge. At low tide they walk barefoot out onto the tidal 
flats, relishing the touch of Thassa’s seabed. 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


79 


THASSA’S CHAMPIONS 


Alignment: Usually neutral 
Suggested Classes: Cleric, fighter, rogue, wizard ` 
Suggested Cleric Domains: Knowledge, Tempest 
Suggested Backgrounds: Acolyte, outlander, 

sage, sailor 
Thassa’s champions typically work on behalf of change, 
embrace new ideas, don’t automatically defend the sta- 
tus quo, and wish to serve the god who controls pound- 
ing waves and massive krakens. 


THASSA’S FAVOR 

In much the same way that the sea and its secrets sim- 
ply exist, Thassa trusts that the lives and actions of her 
champions will serve her long-term goals because of 
their connection to her. What made the god of the sea 
turn her attention to you or how did she show her inter- 
est? The Thassa’s Favor table offers a few possibilities. 


THASSA’S FAVOR 
d6 Circumstance 

1 You nearly drowned in a shipwreck, but Thassa an- 
swered your prayers for deliverance. 

2 You were found on the shore as a newborn, in a basket 
woven of ocean grasses. 

3 You dreamed of a great kraken. When you followed 
your dreams to the sea, the kraken appeared to you 
and gave you Thassa’s blessing. 

4 You grew up on a fishing boat, and your parents taught 
you Thassa's rites. 

5 You were born with a pearl in your mouth, an obvious 
sign of Thassa's favor. You still have the pearl. 

6 You have no idea why Thassa showed interest in you, 
and you might sometimes wish she hadn't. 


DEVOTION TO THASSA 

Following Thassa means devoting yourself to a particu- 
lar way of perceiving the world. Thassa herself seldom 
takes a stand on moral issues, preferring to let matters 
play out, but her mortal champions can’t usually afford 
to be so patient. As a follower of Thassa, consider the 
ideals on the Thassa’s Ideals table as alternatives to 
those suggested for your background. 


THASSA’S IDEALS 

d6 Ideal 

1 Devotion. My devotion to my god is more important to 
me than what she stands for. (Any) 

2 Knowledge. | will learn the secrets of the hidden 
depths. (Any) 

3 Freedom. The sea can take me anywhere, and I'm not 
going to tie myself down. (Chaotic) 

4 Bounty. The ocean always provides, and | will share its 
gifts with those less fortunate. (Good) 

5 Change. Everything's just waiting to be something else, 
including me. (Chaotic) 

6 Power. Like the waves, | answer only to Thassa. (Evil) 


CHAPTER 2 | GODS OF THEROS 


EARNING AND LOSING PIETY 

You increase your piety score to Thassa when you ex- 
pand the god's influence in the world in a concrete way 
through acts such as these: 


• Supporting those who would reform or overturn 
institutions 

* Preventing cataclysmic change 

- Offering a treasure to the sea 

* Defending or maintaining a temple to Thassa 


Your piety score to Thassa decreases if you diminish 
Thassa's influence in the world, contradict her ideal of 
gradual change, or attempt to impose artificial order 
through acts such as these: 


* Trying to keep a secret from Thassa 

* Using magic to calm the sea's fury 

» Upholding an institution not devoted to Thassa 

- Bowing to the desires or demands of another god 


THASSA’S DEVOTEE 
Piety 3+ Thassa trait 


As a devotee of Thassa, you have proven yourself a wor- 
thy representative of the god of the sea. You can cast 
fog cloud with this trait. Fog created in this way smells 
strongly of the sea. You can cast the spell in this way 

a number of times equal to your Intelligence modifier 
(minimum of once). You regain all expended uses when 
you finish a long rest. Intelligence is your spellcasting 
ability for this spell. 


THASSA’S VOTARY 

Piety 10+ Thassa trait 

You can cast blink with this trait. Once you cast the 
spell in this way, you can’t do so again until you finish 
a long rest. Intelligence is your spellcasting ability for 
this spell. 


THASSA’S DISCIPLE 

Piety 25+ Thassa trait 

You are inspired by the tempestuous, uncontrollable 
nature of the sea; you have advantage on saving throws 
against being charmed or restrained. 


CHAMPION OF THE SEA 
Piety 50+ Thassa trait 


You can increase your Dexterity or Intelligence score by 
2 and also increase your maximum for that score by 2. 


MYTHS OF THASSA 


Tales about Thassa typically demonstrate that she is often 
patient, but never kind. 

Callaphe the False. During the last great Silence of the 
gods, a triton appeared, impersonated a mariner named 
Callaphe, and traveled the waves aboard Callaphe’s living 
ship, The Monsoon. This false Callaphe misled the tritons 
with false prophecies and pulled a kraken from the depths, 
hoping to harness his power. When the Silence was lifted and 
Thassa returned to the world, she struck the impostor down 
with such fury that she shattered her bident. Purphoros, 
remembering Thassa’s kindness to him on many occasions, 
replaced her sacred weapon. 

Dreams inthe Deep. While Purphoros is renowned for his 
endless creations and desires to bring new ideas into being, 
Thassa secretly shares similar creative desires. Endlessly 
bored with the predictable denizens of the land and sky, in 
the deepest ocean trenches, Thassa wills immortal dreams 
and nightmares into being. Delicate beauty, undulating 
grace, and tentacular terrors are birthed in the absolute dark, 
iterate for generations, and suffer swift extinctions at the 
god's whim, never knowing the sun's touch. Sapient mortals 
aren’t welcome in these maddening ateliers; Thassa remains 
bitterly unwilling to reveal her work until her creations—and 
the time—are absolutely perfect. 


Every Tear the Sea. Few myths tell of those who escaped 
Thassa’s wrath. This isn’t one of them. When the infamous 
explorer Rasiao failed to steal one of Thassa’s Tidelock Pearls, 
wave-controlling treasures protected by vicious mollusks, 
she spent years avoiding the waves before finding her way 
back to the mainland. Although she'd failed to abscond with 
one of Thassa's treasures, she'd avoided the sea god's wrath, 
a claim she valued more preciously than gold. For years, 
Rasiao lived far from ocean or river, making her home in the 
driest reaches of Theros. She lived a long life, but on one trip 
to Akros to resupply and brag, she drowned in a bowl of ox 
stew. Those who found Rasiao discovered a pearl, too large 
to pass her lips, lodged in her mouth. Fearing further repri- 
sal, Rasiao's daughters committed their mother's body to the 
Deyda River and Thassa's clutches. The explorer's daughters 
never forgot that just as countless drops make the sea, so 
too is every raindrop, tear, and cup part of Thassa's domain. 

Thief's Fate. According to legend, a mortal sailor once 
stole Thassa's bident and used it to sink an enemy fleet. 
Thassa cared nothing for the vanquished fleet, but punished 
the sailor for his thievery by turning his family into eels. The 
sailor tried to care for the eels, but they blamed him for their 
fate and disappeared into the sea, leaving the sailor weeping 
on the shore. 


ө. 
SOARING ABOVE THE POLIS OF MELETIS IN THEIR FLYING CHARIOT, HEROES OF THE 


REVERENT ARMY SENO OFF THE UNRIVALED MELETIAN FLEET 


шшш ШЫН: 


A 


des рача анн). i i a N 4 


——À 


REALMS OF GODS AND MORTALS 


^W HAT IS THE FARTHEST EXPLORED POINT ON 
а /V the known world?” Elspeth asked. 
V "In the east, beyond the leonin lands, 
Y á there's another forest," Daxos told her. 
"Larger even than the Nessian Forest. No one knows how 
far it goes." 


"What's to the west beyond the sea?" Elspeth asked. 

"The world ends at the waterfall where Kruphix's Tree 
grows," he explained. "The sea falls off the edge and into the 
void below." 

"My home was beyond your infinite forest," she said. 

—Jenna Helland, Godsend 


The world of Theros, as its inhabitants understand, in- 
cludes three realms: the mortal world, the divine realm 
of Nyx, and the Underworld. They are three distinct 
planes of existence, tucked into their own pocket of the 
multiverse and shielded from the rest of the cosmos 

by the power of the gods. This chapter discusses each 
of these realms in turn, with a focus on the mortal 
realm where the schemes of the gods intersect with 
mortal lives. 


THE MORTAL REALM 


Compared to most worlds of the Material Plane, the 
mortal realm of Theros is small. The known world is 
barely two hundred miles across, with unexplored wil- 
derness beyond. And some unknown distance beyond 
that is the edge of the world, where the sea flows off the 
disk of the world and into the starry void. 

The known world of Theros consists of a long stretch 
of coastline forming the eastern edge of the vast Siren 
Sea. Eastward from the sea, the land rises up to two 
ridges of mountains. The lofty peaks of the second ridge 
form a barrier that few mortals have passed, so only ru- 
mors of a vast forest describe the land beyond. 

To the north, the coastal lands become a barren re- 
gion of badlands crossed by a labyrinth of arid canyons, 
with minotaur lands beyond. The minotaurs speak of 
impenetrable mountains rising amid a dark forest to 
the north. 

The Siren Sea is studded with islands large and small. 
The largest cluster near the mainland, called the Dakra 
Isles, is poorly charted, and even those sailors who 
attempt to explore the isles return with contradictory 


information. Westward from those islands, some have 
successfully sailed to the edge of the world, though no 
one can say for certain how far it is—the journey never 
unfolds in a straight line. In theory, it is equally possible 
to sail south to the edge of the world, but those waters 
are stormier and more forbidding. 

The heart of mortal civilization lies in and around 
three poleis—cities and their surrounding territories. 
Together the three poleis, Akros, Meletis, and Setessa, 
encompass most of the human population of Theros. 
Meletis covers the whole territory of the southwestern 
peninsula, Akros forms the northern frontier, and Set- 
essa lies at the northern edge of the wild Nessian Wood. 

Two bands of centaurs—the Lagonna and the 
Pheres—roam the hills and grasslands between the 
three poleis. The leonin hunt in the valley of Oreskos, 
nestled between the two mountain ranges. Satyrs dwell 
in a smaller sylvan vale northeast of the Nessian Wood. 
And tritons live primarily in the coastal shallows of the 
Siren Sea, though some manage to make comfortable 
homes among the humans of Meletis. 

The badlands of Phoberos, northwest of Akros, are 
the frontier where Akroan soldiers clash with mino- 
taurs. Farther north is the minotaur city of Skophos, 
little known to humans. 

The necropoleis of Asphodel and Odunos are home to 
the Returned—zombie-like beings who have escaped the 
clutches of the underworld at the cost of their identities. 
The lands around these cities are bleak and barren, as 
if the Returned brought the pall of the underworld out 
with them into the mortal realm. 


LIFE IN THE POLEIS 


Human civilization in Theros is centered in three poleis: 
Akros, Meletis, and Setessa. These poleis exemplify the 
human drive to settle the land, to shape nature accord- 
ing to their needs, and to organize into political struc- 
tures that can withstand the changing fortunes of the 
passing centuries. 

Each polis is centered in a city but includes a wide re- 
gion of surrounding territory, and each one has its own 
distinct society and culture. To the people of Theros, 
"Meletis" is more or less synonymous with "Meletians"— 
the polis isn't just the people who live in the city of 
Meletis or even those who dwell in nearby villages; it is 
the people who follow the Meletian way of life, wherever 
they might be found. 


CHAPTER 3 | REALMS OF GODS AND MORTALS 


OSEE 


a ET XD 


83 


b Ri 


B Ae. 
THE WORLD OF 


/ J 
А 
ме Р ‚4 


С { 
|“ н Phoberos y Sun's Mirror 
g> + 
© Crypts: Oreskos 
Py Oduno of the Lost : ; 
А e. 


Siren Sea 


Map 3.1: THe WorLo OF THEROS 2 
paf a y" 4 


Meletis Four Winds -a 
Harbor 


= 
MAP KEY - 


* Polis 

O City 

* Town 

* Village 

+ Site Xj 


à Mountain ` 
——— 


Кы “Ж 
EA 
esr 


m 


l'Agonina 


Plateau 
а * 


Se 


т читти s——————————————————————— 

EXPLORING THEROS 

Vast and varied lands comprise the world of Theros, from 

the territories of the great human poleis to the dizzying 

peaks of the Oraniad Mountains. The line between legend 

and location often blurs in Theros, though. While the res- 
idents of a polis can be relatively certain their homes will _ 
remain where they left them when they venture off to work, 
the specific locations of legendary sites prove more nebu- 
lous. Even well-known locations are typically noted refer- 
entially, like how the city of Neolantin is often described as 
being along the coast, far to the southwest of Meletis. 

Some sites prove even more elusive. The Dakra Isles, 
for example, move at the whims of the gods and so prove 
impossible to map. 

As a result, Map 3.1 serves largely as a vaguely agreed 
upon arrangement of locations, fuzzy borders, and general 
distances. While the scale and placement of sites are true 
by mortal standards, details might change as the gods 
please. As such, journeying between places is most reliably 
conducted by employing guides or maps specific to a sin- 
gle destination. 

If you are running a campaign in Theros, you can adjust 
distances between locations to suit the needs of your 
adventures. The distance might not be the same for two 
successive journeys; any trek across Theros can expand 
or contract to accommodate adventures and encounters 
as you wish. 

ааа а ee 
CITIZENSHIP AND GOVERNMENT 

Inevery polis, civic responsibility and full protection are 
afforded only to citizens. Citizenship is limited to those 
whose parents were both citizens of the polis. Citizens 
of other poleis, and their children, aren't permitted to 
participate in the government of the polis. In Akros, cit- 
izens must meet one additional requirement: they must 
serve in the army. 

The three poleis have different political structures, 
but each one has a council elected by popular vote of the 
citizenry. The Twelve, Meletis's council of philosophers, 
is the democratically elected ruling body of the polis. 
Akros is ruled by a hereditary monarch who is advised 
by a council of elders elected by and from among the cit- 
izenry. Similarly, Setessa's Ruling Council is formed by 
popular vote, and they govern the polis while its queen— 
the goddess Karametra—is absent. 


TRADE AND CURRENCY 

Trade between Akros and Meletis is constant and pro- 
ductive. Caravans make the two-day journey between 
the poleis at least once a week, carrying fine Akroan 
metalwork and pottery to Meletis, and Meletian fabric, 
stonework, and fish northward. Both poleis mint coins 
of copper, silver, and gold, with equivalent value. 

Setessa trades with the other poleis as well, but less 
extensively. Its Abora Market, just inside the city gates, 
is open to outsiders only on certain days, and Setessan 
merchants prefer to barter goods rather than accept 
currency. Despite these restrictions, Setessan food, 
woodwork, and trained falcons are highly valued in the 
other poleis. 

Aside from the other human poleis, Meletis and Set- 
essa both trade with the centaurs of the Lagonna band. 
The centaurs don’t work metal, so they trade woodwork, 
the produce of the plains, and woven blankets to the hu- 
man poleis in exchange for weapons and armor. 


RECREATION 
The people of the poleis enjoy the opportunity for some 
recreation, as time and money allow. 

Gymnasia are popular gathering places, offering ath- 
letic training as well as space for philosophical discus- 
sion and friendly socializing. A resident of the city might 
visit a gymnasium one day to exercise, the next to view 
a wrestling match between celebrated competitors, and 
the next to hear a renowned philosopher give a lecture 
on ethics. 

Another important venue for recreation is the theater. 
The works of celebrated playwrights, past and present, 
are regularly produced by casts of professional actors. 
On occasion, a storyteller, accompanied by a small 
orchestra, draws crowds to a theater for a recitation of 
one of the great epics, such as The Theriad or The Cal- 
lapheia. Such a performance might stretch over two or 
three days. 


THE MELETIAN CALENDAR 


The astronomers and philosophers of Meletis have 
established a calendar that has found some adoption 
in Akros and Setessa. It divides the year into twelve 
months of twenty-nine or thirty days, each beginning 
with the new moon. About every three years, an extra 
thirty-day month is added at the end of the calendar to 
keep it aligned with the solar year. 

The beginning of the year is considered the end of 
winter, so the new year begins with the spring. Each 
month is holy to a specific god and named after a major 
festival celebrated in Meletis during that month. Setessa 
and Akros have adopted the same names even though 
they don't share all the same observances, with one ex- 
ception: the fifth month (Thriambion in Meletis) is called 
Iroagonion in Akros, after the Iroan Games, which are 
held in that month every year. 

The Meletian Calendar table summarizes the months, 
their lengths, and the god each is associated with. 


MELETIAN CALENDAR 


Month Name Length God 
1 Lyokymion 30days ТһҺаѕѕа 
2 Protokynion 29 days Nylea 
3 Astrapion | 30days Keranos —— 
4 Polidrysion 29 days Ephara 
5 Thriambion 30days — Iroas | 
6 Megasphagion 29 days Mogis 
7 Chalcanapsion 30days _ Purphoros —— 
8 Necrologion 29 days Athreos 
9 Therimakarion 30days Karametra XS 
10 Katabasion 29 days Erebos 
n Cheimazion 30days — Pharika | us 
12 Agrypnion 29 days Kruphix 
1* — Amagnpnon —— Odes Кш ——— 


* This month occurs only once every three years. 


CHAPTER 3 | REALMS OF GODS AND MORTALS 


86 


AKROS 


ONLY VICTORY ENDURES. 
—Akroan motto 


The walled polis of Akros stands defiantly atop a precip- 
itous cliff. The unforgiving mountains around it serve 

as a shield between its holdings and the rest of Theros. 
Few have ever dared to attack its famed fortress, the 
Kolophon, and no attack has ever breached its walls. To 
the residents of Theros, the Akroans hold near-mythical 
status: feared warriors produced by a culture that cen- 
ters around perfecting the mind and body for war. Their 
armies have rarely tasted defeat as they expand the bor- 
ders of Akros, seizing new lands and bounty. 


PEOPLE OF AKROS 


For most of Akros’s neighbors, the term “Akroan” 
evokes legendary warriors, trained from birth in every 
martial discipline known to humankind. It brings to 
mind songs of tight-knit martial bands, holding strong 
in the face of unbeatable odds. It sings of a great yearly 
competition that crowns the preeminent warrior-athlete 
in Akros, and—by extension—the world. The majority of 
Akros's inhabitants, though, aren't members of its mar- 
tial elite. The famed warriors of Akros have the means 
to devote their lives to studying and training in the ways 
of war because they rest atop a rigid social structure of 
serfs and servants that largely dwell beyond the Kolo- 
phon’s walls. Those who stand at the heights of Akroan 
society, or outside it, are detailed here. 


THE MONARCHY 

Traditionally, Akros is ruled by a monarch drawn from 
the lineage of lektoi. The monarchy passes from parent 
to eldest child, but any sibling or first cousin of the heir 
can challenge this succession and claim the throne by 

besting the heir in single combat. 

Currently, the monarchy is in a state of turmoil. King 
Anax has died, and his wife, Queen Cymede, has disap- 
peared. An oracle of Keranos, the queen is said to have 
transformed into a pillar of fire and vanished into the 
wind, but until her death is certain, the lektoi are reluc- 
tant to name a new monarch. Anax and Cymede have no 
children, so the king’s niece, Taranika, acts as regent, 
attempting to guide the polis through what is sure to be 
a difficult transition. 

As if the situation weren’t complicated enough, ru- 
mors have it that Anax isn’t dead. He, or perhaps some 
shimmering Nyxborn simulacrum of him, has been seen 
at the head of squads of satyr hoplites, wielding an axe 
that billows with smoke and drips searing lava. 


LEKTOI 

At the apex of Akroan society are the lektoi, the large 
warrior class of Akros. Members of this class claim 
descent from the seven warriors who first established 
the Kolophon after the fall of the archons. Though the 
families now number more than seven, each one uses 
an animal associated with one of the seven warriors 

as its symbol, either the ram, lion, horse, boar, badger, 
bull, or hart. The ram, associated with Akros's first king, 


CHAPTER 3 | REALMS OF GODS AND MORTALS 


Elektes, is commonly used as a symbol for the lektoi as 
a whole and for Akroan strength, determination, and 
resilience. It is a popular theme in clothing, jewelry, and 
weapon ornamentation, and some lektoi even wear their 
hair braided into stylized ram horns. 

Although the lektoi claim descent from heroes, mem- 
bership in this noble class isn't strictly hereditary. Any- 
one can earn a place among them by claiming a victory 
in the annual Iroan Games. More commonly, members 
of lektoi families lose their place of privilege if they fail 
to fulfill their obligation to serve in the Akroan military. 


STRATIANS 
The Akroan military is formed of wandering bands of 
warriors (drawn from the lektoi families) known as stra- 
tians. Outside the walls of the Kolophon, the stratians 
camp in the forests and fields, hunt game for food, and 
train younger warriors as they go. Theirtasks are to 
search for monsters that have strayed into Akroan terri- 
tory and to protect travelers. 

Stratian forces are divided into three types of duty and 
armed appropriately for the task before them: 


Alamon. Rugged forces of wanderers patrol Akros's 
borders, defending against invasion or attack by mon- 
sters that dwell in the mountains, foothills, and bad- 
lands around Akroan territory. They are armed and 
armored for speed and agility, allowing them to move 
stealthily and strike unexpectedly. 

Lukos. The most elite forces among the stratians, the 
so-called wolves contend with threats that the Alamon 
can't handle alone. After the guerrilla tactics of the 
Alamon have softened up a target, the heavily armored 
Lukos march to finish the task. 

Oromai. The watchers are the guardians of the Kolo- 
phon who protect the fortress from invaders and main- 
tain order within its walls. 


FLAMESPEAKERS 

Prominent spellcasters, the flamespeakers are reclusive 
priests of Purphoros who revere nature spirits and who 
inhabit fiery rifts in the mountains. The ancient practice 
is viewed as primitive but powerful, and Akroans of any 
background might risk making a pilgrimage into the 
mountains to hear a flamespeaker's prophecies. 


SERVANTS AND SERFS 
Lektoi who complete their military service with honor 
often retire to the Kolophon or their family estates and 
go about the leisured life of aristocrats. Their house- 
holds are run by a class of servants made up of lektoi 
who were unable or unwilling to undertake a military 
career. These servants lack citizenship's full privileges 
but retain a position of some honor thanks to their class. 
Below these servants, at the bottom of Akros's social 
hierarchy, are the serfs. Comprising the vast majority of 
Akros's population, the serfs largely reside outside the 
protection of the Kolophon, laboring to grow the staple 
crops that support Akros's citizens and its trade. A rel- 
atively small number of serfs are skilled artisans who 
manage to build a more prosperous life for themselves 
with their crafts. But even these wealthier serfs can't 
own the land they live on, and they enjoy few rights or 
legal protections. 


tart 


& 
t 


THE KOLOPHON STANDS WATCH OVER 
THE POLIS OF AXROS. 


NONHUMANS IN AKROS 

Akros maintains a standoffish—and often hostile— 
stance toward its neighbors, particularly the minotaurs 
of Phoberos, the leonin of Oreskos, and the centaurs of 
the Pheres band. Members of those peoples rarely find 
a warm welcome in Akroan territory. However, Akroans 
respect prowess, loyalty, and self-sacrifice, and might 
welcome any who embody such virtues. Some stratians 
also seek to learn the martial practices of other peoples, 
and might invite individuals or small communities to 
Akros to learn their ways. 

During the Iroan Games, everyone is welcome in the 
stadium. Satyrs flock to the city to witness the competi- 
tion, and some take up permanent residence, celebrat- 
ing the outcome of one year's games until it's time to 
start watching the next. 


FEATURES OF AKROS 


Atthe center of the polis of Akros rises the Kolophon, 

a mighty fortress and the seat of Akroan power. This 
many-tiered structure perches upon a vast cliff, which 
drops into a deep canyon carved by the Deyda River. 
Nature and Akroan ingenuity conspire to make the Kol- 


ophon one of the most intimidating fortresses in Theros. 


Beyond the polis stretch craggy hills and mountains 
broken by narrow stretches of arable plains. It is a 
nearly impassable landscape, save for a few roads hewn 
through passes. Residents claim that only a fool would 
attempt to invade the heartlands of Akros, yet Akroans 
obsessively guard against invasion nonetheless. 


1 
E 


— 9 


Beyond its thick walls, the streets of Akros are dotted 
with towering statues of heroes. Red-tiled roofs soar 
over square-topped sandstone columns, and holy sites 
dedicated to Iroas, Purphoros, and Keranos, among the 
other gods, are many. The architecture is formidable, 
spare, and militaristic, thick with sharp, angular shapes. 


TEMPLE OF TRIUMPH AT AKROS 
At the heart of the walled city is the huge stadium 
that hosts Theros's greatest sporting event, the Iroan 
Games. A grand temple of Iroas stands beside it, serv- 
ing as the venue for award ceremonies. A wide plaza 
connects the stadium to the city's outer gates, offering 
plenty of room for celebration around the annual games. 
When the stadium isn't hosting the actual Iroan 
Games, it is still used daily for training and for lesser 
athletic events. Many of the buildings surrounding 
the stadium are dedicated to serving it: smaller train- 
ing facilities, providers of athletic gear, stables, and 
other shops. 


CITADEL 

The uppermost tier of the city, perched on a rocky out- 
cropping at the southwestern corner of the Kolophon, 

is the great citadel. The Oromai (the “watchers” who 
maintain order and defend the Kolophon) are quartered 
within the citadel's imposing walls, and the monarch's 
palace is built atop it. Temples of Iroas, Heliod, and 
Keranos also adorn the top of the citadel, the latter com- 
missioned by the late Queen Cymede, built with an open 
roof to give her a clear view of stormy skies. 


CHAPTER 3 | REALMS OF GODS AND MORTALS 


87 


88 


MYTHS OF THE AKROAN WAR 


Centuries before the polis of Olantin sunk beneath the sea 
(a myth told in chapter 4), its queen left her husband for the 
king of Akros. Slighted and heartbroken, the Olantian king 
summoned his whole host of loyal spears and sails to wage 
war on the fortified mountain polis. 

What followed was a siege that stretched on for decades. 
Whole parts of Akros were destroyed and rebuilt in the fight- 
ing. There were heroes who knew only a life of conflict, per- 
forming feats of incredible prowess for the honor of Olantin, 
or who awed the gods with their sleepless commitment to 
defending the gates of Akros. 

Most people today know of the event from an embel- 
lished account laid down in an epic poem, The Akroan War. 
Although its author has been lost to time, the poem is con- 
sidered to be a definitive accounting of the greatest war in 
history. Countless soldiers aspire to fight with the honor and 
purpose that inspired the heroes of the Akroan War. 


CHAPTER 3 | REALMS OF GODS AND MORTALS 


AKROS’S SURROUNDINGS 


Arable land is scattered across small plateaus and val- 
leys in Akros, meaning that the serf communities that 
farm the land are small and just as scattered. Volcanic 
rifts, landslides, and venomous animals make travel 
dangerous for anyone who doesn’t know the terrain, and 
visitors wishing to avoid suspicion from patrolling stra- 
tians would be wise to stick to the roads. 


OUTPOSTS 

The Alamon soldiers spend most of their time patrolling 
Akros's outlying areas, centering their patrols around 
scattered outposts. These serve as staging grounds for 
Alamon and Lukos units to prepare as they venture out 
to raid or guard against monsters and invaders. 

One-Eyed Pass. The outpost in One-Eyed Pass serves 
to keep an Akroan eye on the large cyclops population 
of the area, but the stratians also use the cyclopes to 
their advantage. Any time dangerous creatures come 
down from the mountains and pose a potential threat to 
Akroan holdings, the Alamon harry the enemy and try 
to funnel them into the pass. The cyclopes of the pass 
viciously defend their territory against all intruders, 
weakening or even eliminating the danger before it can 
reach the Akroan outpost, where the Lukos finish off 
any stragglers. 

Pharagax Bridge. On the western border of Akros 
gapes a massive chasm rumored to descend all the 
way to the underworld and belch forth foul creatures. 
The great stone bridge that spans it is the only way into 
Akros from this direction. Stratians consider it a high 
honor to be assigned to guard the bridge. 

Titan’s Stairs. These stone “stairs,” seemingly carved 
into the granite cliffs that protect Akros and haunted at 
all times by eerie, whistling winds, provide natural ac- 
cess to Akros. The stratians guard it fiercely and use it 
as a Staging ground for invading the lowlands. 

Phoberos Outposts. Several semipermanent en- 
campments dot the badlands between Akros and the 
wilds beyond. Fresh cadres of troops come here every 
month to relieve soldiers who are worn out by relent- 
less assaults from raiders, fire-breathing dragons, and 
other threats. 

Mountain Shrines. The Akroans believe that the 
gods are best worshiped at the places closest to Nyx— 
mountain peaks. Small temples and shrines are found 
throughout Akroan territory. Some are tucked in caves 
or nestled in crevices or canyons, while others are bare 
altars exposed to the elements. 


PHERES LANDS 


Between the mountains of Akros and the vast Nessian 
Wood to the southeast, Pheres-band centaurs roam 
across the dry, hilly landscape. Gathered in small bands 
of fierce raiders, the Pheres centaurs plunder whatever 
prey they can find: merchants and other travelers mov- 
ing between Akros and Setessa, settlers trying to eke 
out an existence in the region, leonin tribes, Lagonna- 
band centaurs who range too far to the north, and any 
others they encounter. 


MELETIS 


EVIL FLOURISHES WHERE IGNORANCE THRIVES. 
—Perisophia the philosopher 


Meletis is a polis devoted to learning, magic, and prog- 
ress. It is the most populous city-state and home to 
progressive thinkers, pious thaumaturges, and wise 
oracles. Born from the defeat of tyranny, to this day it 
pursues the ideals of free thought, societal betterment, 
and reinvention over stagnation and totalitarianism. 

The archon Agnomakhos ruled the area that is now 
Meletis for centuries. Impressing those he conquered 
into his legions, Agnomakhos aggressively expanded 
his empire, spreading it as far as the forests to the east 
and the mountains to the north. Ultimately, though, the 
heroes Kynaios and Tiro overthrew the archon. From 
the empire’s ruins rose Meletis, a land that endeavors to 
reject cruelty and oppression throughout the world, and 
guards against hypocrisy within its own borders. 

For a time, Kynaios and Tiro ruled Meletis, striving 
to govern in accordance with the highest philosophical 
and ethical principles, which ultimately led them to 
relinquish their power and establish a philosopher-led 
republic. After the kings’ deaths, the council of scholars 
known as the Twelve took up rule of the polis, with the 
sage Elpidios serving as the senior member. 


PEOPLE OF MELETIS 


The people of Meletis take pride in their city’s grand 
architecture, especially the great temples to the gods. 
They value philosophy and other intellectual pursuits, 
especially the practice of magic. Meletis’s army is 
known for its discipline and its piety, and its navy is un- 
paralleled. The city observes every one of the gods’ holy 
days in various ways, and most residents try to live as 
the gods demand. 


Rich fields and the bounty of the sea support most 
people throughout Meletis. The people have reputations 
for being accomplished weavers, skilled sailors, and 
cunning merchants. Books and literacy are also com- 
mon throughout the land, and the work of scribes, car- 
tographers, musicians, and storytellers is well regarded. 
The people of Meletis believe themselves to be the 
inheritors of a heroic tradition, and each person owes 
it to themselves and to society to strive for greatness. 
Beyond Meletis’s common folk, a few groups that hold 
noteworthy standing are detailed here. 


THE TWELVE 
A council of philosophers called the Twelve serves as 
the ruling body of Meletis. They are elected by popular 
vote among the citizens of Meletis and serve for terms 
of four years at a time. They are supposed to govern by 
philosophical principles of justice and social order, and 
many of them do strive to uphold the highest ideals in 
their decisions. Others are more grimly realistic, anda 
few are deeply corrupt, serving only their own interests. 
The most senior member of the council is recognized 
as its leader, responsible for bringing the assembly to 
order and moderating its debate. Currently, this position 
is held by the renowned philosopher and orator named 
Perisophia. 


PHILOSOPHERS 

Though they aren't necessarily heroic, philosophers 
are highly valued in Meletis, which is renowned as the 
center of philosophical thought. They form a privileged 
class, often coming from wealthy families but also sup- 
ported by stipends from the polis’s academies and their 
own students. Different philosophical schools hold po- 
litical as well as intellectual power in the polis, with five 
schools of philosophy dominating Meletian discourse. 


THE SEA WALL AND STATUES OF THE POLIS’S 


FOUNDERS GUARD MEceETIS Bay 


9o 


Elpidians. Perisophia's optimistic Elpidian school 
currently predominates Meletian thought and politics, 
carrying on the works of the heroic Epharan oracle 
Elpidios. The Elpidian school strives to put magic and 
philosophy to use in improving the lives of all Meletians. 
Elpidian mages embrace magic in all its forms. 

Formalists. Formalist philosophers believe in a realm 
populated by abstract entities such as numbers and the- 
ories. They focus their efforts on trying to improve the 
moral fabric of the polis, hoping to create the ideal soci- 
ety, where people live together in peace, and where war 
and crime disappear. 

Uremideans. This school emphasizes logical reason- 
ing, rhetorical excellence, and theories of ethics and vir- 
tue. Uremideans are eminently practical governors who 
seek to balance ethical ideals and realistic necessities. 

Nykleans. Nyklean philosophers teach that reason or 
destiny underlies all of reality, so that everything that 
takes place must unfold just as it does. These philoso- 
phers train themselves to accept and endure whatever 
befalls them, enjoying good fortune but not griev- 
ing its loss. 

Anapsians. Anapsian philosophy embraces the fine 
delights of life: the pleasures of love and friendship, 
fine food and drink, art and music. Anapsians have 
few strong opinions about governance, except that 
an ultimate good end should be kept front of mind in 
all decision. 


'THAUMATURGES 
Meletians view magic as one ofthe greatest art forms, 
and they call the most accomplished mages thauma- 
turges ("wonder workers"). Many Meletian mages 
are trained at the elite academy of the Dekatia, but 
countless smaller schools and private tutors teach the 
magical arts. These lessons in magic typically include a 
well-rounded education in the sciences and philosophy. 
Some thaumaturges find their magical studies aligning 
with popular Meletian philosophies and choose the 
schools of magic they focus on based on such teachings. 
The mark of a true thaumaturge, though, is a gift or 
positive omen from the gods; even the most accom- 
plished student of magic can't earn the title without 
such a sign of divine approval. One mage might receive 
the gift of a spear from Heliod, another could receive a 
clockwork owl from Ephara, and still another might ex- 
perience a wild, creative vision from Keranos. 


THE REVERENT ARMY 

The hoplites of Meletis practice battlefield tactics in an 
environment saturated with religious devotion. The mil- 
itary force of the polis is called the Reverent Army, and 
aims as much to exalt the glory of the pantheon as to 
defend Meletis. The soldiers are clever and resourceful, 
believing their piety leads the gods to smile upon them. 
More likely, though, their extensive training in battle- 
field tactics and magic gives them an edge over other 
soldiers, with most Meletian hoplites knowing at least a 
little magic. 


CHAPTER 3 | REALMS OF GODS AND MORTALS 


NONHUMANS IN MELETIS 

Meletis strives to be a beacon to all of Theros's people. 
Well-intentioned members of any culture are welcome 

on Meletis's streets, and the polis's people work to earn 
the trust of their neighbors. 

Of all the poleis, Meletis has the closest relationship 
with the tritons of the Siren Sea. Several communities 
of tritons consider the harbors of Meletis and secluded 
coastal sanctuaries their home. Many take part in work 
near and under the water that other peoples are ill- 
suited to, but increasingly tritons find work not related to 
the sea, with triton restaurants, chemists, and members 
of the Reverent Army being increasingly common. 

Meletis maintains a fragile peace with centaurs of 
the Lagonna band, engaging in regular trade. It's not 
uncommon for small groups of centaurs to set up shop 
in the polis market for short periods, though few spend 
more than a night or two in the city, most finding it 
claustrophobic at best. 

Few leonin journey to Meletis, knowing little of the 
land beyond what their stories remember of Agnomak- 
hos's tyranny. Even an age after the archon's rule, most 
leonin view Meletis as a cursed place. Those few who 
have traveled to the polis in recent years find it changed, 
with great potential for trade and cooperation, but no 
Meletian or leonin has yet initiated an official dialogue 
between the two peoples. 

Most satyrs have little patience for Meletian philoso- 
phy, visiting largely out of curiosity or on elaborate larks. 
Minotaurs are rarely seen in Meletis, though those who 
visit with peaceful intentions are welcome. 


FEATURES OF MELETIS 


The architectural and academic marvels of Meletis 
testify to the achievements of civilized humanity. The 
streets are paved with bricks made in interlocking geo- 
metric shapes, meant to demonstrate principles of both 
mathematics and magic. Grand temples line the streets, 
testifying to the Meletians' devotion to the gods. These 
rise as both mighty bastions dedicated to individual 
deities and various neighborhood shrines devoted to the 
pantheon as a whole. 

Inside the city, the wild lands feel like a remote threat. 
Perils from the sea present more obvious dangers, but a 
great sea wall protects the polis's port on the Bay of Me- 
letis, while a lengthy channel cuts through the surround- 
ing land to reach Meletis Harbor on the Siren Sea. 


PYRGNOS 
Many Meletians speak of the “edifice of knowledge,” 
referring in the abstract to the sum of all learning and 
scholarship. Every citizen is expected to help improving 
this edifice for the good of the polis, whether through 
philosophical exploration, advancements in magical 
technique, investigation into the nature of the gods, or 
perfection of techniques in crafting and trade. 

But the edifice of knowledge in Meletis is a literal 
structure as well as a metaphorical one: the Pyrgnos 
is a glowing stone tower standing near the coast. It is 
literally formed from the collected learnings of the polis, 
recorded on carved stone tablets and glowing letters 
hovering in the air. At night, the Pyrgnos shines like a 


lighthouse where the sea wall meets the shore, gleam- 
ing on the waters of the Siren Sea. 

A decade ago, the Pyrgnos was partly demolished by 
a kraken that attacked the city, but it has been repaired 
and continues to grow, reflecting the continued learning 
of the polis’s citizens. 


THE DEKATIA 

Meletis boasts many centers of learning, but the preem- 
inent academy for philosophers and mages is the Deka- 
tia. Students who display remarkable promise over the 
course of their earlier education can go on to spend up 
to ten years in arduous training at the Dekatia, appren- 
ticed to master priests, thaumaturges, philosophers, and 
military heroes. Those who manage to complete this de- 
cade of training are renowned as the wisest of the wise 
and the bravest of the brave, combining all the essential 
learning of the polis into one heroic package. 


THE OBSERVATORY 

The Observatory is a tall viewing platform and a win- 
dowed structure offering a splendid view of the sky, 
renowned as a place to study Nyx, the home of the gods. 
Special crystals shaped by thaumaturges and blessed 
by the oracles of the gods enhance the view, making 

it easier for observers to see the workings of the gods 
among the stars and constellations. Priests, mages, and 
philosophers interpret what they see in the Observatory 
as signs and omens from the gods. 


MYTH OF THE FALL OF AGNOMAKHOS 


From the back of his flying bull, the archon Agnomakhos led 
armies across the face of Theros, carving out an empire that 
stood for generations. While numerous rebellions attempted 
to cast off the archon’s rule, each was crushed by his armies 
of giants, leonin, and other fearsome creatures. So, when the 
heroes Kynaios and Tiro sought to inspire an uprising, few 
flocked to their banner. 

Undeterred, the rebels soldiered on against impossible 
odds. Seeing their dedication to the cause of freedom, the 
goddess Ephara came to the heroes. She offered to aid 
Kynaios and Tiro in their battle against the tyrant, supple- 
menting their martial skill with a new weapon: magic. 

With their new power, Kynaios and Tiro inspired the peo- 
ple to rise up against Agnomakhos, ultimately defeating his 
armies and striking the archon down. From their victory rose 
the polis of Meletis and the use of magic among mortals. 

Agnomakhos's fall remains a point of honor in the minds 
of Meletis’s people, a moment immortalized in relief upon 
countless civic buildings throughout the polis. 


MELETIS’S SURROUNDINGS 


Meletis sits on the coast of the Siren Sea, surrounded by 
rivers, sparse woodlands, and vast, stepped grasslands. 
Fields of barley provide sustenance to Meletians and 
their animals. Well-trod roads wind their way through 
the region, but most locals travel along the coast in 
simple boats. 


CHAPTER 3 | REALMS OF GODS AND MORTALS 


MELETIAN HOLDINGS 

The polis of Meletis embodies the heart and mind of 
what it means to be Meletian, but the polis’s lands also 
includes numerous other settlements and wildernesses. 
The people who live in these holdings are no less Mele- 
tians than the inhabitants of the city, and they share the 
values of other Meletians even if their lifestyle affords 
them little opportunity to study magic and philosophy. 

Altrisos. This small walled city is famous for Ephara’s 
intervention to protect it from a kraken, her face coming 
to life on the marble wall and making the barrier grow 
so tall that the kraken couldn't get through. Altrisos now 
has Ephara's face on nearly every building and wall in 
the entire city in gratitude. 

Glossion. Glossion is a small coastal town that would 
be completely unremarkable, except that it's accumu- 
lated a truly impressive library. The bulk of the town's 
economy revolves around maintaining the library and 
meeting the needs of travelers who come to visit it. 

Krimnos. Renowned as the home of Anapse, the 
philosopher who founded the Anapsian school, the vil- 
lage of Krimnos attracts many philosophers who share 
Anapse's delight in the pleasures of a simple life. 

Listes. Listes is a fortress marking the northeastern 
border of the polis. The civilian population is hardly less 
disciplined than the members of the Reverent Army sta- 
tioned there, and the whole population observes Iroas's 
holy days together. 

Natumbria. The residents of Natumbria are famous 
for training sea animals as skillfully as Setessans train 
land and air animals. They train sea snakes, dolphins, 
and even sharks on a few occasions to be combatants, 
working animals, aquatic mounts, and companions. 


Neolantin. Though they are regarded as Meletians, 
the people of Neolantin view themselves as citizens of 
Olantin—a coastal polis that long ago vanished into the 
sea. According to legend, an angry Heliod smote the 
polis with his spear, sinking it in punishment for its 
people's utter hubris. The fact that the Neolantians were 
spared this fate, they say, is evidence of their humility, 
and they take special care in their sacrifices to Heliod. 

Oxus. Oxus is a quiet town with a notably wealthy 
population, consisting largely of merchants who have 
retired from trade with large fortunes at their disposal. 
The tomb of Kynaios and Tiro also stands in the center 
of the town, the subject of many local legends. 

Phaela. A small fishing village, Phaela is most noted 
as being the literal "end of the road" for travelers ven- 
turing south from Meletis. The rugged lands beyond are 
rocky and scattered with forgotten ruins. 

Sitrium. This coastal town is known for the way many 
of its buildings are on stilts to accommodate the chang- 
ing tides. Sitrium is famed for its skilled shipwrights. 

Thesteia. The village of Thesteia is little more than a 
crossroads, but it's notable for its temple to Karametra. 
The site draws farmers from the region who offer a por- 
tion of their crops to the god of agriculture. 


LAGONNA GROUNDS 


At the northern edge of Meletian territory, between the 
sea and the Nessian Wood, roam the centaurs of the 
Lagonna band. Unlike the ferocious Pheres band, the 
Lagonna-band centaurs are generally peaceful and don't 
engage in raids upon Meletian territory. They are fre- 
quent visitors in Listes, Krimnos, and Meletis itself, and 
often carry goods between Meletis and Setessa, since 
they are more at home in the Nessian Wood than most 
Meletian merchants. 


PEOPLE FROM ACROSS THEROS visit MELETIS, LEAVING THEIR 
MARKS ON THE POLIS’S ARCHITECTURE AND PHILOSOPHIES. 


SETESSA 


THIS CITY SAVED ME WHEN I WAS AN ORPHANED CHILD, 
sold into chains. Now is my turn to save it. 
—Kallias, Ophis Tower commander 


Setessa is the favored polis of Karametra, and its build- 
ings blend so perfectly into the forest that it’s difficult to 
tell the difference between inside and outside. The pop- 
ulace lives in harmony with the thick forests, terraced 
farms, and trained animals of Setessa, and they cele- 
brate the cycle of seasons with grand holidays. 

Setessa is also unique among the poleis of Theros in 
that few of its adult residents are men. Women comprise 
the bulk of the population, holding almost all of the lead- 
ership roles and carrying out most work. Men are few 
and far between, mostly performing roles at the polis’s 
edge. Children run freely around the polis. They're so 
important, in fact, that Setessa’s people take in aban- 
doned children from all over Theros. 


PEOPLE OF SETESSA 


The populace of Setessa live in a beautiful paradise, and 
they're prepared to fight to the death to protect it. The 
constant training in archery, falconry, riding, and close 
combat can seem out of place among the idyllic forests 
and beautiful gardens and orchards, but that is the way 
of life in Setessa. 


GENDER IN SETESSA 

Setessans believe that women become heroes through 
martial exploits, while men do so by finding their own 
way in the world. As a result, the polis is populated 
mostly by women and children. 

When young men reach the age of fourteen, their rites 
of passage culminate in a journey called pereérination, 
where they wander the world until they find a new place 
to call home. The few men who reside permanently in 
Setessa live in the Amatrophon, training and caring for 
theanimals there. Some of these men never peregri- 
nated, but others left and then returned to Setessa. 

The women of the polis form a tight-knit community 
where property is held in common. There is no mar- 
riage, and ancestry is traced matrilineally. 

Despite the very different roles played by men and 
women, Setessans are flexible when it comes to any 
individual's place in that structure. Some men set out on 
peregrination after spending a number of years identi- 
fied as women, and some women return from peregrina- 
tion (or never undertake it) after a period of realization. 
Some people move fluidly between roles, and a few 
choose a special role that Setessans view as standing 
outside the dichotomy of gender, living in Ophis Tower. 

The warriors of Ophis Tower are martially trained 
as women are but wander the world as men do. They 
gather information for the Ruling Council, search out 
routes for peregrination (including identifying sym- 
pathetic individuals and households who will mentor 
young men at the start of their journeys), and rescue lost 
and abandoned children from other communities, bring- 
ing them back to Setessa. 


THE RULING COUNCIL 

Karametra is the queen of Setessa, but of course gods 
have more important concerns than the day-to-day 
governance of a human polis. So a five-member council 
attends to the daily tasks of leadership on the deity's be- 
half. The council is made up of the commanders of the 
four prominent fortress-watchtowers that guard the po- 
lis. These commanders are elected by popular vote: An- 
thousa of Leina Tower, Phaedra of Hyrax Tower, Niketa 
of Bassara Tower, and Kallias of Ophis Tower. The fifth 
member is Silverbrow, a centaur oracle who reads the 
Kelema Veil at the Nexuses of the Seasons and advises 
action based on her visions. Anthousa is the head of the 
council, considered Karametra's closest advisor and the 
de facto ruler of the city. 


DEFENDERS AND THE FOUR TOWERS 
Karametra includes defense of the home in her do- 
mains, and the residents of Setessa follow suit. Setes- 
san military forces are organized into four major regi- 
ments, each associated with a fortress tower. 

Bassara Tower. The tower of the fox stands near the 
Summer Nexus and watches for interlopers who enter 
the Nessian Wood without permission. During their 
training, troops there focus on archery and guerrilla tac- 
tics. Their leader is Niketa, a woman in her fifties who 
spends most of her time in the tower since she parted 
ways with her dryad partner. 

Hyrax Tower. The tower of the falcon lies on the ridge 
near the Autumn Nexus. Its regiment includes contin- 
gents of scouts and falconers. Its leader is Phaedra, a 
nineteen-year-old master falconer and orphan from Me- 
letis who was rescued by the Ophis regiment. 

Leina Tower. The tower of the lion stands near Kara- 
metra's temple at the heart of Setessa. Its regiment, led 
by the hero Anthousa, is dedicated to the defense of the 
polis and the training of its children. The Leina warriors 
favor double-edged axes. 

Ophis Tower. The tower of the serpent nestles at the 
center of Setessa. [ts wandering warriors travel the 
world, working on behalf of the Ruling Council. Their 
leader is Kallias, who was sold into slavery as a child. 
They lost an eye and several fingers before they were 
rescued and brought to Setessa, where they have de- 
voted themselves to saving others in a similar plight. 


THE “LITTLE BEARS” ОЕ SETESSA 
Children in Setessa are reared by the polis as a whole 
and treated with the highest respect; their welfare is 
paramount and their training is a significant part of ev- 
ery warrior’s occupation. Orphans and abandoned chil- 
dren are sacred to Karametra, so they are brought into 
the city and tended just as Setessa’s own children are. 
In contrast to the discipline associated with educating 
children in other poleis, Setessan youngsters enjoy tre- 
mendous freedom. Called arkulli, meaning “little bears,” 
they are welcome anywhere in the city. They often wan- 
der in and out of the temple, training grounds, the hall of 
the Ruling Council, the market, and anywhere else their 
paths take them. Such freedom is meant to cultivate a 
curious spirit and help the children find the path they're 
most interested in following later in life. 


CHAPTER 3 | REALMS OF GODS AND MORTALS 


93 


94 


NONHUMANS IN SETESSA 

Setessa doesn’t welcome outsiders, as a rule, except the 
orphaned and abandoned children brought to live in the 
polis. But the polis can be more hospitable to nonhuman 
outsiders than to humans (especially male humans) 
from other poleis. A few centaurs of the Lagonna band, 
leonin, and satyrs have earned the right to live in Set- 
essa. Dryads and naiads from the Nessian Wood rarely 
try to enter the polis, but they are often friendly with the 
Bassara soldiers who patrol the forest. 


FEATURES OF SETESSA 


Setessa fuses nature and civilization into a single living 


organism. The polis extends from a huge tree at its cen- 
ter, like the rings of a still larger tree. A dense circle of 
vegetation forms the city’s outer wall, with the treetops 
magically woven together to create a barrier against 
intruders. Expertly trained archers stand guard on plat- 
forms nestled among the upper branches. Inside these 
natural walls, patches of thick forest alternate with open 
spaces where the Setessans build their homes and civic 
buildings amid the trees. Out of deference to Nylea, the 
residents of Setessa never construct a building that isn’t 
absolutely necessary, and their homes and buildings are 
seamlessly integrated into the environment, with magic 
coaxing vegetation to weave together into walls or roofs. 


‘TEMPLE TO KARAMETRA 

In thevery center of the city is the temple to Karame- 
tra, patron of Setessa. Three ancient trees grow from 
an earthen rise and spiral around the heart of the city. 
The temple, built of glittering limestone, nestles amid 
the massive trunks. Strong magical wards protect the 
temple, since Karametra herself sits here when she vis- 
its her beloved polis. All manner of civic functions are 
based in the temple, and most of them are carried out by 
Karametra's attendants. These attendants serve as heal- 
ers, advisors, teachers, chroniclers, and oracles. 


NEXUSES OF THE SEASONS 

Four holy sites, corresponding to the four seasons, 
stand in or near the polis and serve as temples—primar- 
ily for the rites of Karametra and Nylea, but also to the 
other gods to an extent. These nexus points between 
the mortal world and Nyx—a phenomenon called the 
Kelema Veil—are where omens manifest amid star 
fields that glitter in the shadows and where oracles seek 
messages from the divine. The four nexuses are each 
distinct in their own ways. 

Spring Nexus. Associated with Karametra, the 
Spring Nexus is located in a lavish garden just behind 
her temple in the city of Setessa. A large arch of vines 
and flowers leads into the nexus itself and stays fresh 
and green all year long. Spring is the most celebratory 
time for Setessans—a time for planting and hope. Wor- 
shipers leave gifts for both Karametra and Nylea here. 

Summer Nexus. Located in an olive grove west of 
the city proper, the Summer Nexus is covered by a leafy 
green canopy. As a shelter from summer's heat, the 
nexus is a favorite resting spot for people and animals 
alike, and Nylea and Iroas are worshiped here. 


CHAPTER 3 | REALMS OF GODS AND MORTALS 


Autumn Nexus. Near the southern edge of Setessa, 
in an orchard filled with golden apples, a small cave 
behind a basalt arch holds a perpetually burning flame. 
Priests keep a strict rotation to ensure the fire never 
goes out, as it represents Purphoros's fire that keeps the 
world warm through the colder seasons and allows the 
autumn harvest. In addition to Purphoros, Setessans 
come here to worship Iroas and Mogis, when necessary. 

Winter Nexus. At the eastern edge of Setessa hides a 
rocky cave that was once a lion's den. The cave contains 
a burial ground and is rumored to lead all the way into 
the underworld. Setessan children occasionally dare 
each other to see who can make it the farthest into the 
cave, but the morbid atmosphere usually sends the chil- 
dren scurrying back before long. Setessans come here 
to worship Pharika and Erebos, paying respects to the 
dead or hoping to fend off death for a while yet. 


ABORA MARKET 

The Abora Market is a giant, open-air market just in- 
side the main eastern gate of Setessa. Every day it is 
thronged with citizens buying and selling food, crafts, 
and curiosities. On the seven days surrounding the 

full moon, outsiders are even allowed into the market, 
though they are still prohibited from roaming the rest of 
the polis. Visitors who try to explore beyond the market 
are typically banned from the polis and must forfeit any 
goods they brought into the city. 

The most impressive part of the market is the rap- 
tor hall, where falconers show off the trained raptors 
available for sale. Hunters all over Theros come to buy 
famous Setessan falcons. 


CARYATID GROVES 

Scattered throughout the city are several groves that 
are sacred to Karametra and Nylea, made up of slen- 
der trees with almost humanlike forms. It is said that 
whoever enters one of these sacred groves in search of 
peace will find it—and take root, becoming part of the 
grove. The trees here are caryatids, capable of animat- 
ing in defense of the groves or the city (as animated 
trees) but otherwise resting in silent stillness. 


SETESSA'S SURROUNDINGS 


Beyond the city's encircling trees, the territory of Set- 
essa extends to cover about a third of the Nessian Wood 
and a wide swath of the open chaparral. In contrast to 
Meletis and Akros, no villages or military outposts mark 
Setessan territory, but a few key features in the Nessian 
Wood define the area under Setessan control. 


AMATROPHON 

The Amatrophon encompasses a large forested region 
at the northwestern edge of Setessan territory, and it 
provides a safe haven and training ground for the di- 
verse range of animals that occupy an honored place as 
natural protectors in Setessan society. Experts train the 
renowned falcons of Setessa here, along with horses for 
riding and for combat. More unusual animals are found 
here as well: trainers work with pegasi, wolves, and li- 
ons to get them ready to accompany Setessans in battle. 
Here men live and work alongside women, collectively 
training and caring for the animals that live here. 


NATURE AND CIVILIZATION MELO 


HARMONIOUSLY IN THE POLIS OF SETESSA 


+ 


NESSIAN WOOD 

The vast wilderness of the Nessian Wood is considered 
Nylea’s domain. Its trees are as old as the world, twin- 
ing together to form an impenetrable canopy shielding 
the wood from Heliod's angry glare. Their roots stretch 
deep into the earth, and some say they drink from the 
Rivers That Ring the World, the waters of the Under- 
world. All manner of wild and magical creatures dwell 
in the Nessian Wood, far from the reach of human 
civilization. 

Nylea allows limited hunting in the Nessian Wood, but 
she has been known to kill those who poach without her 
permission. Setessa’s Bassara regiment helps the god 
keep an eye out for such illicit hunters, as well as any 
intruders who might bring danger upon the polis. 

Cypress Gates. A natural gap between two mountains 
on the west side of the Sperche River provides access 
into the Nessian Wood from the east. Ancient Setessans 
carved an impenetrable fortress into the mountains to 
guard the pass. Bassara patrols from Setessa still check 
in on the fortress regularly, and they occupy the fortress 
when there is reason to suspect danger from the east. 
More than once, though, patrols have reached the fort 
only to find something else has taken up residence, 
whether it be rowdy satyrs, grim Returned, or worse. 

Hunter's Crossing. Setessa once extended its claim 
over more of the Nessian Wood, establishing military 
outposts like those of Akros. At the western end of the 


MYTH OF NIKAIA THE FIRST CARYATID d E 
A Setessan archer named Nikaia claimed that she could out- 
shoot anyone, even Nylea. Word of this unwise boast spread, 
and in response Nylea appeared at the next archery contest 
at the Spring Nexus. She challenged Nikaia to an impossible 
feat of archery: to shoot an arrow into one of the twin trunks * 
of Kruphix's great tree at theedge ofthe world. Nikaia im- E- ee 
mediately realized that neither refusal, failure, nor success 
would forestall Nylea's wrath. Nonetheless, she held her head 
high, she and Nylea both let fly, and both arrows hit. Im- 
pressed by the mortal, Nylea took Nikaia to her sacred grove 
and planted her there as a caryatid, immobile but forever 
occupying a place of honor. 
Since then, Nylea has honored dozens of other champi- 
ons and worthy mortals, blessing them with the long lives 
of mighty trees. The grown seedlings of Nikaia and Nylea's 
other favored continue to share their wisdom and protect 
Setessa to this day. 


forest, along the road from Meletis known as the Guard- 
ian Way, the ruins of a round tower lie beside a rushing 
stream. This marks the greatest extent of ancient Set- 
essa'sreach. A site of rich natural beauty, with lilacs 
growing along the riverbank and silver fish darting in 
startlingly clear water, it is abandoned by Setessa and 
favored by travelers as a resting point on the road before 
coming under the eaves of the forest. 


CHAPTER 3 | REALMS OF GODS AND MORTALS 


96 


ORESKOS 


OUR WORLD STANDS ON THREE FEET: PRIDE, DIGNITY, 
and independence. When voices claim we've lost these vir- 
tues, do not listen. Those are the words of thieves, convinc- 
ing you you've already lost what they aim to steal. 

—Liala, matron of the Sun Guides 


A vast valley of dry grasslands nestled between the 
Katachthon and Oraniad Mountains, Oreskos is the 
home of the leonin. Here roam vast herds of knot-horned 
gazelle, flocks of elephant birds, prides of lean lions, and 
a menagerie of other beasts. Predatory griffins and man- 
ticores regularly range over the region's grassy seas, 
while beings like the anvilwroughts of Mount Velus or 
the Nyxborn from Nykthos often experience Oreskos as 
their first glimpse of the wider world. 


LEONIN ОЕ ORESKOS 


Close-knit prides of several dozen to a few hundred leo- 
nin make their homes throughout Oreskos. These com- 
munities treat every member as family, with all taking 
equal roles in hunting, cooking, family care, and other 
daily responsibilities. Status in the tribe typically comes 
with age and by forming relationships with other mem- 
bers of the community, whether through childrearing, 
friendships, romances, teaching, or otherwise. Leonin 
women tend to remain part of their mothers' prides, 
while males often leave to join new prides when they 
find partners. Councils of matriarchs make decisions for 
most prides, these leaders rising from among the oldest 
or best-respected women of the pride. 

Generally, leonin communities avoid outsiders, par- 
ticularly armed groups of soldiers and champions of the 
gods. Many leonin suffered under the rule of the archons 
and at the whim of fickle gods, a grim history that taught 
them well-remembered lessons about trusting strangers 
or relying on deities. Most leonin understand that people 
aren't their culture, though, and individuals who prove 
themselves trustworthy might find gradual acceptance 
among the prides. Even so, leonin prides accept cen- 
taurs, minotaurs, and satyrs more readily than unpre- 
dictable humans and alien tritons. 


LEONIN COMMUNITIES 
Leonin prides typically occupy dens or mobile tent 
cities, or possibly both at different times of the year. 
Their dens commonly lie amid the foothills at the edge 
of Oreskos, particularly along the Oraniads to the east. 
Dens are usually comprised of small, interconnected 
networks of underground chambers. Large, shared 
spaces in these dens are typically decorated with rich 
woven textiles, bone crafts, and rich clay and crystal 
pottery. The dens are cool in the summers, but leonin 
are a sun-loving people and prefer to be outside—even 
sleeping outdoors—whenever weather permits. 
Numerous beasts migrate across Oreskos during the 
spring and fall. During this time, hunters from nearly 
every leonin pride participate in extended expeditions. 
In some cases, the entire pride takes part, emptying 
their dens to journey across the plains. While on the 


CHAPTER 3 | REALMS OF GODS AND MORTALS 


hunt, prides dwell in lavish tent-cities, largely com- 
prised of tents capable of housing whole families. These 
temporary homes surround brightly colored pavilions, 
where craftspeople turn game into meals, clothing, and 
materials, honoring their animal neighbors by wasting 
nothing. While these encampments are obvious and well 
supplied, they are also heavily guarded by wary leonin. 
As a result, strangers who approach such camps tend to 
receive cold receptions. 


THE SPEAKER 

Each year, on the day of the first full moon after the 
autumn equinox, matriarchs from all the leonin prides 
gather at Tethmos to select a monarch, who acts as a 
representative of the prides in the wider world. While 
terms like "queen" or "general" are often applied to this 
leader by outsiders, the meaning of the leonin title, zib- 
ynth, is closer to "speaker." 

As the sun rises on this festival day, the leonin gather 
to renew pacts of friendship. The matriarchs of all the 
prides hold council during this time. As dusk falls, the 
council announces a new speaker. A fantastic celebra- 
tion ensues, involving dancing, feasting, singing, public 
professions of deep feelings, and trading oaths. 

Traditionally, the speaker reigns for a single year. As 
the leonin have grown less isolated, though, they have 
come to explore greater continuity in their leadership, 
and the current speaker, Brimaz, has held the office for 
several years. One of the few men to ever be speaker, he 
is broadminded, humble, and determined, with a deep 
connection to the land. He is quick to seek opinions 
from the matriarchs of the leonin prides, and often de- 
fers to their wisdom. While his focus has largely been 
within the grasslands' borders, he cautiously explores 
engaging in trade with the human poleis 


IRONMANES 

One collection of leonin prides, the Ironmanes, doesn't 
recognize the authority of the speaker. These fearsome 
warriors live in the foothills of the western Katachthon 
mountains, acknowledging no authority but their own. 
The warriors of the tribe stain their fur with rust to 
declare their status and ornament themselves with 
claws and small bones taken from defeated opponents. 
While intensely territorial, the Ironmanes sometimes 
offer their services as guards or guides, though they 
generally disdain working for anyone but other leonin. 
Numerous leonin fighters and rangers count themselves 
as Ironmanes. 


SUN GUIDES 

True children of Oreskos, the Sun Guides have lived in 
the grasslands for countless generations. They know the 
way of Oreskos's beasts and seasons better than any. 
Both mystical and knowledgeable, the Sun Guides read 
the messages in plant growth and animal migrations, 
and make their place in the natural cycle. 

Sun Guide prides might be found throughout Oreskos, 
but most orbit the lake known as Sun’s Mirror. While 
these prides sometimes seek their dens during the 
harshest winters, many will spend years on the open 
plains. Many druids, monks, rangers, and sorcerers hail 
from Sun Guide prides. 


SPEAKER BRIMAT LOOKS BEYOND ORESKOS AND WONDERS 


IF THERE 15 А FUTURE FOR HIS PEOPLE IN THE OUTSIDE WORLD. 


SWIFTCLAWS 

Among the greatest hunters of Oreskos, the Swiftclaws 
are known for speed and efficiency. Their hunts are 
known to be among the shortest and most fruitful. 
While their martial prowess earns them respect, it also 
affords many leonin more time to share tales and study 
the lore of their people. As a result, some of the great- 
est leonin storytellers and historians number among 
the Swiftclaws. Fighters and rogues are also common 
among the Swiftclaws, and many bards and wizards 
come from these prides as well. 


GRASSLANDS OF ORESKOS 


Unspoiled by roads or buildings, Oreskosis a land of 
striking natural beauty, where the plains and sky appear 
to go on forever. Craggy stone formations and ancient 
ruins dot windswept grasslands and plateaus, shading 
into scrubby badlands, rocky hills, and unwelcoming 
mountains. At the sun’s height, the grasslands shine like 
beaten gold, and the sunsets are incomparable. Magnif- 
icent storms spread clouds in a rainbow of colors, creat- 
ing vistas exhilarating to those brave enough to weather 
them. The hills yield ancient treasures and a bounty of 
precious metals and stones. At night, the movements of 
Nyx are striking, but images of the gods seem to keep 
their distance from this land where few pay them honor. 

Yet most non-leonin will never see this beauty. The 
leonin prides guard their lands implacably, and without 
a good reason to be there—or a leonin guide to vouch for 
one's presence— outsiders are often chased away. 


TETHMOS 

Tethmos serves as the default capital for Oreskos, a 
meeting place for the tribes, and the home of leonin 
leaders. Stone buildings and slender windmills jut 
above the plain, their pale colors and metal decorations 
shimmering in the light and changing color as the sun 
moves across the sky. Many leonin matriarchs and other 
wise souls retire to Tethmos to share their wisdom with 
all the prides. In recent years, a few non-leonin traders 
have been admitted into Tethmos, provoking exagger- 
ated tales of the leonin sages and their golden city. 


MOUNT KURE 

Atop Mount Kure rises a massive temple, open-roofed 
and accented in gold. This temple of Heliod, his closest 
to Oreskos, is rarely visited, but on the god's highest 
holy days, worshipers journey there to commune with 
the sun god. These pilgrimages occasionally bring 

the god's servants into conflict with wary leonin hunt- 
ing nearby. 


SUN'S MIRROR 

This vast, placid lake sits at the center of Oreskos. No 
matter the weather around it, the lake's surface remains 
undisturbed, and often reflects the sunlight so brightly 
that it's difficult to look at. Those who approach the lake 
and gaze into its waters usually see their own reflec- 
tions, but on rare occasions, they see visions of places 
far away. The leonin claim that these visions show not 
just the present, but even the past and the future. 


CHAPTER 3 | REALMS OF GODS AND MORTALS 7 
9 


PHOBEROS AND SKOPHOS 


MOGIS RESHAPED OUR ANCESTORS, GIVING FORM TO 
their great rages and pains. We are not our ancestors, 
though. We are god-carved for greatness, but each of us 
determines how. 

—Gysios, Bronzebones veteran 


The western edge of Akroan territory is a region of arid 
canyons and caverns called Phoberos, a land of harsh 
natural whims haunted by ravenous monsters. Fierce 
bands of wild minotaurs haunt these badlands, and for 
centuries these brutal marauders were the only mino- 
taurs the human poleis ever knew—which contributed to 
the minotaurs’ reputation as bloodthirsty brutes. 

But to the north of Phoberos, far from the walls of Ak- 
ros, stands the sprawling, labyrinthine polis of Skophos. 
Skophos is mentioned in a few ancient odes, but only 
a handful of humans have ever beheld Skophos, and 
hardly any have successfully navigated its labyrinthine 
passageways and returned to tell of it. 

The founding of Skophos and its troubled history with 
Akros are the stuff of myth, and it is difficult to distin- 
guish the mortal history of the two poleis from tales 
of the twin gods, Iroas and Mogis. The gods warred 
with each other, their followers and champions vied for 
control of scarce land, and two ideals—the nobility of 
heroic struggle and victory versus the brutality of savage 
slaughter in war—competed for a place in the mortal 
mind. Just as Mogis is the dark shadow of everything 
Iroas stands for, so is Skophos the reflection of Akros. 
And Phoberos is the bloodstained battleground where 
the eternal conflict between the gods and their po- 
leis is waged. 


MINOTAURS OF PHOBEROS 


Most of the minotaurs that roam the badlands of 
Phoberos are outcasts from the society of Skophos. 
They are bandits and marauders, bloodthirsty killers 
infected by the wild rage of Mogis. These minotaurs 
have more in common with the monsters in the Mon- 
ster Manual than with the civilized people described in 
chapter 1 of this book (including their Large size). Most 
of them use only the barest minimum of technology— 
tattered clothes, piecemeal armor, and heavy weapons, 
all scavenged from their fallen foes. They wander alone 
or gather in bands under the leadership of the strongest 
among them, and in either case tend to kill any human 
they encounter. Three distinct bands are particularly 
well-known by their Akroan foes. 


BLOODHORN MINOTAURS 

Named for their blood-caked horns, the Bloodhorn 
minotaurs have ragged claws to supplement their 
charges and gores. Gleeful in their brutality, they 
slaughter and devour any intruders they encounter in 
the badlands, and particularly value the bone marrow 
of young humans. They take pride in their overlarge, 
razor-sharp horns. 


FELHIDE MINOTAURS 

The notoriously dour Felhide minotaurs are descended 
from the warlord Thyrogog of the Ashlands. The The- 
riad recounts the brute’s defeat and the loss of his 
great axe, Goremaster. Viewing Thyrogog’s defeat as 

a divine sign, the warlord’s descendants retreated into 
the Ashlands. 

Burial rites among the Felhide minotaurs involve de- 
vouring those who fell in battle, to remove their shame 
from memory and fuel the survivors’ revenge. Should 
another scavenger reach a fallen Felhide before the rest 
of the band can eat the dead minotaur’s remains, the 
minotaurs mobilize to track down as much of their dead 
comrade's body as possible. 


For CENTURIES, THE MINOTAUR POLIS OF SKOPHOS WAS 


UNKNOWN TO OUTSIDERS. It REMAINS UNEXPLORED. 


RAGEGORE MINOTAURS 

Ragegore minotaurs are the most ferocious of their 
kind, deeply infected by the bloodlust of Mogis. Rage- 
gores never withdraw from a battle, entering a frenzy of 
furious delight at the sight of an enemy's blood. While in 
the heat of battle, a Ragegore minotaur seems to feel no 
pain and barely notices wounds that would kill a human. 
Some Ragegores have been known to fall dead immedi- 
ately at the cessation of battle, their life sustained only 
by their fury. 


CITY OF SKOPHOS 


When Akroan soldiers encounter minotaurs in ordered 
squads, patrolling the badlands on predictable routes, 
clad in armor and wielding bronze weapons, they tend 
to speak of the “Bronzebone band,” as if these mino- 
taurs were just one more faction competing for domi- 
nance in Phoberos. But these minotaurs aren't just one 
more raiding band; they are the soldiers of Skophos, the 
minotaur polis. 

Skophos stands as a literal maze, its twisting streets 
carved from the red sandstone of the badlands. The 
walls of the maze rise as narrow buildings that serve 
as homes, shops, and defensible fortresses for the city’s 
predominantly minotaur population. Mighty stone out- 
croppings tower over the labyrinth, including temples 
to Mogis (the most prominent), Erebos, Keranos, and 
Purphoros. The fortress-palaces of tyrants, the lairs of 
monstrous oracles, and cavernous indoor markets also 
stand as destinations at the end of confounding avenues. 

Priests and warlord champions of Mogis rule the city, 
with individuals serving as tyrants over city districts. 
The city’s rulers rarely meet in council, and when they 
do, the quarrelsome tyrants rarely find common cause 
or any basis for agreement. Only the priests of Mogis 
can force the city’s leaders to put aside their quarrels 
and work toward a single goal. 


LESSER PERISTYLE 

The minotaurs of Skophos acknowledge the entire 
pantheon of gods, though they are far enough inland 
that they have little cause to honor Thassa, and many of 
them view Iroas as an enemy of their people. They wor- 
ship a more ancient aspect of Karametra, who demands 
blood to ensure the fertility of the earth. In the shadow 
of Mogis’s great temple, most of the gods are honored 
with some kind of violence. 

In that context, the small temple known as the Lesser 
Peristyle is an oddity. Dedicated to Ephara, it is a place 
where minotaurs debate philosophy and strive to rein 
in the excesses of the tyrants who govern the city. The 
existence of Skophos is a testimony to the benefits of 
an ordered society, as Ephara teaches, and that self-ev- 
ident lesson is the strongest argument that Ephara’s 
handful of priests can make to justify their presence 
in the city. From that starting point, they pursue their 
vision of a better way of life, aspiring to nobler principles 
than senseless slaughter and better governance than 
iron-fisted tyranny. Under the leadership of the temple’s 
priests—Haraksi, an ingenious smith and mother of 
eight, and Olakia the Torn, an oracle who experiences 


visions from both Mogis and Ephara—a school of mi- 
notaur philosophers aspires to a vision of Skophos 
that can coexist in some measure of peace with the 
wider world. 


Mocis’s CHALICE 

Many grand temples to Mogis stand in Skophos, pre- 
senting a stark contrast to the crude shrines that usually 
serve as sites of worship for the god of fury. Near the 
center of the polis, one temple larger and more elaborate 
than the rest serves as a holy site and the seat of the mi- 
notaur government, called Mogis’s Chalice. 

Fires always burn in two great copper bowls on either 
side of the temple entrance. Iron-spiked crenellations 
ring the temple roof, many decorated with skulls. Red 
clay is smeared at the entrance and the altar, often 
anointed with fresh blood. Inside, a massive bronze mi- 
notaur head hangs above the black marble altar. 

Legend holds that if anyone, minotaur or otherwise, 
kills a hated rival or enemy in the main room of the Tem- 
ple to Mogis, they will be blessed by the god of wrath. 
Even the minotaurs of Skophos will not interfere with 
such a battle, and the victor is always allowed to depart 
without further bloodshed. 


BADLANDS OF PHOBEROS 


Between Skophos and the human polis of Akros 
stretches the desolate wilderness of Phoberos. Numer- 
ous canyons, said to have been cut in the earth during 
battles between Mogis and Iroas, crisscross the rocky 
badlands. As minotaurs prove adept at navigating such 
natural mazes, they often make camp in these crags, 
hidden from the sun and heat. A variety of other raiders 
and monsters similarly make their lairs in such places— 
particularly cyclopes, basilisks, and harpies. 


DEATHBELLOW CANYON 

Deathbellow Canyon is known for its stinking bogs, 
cave-riddled spires, and the ominous markings of 
Ragegore minotaurs. At the canyon’s heart yawns the 
Kragma, a vast cave that resembles a screaming mouth. 
The Kragmais the grim meeting place of the Ragegore 
minotaur bands, where these Mogis-worshiping raiders 
make brutal sacrifices and endlessly quarrel, their war 
cries echoing through the canyon. 


THE STRATIAN FRONT 

Soldiers from the Akroan army monitor Phoberos and 
patrol the borders of Akros, confronting any threats that 
might bring harm to their homeland. Such is an endless 
war that demands Akros's constant attention. While a 
few permanent encampments exist—like raucous Camp 
No Hope and the cavern Fort Sandmouth—most stra- 
tian patrols follow their own path through the badlands. 


THE ASHLANDS 

Buried in white ash, the Ashlands offer a vivid reminder 
of the last time Mount Vesios erupted. Numerous un- 
dead wander these lands, many not realizing that they're 
dead as they wander half-buried ruins. These lands 

are also the home of the Felhide minotaurs and the 
bleached dragon oracle known as Timedrinker. 


CHAPTER 3 | REALMS OF GODS AND MORTALS 


100 


REALMS OF THE RETURNED 


DEATH AND LIFE ARE TWO SIDES OF THE SAME COIN. 
Opposite, but eternally connected. One cannot exist with- 
out the other. 

—Slighos the Body-binder 


Before becoming a god, Phenax died, passed into Ere- 
bos’s realm, and ultimately escaped the Underworld. 
His escape route, the Path of Phenax (see chapter 4), 
has since been employed by rare, but over the ages in- 
numerable, individuals. These Returned find the world 
of the living far different from how they experienced 

it in life—not that they remember their lives. Although 
they've escaped from the Underworld, the Returned still 
find themselves separate from the living, their memories 
lost and their unnatural states striking fear in most mor- 
tals. As a result, most Returned come to follow certain 
paths of behavior and gravitate toward two city-states, 
known as the necropoleis—cities of the dead. 


THE RETURNED 


Walking the Path of Phenax doesn't restore a soul to its 
life. Those who return from the Underworld are hollow 
shells inhabited by grim and purposeless spirits. These 
Returned are separated from their memories, which 
become wandering eidolons (see chapter 6). They retain 
their personalities and skills, but each Returned tends 
to be avery different being from who they once were. 
Their second life is theirs to do with as they please, but 
it’s typically a confused, cursed life, plagued by frustra- 
tion, bitterness, loneliness, and melancholy. Such leads 
many Returned along dark paths. 


ANOGRAPHERS 

Anographers are the scribes of the Returned. On 

long scrolls of bleached white parchment, they write 
half-remembered names, images from dreams, and 
descriptions of places and people that might once have 
held meaning. Other Returned visit anographers and de- 
scribe what scraps of memory they retain. Some believe 
hidden wisdom lies upon these scrolls, clues to ancient 
mysteries, or hints at the lost identities of the Returned. 


GRAY MERCHANTS 

Traders recognize Gray Merchants by their hooded gray 
cloaks and their carts piled high with useless trinkets. 
Their wares include components for sinister rituals, jew- 
elry stolen from graves, cursed magic items, and other 
ominous goods. In return, they demand kitchen utensils, 
worn bridles, waterlogged books, and other unremark- 
able trash. There's no rhyme or reason to what the Gray 
Merchants seek, and the merchants themselves never 
speak. They conduct business through gestures, making 
their unusual trades and plodding off into the shadows. 


KAKOMANTEIS 

Returned kakomanteis employ powerful magic at a 
price paid in blood. Some theorize that in life each ka- 
komantis was a spell caster, and the trip along the Path 
of Phenax corrupted their abilities. Regardless of how 


CHAPTER 3 | REALMS OF GODS AND MORTALS 


they came upon their grisly magic, kakomanteis keep 
small animals, such as rodents, snakes, and insects, 
close at hand to power their spells, though more potent 
magical effects demand more significant sacrifices. 


PALAMNITES 

While most of the Returned are listless and quiet, 
palamnites burn with envy and rage. They are vicious 
killers, destroying what no longer brings them joy. 
Palamnites burn villages, slaughter innocents, and steal 
wealth only to discard it later. Most stories of vengeful 
Returned stem from reports of these tortured souls. 


PSEUDAMMAS 

Pseudammas are cursed by fleeting memories of their 
lost children. They know that they were parents in life 
and that they will never again experience the love of 
their child. Though their plight is heartbreaking, pseu- 
dammas turn tragedy into horror by snatching mortal 
children and attempting to raise them. However, the 
Returned have forgotten the needs of the living and they 
have no concept of how to care for a child. 


ASPHODEL AND THE DESPAIR LANDS 


The influence of the Underworld leaches life and color 
from a peninsula south of the Nessian Wood. Here, the 
necropolis of Asphodel sprawls amid the bleak region 
called the Despair Lands. 

The Returned of Asphodel seek to be left alone with 
their ennui. They rarely leave the city, venturing out only 
when spurred by fugues of emotion or fleeting memo- 
ries. The streets are dusty and rarely walked, though the 
windows of dilapidated hovels glimmer with the staring 
masks of listless Returned. Asphodelis an echo of the 
grim cities of the Underworld, making it a tragically 
ironic home for those who risked so much to escape the 
land of the dead. 


COLISEUM OF THE APHONAI 

Three ancient Returned called the Aphonai rule Aspho- 
del. They wear simple, identical golden masks and long, 
drab robes, making them nearly impossible to distin- 
guish from one another. From the Coliseum of the Apho- 
nai, a perfectly circular stone building that stands at the 
heart of Asphodel, the leaders listen to cases brought be- 
fore them and decide on the few matters of importance 
to the city. Trespassers caught within the city are often 
brought before the Aphonai for judgment. The elder 
Returned never speak, rendering their judgments only 
in gestures. 


ORDER OF PHAIOS 

A cabal of mages known as the Order of Phaios defend 
Asphodel with their magic. The mages of the order de- 
vote themselves to studying arcane mysteries that could 
never be unraveled in a single life. Like all Returned, 
though, they have difficulty remembering what they 
learn. For this reason, the rooms of their order’s vaulted 
hall, the Stoa of Shadows, are covered with coded en- 
gravings that collect their wisdom. While the research 
of the Returned rarely leads them to epiphany, some of 
the few living mages who have stolen into the stoa es- 
cape with remarkable knowledge. 


HETOS, THE BLEAK MIRE 

Asphodel perches at the edge of a sprawling marsh 
called the Hetos Mire. The necropolis stands on an ele- 
vated piece of land surrounded by treacherous bogs and 
tangled thickets. The inhospitable territory serves the 
Returned as a first line of defense against any intruders. 
Near the southern edge of Hetos stands an ages-old, 
crimson cypress called the Blood Tree. Color from 

the tree bleeds into the surrounding bog, making the 
swamp waters look like a charnel pit. Vicious and ven- 
omous swamp creatures are drawn to the Blood Tree 
and frequently drag prey into its foul midst. 


ODUNOS 


The Returned of Odunos despise the living, feeling 
sparks of pleasure when they destroy whatever the 
living value, be it property or people. Within their city, 
armed Returned gangs roam the streets, quarreling for 
no apparent reason. Beyond the city's walls, undead 
raiders strike out, menacing the lands of Akros, Meletis, 
and Phoberos. These raids are led by the city's de facto 
ruler, Tymaret the Murder King, a servant of Erebos 
tasked with returning Phenax to the Underworld. Know- 
ing that Phenax could disguise himself as anyone, Ty- 
maret slaughters all living souls, just to be thorough. 

Those who would strike back against Odunos's raid- 
ers must venture through mires corrupted by sucking 
bogs and necromatic horrors. Those who survive to 
reach the city find it heavily guarded, its towers bris- 
tling with sleepless guards and abominations of unliv- 
ing flesh. 


MYTH OF TYMARET THE MURDER KING 

When Phenax made his escape from the Underworld, there 
was one witness to his escape, an unremarkable soul called 
Tymaret. Sharing what he'd seen with the god of the dead, 
Tymaret received a cursed blessing from Erebos: he would 
be restored to the mortal world, but as a Returned, and with 
the task of slaying Phenax. Tymaret took up the quest, but as 
Phenax was masked, he proved difficult to locate. So Tymaret 
began slaughtering every mortal he encountered, confident 
that one of these victims would be Phenax Yet, when Phenax 
became a god, he evaded his pursuer, leaving Tymaret and 
his legions of Returned to eternally, fruitlessly kill in Ere- 
bos's name. 


THE BOTHROS 

A bottomless chasm yawns at the north edge of Odunos. 
Nothing that has fallen into its depths has ever been re- 
covered. After a successful raid, warriors from Odunos 
usually dispose of their spoils in the Bothros—caring 
nothing for their pillage. Occasionally this includes cap- 
tives, forced into the pit during wordless executions. 


CRYPTS OF THE LOST 

Beyond Odunos rises a cluster of tors honeycombed by 
countless tombs. Few know who were originally buried 
in this morbid labyrinth, but the Returned care nothing 
for the corpses and dust. Occasionally, Returned who've 
grown tired of their half-lives congregate here, waiting 
for a final death to claim them. Some tales claim that 
treasures lie amid the crypts, but others say that Phe- 
nax first emerged from the Underworld here, and his 
path could be retraced back into Erebos’s domain. 


CHAPTER 3 | REALMS OF GODS AND MORTALS 
IOI 


THE SIREN SEA 


CALLAPHE GAZED ON THE COASTLINE, 
certain her destiny called her 
here, where the mist-shrouded rocks sang, 
promising glories undreamed of. 
—The Callapheia 


The vast Siren Sea extends west from the known lands 
of Theros to the edge of the world. As Thassa’s domain, 
the sea hides an amazing array of creatures, including 
the entire triton civilization. Its legendary dangers range 
from deadly reefs and wandering islands to predatory 
beasts and devastating krakens (see chapter 6). Ev- 
er-changing, the Siren Sea is a realm of impossible 
sights and constant danger, the setting of legendary od- 
ysseys and the crucible of heroes. 


TRITONS OF THE SIREN SEA 


Most tritons make their homes in the Siren Sea, either 
migrating with the shifting tides or raising hidden cities 
of outlandish beauty. The majority are devoted servants 
of Thassa who rigorously protect her domain, often 
treating surface-dwelling sailors as trespassers. Tritons 
make most of their goods from materials harvested from 
the deep, but have also developed ingenious forms of 
metallurgy—largely based around volcanic sea vents— 
and chemical etching, crafting wares that rival those 
made on land. The endless array of life and unpredict- 
able changes of the sea make tritons regular witnesses 
to wonders. As a result, most tritons have a natural 
curiosity, ever seeking to see and learn more, but know 
they'll never fathom all the wonders of the world. 

Although numerous triton cultures exist throughout 
the Siren Sea, many of those closest to shore are led by 
priests of Thassa. Triton warriors enact their leaders’ 
will, with many specializing in doing battle against mas- 
sive beasts or ships sailing the surface. The most wary 
communities might even employ shorethieves, tritons 
adept at using magical disguises to infiltrate land-bound 
towns to watch and steal from “dryfolk.” 


DAKRA ISLES 


The Dakra Isles were created when Thassa wept over 
the death of Korinna, a triton queen killed by a human’s 
harpoon. Where the god’s tears fell onto the sea there 
exploded forth an isle suffused with immortal magic 
and memory. Ages later, the Dakra Isles—also called the 
Isles of Enchantment—harbor strange sights and fierce 
monsters. Thassa’s power makes it impossible to keep 
an accurate chart of the islands’ positions, which roam 
as they please. Thus, even the most famed locations 
appear on no map, and sailors might spot them when 
or wherever Thassa wills. A few of the Dakra Isles’ leg- 
endary locations are noted here, and chapter 4 presents 
guidance for creating more magical shores. 


ARIXMETHES 

Tales tell of the lost island of Arixmethes, whose popu- 
lation was wiped out by disaster. In truth, generations of 
hapless humans raised their city, realizing too late that 
they’d done so upon the back of a titanic kraken. When 
the kraken Arixmethes awakened, its throes devastated 
the city upon its back and wiped out the residents. Since 
returning to its slumber, Arixmethes drifts where it will, 
still bearing the ruins of a legendary city upon its back. 


CRONEMOUTH COVE 

This tiny island lies in the midst of perpetual doldrums 
and holds a known gate to the Underworld. It is guarded 
by a coven of sea hags who share a single tongue that is 
perpetually trying to escape from their clutches, wrig- 
gling out of reach with a mind of its own. 


KETAPHOS 

Famed for its role in The Callapheia, the island of Ket- 
aphos supposedly exists in Nyx during the night and in 
the mortal realm during the day. Callaphe and her crew 
were welcomed there and fed by a band of Nyxborn cen- 
taurs when a storm drove them to the island, then found 
themselves stranded on a barren rock when the sun 
rose and the island shifted to the mortal realm. 


SKATHOS 

The island of Skathos was once a sacred meeting place 
for a secret cult of Pharika whose rites revolved around 
consuming a magical flower native to the island. The 
island is now home to the medusa queen, Hythonia (de- 
scribed in chapter 6). 


SKOLA VALE 


TASTE THE WORLD BEFORE EREBOS RIPS YOUR: 
tongue out. 
—Thisbi, satyr dawngreet 


Nestled in the highlands of the Oraniad Mountains, the 
Skola Vale is blessed by Nylea, covered in lush grass, 
and dotted with copses of trees. Satyrs roam the com- 
fortable valley with no need for permanent settlements, 
all their needs provided for by the valley’s magic. Ac- 
cording to legend, Nylea was so taken with the valley's 
beauty that she poured the contents of her wineskin 
onto the vale to make it flourish forever. When wild 
goats drank of this wine, they became the first satyrs 
who made the magical land their home. 

While the Skola Vale is a place of revelry, it isn’t with- 
out its dangers. The satyrs themselves can become too 
raucous in their merrymaking, and monsters lurk in the 
shadows of the trees and the surrounding mountains. 


SATYRS OF THE SKOLA VALE 


The satyrs of the Skola Vale are wild and free. They 
have taboos, but not laws, influence fluctuates con- 
stantly, and all are free to make merry in any way they 
please, so long as it doesn't impede on others’ ability to 
do the same. Disagreements are typically turned into 
opportunities for public competition. Irreconcilable 
issues are usually solved by a strict application of “you 
go over there, and you go over there.” True intentional 
crimes, however, are violations known deep in the satyr 
soul. If needs be, revelry can halt in an instant to help 
someone who's been hurt, and true criminals are exiled 
from the Skola Vale for life. Satyrs quickly bury negative 
thoughts, though, and the loss of one friend merely leads 
them to redouble efforts to make more. 

Distinctions are few among satyrs, but several notable 
groups are detailed here. 


DAWNGREETS 

Dawngreets are satyr emissaries, explorers, and story- 
tellers sent to other communities throughout the world. 
They arrange satyr-style celebrations wherever they go, 
spreading their people's carefree philosophies, praising 
Nylea, sharing news, and creating friends the Skola Vale 
can rely on when necessary. 


NYLEA’S FAVORED 

A circle of satyr druids, Nylea’s Favored protect the 
Skola Vale, restoring nature after damage by wildfires 
or too rowdy satyr parties. They also defend the vale by 
growing dense underbrush and supporting populations 
of wild beasts at their territory’s borders. 


SIBYLS 

The closest people satyrs have to leaders are their 
sibyls, who are blessed with limited ability to see into 
the future. Sibyls warn the community when danger 
threatens the valley, select dawngreets, and oversee the 
“initiation rites” of the Cult of Horns. The oldest sibyl 

is a gray-furred satyr named Cresa. She insists that the 
more she drinks, the further she can see into the future. 


SKOLA VALE REVELS | 


Satyrs hold regular revels called rollick nights. These 
lengthy festivals are full of merrymaking, contests, 
impromptu performances, and song, all accompanied 
by good food and sweet drinks. Beyond these celebra- 
tions, tales are also told of bakkeia, revels that occur 
in deep caves and that involve ancient sacrificial rites. 
Most satyrs say these traditions were abandoned ages 
ago, though. 


CULT or Horns 

Some non-satyrs looking for pleasure without conse- 
quences visit the Skola Vale, encouraged by dawngreets 
and tales of wild revels. After spending some time with 
the satyrs, dark-humored sibyls might invite outsiders to 
join the Cult of Horns. If they agree, the non-satyr might 
be crowned with a circlet of horns, marking them as 
"stubs" (for their crown's stubby horns). A period of haz- 
ing follows, where the stubs are enticed to perform me- 
nial or humiliating tasks. When the satyrs grow bored— 
or a respected, sober satyr steps in—the hazing ends, 
which typically results in the stub later waking up alone 
in the mountains. Most satyrs who participate in such 
ungenerous behavior are chided and are themselves 
made to serve at the next revel, but the satyr memory for 
consequences is short and the tradition persists. As for 
former stubs, most never share details about their expe- 
riences, their secrecy contributing to tales of dark rites 
and sinister enchantments in the vale. 


FEATURES OF THE SKOLA VALE 


The Skola Vale is a wild place where majestic animals 
run free, trees, vines, and bushes provide fruit, and Nyl- 
ea's magic enhances the land. Plants and animals grow 
rapidly in the valley. The chaotic satyrs may upend a 
copse of trees one night only to have it regrow by morn- 
ing. Most of the Skola Vale consists of greenery rolling 
over gentle hills. During the day, the vale's residents 
hunt small game and gather wild fruit for wine. Other 
predators, such as bears, lions, and rocs, hunt the re- 
gion as well. Some of these beasts, whether predator or 
prey, have become Nyxborn legends that appear again 
and again through the generations, either as threats 

or the stuff of incredible meals. Satyrs speak of both 
Kexosrexsos the Braided Lion and Hulp the Pork Bird 
with equal awe. 


WOODLANDS 

The Skola Vale's trees grow in twisted, climbable 
shapes allowing inhabitants shady places to play and 
sleep. Dryads protect the largest of these trees, espe- 
cially from drunken satyr antics. During the day, the 
copses are idyllic forests, filled with the music of pan- 
pipes. At night, though, the forests grow more menac- 
ing. Nocturnal monsters roam the wood—particularly 
chimeras, cockatrices, and harpies—striving to pick off 
drunken satyrs wandering alone after a revel. Satyrs 
rarely travel alone at night, believing that noise and mu- 
sic scare away evil, but revelers aren't always as wary as 
they should be. 


CHAPTER 3 | REALMS OF GODS AND MORTALS 


103 


104 


THE KATACHTHON 
MOUNTAINS 


While folk wisdom holds that the eastern Oraniad 
Mountains are blessed by the gods, dark, older magic 
supposedly holds sway in the Katachthons. While the 
Katachthons are a smaller range than the Oraniads, 
they are harsher and more volcanically active, with 
regular avalanches, storms, and unpredictable microcli- 
mates. Clouds obscure heavenly signs, guides become 
disoriented, and explorers wander in ever-smaller cir- 
cles. And above it all, dragons rule the range—fire-belch- 
ing creatures whose bellies, it is said, are filled with the 
flames of Purphoros's forge. 

Those who live in the foothills of the Katachthons are 
loath to acknowledge any tales of wondrous treasure or 
mysterious creatures to be found there, only repeating 
a warning to travelers: if you must cross them, keep to 
the passes. The two passes, One-Eyed Pass and the 
Cypress Gates, aren't safe, but they are generally consid- 
ered less lethal than attempts to blaze one's own trail. 


MOUNT VELUS 

Visible from Akros, Mount Velus is an energetically ac- 
tive volcano. The fiery mountain serves as nothing less 
than Purphoros's home in the mortal world. 

While the volcano has only erupted a few times since 
Akros's founding, those minor catastrophes were 
enough to demonstrate that a major eruption might 
destroy the entire region. Akroans regularly leave offer- 
ings at the foot of the volcano, and rigorously dissuade 
travelers from venturing up to the sacred peak, hoping 
to avert the great explosion they fear is coming. 

While some adventurers have climbed to the volcano's 
caldera, met Purphoros, and lived, the god's anger isn't 
the only danger. A red dragon called Thraxes makes his 
home in the halls of Purphoros's first residence, which 
the god abandoned to create a larger and more ornate 
home deeper in the volcano. The dragon occasionally 
uses the old forge to craft his own creations, melting 
gold from his treasure hoard. He sometimes gives these 
creations to Purphoros as offerings. In exchange the god 
allows the dragon to stay in the volcano. 

Purphoros's forge lies in the deepest part of Mount 
Velus, near a vast lava pool. The massive iron forge is 
surrounded by the finest ores, metals, and gems. Some 
of the greatest treasures Purphoros ever crafted are 
contained in the god's residence, a forge-palace warded 
by an enormous, gilded iron door. Occasionally these 
doors crack open, admitting a curious anvilwrought 
creature into the world, or burst wide, unleashing some 
manifestation of Purphoros's fury. 


MOUNT VESIOS 

Mount Vesios, also known as the Little Sister, is а 
smaller volcano that resembles Mount Velus and erupts 
concurrently with Velus. A monastery on its western 
slope houses scholars and spellcasters who study the 
volcano, believing that through it, they might be able to 
control the eruptions of Mount Velus. Numerous oreads 
and Akroan flamespeakers offer their omens from the 
volcano's heights. 


CHAPTER 3 | REALMS OF GODS AND MORTALS 


THE ORANIAD MOUNTAINS 


The Oraniad mountains stretch along the east side of 
Oreskos. While they don't share the dark reputation of 
their western neighbor, they are the more dangerous 
territory. Tall, timeless mountains, the Oraniads are 
said to be closer to Nyx than any other point on Theros. 
Ancient shrines lie among the lonely peaks, their origins 
lost to mortal memory, and their halls haunted by myste- 
rioussupernatural phenomena. А wanderer might come 
upon a shrine to a forgotten god, only to find it gone 
upon looking back. Travelers might also catch glimpses 
of mysterious creatures here, beings that should have 
long ago passed into Nyx, or that have slipped from the 
divine realm before the gods intended from them to ap- 
pear upon the world. 


EMPTY EvE 

On the western edge ofthe Oraniad range's widest point 
stands its tallest peak, a smooth-sided, towering, extinct 
volcano. Its caldera is a gaping dark hole, and no expedi- 
tion sent to plumb its depths has ever returned. 


NYKTHOS 

The Nykthos is a nexus point between the mortal realm 
and Nyx. The site bears the name of the first Nyxborn, a 
divine artisan tasked with building altars to the gods so 
they could be worshiped by mortals. 

Built on a vast plain high in the mountains, the temple 
forms a mighty semicircle upon a field of starry marble. 
Its position at the peak of Mount Carian affords it an un- 
obstructed view of the horizon in all directions. Statues 
of gods, champions, and oracles adorn the shrine, and 
each deity has an altar in a distinct alcove. Towering 
pillars of light rise from each altar and vanish into the 
starry night sky. Unseen in the heavens above, these pil- 
lars connect to counterparts in an identical temple in the 
foyer to Nyx—the entrance, as it were, to the realm of the 
gods. The few brave souls that complete a pilgrimage 
to Nykthos and sleep on the peak experience extremely 
vivid dreams of divine entities, sometimes talking with 
the gods themselves or gaining visions of the future. 


PHOENIX STAIRS 

An eerie natural formation of hexagonal pillars creates a 
natural staircase up to a small volcanic peak in the Ora- 
niads. A phoenix makes its nest in the caldera at the top, 
tending its precious egg. Phoenix feathers bring high 
prices in markets across Theros, though misfortune 
hunts those who ascend to the creature's lair, even if 
they succeed at obtaining only a single feather. 


WINTER'S HEART 

Among the northern Oraniads stands a blizzard-gripped 
mountain that resembles a volcano. What breathes forth 
from the crater isn't fire, though. The caldera's interior 
is coated with ice so cold it freezes anything it touches. 
Even the fumes that issue forth cause instant frostbite. 
At the volcano's heart stands a glass statue of a haunt- 
ing, androgynous figure offering a diamond crown. None 
who have attempted to claim this strange gift have sur- 
vived. Even the gods prove reticent to speak of the place, 
denying its existence or speaking of it with shame. 


REALMS OF THE GODS 


The mortal world of Theros isn’t the only realm where 
the gods hold sway. The mortal realm is closely linked to 
two other realms, the domains of the gods themselves, 
Nyx and the Underworld. 


Nyx 


Nyx is an endless plane of existence where the powers 
of potentiality and belief hold sway. It is the realm of the 
gods, of belief given form, of dreams, and of rising and 
fading philosophies. From here, the pantheon of Theros 
watches the mortal world and guides the living. Though 
the gods live in a veritable paradise, they can’t sever 
themselves from the mortal world. To do so would be to 
lose the faith of their followers, the source of their magic 
and a power they will not relinquish. 

Nyx can be perceived in the night sky, with its ev- 
er-changing brilliance marked by constellations and 
cosmic phenomena. Its power slips into the world in the 
same form, with star fields filling the shadows of Nyx- 
born beings that are infused with its power (see chapter 
6 for details on Nyxborn). 

While Nyx is impossible to map, distinct regions do 
exist, and some travelers have returned to the mortal 
realm with tales of these incredible locations. 


Mount HiAsTOS 

This drifting mountain rises in sharp relief against the 
starry sky of Nyx, culminating in a golden orb that can 
be seen from a great distance. Some speculate that this 
orb is the source of Nyx’s vibrant colors and lights, and 


that without it, the plane would be plunged into eternal 
darkness. Several gods make their homes on the moun- 
tain's slopes. Heliod maintains a sprawling palace of 
gold and white marble, with a rooftop throne where he 
receives guests. Purphoros maintains a forge beneath 
the mountain, where he crafts philosophies, energies, 
and creations that would be impossible to manifest in 
the mortal world. Keranos lives near the summit of the 
mount, where he sends lightning bolts of inspiration to 
manipulate forces throughout dreams and the cosmos. 
Nylea, too, is known to visit Mount Hiastos, maintaining 
a sanctuary there within an ancient, knotted wood. 


MYSTIC SEA 

This body of mist and water hides endless secrets 
within its depths—both literal secrets that manifest from 
mortal minds and unimagined concepts not yet fully 
formed. Thassa’s palace floats underwater, its buildings 
suspended in giant bubbles that drift with the currents. 
At its edge, in a city of divine copper and marbleized 
hopes, Ephara makes her home. 


TOVIAN FIELDS 

Nyxborn legends battle here in ceaseless, glorious war. 
Unlike any mortal environment, the Tovian Fields are an 
expanse of energies, the clash of opposing philosophies 
manifesting as throngs of legendary combatants. In the 
midst of this riot rise the palatial war-tents of Mogis and 
Iroas, who lead the endless battle. 

Kruphix claims the borders of the Tovian Fields as 
his territory. He doesn't maintain a central residence. 
Rather, his influence binds the conflict, encompassing 
all perspectives and preventing the battle from spilling 
forth into the rest of Nyx. 


THE MIRACLES ANO CONFLICTS OF THE GODS PLAY OUT 


ENOLESSLY IN THE STARS OF Nvx 


THE UNDERWORLD 


The Underworld is the place of final rewards and end- 
less suffering. Although many believe the Underworld 
is literally beneath the ground, in truth the plane is 
distinct from the mortal world, reachable only via mag- 
ical means, hidden pathways, or by death. The souls of 
all dead sapient creatures awake on the banks of the 
Tartyx, where they meet Athreos the River Guide. From 
there, those capable of paying for his service are ferried 
to their new home in the Underworld. 

Most imagine the Underworld’s wards as being 
stacked atop one another, but their actual relationships 
defy mortal understanding. While the Tartyx River 
reaches each ward, Phylias is typically defined as the 
entry to the Underworld, while Tizerus is farthest from 
this entrance. The other wards hold their own equal 
places in between. Regardless, souls destined for each 
realm reach their destinations with equal efficiency and 
permanency. (See chapter 2 of the Dungeon Master's 
Guide for details on planar arrangements.) 

Each distinctive Underworld ward is effectively in- 
finite in scale, with the space between noteworthy lo- 
cations endlessly expanding and contracting. Traveling 
between locations is typically impossible on foot. Secret 
paths that defy mortal logic, magical steeds, and the 
intervention of powerful Underworld denizens all might 
speed one’s travels, though. Attempting to escape the 
Underworld is an entirely different, nearly impossible 
matter, though (see chapter 4 for details). 

Although vast beyond understanding, the Under- 
world’s most noteworthy regions are detailed here. 


THE TARTYX RIVER 

The Tartyx forms the boundary between the mortal 
realm and the Underworld. It is also known as the Riv- 
ers That Ring the World, as it is formed from the con- 
fluence of five tributaries, each originating in one of the 
Underworld’s five wards. The Tartyx is vast, with one far 
shore impossible to see from the other. Countless drift- 
ing islands dot the river, some forested by leafless trees, 
others heaped with crumbling ruins. Still others are 
the domains of powerful demons and strange entities 
that death proves not quite able to claim. None of these 
tiny lands are hospitable to either the living or the dead. 
Even the waters of the Tartyx hold their own threats, 
both mysterious creatures that slither beneath its rip- 
pling waters, and their own infamous power to wash 
away memories and all sense of identity. 


AGONAS 

Agonas is the last home of warriors and soldiers who 
battled in life without honor, as well as the souls of cow- 
ards, mercenaries, and others who lived by the sword. 
Their cries of pain and triumph echo on the faintest 
wind, stirring bloodlust in all who hear them. 

The clash of weapons echo over every ridge and can- 
yon of Agonas's rocky expanse. Great stadiums and plat- 
forms rise from the arid landscape, some carved from 
the remains of titanic ruins, others hanging from mas- 
sive, rusting chains. The many theaters of battle blend 
with dwellings carved into natural rock towers, forming 
an extensive network of arenas and errant fortifications. 
At the ward’s heart thrums the Stadium of Dishonor. 
Here fierce soldiers test their blades against one another 
and against the teeth and claws of vicious monsters. 

Upon arriving, dishonorable souls relegated to Agonas 
are met by oreads (see chapter 6), the souls of other 
dead champions, and cyclopes, who guide them to the 
scene of their endless battle. 


PHYLIAS 

The souls that occupy Phylias were uninspired and 
didn’t strive for greatness in life. They plodded through 
existence and left no mark upon the world through their 
deeds or their deaths. In the afterlife they perform repet- 
itive tasks in close quarters with others just like them- 
selves, all in a mockery of a living community. 

Artless architecture of plain, gray stone gives Phylias 
an outward appearance of normalcy at first glance. But 
the buildings are titanic, blocky masses of hodgepodge 
construction erected seemingly without plan. Although 
the structures might be impressive in size or number, 
they are cold and hollow, derelict monuments in an end- 
less slum. 

Those who arrive in Phylias are met by no one. They 
are simply left to wander away and slip into a place 
among the shuffling masses. 


SHORE OF THE TARTYX RIVER 


UNDERWORLD WARD OF NERONO 


ILYSIA 
In Ilysia the souls of heroic mortals and of those who 
died unjustly find eternal rest and comfort. Erebos’s 
grim influence holds no sway here. 

Ilysia is a sanctuary of peace and tranquility. Majestic 
temple-palaces stand amid lush forests, the colorful 
vegetation draping luminous marble in living mantles of 
flowers and sweet fruit. At the ward’s heart towers the 
Citadel of Destiny, where heroic souls gather to honor 
the gods, trade tales of glory, and feast with worthy com- 
panions. They also hold elaborate physical contests in 
which any Ilysian soul is welcome to participate. 

When the worthy dead arrive in Ilysia, they are wel- 
comed by dryads, majestic chimeras, or the souls of leg- 
endary heroes. 


NERONO 
Nerono is the final home of souls haunted by their mem- 
ories and of mariners who were lost at sea. 

Vast oceans fill Nerono, a realm dotted by lonely is- 
lands and crisscrossed by aimless ships. Titanic ruins 
and great, algae-slick chains rise out of the sea, as do 
the weathered hulls of legendary shipwrecks. The sky 
is a misty blur of color that hangs over water as still as 
glass. Despite the ocean’s normally placid appearance, 
mighty storms often arise from nowhere, casting souls 
into waves and whirlpools by the scores. Somewhere 
within the great oceans hides a twisting tangle of tides 


and winds called the Labyrinth of Memories. This maze 
of waterways confounds unwary travelers and twists 
their course into an inescapable path for eternity. 

When a soul reaches Nerono, sirens, naiads (see chap- 
ter 6), or sphinxes might guide them into the ward. 


TIZERUS 

The deepest ward of the Underworld, Tizerus is the fi- 
nal punishment of murderers and those who committed 
unforgivable offenses against the gods themselves. 

The ward is a gloomy, miserable expanse where the 
ruins of titanic architecture loom over a wasteland of 
black rock. At its center looms Erebos's palace, an om- 
inous structure of polished darkness embellished with 
gold ornaments and streamers of crimson silk. The 
god of the Underworld broods in his halls, occasionally 
striking out with his lash to drag wayward souls into his 
realm. Deep beneath the palace lies the lone glimmer of 
hope amid the ward's gloom: the portal called Lathos, 
which leads back to the world of the living. Beyond Ere- 
bos's palace sprawls a stinking swamp of rotting muck 
and dead vegetation known as the Mire of Punishment. 
Souls trapped there suffer eternal torment at the claws 
of demons and other monstrous creatures. 

When souls damned to Tizerus arrive, they quickly 
find themselves dragged away in a whirlwind of pain 
and terror. Demons, Underworld harpies, lamias, and 
nightmares compete for the chance to haul the doomed 
away to their own personal punishments. 


CHAPTER 3 | REALMS OF GODS AND MORTALS 
107 


THE сооз KARAMETRA AND PHARIKA, THE QUARRELS OF 


* 


* ‹ 


pint FROM Мух INTO THE REALM OF MORTALS. ) < 


y 


gee б seared rele eect ala zii 
аб , Tr uat à nar “sity; № 

һы: 2 = Š 
аса ERR INE УА i Seen N- Y К E. 
ERERKEREEREREE кессе сеске > + шш 
E Y ^N NM: : 


ee aux mien: I Sem 
v fà fa 7 Wwe CPO m (уе 
b m 
1 xis p 
M t as 
"* ee 
зна б ГЕ: teh y SNMP ENDE 
- p 
A | 
RID 44644 CREB CECE ELE ERE EL CECE C4 
ЧА, 
‘ 
ЎА 
„А, 
5 A 
X 


CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


m 4 


f “Sy AN THE GODS DETERMINE MY FATE?" 
Y 
* Elspeth asked. “What is truly the extent of 
their power? Can they make what I want 


He 


AA 
“Ifyou want a god to determine your fate, you must ask 
the god for an ordeal,” Sarpedon said. “They will only grant 

it if they think you are worthy—whatever ‘worthy’ means 


happen—if only I please them enough?” 


for them. If you accomplish it, you may request a hand in 
your own destiny.” 
—Jenna Helland, Godsend 


As exemplified by the labors of Anthousa, the exploits 

of Haktos the Unscarred, the wondrous inventions of 
Dalakos, and Elspeth’s escape from the Underworld, the 
heroes of Theros chart their own fates—and so will the 
player characters in your campaign. 

What adventures might Heliod’s champions under- 
take? What villains and monsters are associated with 
Phenax? How might adventurers get entangled in divine 
schemes? This chapter explores these questions, pro- 
viding abundant advice, tools, and maps for players to 
create their own exciting stories. The options presented 
here expand on the material in chapter 3 of the Dungeon 
Master’s Guide to help you craft adventures for your own 
Theros campaign. Each god of Theros’s pantheon has a 
section here, describing how the deity interacts with the 
mortal world. Beyond the gods, tools for running nauti- 
cal odysseys and descents into the Underworld appear 
in this chapter, along with an adventure that explores 
the machinations of immortals and the dead. 

Monsters and nonplayer characters mentioned in this 
chapter can be found in this book (MOT), the Monster 
Manual (MM), Mordenkainen’s Tome of Foes (MTF), 
or Volo’s Guide to Monsters (VGM). When a creature's 
name appears in bold type, that's a visual cue pointing 
you to the creature's stat block. If the stat block appears 
in chapter 6, the text tells you so. 


GOD-BASED ADVENTURES 


Three elements combine to form the adventures re- 
counted in the epics of Theros: heroes, gods, and mon- 
sters. Each god's section in this chapter provides the 
ingredients to build your own epics: champions and 
blessings, villains and monsters, divine schemes, and 
adventure locations. 


CHAMPIONS AND QUESTS 


Each god's entry in this chapter begins with a discus- 

sion of the god's champions: quests for them to under- 
take, how you might structure a campaign around that 
god's champions, and blessings the god might bestow. 


SERVING Two OR MORE MASTERS 

Often, each of the characters in an adventuring party is 
the champion of a different god—or no god at all. What 
brings the characters together? How do you motivate the 
whole party? Consider these options: 


Divine Coalition. The characters represent a coalition 
of gods who have joined forces against a common foe 
(or cabal of enemies). For example, you might build 
a campaign around the idea that Erebos, Mogis, and 
Pharika are conspiring to unleash slaughter and 
plague on the mortal realm. Perhaps heroic champi- 
ons of Ephara, Heliod, Karametra, Nylea, and other 
gods unite to protect the world from this threat. 

Friendly Cooperation. If Thassa's champion helps 
Heliod's champion today, perhaps Heliod's champion 
will help Thassa's champion tomorrow. As long as the 
aims of gods aren't in opposition, those gods take no 
issue with their champions helping each other. 

Together by Circumstance. A group of characters 
might find themselves on a galley foundering in a 
storm, in a polis under attack, or on the same side in 
a war. In such a case, when divine champions contend 
against a common threat, their allegiance to different 
gods might be less important than the urgency of their 
current situation, and they might forge lasting friend- 
ships that transcend their religious allegiances. 


QUESTS 

A mortal champion is a vessel of divine power and an 
agent of divine will. A champion's role is to act as the 
god's eyes and hands, upholding the deity's ideals and 
shaping the world to conform to those ideals. 

In return for the gods' divine blessings, champions 
are expected to do the god's bidding. The quests in each 
god's section throughout this chapter provide examples 
of tasks the gods might assign to their champions. As 
long as at least one member of the adventuring party 
is a champion of the god in question, these ideas might 
serve as adventure seeds. 

Completiné a Quest. When a champion undertakes 
a quest on a god's behalf, the champion can expect a 
reward for doing so. As long as the champion is actively 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


109 


по 


pursuing the quest and upholding the god’s ideals along 
the way, you can increase the character's piety score, 
using the general rule of raising it by 1 every session. 
Upon completing a quest bestowed by the god, the char- 
acter might earn a blessing (such as those described in 
this chapter) as well as a piety score increase. 

Declining a Quest. The cost to a champion for refus- 
ing to accept a god’s quest can be steep. Sometimes, a 
champion can safely put the task on hold for a time, such 
as when helping another champion complete a quest for 
a different god. As long as undertaking the quest isn’t a 
matter of urgency, gods usually don’t punish champions 
who procrastinate. But if a champion willfully ignores a 
god’s quest or pursues opposite aims, they might suffer 
any of the following consequences: 


+ The character’s piety score might decrease by 1 each 
day, or each play session, for as long as the character 
continues to refuse the quest. 

• The god might intervene to steer the champion toward 
the quest: Thassa could cause a storm to blow the 
character's ship off course, for example, bringing the 
champion to where the god wants them to be. 

* [n extremeinstances, the god might place a magical 
command on the character, similar to a geas spell. 


GOoD-BASED CAMPAIGNS 

Each god's entry in this chapter explores the themes and 
events that could drive a campaign focused on the cham- 
pions or agenda of that god. Typically, in a campaign 
centered on a god, one or more of the player characters 
are champions of that god, so it's natural—and perhaps 
even necessary—for them to become directly embroiled 


in how events unfold. 


VILLAINS AND MONSTERS 


Just as many heroes serve as champions of the gods, 
many villains also serve their wills. Each god’s section 
offers ideas for NPCs whose devotion turns their behav- 
ior in a villainous direction. It also provides suggestions 
for the kinds of monsters that might be associated with 
that god and serve as foes in an adventure. Generally, 
monster suggestions exclude foes that could work for 
most gods, like acolytes and priests from the Monster 
Manual and oracles from chapter 6 of this book. 


GODS AS CAMPAIGN VILLAINS 


You can build a campaign around the villainous plans 
and deeds of a god, pitting the heroic adventurers 
against that god’s servants and emissaries throughout 
their careers. Each god’s entry offers suggestions on 
how such a campaign might progress. Additionally, a 
table of divine schemes suggests ambitions a god might 
pursue, or threats they might unleash, as a campaign’s 
primary antagonist. 


ADVENTURE LOCATIONS 


Each god's section includes a map of an iconic location 
often associated with a specific god. The description of 
each location includes tables that list possible goals for 
an adventure based there and villains the characters 
might face there. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


DIVINE ASSISTANCE 


STORM-TOSSED AND BROKEN, FOUNDERING, 
Callaphe cried out to Thassa. 
Tritons came swiftly to save her, 
bringing her north to the Lindus. 
—The Callapheia 


The gods are fond of meddling in mortal affairs, and 
heroes sometimes call on their gods for aid in times of 
desperate need. Spells such as divination and commune 
give characters the opportunity to ask their gods for 
information, and clerics who beseech their gods for as- 
sistance sometimes receive miracles in answer. Heroes 
also have the opportunity to ask the gods for favors, af- 
ter proving their worth by enduring a divine ordeal. 

At other times, the gods take the initiative to reach out 
to mortal heroes, sending them on quests or meddling 
in their adventures. Dreams, omens, and emissaries are 
the most common means by which gods might make 
their wishes known. 

Two crucial principles should guide your use of divine 
involvement in your campaign: 


Don't eliminate character choice. The gods can tell 
characters to do things, and even threaten to punish 
them if they don't do things, but the gods can't control 
mortal actions. 

Don't eliminate risk and danger. The intervention of 
a god should never guarantee success or victory, nor 
should a god's interference portend immediate defeat. 
Gods can act to change the balance of an encounter 
or offer an avenue of escape, but they count on their 
champions to be heroes and act accordingly. 


COMMUNICATION 


Communication between the mortal world and the 
divine can take a variety of forms, from omens that get 
mortals’ attention by distorting natural phenomena to 
face-to-face conversations between a mortal and the 
manifestation of a god. 

As explained in chapter 2, the gods aren't all-knowing, 
so theoretical limits do exist on the information a god 
might be able to pass on to a human champion. That 
said, the gods are tremendously knowledgeable, with 
perfect recall of their past experiences and a reliable 
ability to predict the short-term future. The gods don't 
like to reveal their ignorance of any matter, so they 
might give a purposefully unclear or misleading answer 
rather than admit they don't know the right one. 


OMENS 

When the lynx-constellation paces restlessly in the 
night sky, it is an omen that Nylea is worried. When the 
tides rise high in defiance of the natural cycle, that is 

an omen that Thassa is distressed. When rain falls on a 
sunny day, Keranos and Heliod must be in conversation. 
Through supernatural events such as these, evidence of 
the gods' presence and influence is demonstrated, meta- 
phorically manifesting their divine wishes. 

Weal and Woe. The gods usually send omens as ei- 
ther warnings or as signs of their favor. The response to 
the augury spell takes the form of an omen foretelling 
weal or woe, and the gods might use omens in the same 
way, even without being asked to provide a sign. When 
a divine champion sets out on a course of action, a god 
might express approval or disapproval, hoping to either 
encourage or dissuade the mortal. 

The augury spell requests an omen. At your option, 
you can simply provide the short answers offered in the 
spell description—weal, woe, weal and woe, or noth- 
ing—but you can also describe more elaborate omens. 
The form of the response might vary depending on the 
method of divination used, which can go beyond the in- 
laid sticks, dragon bones, or ornate cards mentioned in 
the spell description. Diviners in Theros look for signs 
in the stars, in the patterns of flocks of birds in flight, in 
the shapes of clouds, in the organs of sacrificed animals, 
in the sounds of thunder, in the designs left by waves on 
sand, and through many other means. So if an oracle 
stands on a beach imploring Thassa for an augury re- 
garding a course of action you believe to be disastrous, 
you might describe the waves washing over the beach— 
and circling around the oracle's feet, leaving them com- 
pletely dry. (If necessary, though, you should clarify that 
the oracle knows the answer to be “woe.”) 

Other Messages. An omen can also have a more 
direct meaning beyond simply “weal” or “woe.” You 
can use omens to nudge the characters to an adventure 
location, to lead them to an oracle who lives far from 
the polis, or to hint at the true identity of a villain. Nylea 
might cause a flock of birds to suddenly rush eastward, 
inviting her champion to follow in that direction, or an 
animal might snarl whenever the villain’s name is spo- 
ken. Omens should communicate important messages 
from the gods, something meaningful enough that dei- 
ties have deigned to interfere in mortal efforts. The gods 


don’t provide omens to address unimportant questions 
(unless the characters use a spell for this purpose). 

Interpreting Omens. A degree of mystery surrounds 
every omen, but the more complex an omen is, the 
more confusing mortals might find it. In addition, it’s 
sometimes not clear whether a strange occurrence in 
the natural world is the work of the gods or has some 
other origin. 

If a character struggles to interpret the meaning of 
an omen, you might allow them to make a DC 14 Intel- 
ligence or Wisdom check (perhaps modified by profi- 
ciency in Arcana, Nature, or Religion) to determine the 
nature of simple omens, with a success indicating that 
the correct message has been gleaned. Alternatively, 
characters might need to seek out oracles to interpret 
complicated omens for them. 

Omen Examples. The tables on the following pages 
provide examples of phenomena that could serve as 
omens of the various gods. Although they each have 
their own areas of concern, any god can manipulate the 
natural world as they please. You can choose a god to 
closely align the omen with and roll either a d6 or a d8 
to get an omen associated with that god, or you can roll 
а 1100 to get an omen from any of the god's omen tables 
at random. 


DIVINATION 

Clerics and oracles have spells at their disposal that al- 
low them to ask the gods for insight. The divination and 
commune spells contact a god and promise a truthful 
reply to the caster's questions. The reply takes the form 
of a simple “yes” or “no,” a cryptic rhyme, or an omen. 

It might be transmitted through a disembodied voice, 

a vision only the caster can see, or any other mystical 
manner. А verbal reply to a divination or commune spell 
must be truthful, but it might still be misleading. A god 
can't speak a deliberate lie in response to either spell, 
but they can be evasive while remaining within the 
boundaries of the truth. If a character casts one of these 
spells more than once in the same day, however, there is 
an increasing chance of receiving an unclear answer or 
none at all (as described in the spells' entries in the Play- 
er's Handbook). This might happen because another 
god, alerted to the connection between the caster and 
their god by the first casting of the spell, intercepts the 
second one and chooses to mislead the character. Or it 
could simply mean that the god is tired of the character's 
pestering and chooses not to answer. 


DREAMS AND VISIONS 

When mortals sleep and dream, they are said to "visit 
Nyx.” During this time, mortals are particularly suscep- 
tible to divine contact. A god might communicate with 

a sleeping mortal as if by casting dream—including 

the ability to transform the mortal’s dreamscape into 

a nightmare. Whatever form such a dream takes, they 
are often similar to omens, making heavy use of symbol 
and metaphor. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


OMENS OF ATHREOS 


46 
1 


4100 
01 


02 
03 


04 


05 
06 


Omen of Athreos 

Faintly glowing wisps of fog or mist coalesce 
into shapes in the air. 

Ghostly whispers come from nowhere. 

The ground beneath a character's feet flows 
like water in a river. 

A veiled figure observes the character from a 
distance, then vanishes. 

Silent mourners carry a body past. 

Echoes produce words different from the 
ones originally spoken. 


OMENS OF EPHARA 


d100 


12 


Omen of Ephara 

A carved image or face-like pattern on a wall 
animates and speaks. 

The streets of a city seem to alter course to 
lead to a specific destination. 

Birds fly in parallel rows, like a marching 
army. 

Eddies in a stream subside, and the water 
flows in a straight line. 

A grove of trees has a perfectly symmetrical 
configuration. 

A clay vessel overflows with water. 


OMENS OF EREBOS 


48 


4100 
13 
14 


15 
16 
17 


18 
19 


20 


Omen of Erebos 

Small animals drop dead within an area. 

A gold coin hangs like a piece of fruit from the 
branch of a dead tree. 

The sun's light does not penetrate an area. 
A character is stung as if struck by a whip. 
Words can be heard in the sounds made by 
clinking coins. 

An eclipse suddenly occurs. 

Crows or vultures drop bones in an ominous 
pattern. 

Swirling smoke forms macabre shapes. 


OMENS OF HELIOD 


d8 
1 
2 


со ы O^ л 


4100 
21 
22 


23 
24 
25 
26 


27 
28 


Omen of Heliod 

A brilliant pattern appears around the sun. 

A shaft of sunlight breaks through cloud cover 
or foliage to shine on a specific spot. 

A pegasus appears and invites a character to 
touch it. 

The sun remains in the same place in the sky 
for far too long. 

The sun blinks. 

No shadows are cast. 

A specific area can't be made dark. 

The sky turns blood-red at sunrise or sunset. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


112 


OMENS OF IROAS 


dé 4100 
1 29 
2 30 
3 31 

32 
5 33 
6 34 


Omen of Iroas 

The rousing blare of distant trumpets drowns 
out other sounds. 

Clouds limned by sunlight take a form that 
resembles Ігоаѕ. 

A character's weapon or shield shatters dra- 
matically, then repairs itself. 

A four-winged bird circles overhead. 

The sun or moon appears to have four glow- 
ing wings. 

Water or wind sounds like cheering. 


OMENS OF KARAMETRA 


96 4100 
1 35 
2 36 
3 37 
B 38 
5 39 

40 


Omen of Karametra 

Patterns form in fallen leaves or in the scat- 
tered leavings of grain in a field. 

Rustling plants produce sounds that resemble 
words. 

Fruit begins mewling and giggling like de- 
lighted infants. 

Hearth fires blaze or small fires start up, at- 
tracting small creatures to curl up in front of 
them. 

Wild animals act domesticated. 

Food multiplies or heals when bitten. 


OMENS ОЕ KERANOS 


d6 4100 
1 41 
2 42 
3 43 
4 44 
45 
46 


Omen of Keranos 

Lightning strikes, thunder rumbles, or rain 
falls in a clear sky. 

A powerful thought springs unbidden to 
mind, like a shout in one's head. 

Rain produces a melody that sounds like a 
familiar song. 

A lightning-scarred tree stands alone in a for- 
est clearing. 

A fierce wind blows in a particular direction. 
A character sees distinct figures or patterns in 
the sky when lightning flashes. 


OMENS or К1ОТНҮ$ 


dé 4100 
1 47 
2 48 
3 49 
4 50 
5 51 
6 52 


Отеп of Klothys 


A character experiences an extended episode 
of déja vu. 

Spider webs gleam as if they were made of 
silver threads. 

The sky turns a rich gold color. 

A character's hair grows several inches and 
braids itself. 

Glowing green threads create a pattern or fol- 
low a path in the air. 

A character experiences a powerful episode 
of déja vu. 


OMENS OF KRUPHIX 


d6 
1 
2 
3 


d100 


53 
54 
55 


56 
57 


58 


Omen of Kruphix 

The natural world falls utterly silent. 

An aurora shimmers on the horizon. 

The attention of every celestial figure in the 
night sky is suddenly focused on one charac- 
ter or place. 

Nyx appears in the shadows of all things. 
Two extra ethereal arms sprout from a char- 
acter's body. 

The night sky appears to wheel overhead as 
though years are streaming by. 


OMENS or Mocis 


d6 
1 


d100 


59 


60 


61 


62 


63 
64 


Omen of Mogis 

A creature spontaneously starts bleeding, 
their blood pooling in a bull shape. 

Normally harmless animals turn aggressive— 
the smaller, the angrier. 

Water (a stream, pool, rain, or a liquid in a 
container) turns to boiling blood. 

A bestial roar erupts from over the horizon or 
deep within the earth. 

The stars turn red. 

A character develops a ravenous hunger for 
raw meat. 


OMENS OF NYLEA 


d8 


1 


5 
6 
7 
8 


65 


66 
67 
68 


69 
70 
71 
72 


d100 Omen of Nylea 


Butterflies land on a character or fly together 
in a particular direction. 

Fallen leaves blow perpendicular to the wind. 
The weather suddenly changes radically. 

A colored arrow strikes nearby, arching from 
an impossible direction. 

Plants sprout and grow to maturity instantly. 
Trees and vines coil to hinder movement. 
Animal tracks appear where nothing walks. 
A celestial lynx paces back and forth across 
the night sky. 


OMENS OF PHARIKA 


d6 
1 


d100 
73 


74 
75 
76 


77 


78 


Omen of Pharika 

Hundreds of snakes, spiders, or centipedes 
crawl from the ground. 

A strong chemical smell follows a character. 
A character exhibits a disease's symptoms. 
Leaves shrivel and turn black, while flowers 
pour acidic nectar. 

A snakeskin wraps around a way marker or 
personal possession. 

Patterns of clouds or stars slither away, mov- 
ing with an audible susurrus. 


OMENS OF PHENAX 


d6 
1 


d100 
79 


80 


81 


82 
83 


84 


Omen of Phenax 

Shadows move independently of whatever 
casts them, appearing to run away. 

A gold mask momentarily appears over the 
face of every living creature in sight. 
Objects, landmarks, even stars momentarily 
vanish, as if pilfered in plain sight. 
Everything turns shades of gray. 

Creatures’ mouths momentarily vanish and 
they can’t make sounds or speak. 

The sun momentarily melts, raining gold 
coins that vanish soon after landing. 


OMENS OF PURPHOROS 


d8 
1 
2 


мо € fF 


d100 
85 
86 


87 
88 
89 
90 
91 


92 


Omen of Purphoros 

The sound of a hammer rings in the air. 
Noxious gas suddenly vents from under- 
ground. 

The ground or a metal object becomes un- 
comfortably hot. 

An animal moves in a mechanical manner. 
Huge plumes of smoke rise from the horizon. 
The earth shakes in a deliberate rhythm. 
Something that was broken is reshaped into 
something new. 

A statue or metal object comes to life. 


OMENS OF THASSA 


d8 
1 


d100 
93 


94 
95 
96 


97 
98 
99 
00 


Omen of Thassa 

A lustrous seashell or small fish appears in 
someone's drink. 

The tide goes out (or in) at the wrong time. 
The sound of crashing waves fills the air. 
Ripples in water form patterns of ships and 
sea creatures. 

A beautiful coral pillar rises from the earth. 
A flock of dozens of noisy seabirds land. 

A school of sea creatures swim in the air. 
Someone starts drowning on dry land. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


113 


114 


DIVINE INTERVENTION 


As with Callaphe the Mariner’s desperate cry to Thassa, 
heroes in dire straits sometimes implore their gods 

for help. Occasionally, the gods answer. Whether a re- 
sponse is elicited by a hero’s desperate prayer, a cleric’s 
use of the Divine Intervention class feature, or a god’s 
decision to intervene in mortal affairs for good or ill, an 
answer can manifest in a variety of ways. 


BLESSINGS 

As described in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master’s 
Guide, the gods sometimes use blessings to reward 
their faithful servants for momentous deeds. Completing 
a quest bestowed by the god is an accomplishment that 
might merit a blessing as a reward. Occasionally, a god 
might also offer a blessing when sending a champion on 
a quest, helping them to prepare for the task ahead. 

A character retains the benefit of a blessing until it 
is taken away by the god who granted it, which might 
happen if a character’s piety score is reduced. Unlike 
a magic item, a divine blessing can’t be suppressed by 
an antimagic field or similar effect. There is no limit on 
the number of blessings a character can receive, but a 
character can’t benefit from multiple applications of a 
blessing at the same time. 

If you choose to award blessings to the characters in 
your campaign, use the guidelines in the Dungeon Mas- 
ter’s Guide. If a blessing duplicates the effect of a magic 
item, it requires a minimum piety score based on the 
rarity of the item: 


Uncommon magic item: requires piety 3 or higher 
Rare magic item: requires piety 10 or higher 

Very rare magic item: requires piety 25 or higher 
Legendary magic item: requires piety 50 or higher 


You can use these additional blessings for your cam- 
paign, or use them to inspire more supernatural gifts. 

Blessing of Farsight (Requires Piety 3+). You 
have advantage on Wisdom (Perception) checks that 
rely on sight. 

Blessing of Protection (Requires Piety 3+). As a 
bonus action, you can invoke your god's protection, 
providing you with a +1 bonus to your AC for 1 minute. 
Once you use this blessing, you can’t use it again until 
the next dawn. 

Blessing of Resilience (Requires Piety 3+). When 
you are about to take acid, cold, fire, lightning, or 
thunder damage, you can use your reaction to gain re- 
sistance to that damage type until the end of your next 
turn. Once you use this blessing, you can’t use it again 
until the next dawn. 

Eyes of Nyx (Requires Piety 10+). As an action, you 
can imbue your eyes with enhanced vision for 10 min- 
utes. While the blessing is active, your eyes look like the 
starry void of Nyx, and you can see invisible creatures 
and objects within 60 feet of you that are within your 
line of sight. Once you use this blessing, you can't use it 
again until the next dusk. 

Weapon of Nyx (Requires Piety 10+). You can use 
a bonus action to cause one weapon you are holding 
to surge with divine power for 1 minute. On a hit, the 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


weapon deals an extra 1d8 radiant damage. (Depending 
on your god, it might deal a different damage type—ne- 
crotic for Erebos, lightning for Keranos, or fire for Pur- 
phoros, for example.) Once you use this blessing, you 
can't use it again until you finish a long rest. 


EMISSARIES 

A divine emissary is a creature woven from the fabric 
of Nyx as a tool to carry out a god's divine will. Emis- 
saries have no will of their own; they are extensions of 
their creators' divine substance, brought into the mortal 
world to fulfill a specific mission. When that mission is 
complete, they return to Nyx. 

While certain deities are associated with sending fa- 
vored animals as their emissaries—such as the stag of- 
ten associated with Heliod and Nylea's lynx—any animal 
might be a god's emissary. In each case, divine emissar- 
ies have a few shared characteristics: 


* They are Nyxborn and have one or two of the Nyxborn 
traits described in chapter 6, commonly magic resis- 
tance and magic weapons. 

* They're of remarkable size, being at least one size cat- 
egory larger than normal. 


MIRACLES 

As the simplest form of miracle, a god can produce the 
effect of any cleric spell or any spell associated with 

one of the god's domains, and have the spell take effect 
anywhere in the mortal realm. The gods' capabilities 
aren't limited by spell lists, though, and their miraculous 
intervention can have any effect you want. Direct godly 
intervention tends to be subtle and rare, though, as it 
attracts the attention of other gods and might encourage 
them to meddle in their own ways. 


DIVINE ORDEALS 


Life as a champion of a god offers abundant opportuni- 
ties to escape life's tedium, but a mortal who wants to 
truly take control of fate can request an ordeal from one 
of the gods. An ordeal, as the name indicates, is no easy 
task. To receive one, a candidate must accomplish at 
least one near-impossible feat to even make the request: 
finding a pathway into Nyx. But the reward for triumph 
is appropriate to the scale of the challenge. 


JOURNEY INTO Nyx 
The first stage of a divine ordeal is entering Nyx. Cal- 
laphe the mariner is said to have sailed her ship over 
the waterfall at the edge of the world and right into Nyx, 
where she can still be seen among the constellations. 
Additionally, Kruphix's Temple of Mystery at the edge of 
the world and the shrine of Nykthos are known to hold 
portals that lead to the gates of Nyx. 

In theory, high-level characters can use spells such 
as plane shift or gate to move from the mortal realm 
to Nyx. In practice, securing the proper material com- 
ponent to travel to Nyx through the plane shift spell is 
roughly as difficult as sailing to the edge of the world, 
and Kruphix can (and usually does) prevent the gate 
spell from opening a portal into Nyx. 

There might be other ways to get into Nyx, and each 
one is a challenge suited for the greatest heroes. 


' 


ASK AND RECEIVE 

After reaching Nyx, a hero must next ask a god for an 
ordeal. Asking for an ordeal is as simple as calling out 
one's intention to the god: “Erebos, I request an ordeal!" 

The gods grant ordeals only to those they consider 
worthy. The hero need not be a worshiper of the god 
being beseeched, or be concerned with upholding the 
god's ideals. As a rule, any hero capable of reaching 
Nyx is worthy of receiving an ordeal in most gods' eyes. 
Additionally, a god will typically only grant a champion 
one ordeal in their lifetime—allowing more only under 
exceptional circumstances. 

A god might test multiple members of a group, con- 
fronting each with their own ordeals. Alternatively, 
champions devoted to different deities might all request 
ordeals from their own gods. Those who don't partici- 
pate in an ordeal, though, still have plenty to do in Nyx 
and might find themselves contacted by agents of the 
gods or that realm's other legendary inhabitants. 


THE ORDEAL 

Assuming the god deems the hero worthy, the ordeal 
gets under way. The hero falls into a trance and steps 
alone into a dreamscape constructed by the god. 

Work to craft an ordeal that provides a significant 
challenge for the character to overcome. Fundamentally, 
an ordeal is a test of the character’s heroic drive, as 
described in chapter 1. Will the character’s drive prove 
strong enough to overcome everything else? 

An ordeal is a single encounter, which might involve 
combat, interaction, a series of ability checks, or other 
activities. It takes place in a dream state, so it’s not 


essential that you give this encounter anything more 
than a narrative framing. The point is that the ordeal 
should test whether the hero’s drive can counteract their 
other personality traits. The god who grants an ordeal 
shapes it. Keranos, for example, might challenge a hero 
with saving innocents during a dangerous storm, or 
Thassa might throw a mortal into a dreamscape where 
their ship is attacked by a kraken. Beyond the obvious 
challenge, the ordeal should create tension between a 
character’s heroic drive and their other characteristics. 
You can use these guidelines to determine the appro- 
priate degree of challenge for elements of an ordeal: 


Combat with One Creature. Use a monster or an 
NPC with a challenge rating equal to half the charac- 
ter’s level. 

Combat with Multiple Creatures. Use 2d4 creatures, 
each of which has a challenge rating of about one-fifth 
the character’s level. 

Ability Checks. Set the DC at 20 for most checks and 
25 for checks that are crucial to the ordeal. 


THE REWARD 

There’s typically no penalty for failing an ordeal, but 
the reward for success can be great. A character can re- 
quest anything from a god. Consider these examples of 
what a god might grant to a successful hero: 


• A miracle or other form of divine intervention 

• A supernatural gift of your choice from those de- 
scribed in chapter 1 

• A magic item of a rarity appropriate to the charac- 
ter's level 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


116 


ATHREOS 


The River Guide straddles the line between life and 
death, maintaining the cosmological balance with no re- 
gard for the morals and emotions of mortals. Athreos’s 
champions seek to further his goals, and rarely do so 
with greater sympathy than their grim patron. 


ATHREOS’S CHAMPIONS 


Athreos expects his champions to maintain the balance 


between the living and the dead, just as he does. Beyond 
this, his servants take it upon themselves to maintain 
funerary customs unique to their cultures and preserve 
the memories of the departed. Beyond the mortal world, 
the River Guide opposes any who disrupt the cycle of 
life and death, behavior that occasionally brings him 
into conflict with other deities—particularly Erebos and 
Heliod, but also occasionally Phenax and Pharika. 

The Athreos’s Quests table suggests a few adventures 
the god’s champions might involve themselves in. 


ATHREOS’S QUESTS 


d6 Adventure Goal 

l1  Sealasecretpath that the Returned use to escape the 
Underworld. 

2 Strike against one ofthe necropoleis, either Asphodel 
or Odunos, curtailing its growth or bringing it to ruin. 

3 Seek out a lampad nymph who has fallen in love with 
a soul he was supposed to lead to the Underworld. 

4 Нипї down a rampaging cerberus and return it to its 
place guarding the Underworld. 

5  Reconsecrate a grand but neglected mausoleum, put- 
ting the unquiet spirits there to rest. 

6 Оеѓеаї an agent of a god who seeks to free a loved 
one, a mentor, or a champion from the Underworld. 


AN ATHREOS CAMPAIGN 

Early in a campaign, Athreos's champions likely face 
dangerous or wayward undead, such as ghouls and 
ghosts, or monsters that have taken up residence in sa- 
cred burial sites. As the story progresses, the Returned 
and eidolons might feature more prominently, along 
with situations that force champions to oppose those 
seeking the souls of loved ones or the spirits of those 
with work left undone. At some point, Athreos's champi- 
ons might come to oppose the arrogance and treachery 
of Erebos, Heliod, and Phenax, or the machinations of 
demons or the necropoleis of the Returned. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


The River Guide's mortal servants will likely find their 
emotions tested—particularly their sense of morality 
and their inclination toward sympathy. Any mortal 
might be moved to restore a ruler whose death will ig- 
nite a war or by the plight of lovers separated by death. 
Athreos cares not for such things, and he expects his 
followers to guard the borders between life and death as 
emotionlessly as he does. If one of his servants falters, 
Athreos is quick to revoke his blessings. 


ATHREOS'S VILLAINS 


Athreos's champions readily forsake their connections 
to other mortals. Working among endless throngs of the 
dead and grieving can sap one's empathy and harden 
any soul. As a result, Athreos's followers make grim 
opponents when they prioritize the needs of the dead 
over the living. Their mission also makes them ready 
foes of the Returned and their allies. Some seek to 
achieve greater efficiency in the transition of the doomed 
into death, such as by impeding medical treatment or 
wrecking warships destined for hopeless wars. Athreos 
doesn't approve of utter cruelty, but neither does he par- 
ticularly care, so long as the dead meet him with coin. 

The Athreos's Villains table suggests a variety of foes 
that might arise from among the god's followers. 


ATHREOS'S VILLAINS 


de Villain 

1 An oracle (see chapter 6) follows omens to find those 
who have been resurrected, claiming they owe Ath- 
reos a debt. 

2 A mercenary (gladiator) accuses a community of har- 
boring Returned and threatens to claim their leader's 
life to restore the balance. 

3  Awarmongering noble rallies the public against a 
necropolis, encouraging a war between the living and 
the dead. 

4  Agroup of cult fanatics charges exorbitant prices for 
funeral rites, threatening to lead the dead astray un- 
less they're shown proper respect. 

5 Apriest of Athreos speaks out against healers and 
Pharika's followers during a plague, offering death as 
the only alternative to suffering. 

6 A lampad (see chapter 6) hunts the offspring of 
an ancient hero who escaped death, claiming they 
shouldn't exist. 


ATHREOS'S MONSTERS 

Most creatures that serve Athreos aid the god in 
destroying the undead. Beyond that, the Athreos's 
Monsters table presents a few creatures likely to 
serve the god. 


ATHREOS’S MONSTERS 


Challenge Creature Source 
1 Giant vulture "MM 
2 Two-headed cerberus MOT 
3 Hell hound MM 
3 Lampad MOT 
6 Invisible stalker MM 
6 Underworld cerberus MOT 
8 Spirit naga MM 
9 Phylaskia MOT 


ATHREOS AS CAMPAIGN VILLAIN 


Athreos sees his responsibilities as necessary, but 
doesn't cherish them. Were there a more efficient way 
to maintain the cycle of life and death, or to create some 
sort of stasis, he might pursue it. Alternatively, wittingly 
or otherwise, Athreos might allow some less reliable 
being to take over his labors. Regardless of the circum- 
stances, any change in the River Guide's role would 
have dramatic effects on the living and the balance of 
power between Theros's immortals. Adventurers caught 
in Athreos's machinations have the potential to influ- 
ence nothing less than the underpinnings of existence. 
Correcting any imbalance in the cycle of life and death 
likely involves the assistance of other gods. If Athreos 
ever truly abandons his duties, it might be necessary for 
another to take up his labors. Candidates could include 
titans or gods, but a selfless mortal might also sacrifice 
themselves to become the new Athreos. 


ATHREOS’S DIVINE SCHEMES 

If Athreos were to have desires beyond his responsibil- 
ities to the dead, he would likely keep them secret and 
act with slow, nearly invisible, deliberateness. The Ath- 
reos's Divine Schemes table suggests just a few of the 
god's potential objectives. 


ATHREOS's DiviNE SCHEMES 


d4 Scheme 

1 Athreos tires of his responsibilities but refuses to 
abandon them. Secretly, he has allowed the same 
spirit to be reborn again and again, allowing it to see 
all of life and death so it might one day take his place. 
When this apprentice disappears, Athreos refuses to 
ferry any more souls until his student is returned. 

2 The wealth Athreos collects in payment for his work 
has gone missing, stolen from his sanctuary at the 
end of the Tartyx River. The River Guide needs the 
treasure returned swiftly, not out of greed, but as it is 
payment for something beyond the gods. 

3 Тһе Rivers That Ring the World are drying up. As the 
tides recede, great ruins are revealed, rising from the 
river bottom. Athreos sends agents to the headwaters 
of the Tartyx River, seeking the cause of the problem 
before whatever the river had kept drowned emerges. 

4 War between Heliod and Erebos is inevitable. Rather 
than letting it explode unpredictably, Athreos puts a 
plan into motion to mitigate the damage. Ultimately, 
all it takes to end the war is Heliod's death or Erebos 
joining the Returned. 


THE SHORES OF THE Rivers THAT RING THE WORLO 


ARE WATCHED BY ATHREOS AND HIS SERVANTS 


UNDERWORLD CROSSING 


The Tartyx River is dotted with ruined temples of Ath- 
reos on either side of its banks that serve as crossing 
points between the mortal world and the Underworld. 
Souls of the dead wait on the riverbank at these desolate 
places for the River Guide to appear and grant them 
passage to the Underworld side. 

The ruined temple buildings are as enigmatic as 
their patron. No priests inhabit or care for these places, 
though they are guarded by cerberi and phylaskia (both 
described in chapter 6). When living mortals enter these 
shrines, the buildings come alive with magic traps 
meant to keep the living out of the realm of the dead and 
the dead from returning to the land of the living. 


UNDERWORLD CROSSING ADVENTURES 
Adventures in Underworld crossings usually involve 

the characters entering or exiting the Underworld or 
helping or preventing someone or something from doing 
so. Souls with coin left after crossing the Tartyx often 
discard their excess valuables upon reaching the Under- 
world—their treasures proving useless in the realm of 
the dead. The dunes of discarded coins that pile up on 
the Underworld’s shores might be enough to tempt mor- 
tal treasure hunters, even at the risk of being eternally 
pursued by Athreos’s servants. 

Alternatively, it might be souls rather than riches that 
tempt adventurers to the Tartyx’s banks. A spirit who 
died without payment for Athreos might linger at the 
river’s edge. Perhaps adventurers seek to help such a 
lost soul pass on to the Underworld, or they might offer 
to pay for passage if a spirit shares valuable information 
with them. In either case, adventurers might offer the 
dead help in reaching their final resting place. 

The Underworld Crossing Adventures table offers 
ideas for adventures that could occur in such a place. 


UNDERWORLD CROSSING ADVENTURES 


412 Adventure Goal 
1 Enter the Underworld without alerting Athreos to your 
presence. 
Escape the Underworld. 


Force someone to lose their identity in the waters of 
the Tartyx River. 


4 Escort a Returned sentry (see chapter 6) escaping 
from the Underworld into the mortal world. 


5 Bargain with a lampad (see chapter 6) to learn where 
the body of a lost hero lies entombed. 


6 Get information from a soul waiting to be ferried to 
the Underworld. 


Pay for a stranded soul to cross the Tartyx River. 


8 бїеа! a specific valuable from the banks of the Tartyx 
River and escape unseen. 

9 бай from the crossing to a nearby, haunted island in 
the center of the Tartyx River. 


10 Сопуіпсе an innocent spirit who keeps returning to 
their mortal home to pass into the Underworld. 


11 Seek an audience with Athreos. 
12 Capture an Underworld cerberus (see chapter 6). 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


UNDERWORLD CROSSING MAP 

The Underworld crossing shown in map 4.1 ismadeup 
of two halves of a bleak, broken temple on either side of 
the Tartyx River. Each half of the temple facing the river 
ends in a dock. The riverbank on the mortal side is cov- 
ered in gold coins. This half of the temple holds a large 
sanctuary with a cracked floor and sinking altar where 
phylaskia and cerberi stand guard. Surrounding this 
cavernous hall, shadowy corridors that lead to the dock 
are covered in trapped glyphs that explode with energy 
and collapse ceilings when activated by the presence 

of mortals. 

The temple half on the Underworld side of the river 
consists of twisting crypt halls that hold no bones, bod- 
ies, orother remains—only dust and guardians. These 
halls give way to a second sanctuary filled with somber 
funeral music—though there are no instruments in 
sight. It's said that living creatures that hear this song 
are driven to the depths of despair. A massive statue of 
Athreos watches over this chamber and the guardians 
who reside there. 


UNDERWORLD CROSSING VILLAINS 

Mortals who adventure in an Underworld crossing are 
likely to battle foes trying to enter or escape the Under- 
world—or trying to prevent the characters from doing 
so. Examples of such villains appear on the Underworld 
Crossings Villains table. 


UNDERWORLD CROSSINGS VILLAINS 


d6 Villain 

1 A Returned palamnite (see chapter 6) seeks to de- 
stroy all Underworld crossings so the dead can freely 
enter the morta! world. 

2 A conquering general captures a number of Under- 
world cerberi (see chapter 6), plotting to unleash the 
terrifying beasts during a war. 

3 А greedy priest of Erebos steals coins from the dead 
before they are buried, thereby filling a crossing with 
stranded souls. 

4 A nightmare shepherd (see chapter 6) takes over a 
crossing and doesn't allow souls to pass into the 
Underworld. As a result, they become specters that 
harass the living in the mortal world. 

5 A priest of Athreos becomes annoyed with the dead 
returning and sends armies of clergy to secure the 
mortal side of the crossing. 

6 A satyr reveler (see chapter 6) seeks to throw an eter- 
nal revel! By stealing coins from the dead, the satyr 
traps souls at his morbid, Tartyx-side bacchanal. 


CX © “Land of the Living 
М 4 


EN 


ion 
La 
B 


K'a 0 UNA, ROS | 
кш 


emery (e oS 9 @ л 


Эр ae 2e Pea 


se € © Q i 
square è:S.feet _- ч; | m 
3 mm. NE өз. 


Mae 4.1: UNDERwORLO CROSSING 


120 


ЕРНАРА 


Serious and knowledgeable, Ephara watches over cities, 
protecting them from the wilds and seeing that they de- 
velop in a just and beautiful way. 


EPHARA'S CHAMPIONS 


The god of the polis seeks out those who would de- 
fend their cities with the same devotion that she does, 
fighting against threats both within and outside a 
city's walls. 

The Ephara's Quests table suggests a few adventures 
the god's champions might involve themselves in. 


EPHARA's QUESTS 

d6 Adventure Goal 

1 Oust the corrupt leader of a town or a city. 

2 Reclaim a city that has been overrun by creatures of 
the wild. 

3 Help establish a new city in a sparsely populated 
area. 
Find a treasure to adorn a major landmark of a city. 

5 Hunt down a criminal who is causing devastating 
damage to a city, such as by arson. 

6 Defeat a champion of an opposed deity, most likely 
Phenax or Nylea. 


AN EPHARA CAMPAIGN 

A campaign centered around Ephara is almost by ne- 
cessity an urban campaign, and likely one that primarily 
or entirely takes place within a single city. Ephara is 
concerned with the establishment, development, and 
protection of cities, and a campaign centered on her 
champions and goals might focus on just one of these 
aspects over the course of the campaign. 

A game focused on establishment might see the char- 
acters founding a new city, or perhaps reviving a dead 
one. One focused on development could go beyond the 
basics of what a city needs to survive and get into what 
a city requires to thrive—which could easily lead to 
campaigns less focused on combat and more on social 
encounters and intrigue. Lastly, a campaign focused on 
defending a city could present a range of threats, from 
external foes—like wild creatures or invading armies— 
to internal enemies—like corrupt leaders or dangerous 
criminals. In any of these cases, Ephara cares about 
protecting cities from the poison of corruption and tyr- 
anny as wellas threats from armies or the wild. 

If the characters falter in any of these major goals, 
they could lose Ephara's favor and have to prove 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


themselves again worthy of her grace, perhaps by 
making substantial improvements to a city or defeating 
a major threat. 

Foes in an Ephara campaign could be deadly mon- 
sters, corrupt politicians, or even impending natural 
disasters. The reappearance of figures from a city's 
past, either as Returned or Nyxborn, can also throw a 
community into disorder. Who has the greater right to 
rule: the currentruler or the city's legendary founder? 


EPHARA'S VILLAINS 


Many see Ephara and her followers as villains, treading 
on the wilderness to expand cities and civilization. Even 
people who live in urban environments might not be 
safe from foes who profess to be in Ephara's service. 
Those who become excessively focused on rules and 
justice could overstep their bounds, using the law to op- 
press countercultural or nonconforming populations. 

The Ephara's Villains table suggests a variety of foes 
that might arise from among the god's followers. 


EPHARA'S VILLAINS 


d6 Villain 

1 A neighborhood leader enacts punitive laws, prevent- 
ing people from expressing themselves. 

2 A guard imprisons people who worship gods op- 
posed to Ephara, such as Phenax and Nylea. 

3 A noble is building a new development directly in a 
forest, where it will displace wildlife that has lived 
there for millennia. 

4  Asoldier begins killing people who have committed 
terrible crimes but have been acquitted because of 
loopholes in the judicial system. 

5 A group of mages who follow Ephara want to build a 
city on an island, heedless of the current residents. 

6 An oracle (see chapter 6) leads a cadre of scholars 
secretly destroying work that they deem antithetical 
to proper society. 


EPHARA'S MONSTERS 

Ephara isn't often associated with monsters. Even so, 

a few monsters common in urban settings might be 
involved with the deity or her worshipers. Since many 
of Ephara's most devout followers are scholars, they 
commonly use magically constructed creatures in their 
plans. The vast majority of villains associated with 
Ephara are humans: soldiers, politicians, priests, and 
scholars who believe that Ephara's vision of a proper 
city is more important than the people living in it. The 
Ephara's Monsters table presents just a few foes likely to 
serve the god's will. 


EPHARA's MONSTERS 


Challenge Creature Source 
1/8 Guard MM 
1/2 Anvilwrought raptor MOT 

3 Meletian hoplite MOT 
9 War priest VGM 


EPHARA'S DIVINE SCHEMES 


Challenge Creature Source 
11 Gynosphinx* MM өл ү ee i ue ee gee no 
15 Biondi папага ape MOT ripple effec tha опе] est е mortal followers of all gods 
- involved. The Ephara's Divine Schemes table presents 
E Androsphinx MM just a few conflicts the god might be involved in. 
23 Empyrean MM 


* See chapter 6 for details about these creatures in Theros. 


EPHARA AS CAMPAIGN VILLAIN 


A campaign with Ephara as the villain might be well 
suited to a wilderness-based campaign. Many people of 
the wilds see the patron of cities as inherently villain- 
ous—a colonialist monster who crushes the wilderness 
in the name of supposed civilization. For player charac- 
ters who are affiliated with the wilderness or who wor- 
ship Nylea, Ephara makes an obvious antagonist. 

A likely storyline with Ephara as the main villain 
would involve the characters trying to stop champions of 
Ephara from establishing a new city or expanding an ex- 
isting city into the wilderness, displacing the people and 
creatures that inhabit the area. This wilderness could 
be where the characters live, or the residents of the area 
might ask the characters for help. Since the followers 
of Ephara see cities as inherently superior to other lo- 
cations, they are unmoved by simple pleas to leave the 
wilderness as it is, and the characters likely must stop 
them by force. 


EPHARA'S URN 15 A FOUNTAIN OF BLESSINGS, 


EPHARA’S DIVINE SCHEMES 


d4 
1 


Scheme 

Ephara tries to curry Karametra’s favor, hoping to 
persuade her to use her influence over agriculture 

to help the cities under Ephara’s protection flourish. 
But Karametra, as the patron of Setessa, thinks that 
Ephara’s focus on cities is dangerous and damaging 
to the lands. Nylea lashes out at both Karametra and 
Ephara, believing them to be working together. 
Ephara attempts to strip Phenax of his “stolen” divin- 
ity, outraged by his influence over criminals. 

A recent earthquake has changed the coastline, 
exposing a new island with a verdant and lush land- 
scape. Ephara and Nylea are locked in a battle for 
control over the island, with Nylea wanting it to re- 
main wilderness and Ephara seeking to build a city on 
the fertile ground. 

Ephara sends champions to free a city from the 
control of tyrants who worship Mogis, god of wrath. 
Mogis retaliates by sending his armies to attack a city 
under Ephara's protection. 


122 


АСОВА 


Many settlements in Theros have a centrally located ag- 
ora, or public forum, where artists perform, politicians 
give speeches, philosophers debate, vendors hawk their 
wares, and people congregate. Many agoras are sur- 
rounded by stoas, covered walkways that lead to other 
areas of the settlement. People in the agora might re- 
treat beneath the awnings for privacy and shade, while 
others stand on the roofs of the porticos to shout mes- 
sages to the assembled crowds. 

In addition to activities involving art, commerce, pol- 
itics, and religion, people come to the agora for socializ- 
ing and learning the latest news and gossip. The crowds 
attract less savory folk, like spies and thieves. Priests of 
Ephara often bless agoras because they are so central to 
civilized life in Theros, but all the gods are usually hon- 
ored in these forums with statues or other works of art. 


AGORA ADVENTURES 

An agora is the perfect location for adventures where 
roleplaying takes center stage. The characters could 

use the crowd as cover for a clandestine meeting or as 
an audience to rally to action. A simple shopping trip in 
an agora can turn into an adventure when a thief steals 
from the characters or they overhear a sinister conversa- 
tion. The Agora Adventures table offers ideas for adven- 
tures that could occur in such a place. 


AGORA ADVENTURES 

d12 Adventure Coal 

1 Apprehend the ringleader of a thieves’ guild who fre- 

quently targets people in the agora. 
Protect a civil leader giving a speech. 
Perform for an audience. 
Humiliate someone giving a speech or performing. 
Make a profit running someone’s market stall. 
Sabotage business for the entire market. 
Eavesdrop on a private meeting under a stoa. 


Incite a crowd to action with a public speech. 


D о мо л FW м 


Debate a well-loved politician or philosopher and 
convince the audience to take your side. 
10  Recapture an escaped beast that was up for sale. 


11 Stop a public execution. 


12 Quella riot without violence. 


AGORA MAP 

The agora shown in map 4.2 is surrounded by stoas, 
with statues of different gods on their roofs overlooking 
the public area. Market stalls stand in orderly lanes, and 
vendors position their carts between them. 

Two stages stand at either end of the forum. One is a 
huge platform where performers, politicians, and phi- 
losophers address the crowds. The smaller stage has 
steps that lead up to a higher platform. Criminals sen- 
tenced to death are thrown from this height onto the 
ground below, where the crowd then finishes the job. 
Stocks are also set up at the top of this stage for petty 
criminals to be publicly humiliated. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


At the agora's center stands a grand fountain with a 
larger-than-life sculpture depicting all the gods sharing 
a feast. On holy days, priests invite people to wash their 
feet in the fountain and receive blessings from the gods. 


AGORA VILLAINS 

An agora villain could be almost any humanoid, from a 
corrupt politician to a common criminal thug. Some of 
these folks use monsters to do their dirty work. Exam- 
ples of such villains appear on the Agora Villains table. 


AGORA VILLAINS 


d6 Villain 

1 An assassin murders a politician's rivals then poses 
the victims in grisly, public tableaus. 

2 A group of thugs vandalizes market stalls whose 
owners don't pay a weekly protection fee. 

3 . Cultists of Pharika plot to spike the wine at a party in 
the agora with an experimental poison. 

4 Asnake charmer overreaches when he unsuccessfully 
attempts to control an amphisbaena (see chapter 6) 
during a performance. 

5 A disgraced priest of Ephara releases a horde of 
anvilwrought creatures (see chapter 6) on a crowd 
gathered at the agora. 

6 A mage politician uses enchantment magic to spread 


rumors about rivals. 


LOGOS {R 


Beneath the Fountain 


[Р a Benches 
[] 


3 


fice кас (LE) 


(Fae 
d 


RENE 
Prisoners' 
A Scaffold 


ШШ 


1 square = 5 feet 


Map 4.2: AGORA 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


123 


ЕЕЕВО$ 
Jealous but patient, Erebos is a demanding master. His 


champions know that service to him lasts not just until 
their deaths, but beyond that. 


EREBOS’S CHAMPIONS 


Erebos spends most of his time and attention on the 
Underworld, leaving his champions to safeguard his in- 
terests in the realm of the living. He might call upon his 
followers to punish those who escape the Underworld, 
spread despair, or thwart the schemes of other gods, 
particularly Heliod and Phenax. The Erebos’s Quests 
table suggests a few adventures the god’s champions 
might involve themselves in. 


EREBOS’S QUESTS 
d6 Adventure Goal 


ture a hero who came back to Theros as a Re- 
tu id send them back to the Underworld. 
2 Find out why those who die in a coastal village never 


arrive in the Underworld, and why the village is 
haunted by eidolons. 
3 Protect those who attend the funeral of a village elder 
in the hills near Akros, where minotaurs have dis- 
rupted recent burials. 

4 Investigate an alchemist who claims to have trans- 
muted lead into gold—but who might somehow be 
stealing it from the Underworld. 

є fute the claim of a priest of Heliod who is said to 
Бе immortal because of the sun god's blessing. 


6 Take an aging champion of Iroas who has pledged 
their soul to Erebos in exchange for a glorious death 
on one last foray into the wild lands. 


AN EREBOS CAMPAIGN 

A campaign structured around the player characters as 
champions of Erebos often invites a certain amount of 
moral complexity. Perhaps heroes are brought together 
to oppose an overreach by a champion of Heliod. Or 
maybe they're united by some common plight such as 
plague or war, as Erebos grants his blessings to those 
who determinedly face fate. From there, they might be 
drawn into helping Erebos maintain the line between 
life and death by fighting against Returned raiders. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


Champions of Erebos who want to maintain a moral 
code separate from that of their god have a difficult path 
to walk. They might find themselves forced to choose be- 
tween what they believe is right and what their god tells 
them to do. If this leads them to violate one of Erebos's 
most sacred rules—by allowing a lost soul to escape, 

for example—Erebos could transform into a campaign 
villain. The characters might then try to atone for their 
behavior or seek the protection of another god. 


EREBOS'S VILLAINS 


Erebos's sphere of influence is every bit as essential to 
life on Theros as Heliod's, but it is easy to see why many 
take a dim view of him and his champions. The status 
quo that Erebos seeks to uphold is a brutal one, based 
on the tragic fact that every life ends in death. 

Followers of Erebos might become villains when they 
follow their god's orders, sowing despair among the 
populace. Some become death-crazed killers or dispas- 
sionate murderers, unable to see the difference between 
dying now and dying later. Others abuse their blessings 
to cheat death for themselves or their loved ones, and 
still others simply want to get rich. 

The Erebos's Villains table suggests a variety of foes 
that might arise from among the god's followers. 


EREBOS’S VILLAINS 
d6 Villain 

1 A veteran bargains with Erebos to allow him to re- 
main in the living world as a Returned in exchange for 
a steady stream of mortal sacrifices. 

2 A prominent knight of another god loses their entire 
family, then publicly turns to Erebos in hopes of being 
reunited with loved ones in the Underworld. 

3 An acolyte convinces Erebos to bring her murdered 
daughter back to life, but the daughter is restored as 
a potent Returned who now terrorizes the polis. 

4 Awealthy noble drives tenants out of a poor part of a 
polis so he can build a temple to Erebos. 

5 The queen of a remote settlement prays to Erebos 

. for endless treasure, and Erebos “blesses” her by 
turning the nearby river to liquid silver. The tyrant is 
delighted, but everyone else in her domain suffers. 

6 A priest of Erebos terrorizes a village, convinced that 
a particular Returned has taken refuge there. 


EREBOS'S MONSTERS 

Erebos has legions of fallen monsters, heroes, and 
villains that he can send back to the world of the living 
temporarily as Nyxborn. The Erebos's Monsters table 
presents just a few foes likely to serve the god's will. 


EREBOS's MONSTERS 


Challenge Creature Source 
2 Shadow MM 

2 Two-headed cerberus MOT 

3 Lampad MOT 
3 Nightmare MM 


Challenge Creature Source 
5 Night hag* MM 
9 Aberrant overlord | MOT 
n Doomwake giant MOT 
n Nightmare shepherd MOT 


* See chapter 6 for details about these creatures in Theros. 


EREBOS AS CAMPAIGN VILLAIN 


The god of death is a natural villain, whether from the 
beginning of the campaign or after he takes a villainous 
turn against his former champions. 

As a campaign villain, Erebos will try to carry out 
the worst of his schemes: sowing despair, ending lives 
before their time, or supplanting Heliod. The campaign 
might begin with cultists of Erebos committing random 
murders, then escalate when a prominent priest or 
champion of Heliod is assassinated. Adventurers who 
have no love for the sun god might still find cause to put 
a stop to Erebos's terrors— particularly if he starts lash- 
ing out against followers of other gods. 


EREBOS’S DIVINE SCHEMES 

When the god of death chooses to move against the 
other gods, the effects can be catastrophic. The Erebos's 
Divine Schemes table suggests a few ways Erebos might 
move against both gods and mortals. 


EREBOS'S MINIONS HUNT THE RETURNED AND 
WARN THOSE WHO CONSIDER THE SAME FOLLY. 


Eresos’s DIVINE SCHEMES 


d4 
1 


Scheme 

Erebos has captured Phenax's eidolon, the identity 
severed from Phenax's body when he became the first 
Returned, and uses it to force Phenax to serve his 
whims. 

Erebos unleashes a deadly plague. The cure grows 
only in the peaceful Underworld realm of Ilysia. Mor- 
tal champions flock to tysia, threatening to breach 
the ward's sanctity and allow Erebos's influence to 
creep in. 

Servants of Heliod find a stone that can raise the 
dead in both body and soul. Enraged, Erebos sends 
his followers to claim the stone, which Heliod's wor- 
shipers have claimed as a holy relic. 

With the aid of Pharika, Erebos creates a poison ca- 
pable of killing a god. Learning ofthis, the other gods 
try to force Erebos to relinquish the poison, but the 
god of the dead has already deployed it in the form of 
a sapient being. Now, champions of the gods scour 


the world, searching for the living weapon. 


126 


GRAVEYARD TEMPLE 


Any place where the remains of the dead are interred is 
considered a place of worship for Erebos. A graveyard 
can consist of mass graves, individual burial plots, 
family tombs containing interment niches or urns, or a 
combination of all such sites honoring the dead. These 
places often include a shrine to the god of death, which 
is home to the graveyard's priests. 

During the day, the priests lead funeral rites, care for 
the graveyard, and offer counsel to those praying for 
acceptance of their fates. Larger graveyard complexes 
might also have a vault for storing gold or other valu- 
ables, and the priests could act as financial advisors and 
executors of estates, since wealth and death go hand in 
hand in Theros. 

At night, the restless dead might walk through the 
graveyard's temple. Sometimes these dead are restless 
ghosts that can't pass into the Underworld until they 
finish a piece of business. Others might be Returned, 
lingering near their place of burial because they can't re- 
member where else to go, or evil undead—such as spec- 
ters and wraiths—waiting to harm any living creatures 
they come across. 


GRAVEYARD TEMPLE ADVENTURES 

Graveyard temple adventures are centered on death 
and wealth. The characters could be asked to deal with 
undead, protect or steal a grave's remains or treasure, 
or attend a funeral in the graveyard. Many graveyards 
have tunnels connecting the tombs that the priests use 
in their caretaking duties, so exploring such a complex 
can be a daunting task. The Graveyard Temple Adven- 
tures table offers ideas for adventures that could occur 
in such a place. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


GRAVEYARD TEMPLE ADVENTURES 


d10 Adventure Goal 
1 Rob a grave or the temple’s vault. 
Protect a grave or the temple’s vault from robbery. 
3 Destroy a seemingly endless wave of undead pouring 
forth from a graveyard. 
4 Ргеуепі the funeral of a loathed individual from being 
disrupted. 
Find an entrance to the Underworld in the graveyard. 
6 Reunite a Returned sentry (see chapter 6) and their 
ghostblade eidolon (see chapter 6). 
Destroy giant spiders infesting a tomb. 
Acquire death records for a family from a temple full 
of angry spirits. 
9 Escape the graveyard when undead suddenly rise and 
overtake the complex. 
10 Usea person's remains to raise them from the dead. 


GRAVEYARD TEMPLE MAP 

The temple shown in map 4.3 sits at the center of a 
graveyard, which consists of underground tombs that 
hold urns of ashes, individual burial plots, and a mass 
grave for those who couldn't afford better. The ground 
level of the temple contains a chapel with benches and 
a raised dais, which holds an altar and a viewing table 
for bodies of the deceased. The other chambers of the 
temple's first floor contain the priests' quarters, offices, 
embalming chambers, as well as a vault. 

The temple's cellar holds burial and financial records, 
as well as tools used in the caretaking of the graveyard. 
Tunnels that can be sealed with iron doors connect the 
cellar to all of the graveyard's tombs. 

One of the graveyard's individual plots is marked with 
a nameless marker. This grave plot doesn't contain a 
body. The most valuable treasures entrusted to the tem- 
ple's care are buried in this spot. 


GRAVEYARD TEMPLE VILLAINS 

Graveyard temple villains include those seeking to con- 
trol death and wealth. Examples of such figures appear 
on the Graveyard Temple Villains table. 


GRAVEYARD TEMPLE VILLAINS 

d6 Villain 

1 Aterrified Returned palamnite (see chapter 6) runs 
amok in the graveyard, having lost all sense of itself 
after finding its way back to the world. 

2 Acyclops with a taste for rotting flesh digs up plots 
in the graveyard each night. 

3  Apriest removes limbs from corpses to build an con- 
gregation of flesh golems he can't control. 


4 Agate to the Underworld releases a bloodthirsty Un- 
derworld cerberus (see chapter 6) into the graveyard. 

5 Anarchmage works to raise a vengeful army from the 
remains of her war-ravaged village. 

6 A mob of paranoid, inexperienced commoners hunt 
for Returned but end up tormenting all strangers. 


LI 


ttr NS 
E 


AS. ша 2 


QU 


NN V 


=) 


te, 


fi aloe 
EA IT Ea 


1square = 5 feet 


Storage [BB 


VA, 
Temple Basement 


CS 
SAW 


False Mausoleum 
& Treasure Vault 


Map 4.3: Gravevaro TEMPLE 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


127 


128 


HELIOD 


As powerful as he is arrogant, Heliod believes in his 
vision of a bright, orderly future and demands that his 
champions help bring it into being. 


HELIOD’S CHAMPIONS 


Heliod’s champions are a means to accomplish his 
goals. In the world, Heliod is concerned with law and 
order, justice and fidelity. On a larger scale, he seeks 
to establish his superiority over the other gods, and his 
mortal champions might get caught up in those schemes 
in ways both large and small. 

The Heliod’s Quests table suggests a few adventures 
the god’s champions might involve themselves in. 


HELIOD’s QUESTS 


d6 Adventure Goal 

1l Bring a shard of sunlight to a place of unending 
darkness. 

2 Establish law and order in a place of anarchy and 
lawlessness. 

3 Keep people safe from a natural disaster caused by 
the anger of another god (such as a volcano spawned 
by Purphoros or a tidal wave caused by Thassa). 

4 Hunt down a notorious lawbreaker who has fled from 
a polis into the wilderness. 

5 Triumph in a contest of strength or charisma to prove 
Heliod's superiority over the other gods. 

6 Defeat a champion of another god (most likely 
Erebos, Purphoros, Phenax, or Mogis). 


A HELIOD CAMPAIGN 

A campaign structured around champions of Heliod 
might cast adventurers as valiant protectors of civiliza- 
tion. Rampaging monsters, lawless agitators, hardened 
criminals, oath breakers, and the champions of Heliod's 
divine enemies pose constant threats, and the charac- 
ters are charged with combating them all. 

At the beginning of the campaign, the characters 
might stand alongside other defenders of a polis against 
attacking monsters and receive Heliod's blessing at a 
crucial moment to turn the tide of battle. Hailed as he- 
roes by the polis, they continue to enjoy Heliod's favor as 
they vanquish one threat after another. 

Losing their patron's favor is the greatest danger to 
champions of Heliod. If the god views them as disobe- 
dient or comes to see them as a threat, he might turn 
against them. At that point, characters might either try 
to regain his favor or seek protection with another god. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


HELIOD'S VILLAINS 


It's easy for servants of Heliod—and even the god him- 
self—to take on a villainous role in the world. Heliod's 
followers easily become obsessed with upholding justice 
atthe price of mercy, or with advancing order at the 
price of freedom, turning them into vicious tyrants or 
overzealous enforcers. On a smaller scale, someone 
who has suffered a grievous wrong might swear an oath 
of vengeance in Heliod's name and become a deadly vig- 
ilante. When a follower of Heliod's righteous zeal for jus- 
tice turns to oppressive tyranny, Heliod himself might 
send champions to stop the would-be tyrant. 

The Heliod's Villains table suggests a variety of foes 
that might arise from among the god's followers. 


HELIOD'S VILLAINS 

dé Villain 

1  Alocal noble imposes overwhelming punishments for 
even minor infractions of law. 

2  Aleader persecutes an entire population of people 
because of a crime committed by a single member. 

3 An assassin starts killing everyone connected to a 
trial after which the perpetrator was exonerated. 

4  Afanatical priest tries to undermine the priests of 
other gods by outlawing their holidays. 

5  Atyrant suppresses free expression, punishes 
protesters, and quashes any form of dissent. 

6 А nervous oracle (see chapter 6) identifies the charac- 
ters as a threat to the stability of the polis. 


HELIOD'S MONSTERS 

Heliod is rarely associated with deadly monsters, more 
often with celestial messengers and noble creatures. 
Even so, adventures that bring characters into conflict 
with Heliod's agents might pit them against creatures 
such as those on the Heliod's Monsters table. 


HELIOD'S MONSTERS 


Challenge Creature Source 
1/8 Noble MM 

2 Centaur MM 

2 Griffon MM 

2 Pegasus MM 

3 Fleecemane lion MOT 

9 Cloud giant MM 

n Roc MM 

23 Empyrean MM 


HELIOD AS CAMPAIGN VILLAIN 


Whether Heliod is a villain from the beginning of the 
campaign or takes a villainous turn against his former 
champions, a campaign centered on Heliod's arrogance 
and peevishness brings the worst of the sun god's quali- 
ties into focus. 

As a campaign villain, Heliod is most likely driven by 
his desire to assert his rulership over the other gods of 
the pantheon and his kingship over everything: Nyx, 


the mortal world, and the Underworld. He might begin, 
through his agents, by enacting laws that make partic- 
ipation in Heliod’s rites mandatory for the citizens of a 
polis. From there, it’s a small step to suppressing the 
open worship of other gods, then trying to spread both 
policies to other cities. If the characters are champions 
of other gods, they might find themselves the targets of 
Heliod’s agents, marked as a threat to order and stability 
in the poleis. 

Such a campaign might end with the characters ap- 
peasing Heliod in some way, convincing the other gods 
(especially Kruphix or Klothys) to intervene and rein in 
Heliod’s hubris, or even confronting Heliod with the sup- 
port of other gods. 


HELIOD’s DIVINE SCHEMES 

Heliod's activities among the other gods can have a 
wide-ranging impact on the pantheon and the mortal 
world. The Heliod's Divine Schemes table offers exam- 
ples of how the god might have a mythic impact on the 
mortal world, embroiling the characters in the middle of 
divine squabbles. 


HELIOD’s SPEAR DOLES OUT HIS BLESSINGS 


AS WELL AS HIS WRATH. 


HELIOD'S DiviNE SCHEMES 


d4 
1 


Scheme 

Heliod decides to confront Erebos in the Underworld. 
He gathers fallen heroes around him as he marches 
on Erebos's palace in Tizerus. Meanwhile, the sun 
has vanished from the sky in the mortal world, and 
the dead can't enter the Underworld. 

Heliod grows tired of the battles between lroas and 
Mogis, and he decides to end their conflict by ban- 
ishing Mogis. To his surprise, both gods turn against 
him. The resulting conflict causes the sun to rain 
divine blood, producing bizarre effects. 

Angry at the hubris of nobles who boast of having the 
best hounds, Heliod turns all dogs into wolves and 
monsters that kill and run wild. 

Heliod arms a champion with his weapon, Khrusor, 
but the hero goes wild with power and tries to slay 
Purphoros. The repercussions border on the cataclys- 
mic, with the champion slain, Mount Velus erupting, 
and the spear shattered. Only Purphoros can repair 
the spear, and he's hardly in the mood to do so. 


SUN TEMPLE 


These multistory towers of worship rise atop mountains, 


hills, and the highest ground in a settlement, bringing 
congregants as close as possible to the sun. Huge win- 
dows, light-reflecting stone, and art depicting legendary 
heroes make every sun temple a bright, inspiring space. 

The rites conducted in sun temples include marriages, 
ceremonies to honor heroes, dawn worship services, 
breakfast banquets, and occasionally funerals, which 
typically involve a pyre for the deceased. These events 
are held on the temple’s roof, where worshipers are clos- 
est to the sun and can feel its warmth. 


SUN TEMPLE ADVENTURES 

Sun temples honor heroes and record their deeds. 

An adventure in which the characters need to meet, 
research, protect, or confront a legendary figure might 
happen in one of these houses of worship. Additionally, 
large groups gather in these temples, potentially leading 
to adventures involving crowds that need to be pro- 
tected, quelled, or investigated. The Sun Temple Adven- 
tures table offers plots that could occur in such a place. 


SUN TEMPLE ADVENTURES 


di2 Adventure Goal 

1 Acquire an artifact used by a legendary hero. 

2 Defend a hero being honored in a ceremony from an 
assassination attempt. 

3 Acquire the remains of a legendary hero from the 
temple's crypts so the person can be resurrected. 

4 Prevent a wedding from taking place, so the couple's 
union doesn't fulfill an ominous prophecy. 

5 Ехроѕе a celebrated hero as a fraud. 

6 Learn the sins of a person seeking religious counsel. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


Adventure Goal 

7 Find out who among a crowd of people gathered at 
the temple murdered a priest. 

8  Disperse a mob of people who blame Heliod and his 
clergy for a long drought. 

9 Defend the temple's worshipers from followers of 
Mogis assaulting the building. 

10 Offer Heliod a burnt sacrifice to gain his blessing. 

11 Offer Heliod a mass sacrifice to prevent him from 
smiting a nearby settlement. 

12  Finda hero's firsthand account of a battle with a 

unique monster among the temple's records before a 

rival group of adventurers does. 


SUN TEMPLE MAP 

The sun temple shown in map 4.4 presents a common 
design for Heliod's holy sites. Most ceremonies take 
place on the rooftop, which is surrounded by statues of 
heroic figures and magnificent gardens that bloom in 
the dawnlight. Worshipers reach the top by climbing 
stairs on the outside of the tower. 

Floor-to-ceiling windows on the temple's fourth level 
reveal a crypt with hundreds of funeral urns placed in 
niches on the wall and in decorative columns. Lower 
levels hold the personal chambers of priests, as well as 
quiet chambers where people can worship at small al- 
tars or seek counsel from clergy who specialize in mat- 
ters of morality. The temple's ground floor contains a 
museum displaying heroic artifacts and accounts of epic 
deeds, all of which are guarded by the ghosts of heroes 
interred in the crypt. 


SUN TEMPLE VILLAINS 

Although sun temples are places that glorify heroic 
deeds, they do attract villains eager to please Heliod, 
defy him, or twist his tenets. Examples of such villains 
appear on the Sun Temple Villains table. 


SUN TEMPLE VILLAINS 


d6 Villain 

1  Aonce-heroic veteran seeking to regain his youthful 
strength tries to burn attendees at a dawn banquet 
as a sacrifice to Heliod. 

2  Asecret cabal of Phenax cult fanatics infiltrates the 
temple and uses details learned in private counseling 
sessions to blackmail worshipers. 

3  Anadult blue dragon, scarred by a champion of He- 
liod, seeks to destroy all sun temples in the hopes of 
bringing about everlasting night. 

4  Acorrupt oracle (see chapter 6) of Heliod sells coun- 
terfeit heroic artifacts to those he can't see as being 
destined for greatness. 

5  Alazy priest of Heliod risks bringing the god's wrath 
down upon the entire temple. 

6 X Anarchmage devoted to Heliod has created a second 
sun, one which endlessly illuminates the land and 
burns those she considers wicked. 


Level 4 


Upto 
bond 5 


Level 2 


: Downto 
Level 1 


DYSON LOGOS 


Mae 4.4: бим TempLE 


Level 5 
Rooftop 


Down to > 
Level4 @ N 


Banquet Table q Altar 


e a T 


Statues of Heroes 
@ 


Ground Floor 


TA " 


9 9 9 


Entry Gallery 


1 square = 5 feet 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


132. 


IROAS 


Iroas expects much of his champions. Constant training 
and testing oneself against the strongest foes available 
are the hallmarks of Iroas’s champions. 


IROAS'S CHAMPIONS 


Iroas's champions are his generals, through whom he 
can deliver death blows to his enemies. On a daily basis, 
Iroas serves the causes of justice and honor. The weak 
are to be protected, just laws are to be upheld, and evil- 
doers must be struck down in righteous anger. Iroas’s 
champions also serve as his vanguard in the eternal war 
against his brother, Mogis. 

The Iroas's Quests table suggests a few adventures 
the god's champions might involve themselves in. 


IROAS's QUESTS 

d6 Adventure Goal 

1 Defeat Returned bandits who are terrorizing the polis. 

2 Defend a polis against a champion of Mogis. 

3  Sailtoa remote island to reclaim a lost weapon of 
great power. 

4 Establish law and order in a place of anarchy and law- 
lessness. 

5 Triumph in a contest of strength or dexterity to prove 
Iroas's superiority over the other gods. 

6 Defeat a champion of another god (most likely Mogis, 
Phenax, or Pharika). 


AN IROAS CAMPAIGN 

A campaign focused on champions of Iroas is filled with 
battle, stunning acts of heroism, and valorous stands 
against great odds. Iroas is a god of action, and his cham- 
pions are the tip of his spear, expected to hurl themselves 
at danger when it presents itself. Iroas holds a bitter 
grudge against his brother Mogis, and Iroas's champions 
often counter the agents of the god of carnage. 

As the campaign begins, the characters could find 
themselves on a field of battle, either as mercenaries or 
sworn soldiers for a polis. Their courage at arms and 
the honor they demonstrate in battle impress Iroas, and 
he proudly bestows his blessing on them. Every subse- 
quent engagement only enhances the characters' repu- 
tation as skilled, steadfast warriors without peer. Their 
actions inevitably lead to a challenge from a champion 
of Mogis who is intent on destroying the characters and 
anyone they hold dear. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


Iroas exalts winners, but even a narrow defeat is still a 
defeat. An opponent who has no qualms about cheating 
and using subterfuge holds an advantage over champi- 
ons of Iroas. If the characters sink to using dishonorable 
tactics, they can expect swift retribution and loss of fa- 
vor in return for their weakness. 


IROAS'S VILLAINS 


Iroas, for all his love of justice and honor, is still a god of 
war. Anyone on the opposing side of Iroas's forces can 
expect to face motivated, dedicated warriors. He is also 
quite stubborn and takes losing a challenge personally, 
sometimes declaring a vendetta if he believes the chal- 
lenge was won dishonorably. 

Iroas's followers sometimes forsake mercy and com- 
passion, as matters of honor and victory are uppermost, 
making them pitiless foes. Writ small, this behavior 
could show up in an overzealous young commander 
who would sacrifice his unit in a hopeless battle rather 
than retreat. If a great champion of Iroas loses their 
moral compass amid the horrors of war and commits 
atrocities in the name of victory, Iroas himself will send 
heroes to stop the fallen champion. 

The Iroas's Villains table suggests a variety of foes 
that might arise from among the god's followers. 


IROAS's VILLAINS 

de Villain 

1  Aknight in the polis guard regularly subjects his 
soldiers to extreme disciplinary techniques, leading 
them to start a revolt. 

2  Ageneral (Akroan hoplite; see chapter 6) commands 
a town be put to the torch for its soldiers' crimes. 
Followers of Phenax are actually responsible for the 
crimes and are framing the community so it will be 
destroyed and turned into a haven for the Returned. 

3 Anaging athlete (gladiator) pursues sinister magic to 
aid his performance at the cost of innocent lives. 

4 The government of a polis fearful of impending war 
forces farmers to join a militia, precipitating a famine 
as crops are left untended. 

5 A priest tries to undermine the servants of other gods 
by forcing them into duels and shaming them if they 
lose. 

6  Agifted orator (noble) offers honest but scathing crit- 
icism of a champion of Iroas. The champion demands 
recompense, and the orator needs support against 
this threat. 


IROAS'S MONSTERS 

Iroas is associated with warriors of all backgrounds. 
Most of the creatures in his retinue lack subtlety and ex- 
cel in physical combat. Adventures that bring characters 
into conflict with Iroas's agents might pit them against 
monsters such as these. The Iroas's Monsters table 
presents just a few foes likely to serve the god's will. 


JASON CHAN 


MYTH OF KELEPHNE THE VICTOR 

It started with a rumor. Athletes gathering in Akros for the 
Ігоап Games whispered of a hermit in the wilderness, a mas- 
ter wrestler who'd brought down giants with her bare hands. 
As the games commenced, the rumors continued, and ath- 
letic victories seemed hollow so long as the so-called best 
was not there to compete. 

When Kelephne did arrive, she was barefoot and had a fire 
in her eyes. The rumors of her skill were not exaggerated, and 
for three days, she battled a continuous stream of compet- 
itors. When no others would challenge her, she left without 
ceremony. She was never seen again, and some speculated 
she was lroas in human form. 

Athletes tried for years to mimic Kelephne's techniques. 
Years later, wanderers discovered a cave covered in writing. 
These instructions became known as Kelephne's manual, and 
her technique was called pankration—now a widely studied 
style of weaponless fighting. 


IROAS’S MONSTERS 


Challenge Creature Source 
1/8 Guard MM 
1 Nyx-fleece ram MOT 
2 Griffon MM 
3 Akroan hoplite MOT 
3 Fleecemane lion MOT 
5 Gladiator MM 
7 Stone giant MM 
1 Roc MM 


IROAS AS CAMPAIGN VILLAIN 


Characters are likely to raise the ire of Iroas because 
they oppose his followers in battle or defy his ideals. His 
anger is direct and unsubtle, much like Iroas himself. 
Iroas might be titled the god of victory in all respects, 
but he cares less about victory in competitions than he 
does about victory in war. In war, both mortals and gods 
could be blinded by the rush to victory or by cleaving 
to stubbornly held ideas. Although a campaign against 
Iroas might be straightforward in how the action plays 
out, the underlying causes of conflict could be quite 
complex, involving attacks on people who may seem 
unrelated to the initial conflict. As a campaign villain, 
Iroas is most likely driven by his desire to win in battle, 
to confront Mogis, or to avenge an insult to his honor. 
The campaign might end with the adventurers win- 
ning Iroas's respect in some way, convincing the other 
gods (including Heliod if the party is interested in honor 
and justice, or Mogis if not) to blunt Iroas's anger, or 
even battle Iroas with the support of other gods. 


InOAS's DIVINE SCHEMES 

Iroas isn't much of a schemer. His view of the world is 
through the crystal-clear lens of battle—strategic and 
tactical plans are unambiguous and executed with pre- 
cision. This isn't to say he is unaware of treachery or 
unprepared for it, only that he prefers to act forthrightly 
and decisively. The Iroas's Divine Schemes table sug- 
gests a few plots the god might involve himself in. 


IROAS’s DIVINE SCHEMES 


d4 
1 


Scheme 

Iroas inspires a brave Akroan general to travel forth 
with a handpicked army and confront the forces of a 
powerful and supposedly vulnerable minotaur war- 
lord. The general loses despite Iroas's favor, and Ak- 
ros is left exposed and poorly defended before a wave 
of Mogis-worshiping minotaurs. 

Heliod, weary of the constant strife between ігоаѕ 
and Mogis, swears an oath to destroy Mogis with a 
godly coalition behind him. Erebos, disgusted with 
Heliod’s hubris, forms a group in support of Mogis. 
Iroas, rather than accepting Heliod's aid, launches a 
grand campaign of his own against his brother. 
Mogis arms one of his champions with an axe capa- 
ble of sundering the souls of mortal creatures. Iroas 
wants his champions to procure the weapon so he 
can lock it away in his armory and thwart his brother. 
Agents of Erebos also seek to recover the weapon on 
their master's behalf. 

Iroas achieves the victory he has always pursued: he 
kills his brother, and the world falls into chaos. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 133 


ARENA 


Across Theros, contest grounds host athletic competi- 
tions and often serve as places to worship the god Iroas. 
The grandest hippodrome in Akros holds thousands 

of spectators, but more modest stadiums can be found 
throughout the land, serving as proving grounds for ath- 
letes and entertainment for the rich and poor. Foot and 
chariot races, hurling competitions, and combat sports 
(wrestling, boxing, and pankration) are all common 
events in arenas, especially during the Iroan Games, an 
annual series of athletic competitions held in Akros. 


ARENA ADVENTURES 

Adventures in an arena often feature the characters as 
contestants in an athletic competition. The reward for 
winning could be treasure, a favor, or an audience with 
a person of importance—even Iroas himself, in the case 
of the Iroan Games. The Arena Adventures table offers 
ideas for adventures that could occur in such a place. 


ARENA ADVENTURES 


d8 Adventure Goal 

1 Help an unfit participant survive an athletic compe- 
tition. 

2 Convincingly lose an athletic competition so a gam- 
bler can win big. 

3 Sabotage a star athlete's chances of winning. 
Attend tryouts to become members of a chariot rac- 
ing team. 

5 Assassinate a person watching a competition before 

the final match ends. 
Save a wrestler from a planned murder in the arena. 
Capture a beast that has escaped from the stadium. 
Recover a blessed trophy and award it to a contest's 
rightful victor. 


ARENA MAP 
The arena shown in map 4.5 has a ring of raised 
benches and private boxes around its sandy floor. The 
map of the arena's upper levels depicts the exterior 
seating and the interior halls below (both of which are 
largely mirrored on the map's opposite site). Tunnels 
and trapdoors allow competitors to enter the arena 
from almost any angle. A large tarpaulin attached to the 
roof can be unfurled to shade the arena's audience. An 
awards platform serves as a shrine to Iroas. Winners 
of athletic competitions stand here to receive medals, 
wreaths, rewards, the blessings of priests, and the 
praise of the crowd. 

Outside the arena and beneath the seats are 
open areas and alcoves where vendors sell con- 
cessions and trinkets, along with booths for 
making bets. 

The space under the arena holds gymnasi- 
ums, an equipment hall, and several staging 
areas and specialty rooms used as locker 
rooms, animal pens, and separate training 
areas for various creatures. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


ARENA VILLAINS 

АП sorts of unsavory elements can be found in an 
arena—backstabbing competitors, desperate gamblers, 
cruel trainers, savage animals, and worse. The Arena 
Villains table presents just a few ne'er-do-wells who 
might frequent physical contests. 


ARENA VILLAINS 

d8 Villain 

1 A champion pankratiast (Akroan hoplite; see chapter 
6) has her cronies lock everyone in the arena. She al- 
lows none to leave until a challenger defeats her. 

2 А minotaur frees all the beasts in the amphitheater 
during a well-attended event. 

3 A chariot racer (gladiator) poisons members of a rival 
team, causing them to fall asleep during competition. 

4 A mage uses magic to spy on athletes’ conversations 
and then blackmails them with the information. 

5 Astone giant interrupts a session of games and de- 
mands achance to compete. 

6 A promoter forces athletes to overexert themselves, 
causing dangerous accidents during competitions. 

7 Anarchmage enchants or polymorphs innocents, 
forcing them to participate in brutal contests. 

8  Adruid uses the awaken spell on beasts in the arena 
to make them more capable competitors. 


LOGOS (В) 


DYSON 


YEONG-HAO HAN ( 


Entrance li * є 
a 


Мар 4.5: ARENA 


Arena Interior | Arena Exterior 


Altar of Iroas 


Arena Floor 


(rite Boxes 


2 


ZA 


77 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


136 


KARAMETRA 


All life—plant and animal—needs fertility to continue to 
exist, making Karametra’s constancy vital to sustaining 
a habitable world for mortals. 


KARAMETRA’S CHAMPIONS 


Karametra’s champions build community, advance 
civilization, and bestow bounty wherever they go in the 
name of their god. Karametra seeks to provide for all, 
end famine and desperation, and ensure that everyone 
is supported by family and community. She isn't a de- 
manding god, but her champions diligently court her 
favor by trying to further her goals. 

The Karametra’s Quests table suggests a few adven- 
tures the god’s champions might involve themselves in. 


KARAMETRA’S QUESTS 

d6 Adventure Goal 
Plant a fruit-bearing tree where one has never grown. 
Save a village whose crops are failing. 
Defend or found an orphanage. 
Teach a settlement to defend itself from wild beasts. 
Reunite an orphan with living relatives. 


QU d Uv мк + 


Convince raiders to give up their ways, settle down, 
found a village, and devote their lives to farming. 


А KARAMETRA CAMPAIGN 

At first glance, a campaign in which the player charac- 
ters are champions of Karametra might seem counter- 
intuitive, since Karametra's goals seem to promote the 
antithesis of an adventuring life. But her ideals might be 
attractive to some adventurers, such as exiles for whom 
the idea of settling down in a safe, prosperous commu- 
nity can be a profoundly seductive prospect. 

Karametra lavishes her favor on those who protect 
established communities, but her most cherished cham- 
pions are those who strike out to found a new settlement 
or bring aid to a struggling or endangered community. 
She loves most keenly those followers who embody her 
values of putting community before self by leaving their 
peaceful lives behind and looking for others to bring into 
the fold. And her pride in them is all the greater when 
they manage to build chosen families who journey with 
them to pursue the same goals. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


At the beginning of the campaign, the characters 
might discover a community in desperate straits and 
receive Karametra's blessing as they restore it to a state 
of safety and prosperity. Or they might find their home 
destroyed, only to receive a vision from Karametra that 
she's placing the community's refugees in their care. 

The greatest danger to champions of Karametra is 
walking the line between cultivating bounty and pro- 
tecting the vulnerable versus becoming greed-driven 
and paternalistic. Karametra values humility, and often 
seeks to teach those who grow too big for their britches 
sharp lessons against hubris. 


KARAMETRA' VILLAINS 


Karametra's followers can embody the best or worst of 
civilization. Just as society can protect the vulnerable it 
can also reinforce injustice and give it the power of law. 
Too much material wealth and security can make people 
less inclined to empathize with those who have less, or 
even make them believe that wealth is a sign of virtue. 
Ignoring these truths can lead Karametra's followers 
down wicked paths. 

At its worst, the worship of Karametra can be twisted 
into compulsory conformity. It can value nature and 
people only for what they can provide. It can care for or- 
phans while doing nothing to remedy the circumstances 
that made them orphans. It can turn defense of one's 
community into xenophobia. It can come to treat the 
wealthy as moral exemplars and the poor as moral fail- 
ures. Karametra's followers can easily tip from valuing 
bounty to indulging in greed. Those who provide for oth- 
ers might come to believe it gives them a right to control 
them. When followers of Karametra cease to balance 
bounty with care, they might come to align with the foes 
presented on the Karametra's Villains table. 


KARAMETRA'S VILLAINS 


d6 Villain 

1 The head of an orphanage (commoner) believes she 
can care for the city’s children better than their par- 
ents and works to have the other adults arrested. 

2 Apriest begins imposing restrictive lifestyle rules оп 
a nearby population in order to “civilize” them. 

3 Alocal leader (Setessan hoplite; see chapter 6) im- 
poses harsh penalties on the poor, claiming their pov- 
erty is a sign they have invited the gods’ wrath. 

4 The head of a prominent family (noble) continues to 
exert abusive control over their adult children, citing 
their role as matriarch or patriarch to justify it. 

5 Alocal leader (druid) forces marriages between wid- 
ows and widowers to increase the population. 

6 A polis leader (soldier) begins doing sweeps of the 
surrounding countryside to round up non-citizens 
and put them to work supporting the community. 


KARAMETRA'S MONSTERS 

Karametra's followers usually protect innocents from 
monsters, but in certain circumstances, they might op- 
pose characters. The Karametra’s Monsters table pres- 
ents a few foes likely to serve the god’s will. 


KARAMETRA’S MONSTERS 


Challenge Creature Source 
0 Awakened shrub ; MM 
1 Alseid MOT 
1 Dryad MM 
2 Awakened tree MOT 
2 Druid MM 
4 Setessan hoplite MOT 
5 Earth elemental MM 
5 Unicorn* MM 
9 Treant MM 
12 Archdruid VGM 


* See chapter 6 for details about these creatures in Theros. 


KARAMETRA AS CAMPAIGN VILLAIN 


The intrinsic wildness of nature is part of Karametra’s 
being. A campaign that paints Karametra as a villain 
might explore the ferocity that seethes inside her, a wild 
aspect held in check by the power of mortal belief, which 
paints her as a gentle, mothering source of bounty. She 
no longer demands blood sacrifices from her worship- 
ers because they no longer believe such supplication is 
necessary—not because she decided to stop. In the pan- 
theon, she personifies a truth that most gods don't fully 
appreciate but do fear: for all the influence they might 
have over mortal lives, the collective force of mortal be- 
lief can reshape the gods’ very nature. 

As а campaign villain, Karametra might seek to 
return to her blood-soaked origins, sending her cham- 
pions to convince communities they must again make 


SN INS ү 


[Em ad | 
jJ" =) | [^ 3 * 
; А, ! 8 


blood sacrifices to please her. Karametra may send 
monsters to the poleis to remind them of the dangers of 
displeasing her, causing even more bloodshed. The cam- 
paign might end with heroes confronting Karametra or 
finding some other way to appease her. 


KARAMETRA'S DIVINE SCHEMES 

The Karametra’s Divine Schemes tables explores ways 
in which the god’s whims might impact the mortal world 
and snare adventurers in divine affairs. 


KARAMETRA’S DIVINE SCHEMES 


d4 Scheme 

1 Karametra’s statues have covered their faces as if 
in despair, and nothing will grow. No one seems to 
know what has caused the god of fertility to withdraw 
her blessings from the world, but the problem must 
be solved if life is to endure. 

2  Karametra judges that mortals have over produced 
and moves to cull populations. She creates new plant 
species that feed on mortals, while her followers act 
oddly, running off to join bloody revels or sacrificing 
each other in the fields. How many must die before 
balance is restored? 

3  Karametra's civilizing influence infringes on the terri- 
tory and freedom of other nature gods, and so Nylea 
and Pharika band together to reduce her power. 

4 Karametra bestows her gifts on a wild cultist or mi- 
notaur champion trying to encourage her older, more 
bloodthirsty worship. The faith takes hold, causing 
the god to make vicious demands of her followers. 


KARAMETRA'S ACOLYTES GATHER THE BOUNTY OF THE 
WILDS FOR THE GOD'S FEASTS IN SETESSA. 


А d 


ARBOR WATCHTOWER 


Sites that are sacred to Karametra, from her grand tem- 
ple in the heart of Setessa to outposts in the wilderness, 
combine careful construction with natural growth. The 
god favors towers and hanging gardens that lift the ver- 
dant natural world up toward Nyx in her honor. In the 
Nessian Wood, Setessans build watchtowers that serve 
the dual purpose of military defense and worship. 


WATCHTOWER ADVENTURES 

A watchtower adventure usually hinges on challenging 
the characters to find a way into or out of the fortress. As 
a military structure, a watchtower might hold secrets, 
weapons, soldiers, and prisoners, any of which the char- 
acters could liberate or defend. If the characters take 
over a watchtower, they could try to keep it for them- 
selves. The Watchtower Adventures table offers ideas for 
adventures in sucha place. 


WATCHTOWER ADVENTURES 
d10 Adventure Goal 
1 Guard a watchtower from assault. 
2 Assault a watchtower, defeating the guards defending 
it and claiming it for a different god. 

3 Steal military plans kept within a watchtower without 
alerting any of the guards inside. 
Free a prisoner from a cell. 
Infiltrate the watchtower as spies. 
Clear out monsters than have taken over the place. 
Steal a legendary weapon. 


Steal griffon mounts. 


о о мо «л + 


Find a spy among the soldiers stationed at a 
watchtower. 
10 Train soldiers at a watchtower to face an approaching 


mythic monster. 


WATCHTOWER МАР 

The watchtower shown in map 4.6 is a roughly hexago- 
nal stone tower, sculpted to help it blend in with the nat- 
ural landscape. Ancient trees grow into and around the 
structure, causing branches and ivy to sprout from every 
level's open balconies. 

The first floor houses the main entrance, guard posts, 
and alcove shrines devoted to the seasons. Most of it is 
taken up by gardens of flowers and fruiting trees. A spi- 
ral stairway ascends through all the higher levels. 

The second floor has an enclosed portion with space 
for storage, food supplies, and kitchens. A broad bal- 
cony features gardens of trees, vines, and food-bear- 
ing plants. 

The third floor looks much like the second, but has 
barracks for guards and a mess hall. Some of the bal- 
cony space is given over to archery targets, but most of it 
is still gardens. 

The fourth floor is similar to the last two, with rooms 
for priests and a library. There are also gardens on the 
balcony, perhaps featuring rarer or stranger plants. 

The top floor is open to the sky and is the main sanc- 
tuary of Karametra. A statue of the god and an altar 
are here. Several ancient trees form a canopy, and their 
trunks are sculpted to look like great heroes. 


WATCHTOWER VILLAINS 

Villains at a watchtower usually want to take over, de- 
stroy, steal from, or infiltrate the place, or they already 
occupy it and use the defensible position to crush their 
enemies. Examples of such villains appear on the 
Watchtower Villains table. 


WATCHTOWER VILLAINS 


d8 Villain 

1 Adisguised abhorrent overlord (see chapter 6) con- 
vinces the soldiers in a watchtower to rise up against 
the officers. 

2 А medusa takes over a watchtower and conducts ex- 
periments on the soldiers she captures. 

3 Sirens (see the harpies entry in chapter 6) call sol- 
diers to the top of the watchtower, then entice them 
over the edge so they can feast on the corpses. 

4 А flight of griffons attacks a watchtower after soldiers 
steal the creatures’ eggs to train the hatchlings to 
serve as mounts. 

5 Acyclops attacks a watchtower, eager to devour the 
animals within. 

6 A druid of Nylea, angered by the construction of a 
watchtower in the forest, attracts a mythic beast to 
the area to destroy the structure. 

7 . Blood-toll harpies (see chapter 6) take over a watch- 
tower and light its beacon to bring more victims to 
the place. 

8  Aspyina watchtower poisons the tower's food sup- 

ply in advance of an upcoming attack. 


)LEY 


NOAH BRAL 


DYSON LOGOS 


Meditation 
Chamber 


Level 4 


E 


Archery Range ' K ü 


Level 2 


1 square = 5 feet 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


[ш L [a 1 mi чш ыр ED EU. ERI TM m 1 


14.0 


KERANOS 


Mercurial and temperamental, Keranos personifies 
storms. Adventuring in the service of the god of storms 
is often challenging but never dull. 


KERANOS’S CHAMPIONS 


Keranos sees his champions as tools to bring insight 
and change to the world. He doesn’t contemplate the 
moral or ethical consequences of his insights, believing 
that such concerns are beneath a god’s notice. This out- 
look might put his champions in a difficult ideological 
situation, stuck between the demands of a wrathful deity 
and uncomfortable moral choices. 

The Keranos's Quests table suggests a few adventures 
the god’s champions might involve themselves in. 


KERANOS’S QUESTS 

d6 Adventure Goal 

1 Help a genius artist who had their inspiration physi- 
cally stolen. 

2 Break down a ruling structure that stifles ingenuity 
and creativity. 

3 Bring together lost icons of power to create an incred- 
ible storm with the might to halt a greater threat. 

4 Finda long-lost artifact that bestows oracular visions 
upon the user. 

5 Defeat the champion of another god in a battle of 
wits (perhaps Phenax, Mogis, or Klothys). 

6 Find and restore a lost art form, arcane technique, or 
crafting method for the glory of Keranos. 


А KERANOS CAMPAIGN 

А campaign focused on champions of Keranos might 
involve acquiring oracular visions, unraveling a proph- 
ecy, or bringing vengeance down on the storm god's 
enemies. He uses his champions as agents of change 
to bring about a great epiphany, as instruments of ven- 
geance against those he feels have wronged him, or as 
divine agents sent to aid his faithful. 

As the campaign begins, the characters might be 
summoned by an oracle and told of a dire prophecy 
threatening the polis. Next, they manage to avert the 
worst consequences for the polis through their wits and 
skill at arms. Now, having demonstrated their potential 
to the polis and Keranos, they become embroiled in ever 
grander, more dangerous prophecies, potentially draw- 
ing in secrets of the other gods or of reality itself. 

It is relatively easy for a mortal to lose Keranos's favor 
because the god is quick to anger and doesn't suffer 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


failure or foolishness well. Should the characters dis- 
appoint the god, they might have to assuage Keranos's 
wrath. They could accomplish this through a great feat 
of wit, by laying low a powerful foe, by embarrassing a 
rival god, or by discovering a great insight or secret. Un- 
til this is done, Keranos would be a potent adversary. 


KERANOS'S VILLAINS 


Inspiration, unguided by morals and ethics, is a danger- 
ous force, but Keranos isn't usually concerned with mat- 
ters of good or evil. As such, a charismatic leader, acting 
on Keranos's divinely inspired intuition, could find them- 
selves succumbing to megalomania and hubris, with 
disastrous consequences for a polis. 

Keranos's followers can become too narrowly focused 
on fulfilling dangerous prophecies without regard for 
loss of life. If you want to pit the characters against a 
morally gray antagonist who might have some traits or 
qualities that they admire, Keranos and his followers 
would work admirably. 

The Keranos's Villains table suggests a variety of foes 
that might arise from among the god's followers. 


KERANOS'S VILLAINS 

d6 Villain 

1  Anoracle (see chapter 6) foretells disaster for a polis 
unless a number of innocent citizens are sacrificed. 

2 An mage servant of Keranos enhances storms as they 
form, threatening the countryside. 

3  Anartist (commoner) creates incredible works of art 
whose subjects come to life and wreak havoc. 

4 Anarchmage who controls lightning rises to power, 
blasting those who oppose her to smithereens. 

5 Awild-eyed oracle (see chapter 6) points to the char- 
acters as harbingers of a coming disaster. 

6  Aliving storm deluges an area, taking what it believes 
is righteous revenge on a community. 


KERANOS's MONSTERS 

Keranos is associated with creatures that act as ex- 
tensions of his volatile temper or his sudden, blinding 
insights. Adventures that bring characters into conflict 
with Keranos's agents might pit them against monsters 
such as these. The Keranos's Monsters table presents 
just a few foes likely to serve the god's will. 


KERANOS's MONSTERS 


Challenge Creature Source 
2 Centaur MM 
3 Akroan hoplite MOT 
3 Blue dragon wyrmling* MM 
5 Air elemental MM 
7 Theran chimera MOT 
9 Young blue dragon* MM 
13 Storm giant MM 
16 Adult blue dragon* MM 
23 Ancient blue dragon* MM 


* See chapter 6 for details about these creatures in Theros. 


YEONG-HAO HAN 


KERANOS AS CAMPAIGN VILLAIN 


Because Keranos doesn't readily concern himself with 
quandaries of good versus evil, it is easy to use him 

as a villain. The god might be driven by frustration at 
mortals over their lack of vision, or by a consuming 
need to trigger unrestrained creative impulses that 
have far-reaching effects, by anger at a real or perceived 
slight. His will might be expressed through an oracle 
who foretells a great tragedy that involves the char- 
acters or someone they care about. As the campaign 
progresses, Keranos becomes increasingly upset at 

the actions the characters take to thwart his insights or 
their defense of the status quo and sends his agents to 
enlighten them. 

The campaign might end with the adventurers unrav- 
eling a troublesome prophecy, proving themselves of 
sufficient wisdom to merit respect, or when they con- 
vince the other gods (especially Klothys) to intervene 
and check Keranos's wrath. 


KERANOS’S DIVINE SCHEMES 

Keranos doesn't interact much with the rest of the pan- 
theon, preferring to brood and dispense epiphanies in 
solitude. He is, however, easily roused to anger and goes 
to extremes to satisfy real or perceived slights. The Ker- 
anos’s Divine Schemes table explores the sorts of plots 
the god might pursue. 


THE MOUNTAIN TEMPLES OF KERANOS ARE CONSTANTLY 


WRAPPED IN STORM CLOUDS. 


1 


KERANOS’S DIVINE SCHEMES 
d4 


Scheme 

Bored with the temporary beauty of violent weather, 
Keranos creates a massive, self-perpetuating storm. 
Over time, the storm grows out of control. Keranos is 
delighted by his creation. 

Dared by Phenax to prove that he can, Keranos in- 
spires eight mortals with eight ingenious ways to de- 
stroy the world. As a result, a genius actor, alchemist, 
inventor, diver, miner, sculptor, thief, and a duplici- 
tous goat all set forth to enact their terrible brilliance. 
Keranos finds the spread of mortal knowledge incon- 
sistent and slow. He empowers a champion to grant 
vast knowledge to any person or beast she touches. 
The advent of sagacious cattle, wolves, and children 
greatly disrupts (and unnerves) those who live in the 
areas through which Keranos’s champion travels. 
Keranos creates a realm of his own design amid the 
Dakra Isles, a place where the land and its creatures 
obey unique physical laws and strange truths. Some 
of the inhabitants escape the isle and begin infecting 
the rest of Theros with their alternate reality. 


ORACULAR CONFLUX 


A few of Keranos's most isolated temples serve a pur- 
pose beyond worship, being sites for the reading of 
worldly signs and recording of knowledge. These orac- 
ular confluxes provide followers of Keranos the tools 
to glean great truths, be they natural occurrences or 
omens of the gods. Because of Keranos’s connection 
to storms and the heavens, such temples often have 
weather vanes, telescopes, and other tools used to pre- 


dict the weather and chart the course of celestial bodies. 


Each shrine has multiple methods of predicting the 
future that it might offer visitors—with reading the stars, 
the clouds, or the entrails of sacrificed animals being 
particularly common. The most popular readings are 
those conducted during thunderstorms. Crowds gather 
in the shrines to watch oracles make predictions based 
on rainfall, wind, thunder, and other weather measure- 
ments. In some communities, oracles actively strive 
to be struck by lightning, risking their lives to receive 
mighty messages from their god. 


ORACULAR CONFLUX ADVENTURES 

The player characters could come to an oracular shrine 
for the same reason that most other people do: to re- 
ceive a prediction about the future. They also might be 
hired as bodyguards for the oracles, who often deliver 
distressing (and perhaps incorrect) predictions to vio- 
lent individuals. The Oracular Conflux Adventures table 
offers ideas for adventures in such a place. 


ORACULAR CONFLUX ADVENTURES 


912 Adventure Goal 
1 Race an air elemental to an oracular conflux in or- 
der to receive a prediction of the future before the 
elemental's whirlwind obliterates all evidence of the 
reading. 
2 Defend the shrine from a worshiper who is angry 
with an oracle for an incorrect prediction. 
3  Convince an oracle to give a worshiper a particular 
false prediction. 
Help the addled victim of a lightning strike recover. 
Recover sacrificial animals from a cyclops raider. 
6 Rig tools used to predict the future so that they pro- 
duce a specific outcome. 
7 Manipulate a situation so prophesied events tran- 
spire within sight of a half-blind oracle. 
8 Evacuate a crowded shrine during a storm when 
lightning strike sets the temple ablaze. 
9 Infiltrate the shrine to determine the accuracy of a 
particular oracle or prediction method. 
10 Steal a book of recorded predictions from the shrine. 
11 Collect the materials necessary to create a revolution- 
ary oracular device. 
12 Protect an oracle who must deliver bad news to a 
worshiper who is both influential and unpredictable. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


ORACULAR CONFLUX MAP 

The oracular conflux shown in map 4.7 has a glass- 
domed roof, atop which is mounted a massive, ornate 
weather vane. During stormy services, oracles watch the 
sky for lightning patterns that they use in predictions. 

The center of the shrine contains a massive orrery. 
Connected to the orrery room is a divination chamber, 
and situated within this chamber is the sacrifice cham- 
ber. These areas are used for various forms of soothsay- 
ing and predictions, including animal sacrifice and the 
reading of entrails. 

Off the divination chamber is the observatory, which 
houses a telescope, an astrolabe, and star charts. Past 
that is the Shrine of Keranos, where a massive statue 
of the god is connected to a lightning rod which extends 
through the roof and 100 feet into the sky. When light- 
ning strikes the rod, magical iron plates in the floor tem- 
porarily glow in the colors of the rainbow. Oracles use 
this display to predict the future. 

Another section contains living areas for priests and 
oracles, and the library which connects the living areas 
to the orrery room contains books that can help oracles 
interpret visions. 


ORACULAR CONFLUX VILLAINS 

A villain in an oracular shrine is likely taking advantage 
of or fighting against the predictions of the future. Ex- 
amples of such villains appear on the Oracular Conflux 
Villains table. 


ORACULAR CONFLUX VILLAINS 


de Villain 

1 A bitter oracle (see chapter 6) who has foreseen her 
imminent death gives false predictions to worshipers 
so they will share her misery. 

2 A storm giant pretends to be an avatar of Keranos 
and takes over the shrine, making its worshipers his 
subjects. 

3 A revenant who died due to a misinterpreted proph- 
ecy comes back for revenge against the oracle who 
issued it. 

4 Accult fanatic from a rival shrine gets the temple's 
animals drunk on fermented fruit, throwing off their 
predictions. 

5 An angry athlete (gladiator) takes the conflux's ora- 
cles hostage, demanding they alter the future after 
predicting his defeat in an upcoming match. 

6 Апогасіе (see chapter 6) makes false predictions to 
convince nobles to give him money and lavish gifts. 


1 square = 5 feet 


@ ө ele 
e Observatory o sy 


Е 


= Кее ы 


@ 4. 


Divination 
Chamber 


Mar 4.7: Овлси ла CoNFLUX 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 143 


e 


144 


KLOTHYS 


Secretive yet vindictive in enforcing her vision of destiny 
in Theros, Klothys not only takes umbrage at perceived 
slights but has also awakened a horde of terrors during 
her ascent from the Underworld. 


KLoTHYS'S CHAMPIONS 


The world has suffered terrible wounds from the hubris 
of mortals and divine entities alike. Klothys directs 
her champions to thwart the overly ambitious, undo 
their damage, and reinforce the natural order that sus- 
tains Theros. 

The Klothys's Quests table suggests a few adventures 
the god's champions might involve themselves in. 


KLoTHYS's QUESTS 
d6 Adventure Goal 

1  Defeata titan-spawned monster that has escaped the 
Underworld. 

2 Destroy an undead creatureterrorizing a small 
community. 

3 Punish a powerful mortal for their hubris. 
Reestablish the balance between nature and 
civilization in a particular location. 

5 Repair the fabric of reality in a place where the 
mortal world was overlaid by Nyx during Xenagos's 
pretensions to godhood. 

6 Defeat a champion of another god (most likely 
Ephara, Heliod, or Ігоаѕ). 


A KLOTHYS CAMPAIGN 
Although followers of Klothys tend to be solitary, fate 
might conspire to bring them together to execute a 
grand plan or be prepared for an imminent event. A 
campaign structured around the player characters as 
champions of Klothys might cast them as anarchists, 
prophets, or vigilantes committed to primal justice. The 
excessive pride of gods and mortals threatens a world 
already weakened by Xenagos's gambit, and Klothys 
chooses champions who can restore and restabilize 
Theros—even if doing so requires extreme measures. 
Klothys rarely reveals her plans. The characters might 
begin the campaign by following a prophecy to a far-off 
land or interpreting infrequent omens to learn of nearby 
threats. Such a campaign can be flexible, allowing the 
player characters freedom to explore other opportunities 
before the next augury draws them back into the main 
storyline. As they overcome greater challenges, topple 
mighty demagogues, and mold the world in accordance 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


with its destiny, the characters might attract followers, 
incite rebellions, and clash with rivals who interpret Klo- 
thys's will in different ways. 

Champions of Klothys are at risk of misinterpreting 
their god's intentions to serve their own purposes or 
selfishly demanding a greater destiny than what they 
are due. This behavior could lead to Klothys retracting 
her blessings or even dispatching loyal champions to de- 
stroy her wayward servants. Her most successful cham- 
pions stand to reorder errant civilizations or rebalance 
disrupted natural orders. 


KLOTHYS'S VILLAINS 


Klothys emerged from the Underworld in order to re- 
store the natural order on Theros, creating a number of 
Nyxborn agents to aid her. Virtually anyone could end 
up a target of the god or her agents if they stand in oppo- 
sition to destiny. 

Various monsters rose from the Underworld when 
Klothys entered the mortal realm, and her most zealous 
followers often see them as manifestations of her will. 
Some might goad these terrors into attacking commu- 
nities, or foster them to further spread the god's will. 
Klothys's most callous followers might also believe that 
society must crumble for the world to heal. If Klothys 
didn't intend this, they reason, then surely she wouldn't 
have brought so many monsters along in her wake. 

The Klothys's Villains table suggests just a few foes 
that might arise from among the god's followers. 


KLOTHYS’S VILLAINS 


d6 Villain 

1 A single-minded Nyxborn assassin of Klothys hunts a 
hero who was raised from the dead. 

2  Believing in the holiness of a terrible beast, Klothys's 
acolytes murder heroes sent to deal with it. 

3 Certain that civilization offends fate, a priest raises a 
herd of typhons to release on a city. 

4 insulted satyr revelers (see chapter 6) channel Klo- 
thys's magic to drive a polis's priests into embarrass- 
ing debauchery. 

5  Anoracle (see chapter 6) knows it is a character's 
destiny to serve Klothys. The seer manufactures trag- 
edy for the individual to provoke this revelation. 

6 A cult fanatic of Klothys believes that the characters’ 
deeds mark them as servants of the titans, destined 
to free one of those ancient terrors. 


KLOTHYS’s MONSTERS 

A variety of monstrous creatures might arise in an area 
as a result of Klothys’s influence, particularly those pre- 
sented on the Klothys's Monsters table. 


KLOTHYS’S MONSTERS 


Challenge Creature Source 
1 Satyr reveler MOT 
2 Satyr thornbearer MOT 
3 Green hag MM 
4 Oracle MOT 


Challenge Creature Source 


6 Annis hag : VGM 
6 Cyclops* MM 
6 Underworld cerberus MOT 
jj Woe strider MOT 
9 Phylaskia MOT 
15 Typhon MOT 


* See chapter 6 for details about these creatures in Theros. 


KLOTHYS AS CAMPAIGN VILLAIN 


As a foe, Klothys might endeavor to reestablish the 
order of the cosmos that existed before the meddling 
of Xenagos and Heliod. These corrections start small, 
manifesting as fires, monster infestations, or a spate of 
accidental deaths. The more the characters intervene, 
the more dire these events become as the god's servants 
overcorrect to account for the heroes' meddling. Alter- 
natively, averting one disaster might naturally lead to a 
greater one, at which point characters must contend not 
only with the latest catastrophe but also with the accusa- 
tions and assaults of Klothys's tireless followers. 
Ultimately, Klothys holds grudges only rarely. The 
campaign might conclude when the characters identify 
the moment they strayed from their destined place and 
correct things in order to appease the god. Likewise, the 
heroes might invoke the other gods' support to deflect 
Klothys's wrath. Boldest of all, the characters might de- 
termine what device allowed the god to enter the mortal 
realm; its destruction could hurl Klothys back into the 
Underworld for untold ages to come. 


KLOTHYS’s DIVINE SCHEMES 

Klothys has many designs for Theros and for the futures 
she has foretold that might never come to pass. The 
Klothys’s Divine Schemes table provides several ways in 
which her foresight and fury might ensnare adventurers. 


KLorHvs's DIVINE SCHEMES 


d4 Scheme 

1 Convinced that Heliod's boundless ambition will 
destroy Theros, Klothys creates an artifact that will 
destroy the sun god once he claims it as his own. She 
needs mortal heroes who can demonstrate the arti- 
fact’s power by vanquishing Erebos's servants, and in 
the process stoke Heliod's envy. 

2 Concerned by the spread of Meletian influence, 
Klothys fills the dreams of the polis's people with 
treachery. Neighbors attack neighbors, and attempts 
by Ephara's followers to intervene only redirect the 
violence toward the polis's patron. 

3 Klothys becomes convinced that mortals giving wor- 
ship to the gods distorts their proper relationship to 
each other, and she sets out to abolish religion. 

4  Nowthat she has left the Underworld, Klothys knows 
it's only a matter of time until the titans escape. To 
prepare the world for the horrors of that inevitable 
conflict, she unleashes Underworld beasts into the 
mortal realm, trusting that the mayhem will bring 
forth heroes who can ultimately defeat the titans. 


MYTH OF KLOTHYS AND THE TITANS 

Most mortals know little of the titans, except the comforting 
fact that these ancient, gigantic terrors are bound far away in 
the Underworld—and are therefore nothing to worry about. 
The fact that Klothys, god of destiny, personally and actively 
holds them there is unknown to most. With her spindle, Klo- 
thys endlessly knots and unravels the strands of destiny, con- 
stantly tightening the trap that keeps the titans imprisoned. 
Were it not for her immortal vigilance, the titans might once 
again claim the mortal realm as their own. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


ABANDONED TEMPLE 


Abandoned temples can be found across Theros. Some 
of these places were once houses of worship of Klothys, 
the nearly forgotten god of destiny, but abandoned tem- 
ples of many other gods also exist as the result of war, 
monster attacks, natural disasters, mass migration, ne- 
glect, or the wrath of deities. 

Every abandoned temple is distinctive, combining 
aspects of its patron god with the result or effect of what 
caused it to be abandoned. You can use the Abandoned 
Temple Condition table to determine an abandoned tem- 
ple’s present state. 


ABANDONED TEMPLE CONDITION 


Status 
Sunken underground 


a 
oo 


Overgrown with plants 
Underwater 

Partially collapsed 

Buried in dirt, mud, sand, or snow 
Beneath a new temple 

Cracked into more than one piece 


о МЧ CO! (л AUNA 


Floating їп an unstable parallel reality 


ABANDONED TEMPLE ADVENTURES 
An abandoned temple might contain records, special 
items, and humanoid remains, any of which adventurers 
might be called upon to retrieve. Many of these temples 
hold dangerous phenomena (such as gates to the Under- 
world), which might have been their undoing. Monsters 
and brigands often inhabit these ruins, as do hermits 
and scholars hording secrets too dangerous to sequester 
elsewhere. 

The Abandoned Temple Adventures table offers ideas 
for adventures that could occur in such a place. 


ABANDONED TEMPLE ADVENTURES 


912 Adventure Goal 
1 Retrieve records or a magic item left in the temple. 
2 Demolish what's left of the temple to prevent anyone 


from retrieving the ancient secrets hidden inside. 


di2 Adventure Goal 

3 Retrieve the remains of a dead humanoid from the 
temple. 
Kill monsters infesting the temple. 
Find a replacement for the temple's current guardian. 
Consult with a hermit who lives in the temple. 


NO ол A 


Stop cultists from performing a destructive ritual їп 

the temple. 

8 Restore the temple to receive the patron deity’s 
blessing. 

9 Finda gate to the Underworld or Nyx. 

10 Consult a demon living in the temple. 

1| Discover why the temple was abandoned. 

12 Restore the temple to reveal the truth hidden in its 

architecture. 


ABANDONED TEMPLE МАР 

The abandoned temple shown in map 4.8 is partially col- 
lapsed, with overturned pillars, and parts of the ceiling 
sunken in to prevent passage to some areas. The abo- 
veground section is overgrown with vines and includes 
the ruins of the main sanctuary, which contains mostly 
rubble except for a cracked altar and a headless statue. 
A library of rotting books and priests' quarters contain- 
ing skeletal remains complete this section. 

The halls are streaked with burn marks. Many of the 
rooms in this place are rubble-strewn and ruined. A pas- 
sage leads to an ancient room with scrying pools filled 
with blood that has barely a trace of dust. A sturdy iron 
door protects the temple's vault. 


ABANDONED TEMPLE VILLAINS 

Monsters who plot alone and criminals on the run or 
who engage in taboo behavior are often found in aban- 
doned temples. Examples of such villains appear on the 
Abandoned Temple Villains table. 


ABANDONED TEMPLE VILLAINS 


d6 Villain 

1 A depraved cult of Klothys captures victims on the 
road and brings them to the temple for ritual torture. 

2 Ahydra slumbers within an abandoned temple, hav- 
ing dug a lair out of one of the collapsed sections. 

3 A medusa living in an abandoned temple grants cura- 
tive aid to those who bring her a humanoid sacrifice. 

4 A bandit captain hiding in a temple hopes to open its 
vault to find treasure, not knowing that a demon is 
trapped inside. 

5 Blood-toll harpies make an abandoned temple their 
nest and devour any creatures that get too close. 

6  Agynosphinx curious about human behavior creates 
a series of deadly traps in an abandoned temple and 
lures adventurers to the place to witness if and how 
they overcome its challenges. 


DYSON LQ 


Map 4.8: ABANDONED TEMPLE 


Overgrown; 
Library. |. | af 


1 square = 5 feet 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


L| 


148 


KRUPHIX 


Enigmatic and patient, Kruphix influences the lives of 
his champions in ways both subtle and profound. 


KRUPHIX'S CHAMPIONS 


Kruphix seldom works directly in the mortal world, pre- 
ferring to act through his champions—when he acts at 
all. He might call upon his followers to suppress a dan- 
gerous truth, reveal a vital secret, or end a destructive 
conflict. When the other gods send their champions to 
circumvent divine agreements, Kruphix often calls upon 
his champions to set things right. 

The Kruphix's Quests table suggests a few adventures 
the god's champions might involve themselves in. 


KRUPHIX’S QUESTS 
d6 Adventure Goal 

1 Seize a powerful magic item from those who would 
misuse it, study it, and then destroy it. 

2 Capture a former follower of Kruphix who used secret 
knowledge for personal gain and deliver them to 
Kruphix's temple for judgment. 

3 Suppress all knowledge of a dangerous secret, such 
as the location of a fountain of immortality, by any 
means necessary. 

4 Bring proof of a powerful conspiracy to the leaders of 
a human polis while evading or defeating the agents 
sent to stop you. 

5 Investigate rumors of an unearthed divine relic and 
decide whether it's safe to be in the mortal realm. 

6 End a conflict between the followers of two other 
gods, whether by mediating, forcing a truce, or siding 
with the weaker group to defeat the stronger one. 


A KRUPHIX CAMPAIGN 

A campaign structured around champions of Kruphix 
can embrace moral complexity, with the adventurers 
sometimes making choices that cause short-term harm 
in the service of long-term good. They might be charged 
with destroying secret knowledge that could help peo- 
ple, revealing a secret that could kill someone but avert 
a larger conflict, or standing in judgment over whether 
knowledge is safe or unsafe. 

At the beginning of the campaign, the characters 
might be united by their discovery of a powerful secret, 
earning Kruphix's patronage in order to keep that secret 
safe. Armed with knowledge that they alone possess, 
the adventurers set out to learn more about the secret 
they share and avert dangers that only they are aware of. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


Champions of Kruphix approach their work with an 
impartiality that others don't always respect, and they 
could find themselves the targets of vendettas by the 
followers of other gods. Over the long term, they risk 
learning things about their world and its gods that could 
shake their faith. Some might even abandon Kruphix's 
principle of balance, either to enrich themselves or to 
serve what they see as the greater good. Kruphix would 
then become a villain, as he sends other agents to sup- 
press the secrets the adventurers carry with them. 


KRUPHIX'S VILLAINS 


Kruphix doesn't often act in the world, but when he 
does, his agenda is often morally ambiguous, and his 
servants' sacred quests can look like villainous schemes 
from other points of view. Kruphix often leaves his 
instructions open to interpretation, and not all of his 
agents use this considerable latitude responsibly. 

The Kruphix's Villains table suggests a variety of foes 
that might arise from among the god's followers. 


KRUPHIX'S VILLAINS 

d6 Villain 

1 Anoracle (see chapter 6) seeks to erase the memo- 
ries of an entire community, reducing them to a sim- 
pler, happier, more natural state. 

2  Agynosphinx possesses magic that can stop a ram- 
paging monster, but refuses to share it for fear that it 
might be misused. 

3 A former agent (spy) of Kruphix knows the location of 
an unguarded portal to the Underworld and plans to 
sell it to the highest bidder. 

4 A noble sows discord among Heliod's followers, 
believing that the sun god is the greatest threat to 
harmony among the gods. 

5 An archmage works to destroy the Temple of Mystery 
to further divide Nyx from the mortal world. 

6  Acultfanatic of Kruphix learns that the characters 
have discovered knowledge mortals were not meant 
to know and works to silence them. 


KRUPHIX’S MONSTERS 

Kruphix is rarely associated with monsters, but those 
most likely to serve him appear on the Kruphix’s Mon- 
sters table. 


KRUPHIX’S MONSTERS 


Challenge Creature Source 
1/4 Blink дор мм 
1/2 Cockatrice MM 
2 Nothic MM 
3 Phase spider MM 
6 Invisible stalker MM 
7 Theran chimera MOT 
n Gynosphinx* MM A 
12 Archmage MM 3 
7 Androsphinx* MM E 


* See chapter 6 for details about these creatures in Theros. 


ҖЕ, 


KRUPHIX AS CAMPAIGN VILLAIN 


As a campaign villain, Kruphix is most likely trying to 
maintain or restore the balance of power among the 
gods. He doesn’t know the future, and his actions some- 
times have dire consequences that he can’t predict and 
wouldn't willingly cause. 

The campaign might begin with the misbehavior of 
another god or gods, then escalate when Kruphix de- 
livers a punishment that seems out of proportion to the 
crime. Further attempts by the other gods to circumvent 
or reverse the punishment could be countered by more 
edicts from Kruphix, perhaps even culminating in an- 
other great Silence. 

Just as Kruphix reins in the worst excesses of the 
other gods, the best chance of foiling Kruphix as a vil- 
lain lies in the nature of Kruphix himself. A campaign in 
which Kruphix is a villain might end with the adventur- 
ers convincing him that his current actions don’t serve 
the balance among the gods. Kruphix’s mind isn’t easily 
changed, though, and the adventurers might need to 
produce extraordinary testimony or evidence. Even just 
reaching Kruphix in order to communicate with him 
could easily require the patronage of other gods. 


KRUPHIX’S DIVINE SCHEMES 

Kruphix wants to maintain the status quo rather than 
overturn it, so his schemes often begin as reactions 

to the activities of another god. The Kruphix’s Di- 

vine Schemes table presents a few examples of how 
Kruphix’s inflexible judgments might have a mythic im- 
pact on the mortal world and make divine conflicts more 
severe rather than less. 


KRUPHIX’S DIVINE SCHEMES 


d4 
1 


Scheme 

Shadowy forces steal a holy artifact, thought to be a 
part of the sun, from Heliod's followers. The priest- 
hood blames Phenax or Erebos, but Kruphix is behind 
the theft, The sun stone holds a terrible secret power, 
and Kruphix seeks to remove it from the mortal world 
before it does great harm. 

Kruphix sends Nyxborn to torment a community. 

The locals are baffled, until it's revealed that miners 
have impeded on a cave that underpins the nature 

of time. Not only are mortals not welcome there, but 
someone has already entered, employed the passages 
there, and stolen something from the past. 

A philosopher in Meletis argues that the gods rely 

on mortals for their existence, rather than the other 
way around. When this idea gains adherents, Kruphix 
curses the polis so that no one can speak or read. 
After a minor altercation between the gods, Kruphix 
declares a new Silence. He refuses to lift it unless the 
other gods agree to aid him in forcing Klothys back 
into the Underworld. 


MYTH OF THE TEMPLE AT THE WORLD's EDGE 
Legends say that Kruphix's holiest temple of mystery stands 
at the edge of the world. Dominated by Kruphix's Tree, the 
temple overhangs Nyx itself, jutting past the vast waterfall 
that marks the edge of the mortal realm. The site's precise lo- 
cation can't be found on any map, but tales claim it is one of 
the few places on Theros where mortals can pass directly into 
Nyx. To pass beyond the waterfall anywhere else is to tumble 
into the Underworld. 


TEMPLE OF MYSTERY 


A temple of mystery is an enigmatic location full of puz- 
zles and traps, found in remote regions of Theros. It is 
believed that surviving and solving the mysteries of such 
a shrine earns Kruphix’s respect. Some scholars claim 
the temples aren’t stationary and that finding a shrine’s 
location is the first puzzle that explorers must solve. 

The priests who care for temples of mystery tend to 
be as mystifying as the puzzles within the places. Each 
temple typically has one caretaker—a powerful oracle 
willing to answer questions for adventurers who can 
overcome the temple’s challenges. The priests are par- 
ticularly impressed with guests who can solve puzzles 
that the oracles themselves have yet to complete. 

At most temples of mystery, the most valuable knowl- 
edge and treasures are protected by the most difficult 
and deadly challenges. For a few bold—or foolish—inves- 
tigators, the rewards are worth the risk. 


TEMPLE OF MYSTERY ADVENTURES 

Exploring a temple of mystery presents the opportunity 
for an adventure that features puzzles and traps, though 
you can also populate it with any other challenges you 
like. The Temple of Mystery Adventures table offers 
ideas for adventures that could occur in sucha place. 


TEMPLE OF MYSTERY ADVENTURES 


912 Adventure Goal 

1 Find and repair one of the temple's challenges that 
has malfunctioned. 

2  Seekthe help of the temple's priest, who's become 
trapped in stasis due to a malfunctioning trap. 

3  Solvethe puzzles in a temple to claim a magic item 
hidden inside. 

4 Rescue someone trapped in the temple. 


d12 Adventure Goal 
5 Learn how a particular trap or puzzle works so it can 
be recreated. 
6 Solve more challenges than a rival party of adventur- 
ers who are also in the temple. 
7 Enter the temple and contend with a complex trap 
that, over time, has developed consciousness. 
8 Lead dangerous individuals into the temple and en- 
sure they never leave. 
9 Question the priest to find the location of another 
temple of mystery. 
10 Lead dangerous creatures into the temple to trap 
them there. 
1| Defeat a cabal of mages that has claimed the temple. 
12 Defeat a temple's challenges to get the attention of 
the gods. 


TEMPLE OF MYSTERY MAP 

The temple of mystery shown in map 4.9 presents a lab- 
yrinth Kruphix might use to test followers and to protect 
valuable secrets of existence. The four-armed sculpture 
at the maze’s heart is said to hold a great secret, perhaps 
a mysterious treasure or a riddle that the statue alone 
can speak. Each other chamber in the complex also 
holds its own unique puzzle or trap. When solved, these 
hazards allow one to progress, but also often impart 
some lesson about history, the nature of the cosmos, or 
the explorer themselves. While this temple exemplifies 
one of Kruphix’s more elaborate (and potentially deadly) 
holy sites, no two of the god’s temples are alike. 


TEMPLE OF MYSTERY VILLAINS 

A villain in a temple of mystery might seek information, 
enjoy torturing adventurers with traps, or have motives 
as enigmatic as the place itself. Examples of such vil- 
lains appear on the Temple of Mystery Villains table. 


TEMPLE OF MysTERY VILLAINS 


d6 Villain 

1 A bored androsphinx asks visitors riddles with no 
correct answer, then tears them apart for fun when 
they respond incorrectly. 

2 A mad archmage, obsessed with a mystery she can't 
solve, wanders the halls of the temple and forces 
those she meets to confront the puzzle. 

3 Adragon disguised as a humanoid waits in the tem- 
ple's entrance and demands treasure from anyone 
leaving. 

4 Тһе priest caring for the temple gets jealous when- 
ever adventurers solve a puzzle he couldn't and tries 
to kill them. 

5 A hero challenges adventurers to solve the temple's 
mysteries faster than she can, but she has rigged 
each to ensure her victory. 

6 A cyclops accidentally trapped in the temple goes on 

a rampage. 


ght Pillars е y 


uzzle 


Shrine and Treasure 
of Kruphix 


o o Q 


Four Statues Puzzle 


У УУУ 37 Z = TNR SI SS 2 Р àz { 
= Al МЯ ЌЕ айн; 1 square = 5 feet < 


Ga Priests Chamber 4 


МАР 4.9; TempLe or Mystery 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 151 


152. 


Mogis demands deeds, not just words, from his follow- 
ers—and he is by far the most bloodthirsty god of the 
pantheon. As such, Mogis and his worshipers are ideal 
antagonists to pit heroes against. Tread carefully when 
using him as a patron, as his area of concern trends to- 
ward villainy rather than heroics. 


MoaIs’s CHAMPIONS 


Mogis's champions are extensions of his ability to wreak 
havoc in the world. The god of slaughter cares only for 
causing strife, and he uses his agents to heighten the 
tension between the poleis, hoping to ignite an all-out 
war. In part, he wants to cause so much carnage that 
his brother eventually has no choice but to face himina 
duel to the death. 

The Mogis’s Quests table suggests a few adventures 
the god’s champions might involve themselves in. 


Mocis's ОчЕ$Т$ 

d6 Adventure Goal 

1 Foment a war between rival poleis. 

2 Bring about anarchy and lawlessness in a formerly 
peaceful polis. 

3 Organize disparate groups of bandits and criminals 
into a cohesive fighting force. 

4 Hunt down a famous defender of the law who cham- 
pions Jroas. 

5 — Triumph in a contest of strength or endurance to 
prove Mogis’s superiority over other gods. 

6 Defeat a champion of another god (most likely Iroas, 
Heliod, or Ephara). 


A МОС1$ CAMPAIGN 

A campaign structured around Mogis as the party’s 
patron can be challenging, and all players must agree 

to play characters in service to the god of slaughter. You 
should work to create a narrative that eventually allows 
the characters to perform acts of heroism. Perhaps this 
means the group swears a vow to Mogis to pursue some 
collective revenge, or maybe the group understands that 
just as Mogis watches them, so does Iroas, and they'll be 
courted by both gods during the campaign. 

In one possibility, perhaps the characters start out as 
the sole survivors of a mercenary company left to die. 
Embittered and resentful, the party swears vengeance 
on their former employer, thereby catching Mogis's at- 
tention. He offers the characters power to help them pur- 
sue their quest for revenge in exchange for their fealty. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


As the characters become immersed in their plans for 
vengeance, Mogis, acting through his agents, pushes 
them farther down a dark path until, at last, they realize 
what they have become. The characters, now deeply 
indebted to the god of slaughter, realize that he will not 
release them willingly from his service. At this point, the 
characters might seek freedom from Mogis's service. 
Iroas or another god could take this opportunity to offer 
the party aid against their former patron. Mogis might 
then assume the role of campaign villain as the charac- 
ters do what they must to atone. 


ModGiS's VILLAINS 


Unquestionably, Mogis makes an excellent villain. His 
lust for bloodshed and willingness to fight all comers 
makes him easy to build a campaign around if you want 
a straightforward, unambiguous foe. 

Mogis's followers could be anything from a disgraced 
politician seeking revenge against their enemies to a 
roving band of minotaurs pillaging the countryside. Mo- 
gis's faithful tend to be at least partially blinded by dark 
emotions, a state that might make them easy to manipu- 
late by the followers of clever deities. The servants of the 
god of slaughter aren't all mindless brutes, though, and 
many allow themselves to be underestimated as a ploy 
to bring ruin upon their foes. 

The Mogis's Villains table suggests a variety of foes 
that might arise from among the god's followers. 


Mocis's VILLAINS 

d8 Villain 

1 A petty tyrant (gladiator) rules his populace through 
threats and intimidation. His favorite pastime is forc- 
ing unwilling subjects to fight in gladiatorial blood 
sports. 

2  Abandofminotaurs directed by a champion of Mogis 
forges a trail of devastation through the countryside. 

3  Aserialkiller (assassin) stalks the streets of the polis, 
taking lives seemingly at random. 

4  Anoracle (see chapter 6) of Mogis marches into 
town and predicts doom on the populace within a 
fortnight. 

5 Priests of lroas and Heliod are being murdered by 
unknown assailants and their temples desecrated. 

6 X Anarchmage is corrupted by Mogis and begins sum- 
moning demons to savage the population. 

7 A badly wounded caravan guard (bandit captain) 
accuses the characters of murder and banditry. 

8 A cabal of Mogis's cult fanatics have almost suc- 
ceeded in finding a way to summon Mogis's war- 
hound to their service. 


MoGis's MONSTERS 

Mogis is associated with vicious monsters bent on 
wholesale destruction. He isn't at all concerned with 
subtlety, but rather with creating mayhem. Adventures 
that bring characters into conflict with agents of the god 
of slaughter might pit them against monsters from the 
Mogis's Monsters table. 


Е 


Mocis’s MONSTERS 


Challenge Creature Source 
1 Death dog ` MM 
2 Berserker MM 
3 Fleecemane lion MOT 
3 Manticore MM 
3 Minotaur MM 
2 Catoblepas* VGM 
6 Cyclops* MM 
7 Theran chimera MOT 
8 Blackguard VGM 


* See chapter 6 for details about these creatures in Theros. 


MOGIS AS CAMPAIGN VILLAIN 


Left unchecked, Mogis and his followers would destroy 
all of creation. This situation leads to plenty of campaign 
hooks and opportunities for the characters to act hero- 
ically in the face of classically villainous foes. 

Mogis is obsessed with defeating his brother Iroas, 
just as Iroas is obsessed with besting him. The char- 
acters could easily find themselves in the middle of the 
brothers’ war. At first, they might be swept along by 
events, but as they grow in power, the characters will 
become the key to checking Mogis's influence, perhaps 
even helping Iroas triumph over his brother. Such an 
event could be fraught with unforeseen consequences 
for the fate of Theros! 


TEMPLES TO MOGIS CAN BE FOUND SCATTERED ACROSS 
THE BADLANDS OF PHOBEROS. 


Lu 


M 


к 1 


MoGis's DIVINE SCHEMES 

Mogis takes a brutal hand in the affairs of gods and 
mortals. The Mogis’s Divine Schemes tables presents 
some ways in which Mogis's unsubtle plots might have 
a mythic impact on the mortal world, catching adventur- 
ers up in the middle of divine vendettas. 


Mocis’s DIVINE SCHEMES 


d4 Scheme 

1 A champion of Mogis unites the minotaur bands and 
cyclops tribes of Phoberos under her banner, creating 
a terrifying army. At Mogis’s command, she leads the 
army in an all-out assault on Akros, hoping to draw 
Iroas into battle and defeat him once and for all. 

2 Mogis bargains with Pharika, convincing her to create 
elixirs that will turn his followers into invincible mon- 
sters. He sends his champions to fetch the necessary 
ingredients for her. 

3  Abitter noble makes a pact with Mogis for power in 
exchange for carrying out a plot to ignite a war be- 
tween Meletis and Setessa. Thousands will die unless 
the scheme is put to rest. 

4 Моріѕ agrees to ally with three other gods against 
their rivals if they help him defeat Ігоаѕ. Mogis's 
brother does the same. Soon the entire pantheon di- 
vides along faction lines and prepare for the final war. 


154 


CANYON SHRINE CANYON SHRINE VILLAINS 
Most of the residents in a canyon shrine make excellent 


adversaries. The sapient beings are clever and cruel, 
and the monsters of animal intelligence are as savage as 
the god of slaughter himself. Examples of such villains 
appear on the Canyon Shrine Villains table. 


Aside from the other dangers of the twisting can- 

yons of Phoberos, followers of Mogis openly worship 
and offer sacrifices to their dark god in these places. 
Twisting cave systems run through the canyon walls, 
offering shelter to both fugitives and monsters, and the 
darkness within the caverns provides a suitable envi- 


ronment for the bloodthirsty deeds of the god’s most CANYON SHRINE VILLAINS 


depraved servants. d8 Villain 
1 A minotaur captures and devours other creatures 
CANYON SHRINE ADVENTURES limb by limb as part of a bizarre ritual honoring 
A journey into a canyon where Mogis is worshiped can Mogis. 
АЕ е palbatunspealsbhe Посрага А BRUNO 2 Atribe of berserkers ride giant bats and hunt human- 


characters could come to a canyon shrine as armed es- 
corts, or would-be rescuers of captives, or to cleanse the 
place of its evil. The characters might also brave sucha 
gorge to hunt one of the many dangerous creatures that 
haunt the area, such as a catoblepas or a chimera. The 
Canyon Shrine Adventures table offers ideas for adven- 


oids that travel through the canyon. 

3 An adult blue dragon ensiaves the inhabitants of the 
caves, intent on building an army to conquer a neigh- 
boring settlement. 

4  Amanticore captures warriors and forces them to 


tures in such a place. fight to the death for its amusement. 
5 A group of cyclopes capture travelers and keep them 
CANYON SHRINE ADVENTURES as livestock in their caves. 
410 Adventure Goal 6 A lamia lures young nobles into its cult with promises 


1 Survive a journey through the canyon while escorting of hedonism and sells those who disappoint it to 
other canyon inhabitants. 
7 Avicious gynosphinx captures groups of people, 


then forces one person to choose which of the others 


a caravan transporting offerings to another god. 

2 Slay a massive, blood-drunk monster that rampages 
through the region. 

3 Finda band of minotaurs residing in the canyon and should be devoured first. 
convince them to attack a gang of undead about to 8 — The victims ofthe canyon's inhabitants rise as 

pass through on their way to attack a village. 


4 Consulta hermit who lives in a hidden part of the 


wraiths determined to end all life in the area. 


canyon. 
Retrieve an item buried amid the shrine's sacrifices. 
Destroy the shrine. 

Negotiate with a group of Mogis's followers. 


oN DU 


Convince a young aristocrat who was seduced into 

joining a cult of Mogis to return home. 

9 infiltrate a cult of Mogis to learn of any raids they 
have planned. 

10 Steal an egg from a griffon nest in the canyon. 


CANYON SHRINE МАР 

Map 4.10 shows a wild canyon that is holy to Mogis. 
Caves long used by bandits, minotaur raiders, and pred- 
atory beasts carve their ways through the craggy walls. 
Many of the caves are connected, but some are isolated. 
Ledges cling to the canyon’s sides. Reaching some of 
these natural platforms requires a dangerous climb over 
jagged rocks. 

The top of the canyon has a few scrubby plants, but is 
otherwise barren. Flying monsters, such as chimeras, 
griffons, harpies, and manticores, make nests on the 
sides of the canyon. At the bottom of the gorge, a river 
cuts through the stone. 

A massive statue of Mogis is carved into an out-of-the- 
way canyon wall. Signs of a bloody battle and the stains 
of countless sacrifices lie before it. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES “ } 


156 


Wild and unpredictable, Nylea can bring both blessings 
and hardships to the heroes whose lives she touches. 


NYLEA’S CHAMPIONS 


Nylea is one of the more active of the gods in the mortal 


realm, but she can’t be everywhere at once. Her heroes 
are her eyes, ears, and arrows on Theros, defending her 
interests anywhere and anytime she can't. 

The Nylea's Quests table suggests a few adventures 
the god's champions might involve themselves in. 


NvLEA's QUESTS 
d6 Adventure Goal 
TM at has been captured and imprisoned 


2 нези reports of unnatural horrors infesting the 
Nessian Wood. 
l corn in a distant grove guarded by 


4 Find and punish an unknown perpetrator who killed a 
unicorn, cut off its horn, and left its body to rot, and 
retrieve the horn. 

Hunt a dangerous creature for a sacred feast. 

6 Defeat a champion of another god (most likely Kara- 

metra, Heliod, or Ephara). 


A NYLEA CAMPAIGN 
A campaign in which the player characters are cham- 
pions of Nylea will feature great feats of heroism in 
defense of nature. Nylea might instruct the characters 
to defend a corner of the Nessian Wood, pitting them 
against poachers, sport hunters, unnatural abomina- 
tions, and ordinary people who want to develop the 
wood for mortals’ use. Nylea doesn't care if the char- 
acters are opposed by simple peasants, or by monsters 
beyond the characters’ ability to cope with. They might 
need to get creative, calling upon Nylea’s own servants— 
such as hydras—to beat back the more powerful threats. 
At the beginning of the campaign, the heroes might 
help defend Setessa from an attack that also threatens 
all of the Nessian Wood, which is their main concern. 
Hailed as heroes even though their defense of the polis 
was a secondary goal, they continue to enjoy Nylea’s 
favor as they confront greater threats. Perhaps they will 
align themselves with the leaders of the polis, or maybe 
Setessa will eventually find itself at odds with the wild 
ideals of Nylea. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


ro 


Nylea's dictates are simple but inflexible, and her 
champions find that her favor turns to wrath if they ne- 
glect their duty to the forest. She might simply banish 
them from the Nessian Wood, or she might become a 
villain, with the characters either seeking to appease 
her or trying to find a new divine patron to protect them. 


NYLEA'S VILLAINS 


From Nylea's perspective, her desires are benign, but 
her unwillingness to favor sapient beings over wild ani- 
mals and plants sometimes makes her a figure of men- 
ace. Those who dwell in permanent settlements often do 
not understand or appreciate the boundaries Nylea sets, 
and can run afoul of her even with the best intentions. 

Nylea's followers might obsess over the idea of wiping 
out civilization, turning them into agents of destruction. 
On a smaller scale, they might twist her patronage of 
the hunt into an excuse to enact vendettas against those 
who wrong them. Even natural creatures can become 
threats when the balance of nature is disrupted, and 
Nylea herself could send champions to intervene when 
her own creatures and followers turn toward evil. 

The Nylea's Villains table suggests a variety of foes 
that might arise from among the god's followers. 


NYLEA'S VILLAINS 


d6 Villain 

1  ASetessan hunt-leader (Setessan hoplite; see chapter 
6) swears vengeance on a poacher in the Nessian | 
Wood who turns out to be an Akroan general. 

2 A hydra goes on a rampage at the edge of the forest. 
It must be dealt with, but a druid follower of Nylea 
will take vengeance on anyone who kills it outright. 

3  Amage who lives in a secluded grove has been using 
a magic item to transform interlopers into boars. She 
claims that Nylea gave her this item. 

4 Adruid uses magic on fields near the border of the 
forest, creating animated plants to drive off farmers. 

5 A scout has taken to hunting and eating sapient be 
ings. What could have caused this gruesome turn? 

6 Those who follow a mysterious green unicorn inevita- 
bly turn up dead, their bodies entangled in strangling 
vines. 

аортаја араарар FSS 595RR 5" 
MvrH OF HALMA, NyLEa’s EMISSARY 


One day, Nylea came upon an enormous lynx lounging in the 
shade of an olive grove, blood on its maw, the carcass of a 
colossal boar beside him. The boar had been one of Nylea's 
favorites, and what followed was a legendary chase where the 
god pursued the lynx through the heart of the Nessian Wood. 
Whenever Nylea drew close, the great cat vanished into the 
forest's shadows. Seasons passed as the god loosed arrow af- 
ter arrow at the lynx, but her efforts remained fruitless. Nylea 
eventually abandoned the hunt, only to find the feline waiting 
for her at the edge of a stream the next evening. The hunt 
resumed, but with the same outcome. It continued like that 
for some time, until Nylea began to grow fond of the beast. 
Soon, the pair started hunting together, and the lynx, which 
she called Halma, became one of adii confidants. 


MATHIAS KOLLROS 


NYLEA'S MONSTERS 

Nylea’s forests are home to many dangerous creatures, 
both natural and supernatural. Adventures that take 
characters into the Nessian Wood might pit them 
against monsters such as those that appear on the Nyl- 
ea's Monsters table. Additionally, Nylea might turn any 
natural creature—from the rarest of exotic creatures 
to suddenly-bloodthirsty livestock—against those who 
offend her. 


NvLEA's MONSTERS 


Challenge Creature Source 
1/2 Scout MM 
1 Огуаа MM 
1 Nyxborn brown bear* MM 
2 Nyxborn saber-toothed tiger* MM 
2 Satyr thornbearer MOT 
3 Archer VGM 
5 Shambling mound MM 
5 Unicorn* MM 
D Treant MM 
12 Ironscale hydra MOT 
19 Polukranos MOT 


* See chapter 6 for details about these creatures in Theros. 


NYLEA AS CAMPAIGN VILLAIN 


As a villain, Nylea is most likely driven by transgres- 
sions against her realm, whether by mortals or by other 
gods. She might begin her retaliation by barring all 
sapient creatures from the Nessian Wood, or by visiting 


1 


punishment on an entire polis for the actions of a few 
citizens. From there, she could easily end up in an esca- 
lating conflict against mortals across Theros, drawing 
in multiple gods and threatening the idea of civilization 
itself. Player characters who are champions of other 
gods could find themselves marked for death by hunters 
who have a grudge against their patrons. 


NYLEA'S DIVINE SCHEMES 
The Nylea’s Divine Schemes table suggests a few ways 
in which Nylea’s whims might impact the mortal world. 


NvLEA's Divine SCHEMES 


d4 Scheme 

1 When the polis of Meletis expands, clearing new land 
for houses and crops, Nylea decides to punish the po- 
lis and destroy it if necessary. Animated trees topple 
the walls, and Nyxborn beasts invade the city. 

2 Nylea refuses to turn winter into spring unless Kara- 
metra agrees to abolish agriculture and yield all crop- 
land back to the forest. 

3 When tensions between Akros and Setessa peak, 
Nylea blames iroas for stirring up the conflict and 
puts Setessa under her protection, expanding the 
borders of the Nessian Wood to encompass all of Set- 
essa, creating a near-impenetrable fortress filled with 
dangerous creatures. 

4  Nylea abruptly vanishes. Explorers deep in the Nes- 
sian Wood discover her sacred grove abandoned, and 
the giant chrysalis at its heart empty. What was in the 
chrysalis? Could it have harmed Nylea? Or did she 
leave with the creature—and if so, did she do that to 


protect the creature, or to protect Theros? 


NvLEA'S SACRED LYNX GUARDS THOSE WHO HONOR THE 
NESSIAN WOOD AND HUNTS THOSE WHO DON'T. 


158 


FOREST SHRINE 


Forest shrines honoring Nylea are found in the wood- 
lands of Theros. These places have few features made 
of stone or steel. Instead, the druids and nymphs who 
care for the shrines use magic to direct the growth of 
plants, producing beautiful natural altars, sculptures, 
and shelters. These creations, wondrous as they are, 
don't dominate the layout of a shrine, since Nylea and 
her worshipers prefer to let nature flourish untamed at 
her holy sites. 

The druids that occupy a shrine sometimes leave for 
days at a time to go on a mission, but they never leave 
the place without guardians. Beasts, plants, and nymphs 
are always on the lookout for intruders. 


FOREST SHRINE ADVENTURES 

A forest shrine is a remote place with inhabitants who 
are difficult to impress. Simply finding and getting per- 
mission to enter a shrine can be an adventure in itself, 
since the druids and nymphs that guard the place are 
wary of outsiders and ready to put down those who take 
needlessly from the forest. 

Characters who are accepted into a forest shrine find 
it to be a guarded, peaceful place, an excellent shelter 
against enemies and weather. Sacred animals and hunt- 
ing weapons are protected in the shrines. The druids 
might be willing to share knowledge and forest secrets 
with those who gain their trust. The Forest Shrine 
Adventures table offers ideas for adventures that could 
occur in or around such a place. 


FoREST SHRINE ADVENTURES 


910 Adventure Goal 

1 Get permission from the shrine's druids to take part 
in a sacred hunt with them. 

2 Prevent game hunters from killing a unicorn, and 
lead the unicorn to a shrine for shelter. 

3 Find a scout from the shrine who has gone missing. 
Escape a shrine after being captured and held there 
for crimes against the forest. 

Rescue trophy hunters being tortured at a shrine. 
Earn a druid's trust to learn a valuable secret about 
the forest. 

Retrieve a sacred weapon held in the grove. 

Recruit the help of the shrine's druids to defeat a 
group of poachers. 

9 Acquire a beast companion from the shrine. 

10 Defend the shrine from a group of harpies. 


FonEsT SHRINE MAP 

The forest shrine shown in map 4.11 is a clearing 
surrounded by a grove of wild olive trees. A pond at 
the center is fed by streams coming from the north 
and south. Arches of grapevines grow up from the 
ground, each creating a small, sheltered area for 
private conversations. Several bushes sculpted in the 
shape of Nylea and predatory forest animals, such as 
the bear and the wolf, are scattered throughout the 
shrine. These plants can come to life as guardians if 
the shrine's protectors call upon them. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


An old, twisted lemon tree grows near the hunters' 
quarters. Bows, spears, and other hunting weapons 
hang from the tree's branches alongside a beehive. 
South of the tree is a firepit with a few boulders sur- 
rounding it for seats. Nearby, a dense, flowering bush 
shaped as an altar stands before a simple log table and 
wood rack used in dressing animals. 

Several hunting blinds lie hidden in the forest sur- 
rounding the shrine. From these camouflaged posts 
archers keep watch for game and threats. 


FOREST SHRINE VILLAINS 

Villains in a forest shrine are likely either trying to de- 
stroy nature or using the power of the natural world to 
harm others. Examples of such figures appear on the 
Forest Shrine Villains table. 


FOREST SHRINE VILLAINS 


d6 Villain 

1 A group of dryads, enraged by seeing a section of 
forest burned, plots to destroy the shrine in order to 
punish the druids for failing to protect the trees. 

2 Poachers (scouts) kill the shrine’s defenders and set 
their traps in the surrounding forest. 

3 The shrine stands in the path of a hydra оп a destruc- 
tive rampage. 

4  Adruid who lost her spouse in a hunting accident 
attacks any hunters who come to the shrine. 

5 A giant boar affected by the awaken spell convinces 
the shrine’s druids to cast the spell on other boars to 
strike back at a contingent of hunting nobles. 


6 A cult fanatic of Erebos infiltrates the shrine in dis- 
guise and plans to kill all its plant life. 


Е 
8 
E 
5 
j 
? 
: 


Мар 4.11: Forest SHRINE 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


цесс о с шүр о Fel T3 (ET PET [83 Fe] fel R83 Fd C eT и д BEER ECC 


160 


+ 


РНАВ1КА 
The god of affliction cares little for mortals, seeing them 


as test subjects whose agony, resilience, and defiance all 
contribute to Pharika’s efforts to reveal reality’s secrets. 


PHARIKA’S CHAMPIONS 


The champions of Pharika are custodians of her exper- 
iments, keepers of her secrets, and practitioners of her 
esoteric arts. They serve as doctors, herbalists, and ad- 
visors as often as they do assassins and poisoners. 

The Pharika's Quests table suggests a few adventures 
the god’s champions might involve themselves in. 


PHARIKA’S QUESTS 


d6 Adventure Goal 

1 Concoct the antidote for a powerful affliction that 
resists conventional treatments. 

2 Seek out a powerful beast whose blood has unique 
alchemical value. 

3  Infitrate the Underworld to extract a secret someone 
carried with them to the grave. 

4 Track down and eliminate someone who is trying to 
keep a radical discovery a secret. 

5 Assassinate an important figure whose death would 
catalyze one of Pharika's experiments. 

6 Perfect a perilous ritual to awaken the landscape and 
learn how to discover its forgotten lore. 


A PHARIKA CAMPAIGN 

Pharika delights in testing the limits of mortality, vacil- 
lating between helping and harming innocent subjects. 
Characters working in Pharika's service might travel 
to sites of suffering and death in order to provide relief, 
such as by slaying the monstrous guardians of a place 
that holds the medicine needed to cure a plague. Then, 
before leaving the area, they or the god's other servants 
might sow the seeds of a new threat. 

Despite any aid they provide, Pharika's servants are 
likely viewed with suspicion. In obtaining rare ingre- 
dients or defending researchers, the characters might 
come into conflict with those who can't see the bigger 
picture—often followers of Heliod or Ephara. Undermin- 
ing these faiths might be the best means of preserving 
Pharika's favorite wildernesses and laboratories. 

Ultimately, Pharika might call upon servants to 
abandon worldly scruples in favor of deciphering one 
of Theros's great secrets. To accomplish this, the god 
might send the characters into the Underworld or Nyx to 
answer a burning cosmic question. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


PHARIKA'S VILLAINS 


Even the most well-intentioned of Pharika's healers can 
be hiding a venomous ulterior motive, and the same 
hand that stitches the characters' wounds one day might 
try to slit their throats the next. Pharika encourages her 
followers to seek balance in administering their "cures," 
spreading afflictions to counteract excessive prosperity 
atleast as often as they provide life-saving help to those 
on the brink of death. All the while, Pharika watches 
with interest to see how mortals contend with both 

good fortune and misfortune, gleaning new knowledge 
through every cry of elation and every death rattle. 

On occasion, Pharika's followers might seem to be 
beneficent when they ease others’ suffering or cure а 
pandemic. Yet they do so indiscriminately, meaning that 
these cures could also save the lives of terrible beasts 
and unrepentant villains. 

The Pharika's Villains table suggests a variety of foes 
that might arise from among the god's followers. 


PHARIKA'S VILLAINS 
d6 Villain 

1 A druid seeds deadly herbs into a village's fields, 
coaxing the plants to resemble farmers’ crops. 

2 The life of a tyrant (knight) is central to one of Phari- 
ka’s experiments in mortal suffering, so the god res- 
urrects the tyrant whenever enemies kill him. 

3 Legend tells of a hydra with alchemical lore scribed 
upon its bones. When an alchemist (mage) begins 
poisoning the beasts, Nylea sends dozens of hydras 
to seek revenge, catching innocents in the fray. 

4  Atown suffering from a plague seeks a cure from a 
cult fanatic of Pharika engaged in warlike research. 
The researcher's blessing alleviates the pox but leaves 
the survivors delusional and violent. 

5 After the characters witness a miracle, an apothecary 
(mage) seeks their blood as a medicinal ingredient. 

6 Ап агсһтаре devotee of Pharika manages to shrink 
monsters to a size so small that they effectively be- 
have as viruses. 


PHARIKA'S MONSTERS 

Serpents, rare magical beings, and poisonous creatures 
number among Pharika's favorite servants, and medu- 
sas and basilisks hold special places in her esteem. The 
Pharika's Monsters table presents just a few foes likely 
to serve the god's will. 


PHARIKA'S MONSTERS 


Challenge Creature Source 
1/4 Nyxborn giant poisonous snake* MM 
1/2 Amphisbaena MOT 
1/2 Cockatrice MM 
2 Swarm of poisonous snakes MM 
3 Basilisk* MM 
6 Medusa* MM 2 
8 Assassin MM А 
8 Hydra MM ` 


Challenge Creature Source 
8 Spirit naga MM 
7 Hythonia :* МОТ 


* See chapter 6 for details about these creatures in Theros. 


PHARIKA AS CAMPAIGN VILLAIN 


As a campaign villain, Pharika might conduct exper- 
iments in mortal resilience and curiosity, tests that 
unfold over generations. The characters might spoil one 
of these experiments, making them the target of Phari- 
ka's ire. While tormenting mortals might seem petty, 
the perilsshe puts them through could also be a way of 
toughening up the characters to face greater threats. As 
the campaign progresses, Pharika could evolve from 
antagonist into an unlikely patron. 

Pharika is also an excellent partner for a range of 
other divine antagonists, lending her support in ex- 
change for future favors. However, with the right over- 
tures and services, the characters might entreat her to 
betray a client, turning her against a new mutual enemy. 


PHARIKA's DIVINE SCHEMES 

Pharika has hundreds of ongoing schemes and exper- 
iments, any number of which might come to fruition in 
the near future. The Pharika’s Divine Schemes table de- 
scribes several ways her deadly plans might complicate 
adventurers’ lives. 


PHARIKA'S DIVINE SCHEMES 


d4 
1 


PHARIKA’S CLERICS BELIEVE THAT THEY ARE BETTER HEALERS 


Scheme 

Pharika creates a mind-controlling incense to manip- 
ulate several of Kruphix’s oracles, compelling them 
to reveal secrets of the cosmos. Unfortunately, her 
mutagenic mist causes them to transform into beings 
they've glimpsed from beyond Theros. 

Seeking to understand more about the Returned, 
Pharika begins granting them elixirs meant to restore 
their lost memories. Although this works as intended 
for a rare few, most of the Returned instead experi- 
ence traumatic visions that drive them to violence. 
Medusas the world over find themselves infected 
with a strange disease. They believe Pharika is collect- 
ing their souls to harvest the secrets they hoard. The 
medusas seek advocates to end Pharika's plague. 
After losing a bet to an ambitious physician, Pharika 
loans the doctor her sacred kylix for one week and 
invites him to cure as many patients as he pleases. In 
that time, he cures death itself in a small town. Not 
only has this emboldened some of the town's scal- 
awags to commit crimes without fear of retribution, 
but the news has also infuriated disciples of Erebos, 
Mogis, and Klothys. Meanwhile, Pharika watches 
with delight as too much of a good medicine inspires 
distress and conflict that threaten to boil over into 


surrounding regions. 


BECAUSE THEY ARE SO WELL ACQUAINTEO WITH DEATH 


162 


HEALING POOLS 


Healing pools are naturally occurring springs and tidal 
pools said to have magical curative properties because 
Pharika has blessed them. Sick or injured people come 
to the pools and leave an offering for the god with her 
priests before bathing. If Pharika deems an offering 
worthy, the waters rapidly cure diseases, heal wounds, 
and sometimes even remove magical curses. If the 

god finds the offering unworthy, the waters poison the 
bather in some way, making their plight worse. If a per- 
son who wants to bathe has no offering for the god, that 
individual can offer themselves or a captured beast as a 
subject for the priest’s medical experiments. 

Many healing pools are in remote locations that are 
difficult to reach, such as hot springs at the top of a vol- 
cano or tidal pools on a monster-infested island. A priest 
of Pharika, often a medusa, usually watches over the 
pool. The priest’s chambers are often in a building or a 
cave near the pools. Such places are part living quarters 
and part medical and alchemical laboratory, where the 
priest makes medicines and poisons and performs ex- 
periments on beasts and humanoid subjects. 


HEALING POOLS ADVENTURES 

Sick or injured characters might have good reason to 
seek out healing pools when a malady is beyond their 
ability to treat. Medical tests that are being conducted 
near healing pools could also present opportunities 

for adventures involving rare cures, new poisons, and 
experiments gone awry. The Healing Pools Adventures 
table suggests ideas for adventures in such a place. 


HEALING POOLS ADVENTURES 


d10 Adventure Goal 

1 Heal yourself or a diseased or injured party member 
in the pools. 

Escort a sick or injured person to the pools. 

3 Kill monsters taking up residence in the pools. 
Capture people and creatures for the priests to use in 
their experiments. 

5 Cure the pools of a contamination. 

Create a poison based on notes provided to you by 
one of Pharika’s priests and contaminate the pools. 

7 Steal reagent-rich water from the pools. 

Rescue a priest's test subject and help them undo or 
adapt to the transformations they underwent due to 
the priest's experiments. 

9 Кі! or capture an escaped beast monstrously trans- 
formed by the priest’s experiments. 

10 Retrieve materials needed to create a cure for a dis- 
ease and convince a priest to help you make it. 


HEALING POOLS МАР 
The healing pools shown in map 4.12 are located in an 
underground cavern, accessible through a wide hole 
in the cavern’s ceiling that leads to a shaft connected 
to the surface. The pools have varying shapes and 
depths, with a bronze statue of Pharika holding 
out a bow! for offerings overlooking many of 
them. One small but deep pool contains an 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


e 
® . 


underwater tunnel, which leads outward and then 
upward to a dry cavern that serves as the priest's 
chambers. 

In crude laboratory above the pools, a stone table with 
restraints is used for experiments on humanoid sub- 
jects. The cages lining the walls are meant for beasts 
used in experiments. Secret passages connected to 
these chambers connects to the pools and the surface. 


HEALING POOLS VILLAINS 

Villains at healing pools are usually interested in heal- 
ing themselves, harming others, or controlling others' 
access to the pools. They might also take issue with the 
strange practices of the pools' clergy. Examples of such 
villains appear on the Healing Pools Villains table. 


HEALING POOLS VILLAINS 


d6 Villain 

1 A group of Returned palamnites (see chapter 6) 
invade the pools, believing the waters’ magic сап re- 
store their lost memories and mortal bodies. 

2  Nereids (see chapter 6) guard the pools, making their 
own judgments about who is and isn't worthy of the 
pools' healing magic. 

3 The magic waters of the pools wash out to sea and 
attract a dying kraken to the area. 

4 An assassin barters captured humanoid test subjects 
for poison from the pools’ medusa priest. 

5 A dying veteran who was poisoned by the pools 
slaughters any person who is healed by the waters. 

6 Anoracle (see chapter 6) allows the pools’ poisons to 
seep from the caves and contaminate a community. 


PETER MOHRBACHER (1), DYSON LOGOS (R) 


Map 4.12; HEALING Poors 


Giant Shak 
"cai 


-A LL 


164. 


PHENAX 


Cunning and deceitful, Phenax spins innumerable plots 
across all of creation. He enjoys upsetting the natural or- 
der of things, either by thwarting the plans of his fellow 
gods or secreting away information for later use. 


PHENAX'S CHAMPIONS 


Phenax's champions are pawns in his grand game of 
lying, cheating, and deception. He takes particular plea- 
sure in tormenting Heliod and Iroas, whom he regards 
with special scorn. Phenax's servants have a tendency 
to show up at the most inconvenient times and places. 

The Phenax's Quests table suggests a few adventures 
the god's champions might involve themselves in. 


PHENAX’S QUESTS 


d6 Adventure Goal 

1 Rob or defend a gambling parlor. 
Destabilize or aid the government of the local polis. 

3  Formorfoil a heretical cult of Heliod to bring discord 
to the countryside. 

4 Assassinate or protect the local magistrate who has 
been cracking down on Phenax worshipers. 

5 Create a grand prank built around obfuscation and 
deceit to embarrass a local government or temple. 

6 Defeat a champion of another god (most likely He- 
liod, Erebos, or Iroas). 


A PHENAX CAMPAIGN 

Phenax fits easily into the role of primary campaign 
villain. He also might be an unconventional and exciting 
patron of the player characters. Phenax is the arche- 
typal outsider, and his champions might be tasked with 
disrupting the established order of a polis or aiding one 
of the necropoleis in expanding or dealing with vari- 
ous threats. 

Plots and schemes are Phenax's lifeblood, suggest- 
ing a complex, shifting campaign full of surprises and 
twists. For example, a simple heist could be the trig- 
gering event for a series of major conflicts between two 
rival temples thatendsin a citywide conflagration. 

Champions of Phenax could also serve as a bulwark 
against more aggressive gods who oppress or subjugate 
others. Alternatively, the party could be a band of free- 
dom fighters resisting the tyrannical ruler of their polis. 
Even though Phenax traffics in lies and deceit, a mor- 
ally gray campaign can be built around the use of illicit 
means to achieve righteous ends. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


PHENAX'S VILLAINS 


Servants of Phenax dot the world, largely staying hid- 
den until they are needed to help spin the web of lies 
that advances his plots. His servants prefer to confront 
foes using guile, cunning, and planning instead of brute 
force. Phenax and his champions move with purpose, 
don't draw attention to themselves, and use misdirection 
to keep foes guessing about when and where their next 
attack will come. 

Phenax's followers could be involved in the politi- 
cal machinations of a polis or the crimes of the local 
thieves' guild. Investigating instances of gambling, 
smuggling, robbery, and fencing stolen loot might bring 
the characters into opposition against Phenax and his 
followers. Whenever possible, servants of Phenax try 
to stage their misdeeds in a waythat implicates other 
faiths or groups, to stir up as much conflict and confu- 
sion as possible. 

The Phenax's Villains table suggests a variety of foes 
that might arise from among the god's followers. 


PHENAX'S VILLAINS 

d8 Villain 

1 Acharismatic crime boss (bandit captain) unites local 
gangs in a bid to seize control of the polis. 

2 A Returned palamnite (see chapter 6) wreaks havoc 
across the countryside in Phenax's name. 

3  Thelies of a government functionary (noble) start a 
trade war between struggling settlements. 

4 Phenax cultists establish a fake cult of Ephara in a bid 
to start a sectarian civil war in Meletis. 

5 An information broker (spy) holds damaging secrets 
about important folk and is blackmailing them. 

6 Agroup of vocal iconoclasts (nobles) are fomenting 
social upheaval that threatens to turn to violence. 

7  Achampion (veteran) of Heliod is threatening 
to torch a section of the polis in her hunt for a 
Phenax-worshiping oath breaker. 

8 Folk go missing then turn up with no memory of their 
disappearance. Phenax cult fanatics are brainwashing 
these souls for use as sleeper agents. 


PHENAX'S MONSTERS 

Phenax is often associated with monsters and individu- 
als that use cleverness and guile to overcome foes. The 
Phenax's Monsters table presents just a few foes likely 

to serve the god's will. 


PHENAX's MONSTERS 


Challenge Creature Source 

1 Returned sentry MOT 
3 Leucrotta VGM 
3 Slithering tracker VGM 
4 Returned palamnite MOT 
5 Ghostblade eidolon MOT 
5 Master thief VGM 
8 Assassin MM 

16 Phoenix MTF 


PHENAX AS CAMPAIGN VILLAIN 


Regardless of whether Phenax begins the campaign 
as a villain or turns against his champions during the 
course of play, he presents himself as a confounding, 
slippery foe. 

As a campaign villain, Phenax might be driven by a 
desire to incite conflict against his fellow gods, usually 
to serve his own ends. Although Phenax doesn’t desire 
rulership over Nyx, he does love to hoard damaging 
secrets and powerful magic. Acquiring these coveted 
items always involves duplicity and theft, and sometimes 
murder. To Phenax, the ends justify the means. Upset- 
ting the order of things is a worthy goal, whether it’s 
done as a means to a greater end or simply to enjoy the 
disruption caused by radical change. 

The campaign’s objective might involve determining 
what Phenax is up to and thwarting his scheme or, fail- 
ing that, dealing with the fallout. Whatever the objective, 
it will require the player characters to confront a being 
who was clever enough to escape the Underworld. 


PHENAX’S DIVINE SCHEMES 

Phenax's activities can have a wide-ranging impact on 
both the pantheon and the mortal world. The Phenax’s 
Divine Schemes table offers examples of the ways in 
which Phenax’s duplicity might have a mythic impact, 
catching adventurers in the middle of divine squabbles. 


FOLLOWERS OF PHENAX HAVE LITTLE RESPECT 
FOR THE REST OF THE PANTHEON. 


PHENAX’S DIVINE SCHEMES 


d4 Scheme 

1 Phenax finds an artifact capable of imprisoning 
Athreos and engages in a shadow war with Erebos, 
causing pandemonium in the Underworld. As a result, 
droves of Returned flood the mortal world. 

2 Phenax undertakes a plot to transform Erebos into one 
of the Returned. If he succeeds, the balance of life and 
death will be shattered. 

3 Рһепах vanishes. For a time, it's believe the god has 
been killed or grew bored and left Theros. In fact, 
though, Phenax managed to imprison another god and 
has since taken their place. 

4 Phenax dispatches a powerful agent to find a lost relic 
called Deception's Edge, a dagger that enables the 
wielder to warp the minds of mortals. Once in posses- 
sion of the artifact, the agent embarks on a campaign 
of assassination and espionage that threatens to lead 
to all-out war between Akros and Meletis. 


166 


AMPHITHEATER 


Music, dance, poetry, drama, comedy, and satire are 

all performed and celebrated in the amphitheaters of 
Theros. These public spaces are also the scene of secret 
hand offs, private meetings, and espionage. The amphi- 
theater’s costumes, makeup, props, and hidden halls 
and entrances make it a good place for those who oper- 
ate in the shadows to do so without arousing suspicion. 
Many performers moonlight as assassins, spies, and 
thieves, given their talents and resources, and as such 
many amphitheaters contain hidden shrines to Phenax. 


AMPHITHEATER ADVENTURES 
Adventures in an amphitheater often revolve around 
deception. Great performances get audiences immersed 
in what they're seeing, lowering their defenses and al- 
lowing pickpockets and spies to work. Backstage, the 
performers and staff hide stolen goods and even bodies 
in plain sight among legitimate props, and they craft dis- 
guises for use outside the theater. 

Theaters make great settings for social adventures. 
In a place where the rich and poor relax together, the 
characters can impress, blackmail, bribe, or steal from 
people of all walks of life. The Amphitheater Adventures 
table presents ideas for adventures in such a place. 


AMPHITHEATER ADVENTURES 


di0 Adventure Goal 
1 Steal an item from an audience member. 
2 Find evidence of a crime hidden backstage. 
3 Defend a theater being гип by a criminal cabal from a 
rival gang's assault. 
4 Таке the place of a group of performers on stage to 
impress an audience member. 
5 Assassinate an audience member during a perfor- 
mance without being seen. 
6 Serve as bodyguards for an audience member. 
Learn which performers are criminals. 
8 Find a spy among the audience members and deliver 
a message to that person. 
9 Steal costumes from the theater to infiltrate a temple 
in disguise. 
10 Intercept and decipher a coded message meant for 
someone else. 


AMPHITHEATER MAP 
The amphitheater shown in map 4.13 is set in 
a natural depression that provides seating 

for the audience. The backstage area con- 
tains dressing rooms for the performers, 
a prop workshop, and a storage area 
filled with extra set pieces. Below, se- 
cret halls include space for the games 
and drinking one might expect from a 
typical den of iniquity, but it also dis- 
guises the barracks and training hall 
of a thieves' guild devoted to Phenax, 
a shrine, and an escape tunnel for 
making a quick getaway. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


AMPHITHEATER VILLAINS 

Liars, sneaks, and charmers often make their living as 
performers. Examples of such villains appear on the 
Amphitheater Villains table. 


AMPHITHEATER VILLAINS 


d8 Villain 

1 An actor charms nobles who see him perform into 
surrendering their fortunes. 

2 The wraith of a murdered actress reenacts her death 
every night, playing the role of the murderer and tar- 
geting a new performer in her place. 

3  Anuntalented dancer (scout) poisons those with 
more skill in order to get ahead. 

4 А таре playwright invites political figures to see his 
satires, then uses magic to make them react dramati- 
cally, which encourages more people to see his plays. 

5 A leading lady is also an assassin for hire, and she 
uses a secret room in the theater as her base. 

6 Burglars (veterans) masquerading as acrobats iden- 
tify marks during their performances, then rob them 
afterward. 

7 А murderer (spy) who works as a prop maker hides 
his weapons and victims in among pieces ofthe set. 

8  Atheater-loving mage uses a homunculus to spy on 
audience members to gain blackmail material. 


DAARKEN (L), DYSON LOGOS (R) 


МАР 4.13: AMPHITHEATER 


Hig 


© 
h Stakes 


Prop 
Storage 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


167 


168 


PURPHOROS 


Impulsive and unsubtle, Purphoros is an unpredictable 
force in the lives of his chosen champions. 


PURPHOROS’S CHAMPIONS 


Purphoros's relationship to his champions is more 

that of a patron than a ruler. He chooses champions 
whose passions advance his interests in the world, and 
he grants them his blessings to use as they see fit in 
service to him. Purphoros is eccentric, however, and 
he could suddenly appear to hand down commands to 
his champions after months or years of silence. Priests, 
other followers of Purphoros, and regular people in 


need might also approach the champions requesting aid. 


Purphoros never rebuffs followers of other gods if their 
need is genuine. 

The Purphoros's Quests table suggests a few adven- 
tures the god's champions might involve themselves in. 


PuRPHOROS's QUESTS 

d6 Adventure Goal 

1 Clear out a monster-infested mine and help procure 
precious iron ore for a master smith. 

2 Protecta traveling theater troupe as they perform a 
new play that glorifies Purphoros and makes another 
god look foolish. 

3 Retrieve a sacred weapon of Purphoros that has fallen 
into the hands of minotaurs. 

4 Resist the corrupt authority of a powerful priest of 
Heliod or a cruel village elder. 

5 Triumph in a contest of strength or crafting to bring 
glory to Purphoros. 

6 Defeat a champion of another god (most likely 
Heliod, Kruphix, Phenax, or Mogis). 


A PURPHOROS CAMPAIGN 

A campaign structured around champions of Purphoros 
can feature the themes of freedom, self-expression, and 
passion, casting the adventurers as brave rebels fighting 
against tyranny and convention. Purphoros's champions 
come from many walks of life, but they are united in 
their dedication to their god and his ideals. 

A Purphoros campaign might begin with the adven- 
turers being called together by a priest of Purphoros or 
a master smith to lend aid with an urgent matter. From 
there, the characters' victories on behalf of Purphoros 
might arouse the ire of Heliod's followers. Given Pur- 
phoros's impulsiveness, conflict with the followers of 
other gods can quickly escalate from petty to violent. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


Although Purphoros is usually even-tempered, his 
champions occasionally run afoul of his violent im- 
pulses. They might find themselves inadvertently in the 
path of one of his destructive rages, or they might earn 
his wrath more directly by displaying weakness or cow- 
ardice. Wayward champions are usually able to atone for 
their deeds and regain his favor when he is in a better 
temperament, but in extreme cases, they could be forced 
to seek refuge with another god, thereafter contending 
with Purphoros as a villain. 


PURPHOROS'S VILLAINS 


Though Purphoros's ideals are shared by many, the 
methods he uses to advance them can be brutal. His 
belief that creation necessitates destruction, combined 
with his cavalier attitude toward authority, make it easy 
for followers of the forge god to be seen as villains. 

There are many paths to villainy in the name of Pur- 
phoros. The quest for ever finer works of craft can give 
rise to deadly rivalries. Resistance to lawful authority 
can become tyranny of another sort. And when passions 
become inflamed, giving in to them can lead to tragedy 
rather than triumph. Purphoros's general hands-off 
attitude toward his champions means that groups of his 
followers could easily find themselves on opposite sides 
in a conflict, and in extreme cases Purphoros himself 
sends heroes to strike down those who stray. 

The Purphoros's Villains table suggests a variety of 
foes that might arise from among the god's followers. 


PURPHOROS'S VILLAINS 
d6 Villain 

Т A cult fanatic of Purphoros turns to Mogis to enhance 
his craft, engaging in bloody rituals to produce exqui- 
site cursed weapons. 

2 An aging veteran seeks to replace her body with living 
bronze and enlists a genius archmage of Purphoros 
to aid her. Then several of their test limbs escape. 

3 A rebel (spy) plots to set fire to a temple of Heliod 
and dedicate the blaze to Purphoros, driving the gods 
toward a conflict he's certain Purphoros will win. 

4 A gladiator of Purphoros partakes of the fumes at 
Mount Velus then goes on what seems to be a ram- 
page that contributes to a mysterious design. 

5 A priest of Purphoros condemns the party for treating 
their weapons and tools poorly, insisting they discard 
them until the heroes prove their worthiness. 

6 А group of oreads (see chapter 6) seeks inspiration in 
flames. The oreads leave Purphoros's forge and con- 
duct thorough studies of everything they burn. 


PURPHOROS'S MONSTERS 

In addition to his followers, Purphoros is associated 
with a wide range of other creatures, such as those pre- 
sented on the Purphoros's Monsters table. 


PURPHOROS’S MONSTERS 


Challenge Creature Source 

1/2 Anvilwrought raptor ` MOT 
Bronze sable MOT 

2 Burnished hart MOT 
4 Oread MOT 
5 Gold-forged sentinel MOT 
5 Fire elemental MM 
6 Cyclops* MM 
9 Fire giant MM 
16 Iron golem MM 
17 Adult red dragon* MM 
24 Ancient red dragon* MM 


* See chapter 6 for details about these creatures in Theros. 


PURPHOROS AS CAMPAIGN VILLAIN 


As a campaign villain, Purphoros is more likely to be 
driven by his impulses rather than by any coherent plan. 
He might begin by encouraging his champions to cre- 
ate works and spread tales that belittle the other gods. 
When other deities retaliate against his chosen, Purpho- 
ros reacts with rage, taking vengeance on other gods’ 
temples and priests across Theros. Assuming the player 
characters are champions of other gods, they might well 
find themselves the targets of Purphoros's rage. 


PURPHOROS'S DIVINE SCHEMES 

Purphoros's fits of passion can have a long-lasting im- 
pact on both gods and mortals. The Purphoros's Divine 
Schemes tables outlines a few ways the god's explosive 
temper might have dire consequences for the world. 


PuRPHOROS's DIVINE SCHEMES 


d4 Scheme 

1 Enraged at Heliod's latest insult, Purphoros causes 
Mount Velus to erupt. The volcano's rage doesn't 
cease, though, threatening the region. 

2  Insulted that the other gods don't appreciate his cre- 
ations, Purphoros breaks the Nyx-infused chains that 
bind the ancient red dragon Thraxes, allowing it to go 
on a far-ranging rampage. 

3  Gripped by sudden inspiration, Purphoros begins 
building a massive Nyx-bronze bridge that will link 
Mount Velus in the mortal world with Nyx itself. Every 
god opposes him in this effort. Can the construction 
effort be sabotaged without bringing the bridge tum- 
bling down on the mortal world? 

4 Purphoros’s double, Petros, reveals an army of metal 
Nyxborn creatures and unleashes them against tem- 
ples and settlements dedicated to other gods. The 
gods blame Purphoros for the attack, but he is too 
proud, and too fond of Petros, to stop the attacks. 


THE ORACLES ОЕ PURPHOROS READ THE GOO'S 


WILL IN EARTH, FIRE, ANO VOLCANIC FUMES, 


170 


VOLCANO TEMPLE . 


The grandest temples of Purphoros burrow into the 
hearts of active volcanoes, being both places of worship 
and workshops. The volcanic vapors inspire artisans 
who worship at the top of the temple, then journey 
down to glowing forges where they craft armor, jewelry, 
weapons, and other works of art. The forges in a volcano 
temple get so hot they can work almost any material, 
mundane or extraordinary. The faithful of Purphoros 
often work on commission or sell their works, though 
some create strictly for themselves. 

Just like the treasures forged inside them, volcanic 
temples are works of art. The priests who maintain the 
structures carve intricate designs with metal filigree in 
the stone walls and craft ornamental decorations that 
make each temple look more like an art museum than a 
cave inside a mountain. The priests know that one day 
the volcano will erupt, destroying their work but provid- 
ing an opportunity to start afresh with newly inspired 
ideas when the cataclysm subsides. 


VOLCANO TEMPLE ADVENTURES 

An adventure in a volcano temple incorporates the 
danger of fire, the power of divine magic, and the allure 
of art and treasure. It is easy to get lost in the temple’s 
twisting, never-finished halls, minor eruptions pose a 
constant threat, and former temples ruined by eruptions 
now connect to dark places that monsters call home. 
Despite these hazards, the valuables most temples hold 
can be too tempting for some adventurers to pass up. 
The Volcano Temple Adventures table presents ideas for 
adventures that could occur in such a place. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


VOLCANO TEMPLE ADVENTURES 


d10 Adventure Goal 

1 Acquire an item that wasn't up to Purphoros's stan- 
dards before it's cast into the lava. 

2 Defend the temple from fiery zombies emerging 
from tunnels connecting to a collapsed temple. 

3 Steal a phoenix egg from the temple. 

4 Become an apprentice to one of the priests and craft 
an item in the temple. 

5 Explore a ruined temple after an eruption to make 
sure it is safe for others to enter. 

6 Stop the temple priests from destroying well-crafted 
but substandard armor and weapons that are needed 
by a nearby settlement. 

7 The volcano is erupting! Prevent ії, or save the most 
fanatical priests who refuse to leave their forges. 

8 Negotiate with fire giants who want to use the tem- 
ple's forges. 

9 Destroy a near-indestructible item in the volcano's 
forges. 

10 Rescue an artisan lost in the temple's twisting halls. 


VOLCANO TEMPLE MAP 

The volcano temple shown in map 4.14 is reached by 
aswitchback stair carved into the side of the volcano, 
which leads to an ornate edifice sculpted into the face 
of the mountain. The temple's facade features massive 
pillars, two mighty statues, and a pair of towering, 
bronze-bound doors. The interior holds a complex of 
workshops, forges, barracks, and mines. The physical 
and spiritual heart of the place is a large cavern where a 
gigantic statue of Purphoros stands amid a pool of lava, 
with a raised altar facing a forge where smiths can com- 
plete their work in sight of their god. 


VOLCANO TEMPLE VILLAINS 

Villains in a volcano temple are out to claim the place's 
treasures or harness the mountain's destructive power. 
Examples of such villains appear on the Volcano Temple 
Villains table. 


VOLCANO TEMPLE VILLAINS 


d6 Villain 

1 An adult red dragon tries to make its nest inside the 
temple, attacking the artisans and priests within. 

2 A priest of Mogis infiltrates the volcano and mars its 
ornate halls, hoping to draw Purphoros's ire and thus 
cause the volcano to erupt at an unexpected time, 
killing everyone in the temple. 

3 A obsessed cult fanatic is never satisfied with her ap- 
prentices' creations and works them to death. 

4 A unit of defeated and desperate hoplites (see chap- 
ter 6) raid the temple, steal magical weapons, and 
prepare to avenge their fallen companions. 

5 An apprentice artisan summons fire elementals that 
he can't control to murder his cruel master. 

6 An iron golem forged in the temple breaks free of its 
maker's control and goes on a killing spree. 


DYSON LOGOS 


Ore Processing 
Chamber 


a Kitchen Storage с 
i Gl 


© і fee, 


Map 4.14: VoLCANO TEMPLE 


Priests' 
Quarters 


БЕЛ, 


ОШ ые 1 square = 5 feet 


o 


T | 


o 

I 
ae AY 
El 
Demum 
aa 
Ll 
I 
Какы 
es] 
Кын 
[zl 
521 
кадек! 
эритиш! 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


171 


» 


172 


Thassa’s influence on the lives of her champions var- 
ies wildly, often influenced by her stormy whims. A 
champion of the god who serves dutifully might not 
attract her attention for years. Those who displease her, 
though, or who engage with those who have earned her 
ire, might find themselves the uncomfortable focus of 
her attention for an extended period. 


THASSA’S CHAMPIONS 


Thassa’s champions are more expressions of her de- 
sires than the means for enacting long-term agendas. 
She disdains the status quo but also has no interest in 
committing to lengthy campaigns to overturn it. Rather, 
her champions’ work often serves her immediate inter- 
ests or embodies her ire about some recent slight. 

The Thassa’s Quests table suggests a few adventures 
the god’s champions might involve themselves in. 


THASSA’S QUESTS 


d6 Adventure Coal 

1 Help a village of Thassa’s faithful evacuate to the hills 
before Thassa sends a great wave to punish the vil- 
lage’s willful coastal neighbors. 

2 Phenax has learned the location of a sunken treasure 
їп а flooded cave. Retrieve the treasure before his 
fortune-hunters can steal it from Thassa. 

3 Smuggle a cargo of offerings for Thassa past harbor 
inspectors at Meletis, skirting new laws put into place 
at the behest of Heliod’s priesthood that ban the im- 
port of items intended for sacrifice to other gods. 

4 Finda magically stolen vessel sequestered high in the 
mountains and return it to the ocean. 

5 Capture a great beast of the land and bring it to the 
shore as an offering for a kraken. 

6 | Humiliate a champion of another god (most likely 
Ephara, Karametra, Pharika, Iroas, or Mogis). 


A THASSA CAMPAIGN 
Thassa's interests naturally pull the characters toward 


the sea, coasts, or lands affected by (or starved of) water. 


She makes a fantastic patron for sea-based campaigns, 
but also land-based journeys where the characters 
might spread Thassa's desire for change and discover- 
ing ancient knowledge. 

The campaign might begin with Thassa warning the 
characters about an impending attack or disaster in- 
volving a seaside community, leaving them to convince 
others and organize a defense. Some citizens might 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


hail them as heroes, while others are suspicious of 
them— particularly when one of the disasters they fore- 
tell seems likely to be Thassa's doing. They might get 
caught up in the schemes of other gods' minions who 
resent their growing influence over the community. 
Thassa knows nothing is permanent, including her 
champions’ service. If they fail to uphold her wishes, she 
will abandon them. In such a case, she might become a 
villain, trying to thwart the characters unless they can 
appease her or gain the protection of a new patron. 


'THASSA'S VILLAINS 


Thassa can take on a villainous role as much through 
indifference as through malice. Thassa takes revenge on 
those who wrong her, and she doesn’t particularly care 
who else is harmed. 

Thassa's followers might become villains for a vast 
range of reasons. Some become obsessed with recov- 
ering or keeping hidden the secrets of the deep. Others 
come to worship the ocean itself, with its uncaring 
depths and half-glimpsed monsters. Still others preemp- 
tively strike at those who risk offending the god—white 
knights, overprotective of their own deity. 

The Thassa's Villains table suggests a variety of foes 
that might arise from among the god's followers. 


THASSA'S VILLAINS 


96 Villain 

1  Atriton master of waves (see chapter 6) demands 
ever greater sacrifices to Thassa from merchants 
moving along a crucial trade route, threatening to 
sink ships that don't comply. 

2 A former priest of Thassa kidnaps indigents and 
plans to drown them as offerings to regain her favor. 

3  Adruid of Thassa, after being mistreated by a coastal 
community, uses magic to lure a plague of giant crabs 
out of the depths to take revenge. 

4 A water elemental is trapped in a village well and has 
changed the drinking water to saltwater. It needs help 
returning to the sea. 

5 Sirens (see the harpies entry in chapter 6) favored by 
Thassa take up residence in a lighthouse, preventing 
its use. 

6  Aship carrying a massive pearl sacred to Thassa has 
been sunk. Thassa’s cultists want the pearl back, but 
anyone trying to retrieve it find that the god’s triton 
followers have claimed it. 


THASSA’S MONSTERS 

Any sea creature might answer Thassa’s call. In addi- 
tion to any aquatic beast or being of elemental water, the 
Thassa's Monsters table presents a few of her servants. 


THASSA's MONSTERS 


Challenge Creature Source 
1/2 Нїрросатр MOT 
] Siren (harpy)* MM 
2 Naiad MOT 
2 Triton shorestalker MOT 


Challenge Creature Source 
5 Water elemental Е MM 
8 Triton master of waves MOT 
13 Storm giant MM 
7 Dragon turtle MM 
23 Kraken* MM 
26 Tromokratis MOT 


* See chapter 6 for details about these creatures in Theros. 


THASSA AS CAMPAIGN VILLAIN 


Many of Thassa’s schemes begin with some perceived 
slight, or even a genuine threat, perpetrated by one of 
the other gods. But Thassa’s acts of intervention are 
seldom subtle, and her resistance to change some- 
times causes her to let a situation worsen until she 
erupts in rage. 

Thassa might begin by answering another god’s offen- 
sive act with a display of power—which might be viewed 
as a threat by other gods. An arrogant dictate from 
Heliod or developments in a coastal community might 
prompt Thassa to send forth a kraken, requiring that 
heroes fight it off. When the kraken is defeated, Thassa 
sends her champions to collect the beast's heart so they 
might resurrect the creature. Characters might then 
face off against Thassa's champions while they attempt 
this resurrection, or fight several younger krakens her 
champions are training. Such a campaign might end 
with the adventurers convincing other gods to placate 
Thassa, or paying penance in the form of treasure, ser- 
vice, or sacrifice. 


THE FLOOR OF THE SIREN SEA 15 LITTERED WITH 


VESSELS THAT NAVIGATEO THE WAVES UNWELCOMED. 


5 


THASSA’S DIVINE SCHEMES 

The Thassa’s Divine Schemes tables offers examples of 
how the god’s whims might have ruinous impact upon 
the world. 


THASSA’S DIVINE SCHEMES 


d4 
1 


Scheme 

After a kraken is sighted near an inhabited island, a 
fleet prepares to set sail from Meletis to face it. In ret- 
ribution, Thassa pulls the ocean back from the entire 
coastline, stranding not only the fleet, but the fishing 
boats and merchant vessels that keep the polis fed 
and supplied. Thassa’s oracles announce that “the 
forest of masts must be felled” before the waters will 
return, but Meletis refuses to give up its navy. How 
can Thassa be appeased? 

During a divine conflict, one of the gods’ weapons 
tumbles into the sea. Thassa refuses to return the 
godly weapon, claiming it as her own, much to the 
owner’s ire. 

Thassa turns a ship full of another god’s champions 
into dolphins as punishment for setting foot on one of 
her holy isles. Can she be persuaded to change them 
back? How will the champions’ patrons respond if she 
refuses? 

When multiple gods turn against her in a dispute, 
Thassa is enraged. She releases the locks binding ev- 
ery kraken in the sea, along with that of an ancient and 
mysterious kraken brood mother. 


COASTAL TEMPLE boasts a massive coral altar where the sea god is wor- 
(row CO IUE ae IND MEC CS en LR o c AC Tt shiped. Tunnels lead to priests' quarters, private medita- 
tion areas, docks, and other areas well suited to the use 
of both land-dwelling and aquatic worshipers. 


Thassa's temples are often located in coastal areas, to 
accommodate both her land-dwelling worshipers and 
her faithful who live beneath the waves, such as tritons. 


These houses of worship often make use of natural COASTAL TEMPLE VILLAINS 
caves and coves that demonstrate the power of the sea Villains in seaside temples often seek to harness the 
over the passage of time. Wave-worn rocks, tidal pools, might of the sea or are almost alien beings that have 
stalactites, stalagmites, coral reefs, and other marine crawled from the depths. Examples of such villains ap- 
features are all incorporated into the decor of a temple. pear on the Coastal Temple Villains table. 

Most coastal temples include chambers that are un- 
derwater at high tide. Worshipers sit in these places COASTAL TEMPLE VILLAINS 


at low tide and meditate on what the future might hold 
while the water rises around them. They leave offerings 
to Thassa in these places, which are carried out to sea 
as the water recedes. 


d6 Villain 
1 A kraken threatens to destroy the temple if worship- 
ers don’t pay tribute to the creature. 


A coastal temple is where people come to contemplate 2 Anereid (see chapter 6) hides inside the temple and 
the sea, the passage of time, and the natural world while murders fishers who worship here for their crimes 
enjoying the sound of the waves, the sight of the sea's against the sea. 
sculptures, and the refreshing feeling of cool water. 3 A group of sirens (see the harpies entry in chapter 6) 


take over the temple and lure new victims inside to 


COASTAL TEMPLE ADVENTURES drown themselves during high tide. 


Fierce tides and sudden storms make coastal temples 

potentially hostile places for the land-dwelling faithful. 
No worshiper, aquatic or otherwise, is safe on the rare 
occasions when a shark or something worse comes up 
from the depths. 


4 A priest of Thassa falsely convinces elderly worship- 
ers that giving more wealth to the temple increases 
the length of time they live. 

5 Agiant octopus under the effects of the awaken spell 


Adventurers could come to a temple to clash with а hunts in the temple at high tide. 
group of Thassa's faithful, which include pirates, cultists 6 X Arageful triton master of waves (see chapter 6) 
who worship krakens, and other unsavory types who believes everyone in a temple is secretly serving a 
sail the waves or swim beneath them. Characters might kraken and begins murdering them. 


also to come to such a place to meditate and listen to 
what the sea tells them. The Coastal Temple Adventures 
table offers ideas for adventures in such a place. 


COASTAL TEMPLE ADVENTURES 


d12 Adventure Coal 
1 Save land-dwelling worshipers who became trapped 


inside the temple during a flood. 

Steal an offering before it washes away. 

Confront pirates worshiping at the temple. 

Defend the temple from kraken-worshiping cultists. 
Kill or drive off a hydra that has claimed the temple 
as its home. 


Un hw ко 


6 Help a killer whale beached in the temple. 

7 . Get information from a worshiper. 

8 Kidnap a worshiper without making a scene. 

9  Steala magic quipper from a sacred tide pool. 

10 Spy on a conversation between two worshipers. 

11 Negotiate with a blue dragon that wants to claim the 
temple as its lair. 

12 Escape the temple as it floods. 


COASTAL TEMPLE MAP 
At high tide, the coastal temple shown in map 4.15 
is covered in a few inches of water, some of which 
gets trapped in depressions when the tide goes 
out. These shallow pools sometimes contain 
colorful fish, crabs, shells, and flotsam, any 

of which Thassa's followers might consider 

to have divine meaning. The largest cavern 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


NN 


Ху 
4 


NE 


A DASS 


TA 


High "s 


Priest's: (ў ака 
(Chamber ubmerged Tunnel Ё 

ANS - -P - = o ll 
vva ү, A ү: 


_ Sanctuary, 
_ о Һаѕѕа 


QE 


MAN 


a 
д МУЙ 


S 
E 
^ 


SINK 


A 


РА J N 

„ёс A S) 

a\Priests\Quarters).. ү, 

S ijo е 3E J N 

pp i t ЇЙ | i» \` 
^ I UU = Àj if 
S { 


ji o ER 
SIE SS m МЛ m. SONS NS 


SUN ANANAS у, 


RC 


et 


эь eg 


* 


& 
"n 
О 
Q 
© 
9 
9 
Я 
о 
3 
z 
б 
a 
a 
rr 
a 
© 
> 
@ 
3 
А 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 175 


176 


NAUTICAL ADVENTURES 


The Callapheia chronicles the legendary story of Cal- 
laphe, captain of The Monsoon, whose wild adventures 
pitted her against all manner of pirates and sea mon- 
sters. Sailors also tell tales of the bold explorer Captain 
Siona and her ship, the Pyleas, recounting her epic voy- 
ages to mystical islands. Both captains and their crews 
still sail the waves of Theros, their stories far from com- 
plete. Yet word of their deeds has inspired generations 
of sailors, merely hinting at the endless treasures and 
adventures to be found at sea. This section provides an 
overview of the wonders and dangers heroes might en- 
counter when they venture out to sea. 


SAILING THE SEA 


Just as on land, everything in the waters of Theros exists 
on а mythic scale. While map 3.1 in chapter 3 suggests 
that travel across the Siren Sea should take only a few 
days, its hazards and countless uncharted islands can 
make what should be a journey of a month a year-long 
odyssey. Even a routine journey can become an epic 
adventure if the characters anger a god, such as Thassa, 
who can make sure the waves are never in their favor. 


EMBARKING ON ADVENTURE 

To begin any nautical adventure, heroes must take 
that first, often daunting, step away from dry land. The 
Adventures at Sea table provides a variety of story 
ideas that might help compel heroes to set forth upon 
the waves. 


ADVENTURES AT SEA 


d10 Adventure Goal 

Slay a monster or pirates terrorizing ships at sea. 
Follow an omen that leads out to sea. 

Seek an artifact hidden underwater or on an island. 
Find your way home after getting lost. 

Find a lost temple of a god. 

Relocate settlers trying to colonize an inhabited isle. 
Discover a safe route through deadly waters. 
Retrace the path of a hero lost at sea. 

Find a whirlpool that is a passage to the Underworld. 
Sail from the edge of the world into Nyx. 


М Со м су tn > Ut ко — 


= 
© 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


RUNNING NAUTICAL ADVENTURES 

Running adventures involving ships and the sea doesn't 
need to be daunting, especially not in a world as steeped 

in magic as Theros. Knowing the difference between port 
(left) and starboard (right), or a ship's bow (front) and 
stern (rear) isn't necessarily important to legendary he- 
roes, particularly when brave crews sail along with them. 
Feel free to think ofthe ship your heroes travel upon less 
in the terms of a pirate story (full of commonplace duties 
and dangers) and more like a vessel in a space-faring, sci-fi 
adventure (where mundane operations often fade into 

the background). How much a story engages with course 
setting, provisioning, periods of inactivity, and other as- 
pects of long ocean journeys is ultimately up to you and 
the players to decide, but consider cleaving to what the 
group thinks is fun rather than stretching for unnecessary 
accuracy (whatever that might mean for a world as magical 
as Theros). 

That said, if you'd like to add nuance to your nautical ad- 
ventures in Theros, the book Ghosts of Saltmarsh provides 
more information on ships, hazards, and environments 
at sea as well as tables for use with nautical encounters, 
mysterious islands, and other marine features. The galley 
presented in that book might also make a fine vessel for 
your adventures—once your players give it a name worthy 
of their legend, that is. 

аьаа 


GETTING LosT 

Many adventures at sea start with a simple premise: get 
home. Whether the tale starts with characters getting 
marooned or in the aftermath of some calamity, the 
characters might share the goal of getting back to where 
they belong. Perhaps the characters find themselves on 
an island of legend, one not found on any map, making 
their travels a journey through the unknown. Even if the 
characters are shipwrecked on a well-known island, the 
influence of the gods, pursuit of deadly sea beasts, will 
of a living vessel, or countless other challenges could 
stand in the way of them reaching home. 


MAINTAINING RELATIONSHIPS 

In a campaign that often changes location, it can be diffi- 
cult to have recurring NPCs. If youintroduce characters 
you'd like the party to stay in touch with, consider the 
following options: 


* Aquatic or flying characters can visit the characters as 
they travel, appearing unexpectedly. 

* Magic items such as sending stones and spells such 
as animal messenger allow characters to stay in touch 
over long distances. 

* Powerful creatures might teleport to the characters' 
location—particularly those unable (or disinclined) to 
share their teleportation powers. 

* When the characters dream, they might meet other 
creatures in Nyx. 

· Some of Theros's mystical islands move around оп 
the sea, allowing the characters to run into them and 
their inhabitants multiple times. 


THE KRAKEN ARIXMETHES CARRIES THE RUINS OF A 


LOST CITY AFFIXED TO THE LENGTH OF ITS SPINE 
5 


MYSTICAL ISLANDS 


The Siren Sea is dotted with mysterious islands that 


are home to strange creatures, mysterious hermits, odd 910 
phenomena, and ancient ruins. These islands make 1 
fantastic adventure locations for characters exploring 
uncharted oceans or those simply trying to get home. 2 
While any island might present the opportunity to rest, 
weather storms, restock, and explore, the islands of 
Theros might also be worlds unto themselves, where 
unlikely beings hold dominion or the gods have crafted 3 
a realm to their specific whims. Such mystical islands 
aren't just stops on an ocean journey; they're unique 4 
lands touched by the magic of the gods. 

A mystical island could be the ultimate destination 5 


of a nautical adventure, or a magical interlude amid a 
larger seafaring campaign. When creating a mystical 
island, consider how its environment and inhabitants 6 
contribute to making it feel like a world unto itself. Also, 
consider how the laws of nature and the gods might op- 
erate differently on the island, giving rise to all manner 

of magical properties. 


ISLAND ENVIRONMENTS 8 
While a mystical island could be a simple spur of rock 

and sand jutting from the ocean depths, there's the 

potential to make it much more. When considering the 9 
very foundations of an island, consider what the gods 
might have set adrift, what might have fallen from Nyx, 
or what might have floated upon the seas for centuries. 
The Mystical Island Environments table suggests some 
possibilities for the sorts of unusual islands that might 
be floating in the Siren Sea. 


10 


ISLAND ENVIRONMENTS 


Environment 

Frozen. The island is magically frozen or is a floating 
iceberg. Perhaps something lies locked within. 
Sargassum. The island is a dense layer of seaweed 
that has developed its own ecosystem of strange 
beasts and trapped sailors. 

Living. The island is actually a gigantic slumbering 
creature— potentially unbeknown to its residents. 
Mirage. Magical phenomena surround a mundane 
island with tempting or treacherous illusions. 

Nyx Shard. The island is a manifestation of Nyx, a 
recreation of a land from the distant past or com- 
pletely from fiction. 

Idyllic. The island has beautiful weather and abun- 
dant fruit—so much so that some might consider 
never leaving. 

Lost Ruin. The island is all that survived a calamity 
that destroyed a legendary city. 

Gateway. The island is inherently magical, perhaps 
being an intrusion from a bizarre demiplane or the 
dream of a sleeping demigod. 

Promised Land. The island is a gift from a godtoa 
favored individual or population, specially tailored 
to suit their whims. 

Divine Refuge. A god created this island to be a per- 
sonal getaway, making it a reflection of the world as 
it would appear ifthey were in complete control. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 177 


UPON ONE OF THE DAkRA Ises, 


BEHIND THE STORIED CURSE OF 


ISLAND INHABITANTS 

Any sort of people, from isolated societies to desperate 
castaways, from monstrous predators to the last beings 
of their kind, might make their home in a hidden island 
sanctuary. The Island Inhabitants table offers just a few 
suggestions for what sort of people might make their 
home on a mystical island. 


ISLAND INHABITANTS 


910 Inhabitants 

1 The Last. Creatures that think they're the last of 
their kind— perhaps Returned, leonin, or humans— 
make their home on the island. 

2 First Contact. A prosperous civilization, uncon- 
nected to the great poleis, thrives on the island. 

3 Strangers. A species not usually connected to 
Theros dwells here—such as thri-kreen, yuan-ti, or 
another creature from the Monster Manual. 


4 Rivals. Two settlements have turned the island into 
a war zone. 
5 Prisoner. A powerful monster or dangerous figure 


from legend is imprisoned on this island. 

6 Tyrant. A powerful individual built a fortress on the 
island, and all other residents revere them. 

7 Fanatics. The island's residents know only one god 
and don't appreciate visits from heretics. 

8 The Dead. A settlement of the Returned is located 
near an obscure passage to the Underworld. 

9 Memories. Everyone on the island is Nyxborn, being 
the reincarnation ofa lost people. 

10 Oracle. An oracle with a reputation for accurate 
knowledge and prediction lives on the island. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


ISLAND MAGICAL PROPERTIES 

Beyond unusual physical compositions and strange 
inhabitants, mystical islands might have magical prop- 
erties. Effects include persistent weather, a unique law 
of physics, a curse that affects visitors, or something 
stranger. When determining what magical properties 
affect a mystical island, consider using any of the magi- 
cal effects here, either as presented or as inspiration for 
magical properties of your own design. 

Bliss Island. Those who visit the island risk being en- 
chanted so they never want to leave. At the end of each 
long rest it takes on this island, a visitor must succeed 
on a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw or be unwilling to 
leave the island before finishing another long rest. After 
failing this saving throw three times, the creature never 
willingly leaves the island and, if forcibly removed, does 
everything in its power to return. A dispel evil and good 
spell removes this effect from the creature. 

Swine Island. Visitors to this island risk being af- 
flicted by the Curse of the Swine. At the end of each long 
rest it takes on this island, a visitor must succeed on a 
DC 10 Wisdom saving throw or be affected by the poly- 
morph spell and transformed into a pig (use the boar 
stat block). The curse lasts until the visitor leaves the 
isle or until it is broken by a spell like remove curse. 

Timeless Island. When characters leave the island 
after spending at least 1 day there, they might find 
that time has passed differently for the outside world. 
Use the Feywild Time Warp table in chapter 2 of the 
Dungeon Master's Guide to determine how much time 
has passed. 

Wild Magic Island. Whenever a spell is cast on the is- 
land, the caster must roll on the Wild Magic Surge table 
from chapter 3 of the Player's Handbook. 


UNDERWATER ADVENTURES 


With vast triton realms hidden beneath the waves and 
legendary ruins drowned in the deep, endless potential 
for adventure lies under the sea. Characters interested 
in exploring the ocean’s depths might seek the means of 
surviving underwater—whether such takes the form of 
magic items or devices crafted by ingenious inventors. 
Alternatively, drowning might only be a concern of those 
who aren't favored by the gods, and heroes might find 
themselves welcomed into the deep by Thassa herself. 
The riches of the deep are also vast, with the peoples 

of the sea hoarding strange treasures and more ships 
resting on the ocean floor than sailing its surface. How- 
ever characters contend with the depths and whatever 
they might seek, consider using the possibilities on the 
Underwater Adventures table to launch a party's explo- 
rations into the deep. 


MYTH OF THE SiNKING OF OLANTIN 


In ancient days, Olantin was a wealthy coastal polis along the 
Siren Sea. Because it was the westernmost of the great poleis 
of old, it became associated with sunset, and therefore, with 
Heliod. A magnificent shrine to the sun god rose within the 
polis, and its priests, a group known as the Triarchy, grew 
wealthy and powerful. 

Details about what came next are unclear, but records tell 
of a veil of darkness that engulfed the coast. People believed 
that Heliod had abandoned them, and many fled the polis. In 
a panic, the Triarchy raised an enormous ball of light into the 
sky as a replacement sun. When the darkness cleared, Heliod 
saw the fake sun and grew furious. With his spear, he struck 
Olantin, shattering the city and casting its ruins into the 
depths of the sea. 


UNDERWATER ADVENTURES 


di2 Plot 

1 Seek aid or advice from the eldest member of an 
aquatic species—such as the first dolphin. 

2 Recover the treasure of a hero long ago devoured by 
a sea beast. 

3 Carry a coastal city's gifts and diplomatic messages 
to an underwater community. 

4 Calm a kraken attempting to break out of its sea lock 
(see chapter 6). 

5 Make a sacrifice at a triton temple devoted to Thassa 
or another god. 

6 X Transform into a sea creature and infiltrate an under- 
sea community. 

7 . Convince a hero who's fallen in love with a sea 
dweller to return home. 

8 Raise a sunken city back above the waves while avoid- 
ing whatever now makes the place its home. 

9  Seekinformation from an oracle who lives on a 
sunken island inside a giant bubble. 

10 Seala hole in the sea that's allowing denizens of the 
Underworld ward of Nerono to escape. 

11 Return a juvenile sea monster caught in a fisher's net 
to its home. 

12 Protect a priest of Thassa intent on journeying to the 
bottom of the sea. 


As THE PEOPLE OF OLANTIN DISCOVERED, AGES OF 
PROSPERITY ANO CULTURE MEAN NOTHING IN THE 


FACE OF A WRATHFUL SEA. 


179 


% 


180 


UNDERWORLD ADVENTURES 


All things eventually reach their end and pass into the 
Underworld. That doesn’t mean the heroes of Theros 
need to accept that fate and embrace eternity quietly, 
though. This section examines fates and features of 
the Underworld, including how the living and the dead 
might interact with this grim land and its inhabitants. 
Methods of escaping this supposedly final resting place 
of all mortal souls are also explored here, along with 
what adventures the Underworld holds for Theros’s 
bravest heroes. 


LIVING DESCENT 


Sometimes the answer to a riddle is lost beyond the 
inky waters of the Tartyx River. When spells and sages 
fail to recover some crucial bit of information, how far 
might heroes go to recover it? One answer is to dare an 
expedition into the Underworld to find what was lost. 
Entering the Underworld is arguably one of the easiest 
feats imaginable—everyone ends up there when they 
die. Entering while still alive, and in such a way as to be 
able to walk out again, is another matter entirely. 

Legends tell of places where the boundary between 
the mortal world and the Underworld is weak. These 
paths lie beyond lands controlled by the poleis and other 
civilized beings. Dark caves with tunnels leading down 
into darkness and rivers quietly lapping at fog-shrouded 
gravel shores give way to the Underworld’s borders. 
Though Athreos ferries the dead across the Tartyx, he’s 
not above accepting a one-way fare from those who still 
breathe. Even the other fearsome Underworld guard- 
ians that keep watch over the dead often allow the living 
to enter. Leaving the Underworld isn’t so simple, and 
once beyond the Tartyx River the living find themselves 
in the same predicament as the dead. Within the Under- 
world, characters who entered bodily are still fully alive. 
They age, suffer damage, heal naturally, and require air, 
food, drink, and sleep as normal. The Underworld isn’t 
conducive to mortal life, though, and between deadly 
creatures and dangerous otherworldly environments, 
the living might soon find themselves numbering among 
the dead. 

Characters can pursue all manner of goals to the Un- 
derworld. Many center on finding something that was 
lost with no other means available to recover it. Perhaps 
this means rescuing a dead soul when resurrection 
magic isn’t an option or retrieving a vital piece of infor- 
mation from someone who wasn't supposed to die. This 
might even mean pursuing the soul of a player charac- 
ter, particularly if they're somehow barred from being 
returned to life through usual magical means. In such 
a case, consider allowing the player to run a temporary 
character who assists the party in the rescue or to play 
their own character as a soul and let them rejoin the 
party to help effect their own escape. 

Regardless of why living characters might enter the 
Underworld, those who attempt the undertaking might 
seek to learn more about the realm of the dead, its vari- 
ous wards (see chapter 3), and where the object of their 
quest ended up. Oracles of any of the gods might aid in 
divining these details, but those likely to be the most 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


—————— ru 
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN You Die? 
When a soul arrives in the Underworld, it has all the mem- 
ories and skills it enjoyed in life. In all respects, it is iden- 
tical to its living self, including its game statistics. Though 
souls can enjoy the acts of eating, drinking, and sleeping, 
they don't require them. They feel hunger and thirst and 
might be tormented by deprivation, but they don't suffer 
the effects of exhaustion because of it. 

Every time a soul dies in the Underworld, it reanimates 
at the start of its next turn with 1 hit point per Hit Die it 
possesses, and it gains one level of exhaustion that can't 
be removed unless the soul returns to life, at which point 
all exhaustion gained in this way vanishes. With each level 
of permanent exhaustion, the soul becomes faded and 
dull, its eyes glazing over more and more until they are 
blank, staring pools. 

A soul that suffers level 6 exhaustion from the continued 
application of this effect petrifies into a statue called a 
misera, and it doesn't rise again. 

pU Wem 


precise—followers of Erebos—are also the least likely 

to be interested in aiding an Underworld escape. How 
characters turn such an oracle to their side and deter- 
mine the accuracy of the information they receive are all 
part of such a momentous quest. 

Once characters enter the Underworld and attain 
their goal, they still face their most daunting challenge: 
escape. Consult the following "Paths of Escape" section 
for ideas on how the living might ultimately make their 
way back out of the Underworld. 


DEATHLY INTERLUDES 


When a character dies, their adventures don't need to 
end. The Underworld presents an opportunity to provide 
a sense of closure for deceased characters—as adventur- 
ers’ ends tend to be quite sudden—or to give them a way 
to continue engaging in the quest while their compan- 
ions attempt to bring them back to life. 

These interludes can be played as brief scenes where 
the player of the dead character is in the spotlight and 
the rest of the group observes. Alternatively, the rest of 
the group could participate as NPCs or even monsters 
the dead character meets and interacts with. 


HERO’s EPILOGUE 

Most adventurers hope their lives come to an end with 
some worthy conclusion. Sometimes in the heat of bat- 
tle, though, that end can be abrupt and without real res- 
olution. An epilogue featuring a hero’s soul descending 
into the Underworld, crossing the Tartyx River, and be- 
ing guided—or dragged—to the ward which awaits them 
might create that satisfying conclusion. 

Consider memorable moments from the character’s 
story and how they can be reflected in the events of their 
final descent. Maybe they see the souls of friends, allies, 
or loved ones who perished, whether their fates are 
good or ill. Perhaps a villain the hero slew now exists 
as a broken misera, giving mute testament to the hero’s 
success. Characters who overcame their personal flaws 
might even be confronted with symbolic or direct exam- 
ples of their past failings and rebuke their old vices in a 
final, crystallizing act of growth. 


THE SOUL ABIDES 

When adventurers in higher tiers of play die, they can of- 
ten expect to be resurrected. In these cases, an interlude 
where the hero gets a glimpse of the afterlife awaiting 
them can be powerful. From a personal standpoint, this 
sort of interlude can serve to reinforce a character's 
choices and actions or offer a warning of what's to come 
if their priorities don't change. 

For characters who embrace heroic virtues and live 
as a beneficial force in the world, they might spend a 
few hours or days in the idyllic embrace of Ilysia. On the 
other hand, those who have stained their soul with dark 
acts might return to life after suffering what feels like 
years of torture in Tizerus's Mire of Punishment. 

In either case, the character might even gain some 
helpful insight into their current predicament or a por- 
tent of events to come. Maybe the soul of a long dead 
sage offers guidance or a legend the hero long idolized 
provides advice on how they defeated a similar threat. 
Silent contemplation while sailing on the Nerono 
oceans could give the character time to decipher part 
of a mystery. An Underworld demon might even say 
something that only one of the character's dead rivals 
could have known. Whatever a character learns during 
their temporary death, they can carry with them back 
into the mortal world. Such might make dying one of the 
most helpful things to happen in a character's greater 
heroic career. 


FUNERARY MASKS HELP THE NEWLY DEAD RESIST THE 
EROSION OF MEMORY AND IDENTITY IN THE UNDERWORLD. 


JOURNEY INTO DEATH 


Those who are prepared for death, or who receive fu- 
neral rites, typically have or are given a coin (or similar 
token of value) interred with their corpse. When these 
individuals’ souls reach the banks of the Tartyx River, 
they have with them the fare necessary to board Athre- 
os's skiff and pass on to the Underworld. 

Those who don’t have a coin with them when they 
die and aren't given funeral rites have no means to pay 
Athreos's toll and thus have no way of reaching their 
place of rest. These lost souls primarily collect along 
the Tartyx's shores where they languish or beg for coins 
to pay for their passage. Some wander away from the 
shore, though, becoming ghosts or other undead. Only 
if their body is granted funeral rites or if the living give 
them payment for Athreos can such souls find rest. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


181 


DENIZENS OF THE UNDERWORLD 


When a spirit reaches the Underworld, they find that 
they’re far from alone. The nature of the Underworld 
under Erebos's rule takes its toll on even the hearti- 

est souls. As time wears on, most of the dead feel the 
weight of ages and misery. Souls suffer injury and pain 
just as living creatures do, and even the dead can perish 
over time or after enduring multiple deaths. The result 
of these forms of spiritual weathering divides the dead 
into the following groups: 


Neoli are newcomers to the Underworld—vibrant spirits 
who remember their lives and, in many cases, are 
coming to terms with death. 

Glazers are vacant, misery-worn souls who have en- 
dured decades of existence in the Underworld. Most 
have spent far more time dead than they did alive and 
remember life as little more than a faded dream. 

Misera are souls permanently turned to stone after 
enduring numerous deaths in the Underworld. These 
corpses of the dead linger where they petrified until 
they crumble to dust. 


PATHS OF ESCAPE 


Despite the inexorable pull of Erebos's lash, even death 
itself can end—or at least be forestalled. Simply walking 
out the way one entered isn't an option—Athreos refuses 
to ferry souls back across the Tartyx. Other pathways 
that connect the Underworld and the living world are 
guarded by vicious creatures. Still, there are a few 
means by which a dead soul can return to life. 


RESURRECTION MAGIC 

By far the simplest means of return for a dead soul is for 
someone who yet lives to cast a raise dead, resurrection, 
or true resurrection spell. If a mortal is a frequent recip- 
ient of resurrection magic, Erebos might take a special 
interest in that soul. A soul in the clutches of Erebos 
himself isn't free, so it can't be returned to life by mor- 
tal magic. 


DEMON FLIGHT 

Creatures that fly across the Tartyx without Erebos’s 
permission find themselves attacked by flocks of vicious 
monsters. The demons of the Underworld make this 
flight with better success than most, though. By bargain- 
ing or force, a demon might be convinced to carry a soul 
on this lengthy, dangerous flight. Should a soul manage 
to survive the harrowing journey, it finds itself restored 
to life in the mortal world. 

Escaping Characters. To attempt this means of es- 
cape, a party must bargain with a demon or acquire 
another means of flight in the Underworld. Then they’d 
better be ready for the fight of their lives as demons, har- 
pies, and other deadly foes pursue them. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


WHaT HAPPENS WHEN A SOUL ESCAPES? 
If a soul meets all the challenges set before it and slips 
from Erebos's clutches, several things likely happen: 


The soul becomes a true, physical being. It is in a new 
version of its body, a physical manifestation of the soul's 
perception of itself (which may or may not be identical 
to its former body). 

The soul’s former body has no further connection to the 
soul; it is an inert, empty shell. Casting spells on the 
body that restore it to life simply have no effect. 

Any object carried out of the Underworld becomes a real, 
physical thing in the mortal world, with all the properties 
and features common to objects of its type. 


LATHOS 

Hidden in the bowels of Erebos's palace is the portal 
Lathos, which leads to the mortal world. Moreover, 
tales say that Lathos can restore a soul to life without 
any cost or loss of one’s identity and sense of self. This 
isn’t to say that Lathosis an easy path to walk, however. 
Erebos's most fearsome servants guard the portal. So 
far, no one has succeeded in escaping through Lathos, 
and the location of the portal’s exit in the mortal world 
is unknown. 

Escaping Characters. Escaping through Lathos is 
likely an appealing option as the portal exacts no price. 
The trick is reaching it. Perhaps the characters know 
some secret that Erebos covets and so might bargain for 
access. Alternatively, they might conduct an elaborate 
infiltration of Erebos’s palace. Such would be a chal- 
lenging endeavor but also a feat worthy of legend. 


PATH OF PHENAX 

The god Phenax, once a mortal who died and passed 
into the Underworld, was the first to discover a way to 
escape, forever known as the Path of Phenax. As part of 
his escape, he swam across the Tartyx, whose waters 
stripped away his identity. Without that vital part of his 
being, Phenax couldn’t be detected by Athreos, and Ere- 
bos couldn’t snare him with his great whip. 

Since Phenax’s escape, other souls have repeated his 
dangerous journey. When mortal souls travel the Path 
of Phenax, the Tartyx washes away their identities, 
symbolized by their faces, which become nothing more 
than blank flesh. Souls that successfully emerge on 
the mortal side of the Tartyx River become Returned, 
with no knowledge of their former name or past life. As 
this is a known consequence, most souls forge a gold 
mask to carry with them. This mask becomes the proxy 
identity worn by all Returned. Souls’ lost identities con- 
tinue to exist, though, becoming eidolons, which scatter 
throughout the mortal realm, having no connection to 
their Returned bodies. (See chapter 6 for more informa- 
tion about eidolons and the Returned.) 

Escaping Characters. Traveling the Path of Phenax 
can present an exciting but challenging option for most 
parties, as it results in affected characters becoming a 
monster of some type—either an eidolon or a Returned. 
If you’re comfortable with characters playing as mon- 
sters or retiring their characters at the end of the quest, 
this can be a rewarding arc to play through. You might 
also introduce some means to reunite a character’s 


ZACK STELLA 


eidolon with its Returned body and restore the character d20 Plot 
to at least some semblance of their former self. This 
should be a monumental undertaking, as it shakes the 
foundation of Theros's division of life and death. 

The exact details of Phenax's route are unclear, and 


5 Meet with your family's most legendary member in 
Ilysia and prove yourself worthy oftheir name. 
6 Steal a legendary, long-shattered treasure from its 


aside from forging masks and a final swim, any number resting place in llysia's Citadel of Destiny. 
of challenges among islands in the Tartyx might com- 7 Seek out a long-dead foe and learn how they're keep- 
prise the path. ing you from being magically resurrected. 

8 Discover a secret from an infamous member of your 
BEYOND DEATH family who became a typhon (see chapter 6). 
When a character dies, the Underworld serves as an op- 9 Save a god's favored worshiper from a cruel punish- 
portunity to allow a dead character to experience their ment in the Underworld—even though they've been 
own story while their companions (hopefully) try to get dead for hundreds of years. 
the body resurrected. Consider the possibilities on the 10  Severoneofthe massive chains of Tizerus, releasing 
Underworld Adventures table should a character find the ancient being it binds. 
themselves trying to escape the realm of the dead. 11 Lead an immortal anvilwrought to Erebos's palace 


and convince the god to let the construct die. 


UNDERWORLD ADVENTURES z à 
12 Discover why Erebos is no longer allowing certain 


d20 Plot i individuals to die. 

1 In Phylias, find and bargain for information with your 13 Coerce a night hag into granting a morbid prophecy 
least favorite dead acquaintance or family member. by stealing its eye. 

2 Smuggle the puppy of an Underworld cerberus (see ]4 Learn a secret way to escape the Underworld from 
chapter 6) into the mortal world. one of the titans. 

3 Find and free a lost hero from the Labyrinth of Mem- 15  Findthelost secretofa long-dead warlord that now 
ories on Nerono. rests with the villain's misera. 

4 Free a legendary lost ship and the souls aboard from 16 Discover from a woe strider (see chapter 6) how to 
the endless Nerono whirlpool they're trapped within. escape the bonds of destiny. 


17 Defeat a host of legendary villains in Agonas's Sta- 
dium of Dishonor. 


18 Prevent one of your ancestors from transforming into 
an eater of hope (see chapter 6). 

19 Travel to Erebos's palace and recover a secret from 
one who failed to bargain for their release. 

20 Seek out Klothys's domain and learn from her oracles 

how you're destined to escape the Underworld. 


3 THOSE WHO FOLLOW THE PATH or PHENAX 
MIGHT RETURN TO THE MORTAL WORLD, BUT 
THEY NEVER REGAIN THE LIVES THEY LOST. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 183 


184. 


No SILENT SECRET 


“No Silent Secret” is a short adventure for a party of 
four to six 1st-level characters, who will advance to at 
least 2nd level by the adventure’s conclusion. 

At the outset, choose which of Theros’s three major 
poleis—Akros, Meletis, or Setessa—you want to start 
near. Alternatively, you might allow the players to 
choose the polis based on their character backgrounds. 
While choosing a polis allows the group to get a glimpse 
of their potential “hometown,” this setting serves as a 
backdrop only briefly, with much of the adventure taking 
place far from the safety of civilization. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


STORY OVERVIEW 


When Phenax sent Varyas the Knowing a vision of the 
oracle’s impending death, the seer didn’t fear—he knew 
his work was just beginning. 

Like all the Returned who followed him, Phenax aban- 
doned his past identity during his flight from the Under- 
world. Through ages, the god managed to recover parts 
of his history, but much remained a mystery to him. 
Recently, though, he discovered a hint of a truth he'd 
never considered. He had to know more, but the secrets 
he sought lay only in the Underworld. Phenax wouldn't 
risk alerting Erebos to his interest, so he sent an agent— 
a soul willing to forsake life, discover his secret, and 
return with the knowledge that even the god couldn't 
escape with. 

Varyas met his end and dutifully sought Phenax's 
mystery in the Underworld. Though it took him years, 
the oracle discovered what he sought. Keeping the infor- 
mation secret and smuggling it out of the Underworld 
proved challenging, though. To guard what he'd learned, 
Varyas inscribed it in code upon a mask and, after multi- 
ple attempts, successfully followed the Path of Phenax. 

When he emerged back into the mortal world, Varyas 
the Returned remembered nothing of his past life, his 
escape from death, or the strange symbols etched on his 
mask. All he recognized of the writing scrawled on his 
mask was the name "Khea." 

With that, a mystery beyond life and death slipped 
from a lost past into the living realm of Theros. 


RUNNING THE ADVENTURE 


This adventure requires the fifth edition D&D rulebooks 
(Player's Handbook, Dungeon Master's Guide, and 
Monster Manual). You should read the entire adventure 
before attempting to run it. If you'd prefer to play, you 
shouldn't read any farther. 

LJ Ф 
Text that appears іп а box like this is meant to be read | 
aloud or paraphrased for the players when their charac- 
ters first arrive at a location or under a specific circum- 


stance, as described in the text. 


The Monster Manual contains statistics for many of the 
creatures found in this adventure. When a creature’s 
name appears in bold type, that’s a visual cue pointing 
you to the creature’s stat block in the Monster Manual. 
If the stat block appears elsewhere, the adventure's text 
tells you so. 


ADVENTURE SUMMARY 


The adventure begins with the characters discovering 
the recently murdered Returned, Varyas, and confront- 
ing his killers. Varyas's gold mask bears a code on it, 
one that points toward the sage Khea wholives in the 
nearby polis. When the characters investigate, they 
learn from Khea that the writing is undecipherable 
except for the first line, which refers to the legendary 
Court of Orestes, a site sacred to the god Phenax. She 
also notes that a recent earthquake has uncovered a 


cave along {һе Khystonos River that could be the secret 
site’s location. If so, then perhaps within lies the key to 
deciphering the mask, along with its own treasures. 

With the information provided by Khea, the adventur- 
ers set forth into the wilds, where they’ll face multiple 
storied dangers before reaching the Court of Orestes. 
Once at the lost holy site, the characters discover an- 
cient guardians, as well as an unliving entity with the 
potential to reveal Phenax’s lost secret. 


STARTING THE ADVENTURE 


Once the players are ready to begin, explain to them that 
their characters are among a group of travelers on the 
road headed into one of Theros's great poleis. They don't 
need to know each other before this scene, but it's fine if 
they do. Once the players are ready, read or paraphrase 
the following text: 

. ° 
The sun sinks low in the west, stretching shadows across 
the well-traveled road only a mile or so from the polis’s 
edge. At your current rate, you—along with a loose 
crowd of other travelers—should reach the polis out- 
skirts just before dark. 

Not everyone's moving at a leisurely pace, though. 

Behind you, a horse rounds a bend in the road, gallop- 
ing at top speed. The beast looks frantic, terrified and 
frothing with exertion. Upon it sways a figure wearing a 
gold mask. The rider barely manages to stay in the sad- 
dle, his body bristling with cruel black arrows. 

Blind with panic, the horse plows on, threatening to 
trample travelers in its path. Before it can, though, the | 
beast's legs give way. Both mount and rider topple, 
crashing into the dust with a piercing whinny and a 


sound like snapping branches. 


Give the characters a moment to react, encouraging the 
players to leap into action—in the first moments after an 
accident, time is of the essence! 

Anyone who rushes to the horse and succeeds on a 
DC 10 Wisdom (Animal Handling or Medicine) check 
can tell that the animal is exhausted and suffering from 
a multitude of minor abrasions. If it is given water, food, 
and rest, though, the horse—a red roan mare—will re- 
cover fully in a day. Simple tooling on the horse's bridle 
reveals the horse's name: Photina. 

Characters more interested in the rider find that he's 
dead. In fact, he's been dead for some time. The figure's 
skin is gray, and his wounds weep black blood. His 
mask is clearly a funerary mask, though it's cast of gold 
rather than clay. Characters who succeed on a DC 10 In- 
telligence check recognize the strange individual as one 
of the Returned, someone who has died and come back 
from the Underworld. A character who removes the 
victim's mask finds no face beneath it—only blank gray 
flesh over a black-lipped mouth—and dozens of lines 
of finely etched symbols covering its interior. Most are 
written in a strange cipher, but among the unreadable 
glyphs, the word "Khea" stands out prominently. 


Before the characters can investigate further, read the 
following text: 


LJ е 
| | 
The sound of racing hooves rises like rolling thunder | 
from the direction the fallen rider emerged. Two more 
riders round the bend, both wearing dark tunics. The fad- 


ing light glints upon the snarling gold masks both wear. 


The riders are both Returned sentries (see chapter 6) 
from the necropolis of Odunos. One wields a shortbow 
rather than a sling: 


Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 80/320 ft., 
one target. Hit: 5 (146 + 2) piercing damage. 


These assassins have dogged Varyas across the coun- 
tryside. They’ve been sent by an influential figure in 
Odunos who caught wind of Varyas’s agenda and who 
seeks to silence any who know Phenax’s secret. The or- 
acle managed to get away from them at a ferry crossing 
some distance back, but not before catching several ar- 
rows in the back. He remained astride his mount despite 
his wounds, but Varyas expired moments before his 
horse crashed in front of the characters. His pursuers 
don’t know that, though. 

These Returned resent all living people but espe- 
cially those aiding their target. They assume anyone 
investigating Varyas's body is assisting him and move 
to cut them down. Even if no one goes to Varyas's aid, 
the riders attack the mortals closest to the body, trying 
to ensure that no witnesses escape. "Get away from the 
heretic, bleeder," one Returned snarls as she strides into 
battle. Both ignore any mortals' explanations and fight 
to the death. Their horses bolt if their riders are slain. 

If the battle turns against the characters, a patrol of 
three guards from the polis stumbles upon the scene. 
The Returned attack them as well. In the aftermath, the 
guards are quick to rush the characters along, but they 
don't interfere if anyone searches the bodies. 


TREASURE ЖООРУ ай 


The Returned carry little beyond the gold funerary 
masks they wear (see chapter 6) and their equipment. In 
addition, one hasa pouch containing 20 sp and a broken 
piece of pottery. Any character who succeeds on a DC 14 
Intelligence (Arcana or Religion) check recognizes the 
shard as an ostraka, a shard from aclayfunerary mask, 
which is used as currency in the Underworld. On it is 
scratched a brief order from the assassins’ commander: 
“Silence the heretic Varyas. His secrets must remain 
dead.” This leader’s identity and agenda speak toward 

a larger threat beyond this adventure (see “Myths to Be 
Told” at the end of this adventure for a few possibilities). 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


185 


186 


Mask OF VARYAS 
(Евомт ANO Back) 


WHAT THE DEAD SEE 


In the wake of the battle with the Returned, the charac- 
ters have an opportunity to continue along their way. Be- 
fore they can, though, all of them witness an incredible 
sight: an omen from the god Phenax. 

For a moment, all sounds turn to whispers, and color 
drains from the world, turning everything shades of 
gray—everything except for the gleaming golden mask. 
Seconds later, things return to normal. Any character 
who succeeds on a DC 12 Intelligence (Religion) check 
recognizes it as a sign from Phenax, but its exact mean- 
ing is unclear. If anyone else is nearby and the charac- 
ters ask them about the omen, it’s clear no bystanders 
witnessed the vision. 

A character who scrutinizes the mask finds nothing 
supernatural about it, but it is plainly marked with the 
word “Khea” followed by line after line of cramped 
glyphs. If a character seeks out a library in the polis and 
spends a day trying to decrypt the text, they can make 
a DC 16 Intelligence check. On a successful check, the 
character deciphers the simplest part of the cipher: "Hid 
from eyes of mortals and gods/Lies wither in Orestes's 
rot." On a failure, they learn nothing. 

Beyond this, the text remains undecipherable, and the 
word “Khea” is also a mystery. If a character spends an 
hour inquiring in the polis about “Khea,” or succeeds on 
a DC 10 Intelligence (History) check (characters native 
to the nearby polis have advantage on this check), they 
determine that Khea is the name of a local sage of some 
renown. Once this factis ascertained, the way to Khea's 
ivy-covered home is easy to learn or recall. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


KHEA THE SAGE 


Khea (N female human oracle; see chapter 6) dwells 

in a nondescript cottage near the edge of the polis. Her 
home is small and cramped, crowded with drying laven- 
der and histories written in dozens of languages. Khea's 
a busy woman, and regardless of when the characters 
arrive, she initially refuses to see them until the next 
morning. If a character succeeds on a DC 16 Charisma 
(Persuasion) check, though, Khea admits them imme- 
diately. A character has advantage on this check if they 
mention that the sage's name is inscribed on the mask 
of a Returned. Khea's usual consultation fee is 3 gp, but 
she waives it once she becomes aware that she is some- 
how involved in this situation. 

Khea is a sharp-witted, hearty woman who never says 
what a brow furrow or eyebrow arch could convey. After 
admitting the characters, judging their manners, and 
pointedly telling rude individuals to wait outside, she 
asks to examine the mask. 


MEANING IN THEMASK 

After studying the mask for some time and consulting 
scrolls from her collection, Khea confirms that, other 
than her name, the text is an unusual code. Even if the 
characters have already deciphered the first lines of the 
cipher, Khea spends some time verifying it for herself. 
In short order, she translates the first stanza as: "Hid 
from eyes of mortals and gods/Lies wither in Orestes's 
rot." She says that this text is purposefully direct, being 
a line from a paean to Phenax. As for the rest, Khea re- 
veals that not only is it a cipher, but an incomplete one; 
letters have been removed from the message in some 
indiscernible pattern. Without knowing what the other 
letters are, the writing is impossible to decode—even 
with magic—since it isn't a meaningful message in its 
partial form. 


BURIED IN THE COURT OF ORESTES 
Although Khea can't tell the characters much more 
about the cipher, she recognizes the name Orestes. 
The line of verse, she says, could refer to the Court of 
Orestes, the legendary tomb of one of Phenax's earliest 
followers. Orestes was said to be a master thief and an 
oracle who foresaw who would become Returned. Ac- 
cording to myth, the site also holds “Phenax’s Silence,” 
though none know if the name is that of an actual object 
or merely a poetic flourish. The fact that this readable 
line begins the inscription leads Khea to surmise that 
the key to translating the full message lies in the tomb. 
The exact location of the Court of Orestes is lost 
to history, but ancient tales hint that it lies along the 
Khystonos River. This narrow river is about three 
days' travel away from any of the poleis. Normally such 
information would mean little, except that Khea has 
heard of an earthquake that dammed the headwaters 
of the Khystonos deep in the Katachton Mountains. As 
aresult, the river's flow has been reduced to a trickle 
for nearly a month, parching the region downstream. 
Although this event has deeply concerned farmers, the 
discovery of ancient etchings and ruined structures 
hidden beneath the waterline has roused many schol- 
ars' interest. 


SAGE ADVICE 

Beyond her suggestion about the Court of Orestes, Khea 
is a font of insights. If any of the characters mention the 
shared vision they experienced, Khea is certain that 
they witnessed a sign from Phenax, verification of the 
god’s ominous interest in this enigma. 

Khea can also identify the name Varyas as belonging 
to a dangerous, rabble-rousing oracle who was devoted 
to Phenax and who died mysteriously years ago. She 
has no idea if the Returned was actually him, but Varyas 
has caused trouble for her more than once—ever since 
she critically savaged his supposedly satirical comedy, 
The Satyr's Half-Horn. She wouldn't put it past the petty 
priest to harass her even in death. 

Khea can also answer most questions about the polis 
she lives in, the lands of Theros, the gods, the Under- 
world, and the Returned. If any characters balk at the 
idea of seeking out the Court of Orestes, Khea explains 
that the gods don't look kindly upon those who ignore 
their omens, and that Phenax is a particularly danger- 
ous enemy to make. If the threat of divine vengeance 
isn't enough to encourage them to continue, Khea offers 
the party 200 gp per character to collect rubbings and 
historic artifacts from the Court of Orestes. 

Once the party commits to undertaking the quest, 
Khea provides the characters with a map and directions 
to where ruins were discovered along the Khystonos. 


INTO THE WILDS 


After meeting with Khea, the characters have an oppor- 
tunity to explore the polis they're visiting and prepare 
however they please. During this time, they might learn 
much about the place. Relate to the players any informa- 
tion appropriate to the polis and its culture from chap- 
ter 3. Additionally, while they make preparations, the 
characters hear one of the tales from the Polis Rumors 
table. Each rumor is followed by a note on its accuracy. 
Those who actively seek information might hear an ad- 
ditional rumor. 


PoLis RUMORS 


d6 Rumor 

1 Purphoros’s wrath shook the mountains and 
dammed the Khystonos River. Now villagers down- 
stream suffer as their fields and herds lack the water 
they need to survive. (Partially true) 

2 The Akroans have invented a new device of war that 
can tear down the walls of the mightiest fortress. 
They tested it in the Katachthon Mountains and plan 
to use it against any who don’t pay tribute. (False) 

3  Aminotaur calling himself King Antigonos wanders 
the wilderness seeking a suitable heir. Anyone who 
can pass his test will become his successor. (True) 

4 If you drink from the legendary Pool of Lyth, the gods 
will grant your greatest wish. (False) 

5 Groups of gold-masked Returned from Odunos have 
been harassing travelers, demanding to know if any- 
one's seen a Returned wandering alone. (True) 

6 | Animmense hydra, Ocyroako, is drinking up the 
springs that feed the Khystonos River. (False) 


Khea's directions take roughly three days to follow from 
any of the three poleis, a journey of approximately 50 
miles—though, owing to Theros's changeable landscape, 
you may adjust this distance and place the Khystonos 
River in the Katachthons wherever you please (see 
"Exploring Theros" in chapter 3). Khea's route avoids 
obvious dangers, but necessarily runs through untamed 
lands. If you want to highlight features of Theros, feel 
free toinclude any additional encounters you please. In 
any event, the two following encounters occur along the 
way—probably on the first and second days of the trip. 
The journey should also provide the characters with 
ample time to getto know one another. Encourage each 
player to share why their character is remarkable or is 
destined for greatness. If the group comes to believe 
that fate has brought a band of extraordinary individuals 
together, feel free to encourage that thinking with signs 
or omens like those from earlier in the chapter. 


THE WATERS OF LYTH 


Eventually, the party crosses a vale not noted on Khea's 
map. Read or paraphrase the following description: 


A shallow valley lies amid the rise and fall of the Katach- 
thon foothills. At the dell's far edge stands a great rock 
outcropping that looks vaguely like a satyr's face. The 
stones weep a steady flow of water, which spreads into 
a serene, sky-blue pond. Willows grow along the waters' 


shore, gently swaying in a light breeze. 


Upon seeing this tranquil scene, each character should 
make a DC 15 Intelligence (History) check. Those who 
succeed recognize this as the storied Pool of Lyth. Tales 
tell that the pool's sweet blue waters grant visions of the 
drinker's deepest desires and sometimes even fulfill 
those desires. 


Poor or LvrH 

There's truth to the tales of the pool's remarkable quali- 
ties. Those properties don't extend from some oracular 
magic, though, but from one of the god Pharika's poi- 
sons, which seep from the surrounding rocks and taint 
the pool. Any creature that drinks from the pool must 
succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or gain 
two levels of exhaustion for 1d4 hours as it is overcome 
with drowsiness and mild hallucinations. 

The pool is no more than 10 feet deep at its center and 
only 1 or 2feet deep near the edges. Anyone who suc- 
ceeds on a DC 16 Wisdom (Perception) check or tries 
to look beneath the pool's surface notices animal and 
humanoid bones barely covered by the water. 


OUTCROPPING CAVES 

Three natural caves open near the top ofthe 30-foot- 
high rock formation at the far end of the pool. These 
crevices might be noticed by anyone who succeeds on a 
DC 12 Wisdom (Perception) check and can be reached 
by climbing with a successful DC 12 Strength (Athlet- 
ics) check. These caves serve as the lairs of the harpies 
that use the pool as their killing ground. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


al 


187 


188 


DUBIOUS ORACLES 

Three blood-toll harpies (see chapter 6), sisters named 
Ahkno, Hakno, and Jhamp, lurk in the caves near the 
pool. The mangy, dull-witted sisters think they’re seers, 
but they're actually just addicted to the pool's tainted wa- 
ters. They use the poisoned pool to attract and weaken 
creatures before setting upon their prey. 

The harpies notice anyone who approaches the pool. 
Under the pretense of being dream interpreters, the har- 
pies call out and flap close to visitors, encouraging them 
to drink from the supposedly magical pool so the sisters 
can interpret their visions. One of the harpies, Jhamp, 
is a particularly bad liar, snickering and casting obvious 
glances while her sisters attempt to dupe strangers. 

If someone drinks from the pool, they are affected as 
previously described but might still ask the harpies to in- 
terpret their meaningless hallucinations. If they do, one 
of the sisters relates her own deepest desires, describ- 
ing in detail the flavor profile and mouthfeel of eating 
one of the drinker's favorite organs. 

The harpies attack after most of the visitors have 
drunk from the pool—or earlier if these fraudulent seers 
grow frustrated. 


TREASURE 

Over their years of minding the pool, the harpies have 
accumulated treasures in their caves. After the har- 
pies are defeated, any character who climbs up to the 
caves and investigates finds a considerable amount of 
feather-encrusted filth, along with the following items: 


* А total of 39 sp 

* Seven turquoise stones carved with the symbols of 
random deities (25 gp each) 

* A potion of climbing 

* А spell scroll of sleep 


BROKEN KING ANTIGONOS 


While the characters cross the wilderness ofthe Katach- 
thon foothills, the following encounter takes place. Read 
or paraphrase this description: 


e е 
А scree-choked gully runs between rugged hills, a dry 
streambed that offers a route through the rising rocks. 

A bend in the steep bluffs hides what lies ahead, but the 


sound of hacking coughs comes from around this corner. 


Just around the corner, some 30 feet from the lead party 
member, rests the minotaur known as Broken King 
Antigonos. He is old and decrepit, garbed in ancient 
finery worn to tatters. A dented crown rests on his brow, 
and one of his horns ends in ajagged stump. He drags 
a rusty greataxe in the dirt, and tied to his back is a 
30-pound, clay amphora painted with images of warring 
hoplites—all of whom have had horns crudely painted 
on them to make them look like minotaurs. The broad- 
mouthed amphora is large enough to hold roughly 55 
gallons of wine. 

When Antigonos spies the characters, he hails them, 
introduces himself, and explains his quest to find an 
heir to his kingdom—a land he says is a week's travel 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


to the east of the Oraniad Mountains. He claims that 

he was a great king who was cursed by Mogis after he 
defied his war advisors by making his sickly but beloved 
child his heir. He was cast out and has since become 
tragically obsessed with finding a worthy heir. 

Whether Antigonos's tale is true, or if he is simply a 
victim of his own fantasies, is unclear. The threat the 
wanderer poses, though, certainly isn't. After telling his 
story, he asks the strongest-looking Medium character 
to submit to his test, believing the gods placed the group 
in his path for a purpose. 


TEST OF THE AMPHORA 

Antigonos believes that the true heir of his kingdom will 
fit perfectly in the enormous amphora he carries, an an- 
cient relic he found deep in the Oraniad Mountains. The 
container is of sufficient size to hold a Medium creature, 
but only one that fits perfectly is acceptable for the pur- 
pose of the test. Antigonos judges what defines a perfect 
fit, holding test-takers to inscrutable standards. The 
minotaur also doesn't reveal that anyone who doesn't fit 
the amphora must be punished, being trimmed to size 
if they're too large or having their extra space filled in if 
they're too small. Only someone who fits perfectly might 
be deemed the king's rightful heir. 

Antigonos allows any Medium creature to attempt the 
test. Doing so requires the creature to climb into the am- 
phora while Antigonos holds it upright. After someone 
has entered the amphora, roll a d20 and consult the Test 
of the Amphora table to determine the results. 


ТЕ$Т ОЕ ТНЕ АМРНОВА 


420 Result 

1-9 The character is too small. Antigonos tries to solve 
this problem by scooping several pounds of dirt into 
the amphora, requiring the creature to make a DC 15 
Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the crea- 
ture is blinded, restrained, and begins to suffocate 
(see chapter 8 of the Player's Handbook). On a suc- 
cess, it is affected as if it had been hit by Antigonos's 
Amphora attack. 

10-19 The creature is too large. Antigonos tries to trim 
them down to size by attacking the creature with his 
greataxe. 

20 The creature fits! Antigonos declares it his heir. He 
bestows his crown, robes, and belt pouch on the 
creature, then bows before wandering off. 


If no one participates in Antigonos's test, the minotaur 
respects their decision and wanders off dejectedly. 


CONTENDING WITH ANTIGONOS 

Broken King Antigonos is a minotaur with 38 hit points 
remaining and who has disadvantage on attack rolls 
due to his decrepit state. He has the following addi- 
tional action: 


Amphora. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one Me- 
dium or smaller creature. Hit: 8 (148 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 
If there is not already a creature inside the amphora, the target 
is restrained inside. As an action, the restrained creature can 
make a DC 14 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check, escaping from the 
amphora on a success. The effect also ends if the amphora is 
destroyed. The amphora has AC 8, 20 hit points, and immunity 
to poison and psychic damage. 


In addition to taking action against those who don't fit 
inside his amphora, Antigonos attacks any characters 
who insult him or try to rob him. Despite his age, he 
can still muster a flash of his past prowess. He gets dis- 
tracted easily, though, using his greataxe and amphora 
(if it is empty) on random targets. If the party attacks 
him for attempting to harm a character, he curses them 
for trying to impede the will of the gods and retaliates. 
If the party doesn't attack the minotaur, he calms 
down after a few rounds. The minotaur is clearly a vic- 
tim of Mogis's cruelty. Any character who proposes Anti- 
gonos follow their deity instead of remaining in Mogis's 
shadow, or suggests a similar course, can make a DC 14 
Charisma (Persuasion) check. If they succeed, Antigo- 
nos abandons his amphora, then goes off to learn more 
about his potential new god. Even if the character fails 
this check, the minotaur turns thoughtful and departs. 
However the party contends with Antigonos, grant 
them experience for having overcome the minotaur. 


TREASURE 

In addition to his battered pewter and silver crown 
(worth 85 gp), amphora (worth 25 gp to the right buyer, 
such as a vintner), and tattered robes (worthless), Anti- 
gonos carries a backpack worn at his belt like a pouch. 
It holds 16 cp, a large carnelian (worth 75 gp), and an 
etching of a bookish-looking minotaur youth. 


THE COURT OF ORESTES 


On the third day of following Khea’s directions, the 
party reaches the Khystonos. Its riverbed is nearly dry, 
the river reduced to a muddy trickle. After following 
the lethargic flow for the better part of a day, the adven- 
turers reach a bend where several prominent rocks jut 
from the mud. These stones mark the entrance to the 
Court of Orestes. 


COURT OF ORESTES FEATURES 


Beyond the entrance along the Khystonos River, the 
Court of Orestes is a crumbling, centuries-old tomb. 
Inside, its walls are made of thick stone blocks, and the 
ceiling is about 10 feet high. Unless otherwise noted, the 
crypt's doors have no hinges; each is a rectangular slab 
that requires a successful DC 12 Strength (Athletics) 
check to shimmy out of place. 

When the Khystonos is at its full height, the Court 
of Orestes is underwater. Since the river's damming, 
though, much of the water has emptied through vari- 
ous cracks in the stonework. Some of the tomb is still 
partially flooded, though, holding roughly 2 feet of river 
water. Flooded areas are marked on map 4.16 and count 
as difficult terrain. 


COURT OF ORESTES LOCATIONS 


The area around the Court of Orestes and its interior 
locations are identified on map 4.16. 


1. KHYSTONOS RIVERBANK 

When the party approaches this area from the south for 
the first time, assuming sufficient illumination, they can 
see the tomb entrance from at least 60 feet away. When 
the structure comes within sight, read the following text: 


е е 
A shallow stream fills only а fraction of the riverbed. At 
a bend, an unnatural arrangement of mud-caked stones 
juts from the exposed riverbank. It appears to be a crude 
stone lintel and posts supporting a rectangular slab 
roughly four feet wide and six feet high. 


The water here is roughly 30 feet wide and 2 feet deep. 
Though the river can be easily forded, the shallow wa- 
ters count as difficult terrain. 

Amid the muck and gravel on the northern bank hides 
a deadly predator, an amphisbaena (see chapter 6). The 
serpent has concealed itself as it watches for prey, the 
mud covering its body granting it advantage on Dex- 
terity (Stealth) checks made to hide. The amphisbaena 
targets the first creature to approach the stone slab. 

Once the serpent is dealt with, anyone who examines 
the rock formation quickly realizes it’s a door. Opening 
or otherwise investigating the door knocks free the dirt 
encrusting it, revealing an ancient etching of a phoenix 
wearing a mask rising from a pile of bones. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


189 


190 


Map 4.16: Court or Orestes 


2. ANTECHAMBER 


The scent of warm, humid rot smothers this dismal 
chamber. Mosaics cover the walls, their colors faded and 
images scrambled by lost tiles. A thick layer of mud cov- 
ers the floor, as well as stairs that descend to the east. A 
stone slab blocks the way to the north. 


The mosaics here once depicted the feats of Orestes, a 
scoundrel-hero who devoted his life to Phenax. Among 
the images, Orestes is portrayed stealing the sun from 
above the polis of Setessa, tricking a cerberus into de- 
vouring itself, stealing a kraken's heart, and racing a 
skiff ahead of the River Guide, Athreos. All the mosaics 
are ruined now, but they can be repaired enough to re- 
veal the gist of what they depicted if a creature spends 
an hour searching through the mud to find the missing 
pieces. Doing so provides no special insight but reveals 
a few details of the life of the legendary character who 
lies interred within these halls. 

If a worshiper of Phenax enters the room, though, that 
creature sees the mosaics in their complete, original 
forms—resplendent in gold and shades of royal purple. 
If that creature touches any of the images, it hears the 
name "Orestes" whispered in its mind. Then the illusion 
vanishes, revealing the mosaics' actual state. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


3. VIEWING ROOM 


Grave niches and alcoves holding funerary urns line the 

walls of this chamber. The ceiling in the northern part of 
the room has collapsed, burying much of the area. At its 
center, a broken marble bier stands atop a short dais. 


This room once served asa place to view the remains 
of those who died in Phenax’s service and offer final 
prayers. The bodies this room once held have rotted 
away in their burial niches, and the urns hold only gray 
muck. Any character who sifts through the goo must 
succeed on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw for each 
niche or urn they search or contract sewer plague (see 
chapter 8 of the Dungeon Master's Guide). 

Treasure. Amid the rotted remains on each of the six 
stacked burial niches lie small bits of jewelry, gold teeth, 
or ancient coins, with each haul worth 2d4 gp. 


4. FLOODED CATACOMB 


The stairs descend into a burial chamber partially 
flooded with muddy water. Ancient stone walls divide 
these catacombs, many lined with grave niches holding 
roughly humanoid shapes wrapped in tattered linen. 
More than one ofthese grim parcels floats freely in the 


stagnant water. 


DYSON LOGOS [L), DANIEL LJUNGGREN (R) 


These catacombs serve as the burial place of lesser Phe- 
nax worshipers who earned the honor of being interred 
near Orestes. Two feet of water fill the room, making the 
entire area difficult terrain. i 

Most of the bodies interred here have rotted away, 
only their wood-and-linen burial dressings holding 
their shapes. If the characters move through the water, 
their effort causes a few floating bodies to drift through 
the muck, bumping into walls and passersby. They are 
harmless but unsettling nonetheless. 

In addition to the bodies, three Returned sentries 
(see chapter 6) lurk here. These Returned are tritons 
and, in addition to the statistics of a normal Returned 
sentry, each can breathe water and has a swim speed 
of 30 feet. Decades ago, anticipating Varyas’s mission, 
Phenax sent these Returned a vision instructing them to 
locate the tomb and guard it. The sentries infiltrated the 
crypt while it was submerged and waited here, drifting 
in a torpor. Expecting Varyas, the sentries attempt to 
ambush any non-Returned who enter the catacombs. 
These Returned are fanatics and fight to the death. 

The stone slab on the east wall can be moved aside to 
allow access to area 5, but any check to do so is made 
with disadvantage because of the room’s standing water. 

Age and water compromised the slab door leading to 
area 6, which now stands askew. 

Treasure. Each of the Returned sentries wears a 
piscine, gold funerary mask (see chapter 6). The bodies 
here bear no grave goods and deteriorate if disturbed. 


5. CRYPTS OF THE DEATHLESS 


. LJ 
Stairs ascend to a hall lined with door frames barred by 
rusted grates. An iron brazier, its sides sculpted with 
furious-looking faces, stands in the middle of the hall, 
midway along its length. Not far beyond, the ceiling has 


collapsed, burying whatever lies there. 


These crypts hold the bodies of Phenax worshipers who 
were expected to return from the afterlife. None did. 

Brazier. The brazier that once lit this hall is sculpted 
with faces reminiscent of the masks the Returned wear. 
Any character who examines the brazier and succeeds 
on a DC 12 Intelligence (Investigation) check notices 
that one of the faces is smiling, and that it's looking 
south toward crypt D. 

Crypts. There are five largely intact crypts here, four 
of which are sealed by rusty metal grates. The grate of 
each crypt can be wrenched free or otherwise bypassed 
with a successful DC 14 Strength (Athletics) check. 
Beyond, each crypt holds a stone sarcophagus engraved 
with a name and depictions of the occupant's most in- 
famous feats. The lid of a sarcophagus can be opened 
with a successful DC 12 Strength (Athletics) check— 
though the partially buried sarcophagi in crypts C and E 
need to be dug out before they can be opened, taking 10 
minutes for each one. 

The crypts contain the remains of the following 
ne'er-do-wells: 


Crypt A holds Yerda Ever-Coin, who paid her debts with 
stolen stars. 

Crypt B holds "Cyclops" Phelnidus, beloved by numer- 
als and friend of dice. 

Crypt C holds Solt, who was born Returned. 

Crypt D holds Gathus Gadus, who could whisper any- 
one and anything to sleep. 

Crypt E is empty. The name on the sarcophagus is vio- 
lently scratched out, and the engraved images are of 
robed figures lamenting the loss of their eyes. 


Secret Door. In the back wall of crypt D is a slightly 
askew secret door. Any character who looks into crypt 
D and succeeds on a DC 14 Wisdom (Perception) check 
notices the secret door. Those who enter the crypt im- 
mediately notice what looks like a crooked wall. The 
secret door opens easily. 

Treasure. Aside from the drenched skeletons within, 
crypts А and D each hold only a mundane clay burial 
mask. The skeleton in crypt B wears an eyepatch that 
is actually a two-birds sling (see chapter 5). Crypt C 
contains a small body wearing a sorrowful silver burial 
mask worth 50 gp. 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


192 


6. SHRINE OF PHENAX 


Much of the ceiling in the southwestern part of this ` 
chamber has collapsed into the rot-tinged water partially 
filling this room. In alcoves flanking the door to the north 
stand twin life-sized statues of a figure wearing a burial 


mask. Both reach out, as ifto accept or offer a gift. 


Much of this shrine has been destroyed, its altar and 
most of its trappings ruined by earth and time. The two 
statues depict the god Phenax; the depictions are slight- 
ly disturbing but harmless. The 2-foot-deep standing 
water here makes the entire room difficult terrain. 

Obscured by water and debris, a mosaic covers the 
floor between the statues. Only a great effort would 
reveal the ancient artwork. Any Phenax worshiper who 
enters the room, however, sees the mosaic clearly, its 
tiles depicting coins falling from a crumbling skull. 

Secret Door. The east wall bears a secret door. Any 
character who succeeds on a DC 18 Wisdom (Percep- 
tion) check notices a movable wall panel. 


7. TOMB OF ORESTES 


This chamber’s ancient masonry rises to form a corbelled 
dome. At the room's center lies a pool of sludge. A broad 
sarcophagus rises from the pool, its lid caked in crum- 
bling candle wax and rotted offerings. Whatever rites 
were performed here were overseen by a larger-than-life 
statue in the alcove to the south, a sculpture depicting: 
the upper body of a grim, masked man. The statue . 
reaches out, as if to accept what it has been offered. 

To the east, a portion of the tomb's wall has collapsed, 


exposing a deep crevasse in the rock. 


This chamber serves as the resting place of the 
oracle-thief Orestes. According to legend, Orestes could 
divine how long someone would live by reading a pool of 
the person's blood. Those who, in his vision, bled black 
were destined to one day follow the Path of Phenax, 
coming back from death as Returned. After Orestes's 
death, his tomb was consecrated as a holy site by Phe- 
nax's followers, in part due to Orestes's sarcophagus 
taking on the oracle's powers of prophecy. 

The room's domed ceiling rises 20 feet. The area 
around Orestes's sarcophagus is difficult terrain, not be- 
cause of the shallow, murky water there, but because of 
the hundreds of stray bones that lie beneath the water— 
the remains of animals sacrificed to Phenax. 

More than the dead dwell in Orestes's tomb, though. 

Lampads. Two unsettlingly attractive lampads (see 
chapter 6) named Antiophes and Callisos recently hap- 
pened upon Orestes's tomb, gaining access through the 
collapsed eastern wall. They discovered the magical 
sarcophagus here and hoped to use it in service to 
the god Athreos, helping to predict which souls would 
eventually try to escape the Underworld and reenter 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


the living realm as Returned. Soon after they arrived, 
though, Varyas's eidolon entered the tomb. Antiophes 
and Callisos hope to capture the errant soul and deliver 
it to Athreos, but the spirit has avoided them so far. 

When the characters arrive, only Antiophes is in the 
room. The whisper-voiced lampad tries to enlist them 
in opening Orestes's sarcophagus, where the eidolon 
is hiding. Those who refuse, or who want to use the 
eidolon for their own ends, earn Antiophes's wrath. The 
lampadattacks, using his Corpse Stride ability to tele- 
port between locations in the tomb— particularly areas 
4, 5, 7, and 8. If seriously wounded, Antiophes teleports 
to area 8 and tells his overprotective partner, Callisos, 
what has happened. Both of the lampads then return to 
try to drive the characters off. 

Eidolon. Varyas's flitterstep eidolon (see chapter 6) 
dwells in this room. It doesn't know why, but it was at- 
tracted to the tomb after returning from death. It doesn't 
know how much time has passed since then, but even- 
tually it encountered the menacing lampad Antiophes, 
who threatened to deliver the eidolon to Athreos. To 
escape the lampad, the eidolon hid inside Orestes's sar- 
cophagus, where it has lurked ever since. 

Sarcophagus. The sarcophagus holds the skeleton of 
Orestes, a few grave goods, and Varyas's cowering eido- 
lon. Additionally, it possesses two magical properties. 

First, the sarcophagus is blessed by Phenax with a 
ward against defilement. The lid is supernaturally heavy, 
requiring a successful DC 20 Strength (Athletics) check 
to dislodge. Any creature who worships Phenax, though, 
or who wears a funerary mask, finds the lid to be far 
lighter, gaining a *10 bonus on this check. 

Additionally, reliefs on the sarcophagus depict Phe- 
nax worshipers and Returned, as well as a prominent 
image of blood dripping onto scales bearing a Returned 
mask. Images of pale drops hover over a skeleton, while 
black drops loom over a Returned. Any character who 
succeeds at a DC 15 Intelligence (Religion) check learns 
that the sarcophagus itself bears a measure of Orestes's 
oracular gifts. If blood is spilled on the lid, it turns black 
if the blood's owner is destined to become a Returned. 
Most of the time, spilled blood doesn't change color. 

If a character drips their blood upon the sarcophagus 
lid, though, you can decide if their blood turns black or 
not—choosing if you want the character's story to go in 
that direction (and you think the character's player will 
accept it), or rolling a 410 and having it turn black on a 
1. The ramifications of this revelation are up to you. 

Development. If the characters open Orestes's sar- 
cophagus, they find Varyas's eidolon inside. The eidolon 
is a cowardly creature that tries to flee if attacked. Even 
through its flickering form, though, its general shape 
suggests the form and mask of Varyas the Returned. 
Any character who succeeds on a DC 14 Intelligence 
(Investigation) check recognizes the spirit as Varyas's 
eidolon, and realizes it might be Phenax's Silence. If 
the characters protect the eidolon or use it for their own 
ends, Antiophes treats this as an affront and attacks. 

After any resulting battle with the lampads, the party 
can converse with Varyas's eidolon, who lethargically 
agrees to leave with them and help decipher the mes- 
sage on Varyas's mask (see "Deciphering the Mask"). 


Treasure. Aside from Orestes's ancient bones, the 
sarcophagus holds gold burial jewelry: an amulet (worth 
65 gp), a cloak clasp (worth 35 gp), and a broad arm- 
band bearing green tourmalines etched to look like ser- 
pentine eyes (worth 150 gp). Additionally, Orestes’s clay 
burial mask is sculpted with a look of wide-eyed shock. 
The mask functions as slippers of spider climbing. 


8. CAVE AND TUNNEL 


On the crumbling eastern wall of the tomb is a rough- 
edged hole that leads to an uneven cavity in the earth. 
Two ancient urns and beds of crushed bones lie inside. 


To the south, a narrow tunnel stretches into darkness. 


Antiophes and Callisos use this cave as their dwelling, 
heaping bones here to suit their tastes. Callisos spends 
much time here, etching grimly poetic prayers to Ath- 
reos on the walls with ink and bone chisels. If called to 
battle by Antiophes, or if audible conflict continues in 
area 7 for more than 3 rounds, Callisos enters the fray. 

The tunnel here leads to a cave system that, after 
days of travel, eventually winds through the lair of the 
wolf-toothed night hag, Stolsluko, then to the shores of 
the Tartyx River. Details of these endless chambers are 
beyond the scope of this adventure. 

Treasure. There are two 2-foot-tall lekythoi (jugs used 
in some burial rites) in this room. One holds muddy 
ashes that Callisos employs as ink. The other contains 
a quantity of amber liquid amounting to three potions of 
healing—sacrifices to Phenax pilfered from the nearby 
tomb. The potions can be collected in empty containers 
the characters might have with them, or the full urn 
(weighing 15 pounds) can be taken. 


DECIPHERING THE MASK 


Characters curious about the nature of Phenax’s Silence 
find no grand prize in the Court of Orestes. Rather than 
great wealth, the seer Orestes vaguely predicted the 
events that would transpire here. As a result, his proph- 
ecy and the resulting legend of Phenax’s Silence fore- 
shadowed the memories the god lost when returning 
from the Underworld and the first step to giving those 
memories voice once more: Varyas's eidolon. 

With the aid of both the eidolon and Varyas's mask, a 
character can start the process of revealing the message 
written on the mask. While Varyas's eidolon doesn't 
remember the message's contents, it retains the ability 
to interpret the cipher—though, possibly in piecemeal 
or half-accurate terms. Deciphering the mask is an 
elaborate process, and keeping the eidolon on task is a 
time-consuming endeavor, requiring that a character 
spend an hour and succeed on a DC 14 Charisma (In- 
timidation or Persuasion) check. On a failed check, the 
eidolon rambles, sharing disjointed half-memories and 
dreamy opinions about its surroundings. On a success, 
the eidolon reveals a snippet of the cipher's meaning. 

What the eidolon reveals is a worthy secret ... and one 
left to you to choose, depending on the story you want to 


tell. Consult the Secrets of Phenax table, which presents 
several options for what divine secret Varyas's eidolon 
might relate. The veracity of this secret is up to you to 
decide, and learning more about it might color future 
adventures of your own design. 


SECRETS OF PHENAX 


d6 Result 

1 Asa mortal, Phenax was destined to free the Titans 
from the Underworld. Mortals killed him to save 
themselves. The gods let him escape the Underworld 
to save themselves. What will Phenax do if he learns 
of his true destiny? 

2  Asecretdeity languishes on an island just beyond 
where the Tartyx cascades off the world's edge. There 
stands a dilapidated palace where Phenax hid for a 
time during his escape from the Underworld. The pal- 
ace's ruler is nothing less than Phenax's eidolon. 

3 Phenax has triplet offspring, three souls that the god 
of deception abandoned in the Underworld. Erebos 
hides these souls, valuing them as hostages—if Phe- 
nax ever remembers that they exist. 

4 Phenax’s bloodline continues. The god’s many-times- 
over grandchildren live as master thieves and number 
among the few souls who might be able to steal Phe- 
nax's place among the gods for their own. 

5  Thesecretto Phenax's immortality lies in the Under- 
world and is accessible only by those who have died, 
come back, and journeyed to the Underworld once 
more. By discovering this secret, any Returned could 
become a god. 

6 Phenax is dying, his immortality flawed. Over the 
ages, he has manipulated destiny and his own blood- 
line to bring about the existence of a being that has 
the potential to reinvigorate him for another epoch: 
one of the characters. 


More of the eidolon's secrets might be coaxed forth, 

but doing that requires patient conversations, greater 
insights into Varyas's schemes, or intervention from 
Phenax's other servants (or even the god himself), all of 
which might be the goals of future adventures. 


MYTHS TO ВЕ TOLD 


If the party has uncovered the secret of Varyas’s mask 
and the mysteries being smuggled out of the Under- 

world, consider whether each character has earned an 
increase to their piety score (see chapter 2). Where the 
story goes next is up to you. To guide the characters to 
their next adventure, consider the following questions: 


* If Varyas was enlisted by Phenax to discover his se- 
crets, what else might the god have told the sage? 

* What other secrets might Varyas's eidolon know? Per- 
haps an oracle, like Khea, could coax forth more? 

* Someone in league with the Returned had Varyas 
killed. Who could it be—agents of Odunos, followers of 
Erebos, or perhaps Tymaret the Murder King himself? 
And what might their intentions toward the party be? 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING THEROS ADVENTURES 


A 1тнім ба de А SHOP, THE TŘITONÍŠENIUS DALAKOS EQUIPS А SATYR. 
aT. WITH THE TO 5т О BECOME LEGENDS. Р 

pa EM Ж 

JM 

jae | * Pits æ 


TREASURES 


HE SUN GOD REACHED OUT AND PUT HIS 
| hand upon Kytheon' shoulder. “You proved 
ET your worth as a warrior in the attack on your 
A polis, but it is time to prove yourself worthy 
to be my champion." He reached up to the sunlit sky, and 
the light coalesced around his fist. It elongated and took the 
shape of a spear that resembled the god's own weapon. 
“With this spear, destroy the titan. This is what I task you 
with. This is your ordeal." 
Kytheon gaped, both at the spear and at the task the god 
had set before him. 
—Ari Levitch, “Gideon: Kytheon Iora of Akros’ 


On Theros, magic items carry reputations as rich and 
storied as those who wield them. They might take form 
in the god-realm of Nyx, spring from Purphoros's forge 
in Mount Velus, or come from legendary mortal smiths. 
Some crafters create great works to put an end to a 
specific peril, while others create to honor the gods. 
The most renowned works are the weapons of the gods 
themselves, treasures synonymous with divine power 
that forge legends with their every use. 


MAGIC ITEMS 


The following sections explore some of the magic items 
that heroes might encounter during their adventures 
across Theros. These treasures might serve as rewards 
for heroic deeds, or they could spur the gods' champions 
toward great acts. All the gods have access to mighty 
troves of storied items, which they have few qualms 
about granting to their favored servants—or reclaiming 
when their usefulness is over. 


GIFTS OF THE GODS 


Just as the heroes of Theros carry great destinies, so 
too do many of the magic items they encounter. The 
common folk don't typically possess magic items, yet 
adventurers come across them with some regularity— 
further evidencing the divine favor most enjoy. Nearly 
every magic item was created with a purpose and often 
carries with it a role in some greater story, whether an 
epic long ended or one yet untold. 

As DM, feel free to make ordinary magic items feel 
like they have significant history and purpose. Even 


а +1 spear might have been carried by a company of 
hoplite veterans that went missing during their quest 
to reach the edge of the world. Wands might be crafted 
from legendary sources, while potions might bear 

the seals of famed alchemists or include signature 
reagents—like a pegasus feather in a potion of flying. 
The Remarkable Origins table offers just a few ways to 
suggest a magic item's remarkable pedigree without al- 
tering its magical properties. 

Certain treasures might also be the objects of heroic 
quests. For example, one might not be considered a true 
hero until one follows in the footsteps of past legends 
and either makes or claims one's own magical garment 
from the wool of a Nyx-fleece ram (see chapter 6). You 
can also use the tables in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Mas- 
ter's Guide to help further inspire the story you create 
for a magic item. 


REMARKABLE ORIGINS 


d12 Origin 
1 The item bears the name or emblem of a lost troop 
of Akroan stratians (described in chapter 3). 
2 Тһейет is etched with a name or prayer written in 
Celestial (the language ofthe gods). 
3 Тһе item looks like it's been at the bottom of the sea 
for a hundred years but functions perfectly. 
4 The item is wrapped in handwritten scrolls, suggest- 
ing it was once possessed by a founder of one of Me- 
letis's philosophical schools (described in chapter 3). 
5 The item bears a design or sculpted feature sugges- 
tive of a Returned mask. 
6 A knotted cover or grip depicts colorful birds or styl- 
ized herd animals from the plains of Oreskos. 
7 The item is at least partially made from the heart- 
wood of a Setessan caryatid (described in chapter 3). 
The wood regularly sprouts fresh leaves, or its whorls 
suggest humanoid features. 
8 The item rests among the remains of its former 
owner, who thanks (or curses) those who take it. 
9 Тһейет is at least partially made of iron. 
10 Whoever first touches the item receives an omen 
from the god who watches over it (see chapter 4 for 
details on omens). e 
n The item lies in a crater, as if it fell from the heavens. à 
12  Theitem glimmers with the stars of Nyx and is a per- 
fect facsimile of an item used by a legendary hero. 


CHAPTER 5 | TREASURES 195 


МАС1С ITEM DESCRIPTIONS 


This section presents an assortment of magic items in 
alphabetical order. See the Dungeon Master's Guide for 
the rules on magic items. 


FLYING CHARIOT 
Wondrous item, rare 


The chariot’s riders and creatures pulling the chariot 
gain а +1 bonus to their AC. 

If this magic chariot is pulled by one or more flying 
creatures, it too can fly. 
S ЧО 

CHARIOTS 

Chariots and the creatures pulling them work like con- 

trolled mounts, as described in the mounted combat 

rules in the Player’s Handbook, but with the following 

differences: 


Mounting or dismounting a chariot costs you 5 feet of 
movement, rather than a number of feet equal to half 

your speed. 

Being mounted on a chariot grants you half cover. 

A chariot's speed is equal to the speed of the slowest 
creature pulling it. 

If multiple creatures are pulling the chariot, they all act 

on the same initiative, and they must take the same ac- 

tion on their turn. 
ei р 


х CHAPTER 5 | TREASURES 
196 


FLYING CHARIOT 


HELM OF THE GODS 
Wondrous item, rare (requires attunement) 


While wearing this helm, you know whether there is a 
celestial or fiend within 30 feet of you, as well as where 
the creature is located, provided the creature isn’t be- 
hind total cover. 

Whenever you finish a long rest while wearing the 
helm, you can pray to one of the gods listed on the Helm 
of the Gods table and store the listed spell in the helm, 
replacing any spell that is already stored there. The save 
DC for the spell is 13. 

The helm has 3 charges. To cast a spell from the helm, 
you must expend 1 charge, and the helm regains 1d3 
charges daily at dawn. 


HELM OF THE GODS 


God Spell 

Athreos protection from evil and good 
Ephara sanctuary 

Erebos inflict wounds 


Heliod guiding bolt 
Iroas heroism 
Karametra  goodberry 


Keranos thunderous smite 
Klothys entangle 

Kruphix dissonant whispers 
Mogis hellish rebuke 


God Spell 
Nylea faerie fire 
Pharika lesser restoration 


Phenax charm person 


Purphoros  searing smite 
Thassa identify 

MOLTEN BRONZE SKIN 

Armor (breastplate, half plate, or plate), rare (requires 
attunement) 


This magical armor appears as a jug of molten bronze. 
When you attune to it, the bronze adheres and contours 
to your skin. The armor can be worn under normal 
clothes, but it doesn't impede bodily functions. Once you 
put it on, it can't be removed unless you choose to do so. 

While wearing the armor, you have resistance to fire 
damage. The armor also doesn't impose disadvantage 
on Dexterity (Stealth) checks. 


POTION OF AQUEOUS FORM 
Potion, rare 


When you drink this potion, you transform into a pool of 
water. You return to your true form after 10 minutes or if 
you are incapacitated or die. 

You're under the following effects while in this form: 


Liquid Movement. You have a swimming speed of 30 
feet. You can move over or through other liquids. You 
can enter and occupy the space of another creature. 
You can rise up to your normal height, and you can 
pass through even Tiny openings. You extinguish non- 
magical flames in any space you enter. 

Watery Resilience. You have resistance to nonmagical 
damage. You also have advantage on Strength, Dex- 
terity, and Constitution saving throws. 

Limitations. You can't talk, attack, cast spells, or acti- 
vate magic items. Any objects you were carrying or 
wearing meld into your new form and are inaccessi- 
ble, though you continue to be affected by anything 
you're wearing, such as armor. 


Pvxis oF 
PANDEMONIUM 


Pvxis OF PANDEMONIUM 
Wondrous item, legendary 


А creature that touches this ornate wooden vessel for 1 
minute gains the benefits of a short rest. That creature 
also gains the effects of the b/ess spell until the creature 
finishes a short or long rest. The creature can't gain 
these benefits again until it finishes a long rest. 

If the vessel is opened, roll on the Pyxis of Pandemo- 
nium table to determine what happens. Any spells cast 
by the vessel have a spell save DC of 17. One minute 
after the vessel is opened, it disappears. It reappears, 
sealed, in a random location on the same plane of exis- 
tence 24 hours later. 

Curse. Any creature that gains the benefit of a short 
rest from the vessel hears cloying telepathic whispers 
emanating it. That creature must make a DC 17 Wis- 
dom saving throw. On a failed save, the creature is 
charmed by the vessel for 1 hour. The charmed creature 
does everything it can to open the vessel as soon as pos- 
sible. On a successful save, the creature is immune to 
the vessel's whispers for 24 hours. 


Pvxis ОЕ PANDEMONIUM 


d8 Calamity 

1 Androphagia. Each creature within 60 feet of the ves- 
sel must succeed on a DC 17 Wisdom saving throw 
or go berserk for 1 minute. The berserk creature 
must begin its turn using the Attack action to make 
one melee or ranged attack (its choice) against the 
creature nearest to it. The berserk creature can re- 
peat the save at the end of its turn, ending the effect 
on itself on a success. 

2 Bile Blight. The vessel casts the harm spell on each 
creature within 30 feet of it. 


3 Flood. The vessel casts the tsunami spell at a point 
of the DM's choice within 120 feet of it. 
4 Medusa's Gaze. The vessel casts the flesh to stone 


spell on each creature within 30 feet of it. 


198 


d8 = Calamity 

5 Labyrinth. The vessel casts the maze spell on each 
creature within 30 feet of it. : 

6 Nightmare. Tendrils of shadow seep from the vessel 


and form into 1d4 shadow demons (see the Monster 
Manual for their stat block), which appear in unoc- 
cupied spaces within 30 feet of it and are hostile. 
7 Swarming Insects. The vessel casts the insect plague 
spell, centered on itself and with a radius of 30 feet. 
8 Unbridled Revel. The vessel casts the Otto’s irresist- 
ible dance spell on each creature within 30 feet of it. 


SIREN SONG LY RE 
Wondrous item, rare (requires attunement) 


You can use an action to play this lyre and cast one of 
the following spells from it: animal friendship, charm 
person, enthrall, suggestion. If the spell requires a sav- 
ing throw, the spell save DC is 13. 

Once the instrument has been used to cast a spell, it 
can't be used to cast that spell again until the next dawn. 


SLING BULLETS OF ALTHEMONE 

Weapon (sling bullet), very rare 

The sling bullets come in a pouch, which contains 1d4 + 
4 bullets. Roll on the Magic Sling Bullets table for each 
bullet to determine its magical property. 

You have a +2 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with each of these bullets. If a bullet misses its target, 
the bullet teleports back into the pouch. Once a bullet 
hits a target, the bullet loses its magic. 


Macic SLING BULLETS 


d4 Bullet 

1 Banishment. A creature that takes damage from this 
bullet must succeed on a DC 15 Charisma saving 
throw or be banished as though affected by the ban- 
ishment spell. 

2 Fulguration. On a hit, this bullet deals an extra 2d8 
lightning damage to its target. All other creatures 
within 10 feet of the target must each succeed on a 
DC 15 Constitution saving throw or take 1d8 thunder 
damage. 

3 Stunning. On a hit, this bullet deals an extra 1d10 
force damage, and the target is stunned until the 
end of your next turn. 

4 Tracking. A creature that takes damage from this 
bullet is marked with a glowing rune where the bul- 
let hit. The mark lasts 24 hours. While the creature 
is marked, you always know the direction to it. 


Two-BiRDs SLING 
Weapon (sling), rare 


You have a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this weapon. 

When you make a ranged attack with this sling and hit 
a target, you can cause the ammunition to ricochet to- 
ward a second target within 10 feet of the first, and then 
make a ranged attack against the second target. 


CHAPTER 5 | TREASURES 


ARTIFACTS 


Miraculous relics fill the tales of Theros. Among these 
legendary items, none are more renowned than the 
weapons of the gods themselves. These artifacts em- 
body divine will and the power of Nyx. Where they 
appear, these weapons change the tide of wars and the 
course of history. 

Typically a deity bestows their weapon only on a 
favored champion or devotee. Depending on the cham- 
pion’s piety score, the mortal can tap into hidden prop- 
erties of the weapon (see chapter 2 for details on piety). 
Alternatively, those who don't worship the weapon's 
divine owner often find themselves cursed for their lack 
of proper devotion. 

Occasionally a god's weapon might fall into the wrong 
hands or go missing entirely, sparking fantastic quests. 
Consult the Weapons of the Gods Adventures table 
for suggestions of the sort of quests these artifacts 
might inspire. 


WEAPONS OF THE GODS ADVENTURES 
d6 Plot 

1 Steal a god's weapon to lay low one of that god's 
servants—a creature that can only be harmed by its 
creator's wrath. 

2 Recover a god's weapon that has been stolen by 
another god's champion in an attempt to frame the 
weapon's owner for cruel acts. 

3 Wrest back a god's weapon from a divine champion 
who needed it but refuses to return it. 

4 Destroy a god's weapon and channel the energy re- 
leased to create a new magic item or work a miracle. 

5 Reforge a god's weapon after an incredible feat 
caused it to shatter. 

6 A god's weapon has gained sentience (see "Sentient 
Magic Items" in chapter 7 ofthe Dungeon Master's 
Guide). Determine whether to use it, return it to its 
creator, or help it grow into its own being. 


ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS 


This section presents an assortment of artifacts in al- 
phabetical order. See the Dungeon Master's Guide for 
the rules on artifacts. 


AKMON, HAMMER OF PURPHOROS 
Weapon (warhammen), artifact (requires attunement) 


Purphoros’s hammer works wonders and disasters, 
the god of the forge using it to craft ground-breaking 
marvels and dangerous inventions in equal measure. 
Purphoros rarely bestows Akmon on mortals but occa- 
sionally leaves it unattended at his forge in Mount Velus. 
When Purphoros does permit a mortal to use the ham- 
mer, it’s usually so they might bring an important work 
into being, wreck a force of destruction, or forge some- 
thing remarkable somewhere the god isn’t welcome. 
Hammer of the Forge. This magic warhammer 
grants a +3 bonus to attack and damage rolls made with 
it. When you hit with an attack using it, the target takes 
an extra 3d10 fire damage. 


Blessing of the Forge. If you are а worshiper of Pur- 
phoros, you gain all the following benefits for which you 
have the required piety: 


Piety 10+. The hammer has 1 randomly determined mi- 
nor beneficial property. 

Piety 25+. The hammer has 1 randomly determined ma- 
jor beneficial property. 

Piety 50+. The hammer has 1 additional randomly de- 
termined major beneficial property. 


If you aren't a worshiper of Purphoros, the hammer has 
2 randomly determined minor detrimental properties. 
See “Artifacts” in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master's 
Guide for details on randomly determined properties. 
Reforged. While holding the hammer, you have re- 
sistance to fire damage and are immune to exhaustion. 
Additionally, you have proficiency with smith's tools and 
have advantage on all ability checks made using them. 
Spells. While the hammer is on your person, you can 
use an action to cast one of the following spells (save 
DC 18): animate objects, heat metal, fabricate, magic 
weapon, mending, shatter. Once you use the hammer to 
cast a spell, the spell can't be cast again from it until the 
next dusk. 
Destroying the Hammer. To destroy the hammer, 
it must be taken to the realm of Tizerus, in the Under- 
world. There it must be coated in clay from the Mire of 
Punishment. The heat ofthe hammer hardens the clay, 
which fuses to it after one month. Once fully hardened, 
the clay-covered hammer must be swallowed and di- 
gested by a kraken. 


DEKELLA, BIDENT OF THASSA 
Weapon (trident), artifact (requires attunement) 


Thassa wields Dekella, a two-pronged weapon 
gifted to her by Purphoros. When the god of the 
sea bestows her weapon on a mortal, it’s of- 
ten so they might work her will far from the 
ocean, right some wrong affecting those 
she'd prefer not to harm, or give a mor- 

tal a glimpse of her terrible respon- 
sibilities. 


Bident of the Deep. Thassa's signature weapon 
thrums with the icy currents of the deep ocean. This 
weapon functions as a trident that grants a *3 bonus 
to attack and damage rolls made with it. When you hit 
with an attack using the bident, the target takes an extra 
2d10 cold damage. 

Blessing of the Deep. If you are a worshiper of 
Thassa, you gain all the following benefits for which you 
have the required piety: 


Piety 10+. You can breathe underwater, and you gain a 
swimming speed of 60 feet. 

Piety 25+. The bident has 1 randomly determined minor 
beneficial property. 

Piety 50+. The bident has 1 randomly determined major 
beneficial property. 


If you aren't a worshiper of Thassa, the bident has 1 
minor detrimental property and 1 major detrimental 
property, both randomly determined. 

See “Artifacts” in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master's 
Guide for details on randomly determined properties. 

Command the Deep. The bident holds the power to 
command the waves and its creatures. As an action, you 
can change the condition of the sea within 1 mile of you, 
creating strong winds and heavy rain that cause violent 
waves (see "Weather at Sea" in chapter 5 of the Dun- 
беоп Master's Guide) or calming a storm. In either case, 
the unnatural weather lasts for 1 hour before returning 
to normal. Once used, this property of the bident can't 
be used again until the next dusk. 

Additionally, you can cast the dominate monster spell 
(save DC 18) from the bident, but only on beasts and 
monstrosities that have an innate swimming speed. 
Once used, this property of the bident can't be used 
again until the next dusk. 


DeKELLa, 
В›ОЕМТ оғ THassa 


200 


Epwixis, " 
Bow or NyLEA 


Aquatic Metamorphosis. You can cast the true poly- 
morph spell (save DC 18) from the bident, but you must 
cast it on a creature to turn it into a kind of creature that 
has an innate swimming speed. Once used, this prop- 
erty of the bident can't be used again until the next dusk. 

Destroying the Bident. To destroy the bident, it must 
be heated by the breath of an ancient red dragon and 
then, while still hot, immersed in the Tartyx River. 


EPHiIXIS, Bow OF NYLEA 
Weapon (Shortbow), artifact (requires attunement) 


Nylea wields the shortbow Ephixis, the bow whose ar- 
rows herald the turning of the seasons. Nylea is quick 
to let her favored followers borrow her bow, particularly 
when they intend to use it to perform great deeds, put an 
end to foul creatures, or cast down the arrogant. 

Bow of the Wild. This divine weapon includes a 
shortbow and a quiver with four arrows, each tied to one 
of the four seasons. You gain a +3 bonus to attack and 
damage rolls made with this bow, and you suffer no dis- 
advantage when attacking at the weapon’s long range. 
Additionally, Ephixis scores a critical hit on a d20 roll 
of 19 or 20. 

Blessing of the Wild. If you are a worshiper of Nylea, 
you gain all the following benefits for which you have the 
required piety: 


Piety 10+. The bow has 1 randomly determined minor 
beneficial property. 

Piety 25+. The bow has 1 randomly determined major 
beneficial property. 


If you aren't a worshiper of Nylea, the bow has | ran- 
domly determined major detrimental property. 

See “Artifacts” in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master's 
Guide for details on randomly determined properties. 


CHAPTER 5 | TREASURES 


Arrows of the Seasons. The four arrows—each asso- 
ciated with a season—that accompany this bow can be 
fired only from it. Each arrow disappears immediately 
after it's used, and it reappears in the quiver at the next 
dusk. The save DC against spells cast with the arrows is 
18. Each arrow has a unique property: 


Spring. As an action, you can fire this arrow, targeting 
a beast or a plant creature you can see within 320 
feet of you. On a hit, the arrow deals no damage, 
and the target gains the benefits of the awaken spell 
for 8 hours. 

Summer. As an action, you can fire this arrow at an un- 
occupied space on the ground that you can see within 
320 feet of you, no attack roll required. A Nyxborn 
lynx is summoned in that space (use the stat block for 
a tiger with the Nyxborn traits from chapter 6). The 
lynx understands your verbal commands and obeys 
them as best it can, and it takes its turns immediately 
after yours. The emissary remains for 1 hour before 
fading away. 

Autumn. As an action, you can fire this arrow at a space 
on the ground that you can see within 320 feet of 
you, no attack roll required, casting the wall of thorns 
spell there. 

Winter. As an action, you can fire this arrow at a space 
that you can see within 320 feet of you, no attack roll 
required, casting the ice storm spell there. 


Destroying the Bow. The bow can't be destroyed 
without first destroying all its arrows. The winter arrow 
must be fed to a cerberus on the winter solstice. The 
spring arrow must be planted at the base of a Black Oak 
of Asphodel on the spring equinox. The summer arrow 
must be broken by a sea giant on the summer solstice. 
Then the autumn arrow must be shot into the carcass of 
a hydra on the autumnal equinox. When all four arrows 
are destroyed, the bow and quiver dissolve into dust. 


KHRUSOR, SPEAR OF HELIOD 
Weapon (spear), artifact (requires attunement) 


Heliod wields Khrusor, a spear blessed with the power 
of the sun. In his hands, it can be pitched from Nyx to 
any point on Theros. When Heliod lends his weapon to 
a mortal, it's typically so they can perform some great 
work in his name or as a test of their worthiness. 

Spear of the Sun. This spear grants a +3 bonus to 
attack and damage rolls made with it. When you hit with 
an attack using this spear, the target takes an extra 2d8 
radiant damage. 

Blessing of the Sun. If you are a worshiper of Heliod, 
you gain all the following benefits for which you have the 
required piety: 


Piety 3+. You gain 15 temporary hit points each dawn. 

Piety 10+. The spear has 1 randomly determined minor 
beneficial property. 

Piety 25+. The spear has 1 additional randomly deter- 
mined minor beneficial property. 

Piety 50+. The spear has 1 randomly determined major 
beneficial property. 


If you aren't a worshiper of Heliod, the spear has 2 ran- 
domly determined major detrimental properties. 


ONG-HAO HAN 


YE 


See “Artifacts” in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master's 
Guide for details on randomly determined properties. 

Luminous. The spear sheds bright light in a 30-foot 
radius and dim light for an additional 30 feet. The light 
is sunlight. 

Sun’s Retaliation. When you take damage from a 
creature within 5 feet of you, you can use your reaction 
to make a melee attack with the spear against that crea- 
ture. On a hit, the spear deals damage as normal, and 
the creature is blinded until the start of its next turn. 
This property of the spear can’t be used again until the 
next dawn. 

Spelis. The spear has 10 charges. While holding it, 
you can use an action to expend 1 or more of its charges 
to cast one of the following spells (save DC 18) from it: 
guiding bolt (1 charge), daylight (3 charges, targeting the 
tip of the spear only), sunbeam (6 charges). The spear 
regains 1d6+4 expended charges daily at dawn. 

Destroying the Spear. If taken to Erebos's palace in 
Tizerus, and used to sacrifice a champion of Heliod to 
Erebos, Khrusor is either destroyed or fundamentally 
twisted to Erebos's service. 


MASTIX, WHIP OF EREBOS 
Weapon (whip), artifact (requires attunement) 


Erebos wields Mastix, a whip capable of extending like 
an impossibly long shadow. In the hands of the god of 
the dead, the whip snares the reluctant dead and drags 
them into his realm. When Erebos grants his weapon 
toa mortal follower, it’s typically to reclaim a powerful 
soul or to humiliate Heliod. 

Whip of the Dead. Erebos's whip seethes with the 
enervating energy of the Underworld. This magic whip 
grants a +3 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with it. When you hit with an attack using this whip, 
the target takes an extra 2d8 necrotic damage and you 


KHRUSOR, 
Spear or HELIOD 


ч 


MastTix, 
Whip оғ Eresos 


regain hit points equal to half the amount of necrotic 
damage dealt. 

Additionally, when you make an attack with the whip 
on your turn, you can increase the range of the attack 
to 300 feet. This property of the weapon can't be used 
again until the next dusk. 

Blessing of the Dead. If you are a worshiper of Ere- 
bos, you gain all the following benefits for which you 
have the required piety: 


Piety 1+. The whip has 1 randomly determined minor 
detrimental property—a burden Erebos imposes to 
test his faithful. 

Piety 25+. The whip has 1 randomly determined major 
beneficial property. 

Piety 50+. The whip has 1 additional randomly deter- 
mined major beneficial property. 


If you aren't a worshiper of Erebos, the whip has 2 ran- 
domly determined major detrimental properties. 

See “Artifacts” in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master's 
Guide for details on randomly determined properties. 

Erebos’s Claim. While carrying the whip, you can 
use an action to cast either circle ofdeath or dominate 
monster (targeting only undead) from the whip. The save 
DC for these spells is 18. Once you use the whip to cast 
a spell, that spell can't be cast from it again until the 
next dusk. 

Destroyiné the Whip. To destroy the whip, it must be 
taken to the heights of Mount Hiastos in Nyx, unraveled 
by a Returned, and left to bask in continual daylight for 
one month. 


CHAPTER 5 | TREASURES 
201 


ECA Я 

Mn el 

z \ 
д 


Р " 4 2 [А 1 Р; 4 3 
ARASTA OF THE ENDLESS mA HER | 
e "o аы О ix 


// SND N A ЕЕН НЫ Чы ccc dc decr - 


эй aio аба oim мба why whe өйи 


sie эйю ates ийт айк айе 27 ДУ 


ауу. ames 


- 


FRIENDS AND FOES 


S THEY SO OFTEN DO, DESTRUCTION AND 
/ я creation intermingled. As Purphoros cut 
mm $ into Nyx, he rattled the celestial creatures 
yi A that populated the night sky. He accidentally 
dislodged Polukranos, the World Eater, from its heavenly 
perch. The fifty-headed monster plunged toward the mortal 
realm, leaving a trail of Nyx blazing in the sky. 

Heliod joined with Nylea, God of the Hunt, who cast vines 
beneath the hydra's body to ease its harsh entrance into the 
world. The hydra materialized in the valley and was mo- 
mentarily stunned into stillness. Though much diminished 
in size, the hydra could still destroy every human city unless 
it was immediately contained. Together the gods trapped 
the hydra inside a cavern deep under the Nessian Forest. 
—Jenna Helland, Godsend 


This chapter provides stat blocks for a variety of crea- 
tures unique to Theros, including mythic monsters—leg- 
endary beings intended to serve as peerless threats. It 
also includes lore relevant to monsters from the Monster 
Manual that appear on Theros. 


NYXBORN CREATURES 


Just as the gods are born of Nyx, so are many creatures. 
Nyxborn creatures are beings of legend, some the 
subjects of hopeful dreams and others the product of 
nightmares. They come into existence as the result of 
divine action, as the expression of abstract ideals, or as 
manifestations of the strength of shared belief. As mor- 
tals continue to tell their tales of creatures that never 
were and repeat legends that glorify historic individuals, 
Nyxborn creatures of those stories might arise. 

Whether monsters, manifestations of long-dead mor- 
tals, or other beings, Nyxborn creatures share certain 
characteristics: they resemble ordinary mortal crea- 
tures, but any part of their body that isn't lit by direct 
light shows the starry gleam of Nyx. Nyxborn creatures 
typically act as the direct servants of one of the gods, 
but occasionally they escape from the realm of Nyx and 
pursue their own goals—which might be as simple as 
violent rampage, or as complex as a far-reaching plan to 
break the power of the gods. 


You can use the Nyxborn Monster Origin table to 
help you decide what brought a Nyxborn creature into 
existence. 


NYXBORN MONSTER ORIGIN 

d6 Origin 

1 А god created the creature to serve as an emissary. 

2  Thecreature formed as the side effect of some other 
divine action. 
The creature escaped from the Underworld. 
The creature took shape from the tales told about it. 
A god made the creature to serve as a pet or mount. 
The creature took shape from dreams or nightmares. 


nu A w 


NYXBORN STATISTICS 


Any type of creature might be Nyxborn. A Nyxborn crea- 


ture has the normal statistics for its kind, but usually 
has a special characteristic, a magical quality that sets it 
apart. When creating Nyxborn creatures, you can sum- 
marize their Nyxborn traits as Magic Resistance, as in 
the Nyxborn Traits table. Alternatively, if you’d like more 
variety, roll on that table to randomly determine the dis- 
tinctive characteristic of a Nyxborn creature, or choose 
one of these or similar traits. 


NYXBORN TRAITS 


de Trait 

1 Magic Resistance. The creature's Nyxborn nature gives 
it advantage on saving throws against spells and other 
magical effects. 

2 Light Sensitivity. A creature ofthe night sky, the Nyx- 
born has disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on 
Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on sight, while it 
is in bright light. 

3  Immutable Form. The Nyxborn creature is the philo- 
sophical ideal of its kind. It is immune to any spell or 
effect that would alter its form. 

4 Magic Weapons. The Nyxborn creature's weapon at- 
tacks are magical. 

5 Nyx Step. The Nyxborn can move through other crea- 
tures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It 
takes 5 (1410) force damage if it ends its turn inside ап 
object. 

6 Starlight Form. The Nyxborn glows with the soft light 
of the night sky, shedding dim light in a 15-foot radius. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


Lid opt ni ape г 


N Y feo s | i ? } жер TE i i D 
i Ӯ : — E eris ‹ m 
5/7/31 2 а> Чә A ATA 


— M йа 


203 


* 


204 


CLASSIC MONSTERS 


Numerous creatures hold special places in the lives and 
myths of Theros's people. Some are beings said to have 
been created by the gods—often for special purposes or 
as divine punishments. Others roam particular territo- 
ries—lands that have become synonymous with a mon- 
strous population. And still other monsters are in some 
way unique to Theros, exhibiting appearances, behav- 
iors, and abilities seen few other places in existence. 
This section explores Theros's most noteworthy mon- 
strous myths and curiosities unique to this world. If a 
monster appears differently on Theros than elsewhere 
in the multiverse, those differences are noted here. 
Should those differences be significant enough to alter 
a creature's statistics, those changes are detailed here, 
as well. If a monster is from a collection other than the 
Monster Manual, its source is listed in its description. 


BASILISK 


Legends told among the worshipers of Pharika describe 
how the god hid a treasure trove of secrets in basilisk 
blood, inspiring her followers to seek ways to reveal the 
truths hidden among organs and scales. Healers dilute 
the blood to use in potions, and oracles employ it in divi- 
nation rituals. 

Basilisks on Theros have only four legs but are sta- 
tistically identical to the monster described in the Mon- 


ster Manual. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


CYCLOPES WOULD RATHER STEAL THE BOUNTY OF 


SMALLER BEINGS THAN TOIL THEMSELVES. 


CATOBLEPAS 


Legends tell of a human herder who bragged that his 
cattle were the finest in all of Theros. When the gods 
heard this, Heliod, Nylea, and Mogis became involved 
in laying a curse that afflicted the mortal and his cattle, 
giving rise to the first catoblepas. How the gods were 
involved, though, and for what honorable or petty rea- 
sons, the gods’ faithful—particularly those of Heliod and 
Nylea—greatly debate (see chapter 2). Regardless, cato- 
blepases are widely viewed as cursed creatures, which 
only Mogis' faithful hold in wicked esteem. 

The catoblepas appears in Ю/о 5 Guide to Monsters. 


CYCLOPS 


The human polis of Akros maintains an outpost in the 
Katachthon Mountains to keep an eye on the cyclops 
population around One-Eyed Pass (see chapter 3). From 
the cyclopes' perspective, the Akroan soldiers provide a 
reliable source of food, for the soldiers herd approaching 
enemies into cyclops territory rather than fighting these 
foes themselves. Thus, the cyclopes attack the Akroans 
just enough to keep the humans afraid of them, but not 
so much that they eliminate them or drive them off. 
Similarly, cyclopes who prey on sheep learn never 
to eat the shepherd. Like the pit of a fruit, a discarded 
shepherd will eventually “grow” a new flock to feed 
the cyclopes. 


}, JACK WANG (В) 


T (t 


STEVE PRESCOTT 


DRAGON 


The dragons of Theros are barely capable of speech and 
sow destruction either individually or by forcing minions 
to carry out their will. Only red and blue dragons exist 
on Theros, and both are brutish tyrants that leave devas- 
tation in their wake. 


BLUE DRAGONS 

Blue dragons live along the ocean shore in cliffside 
caves, from where they scan the waves for prey that 
swims or flies into their territory. Many experienced sea 
captains know the blue dragon lairs along the coastlines 
they ply and chart routes to avoid draconic scrutiny. 


RED DRAGONS 

Red dragons soar over mountain slopes and lowland val- 
leys, feasting on cattle and those who tend herds. They 
often lair in dangerous mountain caves or volcanoes. 
Akroans revere red dragons and employ their images in 
the design of their armor, believing that the creatures 
embody the drive for power and dominion. Akroans 
sometimes settle near a red dragon’s lair, forging tenu- 
ous alliances by making sacrifices of cattle or prisoners 
to gain its favor and protection. 


IMMORTAL PERSPECTIVE 

Despite their arrogance and viciousness, dragons are 
long-lived and perceptive. Their age and patience al- 
lows them to divine signs amid violent weather and the 
rotation of constellations. For worthy sacrifices of food, 


wealth, or flattery, a dragon might share its interpreta- 
tions of omens—either those it has witnessed or sights 
mortals relate to them. Roll on the omens tables in chap- 
ter 4 to determine what the dragon has seen. How the 


dragon interprets these visions is up to you. 


KRAKEN 


Krakens number among the most terrifying denizens 
of the sea, their wrath capable of ruining entire poleis. 
Under normal circumstances, each kraken is bound by 
a sea lock, a magical effect that restricts its travel. The 
area encompassed by the lock is large enough to enable 
the kraken to feed but prevents these near-immortal 
beings from raiding densely populated regions. Some 
stories claim that a seaquake or other natural disaster 
might break a sea lock and free the kraken to rage as 
it pleases. Other tales, though, suggest that sea locks 
emanate from ancient coral weapons buried in the 
ocean depths and that keep a kraken tied within a few 
hundred miles. 


NADIR KRAKENS 

The largest and most devastating krakens, nadir krak- 
ens, dwell in the deepest ocean trenches. These krakens 
are unique beings, of which the terrifying Tromokratis 
(described in the “Mythic Monsters” section of this 
chapter) numbers among the most feared. When a na- 
dir kraken breaks free of its sea lock and rises to the 
surface, continents are redrawn, civilizations collapse, 
and eras end. 


UNLEASHED FROM THE DARKEST OCEAN DEPTHS, EACH 


NAOIR KRAKEN IS A UNIQUE AQUATIC NIGHTMARE. 


LAMIA 


When rage and despair at the gods’ misdeeds consume 
a mortal mind, a lamia comes into being. Most lamias in 
Theros are Nyxborn (described earlier in this chapter), 
owing their existence to their own twisted imagination, 
which has changed their physical nature to reflect their 
internal self. Lamias have wildly varying physical forms, 
ranging from a feline shape similar to the lamia in the 
Monster Manual to a more serpentine form similar to a 
yuan-ti. In each case, the lamia's body reflects the crea- 
ture's corrupted instincts and predatory nature. 


MEDUSA 


Medusas (often called gorgons on Theros) are closely as- 
sociated with Pharika, the god of poison and medicine. 
Pharika has charged her favored servants with guarding 
secrets of life, health, and immortality that are too pow- 
erful to be known by those who lack the wisdom to use 
them properly. Those who approach a medusa with hu- 
mility and worthy offerings might receive the creature's 
favor. The medusa might propose a dangerous quest to 
fetch some rare ingredient or legendary relic, promising 
to reward success with a bit of Pharika's knowledge. 
This information might lead to a cure for a plague, an 
alchemical breakthrough, or a secret of the cosmos. 


FROM THE FOULEST REACHES OF THE UNDERWORLD, 


NIGHT HAGS INVADE THE DREAMS OF MORTALS. 


The medusas of Theros differ from those in the Mon- 
ster Manual in that they have long, serpentine bodies 
in place of legs. A medusa uses the stat block from the 
Monster Manual with the following altered and addi- 
tional actions: 


Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (2d6) bludgeoning damage, and the target is 
grappled (escape DC 11) if it is a Large or smaller creature. Un- 
til this grapple ends, the target is restrained, and the medusa 
can't constrict another target. 


Multiattack. The medusa makes either three melee attacks— 
one with its snake hair, one to constrict, and one with its 
shortsword—or two ranged attacks with its longbow. 


NIGHT НАС 


Night hags on Theros appear as leathery-faced crones 
that hold their single eye within their withered lips as 
they stare with eyeless sockets. They usually build their 
huts in the Underworld, particularly around the tower- 
ing pillars of basalt and granite within the Mire of Pun- 
ishment (see chapter 3). There, amid the lamentations 
of those who have offended the gods, night hags inhale 
the smoke of toxic balefires. They follow the visions 

the smoke invokes to the dreams of vulnerable mortals 
where they sow the seeds of folly. 

A night hag senses the world around her with sensi- 
tive fingers, keen hearing, and the single eye she typ- 
ically holds in her mouth. When a night hag uses her 
powers to transform, her eye often becomes a bauble or 
piece of jewelry she keeps close at all times. 


ALTHOUGH THEY POSSESS GREAT WISDOM, SPHINXES WON'T 


SHARE THEIR SECRETS WITH JUST ANYONE, 


SPHINX 


Sphinxes typically dwell in island sanctums, especially 
in the far reaches of the Dakra Isles. Many develop 
schools of philosophy or academic methods that they 
share with students they deem worthy, their ideas re- 
markable enough to seem akin to magic. Their age and 
wisdom also often allows them to predict what’s to come 
as effectively as any oracle. 


RIDDLES OF THE SPHINX 

A sphinx might ask riddles to explore the cleverness, 

thought processes, and humility of those who seek to 

learn from them. These inquiries help the sphinx gauge 

a would-be student’s mettle before allowing them access 

to its secrets. The following are just a few riddles (along 

with their answers) that a sphinx might use to test a 

visitor's wit: 

* The more of these you take, the more you leave be- 
hind. (Steps) 

« What has six faces, but no mouth, has twenty-one 
eyes, but cannot see? (A die) 

« What turns everything but does not move? (A mirror) 

* The more there is, the less you see. (Darkness) 

• What is stronger than the gods, more terrifying than 
the demons, the poor have it, the rich need it, and if 
you eat it, you die? (Nothing) 


'THE WANDERING ORACLE 

Throughout history, the wise and ancient androsphinx 
Medomai has appeared in Meletis during moments of 
historical import, such as religious ceremonies, cor- 
onations, and the onset of wars. For decades, he has 
brought his cryptic knowledge of future events to the 
people, but since his predictions tend to be dire, his ar- 
rivalis generally viewed as a bad omen. 


UNICORN 


Unicorns on Theros are closely tied to the mysteries of 
Nyx. They often appear in the dreams of those doing the 
work of goodly gods. In such dreams, they might guide 
the weary to solace, the forlorn to joy, and the heroic to 
their destiny. In the waking world, they often provide 

the same aid, sometimes appearing to step from dreams 
into reality. Those who follow unicorns might find the 
treasures of lost heroes, hallowed ruins, or grand omens 
from the gods. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 207 


208 


BESTIARY 


The following pages include descriptions and stat’ 
blocks for inhabitants of Theros. The majority are 
presented in alphabetical order. At the end of this sec- 
tion, you'll find a selection of mythic monsters, foes 
designed to pose challenges worthy of legend. 


STAT BLOCKS BY 
CREATURE ТҮРЕ 


The following list categorizes the creatures in this 
chapter by creature type. Creatures marked with an 
asterisk appear in the “Mythic Monsters” section later 


in this chapter. 


ABERRATION 
Woe strider 


CELESTIAL 
Archon of fallen stars 
Ashen rider 
Winged bull 
Winged lion 


CONSTRUCT 
Anvilwrought raptor 
Bronze sable 
Burnished heart 
Colossus of Akros 
Gold-forged sentinel 


FIEND 

Abhorrent overlord 
Eater of hope 
Nightmare shepherd 


FEY 

Alseid 

Lampad 

Naiad 

Oread 

Satyr reveler 
Satyr thornbearer 


GIANT 
Doomwake giant 
Hundred-handed one 


HUMANOID 

Akroan hoplite 

Leonin iconoclast 
Meletian hoplite 
Oracle 

Setessan hoplite 
Triton master of waves 
Triton shorestalker 


MONSTROSITY 
Amphisbaena 
Aphemia 

Arasta* 

Blood-toll harpy 
Fleecemane lion 
Hippocamp 
Hythonia* 

lronscale hydra 
Nyx-fleece ram 
Polukranos 

Theran chimera 
Tromokratis* 
Two-headed cerberus 
Typhon 

Underworld cerberus 


UNDEAD 
Flitterstep eidolon 
Ghostblade eidolon 
Phylaskia 

Returned drifter 
Returned palamnite 
Returned sentry 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


AMPHISBAENA 


The amphisbaena has a head at either end of its ser- 

pentine body, and each head sports venomous fangs. 

To move, an amphisbaena uses one mouth to grip the 
neck of its other head, forming a hoop that rolls over 

the ground. 


AMPHISBAENA 


Medium monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 


14 (+2) 18 (+4) 12 (+1) 3 (-4) 10 (+0) 3 (-4) 


Skills Perception +4 

Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages — 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Two Heads. The amphisbaena has advantage on saving throws 
against being blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened, stunned, 


and knocked unconscious. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The amphisbaena makes two bite attacks. 
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 


get. Hit: 6 (144 + 4) piercing damage and 4 (146 + 1) poi- 
son damage. 


ALEX HORLEY-ORLANDELLI 


ANVILWROUGHTS 


The first anvilwroughts were created by the god of the 
forge, Purphoros. He gave the secret of breathing life 
into these metal creatures to his most devoted followers 
so they could mimic his works and invent new forms at 
their own forges. 

Some anvilwroughts are vigilant guardians at holy 
shrines, others serve as familiars and messengers, and 
a few were created to emulate beauty found among the 
animals of the mortal world. Each exhibits abilities 
suited to its role, with some behaving like companion- 
able creatures or stoic guardians. 

A few extremely rare and valuable anvilwroughts were 
crafted by the hand of Purphoros himself. A number 
of these magnificent creations are now heirlooms of 
monarchs; others are lost to the sands of time or are 
guarded by ancient monsters. 

Constructed Nature. An anvilwrought doesn't require 
air, food, drink, or sleep. 


ANVILWROUGHT RAPTOR 


Prized among Meletis's thaumaturges, anvilwrought 
raptors are often crafted in the form of a hawk or an 
owl. Most serve as messengers and spies, flying over 
the busy streets or high over the land while carrying or 
seeking vital information for their masters. 


VARIANT: ANVILWROUGHT RAPTOR FAMILIAR 
Some anvilwrought raptors are created expressly to be fa- 
miliars. Such creatures have the following trait. 

Familiar. The anvilwrought can serve another creature 
as a familiar, forming a magical, telepathic bond with its 
willing master. While the two are bonded, the master can 
sense what the anvilwrought senses, as long as they are 
within 1 mile of each other. 


M 


ANVILWROUGHT RAPTOR 


Tiny construct, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 18 (444 + 8) 
Speed 10 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
О те Саз) 34502) - 3(- 1442) 140-5) 
Ln ———————/'IÓ———————————— 

Skills Perception +4 

Damage Immunities fire, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, paralyzed, 
petrified, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 14 

Languages understands one language ofits creator but can't 
speak 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 

EEE —————— 

Keen Sight. The raptor has advantage on Wisdom (Perception 

checks that rely on sight. 


Recorded Mimicry. The raptor can mimic any sound, including 
voices, it has heard in the last 24 hours. A creature that hears 
the sounds can tell they are imitations with a successful DC 12 
Wisdom (Insight) check. 


ACTIONS — 
Multiattack. The raptor makes two attacks with its beak. 


Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (144 + 3) piercing damage. 
Se a Еа а Чыла: ЕП | 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 209 


210 


Bronze SABLE 


BRONZE SABLE | 


The first bronze sables were presented to Karametra as 
a gift by Purphoros to serve primarily as guardians in 
Karametra’s temples. But as others have been created, 
some have been used as nimble scouts, always on alert 
for danger. 


BURNISHED HART 


Among the first anvilwroughts to be forged by Purpho- 
ros, elegant burnished harts wander the mortal realm 

in search of new sights to bring back to the god of the 
forge. On every trip from Mount Velus, where Purphoros 
has his forge, they seek out the far reaches of the world 
so they can witness beauty in all its forms, then later 
reunite with their creator, their minds filled with tales of 
how life’s splendor continues to develop. 


GOLD-FORGED SENTINEL 


The original purpose of gold-forged sentinels is a mys- 
tery, and of all Purphoros's original anvilwroughts, this 
construct is the most difficult to control. A sentinel often 
operates without a master, stalking the high places of 
the mortal world or waiting, still as a statue, for what 
could be decades before reanimating to carry out their 
mysterious purpose. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


[A ЕЕЕ ITE TS ET | 
BRONZE SABLE 


Medium construct, unaligned 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 32 (548 + 10) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (+1) 16 (+3) 15 (+2) 3(-4) 14 (+2) 1 (-5) 


Skills Stealth +5 

Damage Immunities fire, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, paralyzed, 
petrified, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12 

Languages understands one language of its creator but can't 
speak 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 

L——————————"Ó'' J'OOm——————— 

False Appearance. While the sable remains motionless, it is in- 

distinguishable from a normal statue. 


Pack Tactics. The sable has advantage on an attack roll against 
a creature if at least one of the sable's allies is within 5 feet of 
the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated. 


Surprise Attack. If the sable surprises a creature and hits it with 
an attack during the first round of combat, the target takes an 
extra 10 (346) damage from the attack. 


ACTIONS 

Multiattack. The sable makes two bite attacks. 

Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 

Hit: 7 (148 + 3) piercing damage. 
ЕЕЕ АЕА ЕЕЕ ЕЕЕ eee 


BURNISHED HART 


Medium construct, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 45 (6d8 + 18) 


Speed 50 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
V (+3) 15 (+2) 1 (-5) 


14 (+2) 16 (+3)  3(-4) 


Damage Immunities fire, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, paralyzed, 
petrified, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12 

Languages understands one language of its creator but can’t 
speak 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 

Charge. if the hart moves at least 20 feet straight toward a 

target and then hits it with an antlers attack on the same turn, 

the target takes an extra 7 (2d6) fire damage. If the target is a 

creature, it must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or 

be knocked prone. 


Heated Body. A creature that touches the hart or hits it with a 


melee attack while within 5 feet of it takes 5 (1d10) fire damage. 


Sure-Footed. The hart has advantage on Strength and Dexterity 
saving throws made against effects that would knock it prone. 
ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The hart makes two attacks: one with its antlers 
and one with its hooves. 


Antlers. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage. 


Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (144 + 3) bludgeoning damage plus 2 (144) fire damage. 


CA 


9 Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 


^. GoLo-Fonceo SENTINEL 


GOLD-FORGED SENTINEL 


Large construct, unaligned 


Hit Points 76 (8d10 + 32) 
Speed 40 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 13 (+2) 19 (+4) 3(-4) 16 (+3) 10 (+0) 


Skills Perception +6 

Damage Immunities fire, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, paralyzed, 
petrified, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16 

Languages understands one language ofits creator but can’t 
speak 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Charge. If the sentinel moves at least 20 feet straight toward 

a target and then hits it with a ram attack on the same turn, 
the target takes an extra 10 (3d6) bludgeoning damage. If the 
target is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving 
throw or be knocked prone. 


Spell Turning. The sentinel has advantage on saving throws 
against any spell that targets only the sentinel (not an area). If 
the sentinel’s saving throw succeeds and the spell is of 4th level 
or lower, the spell has no effect on the sentinel and instead 
targets the caster. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The sentinel makes two ram attacks. 


Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


Fire Breath (Recharge 5—6). The sentinel exhales fire in a 
15-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 15 
Dexterity saving throw, taking 27 (6d8) fire damage ona failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


SS EE E eee 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


212 


ARCHONS 


The mysterious conquerors known as archons 
once ruled vast empires. These armored war- 
lords saw themselves as champions of merciless 
justice, and they ruled with iron fists. But their 
dominance ultimately came to an end. As the 
archon overlords toppled, they scattered to the 
fringes of the world, and their holdings developed 
into the poleis of today. 

Even though the age of archons is long past, 
many wonder if the few surviving archons might 
someday attempt to reestablish their empire or 
if they are truly resigned to their lesser role in 
the world. 


ARCHON OF FALLING STARS 


The epic accounting of the world’s earliest histories 
called The Cosmogony recounts the battle between 
a group of the gods’ champions and a mighty archon, 
which took place at the mysterious eastern edge of the 
world. Defeated, the falling archon is said to have met 
the rising sun. But Heliod showed mercy to the penitent 
archon, who swore to uphold justice and righteousness 
in the world’s wildest places. As a sign of his mercy, He- 
liod gave the archon a spear that rivaled his own in its 
brilliance. This was the first archon of falling stars. 


ARCHON OF FALLING STARS 


Medium celestial, lawful good 


Armor Class 18 (plate) 
Hit Points 144 (17d8 + 68) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 


20 (+5) 15 (+2)  19(«4) 15 (+2) 21 (+5) 19 (+4) 


Saving Throws Str +9, Соп +8, Wis +9, Cha +8 

Skills Arcana +6, History +6, Insight +9, Perception +9 
Damage Immunities radiant 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened 
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 19 
Languages all 
Challenge 12 (8,400 XP) 


Innate Spellcasting. The archon's spellcasting ability is Wis- 
dom (spell save DC 17, +9 to hit with spell attacks). The archon 
can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material 
components: 


At will: command, guiding bolt, spare the dying 
day each: crusader’s mantle, spirit guardians 


Magic Resistance. The archon has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Mount. If the archon isn't mounted, it can use a bonus action 

to magically teleport onto the creature serving as its mount, 

provided the archon and its mount are on the same plane of 

existence. When it teleports, the archon appears astride the 

mount, along with any equipment it is wearing or carrying. 
While mounted and not incapacitated, the archon can't 

be surprised, and both it and its mount have advantage on 


CSSS 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


Dexterity saving throws. If the archon is reduced to 0 hit 
points while riding its mount, the mount is reduced to 0 hit 
points as well. 


Radiant Rebirth (Recharges after a Long Rest). Ifthe archon 
is reduced to 0 hit points, it regains 30 hit points and springs 
back to its feet with a burst of radiance. Each creature of the 
archon's choice within 30 feet of it must succeed on a DC 16 
Constitution saving throw, or the creature takes 13 (3d8) radi- 
ant damage and is blinded until the start of the archon's turn. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The archon makes two attacks with its ra- 
diant spear. 


Radiant Spear. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., 
one target. Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) piercing damage plus 10 (346) 
radiant damage. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The archon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The ar- 
chon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Attack. The archon makes a radiant spear attack or casts 
guiding bolt. 

Coordinated Assault (Costs 2 Actions). The archon makes a ra- 
diant spear attack, and then its mount can use its reaction to 
make a melee weapon attack. 

Return to Nyx (Costs 3 Actions). The archon causes a corpse it 
can see within 30 feet of it to burst into a shower of radiant 
stars leaving no trace of it behind. Everything it is wearing or 
carrying remains. Each creature within 10 feet of the corpse 
when it bursts must succeed on a DC 16 Dexterity saving 
throw or take 22 (4d10) radiant damage. 


CHRIS RAHN 


The fall of the ancient archon empires left some archons 
bitter and resentful. Seeking to avoid the spread of hu- 
man civilization, these archons made their way to the 
Underworld. The horrors of the place broke their minds, 
bodies, and spirits and twisted them into the terrifying 
archons known as ashen riders. When they ride forth 
upon the mortal world, terrified mortals make offerings 
in a desperate attempt to appease them, but the ashen 
riders aren't merciful, and they delight in reducing the 
paragons of the mortal world to ash. 


ASHEN RIDER 


Medium celestial, lawful evil 


Armor Class 18 (plate) 
Hit Points 178 (21d8 + 84) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CH 
20 (+5) 16 (+3) 19 (+4) 15 (+2) 21 (+5) 18 (+4) 


Saving Throws Str +10, Con +9, Wis +10, Cha +9 

Skills History +7, Insight +10, Perception +10 

Damage Immunities thunder 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened 

Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 20 

Languages all 

Challenge 16 (15,000 XP) 

L————— 'J''/J'''Á'Y/^OC———À——. 
Aura of Silence. When a creature starts its turn within 30 feet of 
the ashen rider, the rider can force that creature to make a DC 
18 Wisdom saving throw ifthe rider can see it. On a successful 
save, the creature is immune to this aura for the next 24 hours. 
On a failed save, the creature can't speak and is deafened until 
the start of its next turn. 


Innate Spellcasting. The ashen rider's spellcasting ability is 
Wisdom (spell save DC 18). The rider can innately cast the fol- 
lowing spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: command, compelled duel 
1/day each: banishment, blade barrier 


Mount. If the ashen rider isn’t mounted, it can use a bonus 
action to magically teleport onto the creature serving as its 
mount, provided the ashen rider and its mount are on the 
same plane of existence. When it teleports, the ashen rider ap- 
pears astride the mount along with any equipment it is wearing 
or carrying. 

While mounted and not incapacitated, the ashen rider can't 
be surprised, and both it and its mount have advantage on 


Dexterity saving throws. If the ashen rider is reduced to 0 hit 
points while riding its mount, the mount is reduced to 0 hit 
points as well. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The ashen rider makes three attacks with its 
ashen blade or twoattacks with its bolt of ash. 


Ashen Blade. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) slashing damage plus 13 (2d12) radi- 
ant damage. 


Bolt of Ash. Ranged Spell Attack: +10 to hit, range 120 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 22 (4d10) necrotic damage, and the target can’t 
regain hit points until the start of the ashen rider’s next turn. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The ashen rider can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from 
the options below. Only one legendary action option can 

be used at a time and only at the end of another creature's 
turn. The rider regains spent legendary actions at the start 
of its turn. 


Attack. The ashen rider makes an attack using its ashen blade 
or bolt of ash. 
Coordinated Assault (Costs 2 Actions). The ashen rider makes 
an attack using its ashen blade or bolt of ash, and then its 
mount can use its reaction to make a melee weapon attack. 
Reduce to Ash (Costs 3 Actions). The ashen rider targets a crea- 
ture it can see within 60 feet of it. The target must succeed 
on a DC 18 Constitution saving throw, or it takes 27 (5d10) 
necrotic damage and its hit point maximum is reduced by an 
amount equal to the necrotic damage taken. This reduction 
lasts until the target finishes a long rest. If thetarget's hit 
point maximum is reduced to 0, its body and everything it is 
wearing and carrying, except for magic items, are reduced to 
ash. A creature reduced to ash can't be revived by any means gi 
short of a wish spell. 5 
» 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


214 


ARCHON MOUNTS . 


Archons always ride into battle on fearsome winged 
mounts. Some legends suggest that the mount is ac- 
tually a physical manifestation of the archon’s will, 
allowing the pair to act with a single mind. The two 
most common archon mounts are winged bulls and 
winged lions. 


WINGED BULL 


Large celestial, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 95 (10d10 + 40) 
Speed 60 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS CHA 
20 (+5) 14 (+2) 18 (+4)  6(-2) 10(«0) 5(-3) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages understands Celestial but can’t speak 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Charge. If the bull moves at least 20 feet straight toward a crea- 
ture and then hits it with a gore attack on the same turn, the 
target takes an extra 19 (3d12) piercing damage. 


ACTIONS 


Gore. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


Hit: 18 (2d12 + 5) piercing damage. 


WINGED LION 


Large celestial, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 114 (12d10 + 48) 
Speed 60 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
20 (+5) 16 (+3) 18 (+4)  6(-2 14(+2) 5 (-3) 


Senses passive Perception 12 
Languages understands Celestial but can’t speak 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Pounce. If the lion moves at least 20 feet straight toward a 
creature and then hits it with a claw attack on the same turn, 
that target must succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or 
be knocked prone. If the target is prone, the lion can make one 
bite attack against it as a bonus action. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 


16 (2d10 + 5) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) slashing damage. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


Two-Meaveo CERBERUS 


CERBERI 


Feared by the living and the dead, cerberi patrol both 
banks of the Tartyx River. These multiheaded hounds of 
the Underworld breathe gouts of molten rock that sear 
and imprison those who trespass upon the borders of 
life and death. Most cerberi have a boundless hunger for 
fresh meat, especially the flesh of humanoids. Villains 
have been known to exploit that hunger by luring cerberi 
away from the river and setting them loose on mortal 
settlements. 


Two-HEADED CERBERUS 


Thought to be a lesser breed of cerberi that have inter- 
bred with mortal wolves, two-headed cerberi typically 
roam the mortal side of the Tartyx River. There they 
generally ignore—or only modestly menace—the souls 
of the dead. Such isn’t the case for mortals, though, and 
they eagerly set upon those who tread too close to the 
Underworld’s borders. 


UNDERWORLD CERBERUS 

Three-headed cerberi dwell deep in the Underworld. 
Terrifying and cunning, they guard portals between the 
wards of the Underworld, Erebos's greatest treasures, 
and noteworthy souls who might attempt to escape the 
realm of the dead. Three-headed cerberi commonly 
serve demons, but if left to their own devices, they often 
herd wily souls into labyrinthine Underworld wilder- 
nesses, then hunt them for sport. 


A 15 (+2) 


y 2350708 


TwWO-HEADED CERBERUS 


Medium monstrosity, lawful evil 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 39 (6d8 + 12) 
Speed 40 ft. 
WIS CH 
13 (+1) 6 (-2) 


INT 
3 (-4) 


STR DEX 


14 (+2) 


CON 
14 (+2) 


| Skills Perception +5, Stealth +4 
Damage Immunities fire, necrotic 
| Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 
frightened, stunned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15 
Languages — 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 
ИНН 
Aggressive. As a bonus action, the cerberus сап move up to its 
speed toward a hostile creature that it can see. 


Multiheaded. The cerberus can't be surprised, and it has ad- 
vantage on saving throws against being knocked unconscious. 


Pack Tactics. The cerberus has advantage on an attack roll 
against a creature if at least one ofthe cerberus's allies is within 
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The cerberus makes two bite attacks. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (1d6 2) piercing damage plus 2 (1d4) fire damage. 


Breath Weapon (Recharge 5—6). The cerberus exhales a 15-foot 
cone of molten rock. Each creature in the cone must make a 
DC 12 Dexterity saving throw, taking 10 (346) fire damage on a 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. On a 
failed save, a creature is also restrained by the hardening rock. 
A creature can make a DC 12 Strength (Athletics) check as an 
action, freeing itself or a creature within reach from the rock on 
a success. The rock has AC 17 and 10 hit points, and it is im- 
mune to fire, poison, and psychic damage. 


UNDERWwORLO CERBERUS 


UNDERWORLD CERBERUS 


Large monstrosity, lawful evil 


Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 104 (11410 + 44) 


Speed 60 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19(«4) 1201) 18 (+4) 10 (+0) 16 (+3) 9(-1) 


aaae 

Skills Athletics +7, Perception +9, Stealth +4 

Damage Immunities fire, necrotic 

Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 
frightened, stunned 

Senses truesight 30 ft., passive Perception 19 

Languages understands all languages but can’t speak 

Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 

ПИН 

Aggressive. As a bonus action, the cerberus can move ир to its 

speed toward a hostile creature that it can see. 


Multiheaded. The cerberus can’t be surprised, and it has ad- 
vantage on saving throws against being knocked unconscious. 


Pack Tactics. The cerberus has advantage on an attack roll 
against a creature ifat least one ofthe cerberus's allies is within 
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated. 
ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The cerberus makes three bite attacks. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 


11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage plus 3 (1d6) fire damage. 


Breath Weapon (Recharge 5—6). The cerberus exhales a 30-foot 
cone of molten rock. Each creature in the cone must make a 
DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 21 (6d6) fire damage on a 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. On a 
failed save, a creature is also restrained by the hardening rock. 
A creature can make a DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check as an 
action, freeing itselfor a creature within reach from the rock on 
a success. Therock has AC 17 and 20 hit points, and it is im- 
mune to fire, poison, and psychic damage. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


CHIMERA 


The term chimera applies to a wide variety of disparate 
monsters that combine the features of multiple beasts. 
While many artistic depictions represent chimeras as an 
amalgam of lion, ram, and dragon, these beasts appear 
with nearly endless variations. 

The Akroans tell a tale of the first chimera’s origin, 
wherein the god Keranos sought to test Nylea’s favor- 
ite champion, Renata of Setessa, by creating a beast 
so deadly that even she would balk at trying to hunt 
it. When Renata slayed this lion-ram-dragon creation 
effortlessly, Keranos created another combination of 
deadlier beasts to challenge her. She slayed that beast, 
too. Despite countless attempts, Keranos was unable to 
create a beast that Renata couldn't best. 

Chimeras typically roam the deep wilds of the world, 
constantly seeking a lair that would perfectly suit one of 
its heads, but then finding it unsatisfying to two-thirds 
of its being. As a result, a hungry chimera might appear 
out of a clear sky to pick off prey nearly anywhere. This 
threat grows even more significant in regions where 
magic runs rampant or where portals to the realm of 


THERAN CHIMERA 


Large monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 95 (10410 + 40) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 13 (+1) 19 (+4) 3 (-4) 14 (+2) 10 (+0) 


Saving Throws Соп +7, Wis +5 

Skills Perception +5 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15 
Languages understands Draconic but can't speak 
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


Spell Turning. The chimera has advantage on a saving throw 
against any spell that targets only the chimera (not an area). 
If the chimera's saving throw is successful and the spell is of 
4th level or lower, the spell has no effect on the chimera and 
instead targets the caster. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The chimera makes three attacks: one with its 
claws, one with its head, and one with its tail. When its breath 
weapon is available, it can use the breath in place of its head or 
its claws. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) slashing damage. 


Head. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 10 (1412 + 4) piercing damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: П (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


Breath Weapon (Recharge 5—6). The chimera exhales fire in a 
15-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 15 
Dexterity saving throw, taking 32 (5d12) fire damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


Nyx exist, as unrestrained magical energy often causes 
more chimeras to appear in a region. As such chaotic 
magic is inherent to a chimera's being, these monsters 
often manage to shrug off spells cast against them. 


CUSTOMIZING A CHIMERA 


The Theran chimera stat block presents one possible 
chimera configuration. You may customize these statis- 
tics to design your own unique chimera. To do so, simply 
roll once on one or all of the following tables. Results 
from the Body Composition table adjust the Theran 
chimera as described, while results on the Breath Weap- 
ons, Head Attacks, and Tail Attacks tables replace those 
respective actions in the stat block. Theran chimeras 
always have the Claws action. If the results of multiple 
tables conflict, chose your preferred result. 


Вору COMPOSITION 
d4 Attack 

1 Plains Creature. The chimera's body is that of a large 
lowland creature, such as a bull or a bear, and it lacks 
wings and a flying speed. The chimera is especially re- 
silient, gaining resistance to cold and fire damage. 

2 Coast Creature. The chimera's body is that of a coastal 
or aquatic creature, such as a heron or a shark. The 
chimera gains a swimming speed equal to its walking 
speed and can breathe air and water. 

3 Mountain Creature. The chimera's body is that of 
a mountain-dwelling creature, such as a ram or a 
dragon. The chimera doesn't provoke an opportunity 
attack when it flies out of an enemy's reach. 

4 Swamp Creature. The chimera's body is that of a 
swamp creature or a cavern-dweller, such as a giant 
lizard or spider. The chimera gains a climbing speed 
equal to its walking speed and it can climb difficult 
surfaces, including upside down on ceilings, without 
needing to make an ability check. 


HEAD ATTACKS 

d4 Attack 

1 Bull Horns. If the chimera moves at least 20 feet 
straight toward a target and then hits it with a head 
attack on the same turn, the target takes an extra 7 
(2d6) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, it 
must succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or be 
knocked prone. 

2 Shark Bite. The chimera has advantage on a head at- 
tack roll against any creature that doesn't have all its 
hit points. 

3 Unicorn Horn. The chimera's head attack is magical 
and deals an extra 4 (1d8) radiant damage. 

4 Cockatrice Beak. A creature hit by the chimera's head 
attack must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving 
throw or be restrained as it begins to turn to stone. The 
restrained creature must repeat the saving throw at the 
end of its next turn. On a success, the effect ends. On 
a failure, the creature is petrified for 24 hours. 


BREATH WEAPONS 


d4 Attack 

1 Lightning Breath (Recharge 5-6). The chimera exhales 
lightning in a 60-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each crea- 
ture in that line must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving 
throw, taking 36 (8d8) lightning damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 

2 Tidal Wave Breath (Recharge 5-6). The chimera has an 
aquatic creature’s head that exhales a torrent of acidic 
water in a 60-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature 
in the line must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw. 
On failed save, a creature takes 27 (5d10) acid damage 
and is knocked prone. On a successful save, it takes 
half as much damage and isn’t knocked prone. 

3 Venom Spray (Recharge 5-6). The chimera has a ven- 
omous creature’s head that exhales a spray of poison 
in a 15-foot cone. Each creature in that area must 
succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or be 
poisoned for 1 minute. While poisoned in this way, a 
target takes 35 (10d6) poison damage at the start of 
each of its turns. A target can repeat the saving throw 
at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on 
itself on a success. 

4  Necrotic Breath (Recharge 5-6). The chimera exhales 
necrotic energy in a 15-foot cone. Each creature in that 
area must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving 
throw, or it takes 31 (7d8) necrotic damage and is un- 
able to regain hit points until the end ofits next turn. 


TAIL ATTACKS 


d4 
1 


Attack 

Venomous Tail. The chimera's tail ends in a snake's 
head or a stinger, which deals piercing damage instead 
of bludgeoning damage. In addition, when the chimera 
hits a creature with its tail, the creature must succeed 
on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or become poi- 
soned for 1 minute. A poisoned target can repeat the 
saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the 
effect on itself on a success. 

Perplexing Tail. The chimera has an additional head 
where its tail should be. The chimera loses its tail 
attack and makes two head attacks when it takes the 
Multiattack action. Use the Head Attacks table to de- 
termine the nature of the new head. 

Shark Tail. The chimera's tail is a large fin. When the 
chimera hits a creature with its tail, the creature is also 
pushed up to 10 feet away. 

Constricting Tail. The chimera's tail can constrict prey. 
If the chimera hits a creature with its tail, the target is 
grappled (escape DC 15) if it is Large or smaller. Until 
this grapple ends, the target is restrained, and the chi- 
mera can't use its tail on another target. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 217 


218 


COLOSSUS OF AKROS 


An enormous golem of bronze and iron overlooks the 
path leading to the polis of Akros. Though it is rarely 
called on to defend the polis, the sight of its towering 
form is enough to ease the minds of the populace. In 
truly desperate times, priests of Purphoros work their 
magic to call the colossus to life, whereupon the earth 
rumbles as it steps down from its twin plinths to place 
itself before the threat. 

Constructed Nature. The colossus of Akros doesn't 
require air, food, drink, or sleep. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


COLOSSUS OF AKROS 


Gargantuan construct, unaligned 


Armor Class 21 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 350 (20d20 140) 


Speed 60 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
28 (+9) 10 (+0) 25 (+7) 3(-4) 1 (40 1(-5) 


Č 

Saving Throws Str +16, Con +14 

Skills Athletics +16, Perception +7 

Damage Immunities fire, poison, psychic; bludgeoning, 
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, stunned, unconscious 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 17 

Languages understands Common and Celestial but can’t speak 

Challenge 23 (50,000 ХР) 

POOO 

Crumbling Destruction. When the colossus drops to 0 hit 

points, it crumbles and is destroyed. Any creature on the 

ground within 30 feet of the crumbling statue must make a DC 

22 Dexterity saving throw, taking 22 (4d10) bludgeoning dam- 

age and 22 (4410) fire damage on a failed save, or half as much 

damage on a successful one. 


Fire Absorption. Whenever the colossus is subjected to fire 
damage, it takes no damage and instead regains a number of 
hit points equal to the fire damage dealt. 


Immutable Form. The colossus is immune to any spell or effect 
that would alter its form. 


Magic Weapons. The colossus's weapon attacks are magical. 


Siege Monster. The colossus deals double damage to objects 
and structures. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The colossus of Akros makes two melee attacks. 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 15 
ft., or range 200/600 ft., one target. Hit: 23 (4d6 + 9) piercing 
damage, or 27 (4d8 + 9) piercing damage if used with two 
hands to make a melee attack. If the colossus makes a ranged 
attack with this spear, the spear magically returns to its hand 
after the attack. 


Sword. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
Hit: 36 (6d8 + 9) slashing damage. 


Flames of Akros (Recharge 6). Magical flames issue from the co- 
lossus toward up to three creatures the colossus can see within 
90 feet of it. Each target must make a DC 24 Dexterity saving 
throw, taking 36 (848) fire damage on a failed save, or half as 
much damage on a successful one. On a failed save, a target 
also magically catches fire for 1 minute. At the end of each of 
its turns thereafter, the burning target repeats the saving throw. 
It takes 18 (4d8) fire damage on a failed save, and the effect 
ends on a successful one. 


ABHORRENT OVERLORD 
Large fiend, lawful evil 


Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 136 (16d10 + 48) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS CHA 
20 (+5) 18 (+4) 16 (+3) 15 (+2) 14(+2) 16 (+3) 


Saving Throws Соп +7, Cha +7 

Skills Deception +7, Intimidation +7, Persuasion +7 

Damage Resistances cold, necrotic 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12 

Languages Abyssal, Common, Infernal 

Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 

L—-————  YO'——X—À—————— Qu 
Innate Spellcasting. The abhorrent overlord's spellcasting 
ability is Charisma (spell save DC 15). It can innately cast the 
following spells, requiring no material components: 


1/day each: confusion, crown of madness, suggestion 


Insatiable Greed. The abhorrent overlord can sense the pres- 
ence of gold within 1,000 feet of itself. It can determine which 
location has the greatest amount of gold and can sense the 


DEMONS OF THEROS 


Some foul souls can't let go of the miserable lives they 
had. Having been despicable in life, these spirits fester 
in death. The worst of these hateful dead, through ages 
of bitterness, gradually transform into fiends, the tor- 
mentors of the Underworld. The people of Theros know 
these fiends as demons. 

Immortal Nature. A demon of Theros doesn't require 
food, drink, or sleep. 


ABHORRENT OVERLORD 


Abhorrent overlords are gaunt, bipedal creatures whose 
gray, leathery skin is in stark contrast to the gleaming 
jewelry made of Underworld gold that they adorn them- 
selves with. Their appetite for pain and death is eclipsed 
only by their greed; these fiends delight in searching out 
treasure and slaughtering all who stand in their way. 

Fell Minions. Harpies, vultures, crows, and other 
flying scavengers are attracted to an overlord's pres- 
ence, drawn by its evil and the promise of warm meat. 
An abhorrent overlord has no sense of loyalty or ca- 
maraderie toward these sycophants and often devours 
members of its retinue, yet more of the same continue to 
flock around the demon, offering fealty and squabbling 
for scraps. 


direction to that site. If the gold is being moved, it knows the 
direction of the movement. It can't locate gold if any thickness 
of clay or lead, even a thin sheet, blocks a direct path between 
it and the gold. 


Magic Resistance. The abhorrent overlord has advantage on 
saving throws against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The abhorrent overlord makes two attacks with 
its claws. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) slashing damage plus 14 (4d6) necrotic dam- 
age. The abhorrent overlord regains hit points equalto half the 
amount of necrotic damage dealt if the target is a creature. 


Storm of Crows (Recharge 6). The abhorrent overlord conjures a 
swarm of spectral crows and harpies in a 20-foot-radius sphere 
centered on a point the overlord can see within 120 feet of it. 
The sphere remains for 1 minute or until the overlord loses 
concentration (as if concentrating on a spell), and its area is 
lightly obscured and difficult terrain. 

Any creature that moves into the area for the first time on a 
turn or starts its turn there must make a DC 15 Constitution 
saving throw. A creature takes 16 (3d10) slashing damage plus 
16 (3410) psychic damage on a failed save, or half as much 
damage оп а successful one. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


219 


EATER OF HOPE ins 


An eater of hopeis bitter to the core, resentful of all 
forms of life and joy. Although these demons can strike 
down most foes, they prefer to let terror and despair 
overtake their victims first, letting their victims mari- 
nate in fear before the fiend devours them. 

Twister of Wills. Being obsessed with wealth and 
dominating lesser beings, eaters of hope hoard treasure 
for the sole purpose of tempting and manipulating mor- 
tals. They revel in using creatures' greed to turn them 


against one another and their own best interests. — HA me р LAS 


EATER OF HOPE 
Large fiend, lawful evil 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 90 (12410 + 24) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4) 17 (+3) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 1 (+0) 16 (+3) 


Saving Throws Соп +5, Cha +6 

Skills Deception +6, Intimidation +6, Persuasion +6 
Damage Resistances cold, necrotic 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Abyssal, Common, Infernal 

Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


PETER MOHRBACHER 


Insatiable Greed. The eater of hope can sense the presence of 
gold within 1,000 feet of itself. It can determine which location 
has the greatest amount of gold and can sense the direction 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


FIENDS OF THEROS 
On Theros, the term "demon" encompasses all fiends. 
The people of Theros might refer to “demons” or “devils” 
interchangeably, having no understanding of the difference 
between fiendish species or distant nightmarish planes. A 
pit fiend might be interpreted by Theros’s mortals as one 
of the Underworld’s countless demonic denizens, while a 
balor meeting a Theros demon on some other plane might 
consider it a rarity from some undiscovered Abyssal layer. 
In general, feel free to use whatever fiends you wish when 
telling stories in Theros—the Underworld's a big place 
with room for all the incarnate wickedness you desire. 


to that site. If the gold is being moved, it knows the direction 
of the movement. It can't locate gold if any thickness of clay 
or lead, even a thin sheet, blocks a direct path between it 
and the gold. 


Magic Resistance. The eater of hope has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The eater of hope makes two attacks with 
its claws. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (148 + 4) slashing damage plus 7 (246) necrotic damage. 


Breath of Hopelessness (Recharge 5—6). The eater of hope ex- 
hales a miasma of Underworld winds in a 30-foot cone. Each 
creature in that area must make a DC 14 Charisma saving 
throw. On a failed save, the target takes 26 (4d12) necrotic 
damage and is cursed for 1 minute. While cursed in this way, 
the target takes an extra 6 (1d12) necrotic damage whenever 
the eater of hope hits it with an attack. On a successful save, 
the target takes half as much damage and isn’t cursed. 


NIGHTMARE SHEPHERD 


A nightmare shepherd is a gaunt, ashen fiend 
with leathery wings. It carries a shepherd's crook, 
which it uses to direct a flock of wandering dead 
that it torments and occasionally feeds upon. 
Overseers of the Underworld. Nightmare shep- 
herds are Nyxborn, drawn from the god-energy 
of Erebos to be guides of the dead, shepherding 
them to one of the five wards of the Underworld 
where they will spend their dismal eternity. They 
prey upon souls who wander from their rightful 
places in the Underworld. 


NIGHTMARE SHEPHERD 
Large fiend, lawful evil 
Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 133 (14d10 + 56) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19(«4) 15 (+2) 18 (+4) м (+2) 17 (+3) 20 (+5) 
Saving Throws Соп +8, Wis +7 
Skills Arcana +6, Deception +9, Perception +7, Persuasion +9 
Damage Resistances cold, necrotic 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities poisoned 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 17 
Languages Abyssal, Common, Infernal 
Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) 


EMP ee e —M— 


Aura of Nightmares. Undead creatures within 30 feet of the 
shepherd gain a +5 bonus to attack and damage rolls. When 
any other creature that isn't undead or a construct starts its 
turn within 30 feet of the shepherd, that creature must suc- 
ceed on a DC 17 Wisdom saving throw or take Tl (2910) psy- 
chic damage. 


Innate Spellcasting. The shepherd's spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 17). It can innately cast the following 
spells, requiring no material components: 


1/day each: confusion, dispel magic, hold person, suggestion 


Magic Resistance. The shepherd has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The shepherd makes two attacks: one with its 
claws and one with its staff. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) slashing damage plus 16 (3d10) ne- 
crotic damage. 


Staff. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage, or 13 (2d8 + 4) blud- 
geoning damage if used with two hands, plus 26 (4d12) psy- 
chic damage. 


Herdthe Underworld (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). 
The shepherd pulls twisted souls from the Underworld; 1d6 


shadows (without Sunlight Weakness; see the Monster Manual) 
arise in unoccupied spaces within 20 feet of the shepherd. The 


shadows act right after the shepherd on the same initiative 
count and fight until they’re destroyed. They disappear when 
the shepherd dies. 


CSSS 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


22I 


EIDOLONS 


When a mortal soul traumatically sacrifices its identity 
in order to escape the Underworld as a Returned, its 
identity manifests as a spirit-like eidolon. While eidolons 
possess many of the skills and details related to their 
past lives, they're disconnected from those experiences, 
choosing to wander the world or brood in haunts they're 
drawn to in death. They care nothing for morbid re- 
unions with their lost bodies or Returned remnants. 

Of the various types of eidolons, flitterstep eidolons 
are the most common and wander without purpose. 
Ghostblade eidolons typically arise from fallen warriors 
and believe they're endlessly embroiled in great battles. 

Undead Nature. An eidolon doesn't require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


Im 


FLITTERSTEP EIDOLON 


Medium undead, any alignment 


Armor Class 14 
Hit Points 44 (848 + 8) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
8(-1  18(«4) 13 (+1) 11 (+0) 12(+1) 10 (+0) 


I ————4!xui1cxc:)!]l]j]QjOXOLAAX4]1]QOO]](unujpammm-m-"«u | 

Skills Perception +3, Stealth +8 

Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
grappled, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, restrained 

Senses passive Perception 13 

Languages the languages it knew in life 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 

И 

Blurred Form. Attack rolls against the eidolon are made with 

disadvantage unless the eidolon is incapacitated. 


Evasion. If the eidolon is subjected to an effect that allows it 

to make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, the 
eidolon instead takes no damage if it succeeds on the saving 
throw, and only half damage if it fails. It can't use this trait if it's 
incapacitated. 


Incorporeal Movement. The eidolon can move through other 
creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It takes 5 
(1d10) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object. 


Turn Resistance. The eidolon has advantage on saving throws 
against any effect that turns undead. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The eidolon makes two melee attacks. Immedi- 
ately before or after one of its attacks, it can use Flitterstep if it 
is available. 


Flickering Dagger. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 6 (144 + 4) piercing damage plus 3 (1d6) psy- 
chic damage. 


Flitterstep (Recharge 5—6). The eidolon magically teleports to 
an unoccupied space it can see within 30 feet of it. If it makes 
an attack immediately after teleporting, it has advantage on the 
attack roll. 


ES CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


GHOSTBLADE ÉIOOLON 


ET aT IIT a RENI YT ае cat T 1 ы 


GHOSTBLADE EIDOLON 


Medium undead, any alignment 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 55 (1048 + 10) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
Weed) 15402) Te) ho 2 32461) 


14 (+2) 


Skills Acrobatics +5, Athletics +6, Perception +4 

Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
grappled, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, restrained 

Senses passive Perception 14 

Languages the languages it knew in life 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 

L-—————————————— ————————À—Ó—— 1 

Blurred Form. Attack rolls against the eidolon are made with 

disadvantage unless the eidolon is incapacitated. 


Incorporeal Movement. The eidolon can move through other 
creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It takes 5 
(1d10) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object. 


Turn Resistance. The eidolon has advantage on saving throws 
against any effect that turns undead. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The eidolon makes two ghostblade attacks. 


Ghostblade. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 8 (148 + 3) slashing damage plus 11 (2410) 
force damage. 


ш 
ш 
> 
z 
z 
> 
= 


FLEECEMANE LION 


Twice the size of normal lions and with resplendent 
manes of silvery or golden hair, fleecemane lions prowl 
and protect sites imbued with the power of Nyx. While 
the specifics of these massive lions’ connection to Nyx 
is unclear, many myths tell of the deadly predators 
stalking mortals and spreading fear until they're ulti- 
mately defeated by a brave hunter. As a result, overcom- 
ing a fleecemane lion is widely considered an early step 
on the road to becoming a true hero. 


FLEECEMANE LION 


Large monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 45 (6d10 + 12) 
Speed 50 ft. 
DEX CON INT wis 
16 (+3) 2) | 


Saving Throws Str +6, Con +4 
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +5 
Senses passive Perception 14 
Languages — 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Keen Smell. The lion has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on smell. 


Pounce. If the lion moves at least 20 feet straight toward a 
creature and then hits it with a claw attack on the same turn, 
that target must succeed on a DC 14 Strength saving throw or 
be knocked prone. If the target is prone, the lion can make one 
bite attack against it as a bonus action. 


Running Leap. With a 10-foot running start, the lion can long 
jump up to 25 feet. 


Spell Turning. The lion has advantage on saving throws against 
any spell that targets only the lion (not an area). If the lion's 
saving throw succeeds and the spell is of 4th level or lower, the 
spell has no effect on the lion and instead targets the caster. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The lion makes two attacks: one with its bite and 
one with its claw. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (148 4) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (146 + 4) slashing damage. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The lion can take 2 legendary actions, choosing from the op- 
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at 
a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The lion 
regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Claw. The lion makes one claw attack. 

Roar (Costs 2 Actions). The lion emits a magical roar. Each 
creature within 60 feet of the lion that can hear the roar must 
succeed on a DC 12 Wisdom saving throw or be frightened of 
the lion until the end of the lion's next turn. 


CLS 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


223 


224 


we 
е 


GIANTS 


A spectrum of giants claims territory across Theros, 
drawing strength from aspects of the world itself—from 
ancient stone and roiling flames to the depths of the 
seas and skies. Unlike many creatures of legend, most 
giants owe their existence not to Nyx and the dreams 
of mortals, but to natural forces in the land. As aresult, 
Theran giants are typically infused with the elements 
they embody, which might manifest as flaming beards, 
frozen skin, hair crackling with lightning, or other pri- 
mal incarnations. 

Beyond these primal giants, though, other giants fill 
the tales of Theros. 


DOOMWAKE GIANT 


Belief is a powerful force in Theros, capable of bringing 


about wonders and changing the world—but not always 
for the better. Doomwake giants arise from pernicious 
fears that infect a whole city or region. If enough mor- 
tals dread destruction for long enough, their terror can 
manifest as one of these massive Nyxborn beings. Once 
unleashed, a doomwake giant goes on a rampage, ful- 
filling the prophecy mortals believed into being. After 
doing so, these terrors typically roam to the edges of the 
world, where they either fade away over time or become 
legends that take on their own terrible life. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


©) Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 


DOOMWAKE GIANT 


Huge giant, lawful evil 


Hit Points 162 (13d12 + 78) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
24 (+7) 12 (+1) 22 (+6) 12 (+1) 14 (+2) 16 (+3) 


Saving Throws Соп +10, Wis +6 

Skills Intimidation +7, Perception +6 

Damage Immunities necrotic, poison 

Condition Immunities frightened, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16 

Languages Giant 

Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) 

Lo ————————————————  '  ''OCO!!———— ——— 
Aura of Erebos. Any creature that starts its turn within 10 feet of 
the giant must succeed on a DC 18 Constitution saving throw, 
or it takes 10 (3d6) necrotic damage and can't regain hit points 
until the start of its next turn. On a successful saving throw, the 
creature is immune to the giant's Aura of Erebos for 24 hours. 


Magic Resistance. The giant has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The giant makes two slam attacks. 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 15 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 20 (348 + 7) bludgeoning damage plus 10 (3d6) 
necrotic damage. 


Noxious Gust (Recharge 5—6). The giant exhales a mighty 
gust that creates a blast of deadly mist in a 60-foot line that 
is 10 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC 18 
Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 
36 (8d8) necrotic damage and is knocked prone. On a suc- 
cessful save, a creature takes half as much damage and isn't 
knocked prone. 

ане ни очса реА: Eee 


HUNDRED-HANDED ONE 


Extra pairs of arms magically orbit the bodies of 

the titanic, nearly forgotten artisans known as hun- 
dred-handed ones. These giants often dwell in remote 
mountains and seaside cliffs, where they carve their 
memories into the ancient stone, covering their territo- 
ries with intricate reliefs and massive statues of bygone 
ages. Some linger near ancient temples and palaces, 
ruins they once raised to the gods or archons of old. 

Artisans of the Archons. Legend has it that the hun- 
dred-handed ones were once a tribe of giant artisans, 
prized by archon tyrants for their ability as stone cut- 
ters and smiths. The archons became greedy for more 
splendid monuments to their greatness. Some believed 
the grandest testaments to their glory were being de- 
nied them by their servants’ unremarkable forms. So 
the archons performed dark rituals, robbing the power 
of ancient, slumbering giants and using it to transform 
their servants. This primal energy granted the archons’ 
agents numerous limbs—the better to raise the archons’ 
monuments and fortresses. 

Yet many of the transformed giants refused to be part 
of the archons’ war machine. Seeking to escape their 
masters, they fled into the wilderness. The furious ar- 
chons’ magic pursued them, cursing them with an end- 
less will to create, but no one to create for and none who 
would ever appreciate or use the art and architecture 
they created. 


A 2л 


HUNDRED-HANDED ONE 


Huge giant, lawful neutral 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 243 (18d12 + 126) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
26(48) 15 (+2) 25 (+7)  14(42) 16 (+3) 16 (+3) 


Saving Throws Con +12, Wis 48 

Skills Intimidation +8, Perception +8 

Condition Immunities frightened 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 18 
Languages Giant 

Challenge 15 (13,000 XP) 


Reactive. The giant can take one reaction on every turn 
in a combat. 


Vigilant. The giant can't be surprised. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The giant makes four longsword attacks or two 
rock attacks. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 15 ft., one 
target. Hit: 21 (348 + 8) slashing damage. 


Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, range 60/240 ft., one 
target. Hit: 30 (4410 + 8) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a 
creature, it must succeed on a DC 21 Strength saving throw or 
be knocked prone. 


REACTIONS 


Deflect Attack. The giant adds 5 to its AC against one weapon 
attack that would hit it. To do so, the giant must see the at- 
tacker and be wielding a melee weapon. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 225 


HARPIES 


Cruel, corpse-eating creatures, harpies endlessly seek 
their next meal, careless of whether it comes from the 


living or the dead. With equal zeal, these vicious scaven- 


gers set upon travelers or claw open fresh graves, strip- 
ping bodies of riches and flesh. Then they carry back 
any treasures or appealing bones they find to reeking 
nests situated in cramped caves or rotten trees. 


APHEMIA THE DISSONANT SONG 


The notorious Nyxborn harpy Aphemia prowls the 
marshy wastes around the necropolis of Asphodel. Her 
shrill songs enthrall the necropolis's undead inhabi- 
tants, which she leads on raids to waylay unsuspecting 
travelers and settlements. 


BLOOD-TOLL HARPY 


Murderous gangs of harpies collect in grim places 
across Theros, preying on any who pass by. Many mer- 
chants face regular losses at the harpies' claws, com- 
mon casualties often referred to as a "blood toll." 


SIRENS 

Sirens are a kind of beautiful harpy with humanlike bodies, 
bird wings and legs, and bright plumage in shades of blue, 
purple, and green. They use the stat block of the harpy in 
the Monster Manual, using their luring song to mesmerize 
their prey and draw it near. Siren songs prove exceptionally 
dangerous to sailors, who risk steering their ships onto 
reefs in an attempt to reach the source of the melody. 


APHEMIA Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- " LUE 
MED КОЛЕМ Е get. Hit: 8 (244 + 3) piercing damage plus 13 (348) ne- 
crotic damage. i 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 52 (8d8 16) 
Speed 20 ft., fly 50 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

1 (+1) 16 (+3) 15 (+2) 13 (+1) 14 (+2) 16(+3) 
a 
Saving Throws Dex +6, Cha +6 
Skills Arcana +4, Intimidation +6, Perception +5 
Damage Resistances necrotic 
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15 
Languages Common 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 
L—-—-———————————————————— 2 —— À—— 2. 
Legendary Resistance (2/Day). If Aphemia fails a saving throw, 
she can choose to succeed instead. 


Magic Resistance. Aphemia has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 
ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Aphemia makes two attacks: one with her bite 
and one with her claws. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 10 (2d6 3) slashing damage. 


Discordant Song. Aphemia shrieks a cacophony of magical 
sounds. Each humanoid within 120 feet of her must succeed on 
a DC 14 Wisdom saving throw or be frightened of her until the 
song ends. A frightened creature takes 7 (2d6) psychic damage 
at the start of its turn while Aphemia is singing. A frightened 
creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a creature's 
saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, the crea- 
ture is immune to Aphemia's Discordant Song for the next 24 
hours. Aphemia must take a bonus action on her subsequent 
turns to continue singing. She can stop singing at any time. 
The song ends if Aphemia is incapacitated or dies. 


Grave Calling Song. Aphemia intones a low, growling magical 
melody. Every undead within 300 feet of her must succeed on 
a DC 14 Wisdom saving throw or fall under her control until 
the song ends. Aphemia must take a bonus action on her 
subsequent turns to continue singing, and she can mentally 
command the undead under her control as partofthe same 
bonus action. She can stop singing at any time. The song ends 
if Aphemia is incapacitated or dies. 


=з CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


111ррослдмр 


BLoop-Iorr HARPY 


Medium monstrosity, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 9 (2d8) 
Speed 20 ft., fly 40 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS CHA 
12 (+1) 13 (+1) 10 (+0) 6(22 1 (+0) 13 (+1) 


Skills Intimidation +3 
Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages Common 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Blood Frenzy. The harpy has advantage on melee attack rolls 
against any creature that doesn’t have all its hit points. 


Dark Devotion. The harpy has advantage on saving throws 
against being charmed or frightened. 

ACTIONS 

Multiattack. The harpy makes two melee attacks: one with its 
bite and one with its claws. 

Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) slashing damage. 


HIPPOCAMP 


Noble steeds of the sea, hippocamps feature in count- 
less tales as guides and mounts to tritons and other 
ocean-faring heroes. While these curious but cautious 
aquatic equines naturally travel in herds, many hold val- 
ued places in triton society. Considered to be servants of 
Thassa, hippocamps are often unpredictable, but their 
great speed and strength can prove awe-inspiring when 
harnessed by the god’s will. 


HIPPOCAMP 


Large monstrosity, chaotic good 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 22 (4d10) 
Speed 20 ft., swim 50 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS CHA 
14 (+2) 15 (+2) 11 (+0)  5(3) 10(40  6(-2 


Damage Resistances cold 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages — 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Amphibious. The hippocamp can breathe air and water. 


Charge. If the hippocamp moves at least 20 feet straight toward 
a target and then hits it with a ram attack on the same turn, the 
target takes an extra 7 (2d6) bludgeoning damage. If the target 
is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 12 Strength saving throw 
or be knocked prone. 


ACTIONS 


Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage. 


Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


225 


228 


HOPLITES 


Hoplites are highly trained warriors, versed not only 

in strategy and tactics but in the glorification of the 
warrior's spirit, the basis of an ethos that forges an un- 
breakable bond between members of a military unit. In 
combat, hoplites typically work in groups and use coor- 
dinated tactics to win victories. 

The three Hoplite Unit Names tables present the 
sorts of titles used by hoplite contingents hailing from 
Theros's great poleis. Consider using these names for 
military forces characters encounter during their adven- 
tures or that they were once a part of. 


AKROAN HOPLITE 


Akroan hoplites, also called stratians, number among 
the fiercest soldiers on Theros. They train relentlessly 
and possess unflinching resolve. In the annals of Akros, 
tales abound of squads of stratians that defended a key 
location against a much larger force or crept behind en- 
emy lines and wreaked havoc in the opposing army. 


MELETIAN HOPLITE 


Meletian hoplites use a combination of cunning, faith, 
and magic to defend their coastal home. Most of these 
skilled soldiers serve in the Reverent Army, the defend- 
ers of Meletis, which uses an array of proven strategies 
and flexible troop formations to gain the advantage over 
foes. Bolstered by trained griffon and pegasus steeds, 
they strike foes where they least expect. 


SETESSAN HOPLITE 


Most Setessan hoplites begin their training as hunters, 
making them skilled in traversing the woods and adept 
at both guerrilla tactics and archery. Their strategies 
often emulate the favored servants of Nylea—especially 
wild beasts like wolves and lynxes. Typically a few sol- 
diers harry an enemy while the rest capitalize on their 
foe's distraction. 


AKROAN HOPLITE 


Medium humanoid (any), any alignment 


Armor Class 18 (breastplate, shield) 
Hit Points 52 (8d8 + 16) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3)  16(43) 14 (+2) 1 (+0) 14 (+2) 13 e) 


Saving Throws Str +5, Dex 45 
Senses passive Perception 12 
Languages Common 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


| 


Hold the Line. While the hoplite is holding a spear, other crea- 
tures provoke an opportunity attack from the hoplite when they 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


AKROAN HoPLiTE UNIT NAMES 


Name 


a 
оо 


Spears of lroas 
lron Fangs 
Arrows of Anax 
The Unbroken 
Anvil of Purphoros 
Skewering Squad 
Shield of Akros 
Cymede’s Heart 


о МЧ DM BP WN — 


MELETIAN HoPLiTE UNIT NAMES 


Name 


a 
oo 


Kraken's Claw 
Hands of Justice 
Thassa's Spear 
Ephara's Shield 
Kindred of the Deep 
Riders of Heliod 
Keepers of Pyrgnos 


oN C^ л fF о ко — 


The Skysworn 


SETESSAN HoPLiTE UNIT NAMES 


Name 


с. 
со 


Nylea's Arrows 

The Watchers 

Fangs of Ophis 

The Swif tswords 
Karametra’s Wolves 
Defenders of the Grove 
Bronze Blades 

The Jackals 


CoN DMN FF WN — 


move within 5 feet of it. When the hoplite hits a creature with 
an opportunity attack using its spear, the creature takes an ex- 
tra 4 (1d8) piercing damage, and the creature's speed becomes 
0 for the rest of the turn. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The hoplite makes three melee attacks or two 
ranged attacks. 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage, or 
7 (148 + 3) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a 
melee attack. 


Shield Bash. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 5 (144 + 3) bludgeoning damage. If the target 

is a Medium or smaller creature, it must succeed on a DC 13 
Strength saving throw or be knocked prone. 


EX MELETIAN HOPLITE 
ОС Medium humanoid (any), any alignment 


Armor Class 18 (breastplate, shield) 
Hit Points 49 (948 + 9) 
1 Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 16 (+3) 13 (+1) 1 (+0) 
Saving Throws Dex +4, Int +5 
Skills Arcana +5, History +5, Perception +3 
Senses passive Perception 13 
Languages Common 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Spellcasting. The hoplite is a 3rd-level spellcaster. Its spellcast- 


ing ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 13, +5 to hit with spell 
attacks). It has the following wizard spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): mage hand, minor illusion, ray of frost (see 
"Actions" below) 

Ist level (4 slots): color spray, expeditious retreat, sleep 

2nd level (2 slots): blur, cloud of daggers, invisibility 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The hoplite makes three weapon attacks. It can 
replace one weapon attack with ray of frost. 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 
ft., one target. Hit: 6 (146 + 3) piercing damage, or 7 (148 
* 3) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a me- 
lee attack. 


Shield Bash. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 5 (144 + 3) bludgeoning damage. If the target 

is a Medium or smaller creature, it must succeed on a DC 13 
Strength saving throw orbe knocked prone. 


Ray of Frost (Cantrip). Ranged Spell Attack: +5 to hit, range 60 
ft., one creature. Hit: 4 (1d8) cold damage, and the target's 
speed is reduced by 10 feet until the start of the hoplite's 
next turn. 


See eee 


SETESSAN HOPLITE 


Medium humanoid (any), any alignment 


Armor Class 16 (leather, shield) 
Hit Points 58 (9d8 + 18) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14 (+2) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 13 (+1) 16 (+3) 1 (+0) 


Saving Throws Dex +5, Wis +5 

Skills Acrobatics +5, Perception +5, Survival +5 
Senses passive Perception 15 

Languages Common 

Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Pack Tactics. The hoplite has advantage on an attack roll 
against a creature ifat least one ofthe hoplite's allies is within 
5 feet of the hoplite and the ally isn't incapacitated. 


longbow attacks. 


Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) slashing damage plus 10 (3d6) poison damage. 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 150/600 ft., 
one target. Hit: 7 (148 + 3) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) poi- 
son damage. 

SE e ST SERN IO a) 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 229 


230 


HYDRAS 


What krakens are to the sea and dragons are to the sky, 
hydras are to the lands of Theros. Various hydras dwell 
at the fringes of civilization, from the bog-dwelling hy- 
dras known across the multiverse to massive ironscale 
hydras that lurk in deep wildernesses. Beyond even 
these exist serpentine horrors born of the whims of foul 
gods, like the legendary hydra Polukranos. 

Territorial Terrors. During their early years, hydras 
feed their rapid growth by terrorizing the land. When 
they grow large enough, they look for a territory to claim 
as their own. Often, they steal lairs from other monsters 
in prolonged, devastating battles. 

Vicious Growth. Soon after a hydra claims a territory, 
it typically buries itself, entering a period of hibernation 
during which it continues to grow. When it awakens, it 
goes on a feeding rampage, so beginning the cycle once 
again. These rhythms of destruction sometimes become 
so ingrained in the minds and lore of a people that, even 
after a hydra's defeat, the beast might reappear as a 
Nyxborn being and begin its legend anew. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


IRONSCALE HYORA 


IRONSCALE HYDRA 


Five-headed ironscale hydras lurkin the wild places of 
the world, being common foes for heroes seeking to test 
their mettle against terrors worthy of the gods’ notice. 
Most ironscale hydras inhabit lakes and boggy caverns, 
from which they hunt unwary creatures that come fora 
drink or swim. 


POLUKRANOS 


Polukranos, called the World Eater, is the mortal 
manifestation of the eternal ideal of a hydra. In its first 
incarnation, it fell from Nyx to the mortal world, and so 
great were its size and strength that the gods Nylea and 
Heliod combined their power to bind the monster deep 
within the Nessian Wood. That incarnation was slain, 
but the eternal ideal remains. A new incarnation of the 
World Eater is a fearsome omen, as the monster only ap- 
pears when the pillars of the world tremble and terrible 
things are afoot in the realm of the gods. Its rampages 
often presage an age of menace for all civilization. 


IRONSCALE HYDRA 


Gargantuan monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 181 (11d20 + 66) 
Speed 40 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS СНА 
22 (+6) 10 (+0) 22(«6  2(-4) 10(+0) 7(-2) 


Skills Perception +8 

Damage Immunities acid 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 18 
Languages — 

Challenge 12 (8,400 XP) 


Acidic Blood. When the hydra takes piercing or slashing dam- 
age, each creature within 5 feet of the hydra takes 9 (2d8) 
acid damage. 


Hold Breath. The hydra can hold its breath for 1 hour. 


POLUKRANOS 


Gargantuan monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 232 (15420 + 75) 
Speed 50 ft., swim 50 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS CHA 
25 (#7. doab-2) 21495) ^ 4093) — 14 («2) . 10 (0) 


Skills Perception +14 

Damage Immunities acid 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 24 
Languages — 

Challenge 19 (22,000 XP) 


Acidic Blood. When Polukranos takes piercing or slashing dam- 
age, each creature within 5 feet of Polukranos takes 10 (3d6) 
acid damage. 


Hold Breath. Polukranos can hold its breath for 1 hour. 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Polukranos fails a saving 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


Multiple Heads. Polukranos has five heads. While it has 
more than one head, Polukranos has advantage on saving 
throws against being blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened, 
stunned, or knocked unconscious. 
Whenever Polukranos takes 40 or more damage in a single 
turn, one of its heads dies. If all its heads die, Polukranos dies. 
Atthe end of its turn, it grows two heads for each of its heads 
that died since its last turn, unless it has taken 40 or more fire 
damage since its last turn. Polukranos regains 20 hit points for 
each head regrown in this way. 


Multiple Heads. The hydra has five heads. While it has more 
than one head, the hydra has advantage on saving throws 
against being blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened, 
stunned, or knocked unconscious. 

Whenever the hydra takes 35 or more damage in a single 
turn, one of its heads dies. If all its heads die, the hydra dies. 

At the end ofits turn, it grows two heads for each of its heads 
that died since its last turn, unless it has taken fire damage 
since its last turn. The hydra regains 10 hit points for each head 
regrown in this way. 


Reactive Heads. For each head the hydra has beyond one, 
it gets an extra reaction that can be used only for opportu- 
nity attacks. 


Wakeful. While the hydra sleeps, at least one of its 
heads is awake. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The hydra makes as many bite attacks as it 
has heads. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (2d10 + 6) piercing damage. 


Reactive Heads. For each head Polukranos has beyond one, it 
gets an extra reaction that can be used only to make opportu- 
nity attacks. 


Siege Monster. Polukranos deals double damage to objects and 
structures. 


Wakeful. While Polukranos sleeps, at least one of its 
heads is awake. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Polukranos makes as many bite attacks as it 
has heads. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
Hit: 18 (2d10 + 7) piercing damage. 


Stomp. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 15 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 16 (2d8 + 7) bludgeoning damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
Hit: 18 (2410 + 7) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a crea- 
ture, it must succeed on a DC 21 Strength saving throw or be 
pushed up to 20 feet away from Polukranos. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Polukranos can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op- 
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a 
time and only at the end of another creature's turn. Polukranos 
regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Detect. Polukranos makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Tail Swipe. Polukranos makes a tail attack. 

Trampling Charge (Costs 3 Actions). Polukranos moves up to 
50 feet in a straight line and can move through the space of 
any creature Huge or smaller. The first time it enters each 
creature's space during this move, it can make a stomp at- 
tack against that creature. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


231 


232 


LEONIN 


Prides of leonin roam the plains of Oreskos, protecting 
the land and its creatures from interlopers, both mortal 
and immortal. As many leonin suffered at the hands of 
archon tyrants in ages past, today their prides largely 
avoid contact with other peoples and spurn the gods that 
ignored their plight. Since then, the leonin have flour- 
ished, finding strength in their bonds with one another 
and the land. Only in recent times have some leonin 
started guardedly looking beyond their homeland and 
wondering what role they might take in the wider world. 

Most leonin hunters are tribal warriors, but those 
who hunt the servants of the gods rather than game are 
known as leonin iconoclasts. 


LEONIN ICONOCLAST _ 


While leonin don’t deny the existence of the gods, most 
denounce them, believing the deities are more likely 

to spread doom than peace and bounty. Some leonin, 
known as iconoclasts, devote themselves to thwarting 
the gods by hunting down their followers and all things 
born of Nyx that impede on Oreskos and the safety of 
the leonin prides. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


LEONIN ICONOCLAST 


Medium humanoid (leonin), any alignment 


Armor Class 17 (Unarmored Defense) 
Hit Points 67 (948 + 27) 


\ Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CH 
14 (+2) 18 (+4) 16 (+3) 13 (+1) 17 (+3) 10 (+0) 


ШИН 

Saving Throws Dex +7, Wis +6 

Skills Arcana +4, Insight +6, Intimidation +3, Stealth +7, 
Survival +6 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 

Languages Common, Leonin 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 

eee, 

Evasion. If the leonin is subjected to an effect that allows it 

to make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, it 

instead takes no damage if it succeeds on the saving throw, 

and only half damage if it fails. It can't use this trait if it's in- 

capacitated. 


Innate Spellcasting. The leonin's spellcasting ability is Wisdom 
(spell save DC 14). It can innately cast the following spells, re- 
quiring no material components: 


1/day each: banishment, detect evil and good 
Unarmored Defense. While the leonin is wearing no armor and 


wielding no shield, its AC includes its Wisdom modifier. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The leonin makes three weapon attacks. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage plus 7 (2d6) force damage. 


Dart. Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, range 20/60 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 6 (144 + 4) piercing damage. 
SSeS ee 


NYX-FLEECE RAM 


Touched by the gods, Nyx-fleece rams grow remarkable 
magical wool. This makes the beasts valuable to heroes 
and scoundrels alike, who would use their wool for ei- 
ther protection or profit. Divine servants guard the few 
herds of Nyx-fleece rams dwelling among Theros's lofti- 
est peaks, assuring they don't fall into unworthy hands. 

Magic Fleece. If someone shears a Nyx-fleece ram 
without damaging the creature, the fleece can be made 
into a magic garment. A wearer who is attuned to the 
garment, as to a magic item, receives the favor of the 
gods in the form of a magical benefit. Use the Powers 
of the Fleece table to determine the property of a newly 
created garment. 


POWERS OF THE FLEECE 
d6 Property 

1 Protection. The wearer gains a +1 bonus to AC and 
saving throws. 

2 Power ofNyx. The wearer has advantage on all Cha- 
risma (Persuasion) checks. 

3 Calming Presence. The wearer can cast calm emotions 
once per day (save DC 13). 

4  Trailof Flowers. Wherever the wearer of the fleece 
walks, flowers spring up magically behind them. The 
flowers wilt away after 1 hour. 

5 Animal Affinity. Any non-evil wearer of the fleece can 
cast animal friendship once per day (save DC 13). 

6 Abundance of Food. The wearer can cast create food 
and water once per day. 


NYX-FLEECE RAM 
Medium monstrosity, unaligned 
Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 27 (5d8 « 5) 

Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 3 (-4) 13 (+1) 10 (+0) 


Senses passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 
Charge. If the ram moves at least 20 feet straight toward a 
target and then hits it with a ram attack on the same turn, the 
target takes an extra 5 (2d4) bludgeoning damage. If the target 
is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw 


or be knocked prone. 


Magic Resistance. The ram has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Sure-Footed. The ram has advantage on Strength and Dexterity 
saving throws against effects that would knock it prone. 


ACTIONS 


Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 8 (244 + 3) bludgeoning damage plus 3 (1d6) 
force damage. 


LLL eee 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


233 


оз 


NYMPHS 


Divine servants that inhabit unspoiled corners of the 
world, nymphs protect places of natural power and in- 
fuse their surroundings with the magic of Nyx. Some 
are benevolent and aid those who live off the land, while 
others embody violent aspects of nature. In either case, 
nymphs generally avoid other sapient creatures, pre- 
ferring to mind the cycles of nature, the daily interplay 
of wild animals, or other cosmic forces. Occasionally, 
though, groups of the same kind of nymphs congregate 
in a place of natural power or beauty. In times of spe- 
cial need, deities tied to facets of nature might employ 
nymphs as messengers, guardians, or scouts. 

The nymphs of Theros include the following myste- 
rious beings, as well as dryads (presented in the Mon- 
ster Manual). 

Immortal Nature. A nymph doesn't require food, 
drink, or sleep. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


ALSEID 


Touched with the golden light of the sun, alseids inhabit 
meadows, plains, and lands of cultivated natural beauty. 
Many live in closer proximity to human civilization than 
other nymphs. Farmers are grateful for the presence of 

alseids on their lands and often leave them offerings of 

mead, honey, flowers, and dates in return for protecting 
their flocks and making their crops more abundant. 


LAMPAD 


Lampads guard the shadowed paths of the world, depths 
typically trod by souls destined for the Underworld. 
These rarely seen nymphs assist Athreos in guiding the 
dead, moving among the spirits that collect along the 
Tartyx River and reclaiming wayward souls that try to 
slip back to the mortal world. This means lampads are 
most often spotted in graveyards, crumbling crypts, and 
tunnels that bore deep into the earth, and near portals 
to the Underworld. 


ALSEID 


Medium fey, chaotic good 


| Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (42 10 (+0) 12 (+1) 13 (+1) 14 (+2) 18 (+4) 


Skills Persuasion +6 

Damage Resistances radiant 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned 
Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages Common, Sylvan 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 
rrr 
Hide in Plain Sight. The alseid has advantage on Dexterity 
(Stealth) checks made to hide while it is in grassland. 


Innate Spellcasting. The alseid's spellcasting ability is Charisma 
(spell save DC 14). It can innately cast the following spells, re- 
quiring no material components: 


3/day each: cure wounds, charm person, sleep 
1/дау each: calm emotions, lesser restoration, plant growth 


Magic Resistance. The alseid has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 
ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The alseid makes two radiant touch attacks. 


Radiant Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 9 (1410 + 4) radiant damage. 


LAMPAD 


Medium fey, neutral evil 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 52 (848 + 16) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12 (+1) 13 (+1) 14 (+2) 11 (+0) 12 (+1) 18 (+4) 


НИНИН 
Skills Deception +6, Intimidation +6 

Damage Resistances necrotic 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned 
Senses passive Perception 11 

Languages Common, Sylvan 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 
EEE 
Corpse Stride. Once on its turn, the lampad can use 10 feet 
of its movement to step magically into one creature’s corpse 
within its reach and emerge from a second creature’s corpse 
within 60 feet of the first corpse, appearing in an unoccupied 
space within 5 feet of the second corpse. Both corpses must be 
Medium or bigger. 


Innate Spellcasting. The lampad's spellcasting ability is Cha- 
risma (+6 to hit with spell attacks). It can innately cast the fol- 
lowing spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: chilltouch (see “Actions” below), gentle repose 


Magic Resistance. The lampad has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The lampad attacks twice with its necrotic touch 
or chill touch. 


Necrotic Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 9 (1410 + 4) necrotic damage. 


Chill Touch (Cantrip). Ranged Spell Attack: +6 to hit, range 120 
ft., one creature. Hit: 9 (2d8) necrotic damage, and the target 
can't regain hit points until the start of the lampad's next turn. 
If the target is undead, it has disadvantage on attack rolls 
against the lampad until the end of the lampad's next turn. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


235 


236 


NAIAD 


Naiads live in and near water. They might be spotted 
among rivers and lakes, on isolated shores, or amid 
coral labyrinths and deep sea fumaroles. Wherever riv- 
ers and seas show their variety and force, naiads gather 
to revel in nature’s might. Individual naiads often grow 
fixated with a single type or body of water, potentially 
preferring a deep sea trench, coastline, or river system 
above all others. Over time, such a resident nymph often 
becomes connected with their aquatic home through 
sightings and stories, becoming a guardian of the place 
and, in effect, a manifestation of its personality. 

Aquatic Collectors. Curious by nature, naiads often 
seek out what the seas and rivers claim. As a result, they 
might be found among sunken ruins and shipwrecks, 
sifting through the remains for whatever catches their 
eye. Living creatures aren't exempt from this curiosity, 
either. Naiads are known to befriend aquatic creatures, 
or even to keep modest menageries. The occasional 
star-crossed castaway has even been known to become 
part of such collections. 

Secret Routes of the Sea. Sailors across the world 
claim that naiads know all the secret aquatic routes of 
Theros. Using this hidden system of currents and arter- 
ies, aship might reach any destination in record time, 
be it across the sea or along a river a hundred miles 
inland. Naiads do nothing to dissuade sailors from this 
belief, and certainly numerous reports tell of charmed 
nymphs leading lost seafarers home. Yet, if tales of na- 
iad-led galleys appearing amid the headwaters of moun- 
tain rivers are true, only the nymphs know for sure. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


Me 


J NAIAD 
Ø Medium fey, chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 


' Hit Points 31 (748) 


Speed 30ft., swim 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

10 (+0)  16(43 т (+0) 15 (+2) 10(40) 18 (+4 
a 
Skills Persuasion +6, Sleight of Hand +5 
Damage Resistances psychic 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned 
Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages Common, Sylvan 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 
иаа АША 
Amphibious. The naiad can breathe air and water. 


Innate Spellcasting. The naiad’s spellcasting ability is Charisma 
(spell save DC 14). It can innately cast the following spells, re- 
quiring no material components: 


Atwill: minor illusion 
3/day: phantasmal force 
1/day each: fly, hypnotic pattern 


Invisible in Water. The naiad is invisible while fully im- 
mersed in water. 


Magic Resistance. The naiad has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The naiad makes two psychic touch attacks. 


Psychic Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 9 (1d10 + 4) psychic damage. 


OREAD 


Aggressive oreads number among the most danger- 
ous nymphs, as they embody the wild might of flames, 
volcanism, and the hidden forces of the earth. These 
creatures typically dwell in remote mountain crags and 
near volcanoes, where they caper among the forces of 
dissolution and rebirth. During avalanches and volcanic 
eruptions, groups of oreads might race ahead of the de- 
struction, dancing, singing, and doing what they can to 
maximize the impending devastation. 

Honor Among Fey. Hearkening back to some ages-old 
conflict, oreads refuse to knowingly destroy any land 
inhabited by another nymph. While they won't work to 
alter the natural course of destruction, neither will they 
make another nymph’s home part of any calamity they 
encourage. As a result, part of what makes an alseid’s 
field or a dryad’s grove seem so blessed is that oreads go 
out of their way to leave such sites alone. 

Tales of Fire. The followers of Purphoros regard ore- 
ads with special reverence, as myths tell of cagey smiths 
befriending these nymphs and convincing them to aid in 
creating phenomenal works. In some tales, a smith finds 
an oread and allows it to relish in the destruction of a 
novel or remarkable item. In recompense, the oread pro- 
vides the smith with materials drawn from the burning 
heart of the world, allowing the smith to create an even 
greater wonder. In more tales, though, a smith pursues 
an oread, then later the mortal's associates find familiar 
tools and a heap of ashes. 


OREAD 


Medium fey, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 49 (9d8 + 9) 


Í Speed 30 ft. 


! STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
б 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) (40 13 (+1) 18 (+4) 


| Skills Athletics +4, Acrobatics +4, Performance +6 
Damage Immunities fire, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned 
Senses passive Perception 11 

Languages Common, Sylvan 

Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Innate Spellcasting. The oread's spellcasting ability is Charisma 
(spell save DC 14, +6 to hit with spell attacks). It can innately 
cast the following spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: fire bolt (see “Actions” below) 

3/day: burning hands 

1/day each: hellish rebuke (see "Reactions" below), scorching ray 
Invisible in Fire. The oread is invisible while fully 

immersed in fire. 


Magic Resistance. The oread has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The oread attacks twice with its fiery touch or 
fire bolt. 


Fiery Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 9 (1410 + 4) fire damage. 


Fire Bolt (Cantrip). Ranged Spell Attack: +6 to hit, range 120 ft., 
one target. Hit: 5 (1d10) fire damage. 


REACTIONS 


Hellish Rebuke (2nd-Level Spell; 1/Day). When the oread is 

damaged by a creature within 60 feet of the oread that it can 

see, the creature that damaged the oread must make a DC 14 

Dexterity saving throw, taking 16 (3d10) fire damage ona failed 

save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 
—_—__{*—*—~—_——_Z—Z{———_————_— Ez) 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


237 


238 


ORACLE 


Oracles posses the ability to interpret the patterns and 
language of Nyx, divining from it the flow of fates and 
the will of the gods. Most of these gifted—or cursed— 
mortals communicate with a single god, interpreting 
their intentions for the wider world. Others aren't 
aligned with a god and observe the night sky, reading 
Nyx like a vast, cryptic scroll for insights. 

Divine Influence. Just as oracles seek insights from 
interpreting the divine, so too do gods occasionally seek 
to manipulate the world through oracles. Sometimes a 
god might speak directly, be it with dramatic manifes- 
tations or direct possession of their servant. Although a 
deity's words might be steeped in metaphors, should a 
god wish to make their intentions clear, they often find 
dramatic ways to make their thoughts known. 

Interpreters of Signs. Oracles possess unparalleled 
experience in divining godly whims from cryptic visions 
and mundane forces. Those who receive divine omens 
(such as those presented in chapter 4) might seek out 
an oracle to gain a clearer vision of the god’s intentions. 
Finding an oracle, though, or one experienced in inter- 
preting certain types of visions, might prove to be an 
adventure in its own right. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


E 


ORACLE 


Medium humanoid (any), any alignment 


Armor Class 15 (Blessings of the Gods) Б, 
Hit Points 44 (848 + 8) b 
Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA d 
10 (+0) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 


13 (4) 16 (+3) 15 (+2) 


Saving Throws Wis +5, Cha +4 

Skills Insight +5, Persuasion +4, Religion +5 
Senses passive Perception 13 

Languages Celestial, Common 

Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Blessings of the Gods. While the oracle is wearing no armor and 
wielding no shield, its AC includes its Wisdom modifier. In ad- 
dition, a creature that hits the oracle with a melee attack while 
within 5 feet of it takes 9 (2d8) force damage. 


Innate Spellcasting. The oracle’s spellcasting ability is Wisdom 
(spell save DC 13, +5 to hit with spell attacks). It can innately 
cast the following spells, requiring no material components: 


Atwill: guidance, light, thaumaturgy 
3/day each: bless, guiding bolt, healing word, hold person 
1/day each: augury, scrying 


ACTIONS 


Eldritch Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) force damage. 


REACTIONS 


Divine Insight (3/Day). When the oracle or a creature it can 

see makes an attack roll, a saving throw, or an ability check, 

the oracle can cause the roll to be made with advantage or 

disadvantage. 
SSS 


PHYLASKIA 


These armored skeletal spirits guard the borders of the 
Underworld and its various wards. Sleepless and mer- 
ciless, they scrutinize all who would pass, and they slay 
those who defy them. 

Undead Nature. A phylaskia doesn’t require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


PHYLASKIA 


Large undead, lawful neutral 


Armor Class 18 (plate) 
Hit Points 104 (11410 + 44) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
20 (+5) 15 (+2) 18 (+4) 10 (+0) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 
Lo rr rrr ww 99 
Saving Throws Con +8, Wis +7 
Skills Insight +7, Perception +7 
Damage Immunities necrotic, poison 
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 
frightened, poisoned 
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 17 
Languages all 
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 
rrr 
Gatekeeper's Aura. Any creature that starts its turn within 
10 feet of the phylaskia must make a DC 15 Wisdom saving 
throw. On a successful save, the creature is immune to this 
aura for the next 24 hours. On a failed save, the creature has 


disadvantage on saving throws and its speed is halved until the 
start of its next turn. 


Undead Fortitude. if damage reduces the phylaskia to 0 hit 
points, it must make a Constitution saving throw with a DC 
equal to 5 + the damage taken, unless the damage is radiant 
or from a critical hit. On a success, the phylaskia drops to 1 hit 
point instead. 


Vigilant. The phylaskia can't be surprised. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The phylaskia makes two longsword attacks and 
uses its Strength Drain once. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 14 (248 + 5) slashing damage, or 16 (2d10 + 5) 
slashing damage if used with two hands, plus 11 (2d10) ne- 
crotic damage. 


Strength Drain. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 12 (246 + 5) necrotic damage. Unless the target 

is immune to necrotic damage, its Strength score is reduced by 
144. The target dies if this reduces its Strength to 0. Otherwise, 
the reduction lasts until the target finishes a short or long rest. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


RETURNED 


Returned have escaped the Underworld and dwell. 
among the living once more, but their second lives are 
rarely what they expected—not that they remember what 
it was they expected. As a result of having followed the 
Path of Phenax (see chapter 4), the Returned lose their 
identities, which manifest as separate beings known as 
eidolons. The experience of escaping the Underworld 
also causes them to lose their faces, which become 
expressionless surfaces with empty eye sockets and 
gaping mouths. These blank surfaces they cover with 
distinctive golden masks. 

Returned reenter the world blank and undead. No lon- 
ger possessing the ability to form long-term memories, 
they generally can’t build meaningful relationships or 
establish new lives. Instead, most experience fleeting 
emotions and follow hollow routines, their existences 
reduced to shadow plays without weight or substance. 

Returned Masks. Adventurers who defeat Returned 
foes might marvel at their fortune in claiming such rich 
spoils after a battle. The mask of a Returned is worth 
approximately 100 gp, based on its composition and 
craftsmanship. However, selling a Returned mask isn't 
a simple matter of cashing it in for coin. Most people on 
Theros know the tales of the Returned and want noth- 
ing to do with such cursed relics or with those who try 
to traffic in them. Finding an unscrupulous merchant 
willing to trade for Returned masks is rare, as the items 
are effectively another sapient being's face. Convincing 
a merchant to buy a Returned mask, or dealing with the 
ramifications of such a sale, might prove to be an adven- 
ture in itself. 

Returned Nature. The Returned are undead. They 
need water and air but not food or sleep. They think and 
speak and even feel emotions based on their new expe- 
riences, but given their circumstances, those emotions 
tend to be muted. 


RETURNED DRIFTER 


Many Returned are pitiable souls who managed to 
escape from the Underworld only to find themselves 
stripped of the passions that motivated their flight. Lack- 
ing purpose and shunned by the living, these Returned 
typically seek places where they'll be left in peace, such 
as lonely tombs or the necropoleis of Asphodel and 
Odunos. There they go through half-hearted parodies 


P E ә 


VARIANT: RETURNED KAKOMANTIS 

Although the dead typically recall little of their lives, 

some have an obsession with magic that survives both 
death and rebirth as a Returned. These Returned, called 
kakomanteis, use their magical prowess to control the en- 
ergy that suffuses the Underworld. A Returned kakomantis 
has the statistics of a Returned palamnite and uses the 
following action option in place of Multiattack: 


Underworld Bolt. Ranged Spell Attack: +4 to hit, range 120 
ft, one creature. Hit: 13 (248 + 2) necrotic damage, and 
the target can't regain hit points until the start of the 
Returned's next turn. If the target is missing any of its hit 
points, it instead takes 17 (2412 + 2) necrotic damage. 


of life, impeded by distraction and ennui. Despite this, 
even the most languorous Returned defend themselves 
if threatened and might be pressed into the service of 
their more willful brethren. 


RETURNED PALAMNITE 


Even death and the loss of their identities can't erase 
the rage that inspires Returned palamnites. These Re- 
turned led violent lives, existences filled with such pain 
and hatred that violence now suffuses their deathless 
bodies. Such makes them exceptionally dangerous to 
the living, as these aimless killers know only suffering 
and seek to spread it whenever the opportunity arises. 
While palamnites might wander the world as danger- 
ous, lone murderers, many gravitate to Odunos, where 
they serve the vicious will of Tymaret the Murder King 
(see chapter 3). 


RETURNED SENTRY 


Most new or purposeless Returned are easily manipu- 
lated into serving their more forceful brethren. Having 
purpose forced upon them, these Returned perform 
simple, artless tasks with middling efficiency. Their 
one virtue is their tirelessness, which makes them 
exceptional guards. In the necropoleis, this sees many 
Returned employed as sentries, though they might also 
be messengers or laborers. If threatened, groups of 
these Returned work well together, sharing the unified 
goals of overcoming their foes and getting back to the 
task at hand. 


RETURNED DRIFTER 


Medium undead, lawful neutral 


Armor Class 13 (leather armor) 
Hit Points 11 (2d8 +2) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14 (+2) 15 (+2) (4) 10 (+0) 12 (+1) 1 (+0 


Damage Resistances necrotic 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 
Senses passive Perception 11 
Languages the languages it knew in life 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Turn Resistance. The Returned has advantage on saving throws 
against any effect that turns undead. 


Unreadable Face. The Returned is immune to any effect that 
would sense its emotions or read its thoughts. Wisdom (In- 
sight) checks to ascertain the Returned's intentions or sincerity 
are made with disadvantage. 


ACTIONS. 


Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 5 (146 + 2) slashing damage plus 3 (146) poi- 
son damage. 


Sling. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120 ft., one 
target. Hit: 4 (144 + 2) bludgeoning damage. 


ш 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 
240 


>» 
RETURNED SENTRY 


Medium undead, lawful evil 


sas 


? RETURNED PALAMNITE 


Medium undead, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 15 (leather armor, shield) 
Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4) 


^ Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 


Hit Points 65 (1048 + 20) Speed 30 ft. 
Speed 30 ft. — 

— o aa STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

STR DEX CON INT wis CHA NAE 1603) 15 (+2) 12 (+1) 1 (40) 12 (+1) (40) 
WO Wy 0483. ЧО 2G — 15 42) e . жуз 

Semmen o em MÀ Damage Resistances necrotic 
Skills Acrobatics +5, Athletics +2, Stealth +5 Damage Immunities poison 
Damage Resistances necrotic Condition Immunities poisoned 
Damage Immunities poison Senses passive Perception 11 
Condition Immunities poisoned Languages the languages it knew in life 
Senses passive Perception 11 Challenge 1 (200 XP) 
Languages the languages it knew in life ршина 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) Pack Tactics. The Returned has advantage on an attack roll 
a against a creature if at least one ofthe Returned’s allies is 
Fleeting Anger. If another creature deals damage to the Re- within 5 feet ofthe creature and theally isn't incapacitated. 


turned, the Returned makes attack rolls with advantage until 


Wed ee next tuin. Turn Resistance. The Returned has advantage on saving throws 


against any effect that turns undead. 
Turn Resistance. The Returned has advantage on saving throws 


against any effect that turns undead. Unreadable Face. The Returned is immune to any effect that 


would sense its emotions or read its thoughts. Wisdom (In- 


Unreadable Face. The Returned is immune to any effect that sight) checks to ascertain the Returned's intentions or sincerity 
would sense its emotions or read its thoughts. Wisdom (In- are made with disadvantage. 
sight) checks to ascertain the Returned's intentions or sincerity 
are made with disadvantage. ACTIONS 

Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
ACTIONS range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage, or 
Multiattack. The Returned makes two shortsword attacks. 7 (148 + 3) piercing damage if used with two handsto make a 


1 melee attack, plus 7 (2d6) poison damage. 
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 


- target. Hit: 6 (146 + 3) piercing damage plus 10 (346) poi- Sling. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120 ft., one 
son damage. target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) bludgeoning damage. 
——_[{_—_>_]_{_[_———_——zZ_Z_———£#—~—~—E=a C 


EMRAH E 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


241 


242 


SATYR 


While most satyrs are known for their high spirits, love 
of revels, and gregarious personalities, these outgoing 
people are neither naive nor defenseless. Some satyrs 
delightedly torment stuffy individuals or pull pranks on 
the unwary, pastimes that can predictably lead to scuf- 
fles. If a satyr can't talk their way out of a conflict—or 
diffuse it with a good-natured distraction—they readily 
defend themselves, their friends, and their homes in the 
Skola Vale. With diversions aside, satyrs bend their clev- 
erness toward tactics and methods of ending conflicts 
as swiftly as possible. This often means turning the 
same skills that make them famed celebrants toward 
battle, be it captivating performances or the aim devel- 
oped through endless games of skill. Once a threat is 
overcome, though, satyrs are quick to engage in their 
favorite part of battle: the victory celebration. 


SATYR REVELER | 


Pursuing lives of endless reverie, satyr revelers eagerly 
participate in celebrations wherever they find them. 
Their boisterous natures go far toward tempting others 
to eat, drink, and carouse with them. Faced with stodg- 
ier individuals or outright rivals, satyr revelers don't 
balk at using the magic of their music, dance, or other 
performances to charm opponents into joining their 
festivities. In the aftermath, these satyrs' foes are more 
likely to suffer embarrassment and groggy mornings 
than any lasting harm. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


- 
! 


SATYR REVELER 


Medium fey, chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 33 (648 + 6) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12 (+1) 16 (+3) 13 (+1) 12(4) 10 (+0) 16 (+3) 


Skills Acrobatics +5, Performance +7, Stealth +5 
Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages Common, Sylvan 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Enthralling Performance. If the satyr performs for at least 1 
minute, it chooses up to four humanoids within 60 feet of it 
who watched or listened to the entire performance. Each target 


must succeed on a DC 13 Wisdom saving throw or be charmed. 


While charmed in this way, the target idolizes the satyr and will 
take part in the satyr’s revels. The charmed condition ends for 
the creature after 1 hour, if it takes any damage, if the satyr at- 
tacks the target, or if the target witnesses the satyr attacking or 
damaging any of the target's allies. 


Magic Resistance. The satyr has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Sleepless Reveler. Magic can’t put the satyr to sleep. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The satyr makes two ram attacks or two short- 
bow attacks. 


Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (2d4 + 1) bludgeoning damage. 


Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 80/320 ft., 
one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


SATYR THORNBEARER 


Not all satyrs live lives of pure whimsy. When forced to 
defend their friends and homes, satyr thornbearers are 
quick to take up their bows and strike against danger. 
Particularly amid the dense trees of the Skola Vale, 
these satyr skirmishers cooperate in loose teams, using 
guerrilla tactics to harass foes then melt back into the 
forest. The blessings of Nylea aid the satyrs in protect- 
ing their home, and a single arrow from a thornbearer's 
bow might rain down like a volley from a whole army. 


SATYR THORNBEARER 


Medium fey, chaotic neutral 


= m — MM = 


Armor Class 15 (leather armor) 
Hit Points 38 (7d8 + 7) 
Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12 (+1) 18 (+4) 12 (+1) Т (+0) 13 (+1) 14 (+2) 


roms ra= — а с 


Skills Perception +5, Performance +6, Stealth +6 
Senses passive Perception 15 

Languages Common, Sylvan 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Magic Resistance. The satyr has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Sleepless Reveler. Magic can’t put the satyr to sleep. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The satyr makes three ram attacks orthree short- 
bow attacks. 


Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (244 + 1) bludgeoning damage. 


Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, range 80/320 ft., 
one target. Hit: 7 (146 + 4) piercing damage. 


Hail of Arrows (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). The satyr 
fires an arrow that magically transforms into a flurry of missiles 
in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 
14 Dexterity saving throw, taking 17 (5d6) piercing damage on 
a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


[RARE ESP ИЧР TRS TNE BLA SETS TARA LORE EN RE ERT ST AS ST ST RE а сч) 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 243 


TRITON 


Clever, far-ranging people of the sea, tritons live rich 
lives unknown to most land-dwelling individuals. While 
the waves separate most tritons from land-dwellers, 
occasionally the inhabitants of the surface and the deep 
come into conflict. In such cases, tritons prove skilled at 
sabotaging ocean-going vessels, employing water-based 
magic, and otherwise whipping up the fury of the sea. 
Few dare insult tritons in their home environment, but 
those who do and survive often learn that the tritons’ 
wrath doesn’t end at the shore. 


TRITON SHORESTALKER 


Some insults don't wash away with the tides. When sur- 
face dwellers threaten the safety of triton communities, 
impede upon Thassa's holiest depths, or steal the trea- 
sures of the deep, triton shorestalkers seek vengeance. 
Using speed and poison harvested from deadly sea 
beasts, these triton assassins slip into shallow waters 
and strike when least expected. Often, surface dwellers 
don't even realize they've been attacked by shorestalk- 
ers, chalking disappearances and deaths up to the innu- 
merable dangers of the sea. 


244 CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


TRITON SHORESTALKER 


Medium humanoid (triton), neutral evil 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 32 (548 + 10) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS CHA 
Т («0 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 10 (+0) 15 (+2) 1 (+0) 


Skills Nature +4, Perception +4, Stealth +5 
Damage Resistances cold 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages Common, Primordial 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Amphibious. The triton can breathe air and water. 


Innate Spellcasting. The triton’s spellcasting ability is Wisdom 
(spell save DC 12). It can innately cast the following spells, re- 
quiring no material components: 


1/day each: fog cloud, gust of wind 


Nimble Escape. The triton can take the Disengage or Hide ac- 
tions as a bonus action on each of its turns. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The triton makes two urchin-spine 
shortsword attacks. 


Urchin-Spine Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, 
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (146 + 3) piercing damage plus 

10 (3d6) poison damage. If the damage reduces a creature to 

О hit points, that creature is stable but poisoned for 1 hour, 
even after regaining hit points, and is paralyzed while poisoned 
in this way. 


Poisoned Spine. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 30/60 

ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) 

poison damage. 
СЕСЕ T E e aama e ee aa] 


TRITON MASTER OF WAVES. 


Triton masters of waves sculpt storms and change the 
tides, bending the sea to their will. Drawing forth living 
currents and the icy cold of the deep, these mages make 
the ocean their ally, using it to defend their people or 
enact Thassa’s wishes. While dire threats from the land 
might bring them to coastal shallows, most masters of 
waves keep to the ocean’s depths. 

Although many masters of waves resent land-dwellers 
and strike out at those who trespass upon their waters, 
most are devoted followers of the sea god. Those who 
share their faith or who bear earnest offerings to Thassa 
might defuse the tritons’ ire—that is, if they survive the 
deadly winds and waves that typically herald these sea 
guardians’ appearance. 


TRITON MASTER OF WAVES 


Medium humanoid (triton), neutral 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 105 (14d8 + 42) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
16 (+3) 11 (+0) 16 (+3) 10 (+0) 12 (+1) 19 (+4) 


Saves Dex +3, Int +3, Cha +7 

Skills Athletics +6, Nature +6, Survival +4 

Damage Resistances cold, fire 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 

Languages Common, Primordial 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 
9% 
Amphibious. The triton can breathe air and water. 


Innate Spellcasting. The triton’s spellcasting ability is Charisma 
(spell save DC 15, +7 to hit with spell attacks). It can innately 
cast the following spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: ray of frost (see “Actions” below) 
2/day: cone of cold 
1/day each: fog cloud, gust of wind, wind wall 


Summon Water Weird (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). 
As a bonus action, the triton magically summons 1d4 water 
weirds (see the Monster Manual). The summoned weirds ap- 
pear in unoccupied spaces in water within 60 feet of the triton. 
The water weirds act immediately after the triton on the same 
initiative count and fight until they're destroyed. They disappear 
ifthe triton dies. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The triton makes two attacks using Wave Touch 
and casts ray of frost. 


Wave Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 22 (4d10) cold damage. 


Ray of Frost (Cantrip). Ranged Spell Attack: +7 to hit, range 
60 ft., one creature. Hit: 13 (348) cold damage, and the tar- 
get's speed is reduced by 10 feet until the start of the triton’s 
next turn. 


REACTIONS 


Frigid Shield. When a creature the triton can see targets the 
triton with an attack, the triton gains 10 temporary hit points. If 
the attack hits and reduces the temporary hit points to 0, each 
creature within 5 feet of the triton takes 9 (248) cold damage. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


245 


246 


TYPHON 


Titanic horrors of writhing flesh and gnashing maws, 


typhons slither through the Underworld seeking only to 
consume. Once the souls of mortal warlords and cruel 


tyrants, typhons come into being over ages of fester- 
ing bitterness and rage. Over time, these souls twist 
into eternally ravenous monstrosities, which rampage 
through the realm of the dead, consuming souls by 
the thousands. The Underworld remains their prison, 


though, and most would relish nothing more than to es- 


cape and slaughter the living once more. 


TYPHON 


Huge monstrosity, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 195 (17d12 + 85) 
Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
24 97) 40440). BOGS). FE2) vw) "5 GM 


Saving Throws Con +10 

Damage Immunities acid, necrotic 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages Common 
Challenge 15 (13,000 XP) 
Keen Smell. The typhon has advantage on Wisdom (Percep- 
tion) checks that rely on smell. 


Regeneration. The typhon regains 20 hit points at the start of 
its turn. If it takes radiant damage, this trait doesn't function 
at the start of its next turn. The typhon dies only if it starts its 
turn with 0 hit points and doesn't regenerate. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The typhon makes three attacks: one with its 
Flurry of Bites, one to constrict, and one with its maw. 


Flurry of Bites. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 10 ft., 
one target. Hit: 35 (8d6 + 7) piercing damage. 


Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 15 ft., one 
Large or smaller creature. Hit: 17 (346 + 7) bludgeoning dam- 
age, and the target is grappled (escape DC 19). Until this grap- 
ple ends, the target is restrained and takes 17 (346 + 7) blud- 
geoning damage at the start of each of its turns. The typhon 
can have up to two creatures constricted. 


Maw. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 26 (3412 7) piercing damage plus 19 (3412) acid damage. 


CESS 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


WOE STRIDER 


Woe striders form from the souls of those who've bro- 
ken the bonds of destiny. Over centuries, these cosmic 
blasphemers transform into hunched, long-limbed hor- 
rors, Sadistic things, woe striders seek ways to reweave 
themselves into the tapestry of destiny. This leads them 
to search for answers within the bowels of other beings, 
performing murderous haruspicy in pursuit of their dis- 
carded cosmic purpose. When they fail to find answers, 
their unnatural cries cause reality to shudder, under- 
mining magic and sane minds alike. 


WOE STRIDER 


Large aberration, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 110 (13d10 + 39) 
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 15 (+2) 16 (+3) 8 (-1) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 


Skills Intimidation +5, Perception +5 

Condition Immunities frightened 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15 
Languages telepathy 120 ft. 

Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


Antimagic Cone. The woe strider's open mouth creates an area 
of antimagic, as in the antimagic field spell, in a 60-foot cone. 


At the start of each of its turns, the woe strider decides which 
way the cone faces and whether its mouth is open or closed. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The woe strider makes two claw attacks and one 


bite attack. If both claws hit the same creature, the target is 
grappled (escape DC 14). 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (146 + 4) slashing damage plus 3 (1d6) psychic damage. 


Bite, Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature 
that is grappled, incapacitated, or restrained. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) 
piercing damage plus 16 (3d10) psychic damage. In addition, 
each magic item the creature is carrying that isn't an artifact 
has its magical properties suppressed for 1 minute. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


247 


a 


248 


MYTHIC MONSTERS 


This section describes three of Theros's most infamous 
terrors, beings whose might and dreadful deeds set 
them apart as menaces of legendary proportions. While 
many of Theros's greatest myths arise from storied ter- 
rors—like the hydra Polukranos or the dreaded titans— 
the monsters in this section have a feature that sets 
them apart: mythic traits. 

Mythic traits transform battles into truly legendary 
confrontations, well suited to the climactic battles at the 
ends of adventures or whole campaigns. Mythic traits 
are optional; they don’t need to be used during combat 
with these monsters. If you so choose, you may simply 
ignore a monster's mythic trait and mythic actions. If 
you wish to increase a battle’s stakes, though, using a 
monster's mythic trait results in some mid-battle twist 
that changes the way the monster behaves, restores its 


ARASTA 


Huge monstrosity, neutral evil 


Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 300 (24d12 + 144) 
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft. 


CHA 
17 (+3 


STR DEX 
24 (+7) 16 (+3) 


CON INT wis 
23 (+6) 15 (+2) 22 (+6) 


Saving Throws Dex +10, Соп +13, Wis +13 

Skills Arcana +9, Deception +10, Intimidation +10, Nature +9, 
Perception +13, Stealth +10 

Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical attacks 

Damage Immunities acid, poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive 
Perception 23 

Languages Celestial, Common, Sylvan 

Challenge 21 (33,000 XP) 

| ees 

Armor of Spiders (Mythic Trait; Recharges after a Short or Long 

Rest). If Arasta is reduced to 0 hit points, she doesn't die or fall 

unconscious. Instead, she regains 200 hit points. In addition, 

Arasta’s children immediately swarm over her body to protect 

her, granting her 100 temporary hit points. 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). |f Arasta fails a saving throw, 
she can choose to succeed instead. 


Magic Resistance. Arasta has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Spider Climb. Arasta can climb difficult surfaces, includ- 
ing upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 
ability check. 


Web Walker. Arasta ignores movement restrictions caused 
by webbing. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Arasta makes three attacks: one with her bite and 


twowith her claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 20 (3d8 + 7) piercing damage, and the target must make 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


resources, or provides it with new actions to use. As 

a result, the battle becomes deadlier and rages on for 
longer than most combat encounters. Each monster fea- 
tures an “Asa Mythic Encounter” section that highlights 
its mythic trait, notes how using it changes the difficulty 
of the encounter and the rewards, and includes read- 
aloud text you can use mid-battle to signal a terrifying 
shift in the conflict. 


ARASTA OF THE ENDLESS WEB 


A victim of the gods’ petty rivalries, Arasta was once 
one of Nylea’s most beloved dryad companions. Phe- 
nax's bitterness saw her transformed into an arachnid 
monstrosity and driven into the darkest depths of the 
Nessian Wood. Now she broods on her unjust fate and 
the fickleness of the gods who left her cursed with mon- 
strous immortality. 


a DC 21 Constitution saving throw, taking 32 (5412) poison 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a success- 
ful one. If the damage reduces the target to 0 hit points, the 
target is stable but poisoned for 1 hour, even after regaining hit 
points, and is paralyzed while poisoned in this way. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (346 + 7) slashing damage. 


Web of Hair (Recharge 4—6). Arasta unleashes her hair in the 
form of webbing that fills a 30-foot cube nextto her. The web 
is difficult terrain, its area is lightly obscured, and it lasts for 
1 minute. Any creature that moves into the web or that starts 
its turn there must make a DC 21 Dexterity saving throw. Оп а 
failed save, the creature is restrained while in the web. A crea- 
ture can use an action to make a DC 21 Strength check. Ona 
success, it can free itself or a creature within 5 feet of it that is 
restrained by the web. 

This webbing is immune to all damage except magical fire. 
A 5-foot cube of the web is destroyed if it takes at least 20 fire 
damage from a spell or other magical source on a single turn. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Arasta can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the options 
below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a time 
and only at the end of another creature’s turn. Arasta regains 
spent legendary actions at the start of her turn. 


Claws. Arasta makes one attack with her claws. 

Swarm (Costs 2 Actions). Arasta causes two swarms of spiders 
(see the Monster Manual) to appear in unoccupied spaces 
within 5 feet of her. 

Toxic Web (Costs 3 Actions). Each creature restrained by Aras- 
ta’s Web of Hair takes 18 (4d8) poison damage. 


MYTHIC ACTIONS 


If Arasta's mythic trait is active, she can use the options below 
as legendary actions, as long as she has temporary hit points 
from her Armor of Spiders. 


Swipe. Arasta makes two attacks with her claws. 

Webof Hair (Costs 2 Actions). Arasta recharges Web of Hair 
and uses it. 

Nyx Weave (Costs 2 Actions). Each creature restrained by Aras- 
ta's Web of Hair must succeed on a DC 21 Constitution sav- 
ing throw, or the creature takes 26 (4d12) force damage and 
any spell of 6th level or lower on it ends. 


SAM ROWAN 


t 


ARASTA AS A MYTHIC ENCOUNTER 
Arasta is a formidable enemy under normal circum- 
stances, but to give characters a truly mythic challenge, 
you can have her call on her Armor of Spiders. Her use 
of this trait signals a drastic turn in the encounter, as 
Arasta summons her arachnid children to protect her. 
While she has temporary hit points from this trait, she 
can choose one of her mythic actions when she uses a 
legendary action. 

Read or paraphrase the following text when Arasta 
uses her Armor of Spiders trait: 


Le 


The nightmarish arachnid unleashes a shriek that sounds like 


a thousand spider carapaces scarring slate. In response, the 
ground ripples and bursts over the monster, revealing itself 
as a wave of countless spiders. The tiny arachnids swarm the 


larger horror, girding it in skittering bodies. 


Fighting Arastaas a mythic encounter is equivalent to 
taking on two challenge rating 21 creatures in one en- 
counter. Award a party 66,000 XP for defeating Arasta 
after she uses Armor of Spiders. 


250 


€ 


Arasta appears as a gigantic spiderlike creature, her 
few humanoid features made monstrous by cruel magic 
and ages of hatred. Webs fill her lair deep in the Nessian 
Wood, sticky strands made not of silk but of her own 
endless hair. In her darkened realm, Arasta broods on 
her hatred of the gods and their servants. She doesn't 
do so alone, though, as innumerable arachnids fawn 
over her, serving as her eyes throughout the wilderness, 
disposing of victims trapped within her hair, and sacri- 
ficing themselves in her defense if they must. 

See "Myths of Nylea" in chapter 2 for more details on 
the tragedy of Arasta. 


ARASTA'S LAIR 

Arasta lives in an enormous, gnarled olive tree called 
Enorasi, which was planted millennia ago by Klothys. It 
is said that those who eat of its fruit can see glimpses of 
the future. Eating the fruit brings with it a risk, though, 
for those who Klothys finds unworthy might be driven 
mad. There, within Enorasi's hollow trunk, Arasta 
awaits the next would-be prophet to make her meal. Her 
webs stretch beyond the branches of the tree and carpet 
the forest floor of her realm. 

Path to the Underworld. Tales are told of forlorn 
souls who, because of grief or madness over the loss of a 
loved one, have sought out Arasta’s lair, as it is rumored 
that some of the strands of her web are anchored near 
the edge of the Underworld and can enable a traveler to 
reach that realm's ashen shores. 

But those who enter her domain unbidden almost 
never go unnoticed, for Arasta can sense the slightest vi- 
bration along her web hair, and her children act as spies 
on her behalf. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


Lair Actions. On initiative count 20 (losing initiative 
ties), Arasta can take a lair action to cause one of the 
following effects. She can't use the same effect two 
rounds in a row. 


* Arasta learns about any creature touching her webs. 
Each creature restrained by a web or Arasta's Web of 
Hair must make a DC 21 Intelligence saving throw. 
On a failed save, Arasta gains knowledge of a crea- 
ture's name, race, where they consider home, and 
what brought them to her web. 

- Arasta casts the giant insect spell (spiders only). 
Itlasts until she uses this lair action again or un- 
til she dies. 


Regional Effects. The region containing Arasta's lair 
is warped by her presence, which creates one or more of 
the following effects: 


e Spiders and insects within 1 mile of Arasta's lair 
serve as her eyes and ears. Birds and other flying 
creatures are absent from the skies and occasionally 
found trapped in webs. 

+ Within 1 mile of Arasta's lair, webs fill all 10-foot 
cubes of open space, so long as the webs can be an- 
chored between two solid masses (such as walls or 
trees). The webs are flammable. Any webs exposed 
to fire burn away in 1 round. Any destroyed webs are 
magically repaired at the next dawn. 


If Arasta dies, the spiders and insects lose their super- 
natural link to her. The webs remain, but they dissolve 
within 1d10 days. 


HYTHONIA THE CRUEL 


Theros’s reclusive medusas often delight in collecting 
and expanding their galleries of petrified victims. Unlike 
other medusas, Hythonia isn’t merely a collector; she’s 
an artist. 

When Hythonia came to the island of Skathos, the in- 
habitants worshiped her as an avatar of the god Pharika. 
The cultists eagerly offered themselves up to the medu- 
sa’s petrifying gaze in hopes of gaining Pharika’s favor. 
Seeing herself surrounded by willing devotees, Hytho- 
nia formulated a cruel plan. After encouraging them 
to engage in wild rituals, Hythonia began turning her 
followers to stone, weaving their forms to create a grisly 
throne made of their petrified bodies. 

While the medusa’s victims have dwindled, tales of 
the medusa queen and the divine secrets she hoards 
have not. Hythonia eagerly trades the mysteries she 
knows but demands a constant price: a beautiful individ- 
ual to become part of her throne. 


HYTHONIA’S LAIR 

Hythonia makes her lair on Skathos, an island where 
a secret sect of worshipers dedicated to Pharika previ- 
ously hoarded secrets and engaged in dark rituals. 

Island of Potent Magic. Although Skathos's location 
remains a mystery, stories tell of the island's magical 
plants and Hythonia's various treasures. Hythonia en- 
courages such rumors by letting lone survivors escape 
her realm, letting the ravings of survivors tempt more 
playthings into her clutches. 

Lair Actions. On initiative count 20 (losing initiative 
ties), Hythonia can take a lair action to cause one of 
the following effects. She can't use the same effect two 
rounds in a row: 


* Hythonia briefly animates creatures that have been 
petrified by her gaze. Each statue attacks one creature 
within 5 feet of it, with a *11 bonus to hit and dealing 
10 (346) bludgeoning damage on a hit. If a Medium or 
smaller creature takes this damage, it is also grappled 
(escape DC 15). 

* Hythonia causes spectral snakes to erupt from a point 
she can see within 150 feet of her. Each creature 
within 20 feet of that point must succeed on a DC 19 
Constitution saving throw or take 5 (2d4) piercing 
damage and become poisoned until the end of its next 
turn. While poisoned in this way, the creature has 
disadvantage on Intelligence checks and Intelligence 
saving throws, and it behaves as if under the effect of 
the confusion spell. 


Regional Effects. The region containing Hythonia's 
lair is warped by her presence, which creates one or 
more of the following effects: 


• A large population of snakes dwells іп the region. 

• Trees within 1 mile of the lair are petrified wood. 
Plants that stay within 500 feet of the lair for 1 day 
turn to stone. 

• Small bodies of water within 1 mile of the lair become 
poisonous. A creature that drinks the water must suc- 
ceed on a DC 19 Constitution saving throw or become 
poisoned for 8 hours. An affected creature can repeat 
the saving throw at the end of each hour. 


HYTHONIA 


» Large monstrosity, lawful evil 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 199 (21d10 + 84) 
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

21 (+5)  17(43) 19(44) 14 (+2) 16 (+3) 18 (+4) 
ГЕ rrr 
Saving Throws Str +11, Соп +10, Cha +10 
Skills Deception +10, Insight +9, Perception +9, Stealth +9 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 19 
Languages Common 
Challenge 17 (18,000 XP) 
rr 

_ Innate Spellcasting. Hythonia's spellcasting ability is Charisma 

(spell save DC 18). She can innately cast animate objects once 
per day requiring no material components. 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Hythonia fails a saving throw, 
she can choose to succeed instead. 


. Petrifying Gaze. When a creature that can see Hythonia's eyes 
starts its turn within 30 feet of her, Hythonia can force it to 
make a DC 18 Constitution saving throw if she isn’t incapaci- 
tated and can see the creature. If the saving throw fails by 5 or 
more, the creature is instantly petrified. Otherwise, on a failed 
save the creature begins to turn to stone and is restrained. The 
restrained creature must repeat the saving throw at the end 
of its next turn, becoming petrified on a failure or ending the 
effect on a success. The petrification lasts until the creature is 
freed by the greater restoration spell or other magic. 

Unless surprised, a creature can avert its eyes to avoid the 
saving throw at the start of its turn. If the creature does so, it 
can't see Hythonia until the start of its next turn, when it can 
avert its eyes again. If the creature looks at Hythonia in the 
meantime, it must immediately make the save. 

If Hythonia sees herself reflected on a polished surface 
within 30 feet of her and in an area of bright light, she is af- 
fected by her own gaze. 


Shed Skin (Mythic Trait; Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). 
If Hythonia is reduced to 0 hit points, she doesn't die or fall 
unconscious. Instead, she sheds her skin, regains 199 hit 


points, and moves up to her speed without provoking opportu- 


nity attacks. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


Ae 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Hythonia makes three attacks: one with her claws, 
one to constrict, and one with her snaky hair. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 9 (148 + 5) slashing damage plus 4 (148) poison damage. 


Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 15 ft., one 
Large or smaller creature. Hit: 16 (2410 + 5) bludgeoning 
damage, and the target is grappled (escape DC 19). Until this 
grapple ends, the target is restrained and takes 15 (3d6 + 5) еж 
bludgeoning damage at the start of each of its turns, and Hy- „066 
thonia can't constrict another target. 


Snaky Hair. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 31 (4d12 + 5) bludgeoning damage, and Hythonia 
can pull the target up to 5 feet closer to her if itis a Large or 
smaller creature. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Hythonia can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. She can take only one legendary action at a 
time and only at the end of another creature's turn. Hythonia 
regains spent legendary actions at the start of her turn. 


Move. Hythonia moves up to her speed without provoking op- 
portunity attacks. 

Snaky Hair. Hythonia makes one attack with her snaky hair. 

Petrified Earth (Costs 2 Actions). Hythonia causes stone spikes 
to erupt from the ground in a 30-foot radius centered on her. 
The area becomes difficult terrain until the start of her next 
turn. Any creature, other than Hythonia, takes 9 (2d8) pierc- 
ing damage for every 5 feet it moves on those spikes. 


MYTHIC ACTIONS 


If Hythonia's mythic trait is active, she can use the options be- 
low as legendary actions for 1 hour after using Shed Skin. 


Numbing Claws. Hythonia makes two attacks with her claws. 
If both attacks hit the same creature, it takes an extra 7 (2d6) 
poison damage and must succeed on a DC 18 Constitution 
saving throw or become paralyzed until the start of her 
next turn. 

Look at Me (Costs 3 Actions). Hythonia can force a sighted 
creature she has grappled to see her eyes and be affected by 
her gaze. 


CHRIS RAHN 


HYTHONIA AS A MYTHIC ENCOUNTER 
Hythonia serves as a potent threat against even high- 
level characters, but you can increase the challenge by 
using the Shed Skin trait. When this happens, Hythonia 
heals many of her wounds and slips away from danger, 
and then she can choose one of her mythic actions when 
she uses a legendary action. 

You might foreshadow Hythonia using her mythic trait 
by describing her skin cracking and turning pale as she 
suffers wounds. Read or paraphrase the following text 


when Hythonia finally uses her Shed Skin trait: 


The medusa’s skin cracks, turns a lifeless gray, and shatters! 


The monster crumbles to dust—but what clatters to the 


ground isn’t scale and bone, but hollow stone. The sound 


of rippling coils precedes the medusa rising up anew, the 
last of her shed skin dropping away, revealing glistening, un- 


scarred scales. 


Fighting Hythonia as a mythic encounter is equivalent 
to taking on two challenge rating 17 creatures in one 
encounter. Award a party 36,000 XP for defeating Hy- 
thonia after she uses Shed Skin. 


254 


TROMOKRATIS - 


Most krakens roam the seas, shattering hulls and scat- 
tering fleets, but the kraken Tromokratis notoriously 
vents its wrath on coastal settlements. Whether it acts 
at the command of the god Thassa or to sate its own 
hunger, Tromokratis numbers among the most feared 
threats in the sea, having no fixed lair and wandering 
where it will. In recent memory, the massive menace 
rose from the waves to topple the Pyrgnos, Meletis’s 
great repository of scholarly knowledge. Since that day, 
the polis keeps a watch specifically for Tromokratis. 


TROMOKRATIS 


Gargantuan monstrosity (titan), any alignment 


Armor Class 22 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 409 (21420 + 189) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 80 ft. 


CON INT WIS CHA 
29 (+9) 22(«6) T (+0) 10 (+0) 


STR DEX 
30 (+10) T (+0) 


Saving Throws Int +14, Wis +8 

Damage Resistances cold, lightning, thunder 

Damage Immunities fire; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing 
from nonmagical attacks 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, paralyzed, 
restrained 

Senses blindsight 120 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages — 

Challenge 26 (90,000 XP) 

[nn 

Amphibious. Tromokratis can breathe air and water. 


Hearts of the Kraken (Mythic Trait; Recharges after a Short 

or Long Rest). When Tromokratis is reduced to 0 hit points, it 
doesn't die or fall unconscious. Instead, the damage creates 
cracks in its carapace, revealing its hearts. Tromokratis has 
four hearts: two on its chest, one on its back, and one at the 
base of its tail. A heart has an AC of 22 and 100 hit points. It is 
immune to bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing damage from 
nonmagical attacks, and it is immune to all conditions. If it 

is forced to make a saving throw, treat its ability scores as 10 
(+0). Ifitfinishes a short or long rest, the carapace heals, any 
destroyed hearts regenerate, and the hearts are covered again. 
Tromokratis dies when all the hearts are destroyed. 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). |f Tromokratis fails a saving 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


Magic Weapons. Tromokratis's weapon attacks are magical. 


Siege Monster. Tromokratis deals double damage to objects 
and structures. 


Spell-Resistant Carapace. Tromokratis has advantage on saving 
throws against spells, and any creature that makes a spell at- 
tack against Tromokratis has disadvantage on the attack roll. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Tromokratis makes three attacks: one with its pin- 
cer, one with its tail, and one with its tentacle grasp. 


Pincer. Melee Weapon Attack: +18 to hit, reach 20 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 20 (346 + 10) bludgeoning damage, and if the target 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


Rough Waters. Tromokratis is a particularly can- 
tankerous nadir kraken that has claimed all the sea 
as its territory. A tumultuous sea is often attributed to 
Tromokratis battling another kraken to assert its claim. 
Often, before a journey, sailors blow conch-shell horns 
in the belief that the sound will soothe nearby krakens. 

The Horn of Humenades. Legend speaks of a magic 
horn that the hero Humenades used in ancient times to 
summon Tromokratis to lay waste to a cursed city lost to 
evil ways. The horn was so powerful that, after the city 
was destroyed, Humenades took it to Tizerus and buried 
it under a stone near the palace of Erebos. 


is a creature, it is grappled (escape DC 26). Until the grapple 
ends, the target is restrained, and Tromokratis can't use this 
attack on anyone else. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +18 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target. 
Hit: 23 (348 + 10) bludgeoning damage, and if the target is a 
creature, it is knocked prone. 


Tentacle Grasp. Melee Weapon Attack: +18 to hit, reach 20 ft., 
one creature. Hit: 20 (346 10) bludgeoning damage, and the 
target is grappled (escape DC 26). If the target doesn't escape 
by the end of its next turn, Tromokratis throws the target up to 
60 feet in a straight line. The target lands prone and takes 21 
(6d6) bludgeoning damage. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +18 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 29 (3412 + 10) piercing damage. If the target is a Large or 
smaller creature grappled by Tromokratis, that creature is swal- 
lowed, and the grapple ends. While swallowed, the creature is 
blinded and restrained, it has total cover against attacks and 
other effects outside Tromokratis, and it takes 42 (12d6) acid 
damage at the start of each of Tromokratis's turns. 

If Tromokratis takes 50 damage or more on a single turn 
from a creature inside it, Tromokratis must succeed on a DC 20 
Constitution saving throw at the end of that turn or regurgitate 
all swallowed creatures, which fall prone in a space within 10 
feet of Tromokratis. If Tromokratis dies, a swallowed creature 
is no longer restrained by it and can escape from the corpse by 
using 15 feet of movement, exiting prone. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Tromokratis can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from 

the options below. Only one legendary action option can 

be used at a time and only at the end of another creature's 
turn. Tromokratis regains spent legendary actions at the start 
of its turn. 


Move. Tromokratis moves up to half its speed. 
Tail. Tromokratis makes one tail attack. 
Bite (Costs 3 Actions). Tromokratis makes one bite attack. 


MYTHIC ACTIONS 


If Tromokratis's mythic trait is active, it can use the options 
below as legendary actions for 1 hour after using Hearts of 
the Kraken. 


Rampage. Tromokratis makes two attacks: one with itstail and 
one with its tentacle grasp. 

Coral Growth (Costs 2 Actions). Each creature within 10 feet 
of Tromokratis must make a DC 25 Dexterity saving throw, 
taking 13 (3d8) slashing damage on a failed save, or half as 
much damage on a successful one. Until the start of its next 
turn, Tromokratis and its hearts gain a +2 bonus to AC. 


ART 


MATT STEW 


TROMOKRATIS AS A MYTHIC ENCOUNTER 
Tromokratis numbers among the most powerful crea- 
tures a group of adventurers might face. If you wish to 
make an encounter with the kraken truly legendary, 
Tromokratis might use its Hearts of the Kraken mythic 
trait. When this happens, it calls upon a reserve of 
strength just as it appears to be vanquished. After its 
hearts are exposed, Tromokratis can choose one of its 
mythic actions when it uses a legendary action. 

Read or paraphrase the following text when 
Tromokratis uses its Hearts of the Kraken trait: 


The titanic monster’s carapace cracks, revealing a pulsing, 


red-purple heart buried amid heaps of blubber and muscle. 


Fissures run across the beast’s ancient shell, revealing three 
other mighty, ichor-slick organs. The sea terror thrashes, 


channeling pain into fury. 


Fighting Tromokratis as a mythic encounter is equiva- 
lent to taking on two CR 26 creatures in one encounter. 
Award a party 180,000 XP for defeating Tromokratis 
after it uses Hearts of the Kraken. 


INDEX 


Agonas, 106 
Akroan War, The, 88 
Akros, 86 
Alseid, 234 
Altrisos, 41, 92 
Amatrophon, 94 
Amphisbaena, 208 
Androphage, 64 
Anvilwroughts 12, 209 
Aphemia, 226 
Arasta, 69, 248 
Archons, 8, 212 
Mounts, 214 
Ashlands, The, 99 
Asphodel, 100 
Athlete, 31 
Athreos, 39, 181 
Adventures, 116 
Champions, 38 
Basilisk, 71, 204 
Bassara Tower, 93 
Blessings, 114 
Calendar, 85 
Caryatid, 94 
Catoblepas, 47, 69, 204 
Centaur, 18 
Lagonna band, 92 
Pheres band, 88 
Cerberus, 65, 214 
Chimera, 216 
Citadel of Destiny, 107 
College of Eloquence, 28 
Colossus of Akros, 218 
Crypts of the Lost, 101 
Cult of Horns, 103 
Cyclops, 88, 204 
Cypress Gates, 95 
Dakra Istes, 8, 85,102 
Dawngreets, 103 
Deathbellow Canyon, 99 
Demons of Theros, 182, 
219 
Despair Lands, 100 
Destiny, 6, 58 
Divination, 111, 142 
Doomwake giant, 224 
Dragon, 35, 71, 99, 104, 
205 
Eidolons, 182, 222 
Emissaries, 114, 156 
Empty Eye, 104 
Ephara, 40 
Adventures, 120 
Champions, 42 
Erebos, 43 
Adventures, 124 
Champions, 44 
Fate, 6 
Flamespeaker, 86, 104 


INDEX 


Fleecemane lion, 223 

Glossion, 41, 92 

Gods, 33 
Adventures, 109 
Assistance, 110 
Divine weapons, 198 
Gods as villains, 110 
Intervention, 114 
Serving multiple, 109 

Gorgon, see medusa 

Harpies, 226 

Heliod, 46 
Adventures, 128 
Champions, 48 

Heroic archetypes, 7 

Heroic drive, 11 

Hetos, 101 

Hippocamp, 227 

History, 7 

Hoplites, 228 

Humans, 17 

Hundred-handed one, 
225 

Hunter's Crossing, 95 

Hydras, 230 

Hyrax Tower, 93 

Hythonia, 251 

Ilysia, 107 

Iroan Games, The, 49, 
87 

Iroas, 49 
Adventures, 132 
Champions, 50 

Karametra, 52 
Adventures, 136 
Champions, 54 

Katachthon Mountains, 
104 

Keranos, 55 
Adventures, 140 
Champions, 56 

Klothys, 58 
Adventures, 144 
Champions, 60 

Kraken, 205 
Nadir, 205 

Krimnos, 92 

Kruphix, 61 
Adventures, 148 
Champions, 62 

Lagonna Grounds, 92 

Lamia, 206 

Lampad, 234 

Languages, 9 

Lathos, 107, 182 

Leina Tower, 93 

Lektoi, 86 

Leonin, 20, 96, 232 

Listes, 92 


Medusa, 70, 71, 206 
Meletis, 89 
Minotaur, 22, 65, 98 
Miracles, 114 
Mire of Punishment, 107 
Mogis, 64 
Adventures, 152 
Champions, 66 
Mount Hiastos, 105 
Mount Kure, 97 
Mount Velus, 104 
Mount Vesios, 104 
Mystic Sea, 105 
Mystical islands, 177 
Natumbria, 92 
Nautical adventures, 
176 
Neolantin, 92 
Nerono, 107 
Nessian Wood, 95 
Nexuses of the Seasons, 
94 
Naiad, 236 
Night hag, 206 
Nylea, 67 
Adventures, 156 
Champions, 68 
Nylea's Favored, 103 
Nymphs, 234 
Nyx, 105,114 
Nyxborn, 14, 63, 203 
Nyx-fleece ram, 233 
Nykthos, 104 
Oath of Glory, 29 
Odunos, 101 
Olantin, 88, 92, 179 
Omens, 111,112 
One-Eyed Pass, 88 
Ophis Tower, 93 
Oracle, 15, 238 
Ordeals, 114 
Oread, 237 
Oraniad Mountains, 104 
Oreskos, 96 
Oxus, 92 
Path of Phenax, 75, 182 
Phaela 92 
Pharagax Bridge, 88 
Pharika, 70 
Adventures, 160 
Champions, 72 
Phenax, 73 
Adventures, 164 
Champions, 74 
Phoenix Stairs, 104 
Pheres Lands, 88 
Philosophy, 89 
Phoberos, 98 
Outposts, 88 


А 


Phylaskia, 239 

Phylias, 106 

Piety, 36 

Polukranos, 230 

Purphoros, 76 
Adventures, 168 
Champions, 78 

Quests, 109 

Returned, 73, 100, 240 

Reverent Army, The, 90 

Satyr, 24, 103, 242 

Sea lock, 205 

Setessa, 93 

Siren Sea, 102 

Sirens, 226 

Sitrium, 92 

Skola Vale, 103 

Skophos, 99 

Sphinx, 207 

Stadium of Dishonor, 
106 

Stratian, 86 

Stratian Front, The, 99 

Sun's Mirror, 97 

Supernatural gifts, 12 

Tartyx River, 106, 180 

Tethmos, 97 

Thassa, 79 
Adventures, 172 
Champions, 80 

Thaumaturges, 90 

Thesteia, 92 

Titans, 34, 58, 145 

Titan's Stairs, 88 

Tizerus, 107 

Tovian Fields, 105 

Triton, 26, 109, 244 

Tromokratis, 254 

Twelve, The, 89 

Typhon, 246 

Underwater adventures, 
179 

Underworld, The, 106 
Adventures, 180 
Denizens, 182 

Unicorn, 207 

Wall of water (spell), 27 

Winter's Heart, 104 

Woe strider, 59, 247 


MYTHS 


Akroan War, The, 88 

Athreos, 39 

Dalakos and the Kraken, 
26 

Ephara, 41 

Erebos, 45 

Fall of Agnomakhos, 91 

First Kings of Meletis, 
15 

Halma, Nylea's 
Emissary, 156 

Heliod, 47 

]roan Games, The, 30 

Iroas, 51 

Karametra, 53 

Kelephne the Victor, 133 

Keranos, 57 

Klothys, 59 

Klothys and the Titans, 
145 

Kruphix, 63 

Mogis, 65 

Mogis and the 
Minotaurs, 23 

Nikaia the First Caryatid, 
95 

Nylea, 69 

Pharika, 71 

Phenax, 75 

Purphoros, 77 

Sinking of Olantin, The, 
179 

Temple at the World's 
Edge, The, 149 

Thassa, 81 

Tymaret the Murder 
King, 101 

Xenagos the Satyr God, 
25 


DUNGEONS @с DRAGONS 


E 


акау 
ZI SS 


ЗУУСУ) ИШ 


SZ 

DUX 

0) ESSET ә 
TAT | 


| AN 


1 - - Shallow 
Waters | 


УМИ 
4 — ? 
МОМ 
i MNA LAM 


18 i A ~ И Е UE К: 
А. КЕЧИ COE NSN 


e:o 9 ө 


өө 9 ob 


` ° 


NASA EY Ss ABA o AR 


9 7 JEAN 
TA 
N Б) 


1 
с=т ! 21) 
Tix [ЫШ 


бан 


[UA ОВ 


m 


NS 
<7 


AW 
ES 


e | - DN BE 
ZN 


: @ ‚шй 
A б: 
o 


zi 
WINER 
S 


© Ө, 
=5 feet _ 


‘ox 
mM 


1000060 6 


LV 72, о y рор, A-D А 


is d . * Land of the Living 


Dy 


D 
E. 
2 — А2 
^ I 
y — а: 


«ll 


MViTHIGODYSSEYS 
ORTHERUS 


XS 


b | 


| Ore Processing 


му 


RAW SOS ZA A D TA KORA 
AN | Eam L Ee 


IE 


7 
ie 


УЕ, 


Y 
7 


M 


S/N 


I 


E 


VAN Г 
E 


TM & © 2020' Wizards of the Coast LLC. 745B14639001 EN 


DUNGEONS {< DRAGONS 


MYITHIGODYSSEYS Ee 
OGTHEROS p alt vs 


Beast "We 
Lair o 


pE 
М 
ү 


2095 NN 
MÁS ©; 


= | +p оо P 
2 xl o | ; 
“ЈМ М) h SS “ Д. : pA 
їйї ДЎЛ 3 7 |f 
D EN z \ 


S Z7 AW. 
SS 


Scrying Pools | 
2 = 


is e A Ne X was 
Wo аут rum m TAN, 


DNRC 


N 


( 
Ч) 


CG 


j 
Ke 


= h^ 
[E 


1; 


N 


2 
DX 
TA 

IS 
1/7 


TAS) 


Pe Bat є 
Gallery * 


/, А. 
pu _ By T = Ww) 
PAN 4 a 4 AQUA 
с Ф N 


2m 


ae INR 


Й ) 4 
1 f Җо р 5 
N d 


Sa 
= 
2.6.0 


SZ 
D 
e | WA ly ү, 
‚!$Һаїтегеа УУЛУ a WE AW 
Sanctuary ДЕ (> У | N 4} INS 
Y “Әт «2а, | A 
@ Ws Bandit Caves 
u^ NF SSYATM o о, 
М, „ЧУ RES 
(He: iy DBD 


No snk oy 
D NEN M Ü X 


| 
gs d fi ч Lc 7 / 1 square = 10 feet 


a 


The world's most popular roleplaying game meets the 
world's most popular trading card game in this campaign 
sourcebook, detailing the Macic: THE GATHERING world 
of Theros for use in DUNGEONS & Dracons.. 


Legends walk the lands of Theros, arealm shaped by 
deities and the deeds of heroes. From the temples of omen- 
speaking oracles to the five realms of the Underworld, the 
champions of the gods vie for immortal favor and a place 
among the world's living myths. 


Choose a supernatural gift that sets you on the path of 
destiny, align yourself with one of Theros's fifteen gods, 


then carve a tale of odysseys and ordeals across the 


domains of mortals, gods, and the dead. 


For use with the fifth edition Player's Handbook , 
Dungeon Master's Guide’, and Monster Manual’. 


Q 
ӧс 


DuncrEonsANDDRAGONS.COM 


786 96 


es Retail: US Ei E En $65.95 
Printed in USA С78750000 


