\ anv 
WAVEINDER’S GUIDE \ 
TOEBERRON 


Explore the EI l ofjEberront in thi is s.campaign ip 
for the world’ s greatest roleplaying game 


II 


CREDITS 

Lead Designer: Keith Baker 

Designers: Jeremy Crawford, Ben Petrisor 

Developers: Jeremy Crawford, Ben Petrisor, Dan 
Dillon, Christopher Perkins 

Additional Design: Ruty Rutenberg 


Art Direction & Illustration: Lee Moyer 

Book Design: Will Hindmarch 

Editors: Kenna Conklin, Will Hindmarch, Ruty 
Rutenberg 

Cover Illustrator: Chippy 

Interior Illustrators: Grace Alison, Mitch Cotie, 
Rich Ellis, Steve Ellis, Tomas Giorello, Howard 
Lyon, William O’Connor, Steve Prescott, 
Wayne Reynolds, Anne Stokes, Mark Tedin, 
Francis Tsai, Brian Valenzuela, Anthony S. 
Waters, Charlie Wen, James Zhang 


This book includes some rules and spells that 
originally appeared in Xanathar’s Guide to 
Everything (2017). 


Playtesters: Teos Abadia, Kurt Caceres, Chelsea 


Caine, Cory Casoni, Wayne Chang, Charlie 
Chu, Kenna Conklin, Ryan Conklin, Jenny 
Conlee, Chris Funk, Dan Garrison, Hrishikesh 
Hirway, Jason Hobson, Noura Ibrahim, Kym 
Jackson,Taliesin Jaffe, Jonathan Keltz, Derek 
Mears, Jason Charles Miller, Marc Mohan, 
Lindsey Mortensen, Marty Mortimer, Cig 
Neutron, Kai Norman, Satine Phoenix, Milynn 
Sarley, Austin Scoggin, Kristian Serrano, 
Eugene Simon, Jimmy Tamborello, Shana 
Targosz, Ivan Van Norman, Kyle Vogt, B Dave 
Walters, Scott Welker, Dinora Walcott 


Special thanks to the people who helped bring 


Eberron to life, including Peter Archer, Mary 
Kirchoff, Lee Moyer, Christopher Perkins, 
Steve Prescott, Robert Rapier, Liz Schuh, Mark 
Sehestedt, Bill Slavicsek, Mark Tedin, and 
James Wyatt. 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, Forgotten Realms, Ravenloft, the dragon ampersand, and 
all other Wizards of the Coast product names, and their respective logos are trademarks of Wizards of the 


Coast in the USA and other countries. 


This work contains material that is copyright Wizards of the Coast and/or other authors. Such material is used 
with permission under the Community Content Agreement for Dungeon Masters Guild. 


All other original material in this work is copyright © 2018 by Keith Baker, and published under the Community 


Content Agreement for Dungeon Masters Guild. 


THE WAYFARER’S GUIDE TO EBERRON 


CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION on ccccsssssssssscsssssssessesssssseeseee 4 
CHAPTER ONE: WHAT IS EBERRON? ................... 5 
A Maioreal World ici: coistcctscezeseniestiteads Gersesnicrions Ginet 6 
Pulp Ave itu Eirenra 7 
Neo-Notr nite G rice tssasaietiieests eneen a 9 
WG Last War ees esi ss cecent cai saucescness esi 12 
Whe: Mornings reen einne e 14 
Ancient MysterieSueoser iieii niiae 17 
If It Exists In D&D, 
There’s A Place for It in Eberron .......sescsseesseresseees 19 
CHAPTER 2: WELCOME TO KHORVAIRE .............. 21 
Nations of Eb Grron sesiis E 22 
Andie E sua ba E E O 23 
Breland senenin a E 24 
Gyre (The Mournlaind)) vx csctvsans.e teens sesrentorsettteatecss 25 
| BEN ONUN eira A E E N O 26 
The Demon Wasteson iini 27 
I Dido vehcslmererrrecreres reer reer et tree rere E e 28 
The Eldeen Reaches... ceceeccceseesseeeneeceeeeeteceeeeenes 2 
Kearrriat ligesessctsteciiiastetavecessesdsi E 30 
The Lhazaar Principalities ..0...... eee eeeeeeereeneeeeeeees 31 
The: Mror Hold Suisei san unsctniereaskis 32 
OD) ATA EPEE E E E ssesevantoucstpadnreets 33 
The Shadow: Marches sssssissssissassestessecseisctsdaaeseeeeea cde 34 
Whe Valetta: Plaisirs rrei nennir 35 
Thrane enire eE a EE 36 
N lenan seer do ian e a Ra EE eE St 37 
AITO i eE EER E E ase 38 
Everyday Tile niinno 39 
MAGIC IN KHORVAIRE.. coscire 41 
MASE Wii Slits ssrin iasanen 42 
Wands inp eT Suenens e aE T E E 43 
The: Magical Economy sts.s..c0ssccscscoasessscsnsoeceoassansses 44 
Faiths of Kh orvatresssis.2:<cscesicsccsessssdisiebes catectoeesceesees 48 
Distant ai Sie, os ces deses sxc deinesneetencaustceesscedhccuseecentsaseesses 52 
Eberron: Above and Beyond.......ce ee eeeeeereereereenes 55 
CHAPTER 3: RACES OF EBERRON...................scs.0 59 
GH AMC eM GS oi, 25 os cb bereenxch seactannccsortes notes seecsosteniecainessd 60 
SHIRES 2s cueateteasecvecodaeheheesnesvensnieneaaieevrancsaneeaeeds 64 
WarlOr eed .ssicces sestastsvegessancayaite néstnsaceosates ds CEEE E EEEE 67 
DWAIN VES vescssivccncveeastestnsdAivaiet ine RE E EER ESENE EE 71 
LEEI E NEEE E A A E A TEN 76 
Im EEn E DE E EE 77 
Ha 16S reenen an NEES e E ENER ENa KOPERE E EEEREN 78 
Pat 98 isis css cies tescik ir 79 
PUMAS xs sesssicrtsvecnetiesericntecsact ete aiasatovessbareienss 82 
Other RACES casas areri ere rar ere Ernes EE Eer PEE Ee 83 


CHAPTER 4: DRAGONMARKS oe 12020101002.. 89 
Creating a Dragonmarked Character... 90 
Dragonmarks and Backgrounds..........eeeeeeee eres 90 
The Powers of the Mark... cee ceesseeseceeeeeeeeeeeees 91 
Dragonmark Appearance... 92 
Background xccinc csstsccsstcsnescoteedescscinesteuevistsbanonssiea ts 94 
The Mark of Detection... ic eeceeceeeseeneeereeeeeeeeees 96 
The Mark of Finding sesissisriressiie uresni 97 
The Mark of Handling... eeeeeeeeeeecereeeeeeeeees 98 
The Mark of Healing: :icccsiscisccsincscucissesssecnoncessees. 99 
The Mark of Hospitality... 100 
The Mark of Making s....ccscccisiniesesaiecsecnencereens 101 
The Mark of Passage sisine 102 
The Mark of Scribing siccicicissassiessesctvecessectsonsssreests 103 
The Mark of Sentinel ....... eee eeceseceeesseeneceeeeeeeeeeeees 104 
The Mark of Shadow \ csc. isiscrvchiestencieecesnaioneeieests 105 
The Mark: of Storia «....ssescsseesssssosessnecsrsssesnesenesensnceess 106 
The Mark of Wardinng.sc.ciccisssssncsies devisees snstnenseiseests 108 
Aberrant Dragonmarks 000... ceeeceeeeeeeeeeeeeteeeneeeeens 111 

CHAPTER 5: MAGIC ITEMS.............sssssscccccsssssseee 113 
Magie Weiss ecered eeetedioeits n ianei r saycouieests 114 

CHAPTER 6: SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS................. 123 
Sharm Backorounds: .accsearadieanerieninse iain ts 124 
The Shape: Of Sharit.ys. capsids ca siecstexsyavecvssaisensayecssta 131 
Central Plateau Quartets eiiie iieiea 134 
Duri Quarter opao o drini EEEN 135 
Menthis Plateau Quarter... eeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 136 
Northed sé Quarter 2: dsc seetesntelecnssatecschezcersscevecsats 137 
Tavick’s Landing Quarter... ceeeeceseeeeceteeeeeeeeeees 138 
Sharn: Above and Below .0....... cc ceeesecsseeseceeeeteeeeeeees 140 
Things to Doin Sha ieesiioinne setae 141 
Criminal Activities in Sharn ..seesseessesersesreresreresees 144 
tart: PONTS zicvssccsieeixcestesct inchssetesineetnasted e 147 
Starting Point: Callestain.. icc ccnccccsssessersedsseccogessontossss 148 
Startno Point: CUMODp ess ienee 150 
Starting Point: Morgrave University ..... cece 152 
A Quick Sharm: Story ities: es teediceanSievesiseieaisels, 155 
The Strectsof Saris sxiacs ssics ves ceed ateysevieersadacevesteeants 157 

APPENDIX A: FURTHER READING....................... 134 
Eberron Sourcebooks «0.00.0... .eecseceseseeceteeseeeeeeseteneeees 134 
Eberron Novels ieres 135 

APPENDIX B: GLOSSARY... essssssesssetsseetneeee 137 

APPENDIX C: DRAGONMARKED HOUSE CRESTS . 142 

APPENDIX D: ARTIFICER............sssssscsssssssscesseeee 146 


THE WAYFARER’S GUIDE TO EBERRON 


Ill 


4 


INTRODUCTION 


Arcs of electricity spark and flare, carrying the 
lightning rail toward the bridge. If Sundry is 
telling the truth, the train holds a fortune in Cyran 
gold... a fortune that rightfully belongs to the 
refugees scattered across Breland. And if Sundry is 
telling the truth, that gold is guarded by a cadre of 
undead soldiers, the elite warriors of Karrnath. 


The airship Revenge glides toward the bridge. 
The warforged ranger Pierce holds his sword in 
his right hand; with his lefi, he clings to the edge 
of Revenge. Pierce is a living weapon, built 

to fight for the people of Cyre. In a moment he'll 
release his grip, and if he times it right he'll land 
atop the coach and have a chance to reclaim the 
lost treasure. If he times ut wrong, he'll be smashed 
to pieces at the bottom of the canyon. 


A human would hold his breath, but Pierce 
doesn’t breathe. He just waits as Revenge passes 
over the bridge, and then he releases his grip. 


BERRON WAS BORN IN 2002 WHEN 

Wizards of the Coast launched 

a worldwide search for a new 

campaign setting. I imagined a 

world of swashbuckling adventure 
and dark fantasy, a place where magic formed 
the foundation of civilization. Over the course of 
the next year I worked with a team of amazing 
artists and game designers to refine and develop 
that core idea, and the end result was the Eberron 
Campaign Setting. In the years that followed, a 
host of authors, designers, and dungeon masters 
across the world have continued to expand and 
explore this setting. 

This book brings Eberron to the fifth edition of 
DunGeEons & DRAGONS, providing an overview 
of the core themes of the setting and the rules to 
connect them to current campaigns. It explores 
the continent of Khorvaire and the great city of 
Sharn. The Wayfinder’s Guide provides ideas and 


THE WAYFARER’S GUIDE TO EBERRON 


hooks for compelling adventures, as well as an 
appendix with a list of sources you can use to 
learn more about the setting. 

Bear in mind: this book presents my vision 
of Eberron. This is the world I run at my own 
table, and the way that I’ve converted its ideas 
to the fifth edition rules. All of the material here 
is presented for playtesting and to spark your 
imagination. The game mechanics are in draft 
form, usable in your campaign but not refined 
by final game design and editing. They aren’t 
officially part of the game and aren’t permitted in 
D&D Adventurers League events. If Wizards of 
the Coast decides to make this material official, it 
will be refined based on your feedback and then 
appear in a D&D book. Beyond that: Eberron 
is your world as much as it is mine. I hope that 
this book provides you with 
inspiration, but don’t 
be limited by my 
ideas or decisions. 
Think of this 
as something 


you can 
build upon, 
not a codex of 
absolute law. 
Welcome 
to Eberron: 
let’s explore! 


CHAPTER ONE: WHAT IS EBERRON? 


In an ancient ruin beneath the Demon Wastes, a 
band of heroes race to claim the Reaper’s Heart. 
If the agents of the Emerald Claw reach it first, 
theyll unleash an army of the dead against the 
people of Khorvaire... 


In the city of Sharn, a brilliant team of spies 

pull off an impossible scheme—breaking into 

the impenetrable vaults of House Rundarak. But 
instead of gold, they find a secret that could shatter 
the fragile peace between the Five Nations... 


On the deck of an airship, a wizard debates the 
interpretation of an ancient prophecy with a blood- 
red dragon. If the sage loses the debate, the dragon 
will destroy the airship and everyone on it. But if 
she wins the argument the dragon will take them 
to distant Argonnessen... and no human has ever 
seen the land of dragons and returned! 


HAT IS EBERRON? IT’s A WORLD 

bound by a golden ring 

and surrounded by twelve 

moons. It’s the intersection of 

thirteen planes of existence, 
which shift in and out of alignment. It’s a place 
where magic has been harnessed as a tool—used 
to build cities, to sail ships through the skies, to 
create both wonders and weapons. 

Eberron embraces swashbuckling action and 
pulp adventure and adds a layer of neo-noir 
intrigue. Stories don’t always end well and there 
isn’t a perfect answer to every problem. ‘The 
Last War turned old allies into bitter enemies 
and destroyed an entire nation, leaving terrible 
scars behind. Crime and corruption lurk in the 
great cities of Khorvaire. Hidden dragons shape 
the course of history. Sinister fiends influence 
the dreams of the unwary. Human greed and 
ambition may prove more dangerous than any 
devil or demon. But through this darkness, there 
are opportunities for a group of bold adventurers 
to make a difference... for better or for worse. 


This chapter explores these core themes 
and the ways that they can affect the stories or 
characters you create in Eberron. Here’s a quick 
overview of what lies ahead. 

e A Magical World. From warforged 
and airships to the mighty dragonmarked 
houses, magic is a part of the world and its 
stories. 

e Pulp Adventure. Whether you’re 
leaping from an airship or battling demons 
in forgotten ruins, Eberron encourages 
cinematic action and swashbuckling 
adventure. 

e Neo-Noir Intrigue. Eberron is a world 
of difficult choices. The line between hero 
and villain is easily blurred, and even the 
champions of the light may have things 
they regret. 

e The Last War. Eberron has just emerged 
from a century-long civil war, and the scars 
of that bitter conflict remain. How did the 
war affect your character, and how will it 
shape your story? 

e The Mourning. This mystical cataclysm 
destroyed an entire nation and created a 
deadly wasteland in the heart of Khorvaire. 
The Mourning brought the war to an end, 
but it is a mystery and a threat that looms 
large over Eberron. 

e Ancient Mysteries. Powerful artifacts 
are hidden in the ruined cities of giants. 
Dragons and demons scheme in the 
shadows, unraveling a prophecy that could 
shape the future. These ancient mysteries 
can be a source of fantastic adventures and 
terrible danger. 

e Ifit exists in D&D, it has a place in 
Eberron... But it may not be the place 
you're used to. 

These elements are all part of Eberron, but 

you don’t have to use all of them in every story. 
As you go through this chapter, decide which 
themes appeal to you and best fit the stories you 
want to tell. 


CHAPTER 1 | WHAT IS EBERRON? 


6 


A Macicat Wort 


The creation myths say that magic is the 
blood of the dragon Siberys, flowing down 
from the golden ring in the sky. Whether this 
is truth or mere myth, magic pervades the 
world. 

Magic as a Tool. In Eberron, arcane 
magic is a form of science. The spells and 
rituals of wizards and artificers have been 
developed and honed over centuries, and 
those principles have been incorporated into 
daily life. Magic is used for entertainment, 
transportation, communication, warfare, and 
much more. While magic is widespread, there 
are limits to is power. You can book passage 
on an airship or get an illness cured by lesser 
restoration, but resurrection, teleportation, and 
similar effects are hard to come by. True wizards 
are rare and remarkable; most common magic 
is performed by a working class of magewrights, 
professional spellcasters who master a small 
handful of rituals or cantrips. The magical 
services available in Khorvaire are discussed 
in more detail in chapter 2, along with the 
availability of magic items. 

Dragonmarked Dynasties. The magical 
economy is dominated by a handful of powerful 
families and the guilds they maintain. These are 
the dragonmarked houses, barons of industry 
whose influence rivals that of kings and queens. 
These dynastic houses derive their power 
from their dragonmarks: arcane sigils that 
are passed down through their bloodlines. A 
dragonmark grants limited but useful magical 
abilities, and over the course of centuries the 
houses have used these powers to establish 
powerful monopolies. House Jorasco dominates 
the medical trade with its Mark of Healing, 
while only someone with House Lyrandar’s 
Mark of Storms can pilot an airship. Chapter 3 
provides more details about dragonmarks and 
the dragonmarked houses, along with rules for 
creating dragonmarked characters. 


CHAPTER | | A MAGICAL WORLD 


EVERYDAY MAGIC 


Here are a few examples of how magic is 
integrated into everyday life in Khorvaire. 
The lightning rail uses bound elementals 
to drive a train of carriages along a path of 
conductor stones. The rail links most major 
cities and is a simple way to travel long 
distances. 
An elemental airship uses a fire or air 
elemental, bound into a ring that holds 
the ship aloft and provides motive force. 
The airship is a recent innovation that is 
transforming the business of transportation. 
Everbright lanterns use continual flame 
to light the streets of Khorvaire. The flame 
never goes out, but metal shutters allow a 
lantern to be dimmed or shut down. 
Speaking stones allow communication 
between distant communities. A short 
message can be sent from one stone to 
another, functionally similar to a telegraph. 
Warforged are sentient humanoid 
golems. Developed during the Last War, 
warforged were created as weapons. The 
Treaty of Thronehold forbid the creation of 
new warforged, while granting freedom to 
the golems that survived the war. Rules for 
making warforged characters can be found in 
chapter 3. 


Putp ADVENTURE 


Eberron is a world of swashbuckling adventure 
and two-fisted action. Whether you’re a DM 
developing an adventure in the world or a 
player preparing to explore it, here are a few 
things to consider. 

Exotic Locations. Lightning rails, airships, 
and other forms of transportation can facilitate 
travel to exotic locations. Adventures could 
take you to the colossal ruins left behind by the 
giants of Xen’drik, the warped landscape of the 
Mournland, or the dark demiplanes within the 
underworld of Khyber. Even if you prefer to stay 
in a town, you could find yourself in the mile- 
high towers of Sharn... or the ancient goblin 
tunnels that lie beneath it. 

What Are the Stakes? What’s better than 
a battle on the deck of an airship? A battle on 
the deck of an airship that’s about to crash. Look 
for ways to raise the stakes of a scene, so players 
feel that every decision matters. ‘This could be 
driven by the consequences of failure: through 


aS 


your actions, you’re protecting your friends, your 
house, or your nation. It could be about time: The 
alarm’s been triggered, and you only have six rounds before 
security arrives. Such things can even be incidental. 
Did you start a fight in an alley behind a bar? 
Now you notice the drunk ogre sleeping in the corner... if 
he wakes up, this could get ugly. 

Player Characters Are Remarkable. 
Eberron is a world in need of heroes. Lingering 
tensions of war remain. From the fanatics of 
the Emerald Claw and the mad cults of the 
Dragon Below to the flesh-warping daelkyr 
and ancient archfiends, Eberron faces many 
threats... and there’s no one out there to stop 
them. In Eberron, the gods are distant and 
don’t directly intervene. The Silver Flame is a 
divine force of light, but it can only act through 
mortal champions. The few powerful benevolent 
NPCs have limitations: the Keeper of the Flame 
loses her powers if she leaves her citadel. ‘The 
mighty great druid is... well... a tree. Most of 
the powerful people in the setting are driven by 
selfish goals. If the Tarrasque comes to Sharn, 


8 


there’s no one else to deal with the problem: the 
fate of the city is in your hands. 

This is something to consider in developing 
your character and choosing your background. 

If you take the soldier background, you can be 
more than just a grunt. What did you do during 
the Last War? What was your greatest triumph 
or most tragic defeat? If you’re a spy, are you a 
prized agent or did you break loose from your 
organization after they pushed you too far? Don’t 
just think of your character as a set of numbers: 
even at lst level, you’re remarkable. 

Hero Points. The heroes of pulp adventure 
are often able to overcome seemingly impossible 
odds. One way to reflect this is to use the 
optional hero points rule from chapter 9 of the 
Dungeon Master’s Guide. This is optional; hero points 
change the balance of the game and give player 
characters an opportunity to turn certain failure 
into success. It’s a way to make heroes feel 
largely than life, but it’s not a good match for 
every story. 

Remarkable Villains. One reason the world 
needs heroes is because it already has villains. It 
may be a long time before you’re ready to face 
the archlich Erandis Vol in battle. But part of 
the flavor of pulp adventure is to have recurring 
villains who are closely matched with the 
heroes—rivals who advance in power as you do. 
One way to create a compelling villain is for the 
DM and players develop the villain’s backstory 
together. As a DM, you might ask a player: When 
you fought in the Last War, Halas Martain served in your 
unit... until he betrayed you. What did he do, exactly? 
Likewise, even when a pulp villain appears to 
die, they can have their own remarkable escapes 
from death. Perhaps Halas had a ring that cast 
an illusion of his death while actually stabilizing 
him, or cast feather fall when he leapt from that 
tower in Sharn. Here as well, as a DM you could 
engage the players: /t’s Halas Martan, all right. 
How do you think he surowed your last encounter? 

This isn’t something every group will enjoy, 
and you never want players to feel as though they 
can’t succeed. But for some groups, this sort of 
collaboration can produce a compelling story and 
a sense of investment in the world. 


CHAPTER | | PULP ADVENTURE 


OPTIONAL RULE: 

ENVIRONMENTAL ELEMENTS 

A fight breaks out in The Cat & Biscuit. The 
gnome rogue leaps from the landing and swings 
across the room, passing over the heads of the 
surprised thugs to land in the perfect position 
for a sneak attack. The shifter barbarian strikes 
a mighty blow that knocks her enemy into the 
blazing hearth; the bandit shrieks as the flames 
spread to his clothes. 


Combat can feel very mechanical. / move 10 
feet. | make an attack roll. | use a reaction. One 
way for the DM to encourage more cinematic 
action is to present a list of Environmental 
Elements. In a tavern, this list could include 
Chandelier, Plate Glass Window, Roaring 
Fireplace, Tray of Drinks, Drunk Patron. If 
you're fighting in an ancient tomb the list could 
be Pile of Gold Coins, Scattered Bones, 
Rotting Tapestry, Moss-Covered Statue. 
Each turn, a player can work one of these 
elements into their description of their action. 
The primary purpose of this is to give players 
ideas; interesting details to use while describing 
their actions. But if a player comes up with a 
particularly clever way to use an element, the 
DM could grant advantage on a check or attack 
roll, or some other benefit. The rogue needs to 
cross a room full of enemies and wants to swing 
on the chandelier? As the DM, I'd let them 
make a simple Dexterity (Acrobatics) check to 
avoid opportunity attacks, essentially getting a 
free Disengage action. 

Environmental elements are always 
optional and largely cosmetic. As a DM, you 
don’t have to grant a bonus for every use of an 
element. But presenting a list can help players 
think of the location as more than just squares 
on a map and challenge them to add more 
cinematic flair to their actions. 


There are ancient and primordial forces at 
Neo-Nomr INTRIGUE work in Eberron. But there are also misguided 
patriots, religious extremists, and dragonmarked 
houses looking to wring a few more pieces of 
gold out of Khorvaire. There are spies who 
will do anything to protect their nations and 
petty criminals trying to build empires. There’s 
a place in Eberron for selfless heroes and truly 
vile villains, but there’s a lot of middle ground in 
between. 


While Eberron embraces the swashbuckling 
action of pulp adventure, it also draws inspiration 
from neo-noir and hardboiled fiction. It’s a 
world where stories don’t always end well, where 
there isn’t a perfect solution for every problem. 
In developing characters or stories in Eberron, 
consider the following concepts. 

Shades of Gray. In Eberron, it’s not always 
easy to separate the heroes from the villains. 
Good people can do terrible things, while cruel 
or heartless people may be serving the greater 
good. An inquisitor may torture 
innocents in a quest to root out a cult 
of the Dragon Below; but if she’s 
stopped, the cult will survive and 
flourish. A group of orcs are raiding 
a human settlement; but the settlers 
have built their village on land sacred to the 
orcs and may be disrupting wards that hold 
evil at bay. The heroes find a powerful magic 
weapon in an ancient tomb; but this artifact is 
the sword of an ancient hobgoblin general, and 
his descendants want it back. ‘There are ways to 
resolve these problems, but the answers aren’t 
always simple or obvious. 

There can certainly be times when decisions 
are straightforward. If the Emerald Claw is about 
to detonate a necrotic resonator that will kill half 
of Sharn, they need to be stopped. But a good 
Eberron story challenges you to think about your 
actions, and the simplest solution may not be the 
best one. 

Human Motives. Not every conflict is a 
fight between light and darkness. In Eberron, the 
vast majority of people are driven by simple 
motives: Greed. Fear. Pride. Ambition. One 
person just wants to get some gold in their 
pocket. Another wants to impress their 
paramour. A leader forcing the Five 
Nations into war is driven both 
by fear of their neighbors and the 
sincere belief that Khorvaire would 
be better off under their rule. 


CHAPTER 1 | NEO-NOIR INTRIGUE 9 


REGRETS TABLE 
1d10 Regret 


1 While you were serving in the Last 
War, you were forced to abandon 
an injured comrade. You don’t know 
if they survived. 


2 You placed your faith and your 
fortune in the hands of a lover who 
betrayed you. You don’t know if you 
can ever trust anyone again. 


3 You murdered a rival. Your actions 
may have been justified, but your 
rival’s face still haunts you. 


4 Someone put their trust in you and 
you betrayed them for personal 
gain. You may regret it now, but 
you can never repair the damage 
you’ve done. 


5 You squandered your family’s 
fortune and brought shame and 
ruin to your household. 


6 You engaged in covert operations 
for a nation (either as a spy or 
soldier). While you were serving 
your country, you did unforgivable 
things. 

7 You abandoned your family to 
pursue a life of adventure. Your 
village was destroyed in the war and 
you don’t know if they survived. 


8 You made a bargain with an 
extraplanar entity that you now 
regret. 

9 You made a promise to a child or a 


lover that you failed to keep. 


10 You volunteered for mystical 
experiments. These may be 
responsible for your class abilities 
(sorcerer spellcasting, barbarian 
rage), but you don’t know if there 
will be side effects. 


CHAPTER | | NEO-NOIR INTRIGUE 


Everyone Has Regrets. Player characters 
are remarkable people, but that doesn’t mean 
they’re perfect. 5E already encourages you to 
pick a flaw for your character, something that 
helps define your motivations. But if you want to 
add a little hard-boiled flavor to your character, 
you might consider a few additional aspects: Do 
you have a debt you need to repay and, if so, do 
you need to resolve this in a week or in a year? 
Did you make a tragic mistake, and if so, is it 
something you can ever undo? The Regrets table 
provides a few examples of missteps that might 
haunt you. 

The Balance of Pulp and Noir. As a 
setting, Eberron works with both pulp and noir 
themes. This is a spectrum: on one end you have 
over-the-top swashbuckling adventure—hattling 
incarnations of evil on the deck of a burning 
airship! On the other end you have gritty hard- 
boiled action in the alleys of Sharn, a brutally 
human scenario where there’s no easy choices. 
The most interesting path often lies between the 
two extremes, but don’t be afraid to focus on one 
end of the spectrum if that’s what suits your story. 


Way Do You NEED 
200 Gorn Pieces? 


A flaw or regret is something that shapes your 
personality, something that plays an ongoing role 
in your story. But perhaps you have a problem 
that needs to be resolved right now. 

This is entirely optional: As a player, you 
could choose to roll or select an option from the 
Debts table. 

Why would you possibly want to take on a 
debt? It’s a way to add depth to your character 
and to provide a compelling, immediate motive 
for adventuring—you’re not just out to get rich, 
you need gold to get that bounty off your head. 
It’s also an opportunity to establish something 
that can be part of your character moving 
forward. If you’re trying to reclaim a magic item 
from a pawn shop, it lets you establish that your 
character has that magic item—which could be 
an heirloom, something you created, a gift from a 
mentor—you’ve Just temporarily lost it. If you’re 
trying to raise money to join a secret society, 
it establishes that your membership in this 
organization may be a part of the story later on. 

Establishing a debt requires collaboration and 
approval by both player and DM. Work together 
to develop the details: who is blackmailing you? 
What’s this secret society? What’s the story 
behind the magic item you’ve pawned, and what 
sort of item is it? As a player, you present ideas 
but the DM has final approval. 


DEBTS TABLE 
1d10 Debt 
1 You committed a crime during the 


10 


Last War, and now you’re being 
blackmailed by someone who has 
proof. Your actions may have been 
justified, but the law won’t care. 


You’ve got a gambling problem. If you 
can’t repay Daask (see chapter 6), 
you're going to be playing tag with a 
cockatrice. 

You own an uncommon magic item, 
but you had to sell it to a pawn shop. 
If you can’t reclaim it within the 
month, they’Il sell it off. 


You were making a delivery on behalf 
of the Boromar Clan (see chapter 6) 
and you lost the merchandise. 


Someone knows the whereabouts of 
a sibling or loved one you thought lost 
in the Mourning, but that information 
is going to cost you. 

You have a degenerative disease that 
can’t be cured by mundane means. 

If you can’t get a lesser restoration 
soon, you're going to start showing 
symptoms. 

Your family lost everything in the Last 
War. 200 gp would get them a stake in 
a new (farm/inn/stagecoach). 

You’ve got a price on your head. 

Until you settle things with House 
Tharashk, you’d better keep an eye 
out for bounty hunters. 


You’ve got an opportunity to join an 
influential secret society. But you’ve 
only got one month to raise the 
membership dues. 

Roll again. It’s not your debt: it’s 
you're lover’s problem. Can you solve 
the problem before they have to face 
the consequences? 


CHAPTER 1 | NEO-NOIR INTRIGUE 11 


Tue Last War 


For hundreds of years the continent of Khorvaire 
was united under the Kingdom of Galifar. ‘This 
came to an end with the death of King Jarot in 
894 YK, just over a century ago. Conflict over 
the succession spiraled into outright war between 
the Five Nations. 

The Last War was a bitter struggle that forever 
changed the shape of Khorvaire. It was a 
century marked by shifting alliances, with years 
of stalemate interspersed with periods of intense 
conflict. This grueling conflict left deep scars on 
the land and the people, but there was worse 
to come. On Olarune 20, 994 YK the nation 
of Cyre was consumed in a magical cataclysm 
now known as the Mourning. The cause of the 
Mourning remains unknown, and many fear that 
it was a consequence of the extensive use of war 
magic. Shock and fear brought the nations to the 


negotiating table, and the Last War came to an 
end in 996 YK with the Treaty of Thronehold. 
While many celebrated the end of the war, 
others remain unsatisfied with its outcome. 
No one won the war, and deep scars remain. 
War-torn villages and towns are still rebuilding. 
Once fertile farmlands are scorched and ruined. 
There are refugees in every major city. And 
even though people optimistically refer to it as 
the Last War, most believe that it’s only a matter 
of time until it begins anew. The mystery of 
the Mourning is the only thing holding the 
warmongers at bay. If the secret of the Mourning 
can be uncovered—+f it can be proven that the 
Mourning couldn’t happen again, or if its power 
could be harnessed as a weapon—the Last War 
could begin again. As such, the nations remain in 
a cold war as each makes preparations and seeks 
advantages in the conflict that could lie ahead. 


EFFECTS OF THE WAR 


Here’s a few of the major effects of the Last 
War. 

Dragonmarked Power. The dragonmarked 
houses sold their services to all sides and 
made considerable profits from the war. The 
Five Nations are divided and dependent 
on the services of the houses, and it’s 
questionable if any one nation can impose its 
will upon them. 

Karrnathi Undead. When a series of 
famines and plagues crippled the nation of 
Karrnath, it embraced the Blood of Vol and 
introduced undead into its armies. The religion 
was largely abandoned toward the end of the 
war and many of the undead were confined to 
crypts, but some are still in use. 

Magical Innovation. Over the course of a 
century of war, the nations and dragonmarked 
houses developed new spells and tools for use 
in the war. Airships and warforged are recent 
developments, and the wandslinger tradition 
emerged from the war. 

The Mourning. This magical cataclysm 
destroyed Cyre and brought the war to an end. 
Cyre is a vast, unrecoverable wasteland and 
those Cyrans who survived the disaster are 
scattered across Khorvaire. 

New Nations. Before the Last War, Galifar 
laid claim to all of Khorvaire. A host of new 
states emerged over the course of the war. 
These include the goblin nation of Darguun, 
the elf kingdom of Valenar, the druids of the 
Eldeen Reaches, the monsters of Droaam, 
and more. 


MILITARY BACKGROUNDS 


The current year is 998 YK. The Last War lasted 


for over a century and only came to an end two 
years ago. As a player character in Eberron, you 
possess remarkable skills. Did you take part in 
the Last War, and if so, in what capacity? If you 
fought, which nation did you serve? Were you 
honorably discharged, or did you abandon your 
cause? If you didn’t take part in the war, why 
didn’t you fight and what did you do instead? 
The following table provides ideas about how 
a background could reflect a connection to the 


Last War. Feel free to change the suggested 
backgrounds. While charlatan is an obvious 
background for a spy, you could easily adapt 
criminal or urchin to the same role. 


MILITARY BACKGROUNDS 
1d10 Military Background 
1 You were a common soldier, facing 
the enemy on the front lines of the 
interminable war. (Soldier) 
2 You served on the open seas, whether 
as a marine, a naval officer, a privateer 
or a smuggler. (Sailor) 


3 You commanded troops and led soldiers 
into battle. Were you a good leader, 
or are you haunted by your failures? 
(Soldier or noble) 

4 You were a spy, gathering intelligence 
for your nation. Are you out of the 
business, or could you still be called 
back in? (Charlatan) 


5 You were tasked with maintaining 
morale and raising the spirits of your 
soldiers. (Entertainer) 


6 You provided spiritual support to your 
troops. Were you always devout, or did 
you find your faith on the battlefield? 
(Acolyte) 

7 You used your remarkable knowledge as 
part of a military think tank... or perhaps 
you provided arcane support on the 
battlefield. (Sage) 

8 You were a smuggler or a profiteer, 
taking advantage of the war to line your 
pockets. (Criminal or charlatan) 

9 You opposed the war. The actions you 
took to protect the innocent have made 
you a local legend. (Folk hero) 

10 You used the connections of your 
influential family to avoid military 
service. Are you haunted by this, or do 
you remain indifferent? (Noble) 


CHAPTER 1 | THE LAST WAR 


13 


14 


THE MOURNING 


The nation of Cyre was once the heart of the 
united kingdom of Galifar. The Last War took 
a heavy toll on Cyre and its citizens, serving as 
the battleground where all of the Five Nations 
crossed swords. But no one was prepared for the 
disaster that struck in 994 YK. 

Accounts of the Mourning vary. Some say that 
a blinding light engulfed the battlefield near the 
Saerun Road. Others say that the dead-gray 
mists began in the capital city of Metrol and 
spread out from there. What is known for certain 
is that within the space of one day the nation 
of Cyre had been engulfed in a wall of mist, 
and that anything caught within the mists was 
horrifically transformed. Over a million Cyrans 
were killed on the day of Mourning. ‘Those who 
survived were the soldiers fighting in enemy 
territory, those living on the borders who were 
able to flee from the advancing mists, those few 
who were able to escape the interior through 
magical means. On Olarune 20, 994 YK, the 
nation of Cyre ceased to exist. 

The Mourning threw Khorvaire into a state 
of shock. Who could unleash such power? Was 
this a weapon, and if so, when would those 
responsible issues their demands? Were its 
borders stable, or could they expand at any 
moment? What was to be done with the Cyran 
refugees surging into every adjacent nation? 

Fear of the Mourning brought the Five Nations 
to the negotiating table, and in 996 YK the 
Treaty of Thronehold ended the Last War. But 
all of those questions remain unanswered. No 
one knows the cause of the Mourning or whether 
it could suddenly expand anew. Breland opened 
its borders to refugees, and Prince Oargev serves 
as de facto ruler in the territory now called New 
Cyre. Despite its grand name, New Cyre is little 
more than a vast refugee camp. Other refugees 
are scattered across Khorvaire; some are treated 
with pity, others with suspicion or anger. And 
fear of the Mourning hangs like a shadow across 
Khorvaire. Could it happen again? Is this how the 
world ends? 


CHAPTER | | THE MOURNING 


THE MourNLAND 


A wall of dead-grey mist surrounds the remnants 
of Cyre. Beyond the mists lies a land twisted 

by magic, a wound that will not heal. The land 

is blasted and strangely transformed. In some 
places the ground has fused into jagged glass. In 
others, it is cracked and burned. Broken bodies of 
soldiers from various sides litter the landscape— 
soldiers whose dead bodies refuse to decompose. 
The Mournland is a vast open grave. 

In the Mournland, the wounds of war never 
heal, vile magical effects linger, and monsters 
mutate into even more foul and horrible 
creatures. Arcane effects continue to rain upon 
the land, magical storms that never dissipate. 
Stories speak of living spells—war magic that has 
taken physical form, sentient fireballs and vile 
cloudkills that endlessly search for new victims. 
Angry ghosts continue to fight their final battles. 
The only thing that’s predictable about the 
Mournland is that nothing is predictable; any 
sort of monster or horror could be found within 
its borders. And yet, it also holds the wealth 
and treasures of an entire nation, along with 
the secrets of House Cannith and everything 
else that was left behind. It’s dangerous. It’s 
mysterious. But it’s also a dungeon the size of 
a nation, with opportunities for those brave 
enough to enter the mists. 


THE Mournine anp You 


The Mourning transformed Khorvaire. Shock 
and fear brought an end to the Last War. In 
making an Eberron character, think about the 
impact it had on you. If you’re from Cyre, what 
did you lose in the Mourning? Family? Friends? 
Are there heirlooms or treasures lost in the mists 
that you’re determined to regain, or loved ones 
you hope to someday see again? Do you feel 
loyalty to your nation and hope to see it restored, 
or have you burned Cyre out of your heart? 
Even if you’re not from Cyre, the Mourning 
may have had a profound impact on you. Are 
you afraid that the Mourning could expand, 
or do you prefer not to dwell on such things? 


If you’re religious, did the shocking tragedy of 
the Mourning cause you to question your faith, 
or did it reinforce it? If you’re an artificer or a 
wizard, are you interested in studying its effects 
more closely... might you even hope to unravel 
its mysteries yourself? Do you see it solely as a 
tragedy, or do you hope that this awesome power 
could somehow be harnessed and controlled? 

Beyond this, player characters are remarkable 

people. Perhaps you were caught in the 
Mourning and survived the experience... but its 
effects remain with you. Consider these ideas. 

e Asa barbarian you could have been a 
simple peasant caught in the Mourning. 
Everyone else in your community was killed, 
but their spirits were bound to you. Your 
barbarian rage represents you channeling 
these vengeful ghosts. Is there a way to lay 
these spirits to rest? Do they have unfinished 
business they want you to resolve? 

e Asa sorcerer your arcane powers could be 
the result of your exposure to the Mourning. 
Were you physically transformed as well, 
or are your powers the only manifestation 


of the Mourning? Are you comfortable 
using your abilities, or are you afraid that 
you may be increasing the power of the 
Mourning with each spell you cast? 

As a warlock your patron could be 
interested in the Mourning and drive you 
to learn more about it. Your patron could 
even be part of the Mourning—whether 

a collective of spirits killed on the Day of 
Mourning, or even a dark and enigmatic 
power that might have been responsible for 
this tragedy. If you take the latter approach, 
do you feel that by using your warlock 
powers you are serving the Mourning? 

Or could it be that you’re siphoning your 
powers from it and believe that you are 
actually weakening it with your actions? 

As a member of an unusual race, you could 
say that you are actually a creation of the 
Mourning. Perhaps your tortle was an actual 
turtle transformed on the day of Mourning. 
Or maybe your tiefling is touched by the 
dark power of the Mourning instead of by 
an infernal power. 


CHAPTER 1 | THE MOURNING 15 


16 


Waar Caused THE MOURNING? 


There will never be an official answer to the 
cause of the Mourning. As a DM in Eberron, we 
want you to decide the cause of this tragedy... 

or if you prefer, to leave it as a mystery that 

will never be solved. With that said, people in 


e The Mourning was triggered by the release 
of an ancient demon overlord trapped 
since the dawn of time. This mighty fiend is 
lurking in the Mournland and building its 
power, but soon it will be ready to act. 


Eberron itself have many theories about the As a DM, the question you need to ask is 
cause of the Mourning; it’s up to you to decide if whether you want the mystery of the Mourning 
any of them are correct. to be solved, and what the consequences would 
e The Mourning was the result of a century be. Right now, fear of the Mourning holds war 
of extensive use of war magic. If the nations at bay. If it’s confirmed that the Mourning is no 
continue to use these magics, the Mourning longer a threat—or if one nation manages to 
will expand. harness its power—the war could begin again. 


The dragonmarked House Cannith made 
a fortune selling magical weapons to all 
sides during the Last War. The Mourning 
was the result of research gone horribly 
awry. The secrets can be found in a 
Cannith research facility within the 
Mournland. If this knowledge could 

be recovered and refined, it could 
produce a terrifying weapon. 


CHAPTER | | THE MOURNING 


Ancient MYSTERIES 


Our world was born in strife. The three 
Progenitor Dragons crafted the planes at the dawn 
of time, and rested in the space that les between 
them. It was then that cruel Khyber turned on 

the others, killing noble Siberys and scattering the 
pieces of his body. Eberron fought Khyber, but 
couldn’t defeat the dark wyrm. And so Eberron 
wound Khyber in her coils and transformed, 
becoming a lwing prison that could 
Jorever hold the darkness within. And 
this is the foundation of our reality. 
Eberron 1s the Dragon Between, the 
world on which we stand. Khyber 

1s the Dragon Below, source of demons 
and foul things. And the ring around our 
world is the broken body of Siberys, 
the Dragon Above, whose blood is the 
source of all magic. 


This cosmic struggle was merely the 
first of many wars that shaped our 
world. The fiendish children of Khyber 
spilled out from the underworld and 
spread chaos across the land. We 

know little of this time, save that the 
mighty dragons—the first children 

of Eberron and Siberys—fought agaist 
these demon overlords. In the end, an act of 
sacrifice kindled the Silver Flame that binds these 
demons to this day. But they hunger to escape 
Jrom their bonds and wreak havoc, and we must 
always be vigilant. 


Ciwiltzations rose and fell. The giants of Xen’drik 
worked great magics, even destroying one of 
the moons. This rash action led the recluswe 


dragons to utterly destroy the giant nations, and conflict with the vile daelkyr. These flesh-warping 
the continent of Xen’drik remains ravaged by the lords of madness were eventually trapped in 

epic spells unleashed in this battle. In Khorvatre, Khyber by wise orcish druids, but ruins are all 
the empire of the goblins was brought down by a that remain of that great empire. 


CHAPTER 1 | ANCIENT MYSTERIES 17 


18 


Modern civilization is built on the bones of the 
past, and these ancient mysteries may have a 
dreadful impact on the future. Many of the 
modern cities of Khorvaire are built on the 
foundations of ancient goblin cities and fortresses, 
and these may still hold aberrant threats from 
the war that destroyed their civilization. Older 
still are the ruins once inhabited by rakshasa 
and other fiends, and these may hold artifacts 
and other treasures far beyond the capabilities 
of any modern artificer. But there is more to the 
past than treasures waiting to be found. Stories 
say that demons and dragons are fighting a long, 
cold war in the shadows. These tales speak of 

a Draconic Prophecy... hidden revelations 
that grant the power to shape the future. Hidden 
dragons, undead elves, immortal fiends; all 

may be fighting to determine the path of the 
Prophecy, and player characters may be pawns 
in this great game. As one of the heroes of the 
age, you surely have a role in the Draconic 
Prophecy. Will you be a tool of one of these 
ancient forces, or will you master the game and 
determine your own destiny? 


Dark Forces 


Dragons and demons are just a few of the 
dangerous forces at work in the world. The 
daelkyr came to Eberron from the Plane 

of Madness. ‘They came with armies of 
aberrations—forces commanded by mind flayers 
and bolstered by beholders. ‘They shattered 
civilizations and spread horrors across Khorvaire. 
The daelkyr were ultimately bound in Khyber 
by druidic magic. They linger in the darkness— 
the Lord of Eyes, the Prince of Slime, Dyrrn 

the Corruptor—creating new aberrations and 
waiting for the day they can unleash their full 
power on the world above. 

While the daelkyr themselves can’t return to 
the surface, their minions can. This leads to the 
Cults of the Dragon Below, mad mortals who 
work with mind flayers and lesser aberrations. 


A cult of the Dragon Below can spring up 
anywhere, as a seed of madness takes root in a 
community or court ... and spreads. 

As if dragons and demons aren’t trouble 
enough, stories say there are fiends lurking in 
mortal dreams. According to these tales, the 
Dreaming Dark is an alliance of nightmare 
spirits from the plane of Dal Quor, fiends that 
feed on mortal fear and manipulate through 
dreams. Some stories say the Dreaming Dark can 
possess people through their dreams, while others 
claim they have psychic agents hidden across 
Khorvaire. 

Beyond the enigmatic daelkyr and the 
Dreaming Dark, other threats have arisen in 
the past century, spinning out of the strife of the 
Last War. The Lord of Blades 1s a warforged 
insurgent, a deadly warrior and artificer who 
seeks vengeance against the humans who 
created his people as weapons for their war. The 
Aurum is a cabal drawn from the wealthy elite 
who seek to turn gold into greater power. The 
Emerald Claw was an elite military unit that 
served Karrnath during the Last War. Disavowed 
by their king, the Emerald Claw engages in 
guerrilla strikes across Khorvaire, and includes 
necromancers, vampires, and undead bound to 
their service. Some say the Emerald Claw serve 
an ancient lich known as the Queen of Death, 
that their true goal is to place her on the throne 
of Karrnath and the Five Nations. 

These are just some of the dark forces working 
in the shadows of Eberron. There are hungry 
lycanthropes, clever doppelgangers, and cults 
devoted to the Dark Six. There are stories of a 
cabal of assassins with aberrant dragonmarks 
and elves twisted into creatures of nightmare. 
And that’s not to mention the mundane crime 
and corruption that can be found in any major 
city. It’s a dangerous world—hopefully you can 
handle it! 


CHAPTER | | IF IT EXISTS IN D&D, THERE’S A PLACE FOR IT IN EBERRON 


IF It Exists In D&D, 
THERE S A PLACE For IT IN 
EBERRON 


... But It May Not Be the Place You’re Used To. 


Eberron draws on the core elements of D@D. 
It’s a world of wizards and rogues, a setting 

with halflings and dwarves and elves. Want an 
otyugh? Orcs? Goblins? Paladins? They’re all 
there. Eberron draws on the same basic elements 
as other settings, but it often diverges from the 
traditional archetypes assigned to those things. A 
few factors here: 

No fixed alignments. Mortal creatures 
are shaped by their culture and personal 
circumstances. An orc is just as likely to be lawful 
good as chaotic evil, depending on their personal 
history. A gold dragon, a beholder, a halfling; 
you can’t make automatic assumptions about 
any of them. In part this is because of Eberron’s 
distant gods. Orcs aren’t driven by Gruumsh’s 
fury, and the gnolls aren’t tied to Yeenoghu. 

The exceptions to this rule are creatures whose 
identities are shaped by magic. Fiends and 
celestials embody pure ideals of good and evil; 
lycanthropes are driven by a curse. 

Monsters aren’t always villains, and 
the villains aren’t always monsters. Many 
of the gnolls of Droaam are more honorable 
than the human mercenaries of House Deneith. 
In Karrnath and Aerenal, undead are used as 
tools. You certainly could find yourself fighting a 
merciless minotaur in the slums of Sharn... but 
you re just as likely to cross swords with a cruel 
halfling cutthroat. 

There’s a place for everything in 
Eberron... but it may not be a prominent 
place. Kenku aren’t mentioned in any of the 
canon sourcebooks of Eberron. There’s many 
ways to add kenku into Eberron, but that doesn’t 
mean that there needs to be a kenku nation 
or that kenku have played a significant role 


in history; it may be that a dozen kenku were 
thrown out of the Faerie Court of Thelanis and 
these are all the kenku in the world. So just 
because it’s possible to put anything you want in 
the world, don’t assume that the streets of Sharn 
are a zoo flooded with every character race that’s 
ever been suggested. 

Chapter 3 provides advice on adding new races 
to Eberron. Here’s a few other ways that you 
can add something into Eberron with minimal 
impact on the setting. 

e It comes from the vast and largely 

unexplored continent of Xen’drik. 


e It was created or caused by the 
Mourning—the mystical cataclysm that 
destroyed Cyre—and has only been around 
for four years. 


¢ It’s a product of the underworld of Khyber, 
the source of many aberrations and 
monsters. 


e It’s the result of recent experiments by 
one of the dragonmarked houses or a mad 
artificer. 


e It comes from one of the planes and slipped 
into the world during a recent convergence. 


Not everything has to exist in Eberron. 
You can find a place in Eberron for anything. 
But it’s also possible to say that something doesn’t 
exist in Eberron. For example, if you wanted to 
use Gruumsh in Eberron, you could re-imagine 
him as one of the demon overlords of the first 
age. You could decide that he’s the classic 
Gruumsh, who has recently found his way to 
Eberron from the core cosmology. But the DM 
can always say “No, there is no version of Gruumsh in 
my Eberron.” 

This comes to a critical point. Nothing is set 
in stone. Like every sourcebook that’s come 
before it, this book is intended to be a source of 
inspiration: use what inspires you, but always feel 
empowered to change the world to better suit the 
story you want to tell. There’s a place in Eberron 
for everything in that exists in D&D... but it’s up 
to you whether to make use of it. 


CHAPTER 1 | IF IT EXISTS IN D&D, THERE’S A PLACE FOR IT IN EBERRON 


19 


EBERRON AND THE MULTIVERSE 


Eberron has always been a part of the multiverse. 
Eberron is surrounded by its thirteen planes. 
These planes play an important role in the 
setting, producing dramatic effects as they shift 
in and out of alignment with Eberron. But the 
Astral and Ethereal Planes surround and enfold 
Eberron, and if someone ventures into the Deep 
Ethereal it’s possible to pass beyond Eberron’s 
closed system and step into the Great Wheel or 
the World Tree. 

As a DM, it’s up to you to decide whether such 
travel is trivially easy or all but impossible... and 
whether threats from other settings will make 
their way into Eberron. Most people consider the 
tale of the Progenitor Dragons to be a fable: a 
myth to explain the underworld and the golden 
ring in the sky. But what if it’s true? What if 
three divine beings joined together to build 
a new creation in the depths of the Ethereal? 
Elves, orcs, dragons; all of these could have been 
created in the image of the creatures of the Great 
Wheel but given a chance to develop beyond 
the reach of Lolth and Gruumsh. The Ring of 
Siberys could in fact be a shield: a defense that has 
hidden Eberron since it was first created. 

If you’re not interested in connecting Eberron 
to other settings, then that shield is still intact. 

But if you do want to incorporate elements from 
other realms, this shield is starting to fail. Perhaps 
House Cannith will build a planar gateway and 
accidentally bring the Blood War into Eberron. 
Maybe Tiamat has only just discovered Eberron 
and is slowly corrupting its dragons. Ultimately, 
it’s up to you. You can avoid any contact between 
Eberron and other settings. You can explore 

the idea of that contact being recent and new 
(perhaps linked to the Mourning, either as cause 
or effect). Or you can choose to say that there 
has always been travel between these realms, 
adjusting things to incorporate these ideas. 

If you choose to explore the idea that contact 
between settings is recent and limited, consider 
what that might mean for everyone involved. In 
the Great Wheel Asmodeus is an ancient threat, 
with well-established cults, lines of tieflings, and a 


great deal of lore to be discovered. If Asmodeus 
has just discovered Eberron, the sages know 
nothing about him. He has no power base to 
work with and will have to recruit new followers. 
And you might see unusual alliances forming 
against him, as both celestial and fiend might 
join forces to drive out the outsider. As with 
everything else, Eberron provides an opportunity 
to explore existing things in a new way. 


FAMILIAR FACES, UNFAMILIAR ROLES 


A few things to bear in mind as you step into 
Eberron... 

Dragons have a civilization humanity 
knows almost nothing about. Shapeshifted 
dragons may be secretly manipulating human 
civilization. 

Elves are split into two cultures. The 
reclusive Aereni are gifted wizards ruled by 
their undying ancestors. The Valenar elves 
are ruthless warriors who strive to be avatars 
of ancient heroes. Other elves live among 
humanity and have adopted its customs. 

Gnomes are schemers and scholars 
who maintain order through intrigue and 
assassination. 

Goblins once had a mighty empire, and 
a tradition based on honor and martial 
discipline. Their civilization was crushed 
by the daelkyr and their land was stolen by 
humanity. They aren’t inherently evil, but they 
have good reason to loathe the people of the 
Five Nations. 

Halflings can be found as merchants and 
innkeepers, but in their homeland they’re 
dinosaur-riding rangers and barbarians. 

Orcs are a proud and primal people. While 
they’ve never built great cities, they were the 
first druids of Eberron. Many continue these 
ancient traditions and fight to protect Eberron 
from aberrations... while others have fallen 
prey to the madness of the daelkyr. 


CHAPTER | | IF IT EXISTS IN D&D, THERE’S A PLACE FOR IT IN EBERRON 


CHAPTER 2: WELCOME 
TO KHORVAIRE 


Just one century ago, Galifar was synonymous 
with Khorvaire. This map showed one great 
nation, harmonious and united. Perhaps that’s 
overstating things. Humanity never crossed the 
Graywall Mountains or explored the jungles 

of the east. The Five Nations always had 
cultural differences and those who yearned for 
independence. But still, the map showed us at our 
best: one nation, united in a common cause. 


Now I look at the map and I don’t recognize 

my world. Galifar has been shattered. The Five 
Nations are wreparably severed. There are so 
many new realms—kingdoms of elves and goblins, 
even this so-called ‘nation of monsters.’ Can 

it possibly last? And if not, will it be another 

war that brings it down, or will the Mourning 
consume us all? 


—Lyrian Das, Morgrave Historian 


EN’DRIK IS A LAND OF RUINS AND 

mysteries. The dragons of 

Argonnessen have no love for 

lesser creatures. The psychic 

tyrants of Sarlona maintain strict 
control over their borders and their people. So, 
most player characters begin their adventures on 
the continent of Khorvaire. While humans make 
up the majority of the population in the civilized 
nations of Khorvaire, the continent is home a 
wide range of peoples and cultures. Once largely 
unified under the Kingdom of Galifar, today 
Khorvaire is split into many nations—some old, 
others newborn from the crucible of war. 

This chapter provides an overview of the 
nations of Khorvaire, along with a glimpse of 
common life, magic, religion, and the world— 
and planes—that lie beyond it. 


22 


NATIONS OF EBERRON 


This section provides an overview of the nations 
of Khorvaire. ‘The focus is on what you need to 
know to create characters and NPCs from these 
places. If you want more details on the culture, 
history, and geography of the nations, you can 
find additional resources in appendix A. As you go 
forward, here’s a few useful things to bear in mind. 

The Five Nations. Aundair, Breland, Cyre, 
Karrnath and Thrane are collectively referred 
to as the Five Nations. These nations formed the 
heart of the Kingdom of Galifar, and while each 
has a unique cultural identity they are built on 
this shared foundation. Families are spread across 
the Five Nations; the rulers of the Five Nations 
are tied to the Wynarns, the royal bloodline of 
Galifar. Despite their differences, an Aundairian 
has more in common with a Thrane than they do 
with a Zil gnome or a Lhazaar pirate. 

Aside from Cyre—which was destroyed in the 
Last War—the Five Nations remain the largest 
and most powerful countries in Khorvaire. 


CHAPTER 2 | NATIONS OF EBERRON 


VALENAR 
& 


$ r 


The Treaty of Thronehold officially ended 
the Last War. The treaty recognized the following 
nations as sovereign states: Aundair, Breland, 
Darguun, the Eldeen Reaches, Karrnath, the 
Lhazaar Principalities, the Mror Holds, Q’barra, 
the Talenta Plains, Thrane, Valenar, and Zilargo. 
These nations abide by a common set of laws 
and maintain diplomatic relations. The Demon 
Wastes and Shadow Marches are regions that 
have no unified government, while Droaam has 
declared itself to be a nation but has yet to be 
recognized by the others. 

Getting Around. The Five Nations are 
connected by an excellent system of roads, and 
travelers can always make their way by horse 
or coach. Major cities are tied together by the 
lightning rail of House Orien, which allows you 
to avoid the perils—and tedium—of the roads. 

If speed is an issue, you can book passage on a 
Lyrandar airship. This is the fastest way to travel, 
but also the most expensive. Refer to the “Magic 
in Khorvaire” section for more travel options. 


AUNDAIR 


Capital: Fairhaven 
Noted for Arcane magic, cheese, education, 
fashion, grains, wine 


Aundair is a realm of grand cities surrounded 
by fertile farmlands. Its legendary founder was 
devoted to the acquisition of knowledge and 
the study of magic, and the floating towers 

of Arcanix are the finest institute for mystical 
study in Khorvaire. Magic is a part of daily life 
throughout the Five Nations, but it is especially 
common in Aundair; the nation produces more 
magewrights and wandslingers than any other. 

From the nobles in the towers of Fairhaven to 
the common folk working the vast vineyards of 
Bluevine, Aundairians value wit and wisdom. 
Aundairians prefer finesse to brute force and 
appreciate cunning wordplay and fine fashions. 
The Sovereign Host is the dominant faith of 
Aundair, with a particular devotion to Aureon. 
However, the Silver Flame also has a deeply 
devoted following—some might say overzealous 
or extreme. 

Aundair is ruled by Queen Aurala ir Wynarn. 
Aurala is a just ruler, but she has never 
abandoned the dream of a Galifar reunited 
under her rule. While Aundair is a small nation, 
its arcane superiority allowed it to hold its own 
during the Last War. Many believe Aurala 
is pressing Arcanix to develop battle magic 
that will ensure Aundair’s victory in whatever 
conflicts lie ahead. 


INTERESTING THINGS About AUNDAIR 


e The floating towers of Arcanix are a center 
for mystical research. Bear in mind that 
many of its sages specialize in ritual magic 
and abstract theory; it’s not filled with high 
level wizards. 


e Arcane magic is tied into many aspects 
of Aundairian life—more so than other 


nations. There’s a cleansing stone in 
every village, and you might encounter 
animated farming equipment in the fields. 
The Knights Arcane are an elite unit 
of eldritch knights, and the Royal Eyes 
of Aundair are spies that specialize in 
divination magic. 

e House Lyrandar is based on the island 
of Stormhome, and House Orien has 
its ancestral seat in the city of Passage. 
Aundair is also home to Baron Jorlanna 
d’Cannith of the House of Making. 


e Some Aundairian nobles are bound by 
arcane pacts handed down through the 
generations. Only remarkable heirs— 
such as player characters—develop the 
full powers of a warlock. Most such lines 
are tied to archfey, but you could explore 
other paths. 


AUNDAIRIAN CHARACTERS 


Regardless of your Intelligence score, if you’re an 
Aundairian you’re sure you’re the smartest person 
in the room. Consider the following things. 

Arcane Talent. If you’re not going to play 
a magical class, consider being a high elf or a 
variant human with the Magic Initiate feat. 
Whether you learn offensive cantrips and fight 
as a wandslinger or pick up a few practical 
tools (prestidigitation, mending, mage hand), every 
Aundairian should know a little magic. 

Magic Beats Mundane. Why use your hand 
when you could use mage hand? Who still uses a 
bow when you could use a wand? “Sovereigns above, 
Wyllis. We’re days away from the Eleventh Century and 

you're still shooting people with pointed sticks?” 

Show Some Style. Don’t settle for common 
clothes and a squalid meal when you could wear 
fine glamerweave and drink the best wine. If you’re 
a fighter, focus on finesse and Dexterity instead 
of crude strength. And never miss an opportunity 
for a clever quip. 


CHAPTER 2 | AUNDAIR 23 


BRELAND 


Capital: Wroat 

Noted for Industry, manufactured goods, 
metalwork, processed ore; organized crime, 
subterfuge 


In the wake of the Last War, Breland is one 
of the most powerful nations in Khorvaire. 
Possessing a large population and abundant 
resources, Breland leads the Five Nations in 
industry. 

The Brelish are known for their pragmatism 
and independence. They lack the discipline of 
Karrns or the faith of the Thranes, but they 
excel at finding new and innovative solutions 
to problems. The Brelish also have a talent 
for intrigue and subterfuge. The King’s Dark 
Lanterns are one of the finest intelligence 
agencies in Khorvaire, rivaled only by House 
Phiarlan and the Trust of Zilargo. The dark side 
of all of these things is a strong streak of cynicism, 
which allows crime and corruption to flourish 
in Brelish cities and churches. The Sovereign 
Host is the dominant religion of Breland, but 
in general the Brelish aren’t as devout as their 
cousins in other nations. 

King Boranel ir Wynarn of Breland rules in 
conjunction with an elected parliament. Boranel 
is a popular leader celebrated for his exploits 
during the Last War. But his children have yet 
to prove themselves, and there is a growing 
movement that advocates abandoning royal rule 
when Boranel passes. 


INTERESTING THINGS ABouT BRELAND 


e The great city of Sharn is the largest 
metropolis in Khorvaire. The City of 
Towers is almost a nation in its own right 
and is a hub for commerce and intrigue. 
Chapter 6 provides more information on 
Sharn. 


e The Boromar Clan is the oldest and most 
powerful criminal organization in Breland. 


CHAPTER 2 | BRELAND 


The Boromar leadership are halflings with 
ties to the Talenta Plains. Other notable 
criminal organizations include the monsters 
of Daask and House Tarkanan, an alliance 
of assassins and thieves with aberrant 
dragonmarks. 


e Breland’s major cities are especially 
cosmopolitan. Due to its proximity to 
Droaam, its cities include more monsters— 
ogres, orcs, goblins, and even sahuagin, 
harpies, and gargoyles—then are seen 
elsewhere in the Five Nations. 


e Breland has accepted more Cyran refugees 
than any other nation. The largest refugee 
camp, New Cyre, has a population of over 
four thousand and is being converted into 
a town. Prince Oargev of Cyre considers 
himself a king in exile, but effectively he’s 
the mayor of this town. 


BRELISH CHARACTERS 


As you develop a Brelish character or NPC, 
consider the following. 

Slightly Shady. Many Brelish have a loose 
relationship with the law. Even if you’re a hero, 
you may have a few questionable connections 
or friends in low places. Backgrounds such as 
criminal or charlatan/spy are a way to reflect 
this, regardless of your class. You could also be a 
folk hero who’s challenged the laws to protect the 
innocent, or an entertainer who’s played in every 
dive in Sharn. 

Innovative and Independent. Find your 
own path in the world; don’t simply follow. As 
a cleric you might challenge your church and 
follow your own divine revelations. As an arcane 
caster you could search for new techniques or to 
unravel forgotten secrets. 

Practical. Whether it’s about fashion, food, or 
conversation, the Brelish tend to be practical and 
pragmatic. Why spend a fortune on a fancy meal 
when a simple one will do? You'll use whatever 
tool gets the job done, and you don’t see a need 
for unnecessary flair. 


Cyre (THe MourNnLanb) 


Capital: Metrol (destroyed) 
Noted for Artifice, art, jewelry, music, oratory, 
philosophy; creativity, versatility 


Destroyed at the end of the Last War, Cyre now 
only exists in the hearts of the refugees scattered 
across Khorvaire. 

Before the war, Cyre was the seat of the kings 
and queens of Galifar. The wealth of the kingdom 
flowed through Cyre, and it was a nexus for 
commerce and culture. By tradition, Cyre’s 
Princess Mishann had the rightful claim to the 
throne of Galifar. While Cyrans take pride that 
they alone were in the right in the Last War, they 
unquestionably lost more to the war than any 
other nation. As a Cyran, you stand on the moral 
high ground, but that may offer little comfort. 

Cyrans like to say that their culture represents 
the best that Galifar had to offer... which is 
to say, a little bit of everything. Cyrans value 
diversity and versatility, both in talents and 
thought. Cyre couldn’t match Karrnath in 
martial discipline or Aundair in the arcane 
arts, but as a nation it was characterized by the 
flexibility of its forces. 

While the Sovereign Host was the dominant 
faith of Cyre, the Silver Flame had a significant 
following. Many survivors have questioned their 
faith in the wake of the Mourning, but some 
believe that this is a divine trial and a time when 
faith is needed more than ever. 

Queen Dannel ir Wynarn was in Metrol on 
the Day of Mourning and is presumed to be 
dead. Her son Prince Oargev ir’;Wynarn holds 
court in New Cyre, a massive refugee camp set 
up in Breland. Some refugees support Oargev 
and the dream of a restored Cyre, while others 
prefer to focus on the future instead of trying to 
reclaim the past. As a Cyran you should decide 
whether you hold tight to your national identity, 
or whether consider yourself to be an adventurer 
without a nation. 


INTERESTING THINGS ABOUT CYRE 


e Cyre was the ancestral seat of the 
dragonmarked House Cannith, the house 
of Making. The house maintained arcane 
workshops across Cyre. Who knows what 
treasures wait in Cannith vaults for those 
who brave the dangers of the Mournland? 


e Stories say communities of warforged live 
in the Mournland, including the insurgent 
called the Lord of Blades. 


e While not as flamboyant as Aundair, 
Cyran fashions involved bright colors 
and glamerweave. Some have made a 
point of continuing this custom. Others 
wear clothing cut in the Cyran style, but 
entirely in black; this is generally known as 
“Mourning wear.” 


CYRAN CHARACTERS 


When creating a character from Cyre, consider 
the following. 

What Have You Lost? Did you lose wealth 
or status? Did you have family or loved ones lost 
in the Mourning? Did you lose something you 
could one day recover from the Mournland— 
arcane research, an heirloom artifact? Consider 
the impact this has on your background. As a 
Cyran noble or soldier, your estates have been 
lost and your army scattered; but you still have 
the respect of your comrades or peers. 

What Do You Hold Onto? Do you have a 
trinket that embodies Cyre for you? Is your wand 
or weapon an heirloom of your family? As an 
entertainer or guild artisan, are you preserving a 
particular Cyran tradition? 

What Drives You? Are you determined 
to solve the mystery of the Mourning? Do 
you want to help other refugees? Or are you 
only concerned with your personal survival? Is 
there something you want to recover from the 
Mournland, or would you prefer to never set foot 
in it again? Do you hold a grudge against the 
nations that fought against Cyre in the war, or 
are you only concerned with the future? 


CHAPTER 2 | CYRE (THE MOURNLAND) 25 


26 


DARGUUN 


Capital: Rhukaan Draal 
Noted for Goblinoid mercenaries 


Goblins and their kin have always been part 
of Khorvaire. Their ancient empire spread 
across the lands now held by the Five Nations, 
and many human cities are built on goblin 
foundations. ‘This empire collapsed into savagery, 
and when humanity arrived, goblins were driven 
from their ancestral lands or enslaved. Galifar 
ended the practice of slavery. But goblins have 
long been a disenfranchised people, living in 
the shadows of the Five Nations or in wild lands 
shunned by humans. 

The land that’s now Darguun was once part 
of Cyre. The hobgoblin clans known as the 
Ghaal’dar were based in the Seawall Mountains, 
but during the Last War the demand for 
mercenaries drew an ever-increasing number of 
goblins out of the mountains to fight for Cyre and 
Breland. Late in the war a brilliant hobgoblin 
named Haruuc recognized that the goblins 
had become the dominant power in the region. 
Uniting the Ghaal’dar under his banner, Haruuc 
seized the territory he was supposed to protect. 
The Five Nations were unprepared, and Breland 
quickly negotiated an alliance with Haruuc to 
secure the border. Cyre fought the goblins until 
the Day of Mourning, but when the Treaty of 
Thronehold was forged the majority of delegates 
chose to recognize the new nation of Darguun to 
ensure peace. 

Darguun is a young and volatile nation. 
It is ruled by the hobgoblin Lhesh Haruuc 
Sharaat’kor. Haruuc remains a brilliant 
strategist and tactician, but many wonder if 
he can maintain the web of alliances that hold 
the Ghaal’dar together, and whether he or his 
people will be content to abide by the terms of the 
treaty. And there are stories of other goblins still 
hidden in the mountains—the enigmatic “Heirs 
of Dhakaan,” who could pose a threat both to the 
goblins and Khorvaire itself. 


CHAPTER 2 | DARGUUN 


Traditionally, the Ghaal’dar worshipped a 
form of the Dark Six. House Deneith introduced 
the Sovereign Host to the region, and some 
goblins have embraced this faith, especially Dol 
Dorn, Dol Arrah, and Balinor. 


INTERESTING THINGS ApouT DARGUUN 


e Rhukaan Draal is the largest city in 
Darguun. As the goblins have little 
interest in the laws of the Five Nations, 
Rhukaan Draal is a haven for fugitives and 
smugglers. 


e House Deneith has a strong presence in 
Darguun. While no one will employ goblin 
armies in the wake of Haruuc’s betrayal, 
smaller units of goblin mercenaries are 
valued for their ferocity and skills. 


DARGUUL CHARACTERS 


Darguun is a logical point of origin for goblin, 
hobgoblin, or bugbear characters. When creating 
a Ghaal’dar character from Darguun, consider 
the following. 

Constant Struggle. Among the Ghaal’dar, 
you are constantly forced to prove your strength 
and skill or to cede dominance to others. 
Ghaal’dar rarely kill in a casual battle; you may 
fight to prove a point, but kill only when you must. 

Loyal to Your Clan. While you may challenge 
your peers in times of peace, when blades are 
drawn you stand by your clan—or those allies 
you have bonded with—auntil death. Note that 
the Ghaal’dar are an alliance of clans: this loyalty 
doesn’t extend to warriors of other clans. 

Muut and Atcha. Your ancestors once forged 
an empire even greater than Galifar. Perhaps 
you believe that your people can reclaim this lost 
glory. The Dhakaani were renowned for their 
martial skill, but also for their discipline. Muut 
roughly translates to “duty”—your duty to your 
empire, your clan, your commander. Muut is 
expected; if you have no muut, you have no place 
in battle. Atcha is closer to “honor”; it is your 
personal honor, gained by doing virtuous deeds 
that go beyond the expectations of muut. 


THE DEMON WASTES 


Capital: None 
Noted for Fiends, pestilence, violence 


Rivers of lava cut across plains of black sand 
and volcanic glass. The only vegetation you can 
see is blood-red moss and a thick layer of slime, 
and that appears to be moving. A jagged rock 
formation might be a piece of an ancient wall... 
or perhaps that’s just your imagination. 

This is the Demon Wastes. Tens of thousands 
of years ago, fiends ruled Khorvaire. This region 
was the seat of power of some of the mightiest 
archfiends, holding cities of rakshasas and 
demons. These foul spirits were bound long ago, 
but their power still lingers in this place. Vile 
creatures continue to crawl up from the depths of 
Khyber. And there are a handful of primordial 
ruins sustained by dark magic... ruins that may 
still be home to fiends and their treasures. 

A mountain range known as the Labyrinth 
separates the Demon Wastes from the Eldeen 
Reaches. Due to ancient warding magic, any 
foul thing that wishes to leave must pass through 
the Labyrinth. These passes are guarded by the 
Ghaash’kala, tribes of orcs sworn to contain the 
evils of the Waste. The Ghaash’kala worship a 
version of the Silver Flame that they call Aalok 
Shash; they consider the people of the Five 
Nations to be soft and naive. 

The Carrion Tribes are savage barbarians 
who dwell in the Wastes. Each tribe is devoted 
to one of the archfiends and they engage in 
endless battles against the Ghaash’kala and the 
other Carrion Tribes. These people are mostly 
humans, but there are corrupted orcs, half-orcs, 
and tieflings mixed in, along with a handful of 
other races represented. The Carrion Tribes are 
savage and cruel, and know almost nothing about 
the world beyond the Labyrinth. 


INTERESTING THINGS 
Apout THE WASTES 


e Stories tell of the lost city of Ashtakala, a 


citadel of fiends still populated by rakshasas. 


The libraries of Ashtakala contain arcane 
secrets and details about the Draconic 
Prophecy and its vaults hold untold 
treasures. 


e The Demon Wastes contain portals to 
Khyber—specifically, to demiplanes 
within Khyber. These are similar to the 
layers of the Abyss in the core cosmology, 
unearthly realms populated by demons. 
The Ghaash’kala raid these demiplanes to 
get the supplies they need to survive. 


CHARACTERS FROM THE WASTES 


If you’re from the Demon Wastes, you likely fall 
into one of two categories. 

Ghaash’kala. You’ve been raised in one of 
the harshest lands in Eberron and spent your 
entire life battling fiends. Why have you left your 
post? Have you had a vision from Kalok Shash? 
Are you pursuing a rogue demon? Have you 
been given a quest by the leader of your tribe? 

Most of the Ghaash’kala are orcs or half-orcs. 
They’re deeply devoted to their faith and might 
be paladins (Vengeance or Devotion), clerics 
(Life, Light, or War) or Zealot barbarians. 
Hermit and outlander are logical backgrounds: 
you know little about the ways of civilization, but 
you have have insights and the skills to survive in 
the harshest environments. 

Carrion Tribes. Why have you left the 
Wastes? Have you turned your back on the vile 
traditions of your demon-worshipping clan? 

Or are you the champion of one of the fiendish 
Overlords—but sworn to hunt down and destroy 
the servants of a different archfiend, who poses 

a more immediate threat to Khorvaire? Either 
way, you are a stranger in a strange land: a 
savage used to a constant battle for survival in a 
world shaped by demons. 


CHAPTER 2 | THE DEMON WASTES 


27 


28 


DROAAM 


Capital: The Great Crag 
Noted for Monstrous mercenaries, byeshk 


Droaam is a nation of monsters. It is ruled by 
the Daughters of Sora Kell. Each of these three 
hags is a legend in her own right, the subjects of 
tales used to frighten children. Eleven years ago 
they laid claim to the lands west of the Graywall 
Mountains and founded the nation of Droaam. 

While these barren lands were claimed by 
Breland, Galifar had never tamed this wild 
region. It had long been a haven for host of 
creatures. Gnolls, orcs, and goblins are the most 
common, but ogres, trolls, harpies, minotaurs, 
medusas, tieflings, changelings, lycanthropes 
and many more dwell in this region. In the past 
these creatures fought one another more often 
than they raided human settlements. Under 
the leadership of the Daughters of Sora Kell, 
they have been given new purpose... and the 
Daughters use an army of ogres and war trolls 
to maintain order. To date, the other nations of 
Khorvaire have refused to recognize Droaam, 
and it was not part of the Treaty of Thronehold. 
Most people believe that it can’t last—that even 
the Daughters can’t hold this disparate alliance 
together—but currently it is stronger than ever. 

Droaam works closely with House Tharashk, 
selling the services of monstrous soldiers and 
laborers and bysehk ore, a form of metal with 
magical properties. Beyond that, it is a frontier 
nation that is still expanding. As Droaam 
isn’t bound by the Treaty of Thronehold, it’s 
become a haven for war criminals and deserters, 
along with other criminals and mages pursuing 
forbidden paths of magic. 

Many of the monsters that make up Droaam 
have their own unique subcultures. Most worship 
the Dark Six, but there are other religious 
traditions as well. 


CHAPTER 2 | DROAAM 


INTERESTING THINGS ApouT DRoAAM 


e The city of Graywall lies on the border 
between Droaam and Breland. The second- 
largest city in Droaam, it is a center for 
trade, a haven for Brelish criminals, and 
a place where monsters and humans can 
meet on largely neutral ground. 


e The Venomous Demesne is city of tieflings 
on the western shore of Droaam. It is the 
largest tiefling community in Khorvaire, 
with arcane traditions developed over the 
course of thousands of years. 


e Droaam uses the supernatural abilities of 
its citizens as tools, just as the Five Nations 
use arcane magic. The Daughters of Sora 
Kell keep their people fed with troll sausage 
and use harpy’s song to quell brawls. Think 
about how a monster’s natural powers 
could be put to practical use. 


DROAAMITE CHARACTERS 


Minotaurs, orcs, gnolls, tieflings, changelings, 
and other monstrous species all have a place 
in Droaam. Consider these when making a 
Droaamite character. 

What Makes You Different? The people of 
Droaam aren’t just humans with horns or green 
skin. Think about the strengths of your people 
and what makes you different from humanity, 
both physically and culturally. 

Are You Proud? Many citizens of Droaam 
are proud of their nation. You know that the rest 
of Khorvaire considers you to be a “monster”. In 
Droaam, you are going to prove to them that you 
and your kind are capable of things humanity 
can’t even imagine. Or you might ignore this big 
picture and be driven solely by your personal 
desires or the goals of your family or warlord. 

Backgrounds. The creatures of Droaam are 
very diverse. A Droaamite kobold might be an 
urchin rogue. A minotaur could be a outlander 
barbarian with little knowledge of the outside 
world, while a tiefling warlock could be a sage 
well versed in history and arcana. 


THE ELDEEN REACHES 


Capital: The Greenheart 
Noted for Agriculture, animal husbandry, 
druidic magic 


A stretch of fertile farmlands borders a vast, 
untamed forest. Farmers tend to the fields, while 
tribes of shifters and circles of druids and rangers 
roam the woods. These are the Eldeen Reaches. 
Druids and shifters have dwelt in the Towering 
Woods for thousands of years, but the eastern 
farmlands of the Reaches were part of Aundair 
until the Last War. The lords of Aundair 
focused their resources on the war effort, 
ignoring banditry and other problems faced 
by the farmers of the east. The Wardens of the 
Wood—largest of the druid sects—came to the 
aid of these farmers. Fifty years ago, the people of 
eastern Aundair seceded and formed the Eldeen 
Reaches. The Reaches were recognized as a 
nation by the Treaty of Thronehold, but many 
fear Aundair will try to reclaim the region. 
Druidic magic is a central part of life in the 
Eldeen Reaches. Most of its people seek to 
live in harmony with the natural world, and 
communities have a druidic advisor who helps 
with planning and planting. The Towering 
Woods are also home to tribes of shifters, who 
maintain a nomadic existence. ‘The Wardens of 
the Wood maintain order and settle disputes, 
and the Great Druid Oalian—an awakened 
greatpine—s the spiritual leader of the Reaches. 


INTERESTING THINGS 
Apout THE REACHES 


e The fey have a strong presence in the 
Towering Woods. The region with the 
strongest ties to the Faerie Court is called 
The ‘Twilight Demesne. 


e The Gloaming is a region with strong ties 
to Mabar. It’s charged with negative energy 
and filled with sinister things. 


e Varna is the largest city in the Reaches 
and the seat of the dragonmarked House 
Vadalis. 


ELDEEN CHARACTERS 


Druidic traditions are important to the people of 
the Eldeen Reaches. Even if you’re not a druid, 
you may follow one of these five paths. As a 
variant human, you could take the Magic Initiate 
feat to learn a little druidic magic. 

Most of these traditions work with the druidic 
Circles of Land, Moon and Shepherd; Beast 
‘Totem barbarians; clerics with the Nature 
domain; or rangers with the Hunter or Beast 
Master archetypes. Other classes or archetypes 
especially suited to a path are called out below. 

The Wardens of the Wood seck to maintain 
the balance between nature and civilization, 
protecting each from the other. 

The Greensingers sce the magic of the fey 
as a part of nature. They honor the archfey that 
have influence in their regions and try to live in 
harmony with other fey creatures. Bards and 
archfey warlocks are often found among the 
Greensingers, and the Circles of Dreams works 
well for Greensinger druids. 

The Gatekeepers protect the natural world 
from unnatural threats, such as aberrations and 
fiends. They maintain ancient wards that bind 
the daelkyr in Khyber. Horizon Walker rangers 
and Ancestral Guardian barbarians fit in here. 

The Ashbound are champions of the natural 
world and fight anything that threatens it. Many 
of them consider arcane and even divine magic 
to be such a threat. Ashbound sometimes attack 
the holdings of dragonmarked houses and seek to 
release bound elementals. Barbarians are often 
found among the Ashbound, and Berserker and 
Storm Herald are logical paths. 

The Children of Winter believe that death 
is a natural part of life. ‘This leads them to 
fight undead, but also to take actions that cull 
the weak and strengthen survivors. Extremists 
have spread plagues, especially in large cities. 
Warlocks and Gloom Stalker rangers can be a 
good fit. 


CHAPTER 2 | THE ELDEEN REACHES 29 


KARRNATH 


Capital: Korth 
Noted for Ale, dairy, glass, livestock, lumber, 
paper, textiles; undead, martial discipline 


The people of Karrnath are stoic and grim. 
Karrnath is a nation of storms and long winters, 
and Karrns are accustomed to enduring hardship 
without complaint. 

First and foremost, Karnath is known for 
its military tradition. Strength, strategy, and 
discipline are the core values of Karrnath. 

While Karrnath’s soldiers may be the finest in 
the Five Nations, they lack the magical support 
of Aundair or Thrane, which evened the odds 
during the Last War. Nonetheless, Karrns are 
proud of their martial history, and most are 
convinced that they would have eventually won 
the Last War. 

Karrnath suffered a series of severe food 
shortages and plagues early in the Last War. This 
caused the king to embrace the Blood of Vol as 
the national religion. The priests of this faith 
bolstered Karrnath’s forces with undead. The 
current King, Kaius ir Wynarn II, broke ties 
with the Blood of Vol and has stopped creating 
new undead, but Karrnath still has a significant 
number of skeletons and zombies in service. 
Many Karrns still follow the faith of the Blood of 
Vol and approve of the use of undead, but just 
as many feel that this disgraces Karrnath’s proud 
military history... and that the necromancers 
themselves might have been responsible for the 
famines and plagues. 


INTERESTING THINGS ABOUT 
KARRNATH 


e Rekkenmark Academy is the premier 
military institute in Khorvaire; prior to the 
Last War, all of Galifar’s officers trained at 
Rekkenmark. 


e The Sovereign Host has regained its place 
as the dominant religion of Karrnath, but 


CHAPTER 2 | KARRNATH 


there is still a strong following for the Blood 
of Vol. Atur, the so-called “City of Night”, 
is the faith’s stronghold in Karrnath. 


e The Nightwood is a massive forest with a 
close tie to the Plane of Mabar. Monsters 
and undead sometimes slip out of the 
Nightwood to threaten the surrounding 
regions. 


e ‘The laws of Karrnath are harsher than 
those of the other Five Nations, closer to a 
state of martial law. 


e King Kaius III is a strong proponent of 
peace, but many of the local warlords are 
certain Karrnath could and should unite 
Galifar, and there are whispers of a coup. 


KARRNATHI CHARACTERS 


Karrns are somber folk, and generally disapprove 
of extravagance or excessive shows of emotion. 
As you develop a Karrnathi character or NPC, 
consider the following. 

Military Service. Karrns have a strong 
tradition of military service, and soldier or sailor 
are appropriate backgrounds for any character. 
The laws of Karrnath are harsh, and criminals 
and charlatans have a difficult time here. The 
Martial Adept feat is a way to give a character a 
strong sense of military experience. 

Martial Tradition. Karrnathi tradition 
emphasizes teamwork, focus, and force. Heavy 
armor and weapons are prefered. Battlemasters 
and Champions are both sound archetypes for 
fighters, while Karrnathi wizards are typically 
Evokers or Necromancers. Heavy Armor Master, 
Sentinel, and Tough are all logical feats for 
Karrnathi warriors; Polearm Master or Shield 
Master are also appropriate, depending on 
personal preference. 

The Dead. Undead soldiers have served in 
Karrnath’s armies for decades. How do you feel 
about the undead? Are you a follower of the 
Blood of Vol who considers the undead to be a 
practical tool? Do you have a relative or friend 
currently serving? Or do you despise the Blood of 
Vol and the use of necromancy? 


THE LHAZAAR PRINCIPALITIES 


Capital: Regalport 
Noted for Ships, fish, mercenaries, merchants, 
pirates 


This loose confederacy of pirate lords, merchant 
princes, and sea barons holds the northeastern 
coastline of Khorvaire and the many islands 
scattered across it. While they were recognized as 
an allied nation under the Treaty of Thronehold, 
the Principalities are a loose alliance. Each island 
domain has its own traditions, values, and goals— 
and each has a long list of vendettas and feuds 
with other princes. Beyond this, anyone who can 
win the support of enough ships and people can 
claim a principality; if you want to establish your 
own tiny kingdom, this is the place to do it. 

The Lhazaar are the finest sailors in Khorvaire. 
During the Last War, they served all nations as 
privateers and engaged in piracy on the side. 
With the end of the Last War they’ve largely 
returned to the merchant trade, but there are still 
pirates on the open seas. 

The Lhazaars value their independence. This 
is a place where anyone can rise to captain a 
ship or even seize a principality. Leadership 
is something earned, not given. High Prince 
Ryger ir’Wynarn of Regalport seeks to forge 
the Principalities into a unified force. He has 
the finest fleet, and it was his efforts that saw the 
Principalities recognized at Thronehold... for 
which he gave himself the title of “High Prince.” 
But so far, the other princes have rejected his 
proposals for a greater union. 

There are principalities devoted to the Blood 
of Vol and a few that favor the Sovereign Host. 
Beyond this, the Lhazaar show little enthusiasm 
for religion, though many will curse the Devourer 
when a storm comes. 


INTERESTING THINGS ApouT LHAZAAR 


e The Lhazaar Principalities have the largest 
changeling population in Khorvaire. Many 
of these are concentrated in the Gray 


Tide, a domain founded by changelings. 
However, changelings are found across the 
Principalities and the Lhazaar are generally 
used to them. 


e ‘The Wind Whisperer principality includes 
a number of half-elves with the Mark of 
Storm—excoriates and foundlings with 
no tie to House Lyrandar. The Wind 
Whisperers want to obtain airships, by any 
means necessary. 


e Dreadhold is an infamous island prison 
maintained by House Kundarak. Said to 
be inescapable, Kundarak houses both 
infamous criminals and mystical threats. 


LHAZAAR CHARACTERS 


As you develop a Lhazaar character or NPC, 
consider the following. 

Seafarers and Swashbucklers. Most 
Lhazaar spend more time at sea than they do 
on land. Sailor is an appropriate background 
for any Lhazaar, but you can also ask your DM 
if you can switch a tool proficiency for vehicles 
(water) proficiency. Lhazaar are flamboyant 
people with little concern for the law, so 
charlatan, criminal, entertainer, and folk hero 
are all strong backgrounds. 

Local Customs. Each principality is unique. 
Each has its own martial traditions, fashions, 
and slang. Think about how your choices reflect 
your principality. Your dwarf barbarian could 
be one of the savage Cloudreavers. Your dashing 
swashbuckler rogue could be a colorful Wind 
Whisperer. The Bloodsail elves have a strong 
tradition of necromancy... an excellent match for 
your elf wizard. There are many principalities, 
and you can always work with your DM to 
develop one that fits your character. 

Big Dreams. Whatever their circumstances, 
the people of the Principalities are always looking 
to the future. What is it you want? To find a 
forgotten treasure hoard? To command your 
own ship? To take your place as a prince? Think 
big, and chase your dreams. 


CHAPTER 2 | THE LHAZAAR PRINCIPALITIES 


31 


32 


THE Mror Hops 


Capital: Krona Peak 
Noted for Dwarves, banking, mining (precious 
and nonprecious metals), metalwork 


Long ago, the Mror Lords were forced to swear 
fealty to Karrnath and Galifar. In the early days 
of the Last War, they declared their independence 
and the sovereignty of the Mror Holds. ‘That 
declaration was less than a century ago and that 
makes it fresh in the mind of many dwarves. The 
Mror are proud of the wealth of their nation and 
the talents of their smiths, of the skills of their 
warriors and the strength of their impregnable 
fortresses. The Mror star is rising. 

When humanity first came to Khorvaire, the 
dwarves were locked in endless feuds. Over 
the centuries, they turned their energies to 
harnessing the astonishing natural resources 
of their mountain home. The dwarves were 
reborn as merchant princes. And along the way 
they made a remarkable discovery: ruins of an 
ancient dwarven empire. This forgotten realm 
was destroyed by the daelkyr and its vast halls 
are held by aberrations and other dark things. 
Nonetheless, these ruins are another source of 
pride for the Mror. They’re heirs of a mighty 
empire that may one day rise again. 

The Mror Holds are a loose confederation. 
Twelve noble clans each govern a hold and have 
a representative on the Iron Council, which 
resolves disputes and issues affecting the entire 
nation. Each hold includes a number of lesser 
clans, who owe fealty to the noble line. 

The Sovereign Host is the dominant faith of 
the Mror Holds. Kol Korran is the most beloved 
of the Sovereigns, but Onatar, Olladra, Boldrei, 
and Dol Dorn are also revered. 


INTERESTING THINGS ABOUT THE 
Hops 


e The Mror Holds have deep reserves of 
gold, silver, and other rare and precious 
metals, along with iron and other ores. 


CHAPTER 2 | THE MROR HOLDS 


e The Ironroot Mountains have long been 
home to the Jhorash’tar, a clan of orcs. 
The Jhorash’tar have been slowly driven 
into the least hospitable regions of the 
mountains. A few of the clans are seeking 
to incorporate the Jhorash’tar into Mror 
society, while others wish to drive them out 
once and for all. 


e ‘There used to be a thirteenth royal clan. 
Four hundred year ago, the dwarves of 
Noldrunhold were wiped out; no one knows 
if this was the work of the Jhorash’tar, a 
rival clan, or some force from below the 
mountains. Other clans have tried to claim 
the Noldrun lands, but this has always met 
with disaster. 


Mror CHARACTERS 


As you develop a Mror character or NPC, 
consider the following. 

Clan Focus. Is your clan known for 
mercantile power or martial skill? Are you a 
noble—even if you’re a few steps removed from 
true power? Or are you a simple guild artisan 
or soldier? Most Mror have embraced modern 
martial techniques, but there are a few minor 
clans that still cling to the barbarian traditions of 
the past. 

Holding onto the Past. Do you treasure the 
legends of the ancient dwarf empire? As a Mror 
artificer, you could be a sage determined to 
reclaim the lost techniques of the past. And how 
do you feel about the Five Nations? Do you still 
hold a grudge for the indignities suffered by your 
ancestors, or do you feel pity for this broken 
kingdom? 

Pride in Possessions. From the wealthiest 
clan lord to the simplest miner, the Mror take 
great pride in their possessions. Quality is more 
important than appearance, and you are also 
interested in the history of the things you carry; 
if you find a magic weapon, you want to know 
the battles it has seen and the warriors who have 
wielded it before you. 


Q'BARRA 


Capital: Newthrone 
Noted for Eberron dragonshards, rare herbs 


Q’barra is a young nation on the edge of 
Khorvaire, an untamed frontier filled with 
danger and opportunity. During the golden age 
of Galifar, no human ever bothered to cross the 
Endworld Mountains to explore the vast jungle 
beyond. When the Last War broke out, a fleet of 
settlers came to Q’barra in search of a new home 
far from the war. As this settlement expanded, 
the settlers discovered massive deposits of 
Eberron dragonshards. Over the last decade, 
a wave of prospectors, wandslingers, refugees, 
and fortune-seekers have descended on Q’barra, 
along with brigands, deserters from the war, and 
all manner of criminals and opportunists. 
There’s one small complication: Q’barra 
is home to a number of ancient civilizations 
humans know nothing about: the lizardfolk of 
the Cold Sun Federation, the dragonborn of 
Ka’rhashan, and the confederacy of the Poison 
Dusk. Most settlers know very little about 
these cultures, and collectively refer to them as 
“scales.” King Sebastes ir’Kesslan of Newthrone 
has established a treaty with the Cold Sun 
Federation, but communication has always been 
difficult. The prospectors of Hope regularly 
break the terms of the treaty. There have been a 
number of clashes with the scales and many here 
fear that a greater conflict is on the horizon. 
Q’barra is split into three main regions. New 
Galifar is the original colony; it has a feudal 
structure and holds to the laws of the Five 
Nations. Its capital city of Newthrone is the 
largest city and port in O’barra. To the north, 
Hope is a collection of small mining towns. In 
Hope, the law goes only as far as the people 
willing to enforce it. And beyond these human 
regions lie the unexplored lands of the scales. 


INTERESTING THINGS ApouT Q’BARRA 


e There are ruins in Q’barra tied to the Age 
of Demons. So far the settlers know little 
of the history of this region, but the Poison 
Dusk has ties to fiendish powers. 


e House Tharashk has a strong presence in 
both Hope and New Galifar. Tharashk 
is the primary buyer of Eberron 
dragonshards, and also runs its own large- 
scale mining operations. 


Q’BARRAN CHARACTERS 


Q’barra is home to the settlers and prospectors 
from the west—mostly humans but including 
members of all races found in the Five Nations. 
It’s also a possible origin for dragonborn and 
lizardfolk characters. 

Settlers. O’barra is an excellent place to 
explore some of the traditional archetypes of the 
classic Western. As a paladin, you could be a 
lone sheriff seeking to protect your newly formed 
mining village. Your cleric could be the town 
preacher. As a sorcerer or bard with a criminal 
background, you could be a dashing wandslinger 
looking for trouble and gold. O’barra can be a 
land of opportunity for newly freed warforged 
and Cyran refugees in search of a new home. 

Lizardfolk. The lizardfolk have a primitive 
culture that blends druidic traditions with the 
beliefs of the Silver Flame. You may have been 
sent to study the softskins—to learn about 
them and potentially serve as an envoy for your 
people. Alternatively, you could be following a 
personal vision. 

Dragonborn. The dragonborn live amid the 
remnants of ancient glory. They have a proud 
martial tradition, and a number of dragonborn 
have ventured west in search of worthy 
challenges. If you follow this path, you might 
have served as a mercenary in the Last War. 


CHAPTER 2 | O7BARRA 33 


34 


THE SHADOW MARCHES 


Capital: Zarash’ak (unofficial) 
Noted for Eberron dragonshards, herbs 


When most people think of the Shadow 
Marches, they imagine a fetid backwater where 
illiterate humans mingle with orcs and other foul 
creatures, practicing strange rites by the light of 
the moons. While flawed, this vision isn’t entirely 
inaccurate. ‘The Shadow Marches are a desolate 
land of swamps and moors. The homeland of the 
orcs, it was scarred in the ancient conflict with 
the daelkyr. These fiends left twisted creatures 
and aberrations in the swamps, and sowed seeds 
of madness that linger to this day. ‘There are 
indeed moonlit rituals in the Marches: some to 
honor the daelkyr, others to maintain the wards 
that keep them trapped in Khyber. Humans 
came to the Marches long ago, refugees fleeing 

a war in the distant land of Sarlona. Over time 
the two cultures merged, forming the Marches as 
they exist today. 

The Marches had little contact with Galifar or 
the east until a few hundred years ago, when a 
House Sivis expedition made two discoveries: the 
region contained valuable dragonshards, and a 
number of clans had manifested the Dragonmark 
of Finding. This led to the foundation of House 
Tharashk, as these clans joined together to 
master the economic potential of their mark and 
leverage their mineral wealth. 

The Shadow Marches aren’t a nation. No one 
voice speaks for the clans and tribes, and most 
of the tribes have no interest in dealing with 
outsiders. House Tharashk is the largest faction 
in the region, and their city of Zarash’ak is the 
center for commerce. 

House Tharashk is the main point of contact 
between the Shadow Marches and the outside 
world. ‘Vharashk aside, it remains a collection 
of tribes and cultists following their ancient 
traditions in the shadows of the swamps. 


CHAPTER 2 | THE SHADOW MARCHES 


INTERESTING THINGS 
Apout THE MARCHES 


e The Gatekeepers are a druidic tradition 
that began in the Shadow Marches. The 
defeated the daelkyr in the past, and 
they are sworn to protect Eberron from 
unnatural and extraplanar threats. 


e The Cults of the Dragon Below are wildly 
diverse, and often driven by madness. 
Many worship daelkyr or have ties to 
aberrations. 


MARCHER CHARACTERS 


As a character from the Shadow Marches, 
you could choose to carry the Mark of Finding 
regardless of whether you have ties to House 
Tharashk. 

As a Marcher, a critical question is whether 
you have ties to one of the orc tribes or the 
integrated clans. 

The Clans blend the traditions of human and 
orc, building towns and working with steel. ‘They 
still rely on skilled hunters, and they have their 
own unique traditions of art and music. Rangers, 
rogues, and bards all have a place in the clans, 
and there are gatekeeper druids among them. 
Some in the clans worship a limited form of the 
Sovereign Host focused on Balinor, Boldrei, and 
Arawai; this is a sound path for a Nature cleric. 

The Tribes maintain traditions that 
predate humanity. They’re nomadic hunter- 
gatherers, and don’t work metals; they make 
their tools from stone, hide, wood, and bone. 
Tribal Marchers are mostly orcs, but there 
are a few humans and half-orcs among them. 
Tribal Marchers are fierce warriors and skilled 
hunters with a close bond to the natural world; 
barbarians, druids, and rangers all have a place 
here. Outlander and hermit are both appropriate 
backgrounds for a tribal Marcher. 


THE TALENTA PLAINS 


Capital: Gatherhold 
Noted for Halflings, livestock, dinosaurs 


The halflings of the Talenta Plains live a simpler 
life than the people of the Five Nations. They 
have no cities, no industrialized magic. But 

they do have dinosaurs. The halflings have 
domesticated the dinosaurs of the plains, and use 
these creatures as mounts, livestock, and beasts of 
burden. There is a sacred bond between a hunter 
and their mount, and few people are prepared to 
face a raging halfling barbarian riding a furious 
clawfoot raptor. 

Talenta religion is based around reverence for 
spirits, both departed ancestors and the spirits 
of the natural world. Each nomadic tribe has 
a lath—a chieftain who guides and protects the 
tribe—but it is the shamans who consult the 
spirits and choose the paths of migration. 

In the past the tribes have stood alone, but 
during the Last War many halflings came 
together under Lathon Halpum to defend their 
land, and it is Halpum who won recognition for 
the Plains as one of the Thronehold nations. The 
Plains have only been considered a nation for 
two years, and it’s still unclear what this means; 
however, it has resulted in more traffic between 
the Plains and the outside world. 


INTERESTING THINGS 
ABOUT THE PLAINS 


e Gatherhold is one of the only cities in 
the Talenta Plains. All tribes come to 
Gatherhold to trade, hold councils, and 
settle disputes. House Ghallanda maintains 
Gatherhold, but it is understood that 
Gatherhold belongs to the people, not the 
houses. 


e House Ghallanda and House Jorasco 
both began in the Talenta Plains and still 
maintain connections to their ancestral 


homeland. The dragonmarked bloodlines 
are spread throughout the tribes, and you 
can play a dragonmarked halfling from the 
Plains who doesn’t work for the houses. 


e Stories speak of ancient ruins that date back 
to the first age of the world, and of a vast 
graveyard holding the bones of dragons. 


TALENTAN CHARACTERS 


Review the halfling section in chapter 3 for 
quirks and other things relevant to characters 
from the Plains. Also consider the following. 

Wild Warriors and Tricksters. You were 
born in the wild, and your wits and your weapons 
helped you survive. Talenta warriors are often 
barbarians or rangers, relying on speed and skill. 
However, cunning and charisma are equally 
important, and bards and rogues certainly have 
a place on the plains. Outlander is a logical 
background, but you could easily be a bold folk 
hero, a dashing entertainer, or a clever charlatan. 
You could even be an urchin who was stranded 
in a great city at a young age and adapted to 
hunting in this stone jungle. 

Surrounded by Spirits. Fey, fiends, the 
ghosts of ancestors; these are all part of the 
spirit world, and they’re all around you. Do you 
believe that the spirits guide your actions? Do 
you show respect to the spirits of a location? 
Talentan shamans tend to be Shepherd or Moon 
druids, often assuming the form of dinosaurs. 
However, you could reflect a strong bond to 
spirits by playing an Archfey warlock, Nature 
cleric, Oath of the Ancients paladin, or a Beast 
Totem or Ancestral Guardian barbarian. Hermit 
and Outlander are sound backgrounds, but 
you could be an acolyte or a sage who consults 
with spirits instead of reading books. Warriors 
and shamans alike often wear masks in order to 
present a particular face to the spirit world. 

Dinosaurs. Talenta halflings have a close 
bond to their dinosaur companions. You can find 
additional information on this—and statistics for 
a clawfoot raptor—in chapter 3. 


CHAPTER 2 | THE TALENTA PLAINS 


35 


THRANE 


Capital: Flamekeep 
Noted for Divine magic, the Silver Flame; fine 
crafts, wool, textiles, fruit, livestock 


The modern Church of the Silver Flame was 
founded in Thrane, and most of the people of the 
nation are devout followers of this faith. During 
the Last War, the people of Thrane chose to set 
aside the rule of the monarch and to embrace 
the leadership of the Church. For the last seventy 
years Thrane has been a theocracy. The head of 
the state is 11-year-old Jaela Daeran, the divine 
selected Keeper of the Flame; however, Jaela 
looks to the Council of Cardinals to perform the 
practical work of running the nation. 

The primary purpose of the Silver Flame is 
to defend the innocent from supernatural evil. 
The faith has always had a militant aspect, 
with battalions of templars and peasant militias 
prepared to face undead, lycanthropes, or other 
monstrous threats. But compassion and charity 
are core values of the church, and the templars 
are tasked to defend all innocents. Even during 
the Last War, if a fiendish threat were to arise in 
a Brelish village, Thrane templars would ally with 
the locals to bring an end to the threat. With that 
said, this is the zdeal. There are zealous Thranes 
who believe the Church is destined to reunite 
Galifar under the Silver Flame, and corrupt 
priests interested only in power and wealth. 

Not all priests are divine spellcasters, and the 
typical templar is a mundane warrior; however, 
due to the deep faith of its people, Thrane has 
more clerics, paladins, and divine spellcasters 
than any other nation in Khorvaire. 


INTERESTING THINGS ABOUT THRANE 


e Flamekeep is the capital of Thrane and the 
seat of the Silver Flame. The Keeper of the 
Flame dwells in the great Cathedral of the 
Silver Flame, which holds a pillar of fire 
born when Tira Miron sacrificed herself to 
bind the demon Bel Shalor. 


CHAPTER 2 | THRANE 


e Faith is a part of daily life in Thrane, and 
divine adepts provide many important 
services. However, arcane magic is still a 
part of life in Thrane. The streets are lit 
with everbright lanterns, and there are 
magewrights and even wizards, just not as 
many as in other nations. 


e The feudal system of nobility remains in 
place; it’s simply that ultimate authority 
rests in the hands of the church. Queen 
Diani ir’;Wynarn is the “blood regent,” 
serving as a symbolic advisor to the Keeper 
of the Flame. ‘There is a small fraction of 
the population who would like to see the 
traditional monarchy restored to power. 


THRANE CHARACTERS 


As you develop a Thrane character or NPC, 
consider the following. 

The Impact of Faith. Are you a follower of 
the Silver Flame? Faith doesn’t require divine 
magic, but if you want to reflect a close bond 
to the Flame, you could gain a few divine spells 
by taking the Magic Initiate feat. Archery is a 
devotional practice of the Silver Flame, so as 
a martial Thrane you might focus on archery- 
related combat styles and spells or take the 
Sharpshooter feat. Any Thrane could take the 
acolyte background to reflect a strong connection 
to the church, or the soldier background based 
on service with the templars. 

Church or Crown? Do you fully support the 
theocracy? Or would you like to see Queen Diani 
restored to the throne? There are many people 
of faith who believe that miring the church in 
politics distracts it from its true mission and 
invites corruption. 

Dealing with Darkness. The Shadow in 
the Flame can tempt even the most virtuous 
soul. How do you react when you encounter 
corruption and greed? Are you a compassionate 
person who seeks to lead people to the light, or 
a zealot determined to crush all darkness? How 
will you react when you encounter monsters— 
minotaurs, ogres, gnolls—in a civilized setting? 


VALENAR 


Capital: Taer Valaestas 
Noted for Elves, mercenaries, horses 


In the midst of the Last War, an army of warrior 
elves seized this region from Cyre, invoking a 
claim to the land from long before humanity’s 
arrival on the continent. The elves of Valenar are 
utterly devoted to the arts of war. Their cavalry 
has no equal in Khorvaire, and they combine a 
talent for magic with stealth and swordplay. Cyre 
employed the Valenar as mercenaries and was 
entirely unprepared for betrayal. When Cyre was 
destroyed in the Mourning, no one wanted to 
challenge the Valenar; in the interests of peace, 
this elf kingdom was recognized by the Treaty of 
Thronehold. 

The elves are already pushing the limits of 
the treaty. The Valenar constantly search for 
worthy challenges. While some venture into the 
Mournland or the untamed jungles of Q’barra, 
Valenar warbands have launched raids into 
Darguun and even Karrnath. While High King 
Shaeras Vadallia has promised to rein in his 
warriors, some believe that the elves will continue 
this provocation... that their main interest 1s 
conflict with a worthy foe, and that they want 
Darguun or Karrnath to declare war. 

Valenar is a feudal kingdom. The elves are 
warrior princes, but they spend little time at 
rest. They operate in small units called warbands, 
and those that aren’t patrolling the kingdom 
are abroad seeking adventure. Most of the civic 
administration 1s handled by half-elves. Some 
of these are the children of Valenar elves, but 
most are immigrants who’ve come from the Five 
Nations in search of opportunity. Below this are 
the natives. Once vassals of Cyre, now they’re 
vassals of Valenar. Some hated the Cyrans and 
welcome the elves. Others despise their new 
leaders and are plotting against them. But life 
hasn’t changed much for the commoners, and 
most don’t actually care who wears the crown. 


INTERESTING THINGS ABouT VALENAR 


e The dragonmarked House Lyrandar has 
helped the elves build the infrastructure 
of their kingdom. The half-elves have no 
homeland, and some believe that the half- 
elves of Lyrandar hopes to make Valenar a 
haven for their people. 


e The ancestors of the elves fought the 
ancient goblins for control of this region 
many thousands of years ago. Relics of 
that struggle can still be found scattered 
across Valenar and the Blade Desert: ruins, 
haunted fortresses, battlefields that have 
slipped out of alignment with time. 


VALENAR CHARACTERS 


The elf section of chapter 3 provides additional 
information about creating Valenar elves. 
Whatever kind of character you’re creating, 
consider the following. 

Martial Role. Valenar has always been 
on a war footing. As an elf, consider your role 
in a warband. Are you a simple soldier? An 
outlander scout? An acolyte devoted to the elven 
ancestors, or a sage familiar both with Valenar 
history and the lore of potential enemies? As a 
half-elf you might be an entertainer, a sailor, or 
a guild artisan working to support the elf army... 
or a charlatan seeking seeking intrigue and 
opportunities. As one of the vassals, you could be 
a guild artisan working for the elves, an urchin 
born in Taer Valaestas, or even a folk hero 
fighting to protect the common folk. 

Dreams. What is it you hope to achieve as 
an adventurer? Have you left Valenar behind, 
or are your aspirations tied to the kingdom? 

As a_half-elf with Valenar blood, do you want 
to be recognized as a true Valenar—granted a 
bond to a patron ancestor, a place in a warband, 
and a chance at immortality? Or are you more 
interested in building a homeland for your own 
people? As a native, do you want to work with 
the elves or do you want to drive them out—and 
if so, who do you want to replace them? 


CHAPTER 2 | VALENAR 


37 


38 


ZILARGO 


Capital: Korranberg 
Noted for Gnomes, alchemy, education, 
elemental binding, entertainment, precious stones 


Zilargo is the homeland of the gnomes, and 

at first glance it appears to be a paradise. The 
streets are bright and clean. The universities and 
libraries are the finest in Khorvaire. Everyone 
seems happy and helpful, and crime is all but 
unheard of. But Zil society is filled with layers 

of intrigue and blackmail that are often invisible 
to human eyes. And below that lies The Trust, 

a ruthless secret police force that eliminates any 
threat to society. 

Zilargo isn’t a tyranny. Each major city has a 
democratically elected ruling council and a seat 
on the Triumvirate that governs the nation; the 
Trust reports to the Triumvirate. The Zil gnomes 
built this system, and they are quite happy with 
it. Their streets are safe, and as long as you play 
by the rules of the game, the Trust won’t target 
you. Outsiders find this casual acceptance of 
preemptive assassination to be terrifying, but the 
Zil actually trust the ‘Trust. 

Every Zil gnome is in a web of intrigues. ‘This 
is condoned by the Trust, as long as no laws are 
broken and the state itself isn’t threatened. It’s 
fine for a gnome charlatan to connive another 
gnome out of a jewel mine—as long as this is 
accomplished through cunning, negotiation, or 
deception rather than violence or outright theft, 
and as long as the mine stays in Zil hands. The 
same applies to adventurers planning schemes 
in Zilargo: violence will get one targeted by the 
Trust, but intrigue is perfectly acceptable. 

The Trust itself is a network of spies and 
assassins. Most agents of the ‘Trust simply pass 
information through dead drops; some estimate 
that a third of the nation works for the Trust 
in this capacity. When the Trust identifies a 
threat, it acts preemptively. Ifa problem can be 
solved without violence—by sharing a piece of 
information, or a whispered warning sent via 


CHAPTER 2 | ZILARGO 


message—that’s what they'll do. But the ‘Trust 
won't hesitate to eliminate a threat, whether with 
poison, spell, or a blade. Typically, a target will 
never even see the agent that kills them. 


INTERESTING THINGS ÅBOUT ZILARGO 


e The Library of Korranberg is considered to 
be the finest repository of knowledge in all 
of Khorvaire. 


e The Korranberg Chronicle is the leading 
source of news in the Five Nations, and 
gnome chroniclers travel across Khorvaire 
in search of stories. 


e The major cities of Zilargo have temples 
and shrines dedicated to every religion. 
Most Zil explore a few faiths before settling 
on one; others practice multiple religions. 


Zit CHARACTERS 


As you develop a Zil character, consider the 
following things, along with the suggestions in the 
Gnome section in chapter 3. 

Family Ties. In a nation shaped by intrigue, 
you have to have someone you can rely on... 
and for the Zil, that’s family. Unless you’re an 
orphan, discuss your family with your DM. 
What’s their business? Who’s your favorite 
relative? Are you currently involved in any family 
schemes? Family members may call on you for 
help over the course of your adventurers, but 
they can also be a resource for you. 

Knowledge and Power. The Zil prize 
knowledge above all else. Sage is a suitable 
background for any Zil; charlatan and spy are 
also appropriate, reflecting their love of intrigue. 
Classes that specialize in melee combat are rare 
among the Zil. Rogues, bards, wizards, and 
artificers are the soldiers of Zilargo. 

One unusual option is to play a warlock whose 
pact is with the Trust itself. You receive your 
orders telepathically. Your class abilities can 
reflect specialized training or granted abilities — 
the magical equivalent of super-spy gadgets! 


EVERYDAY LIFE 


There are details you don’t need to know, but 
that you might want to know. When something 
costs 1 CP, you can just say “one copper piece” but 
do the people of Khorvaire have a name for 
their coins? Is there a convention for naming 
characters? This Wayfinder’s Guide is an overview. 
If you want more information on a particular 
subject, refer to the sources in the Appendix. 
But for now, here are a few useful facts about 
everyday life in Khorvaire. 


THE CALENDAR OF GALIFAR 


The Galifar calendar tracks the years since the 
Kingdom of Galifar was founded, using the 
abbreviation YK. The week is divided into seven 
days, with four weeks to a month and twelve 
months to a year. Despite the fall of Galifar, the 
nations of Khorvaire still use this calendar. 

The seven days of the week, in order, are Sul, 
Mol, Zol, Wir, Zor, Far, Sar. 

The twelve months are named after the twelve 
moons that orbit the world: 

1. Zarantyr (mid-winter) 


Olarune (late winter) 
Therendor (early spring) 
Eyre (mid-spring) 
Dravago (late spring) 
Nymm (early summer) 
Lharvion (mid-summer) 


Barrakas (late summer) 


Oo OO: ty Oa ae eS 


Rhaan (early autumn) 
10. Sypheros (mid-autumn) 
11. Aryth (late autumn) 

12. Vult (early winter) 


King Jarot irWyrnarn died on Therendor 12, 
894 YK. The Day of Mourning occurred almost 
exactly a century later, on Olarune 20 994 YK. 

By default, a new Eberron campaign begins on 
Zarantyr 1,998 YK. 


THE CURRENCY OF GALIFAR 


Merchants and nobles often use letters of 
credit to handle large transactions, drawing on 
the reserves of the dwarvish banks of the Mror 
Holds. But most day-to-day transactions use 
coins of precious metal. With the collapse of the 
Kingdom of Galifar, each of the Five Nations 
began to mint its own currency, along with 

the Mror bankers. However, while the designs 
imprinted on these coins vary based on the 
source, each of these forces has continued to use 
the same metals, weights, and denominations set 
forth in the days of Galifar, maintaining a simple 
standard for commerce across Khorvaire. 


e The crown (CP) is made from copper and 
traditionally depicts the crown of Galifar 
on one face. The crown is the lowest 
denomination of coin minted under the rule 
of Galifar, which spawned the saying “In 
Galifar, even the beggars have crowns.” 


e The sovereign (SP) is made from silver, 
and bears the face of a living or recent 
ruler. An unskilled laborer can expect to 
earn a sovereign for a day’s work. 


e The galifar (GP) is made from gold. It 
bears the image of Galifar I, the founder of 
the old kingdom. 


e The platinum dragon (PP) bears the 
image of one of the dragons of legend. 
With a value of one hundred sovereigns, 
these coins are used only by the wealthiest 
citizens of Khorvaire, and the average 
peasant may never see such a coin. 


‘There are a number of other coins in circulation, 
such as the double crown of Breland or the 

silver throne of Cyre, which has a value of five 
sovereigns. Still, all of the major nations make 
use of the four basic coins described above. 


CHAPTER 2 | EVERYDAY LIFE 


39 


40 


LANGUAGES IN EBERRON 


In Eberron, languages are tied to culture and 
geography as opposed to biology. A dwarf raised 
in Breland might not actually know Dwarvish, 
while the language of the giants is closely tied 

to the distant land of Xen’drik. The following 
optional rules are a way to explore this aspect of 
the setting. 


Optional RULE: COMMON LANGUAGES 


Common is the language of the Five Nations. 
The Mror dwarves speak Dwarvish and the 
Aereni elves speak Elvish, but they know 
Common as the language of trade. 

In Eberron, there are a number of other 
languages that serve this role in different regions 
or cultures. The DM may change the languages 
assigned to a monster or NPC to reflect this. 

Giant is the common tongue of Xen’drik. It 
is rarely encountered on Khorvaire. Monsters in 
Khorvaire usually speak Goblin. 

Goblin is the common tongue of Darguun, 
Droaam, and the Shadow Marches, along with 
most “monstrous” creatures in Khorvaire. It was 
the language of the goblin empire that dominated 
the continent before humanity arrived. Orcish is a 
dead language; it may be encountered in ancient 
inscriptions, but modern orcs speak Goblin. 

Infernal is spoken by spirits that embody 
evil. This incorporates Abyssal; all fiends speak a 
common language. Infernal is sometimes called 
“Khyber’s speech,” while Celestial is “the tongue 
of Siberys.” 

Riedran is the common tongue of the 
continent of Sarlona. Quori is spoken by the 
kalashtar, spirits native to Dal Quor, and the 
Inspired lords of Riedra. 


CHAPTER 2 | MAGIC IN KHORVAIRE 


OprTioNAL RULE: SWAPPING RACIAL LANGUAGES 


This optional rule allows you to exchange a 
language granted by your race for a different 
standard language. Your DM must approve the 
language you select. ‘This is a way to reflect a 
character with no ties to the culture of their race. 
Halfling is the language of the Talenta Plains; if a 
halfling was raised in the Mror Holds, they might 
replace Halfling with Dwarvish to reflect this. 


NAMES IN THE Five Nations 


Naming conventions vary by nation. The Zil 
gnomes always use three names—a given name, 
a family name, and a clan name. Warforged 
often use a single name. Within the Five Nations, 
most citizens have a given name followed by a 
surname. This surname is either a family name 
or related to an occupation or region of origin. 
So Sorn Fellhorn, Kara of Windshire, and Tellan 
Magewnght are all names you might find among 
the common folk of the Five Nations. 

The noble families of Galifar—along with 
those granted land and titles by one of the 
sovereigns of the Five Nations— add the prefix 
ir’ to their surname. So the name Darro w’Lain 
tells you that this individual is a landed noble. 
The Wynarns were the royal line of Galifar, 
and the current rulers of Aundair, Breland, and 
Karrnath are all heirs of the Wynarn bloodline. 
Thus, Queen Aurala of Aundair is Awrala 
ir Wynarn. 

Another common prefix is d’, used by 
any heir of a dragonmarked house who has 
manifested a dragonmark. So Mernx d’Cannith 
is a member of House Cannith who has 
manifested the Mark of Making. 


MAGIC IN KHORVAIRE 


Your airship soars through the skies, 
approaching the mile-high towers of Sharn. You 
disembark, walking down a street lit by everbright 
lanterns, and make your way to your favorite 
Ghallanda tavern. Inside, the halfling bartender 
uses prestidigitation to chill and flavor an array 

of exotic beverages. A Phiarlan bard entertains 
the crowd with song and a dazzling display of 
illusions. An argument between two veterans 
escalates into violence: the Brelish tough 
produces a knife, but the Aundairian duelist 
already has a wand in her hand. 

Magic is a part of life in Khorvaire. Arcane 
magic is a form of science, and the Five Nations 
are built on this foundation. Magewrights are 
professional spellcasters who use rituals and 
cantrips to provide a host of services. The 
dragonmarked houses provide magical services 
that are beyond the powers of a common 
magewright. And manifest zones are specific 
locations where the energies of the planes bleed 
into Eberron; these allow dramatic effects that 
can’t be replicated elsewhere, such as the colossal 
towers of Sharn. 


Wipe Macic, Not Hieu Macic 


While magic is widespread, the scope of magic is 
limited. Low-level spells are a part of everyday 
life, but high-level magic remains remarkable. 
Common Magic. Cantrips and Ist 
level spells are commonplace. Magewrights, 
wandslingers, and dragonmarked heirs can all 
produce these sorts of effects, and you'll see 
the impact of this magic as part of everyday 
life. Common magic items can be found in any 
community and purchased in any major city, 
provided you can find a shop or dragonmarked 
enclave that deals in what you’re looking for. 
Common magic items generally range in price 
from 50-100 gp. 
Uncommon Magic. There are magewrights 
and dragonmarked heirs who can cast 2nd 
and 3rd level spells, and such services can be 


bought... but not cheaply. You'll find houses 
with arcane locks on their doors, but that’s a sign of 
a wealthy owner. The same is true of uncommon 
magic items. It’s possible to purchase these in 

a major city, but selection and quantity will be 
limited; in a smaller town, they'll be more limited 
still. Uncommon magic items typically cost 
between 100-500 gp, though costs can be higher 
based on scarcity. 

Rare magic. Spells of 4th through 5th level 
are beyond the reach of most people. People are 
familiar with the concept of spells like teleportation 
or raise dead, but few people have ever seen either 
of these things actually performed. Only the 
most remarkable magewrights have access to 
such magic, so these services usually come from 
the dragonmarked houses—specifically heirs 
with Greater Dragonmarks and dragonshard 
focus items. 

In theory, rare magic items can be purchased, 
with prices ranging anywhere from 2,000 gp— 
20,000 gp. In practice, these things are rare. A 
rare magic item might be the prize of a collection 
in a Sharn emporium, or the showpiece of 
a House Cannith forgehold. It’s more likely 
that such items will be acquired as rewards for 
working with a powerful organization than 
simply found for purchase in a store. Of course, 
should you have a ridiculous sum of gold burning 
a hole in your purse, you might be able to 
commission House Cannith to create a rare item 
for you... though this would take time. 

Very Rare and Legendary Magic. Spells 
of 6th level and above are largely the stuff of 
legends and folktales. The few people known to 
wield this sort of power are themselves legends: 
Mordain the Fleshweaver, the Keeper of the 
Silver Flame, the Daughters of Sora Kell. If 
encountered in the Five Nations, such magic 
will likely be tied to an eldritch machine or a 
manifest zone. 

Legendary magic items are generally the work 
of dragons or demons, or relics found in the ruins 
of Xen’drik. Very rare magic items could be tied 
to similar sources, or they might be masterworks 
of the elves of Aerenal or Valenar heirlooms. It’s 
unlikely that such a treasure would ever be sold. 


CHAPTER 2 | MAGIC IN KHORVAIRE 4l 


42 


MAGEWRIGHTS 


In Khorvaire, magic is a tool that’s incorporated 
into many jobs. There are entirely magical 
careers, such as the medium or the oracle. But 
much of the time, mundane skill and magic are 
combined together. A lamplighter can work with 
mundane lanterns, but also learns continual flame 
to create and maintain the everbright lanterns that 
light the streets. A chef can heat and flavor food 
with a cantrip. 

A magewright knows one to four cantrips or 
spells. Magewrights don’t use spell slots. Cantrips 
can be used casually, but their spells are usually 
cast as rituals—even if the spell doesn’t normally 
have the ritual tag. When converting a spell 
to a magewright ritual, it can have a casting 
time of up to one hour. It’s also common for 
a magewright’s ritual to have an additional 
component cost in dragonshards, the fuel of the 
magical economy. A typical cost would be 20 gp 
for each level of the ritual, but this is only a basic 
guideline. The point is that the limitations on a 
magewright are time and money. A locksmith 
can cast more than one arcane lock in a day; but it 
takes an hour and 65 gp for each lock they want 
to create. 

While the common spell list is a starting point 
for magewright spells, you can modify these spells 
to fit the job. Spells used by adventurers are often 
quite versatile. Prestedigitation can heat or chill 
an object, light or extinguish a flame. Both the 
lamplighter and the chef may know prestidigitation, 
but the chef’s version may only work on 
food, while the lamplighter can only light or 
extinguish flames. An actor may know a version 
of thaumaturgy that helps project their voice but 
doesn’t provide any of the other benefits. Artisans 
often know a version of guidance that only helps 
with their particular art. This could also result 
in a magewright having a spell that’s superior to 
the usual version of a spell, reflecting their tight 
focus. An oracle’s version of augury might be able 
to predict outcomes up to a week in advance, 
as it’s hard to make a business out of predicting 
events that occur in the next 30 minutes. 

In dealing with a magewright, think about the 


CHAPTER 2 | MAGEWRIGHTS 


form their magic takes. A locksmith can perform 
knock as a ritual. But they don’t just snap their 
fingers. They may use lengths of wire or iron rods, 
tracing patterns around the lock they’re dealing 
with while murmuring incantations. An oracle 
might work with cards or dice, or study charts of 
planar conjunctions. The magewright performs 
magic as both a job and a science. 

Here are some examples of magewrights and 
the services they provide. Not every healer can 
cast lesser restoration, and not every oracle can cast 
dwination—these are general guidelines. 

e Chef. Prestidigitation (food only), purify food & 

drink (ritual), gentle repose (ritual, food only). 
Familiar with cook’s tools. 


e Healer. Proficient with Medicine and 
herbalism kits. Spare the dying, detect poison G 
disease (ritual), lesser restoration (1-hour ritual, 
40 gp component cost). 


e Launderer. Mending, prestidigitation; both 
only affect fabric. 


e Lamplighter. Light, continual flame (\-hour 
ritual, 90 gp component cost); uses tinker’s 
tools to create and repair lanterns. 


e Locksmith. Arcane lock (1-hour ritual, 65 
gp component cost), knock (ritual, 40 gp 
component cost); proficient with thieves’ 
tools and tinker’s tools. 


e Medium. Speak with dead (ritual, 60 gp 
component cost). Some mediums use a 
form of minor illusion to conjure an image 
of the deceased. A medium might be 
proficient in Insight to help mourners deal 
with grief—or in Deception. 

e Oracle. Augur (ritual, 65 gp cost); divination 
(1-hour ritual, 105 gp cost). 


The term magewnight specifically refers to an 
arcane spellcaster. In religious communities (such 
as those in Thrane) adventurers may find divine 
casters performing these same functions. Such a 
divine caster is called an adept. Divine magic is 

a gift instead of a science, and adepts typically 
work on behalf of their faith rather than selling 
their services. 


WANDSLINGERS 


The Last War saw a dramatic increase in the 
use of magic in battle. Aundair was the first 
nation to field units of arcane dragoons, but as 
the war continued cantrip specialists could be 
found in the armies of most nations. Due to the 
considerable training required to master magic, 
this has remained an elite specialty. The common 
soldier wields a spear or crossbow but it’s not 
unusual to see a warrior with a sword on one hip 
and a wand on the other. Within the army, such 
a soldier is referred to as an arcaneer. 

On the streets, they are called wandslingers. 

A wandslinger is defined by the ability to 
cast at least two cantrips, typically drawn from 
the sorcerer or wizard spell list. A common 
wandslinger also knows a single 1st-level spell, 
which they can cast once per long rest. An 
exceptional wandslinger may know up up to 
three spells of up to 3rd level. A wandslinger’s 
spells and cantrips are almost always combat 
spells with an immediate effect, such as fire bolt, 
ray of frost, burning hands, or shield. 

The critical limitation of the wandslinger is a 
dependence on an arcane focus. A wandslinger 
must have an arcane focus—a wand, rod, 
staff, orb, or crystal—to perform magic. Some 
wandslingers use different focuses for their 
various cantrips, such as a wand for fire bolt and 
a rod for burning hands, but wandslingers can use 
any arcane focus they get their hands on. As a 
result, arcane focuses are regarded as weapons 
throughout Khorvaire. 

If you’ve got a wand tucked into your belt, 
people may assume you know how to use it. 


PLAYING A WANDSLINGER 


“Wandslinger” isn’t a class. Anyone who can 
perform arcane magic could be considered a 
wandslinger, and any character could acquire 
a wandslinger’s spell set by taking the Magic 
Initiate feat. As such, whether your character is 
a wandslinger is really a question of style. 

e Did you serve in the Last War? If so, who 
did you fight for? Did you learn or hone 
your magical skills as part of your military 
training? 

* Do you primarily view your magic as a 
weapon, or do you hate being forced into 
combat? Do you have a diverse range of 
spells, or is your magic largely oriented 
around combat? 

* A player character is never required to 
use an arcane focus when casting a spell. 
But if you’re a wandslinger, you’re more 
comfortable with a focus in your hand. 
Casting a spell without a focus takes 
effort. There’s no mechanical penalty 
associated with this; it’s just something to 
consider when describing your actions. 


As long as your DM approves, you could 
justify the abilities of an arcane class as 

being derived from wandslinger training as 
opposed to the usual source. If you’re playing 
a sorcerer or warlock, you could say that your 
choice of Sorcerous Origin or Otherworldly 
Patron reflects specialized military training. 
This doesn’t change the way these features 
function; it means that instead of making a pact 
with a fiend, your warlock has a connection 

to an elite order of arcaniers that share these 
abilities. Instead of dealing with the demands of 
a patron, you might receive requests from your 
former commander or your comrades from the 
war. Ultimately, it’s about the story you want to 
tell with your character. Are you an impetuous 
duelist, quick to draw your wand at the first 
provocation? A former soldier trained to use 
magic as a weapon? Or an arcane scholar who 
despises hotheaded wandslingers who know 
nothing about the science of magic? 

Identifying your character as a wandslinger 
doesn’t change your class features. Chapter 3 
offers a wider selection of arcane focus items 
that can add color to your character. 


CHAPTER 2 | WANDSLINGERS 


43 


44 


THE Macicat Economy 


With this general understanding of the sort of 
magic that’s found in the world, here’s a closer 
look at a few particular fields of industry. 


COMMUNICATION 


The Couriers’ Guild of House Orien runs a 
standard postal service, delivering messages by 
horse and lightning rail. Sending a letter to a 
central station in a major city costs a few copper 
pieces. A direct delivery within a city could run 
up to 5 sp. Sending a large or unusual package— 
or a rushed delivery—costs considerably more. 

Should you need to send a message more 
quickly, you'll turn to the message stations of 
House Sivis. The basic tool is the speaking stone, 
which allows a dragonmarked operator to send a 
short message to any other speaking stone. Sending 
a message through the stones costs | gp for 
every five words in the message and takes one 
minute for every ten miles between the station 
and the destination. ‘The gnomes at the receiving 
station will transcribe the message; for an extra 
gold piece, they'll have a courier deliver it to 
the intended recipient. Most large communities 
will have a message station, but small villages or 
frontier towns may not. 

The speaking stone network is the backbone of 
communication, but if it’s not fast enough, there 
is one more option. A Sivis enclave might have a 
heir who can perform sending, which can send a 
message instantly to any Sivis station—and even 
allow a response, if the recipient is present and 
waiting at the target station. If available, this 
service generally costs 200 gp. 


ENTERTAINMENT 


While true bards are uncommon, magewright 
entertainers learn to weave magic into their 
performances. Illusion is a common tool, used 
both to enhance a mundane performance or 

as an art form in its own right. A gymnastic 
performance might incorporate jump or feather fall. 
The effects of the thaumaturgy cantrip—booming 


CHAPTER 2 | THE MAGICAL ECONOMY 


voice, influence flames, spontaneous sounds—are 
a boon for any actor. In general, think of ways 
that such low-level effects might be incorporated 
into a performance. 

The Dragonmarked Houses of Shadow 
dominate the entertainment industry. House 
Phiarlan operates west of the Mournland, while 
House Thuranni is based in Karrnath and the 
Lhazaar Principalities. Each house has its own 
theatres, companies, and star performers, but 
you don’t need a dragonmark to get into show 
business; the houses train and license all manner 
of artists and entertainers. 


FASHION 


When it comes to fashion, the most common 
manifestation of magic is glamerweave: clothing 
imbued with illusion. ‘This can involve concrete 
images, such as a cloak lined with glittering stars 
or a gown with a pattern of flames; the wearer 
might even be able to adjust the intensity of 
these flames with a word. More elaborate (and 
expensive) glamerweave could even produce the 
effect of being wreathed in flames. However, 
glamerweave can also have more abstract effects: 
slowly shifting colors or a shimmering glow, 

for example. Glamerweave can cost anywhere 
from 10 to 200 gp depending on the effect; it’s 
stylish, but certainly a sign of wealth. Zilargo and 
Aundair are the primary sources of glamerweave, 
and competition between designers has grown in 
recent years. 


MEDICINE 


The halflings of House Jorasco have long 
dominated the business of healing. Most large 
communities have a Jorasco healing house, and 
even smaller communities often have a lone 
Jorasco healer. The basic services provided by 
Jorasco involve use of the Medicine skill and 
herbal remedies. The next tier of treatment is 
lesser restoration, offering immediate recovery from 
disease for those willing to pay the price. Greater 
restoration 1s possible if the house has an heir with 
the Greater Mark of Healing, though this gift 


can only be used once per day. House Jorasco is 
also the primary source of healing potions; the 
quantity and quality available will depend on the 
size of the healing house. 

House Jorasco demands payment before it 
renders any service. The Church of the Silver 
Flame and priests of Boldrei often maintain 
charitable clinics, but most of these facilities only 
provide mundane healing. 

Resurrection is possible in Eberron, but it’s 
rare. House Jorasco has a handful of altars 
of resurrection, and someone with the Greater 
Dragonmark of Healing and 5,000 gp worth 
of dragonshards can use one of these altars to 
perform raise dead. Beyond this, there’s a few 
divine healers with the power to raise the dead. 
But no one uses this power lightly. Regardless 
of the method used, it’s hard to pull someone 
back from Dolurrh, and it grows more difficult 
with each day that passes after death. Opening 
a channel to Dolurrh can potentially result in a 
malevolent spirit taking possession of the body; 


in a general release of hostile ghosts; or even a 
marut inevitable manifesting and attacking the 
spellcaster. All of which means that resurrection 
is possible for player characters and exceptional 
NPCs, but it’s not a reliable service for the 
general public. Most of the time, when someone 
dies, they stay dead. 


TRANSPORTATION 


All the standard modes of transportation can be 
found in Khorvaire. People use boats, barges, 
horses, coaches, and more. If something moves 
over land it’s likely run or licensed by House 
Orien. Ifit moves along the water or through 
the air, it’s likely connected to House Lyrandar. 
Both houses license independent agents, so the 
captain of a mundane galleon won’t necessarily 
be a Lyrandar heir, but the Lyrandar seal on 

a licensed ship assures you of the quality of the 
vessel and its crew. Eberron also features some 
unique modes of transport. 


46 


Elemental galleons use bound water 
elementals to increase the speed of the vessel. 
These have long been the mainstay of House 
Lyrandar; an elemental galleon can maintain 
a speed of 20 miles per hour, more than twice 
the speed of a mundane ship of similar size. The 
cost of such travel is likewise twice the cost of a 
normal journey. 

The lightning rail of House Orien is the 
gold standard for overland travel within the Five 
Nations. An elemental engine pulls a train of 
linked coaches over a path of conductor stones, 
maintaining a speed of 30 miles per hour. The 
rail links most of the major cities of the Five 
Nations, though the destruction of Cyre has made 
travel between eastern and western Khorvaire 
more challenging. A journey on the lightning rail 
generally costs twice as much as an inn stay of the 
same duration, with quality ranging between the 
modest coaches shared by most travelers (1 gp/ 
day) and the wealthy luxury coaches (4 gp/day). 
People satisfied with squalid accomodations can 
try to stow away on a cargo car, but Orien guards 
discourage such behavior. 

Elemental airships are the pride of House 
Lyrandar, using bound air and fire elementals to 
propel a vessel through the sky. Airships travel 
between 20 to 40 miles per hour and have the 
advantage of being able to cross any terrain. 
Airships have only been in service for eight years, 
and as a result many cities don’t yet have the 
facilities required for docking or maintaining an 
airship. However, airships are quickly becoming 
the prefered method of travel for those who can 
afford them. Airship travel generally costs five 
times as much as an inn stay of the same quality 
and duration. 

Teleportation is the swiftest form of travel, 
but also the most limited. An Orien heir with 
the Greater Mark of Passage can cast teleportation 
cucle once per day; most major Orien enclaves 
have permanent circles and can be used as 
destinations. When this service is available, it 
generally costs 2,500 gp. 

All of these forms of advanced travel require 
someone with the appropriate dragonmark— 
the Mark of Storm for elemental galleons and 


CHAPTER 2 | THE MAGICAL ECONOMY 


airships, or the Mark of Passage for the lightning 
rail—to control the vessel. While it may be 
possible to develop an airship that doesn’t require 
a Lyrandar pilot, the Dragonmarked Houses are 
quite protective of their monopolies. 


WARFARE 


Magic plays an important role on the battlefield. 
House Cannith produces a wide range of siege 
equipment and mystical weapons and made 
a number of breakthroughs during the Last 
War. Massive siege staffs fill the role of artillery. 
Semi-sentient warforged titans scatter squads 
of infantry. Kundarak sappers spread glyphs of 
warding to deny a region to an enemy. Wands and 
rods haven’t replaced the swords or bows, but 
elite arcaneers are becoming more common. 
The armies of Aundair specialize in the use 
of magic and have the greatest numbers of 
wandslingers. Karrnath has long been known 
for its military discipline, but also became 
infamous for its widespread use of undead 
soldiers. Thrane is renowned for its peasant 
archers and use of divine magic, thanks to its 
fierce devotion to the Church of the Silver 
Flame. Cyre relied heavily on mercenary 
services—including the Valenar elves and the 
goblins of Darguun—and fielded the greatest 
number of warforged troops. Finally, Breland 
had the best intelligence and industry of the 
nations; it was also noted for the use of Zil 
elemental weapons and for its floating fortresses. 


CREATING MaGic ÍTEMS 


House Cannith has an enclave devoted solely 

to wand production. This facility is equipped 
with tools that amplify the Mark of Making 

and channel planar energies; the artisans also 
have access to a vast array of exotic woods and 
materials. You can also create a wand, but you’re 
starting from scratch and creating the tools you 
need. Essentially, when House Cannith creates 
magic items, it’s using factories; while your 
artificer is the equivalent of the tinkerer working 
in the garage. You can create magic items, and 


you can potentially create items that House 
Cannith can’t make... but it’s going to take you 
more time and gold than it takes for them. Here’s 
an overview of the process. 

The Schema. The first step in creating a 
magic item is to acquire a schema for it. This is the 
equivalent of a recipe or a blueprint; it explains 
the process and components required to create 
the item. If you can obtain a schema—from 
House Cannith, the mystical library of Arcanix, 
the collection of an experienced artificer— 
you're ready to move on. Otherwise, you can 
create a schema, but this takes time and skill. 

An arcane spellcaster uses Arcana to create 
schema. A divine caster uses Religion, while 

a druid or ranger relies on Nature. You must 
have a minimum skill bonus—your proficiency 
bonus plus your ability score bonus—in order 
to develop a schema. You must maintain the 
minimum skill bonus for the duration of your 
work, so an effect that increases an ability score 
for a few minutes won’t help you. 


SCHEMA CREATION REQUIREMENTS 


Item Rarity Work weeks Minimum Skill 
Common 3 days +2 
Uncommon 1 +4 
Rare 3 +6 
Very Rare 8 +8 
Legendary 16 +10 


This ability to develop a schema represents 
remarkable talent. It could take House Cannith 
years or decades to develop a particular schema; 
the fact that you can accomplish this in weeks 
reflects the idea that player characters are 
innovators. However, it is always up to the 
DM to decide if you can create a particular 
schema. The DM can always choose to exclude a 
particular magic item from a campaign. 

Rare Components. Any magic item requires 
specialized materials—Eberron dragonshards, 
rare woods or metals, exotic herbs or other 
substances. While exotic, these things can 
be purchased or obtained in any major city. 

But creating a magic item from scratch often 


requires rarer components that can’t simply 

be purchased. You might need a flower from 
Thelanis, a feather from a couatl, or the scale 

of a dragon. More often than not, such this will 
require an adventure. You may not have to kill 
something to obtain what you need, but you'll 
surely have to overcome a challenge. The Magic 
Item Ingredients table suggests how difficult that 
challenge could be. 


MAGIC ITEM INGREDIENTS 


Item Rarity CR Range 
Common 1-3 
Uncommon 4-8 

Rare o= 
Very Rare 13-18 
Legendary 19+ 


It’s possible to find a rare component even 
when youre not looking for one. You could 
discover an exotic Khyber crystal in the ruins of 
an artificer’s workshop. ‘Time and study could 
yield suggestions as to what items could be made 
with the component; for example, that Khyber 
shard could be used to create an tron flask or 
dimensional shackles. 

Creation. Once you have your schema and 
any rare components, you’re ready to begin. ‘The 
DM can assign skills or tools that are required 
for this act of creation, so that it requires both 
proficiency and access to these tools. You must 
pay the basic costs of materials and services 
required to make the item. And you must spend a 
significant amount of time working on it; creating 
a legendary item can take a year of effort! 


MAGIC ITEM CRAFTING TIME AND COST 


Item Rarity Work weeks* Cost* 
Common 1 50 gp 
Uncommon 2 200 gp 
Rare 10 2,000 gp 
Very Rare 25 20,000 gp 
Legendary 20 100,000 gp 


* Halved for a consumable item 


CHAPTER 2 | THE MAGICAL ECONOMY 47 


The Magic Item Crafting Time and Cost table 
provides a basic framework, but various factors 
could reduce time or cost. Eberron dragonshards 
are a significant amount of the cost of materials. 
A remarkable dragonshard could reduce the 
cost of creating an item by 10 percent. A planar 
convergence could reduce the time or cost 
required to make an item with an effect tied to 
that plane. Ultimately, this is a story, and there 
are exceptions to every rule. 

Complications. These rules for magic item 
creation are derived from the system presented 
in Xanathar’s Guide to Everything. This also offers 
the idea that the creation of a magic item is a 
complex procedure and that complications can 
arise. If you use this rule, there’s a 10 percent 
chance of a complication arising for every 
five workweeks spent on crafting the item. 
Xanathar’s Guide presents a number of possible 
complications. Here are few tied to Eberron. 


CRAFTING COMPLICATIONS 


d6 Complication 


íl A Dragonmarked House takes an 
interest in your work. Do they 
view you as a threat, or are they 
impressed by your techniques? Do 
they want to buy the item, and what 
will happen if you refuse? 

2 A mishap creates a temporary 
manifest zone. 


3 You need to acquire an additional 
rare component. 


4 The shifting balance of the planes 
interferes with your work; you must 
wait for the current planar alignment 
to change. 

5 Your efforts draw the attention of 
one of the conspiracies of Eberron— 
such as the Chamber, the Aurum, the 
Emerald Claw, or the Lords of Dust. 

6 Your item unexpectedly becomes 
sentient. 


CHAPTER 2 | FAITHS OF KHORVAIRE 


FAITHS OF KHORVAIRE 


Religion plays an important role in Eberron. 
While gods don’t physically manifest as they 

do in other settings, people of faith believe that 
divine forces play a role in everyday life. Beyond 
this, shared beliefs help to unite communities and 
to provide hope in difficult times. 

Appendix B of the Player’s Handbook provides 
concrete details about the primary religions of 
Eberron, including holy symbols and domains. 
This section provides a more direct look at what 
your faith means to you and how to reflect that 
devotion through your actions. 

In creating a devout character, it can be 
useful to think about the source of your faith. 
Were you brought up in your religion, or did 
you come to it later in life? Are you primarily 
devoted to the principles of your religion, 
or have you had a personal, transcendental 
experience? Do you believe that you have a 
divine destiny to fulfill, or are you still waiting 
for your purpose to be revealed? 


CHOOSING ARCHETYPES 


While the Player’s Handbook provides a 
baseline for domains, it doesn’t include 
paladin oaths or archetypes from other 
sources. As new options are always 
emerging, there’s no way to create an 
absolute list, and beyond that this is 
something driven by a character’s story. The 
Oath of Devotion is a logical archetype for 
a paladin of the Silver Flame, but a zealous 
paladin specifically devoted to pursuing evil 
could easily take an Oath of Vengeance. 
Likewise, the Forge domain should be an 
option for priests of Onatar or the Traveler. 
Consider your beliefs and your story and 
choose an archetype that works with both. 


THE CHURCH OF THE SILVER FLAME 


e The Silver Flame is force of light holding 
foul demons at bay. Those who seek to 
defend the innocent from evil may draw on 
the power of the Flame. 


e Battle supernatural evil with steel, fire, and 
magic. Every mortal soul can be guided 
to the light. Inspire and guide others to 
virtuous behavior; force is a last resort. 


e Listen to the Voice of the Flame but 
beware the deceiving whispers of the 
Shadow in the Flame. 


The Church of the Silver Flame has a disciplined 
hierarchy with a martial aspect. Friars and 
ministers seek to guide people to the light, while 
templars defend them from evil. 

Eberron is a place where supernatural evil is a 
very real threat. Demons possess the innocent. 
Vampires lurk in the shadows. Aberrations can 
emerge from Khyber at any time. Zealots may 
go too far in the pursuit of evil and priests may 
be more concerned with mundane power than 
faith. But the majority of those who follow the 
Silver Flame stay true to its principles. They seek 
to lead virtuous lives, to protect the weak, and to 
guide the wicked to the light. 

The Church is based in Thrane but its 

followers are spread across Eberron. 
It’s up to you whether you support 
the theocracy of Thrane or 
whether you feel that it’s a 
mistake to draw the Church 
into politics. A number of 
variant sects worship the 
Silver Flame; you can always 
find your own path. 
Archery is a devotional 
practice of the Silver 
Flame, used both as a 
means of meditation and 
a martial art. 


ad 


The Silver Flame 


THE SOVEREIGN Host 


e The Sovereigns are with us at all times. 
Onatar stands at every forge and Dol Dorn 
is with you whenever blades are drawn. 


e The Sovereigns shape the world. They 
offer us guidance and strength, but we must 
learn to listen. 


e Honor each Sovereign in its place and time. 
If you hear one voice clearly, embrace their 
path and embody their values. 


As a follower of the Sovereign Host, you believe 
that the hand of the Sovereigns can be seen in 
all things. What others take to be intuition or 
instinct, you see as the voice of the Sovereigns 
offering guidance. You don’t need absolute 
proof: the fact that there is a bountiful harvest is 
proof enough of Arawai’s benevolence. 

The Sovereign Host has a looser structure than 
the Church of the Silver Flame. Many variations 
and subsects of the faith exist. Many temples are 
only loosely aligned—in a small village, a skilled 
smith might double as the priest because people 
believe he’s close to Onatar. A midwife might be 
seen as speaking for Arawai and Boldrei. 

You may feel a particular connection to one 
Sovereign and, as a divine spellcaster, this could 
drive your choice of domain or oath. But as a 
vassal (the common term for a follower of the 
Host), you are expected to 
respect and honor all of 
the Sovereigns. 


The Sovereign Host 


CHAPTER 2 | FAITHS OF KHORVAIRE 49 


The Dark Six 


THE Dark Six 


The Dark Six and the Sovereign Host are 
opposite sides of the same coin. If you believe it 
one you inherently believe in the other; the only 
question is whether you fear or revere the Dark 
Six. The principles of the faith are the same: 
just like the Sovereigns, the Six are with us at all 
times. They shape the world and speak to those 
who will listen. 

In general, the Sovereigns represent values 
tied to civilization: Law, community, trade, 
industry, agriculture, honor in war. The Dark 
Six embody dangerous concepts: Death, chaos 
and change, the destructive powers of nature, 
treachery in battle, dark magic and monsters, 
passion and madness. ‘Those who worship the 
Sovereigns fear these things; those who revere 
the Six embrace them and don’t consider them 
to be evil. If you’re a barbarian, it’s the Fury 
who unleashes your rage. If you’re an assassin, 
you walk the path of the Mockery as opposed to 
that of Dol Arrah. 

The creatures of Droaam generally revere the 
Dark Six. Humanity sees the Shadow as a villain 
who gave the harpy her voice and the medusa 
her gaze; to the harpy and the medusa, this 
makes the Shadow a hero. 


CHAPTER 2 | FAITHS OF KHORVAIRE 


THE Bioop oF VoL 


e Each one of us has a spark of divinity 
within our blood and our spirit. Find that 
power within. 


e Death is the end, Dolurrh is oblivion, and 
if the gods exist they are cruel. Stand with 
those you care for; all we have 1s this life 
and each other. 


Because of its association with necromancy and 
the undead, many people believe that the Blood 
of Vol embraces death and that its followers 
wish to become undead. Neither of these things 
are true. The Seekers of the Divinity Within 

(as the faithful call themselves) don’t revere the 
undead; they believe that once someone has 
died you might as well put the corpse to use. 
But the spark of divinity is tied to both blood 
and soul, and the Seekers believe that the 
undead can never fully harness its power. The 
vampires and mummies of the Blood of Vol 
have sacrificed their chance at divinity in order 
to guide and protect the living. They’re martyrs, 
not something to envy. 

Public opinion of the Blood of Vol is often 
colored by the actions of the Order of the 
Emerald Claw. This extremist sect serves a lich 
known as the Queen of Death, and employs 
undead and necromancy in acts of terror. Most 
Seekers have no love for the Emerald Claw and 
don’t support its actions. 


The Blood of Vol 


THE PATH oF LIGHT 


e We live in an age of darkness. We must find 
the path that leads to the light. 


e Act with compassion and courage. Each 
noble act is a step on the path. 


e Hone your body and your mind. You are 
the tool you will use to change reality. 


The Path of Light is the faith of the kalashtar and 
has few followers in Khorvaire. A Lightspeaker 
seeks to change reality—in the big picture by 
ushering in an age of light, while on the small 
scale by excising negative influences and 
performing good works. 

While compassion is important, there are those 
among the followers of the Path of Light who 
believe in taking surgical action to eliminate 
sources of evil. Where followers of the Silver 
Flame believe that all mortals can be brought to 
the Flame, some who follow the Path of Light 
believe that it’s more expedient to eliminate an 
infection and to allow a soul to find the light in its 
next incarnation. 


The Path of Light 


THE UNpyING Court 


e Our greatest champions and sages will 
never be lost to us. Their wisdom guides us, 
and their power protects us all. 


e Honor our past. Respect our traditions. 
Perfect your skills and you may earn your 
place among the Deathless. 


e Destroy those foul creatures that channel 
the power of Mabar, for they consume the 
essence of our world. 


The elves of Aerenal refuse to allow their 
greatest souls to be lost to Dolurrh. Using 
powerful magic, they raise these champions 
as deathless, a form 
of undead imbued 
with positive energy. 
The Undying Court 
is a council of the 
deathless, ancient 
elves who have guided 
their descendants 
for twenty thousand 
years. As individuals, a 
deathless councilor is 
no more powerful than 
a traditional lich. But 
working in concert, the Undying Court creates 
a pool of energy that empowers their divine 
spellcasters. 

Of all of these religions, the Undying Court 
is the most grounded in reality. You can go to 
Shae Mordai and seek an audience with the 
Court. As a follower of the Undying Court, 
consider why you are so far from home. Were 
you sent from Aerenal with a mission? Is it for 
the Court as a whole or are you acting as an 
agent of a specific counselor—perhaps your own 
ancestor? Followers of the Undying Court despise 
negatively charged undead, so without a concrete 
mission, one should seek to destroy the undead 
and the necromancers who rouse them. 


The Undying Court 


CHAPTER 2 | FAITHS OF KHORVAIRE 51 


52 


CULTS OF THE DRAGON BELOW 


e There is a paradise within the world, a vale 
bathed in the light of the Inner Sun. Earn 
your passage with the blood of worthy foes. 


e Our existence is a chrysalis state, preparing 
us for transcendent immortality within the 
bowels of the Gibbering Mouther. 


e The Lord of Eyes sees all secrets. His 
gaze elevates the worthy and slays the 
unbeliever. Drive all doubt from your heart 
and you will see reality through new eyes. 


The Cults of the Dragon Below are wildly 
diverse. The tenets above describe the beliefs 

of three different cults, and the image of the holy 
symbol is one common example—a piece of 
volcanic glass—not something shared by all 
cults. There are warlocks who draw power from 
demon overlords and daelkyr cultists who serve 
mind flayers and beholders. Others are simply 
driven by deep convictions that others see as 
madness. Outsiders use the term “Cult of the 
Dragon Below” as a blanket term to describe 

all of these things, but the cultists themselves 
don’t use this name or see themselves as part 

of a greater whole. New cults can spring up 
anywhere at any time, as a seed of madness takes 
root and spreads. 

If your character is part of a cult, work with the 
DM to define your personal beliefs, along with 
the size and scope of your cult. Does your faith 
have wide support across the Shadow Marches? 
Or are you and your family the only people who 
share your particular beliefs? 


CHAPTER 2 | DISTANT LANDS 


DisTANT LANDS 


This Wayfinder’s Guide focuses on the continent of 
Khorvaire and the city of Sharn. But Khorvaire 
is only one continent of many, and in time 
adventurers may wish to explore distant lands. 
Here is an overview of the other regions of 
Eberron. If you wish to know more, refer to the 
sources presented in the appendix. 


AFRENAL 


In Aerenal, you might... 
e Consult an elven archmage who’s been 
dead for twenty thousand years. 


e Battle sinister forces that have crawled into 
Eberron from a realm of eternal night. 


e Learn secrets of arcane magic unknown on 
Khorvaire. 


The massive island of Aerenal is the ancient 
kingdom of the elves. Its jungles are a source 
of strange and valuable lumbers: the soarwood 
used for the hulls of airships, tough bronzewood, 
even trees that remain alive after being felled. 
Beyond this, the island is close to the planes of 
Irian and Mabar... allowing the lines between 
life and death to become blurred. This can be 
dangerous, with dark forces creeping in from the 
plane known as the Endless Night. But it’s also 
allowed the elves to perform feats of necromancy 
unmatched in Eberron. Among the Aereni elves, 
the honored dead walk among the living. Heroes 
who died in glorious battle return to serve the 
Sibling Kings. And in the depths of Shae Mordai, 
the deathless lords of the Undying Court study 
the shifting balance of the planes and the path of 
the Draconic Prophecy. 

While necromancy is a pillar of Aereni 
society, it isn’t the dark force you’re used to. 
The deathless undead of Aerenal are sustained 
by positive energy—the light of Irian and the 
devotion freely given by their descendants. The 
elves of Aerenal despise necromancy that draws 
on the negative energy of Mabar, and agents of 
the Undying Court are charged to seek out and 
destroy vampires, liches, and other such undead. 


ae ei 


zi $ 
KHOR 


v 4 


Barren Sea 


“XEN:DRIK 


es <4 Dark Sea 


Ic 
> 


enfaw Sease 
` 


EBERRON JA 


HOUSE SIVIS PRESENTS | 
| 4 TRUE AN ACCURATE | 
\\ MAP oF irs SEAS 
ano CONTINENTS y 


Sea of Lost Souls 


Aereni civilization is over twenty thousand 
years old. They’ve watched nations of goblins 
and humans rise and fall, secure in their island 
sanctuary. The Aereni possess many secrets and 
powers the Five Nations have yet to discover. 
But the elves are more interested in practicing 
and perfecting these ancient traditions than in 
innovation and discovery. An Aereni wizard 
might spend a decade refining the pronunciation 
of a single spell’s incantation. For now humanity 
can’t match the power of the elves. If that balance 
begins to change, will Aerenal take action? 


ARGONNESSEN 


In Argonnessen, you could... 
e Clash with tribes of dragon-worshipping 
barbarians. 


e Explore an ancient city of dragons. 
e Discover mighty artifacts and epic spells. 


Argonnessen is home to the oldest civilization 
on Eberron. ‘The dragons wield epic magic, and 
their homeland is shielded against divination and 
teleportation. Tribes of barbarians roam Seren 
Islands and the coastlines of Argonnessen; these 
include members of almost every humanoid 
race, perhaps collected by dragons in ages past. 
These Seren barbarians worship the dragons 
and protect the coasts from invaders. To date, 
no one from the Five Nations has ever ventured 
into the interior of the continent and returned to 
speak of it. 


CHAPTER 2 | DISTANT LANDS 


nN 
S9) 


54 


No one knows just how many dragons there 
are in Argonnessen, but people tell stories of 
vast cavern complexes filled with the treasures 
of fallen civilizations, of prisons holding bound 
demons, of cities made from diamond and 
adamantine. Is there any truth to these tales, or is 
it all myth? 


EVERICE AND THE FROSTFELL 


In Everice or the Frostfell, you might... 
e Discover an ancient civilization hidden 
beneath the ice. 


e Search for the survivors of a lost expedition. 


e Find the source of a mysterious mystical 
signal. 


The poles of Eberron are almost as mysterious 

as Argonnessen. Some dwarves believe that 

their ancestors originally came to Khorvaire 
from the Frostfell, but there’s been no contact 
with Frostfell dwarves in modern times. Legends 
speak of undead hordes, free-roaming fiends, and 
terrifying monsters in these arctic lands. 


SARLONA 


In Sarlona, you could... 
¢ Infiltrate an empire ruled by 
psychic overlords. 


e Defend an ancient mountain 
monastery. 


e Disable a monolith used to control 
the dreams of a city. 


Tens of thousands of years ago, the 
vast continent of Sarlona was the 
cradle of human civilization. Three 
thousand years ago, the first human 
colonists set forth from Sarlona, 
setting in motion the events that 
would shape modern-day Khorvaire. 
Once Sarlona was home to over 

a dozen distinct kingdoms, but 
today only two established nations 


CHAPTER 2 | DISTANT LANDS 


remain: the mighty empire of Riedra and the 
mountain sanctuary of Adar. Riedra is ruled by 
the Inspired, humans tied to extraplanar spirits 
and imbued with psychic powers. Adar is the 
homeland of the Kalashtar. Riedra maintains an 
endless siege of Adar, and both nations have little 
contact with Khorvaire. 


XEN DRIK 


In Xen’drik, you could... 
e Seek to destroy ancient mystical weapons 
before they fall into the hands of villains. 


e Battle savage giants in the ruins of their 
ancient cities. 


e Match wits with cunning drow in the 
depths of a primordial jungle. 


In the distant past, Xen’drik was home to the 
civilizations of the giants. Now it is a place of 
mysteries and ruins. The giants were destroyed 
by the dragons of Argonnessen, and the epic 
magics unleashed in that battle warped the land. 
Space and time are unreliable in Xen’drik. But 
it is a land that holds untold treasures, and the 
richest source of rare Siberys dragonshards. In 
addition to savage giants, Xen’drik is home to 
the enigmatic drow and many other races and 
creatures never seen in Khorvaire. 

The port city of Stormreach serves as the 
gateway to Xen’drik. It’s proven difficult to 
maintain colonies within Xen’drik, though the 
end of the Last War has created a new interest in 
exploration. 


EXOTIC MAGIC? 


One idea suggested in this chapter is that 
explorers can discover mystical secrets in 
distant lands. But what does that mean? 
How do you give the Aereni elves or giants 
of Xen’drik spells no one has seen before? 

Spells and magic items are constantly 
being introduced in new sourcebooks and 
online content. One option is for a DM to limit 
access to some or all of this new material. If 
a player wants to use a spell from Xanathar’s 
Guide to Everything, they have to find it. 
When a character has an opportunity to learn 
new magic—whether by studying with a 
member of the Undying Court or reading the 
crumbling pages of a giant’s spellbook—the 
DM can allow them to exchange an existing 
spell for a new spell. 

This applies to arcane magic as well as 
divine. The Silver Flame is worshipped 
in many different ways around the world, 
and the giants had their own form of the 
Sovereign Host; while exploring an ancient 
temple, a cleric could learn new ways to 
invoke the power of the divine. 


EBERRON: ABOVE AND BEYOND 


While planar travel is uncommon, it can help to 
have an understanding of Eberron’s cosmology 
and how the influence of the planes can affect 
your story. 


THE MATERIAL PLANE 


Eberron is the heart of the material plane. It 
is surrounded by the Ring of Siberys, a band 
of golden dragonshards. Beyond this, twelve 
moons orbit the world. To date, no creature from 
Eberron has ever explored the moons. None can 
say whether they are lifeless rocks or thriving 
worlds in their own right. Some sages believe that 
the moons are actually connected to the planes, 
or that they might even be physical extensions of 
the planes, but this remains a mystery. 

To date, no other planets have been discovered 
within Eberron’s material plane. However, 
the underworld of Khyber contains a host of 
demiplanes: tiny pockets of reality that exist 
within the underworld. As such, venturing below 
the surface of Eberron can lead you to a network 
of caverns and passages... but if you find the 
right passage, it can take you to fantastic and 
deadly worlds inhabited by fiends, aberrations, 
and other children of Khyber. This is one way 
to adapt material from Out of the Abyss and 
Mordenkainen’s Tome of Foes to Eberron. There 
may be realms of demons and devils deep within 
Khyber, long held at bay by the influence of 
Siberys and the Silver Flame. 


THE PLANES OF EBERRON 


The material plane is enfolded by thirteen 
planes of existence. Many of these have aspects 
of both outer and inner planes. All of the planes 
overlap with Eberron in some way, and they 
influence and are influenced by the material 
plane. This influence waxes and wanes; scholars 
often depict the planes as orbiting Eberron, 
though this purely a metaphor for their shifting 


CHAPTER 2 | EBERRON: ABOVE AND BEYOND 


55 


56 


DAANVI 


SYRANIA 


THE AZURE SKY 


E3 IRIAN 

7 THE 
ETERNAL DAY 
THE PERFECT 


7 “Ox nines 


D 


THE REGION 
OF DREAMS 


DOLURRH 


THE REALM OF 
THE DEAD 


FERNIA 
THE SEA OF FIRE 


aii riai 


influence. When the influence of a plane is 
especially strong it is said to be coterminous. 
When its influence is weak, a plane is remote. 
These states can be important for epic rituals, 
the creation of eldritch machines or interaction 
with extraplanar entities. There are also manifest 
zones: places in the material plane where the 
barriers are thin and where some aspects of a 
plane can bleed through. Ghosts may linger in a 
manifest zone to Dolurrh, while a manifest zone 
tied to Lamannia might have wild vegetation 
and enhance druidic magic. 

Daanvi: The Perfect Order. Daanvi 
embodies the ideas of law and order, civilization 
and discipline. It is filled with perfect cities and 
carefully ordered fields, with immortal courts and 
endless archives holding every law ever imagined. 


CHAPTER 2 | EBERRON: ABOVE AND BEYOND 


LAMANNIA 


THE TWILIGHT: FOREST 


\ MABAR 
t C 0. Nz k: Boy 0 gone r mar 


THELANIS 
THE FAERIE COURT 


RISIA 


THE PLAIN OF ICE 


Dal Quor: The Region of Dreams. With 
a few exceptions (such as elves, kalashtar, and 
warforged), mortal creatures touch Dal Quor 
when they dream. The outer fringes of the plane 
are morphic and shaped by the memories and 
experiences of dreamers. There is a dark core at 
the heart of the plane, shaped by the nightmare 
force known as the Dreaming Dark. For reasons 
unknown to the general populace, Dal Quor is 
always remote and only touched in dreams. 

Dolurrh: The Realm of the Dead. When 
a mortal soul dies, it is drawn to Dolurrh. It is a 
place defined by despair and apathy; over time, 
memories are leached out of the trapped spirits 
until only a husk remains. While this seems bleak, 
most religions maintain that Dolurrh isn’t the 
end; it is a gateway to whatever lies beyond. Such 


a 
XORIAT 
THE REALM OF 
MADNESS 


SHAVARATH 


BATTLEGROUND 


faiths assert that what appears to be dissolution is 
the natural process of the soul moving to a higher 
plane of existence that mortals can never touch: 
joining with the Sovereigns, merging with the 
Silver Flame, or simply rejoining the cycle of life 
in a new form. Nonetheless, Dolurrh is a gloomy 
plane filled with the lingering traces of the dead. 
When Dolurrh is remote it is impossible to 
resurrect the dead. When it’s coterminous ghosts 
become more common. Resurrection spells are 
easier to perform, but carry the risk of bringing 
back unwanted spirits. 

Fernia: The Sea of Fire. This plane 
encompasses both the raw elemental force of fire 
and the zdea of fire: flame used as a weapon, as a 
force that holds darkness at bay, as a destructive 
power and force for change. It is home to all 
manner of fire elementals and also to celestials 
and fiends that embody these ideas. 

Irian: The Eternal Dawn. A plane of light 
and hope, Irian is the source of positive energy in 
Eberron. 

Kythri: The Churning Chaos. The plane 
of chaos and change, Kythri is a morphic realm 
in constant flux. 

Lamannia: The Twilight Forest. While 
it is called a “Forest”, Lamannia embodies 
primordial nature, and contains every possible 
natural environment. It is home to massive 
beasts, lycanthropes, elementals, and other things 
that reflect the power of nature. 

Mabar: The Endless Night. Mabar is the 
darkness that hungers to consume light and life. 
It is the source of negative energy in Eberron, 
and largely serves the same role as the Shadowfell 
in the core cosmology. 

Risia: The Plain of Ice. The counterpart of 
Fernia, Risia embodies water, winter, and all the 
ideas that can be embodied by them. 


Shavarath: The Battleground. This is the 
plane of war, and it is gripped by a conflict that 
will never end. Armies of fiends and celestials 
have fought in Shavarath since the dawn of time, 
asserting that their struggles are reflected in the 
balance of good and evil across all reality. 

Syrania: The Azure Sky. Crystal spires 
float in a perfect blue sky. Farms and calm 
communities stretch across clouds. This is 
the plane of peace and all things that flourish 
in times of peace. This includes commerce; 
the Immeasurable Market of Syrania draws 
merchants and travelers from across reality. 

Thelanis: The Faerie Court. Similar to 
the Feywild of the core cosmology, Thelanis is 
the plane of stories and the home of the fey. It 
is one of the easiest planes to reach, and many 
tales begin with a hero unintentionally crossing 
into Thelanis. 

Xoriat: The Realm of Madness. Xoriat is 
alien, the plane of things that are fundamentally 
unnatural. It challenges ideas of what is possible. 
Some can look upon Xoriat and see it as a place 
of revelations; but most mortals who come to 
close to Xoriat fall prey to madness. Xoriat is 
the source of many aberrations, along with the 
terrifying daelkyr. 


ASTRAL AND ETHEREAL 


The planes of Eberron are bound together in 
their own cosmology. But the astral and ethereal 
planes surround and enfold them, functioning 
exactly as they do in the core cosmology. If 

you wish to facilitate contact between Eberron 
and other settings, passage through the Deep 
Ethereal is the simplest way to accomplish it. The 
potential impact of contact between Eberron and 
other realms is discussed in chapter 1. 


CHAPTER 2 | EBERRON: ABOVE AND BEYOND S7 


CELESTIALS, GODS, AND FIENDS 


Eberron has no parallel to the gods of other 
settings. It’s possible that the Progenitor 
Dragons were such beings, but many assume 
that the Progenitor Dragons are entirely 
metaphorical. As an Eberron DM, you decide 
the truth of this. 

The people of Eberron believe their gods are 
omnipresent—not bound to a single coherent 


form but rather present in all places at all times. 


If you revere the Silver Flame, its power is 
always with you. The Sovereign Onatar guides 
the hand of every smith if they know how to 
listen for his voice, and Dol Arrah and Dol 
Dorn are present on every battlefield, guiding 
every soldier. 

This means religion is driven by faith as 
opposed to the concrete actions of deities. The 
faithful believe that their triumphs reflect the 
hand of the divine. They don’t expect a god to 
physically show up and solve their problems. 

Fiends and celestials certainly exist, however. 
Some have powers rivalling deities in other 
settings. Extraplanar immortals are generally 
invested in the own planes and have little 
interest in Eberron. There are demons and 
archons battling in Shavarath, but they’ve been 
fighting one another since before humanity 
existed and they can’t leave their posts to fool 
around in Eberron. Rare exceptions occur, 
such as the Daelkyr or the Dreaming Dark, but 
extraplanar immortals are mostly concerned 
with their planes. 

As such, player characters are more likely to 
encounter native immortals on Eberron: spirits 
spawned by Khyber or Siberys. 

The Overlords are the most powerful native 
fiends. A few of the best-known Overlords: 


CHAPTER 2 | EBERRON: ABOVE AND BEYOND 


e Bel Shalor, the Shadow in the Flame. 
A spirit of corruption, Bel Shalor is said 
to be bound in the temple-citadel of 
Flamekeep. It whispers to all those who 
follow the Silver Flame, trying to lead them 
astray. 


e Rak Tulkhesh, the Rage of War. The 
embodiment of aggression, Rak Tulkhesh 
feeds of hatred and drives mortals to battle. 


e Sul Khatesh, the Keeper of Secrets. A 
spirit of forbidden knowledge, Sul Khatesh 
possesses a wealth of arcane secrets and 
hidden knowledge... but her secrets 
inevitably lead to tragedy. 


When adapting evil gods or archfiends to 
Eberron, one option is to make them Overlords. 
For example, ‘Tiamat could be an Overlord 
embodying the pride and potential for evil within 
dragons, while Lolth could be an Overlord who 
preys on the elves. 

The rakshasa are the most common native 
fiends. They still scheme in the shadows, seeking 
to free their Overlords. However, any fiend—any 
devil, demon, or other evil immortal—could be 
a spawned by Khyber if it suits your story. Such 
fiends may be bound to an Overlord, or they may 
be independent incarnations of evil unleashed on 
the world. ‘The most powerful fiends are bound 
by the same powers that hold the Overlords at 
bay, and interacting with or summoning such a 
creature requires the use of magic. 

What about native celestials? The primary 
celestials of Eberron are the couatl. However, in 
the dawn of time the vast majority of Eberron’s 
celestials sacrificed themselves to bind the 
overlords. This is why Eberron needs heroes. 
The Silver Flame holds the essence of this power, 
but it takes a mortal champion to wield it. 


CHAPTER 3: RACES OF EBERRON 


The Bazaar in Sharn is flooded with merchants 

and customers. An Aereni elf scowls behind a golden 
deathmask as she argues with a dwarf merchant. 

As a Talenta halfling makes his way through the 
crowd, people scramble to get out of the way of the 
barbanan’s reptilian mount. One creature holds his 
ground—a tall figure formed from steel and leather, 
who glares at the halfling with gleaming crystal eyes. 
This warforged spent twenty years on the battlefield, 
and it has no fear of the halfling warrior. Neither one 
noticed the changeling who stole the halflings purse, 
but she alters her features anyway, taking the form of 
an old man as she moves around the corner. 


BERRON CAN BE HOME TO ANY OF THE 
creatures found across the multiverse 
of DUNGEONS & Dracons. Humans, 
gnomes, elves, and orcs have all 
made their marks on the continent 
of Khorvaire. However, the creatures of Eberron 
can be quite different from their counterparts on 
other worlds. The orcs of Eberron include druids 
and paladins who fight to defend the world from 
demons and aberrations. The Valenar elves are 


fierce warriors, and the Talenta halflings are brave 
nomads who cross the plains on dinosaur mounts. 

This chapter provides an overview of the 

common races and their role in the world. It 
also presents four new races that were originally 
developed for the Eberron campaign setting. 

e Changelings are clever shapeshifters that 
can disguise themselves as members of 
other races. Exceptional spies and rogues, 
they live in the shadows of humanity. 


e Kalashtar are humans bound to spirits 
from the plane of dreams, imbued with 
wisdom and telepathic talent. 


e Shifters draw on their distant lycanthropic 
heritage to manifest bestial traits for short 
periods of time. A diverse race shaped by 
the beasts within them, shifters often prefer 
the wilds to the civilized world. 


e Warforged are artificial lifeforms built to 
fight in the Last War. Created as tools of 
battle, they must now find their place and 
purpose beyond the war. 


59 


60 


CHANGELINGS 


Long ago there was a woman named Fes, and she had one hundred 
children. Her rivals conspired against her and swore to kill her 
children. Jes begged the Sovereigns for help, but their only answer 
was the wind and rain. In the depths of her despair, a lonely 
traveler took her hand. T will protect your children if they follow 
my path. Let them wander the world. They may be shunned 
and feared, but they will never be destroyed.’ Fes agreed, and 
the traveler gave her his cloak. When she draped it over her 
children their old faces melted away and they could be whoever 
they wanted to be. And so it remains. Though the Children are 
shunned by all, the gift of the Traveler protects them still. 


—Chance, changeling priest 


A changeling can shift its face and form with a 
thought. Many changelings use this gift as a form 
of artistic and emotional expression, but it’s an 
invaluable tool for grifters, spies, and others who 
wish to deceive. This leads many people to treat 
known changelings with fear and suspicion. 


HIDDEN PEOPLE 


Wherever humans can be found, there are 
changelings; the question is whether their 
presence is known. 

Changelings are born to one of three paths. 
A few are raised in stable communities where 
changelings are true to their nature and deal 
openly with the people around them. Some are 
orphans, raised by other races, who find their 
way in the world without ever knowing another 
like themselves. Others are part of nomadic 
changeling clans spread across the Five Nations 
who keep their true nature hidden from the 
single-skins. Some clans maintain safe havens in 
major cities and communities, but most prefer to 
wander the unpredictable path of the Traveler. 

In creating a changeling adventurer, consider 
the character’s relationships with people around 
them. Does the character conceal their true 
changeling nature? Do they embrace it? Do they 


have connections to other changelines or are they 


alone and in search of companions? 


CHAPTER 3 | CHANGELINGS 


Masks 
AND PERSONAS 


In their natural form changelings are slender and 
pale, with colorless eyes and silver-white hair. 

A changeling can alter its physical appearance 
with a thought. While this can be used to deceive 
others, it is a natural form of expression for the 
changeling. A changeling shifts shapes the way 
others might change clothes. A casual shape—one 
created on the spur of the moment, with no depth 
or history—is called a mask. A mask can be used 
to express a mood or to serve a specific purpose 
and then never used again. However, many 
changelings develop identities that have more 
depth. They build an identity over time, crafting 
a persona with a history and beliefs. This focused 
identity helps a changeling pinpoint a particular 
skill or emotion. A changeling adventurer might 
have personas for many situations, including 
negotiation, investigation, and combat. Personas 
can be shared by multiple changelings; there 
might be three healers in a community, but 


whoever is on duty will adopt the persona of 
Tek, the kindly old medic. Personas can even 

be passed down through a family, allowing a 
younger changeling to take advantage of contacts 
established by previous users of the persona. 


CHANGELING NAMES 


A changeling might use a different name for 
each mask and persona and adopt new names 
as easily as they develop new faces. The true 
name of a changeling tends to be simple and 
monosyllabic; however, there are often accents 
to a changeling’s name that are expressed 
through shapeshifting, something single-skins 
will likely miss. So, two changelings might have 
the name Jin, but one is Jin-with-vivid-blue-eyes 
and one is Jin-with-golden-cheeks. 

Changelings have a fluid relationship with 
gender, seeing it as one characteristic to change 
among many others. 

Changeling Names: Bin, Cas, Dox, Fie, 
Hars, Jin, Lam, Mas, Nix, Ot, Paik, Ruz, Sim, 
Toox, Vil, Yug. 


CHANGELING TRAITS 


Your changeling character has the following 
traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma 
score increases by 2. In addition, one ability score 
of your choice increases by 1. 

Age. Changelings mature slightly faster than 
humans but share a similar lifespan—typically a 
century or less. While a changeling can transform 
to conceal their age, the effects of aging affect 
them similarly to humans. 

Alignment. Changelings tend toward 
pragmatic neutrality, and few changelings 
embrace evil. 


Size. Your size is Medium. To set your height 
and weight randomly, start with rolling a size 
modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d4 


Height = 5 feet + 1 inch + your size modifier in 

inches 

Weight in pounds = 115 + (2d4 x your size 

modifier) 

Speed. Your base walking speed 1s 30 feet. 

Shapechanger. As an action, you can change 
your appearance and your voice. You determine 
the specifics of the changes, including your 
coloration, hair length, and sex. You can also 
adjust your height and weight, but not so much 
that your size changes. You can make yourself 
appear as a member of another race, though 
none of your game statistics change. You can’t 
duplicate the appearance of a creature you’ve 
never seen, and you must adopt a form that 
has the same basic arrangement of limbs that 
you have. Your clothing and equipment aren’t 
changed by this trait. 

You stay in the new form until you use an 
action to revert to your true form or until you 
die. 

Changeling Instincts. You gain proficiency 
with two of the following skills of your choice: 


Deception, Insight, Intimidation, and Persuasion. 


Languages. You can speak, read, and write 
Common and two other languages of your 
choice. 


CHAPTER 3 | CHANGELINGS 


61 


62 


KALASHTAR 


I am kalashtar, born of two worlds. Over a thousand years ago, my 
ancestor bound her bloodline to the spirit Kashtai, and I am a child 
of that union. Kashtai moves within me. Her memories come to me in 
dreams, and at times her voice whispers in the silence of my mind. As 
long as at least one of my sisters is alive, Kashtai will surowe—and 
as long as she lives, she will fight il-Lashtavar. 


—Lakashtai, servant of the light 


The kalashtar are a compound race created 
from the union of humanity and renegade spirits 
from the plane of dreams—spirits called quori. 
Kalashtar are often seen as wise, spiritual people 
with great compassion for others. But there is 

an unmistakable alien quality to the kalashtar, 
as they are haunted by the conflicts of their 
otherworldly spirits. 


KALASHTAR QUIRKS 


Bounp TO Spirits 1d10 Quirk 


; — 1 You try to understand the motives and 
Every kalashtar has a connection to a spirit of feelings of your enemies. 


light, shared by other members of their bloodline. 2 
Kalashtar appear human, but the spiritual 
connection affects them in a variety of ways. 
Kalashtar have symmetrical, slightly angular 
features. The eyes of a kalashtar often glow when 
it is focused on a task or feeling strong emotions. 
The kalashtar can’t directly communicate 
with their quori spirits. A kalashtar might 
experience this relationship as a sense of instinct 
and inspiration, drawing on the memories of 
the spirit when they dream. ‘This connection 
grants kalashtar minor psionic abilities, as well 
as protection from psychic attacks. All of these 
dream-spirits are virtuous, but some are warriors 


You prefer using telepathy over speaking 
aloud. 


3 You feel a drive to protect the innocent. 

4 You apply dream logic to mundane 
situations. 

5 — You discuss things out loud with your quori 
spirit. 

6 You suppress your emotions and rely on 
logic. 

7 You are strongly influenced by the emotions 
of those around you. 


8 — You prefer to find nonviolent solutions to 
problems whenever possible. 


and others are more contemplative. Work 9 You are driven by a warrior spirit and will 
together with the DM to determine the nature of fight for any noble cause. 
the linked spirit. Typically, a kalashtar knows the 10 You are obsessed with Dreaming Dark 


name and nature of their spirit, but for some— CONSPIKACIES: 


for instance, an orphan kalashtar raised among 
outsiders—may know nothing of their spirit or the HUNTED BY NIGHTMARES 
source of their psychic gifts. 

The bond to the spirit can cause some kalashtar 
to display unusual quirks of behavior. You can 
roll or select a trait from the following table. 


The virtuous spirits tied to the kalashtar fled from 
the dream-realm of Dal Quor to escape evil spirits 
that dominate the realm. The rebel quori believe 
that through meditation and devotion, they can 


CHAPTER 3 | KALASHTAR 


change the fundamental nature of Dal Quor, 
shifting the balance from darkness to light. Most 
kalashtar communities focus on acts of devotion 
known as the Path of Light. But the dark powers 
of Dal Quor have their own plans on Eberron. 
Through the force known as the Dreaming Dark, 
these monsters manipulate the folk of Khorvaire to 
eliminate kalashtar whenever possible. 

Many kalashtar defend themselves from the 
Dreaming Dark by focusing on devotion to the 
Path of Light but some among the kalashtar seek 
out the agents of the Dreaming Dark and oppose 
their plans, or protect the innocent however 
they can. Some kalashtar grow up isolated from 
others, knowing nothing about Dal Quor or the 
Dreaming Dark. Such orphans may use their 
abilities for personal gain or otherwise act against 
the virtuous instincts of their quori spirits; this can 
cause internal conflicts and violent mood swings. 


KALASHTAR NAMES 


A kalashtar name mixes a personal prefix to the 
name of the quori spirit within the kalashtar. Each 
spirit has a gender identity, but this might not 
match the gender identity of the kalashtar host. 
A female kalashtar may have what others would 
consider a masculine name, because she’s tied to a 
spirit with a masculine identity. Kalashtar orphans 
are unlikely to know the name of their spirit and 
take names from another source. 

Male Quori Names: Hareth, Khad, Kosh, 
Melk, Tash, Ulad, Vash 

Female Quori Names: Ashana, Ashtai, 
Ishara, Nari, Tana, Tari, Vakri 

Kalashtar Names: Coratash, Dalavash, 
Dolishara, Halakosh, Khoratari, Koratana, 
Lanhareth, Molavakri, Nevitash, Sorashana, 
‘Torashtai, Valakhad, Vishara 


KALASHTAR TRAITS 


Your kalashtar character has the following traits. 
Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom 
score increases by 2, and your Charisma score 
increases by 1. 
Age. Kalashtar mature and age at the same 
rate as humans. 


Alignment. The noble spirit tied to a 
kalashtar drives it toward lawful and good 
behavior. Most kalashtar combine strong self- 
discipline with compassion for all beings, but 
some kalashtar resist the virtuous influence of 
their spirit. 

Size. Your size is Medium. To set your height 
and weight randomly, start with rolling a size 
modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d6 


Height = 5 feet + 4 inches + your size modifier in 

inches 

Weight in pounds = 110 + (1d6 x your size 

modifier) 

Speed. Your base walking speed 1s 30 feet. 

Dual Mind. You have advantage on all 
Wisdom saving throws. 

Mental Discipline. You have resistance to 
psychic damage. 

Mind Link. You can speak telepathically to 
any creature you can see, provided the creature is 
within a number of feet of you equal to 10 times 
your level. You don’t need to share a language 
with the creature for it to understand your 
telepathic utterances, but the creature must be 
able to understand at least one language. 

When you're using this trait to speak 
telepathically to a creature, you can use your 
action to give that creature the ability to speak 
telepathically with you for | hour or until you 
end this effect as an action. To use this ability, 
the creature must be able to see you and must be 
within this trait’s range. You can give this ability 
to only one creature at a time; giving it toa 
creature takes it away from another creature who 
has it. 

Severed from Dreams. Kalashtar sleep, 
but they don’t connect to the plane of dreams 
as other creatures do. Instead, their minds draw 
from the memories of their otherworldly spirit 
while they sleep. As such, you are immune to 
spells and other magical effects that require you 
to dream, like dream, but not to spells and other 
magical effects that put you to sleep, like sleep. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write 
Common, Quori, and one other language of 
your choice. 


CHAPTER 3 | KALASHTAR 63 


SHIFTERS 


Geth’s ancient heritage rose up from deep within him, spreading out 
from the core of his being. Some shifters manifested terrible claws, 
others masswe fangs, still others astounding speed or heightened 
senses. Geth’s gift from his lycanthrope ancestors was sheer 
toughness. Strength seeped into his bones and flooded his 
flesh. His skin hardened, and his hair became coarse 


like an animal’s tough hide. A sense of invincibility 
spread through him. For the moment at least, he felt 
unstoppable! 


—Don Bassingthwaite, 
The Binding Stone 


Shifters are sometimes called the weretouched, 
as many believe that they are the descendants of 
humans and lycanthropes. ‘They are humanoids 
with a bestial aspect; while they cannot fully 
change shape they can temporarily enhance their 
animalistic features—a state they call shifting. 
Whatever their origins, shifters have evolved into 
a unique race. A shifter walks on the knife’s edge 
between the wilds and the world around them. This beast within is reflected by the shifter’s 
Do they embrace their primal instincts or the subrace. Four subraces are especially common: 


path of civilization? i ts 
e Beasthide often signifies the bear or boar: 


stoic, stubborn and thick-skinned. 


THE BEAST WITHIN e Longtooth shifters typically have lupine 


er ; l traits and prefer to run with a pack. 
Early in childhood, a shifter forms a bond with 


a beast within: a totemic force that shapes their 
body and mind. Some shifters believe that these 
spirits are independent entities, and they may 
speak of Bear or Wolf as ancestors or guides. e Wildhunt shifters are born from any 
Most just see the beast within as a formidable creature that tracks its prey. 
expression of their inner nature, something that 
emerges over time as the shifter’s personality 
takes shape. The beast within is a pool of 
powerful instincts, and its influence is revealed 
by a shifter’s personality: a feline shifter may be 
cool and distant, driven by predatory instincts, 
while a shifter with a lupine spirit is drawn to 
find and protect a pack. When a shifter fully 
embraces this beast within they physically 
transform for a short time. 


e Swiftstride are often predatory and feline, 
but a swiftstride could also be a cunning rat 
who darts through the shadows. 


While the beast within certainly has a physical 
impact on a shifter, it has a spiritual and 
psychological effect. Two beasthide shifters share 
the same special ability, but if one has the aspect 
of the boar and the other is more like a bear, 
they'll be quite different in personality. With any 
shifter, identifying the beast within is a crucial 
part of understanding the character. 


64 CHAPTER 3 | SHIFTERS 


SIMILAR AND DIVERSE 


Shifters are similar to humans in height and build 
but are more naturally lithe and flexible. Their 
facial features have a bestial cast, with large eyes, 
flat noses, and pointed ears; most shifters also 
have prominent canine teeth. They grow fur-like 
hair on nearly every part of their bodies. 

The traits of the beast within affect a shifter’s 
appearance as well. A swiftstride shifter may 
have catlike eyes and delicate build, while a 
beasthide shifter might be a massive brute built 
like a bear. While a shifter’s appearance might 
remind an onlooker of an animal, they remain 
clearly identifiable as shifters even when at their 
most feral. 


THE Journey Yet 10 COME 


Shifters have a strong presence in the Eldeen 
Reaches, and they often live among humans 
and can be found in rural areas across 
Khorvaire. While they form powerful bonds 
to friends and kin, shifters place great value on 
self-reliance and freedom. It’s a shifter proverb 
to “always be prepared for the journey yet to 
come,” and most shifters strive to be ready for 
change or opportunity. 

Shifters have a natural inclination toward 
classes with a primal connection. A shifter 
barbarian draws their rage from the beast within. 
A shifter ranger indulges their urge to wander 
and hunt. A shifter rogue harnesses their own 
predatory instincts. But shifters can pursue any 
path or faith. 


SHIFTER NAMES 


Shifters have no language of their own and 

often live in blended communities. Their names 
typically overlap with the names of other cultures 
in their region. Many shifters prefer to keep 

their personal names for their friends and use 
“wandering names” with strangers. These are 
usually tied to a physical or personality trait. 


Shifter Names: Badger, Bear, Cat, Fang, 
Grace, Grim, Moon, Rain, Red, Scar, Stripe, 
Swift, Talon, Whiskers, Wolf. 


SHIFTER TRAITS 


Your shifter character has the following traits. 

Age. Shifters are quick to mature both 
physically and emotionally, reaching young 
adulthood at age 10. They rarely live to be more 
than 70 years old. 

Alignment. Shifters tend toward neutrality, 
being more focused on survival than concepts of 
good and evil. A love of personal freedom can 
drive shifters toward chaotic alignments. 

Size. Your size is Medium. To set your height 
and weight randomly, start with rolling a size 
modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d8 


Height = 4 feet + 6 inches + your size modifier in 

inches 

Weight in pounds = 90 + (2d4 x your size 

modifier) 

Speed. Your base walking speed 1s 30 feet. 

Darkvision. You have superior vision in dark 
and dim conditions. You can see in dim light 
within 60 feet of you as if it were bright light, 
and in darkness as if it were dim light. You can’t 
discern color in darkness, only shades of gray. 

Shifting. As a bonus action, you can assume 
a more bestial appearance. ‘This transformation 
lasts for 1 minute, until you die, or until you 
revert to your normal appearance as a bonus 
action. When you shift, you gain temporary hit 
points equal to your level + your Constitution 
modifier (minimum of | temporary hit point). 
You also gain additional benefits that depend on 
your shifter subrace, described below. 

Once you shift, you can’t do so again until you 
finish a short or long rest. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write 
Common. 

Subrace. The beast within shapes each 
shifter physically and mentally. The four major 
subraces of shifter include: beasthide, longtooth, 
swiftstride, and wildhunt. Choose a subrace for 
your shifter. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHIFTERS 


65 


66 


BEASTHIDE 


Stoic and solid, a beasthide shifter draws strength 
and stability from the beast within. Beasthide 
shifters are typically tied to the bear or the boar, 
but this subrace could embody any creature 
known for its toughness. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution 
score increases by 2, and your Strength score 
increases by 1. 

Natural Athlete. You have proficiency in the 
Athletics skill. 

Shifting Feature. Whenever you shift, you 
gain 1d6 additional temporary hit points. While 
shifted, you have a +1 bonus to your Armor 
Class. 


LONGTOOTH 


Longtooth shifters are fierce and aggressive, 

but they form deep bonds with their friends. 
Many longtooth shifters have canine traits that 
become more pronounced as they shift, but they 
might instead draw on tigers, hyenas, or other 
predators. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score 
increases by 2, and your Dexterity score increases 
by 1. 

Fierce. You have proficiency in the 
Intimidation skill. 

Shifting Feature. While shifted, you can 
use your elongated fangs to make an unarmed 
strike as a bonus action. If you hit with your 
fangs, you can deal piercing damage equal 
to 1d6 + your Strength modifier, instead 
of the bludgeoning damage normal for an 
unarmed strike. 


SWIFTSTRIDE 


Swiftstride shifters are graceful and quick. 
Typically feline in nature, swiftstride shifters are 
often aloof and difficult to pin down physically or 
socially. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity 
score increases by 2, and your Charisma score 
increases by 1. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHIFTERS 


Graceful. You have proficiency in the 
Acrobatics skill. 

Shifting Feature. While shifted, your walking 
speed increases by 10 feet. Additionally, you can 
move up to 10 feet as a reaction when a creature 
ends its turn within 5 feet of you. This reactive 
movement doesn’t provoke opportunity attacks. 


WILDHUNT 


Wildhunt shifters are sharp and insightful. 
Many are constantly alert, ever wary for possible 
threats. Others focus on their intuition, searching 
within. Wildhunt shifters are excellent hunters, 
and they also tend to become the spiritual leaders 
of shifter communities. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score 
increases by 2, and your Dexterity increases by 1. 

Natural Tracker. You have proficiency in 
the Survival skill. 

Shifting Feature. While shifted, you have 
advantage on Wisdom checks, and no creature 
within 30 feet of you can make an attack roll 


with advantage against you, unless you’re 
incapacitated. 


WARFORGED 


“Pierce was built by design, while you were built by accident,” 
Lakashtai said. “The soul ıs what matters, not the shape of 


the vessel.” 


“What makes you think he has a soul?” Gerrion said. 


“What makes you think you do?” 


—Keith Baker, The Shattered Land 


The warforged were built to fight in the Last 
War. The first warforged were mindless 
automatons, but House Cannith devoted vast 
resources to improving these steel soldiers. 

An unexpected breakthrough produced fully 
sentient soldiers, blending organic and inorganic 
materials. Warforged are made from wood 

and metal, but they can feel pain and emotion. 
Built as weapons, they must now find a purpose 
beyond the war. A warforged can be a steadfast 
ally, a cold-hearted killing machine, or a 
visionary in search of purpose and meaning. 


LIVING STEEL AND STONE 


Warforged are formed from a blend of organic 
and inorganic materials. Root-like cords infused 
with alchemical fluids serve as their muscles, 
wrapped around a framework of steel, darkwood 
or stone. Armored plates form a protective outer 
shell and reinforce joints. All warforged share 
a common facial design, with a hinged jaw and 
crystal eyes embedded beneath a reinforced 
brow ridge. A sigil is engraved into the center of 
the forehead; this is unique to each warforged. 
Beyond these common elements of warforged 
design, the precise materials and build of a 
warforged vary based on the purpose for which it 
was designed. A juggernaut warrior is a massive 
brute with a heavy steel frame, while a skirmisher 
can be crafted from wood and light mithral to 
grant it lithe and elegant movement. 

While they’re formed from stone and steel, 
warforged are living humanoids. Resting, healing 
magic, and the Medicine skill all provide the 


same benefits to 

warforged that they do to other humanoids. A 
warforged can focus its mind on its body as it 
rests, adjusting its shape and form to assume one 
of a few defensive postures. A warforged who 
expects heavy combat might focus on durability, 
while during a time of peace they might be 
content to adopt a lighter, less aggressive form. 


WARFORGED PERSONALITY 


The warforged were built to serve and to fight. 
For most of their existence, warforged had a 
clearly defined function and were encouraged 
to focus purely on that role. The Treaty of 
Thronehold gave them freedom, but many 
warforged struggle both to find a place in the 
post-war world and to relate to the creatures that 
created them. 

The typical warforged shows little emotion. 
Many warforged embrace a concrete purpose— 
protecting allies, completing a contract, or 


CHAPTER 3 | WARFORGED 67 


other pursuits—and devote themselves to this 
task as they once did to war. However, there 
are warforged who delight in exploring their 
feelings and their freedom. Most warforged 
have no interest in religion, but some embrace 


faith and mysticism, seeking higher purpose and 


deeper meaning. 

The typical warforged has a muscular, sexless 
body shape. Some warforged ignore the concept 
of gender entirely, while others adopt a gender 
identity in emulation of creatures around them. 


Quirks 


Whether due to some flaw in their creation or 
simple ignorance of how other creatures operate, 
warforged often acquire an odd personality trait 
or two. A warforged player can choose to roll or 
select a trait from the Warforged Quirks table. 


WARFORGED QUIRKS 
1d10 Quirk 


1 You analyze (out loud) the potential threat 
posed by every creature you meet. 

2 You don’t understand emotions and often 
misread emotional cues. 

3 You are fiercely protective of anyone you 
consider a friend. 

4 You often say the things you are thinking 
aloud without realizing it. 

5 You try to apply wartime tactics and 
discipline to every situation. 

6 You don’t know how to filter your feelings 
and are prone to dramatic emotional 
outbursts. 

7 You don’t understand clothing beyond its 
utility and assume that what a creature 
wears denotes its job and status. 

8 You are obsessed with your appearance, 
and constantly polish and buff your armor. 

9 You are deeply concerned with following 
proper procedures and protocols. 

10 War is the only thing that makes sense to 
you, and you’re always looking for a fight. 


CHAPTER 3 | WARFORGED 


WarForGED NAMES 


Warforged were assigned numerical designations 
for use in military service. Many of them 
adopted nicknames, often given to them by their 
comrades. As free individuals, some have chosen 
new names as a way to express their path in life. 
A few take on human names, often the name of a 
fallen friend or mentor. 

Warforged Names: Anchor, Banner, 
Bastion, Blade, Blue, Bow, Church, Crunch, 
Crystal, Dagger, Dent, Five, Glaive, Hammer, 
Iron, Lucky, Mace, Pants, Pierce, Red, Rusty, 
Scout, Seven, Shield, Slash, Smith, Spike, Stone, 
Temple, Vault, Wall, Wood. 


70 


WARFORGED TRAITS 


Your warforged character has the following 
traits. A few of the traits give you a choice; 
consider how your choice reflects the purpose for 
which your character was built. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution 
score increases by 2, and one other ability score 
of your choice increases by 1. 

Age. A typical warforged is between two 
and thirty years old. The maximum warforged 
lifespan remains a mystery; so far, warforged 
have shown no signs of deterioration due to age. 
You are immune to magical aging effects. 

Alignment. Most warforged take comfort in 
order and discipline, tending toward law and 
neutrality. But some have absorbed the morality, 
or lack thereof, of the beings with which they 
served. 

Size. Your size is Medium. To set your height 
and weight randomly, start with rolling a size 
modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d6 


Height = 5 feet + 10 inches + your size modifier in 
inches 


Weight in pounds = 270 + (4 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed 1s 30 feet. 
Constructed Resilience. You were created 
to have remarkable fortitude, represented by the 
following benefits: 
e You have advantage on saving throws 
against being poisoned, and you have 
resistance to poison damage. 


e You don’t need to eat, drink, or breathe. 
e You are immune to disease. 


e You don’t need to sleep, and magic can’t 
put you to sleep. 


Sentry’s Rest. When you take a long rest, 
you must spend at least six hours in an inactive, 
motionless state, rather than sleeping. In this 
state, you appear inert, but it doesn’t render 
you unconscious, and you can see and hear as 
normal. 


CHAPTER 3 | WARFORGED 


Integrated Protection. Your body has built- 
in defensive layers, which can be enhanced with 
armor: 

e You gain a +1 bonus to Armor Class. 


e You can don only armor with which you 
have proficiency. To don armor, you must 
incorporate it into your body over the 
course of 1 hour, during which you remain 
in contact with the armor. To doff armor, 
you must spend | hour removing it. You 
can rest while donning or doffing armor in 
this way. 


e While you live, your armor can’t be 
removed from your body against your will. 


Specialized Design. You gain one skill 
proficiency and one tool proficiency of your 


choice. 
Languages. You can speak, read, and write 
Common and one other language of your choice. 


DWARVES 


“Gold is the gift of the mountains, but iron comes 
Jrom blood and bone.” 


—Mror Proverb 


The origin of the dwarves is shrouded in mystery. 
Their legends say that they came to Khorvaire 
from a land of endless ice; some believe this to 
mean the arctic Frostfell, while others assert that 
the first dwarves must have come from the plane 
of Risia itself. Wherever they began, the dwarves 
established a mighty nation beneath the surface 
of Khorvaire. Tales speak of mighty artifacts and 
vast treasures crafted in the deeps, and of wars 
fought against the goblin Empire of Dhakaan. 
No one knows where the line lies between truth 
and story. The ancestors of the modern dwarves 
were exiles from this ancient kingdom, and the 
realm below was destroyed by the daelkyr. Bold 
adventurers can delve into the haunted darkness 
of the fallen kingdom... but legends are the only 
legacy modern dwarves have of this age of glory. 


DWARVES OF THE Five Nations 


Dwarves are spread across Khorvaire. Dwarf 
soldiers and engineers were part of the armies 
that united the Five Nations, and dwarf masons 
laid the foundations of the greatest cities of 
Galifar. While many of the dwarves of the Five 
Nations still speak the language of their ancestors, 
they feel a bond to the lands of their birth. A 
Brelish dwarf feels a deep, personal connection to 
the towers of Sharn or the great walls of Wroat; 
the typical dwarf is actually more patriotic than 
the average human of the Five Nations. ‘This 
passion caused most dwarves to serve their nation 
in the Last War, at least for a time; this is the 
general basis of dwarven weapon training. Most 
dwarves also have a strong bond to their families, 
so to a dwarf, family and nation are two edges of 
the same blade. 


As a dwarf of the Five Nations, consider how 
widespread your family is and where their roots 
lie. Are they soldiers? Priests or politicians? 
Architects or stonemasons? Are you close to 
your relatives or have you had a falling out— 
or potentially lost your kin in the Last War? 
Likewise, consider what you did in the war and 
how that reflects on your current actions. Were 
you a soldier, and if so, how did that service end? 
If not, did you serve your nation in another way, 
or did you turn your back on it? 


DWARVES OF THE Mror HoLDS 


The Mror Holds are discussed in chapter 2. 
One question to consider is why _you’ve left the 
Holds. Whether you’re an heir of a noble clan 

or a simple guild artisan, what has drawn you 
away from your homeland? The Mror Past table 
provides a few ideas. 


DWARVES AND DRAGONMARKS 


House Kundarak carries the Mark of Warding. 
In addition to providing all manner of security, 
House Kundarak dominates the banking industry. 


MROR PAST 
1d6 Reason for Leaving 


1A feud with a rival clan has gotten out of 
hand, and it’s best that you leave the Holds 
for a few decades. 


2 You're ina large family and there’s no room 
for you to shine in your hold; you hope to 
prove yourself in the wider world. 


3 Your clan has arranged your marriage and 
your future; you’ve decided to have a few 
adventures before you settle down. 


4  Yov’re pursuing a vendetta with a personal 
rival. Are you seeking to defeat them in 
battle or in business? 

5 You’re searching for a legendary dwarven 
artifact, removed from the Mror Holds 
centuries ago by a Karrnathi noble. 

6 You want to assemble a band of champions 
who can help you explore the ancient ruins 
beneath your ancestral home. 


CHAPTER 3 | DWARVES 71 


72 


ELVES 


Caerys held her double blade in the falcon guard, level 
with her shoulders and spreading out like wings. “T 
came in search of legends. Ten thousand years ago 
Daealyth of Taeri stood this ground and faced your 
ancestors, and twenty fell before his singing blades. 
You are no Dhakaant of old, and a mere twenty of you 
will bring no honor to the Taert.” 


The warlord hissed in fury, and his flail flashed in the 
firelight. The chain wrapped around Caerys’ blade but 
she twisted away. The flail flew into the darkness. She 
spun forward, her double blade weaving a circle of fire 
as she danced toward the chieftain. In a moment the 
song of steel was over. 


Caerys watched as the warlord fell to the ground. 
With a contemptuous snap of her wrist, she flicked 
the blood from her blade into the eyes of the stunned 
onlookers. She smiled behind her spirit veil, counting 
the blades arrayed against her. 


“But forty will.” 


Elven culture began on the distant continent of 
Xen’drik. Tens of thousands of years ago, the 
elves rose up against the giants who ruled that 
land. Ultimately, the elves fled from Xen’drik and 
settled the island nation of Aerenal. There they 
split into two distinct cultures: the introspective 
Aereni and the warlike Tairnadal. While 
neither of these cultures have much interest in 
human activities, a small number of elves have 
immigrated to Khorvaire over the years and have 
integrated with the cultures of the Five Nations. 
As a whole, elves are driven by tradition 
and respect for the past. Where humans value 
innovation, elves strive to perfect the techniques 
of their ancestors. With centuries to devote to 
their studies, the elves are masters of their chosen 
crafts; at the same time, their society has changed 
very little over the last five thousand years, while 
Khorvaire is constantly evolving. As an elf, 
consider your relationship with the past. Do you 
value the traditions of your ancestors? Or do you 
fear that your people are too mired in the past, 
and need to find a way forward? 


CHAPTER 3 | ELVES 


ELVES OF AERENAL 


Aerenal is ruled by the Undying Court, a council 
of undead elves sustained by positive energy. 
The Undying Court wields godlike power and 
has protected your island home for thousands of 
years. The greatest heroes of your people join the 
Undying Court after death; if you achieve great 
things in your life, you too could achieve this 
immortality. 

The Aereni are isolationists who have little 
interest in the world beyond their island. The 
Five Nations are a place of chaos and war. With 
this in mind, what has caused you to leave your 
island and wander the world? Are you in search 
of a power that could earn you your place in the 
Undying Court? Have you been given a quest by 
one of your own deathless ancestors? Or are you 
an exile, banished from your homeland for some 
crime against the Undying Court? 

As one of the Aereni, think about your history. 
What is your family known for, and how can you 
prove yourself to be a master of these skills? Do 
you have ancestors in the Undying Court, and if 
so, what’s your relationship with them? Do you 
find dealing with the short-lived races to be a 
challenge, or are you patient with them? 


ELF VARIANTS 


The Valenar and Aereni are physically similar 
but culturally distinct. Aereni are typically 
high elves, while Valenar are usually wood 
elves; but both of these subraces are options 
in these cultures. The Aereni place greater 
importance on perfecting a single skill than 
on training with weaponry, while the Valenar 
take pride in their skill with scimitars. These 
elves have a racial trait in place of the Elf 
Weapon Training trait. If your DM allows 

it, your elf character can forgo Elf Weapon 
Training and instead take the elf trait based 
on their culture: 

* An Aereni elf can choose one skill or 
tool proficiency. Your proficiency bonus 
is doubled for any ability check you 
make that uses this chosen proficiency. 

* A Valenar elf gains proficiency with the 
scimitar, double scimitar, longbow, and 
shortbow. 


ELVES OF VALENAR 


Your people are dedicated to the arts of war. 
Millenia ago, your ancestors fought an epic 
war against mighty giants. When they came to 
Khorvaire, they battled the champions of the 
goblin empire. The greatest heroes of those 
struggles live on after death, known as the patron 
ancestors. When you became an adult, one of the 
patron ancestors formed a bond with you. Now 
it is your duty to follow in the footsteps of your 
patron, living your life as they lived theirs, allowing 
this champion to live on through you. This is why 
your people constantly seek out conflict; you need 
to find challenges worthy ofa hero. 

In creating a Valenar, think about your patron 
ancestor. Your class should reflect their class; 
if you’re a wizard, your ancestor was likely a 
legendary archmage. If you’re a ranger, was 
your ancestor a famous blademaster, or a 
stealthy hunter? Was your ancestor chivalrous 
or merciless? Bold or clever? Whatever their 
nature, it’s your duty to follow their example. 
Is this something you proudly embrace, or do 
you resist it? Each patron ancestor is tied to 
many Valenar: do you have a particular rival 


who channels the same ancestor, or one who 
channels a rival of your ancestor? 

It’s also important to think about why you 
are traveling with a group of player characters 
instead of serving in a Valenar warband. Are 


you driven by visions from your patron ancestor? 
Are you pursuing an epic quest that mirrors their 
legendary deeds? Do you seek vengeance for the 
death of a friend or ally? Or have you turned 
away from your people, either by choice or 
because of the actions of a rival? 


VALENAR DOUBLE SCIMITAR 


The double scimitar is the signature weapon of 
Valenar elves. A haft of fine wood supports a 
long blade on either end. Forged with techniques 
honed over tens of thousands of years, these 
blades are strong, sharp, and remarkably light. 
Each scimitar is a masterpiece, and as a result 
the double scimitar is an expensive weapon, but 
few people ever have an opportunity to purchase 
one. If youre an elf, your blade could have a 
long and storied history. If you’re not an elf, you 
might have stolen the weapon from a fallen foe 
or received it from a dying Valenar ally. If you 
work with your DM to create the story behind 


CHAPTER 3 | ELVES 


73 


74 


DOUBLE-BLADED SCIMITAR: MARTIAL MELEE WEAPON 


Cost 
100 gp 


Weapon Name 
Double-bladed Scimitar 


Damage 


your double scimitar, you can start with the 
weapon at 1st level in place of a martial weapon 
normally granted by your class. However, it can 
be dangerous for a non-elf to carry a double 
scimitar. Valenar may demand its return or 
challenge you to prove that you’re worthy to 
wield it. 

Special. If you attack with a double-bladed 
scimitar as part of the Attack action on your turn, 
you can use a bonus action immediately after to 
make a melee attack with it. This attack deals 
1d4 slashing damage on a hit, instead of 2d4. 


Feat: REVENANT BLADE 

Prerequisite: Elf 

You are descended from a master of the double- 
bladed scimitar, and some of that mastery has 
passed on to you. You gain the following benefits: 


e Increase your Dexterity or Strength score 
by 1, to a maximum of 20. 


e While you are holding a double-bladed 
scimitar with two hands, you gain a +1 
bonus to Armor Class. 


e A double-bladed scimitar has the finesse 
property when you wield it. 


ELVES OF KHORVAIRE 


Throughout history, elves have occasionally 
immigrated to Khorvaire—some by choice, 

some through exile. Many of the finest wizards 

in the Five Nations are high elves, along with 
renowned artisans. Wood elves are found among 
the rangers and druids of the Eldeen Reaches, 
though you could just as easily be a wood elf who 
hunts in the darkest alleys of Sharn. Subrace is a 
matter of aptitude as opposed to genetics, and the 


CHAPTER 3 | ELVES 


2d4 slashing 


Weight 
6 Ibs 


Properties 
Special, two-handed 


people of Khorvaire will see you only as an elf. 
As an elf in Khorvaire, you have grown up 
among short-lived races. You may not be as 
concerned with history and tradition as the 
Aereni and Valenar; you could even live your 
life entirely in the moment, with no care for your 


family or your legacy. Nonetheless, you may 
have outlived many human friends; how does 
that affect you? Did you know the parents or 
grandparents of another member of the party... 
and if so, might you be trying to repay a debt to 
that long-dead friend? Do you remember a time 
before the Last War? Did you fight in the war, 
and if so, for which side? 


THE Drow oF EBERRON 


During the ancient war between giants of 
Xen’drik and their elf slaves, the magebreeders 
of the giants bound the essence of shadows into 
the loyal elves. ‘These were the first drow, assassin 
bred to fight prey on their sunlit kin. The drow 
were made to kill elves, and while thousands 

of years have passed, a deep enmity remains 
between them. 

The drow remained on Xen’drik and were 
caught in the collapse of its civilizations. ‘Today 
they linger in the shadows of Xen’drik and 
are all but unknown on Khorvaire. There are 
three distinct drow cultures. The Vulkoori 
are tribal hunters who worship totem spirits, 
especially the scorpion Vulkoor. ‘They hunt 
giants and may threaten anyone who travels in 
the shattered land. The Sulatar live in obsidian 
cities and wield powerful fire magic; they seek 
to one day unleash fire across the world. And 
the Umbragen live in the underworld below 
Xen’drik, wielding sophisticated shadow magics 
as they battle against aberrations and the daelkyr. 

Most of the people of Khorvaire have never 
seen a drow, and you likely know little about the 
Five Nations. As a drow PC, are you a Vulkoori 
hunter who somehow made your way to 
Khorvaire—a primitive warrior finding your way 
in this strange new world? Are you an Umbragen 
shadow-wielder seeking powers that can help 
your people in their endless war? Or a Sulatar 
fire-binder pursuing a personal path to glory? 

Do you despise elves you encounter and seek out 
conflict, or are you willing to forget the ancient 
war between your people? 


CORELLON AND LOLTH 


The elves of Eberron weren't created by the 
gods you may know from other settings. In 
Eberron, the Sulat Giants created the drow 
as a weapon to fight the rebellious elves: 
there is a lingering enmity between drow 
and elf, but it’s not driven by the influence 
of Lolth. Meanwhile, the elves revere their 
ancestors—many of whom still linger and 
guide them—as opposed to distant gods. 

This is an opportunity to explore these 
traditional races in a new light. However, if 
you want to incorporate Corellon and Lolth, 
there’s a few ways to do it. One possibility 
is that Eberron was created as a copy of 
the distant realms of the multiverse, hidden 
away to prevent the gods from influencing 
it. AS such, while the drow of Eberron have 
no knowledge of Lolth, if she found her way 
through the Ring of Siberys and into Eberron, 
she might be able to poison their hearts and 
turn them to her service. 

Alternately, you could present both 
Corellon and Lolth as legendary champions 
from the past. Corellon could be one of the 
great heroes and patron ancestors of the 
Valenar, or one of the leaders of the Undying 
Court; while Lolth could be the legendary first 
commander of the drow, whose spirit lingers 
and hungers for revenge. 

Ultimately, it’s a question of the story you 
want to tell. Do you want to preserve the 
unique cultures of Eberron? Incorporate 
Corellon and Lolth into those cultures 
organically? Or explore the idea of these 
powers just discovering Eberron and 
awakening hidden memories in the blood of 
elf and drow? 


ELVES AND DRAGONMARKS 


The elven houses of Phiarlan and Thuranni carry 
the Mark of Shadow. They control the business 
of espionage throughout Khorvaire, but they 

also operate more legitimate businesses related to 
art and entertainment. Once they were a single 
house, but they split during the Last War; now 
they are ruthless competitors in both espionage 
and entertainment. 


CHAPTER 3 | ELVES 


75 


76 


GNOMES 


“Five words can defeat a thousand swords.” 


— Zil proverb 


Gnomes possess a love of knowledge that many 
would describe as lust. Most gnomes hate physical 
violence and prefer to solve their problems with 
words—whether that’s a wizard’s word of power 
or a rogue’s careful threat. The common view 

of the gnome is that of a friendly busybody, 
always ready to lend a hand or share a story. But 
in fact, that cheerful gnome is often gathering 
information that could one day be useful. 


GNOMES OF ZILARGO 


It would be an exaggeration to say that every Zil 
gnome is a ruthless schemer. But intrigue is the 
favorite pastime of the Zil. As a Zil gnome, you’ve 
been taught to manipulate and deceive since 
childhood. You’ve been involved in dozens of 
schemes and feuds, and you’re likely still tied up 


in a few of them (consult the Zil Schemes table). 
Even if you have a good heart and noble goals, 

you may still prefer to use trickery and cunning 
instead of relying on honesty or brute force. 

Zil gnomes typically use the forest gnome 
subrace. The natural illusionist trait is a part of 
daily life in Zilargo, used both for entertainment 
and for trickery. The Thurimbar rod is a common 
magic item that amplifies this natural gift for 
purposes of creating music. The power to speak 
with small beasts is likewise something often 
put to practical use, and the Zil often use small 
animals as messengers or guides. While Zil 
gnomes don’t automatically have proficiency 
with Deception or Persuasion, these skills are 
common in Zil society; you could take the 
charlatan or criminal background as a way of 
reflecting your Zil upbringing. 

As a player character, one question 1s why 
you ve left Zilargo and what ties you still have 
to it. You could be a sage gathering information 
for the Library of Korranberg, or an investigator 
sending stories of your adventures back to the 
Korranberg Chronicle. Family is very important 
to the Zil, and you could be pursuing the interests 


ZIL SCHEMES 
1d10 Scheme 
1 Your family is working on a new form of elemental binding, but they need Khyber dragonshards— 
lots of them. 
2 You have a mysterious contact who sends you missions via sending; when you follow their 


instructions, you invariably receive a reward. 


3 You’ve acquired a plot of land in Xen’drik. You’ve never been there, and if you don’t visit it within a 


year, you'll lose the claim. 


4 Due to an unusual twist of Triumvirate law, you share the same name with a number of other Zil and 
you’re all legally considered to be the same person. 


You’ve acquired a spellshard that contains a vast amount of text in a seemingly unbreakable code. 


You know the location of a wanted war criminal. Will you turn them in, or try to get something in 


exchange for your silence? 


You’ve been selling false treasure maps. But now you’ve found one that might be real. 


You’ve acquired a controlling stake in a distant dragonshard mine, but the mine was abandoned 
centuries ago due to “problems.” Kobolds? Aberrations? There’s only one way to find out. 


g Your family is facing financial ruin and they’ve taken out a lucrative life insurance policy on you. It 
only pays out if you die under unusual circumstances, and they’re encouraging you to seek out ever 


more dangerous adventures. 


10 You’re peddling a life extension scheme where clients are petrified by a medusa and then restored 


after a predetermined amount of time. 


CHAPTER 3 | GNOMES 


of your family... or seeking to interfere with 

the plans of a rival family. You could even be 
working for the mysterious Trust, the conspiracy 
that maintains order in Zilargo. If you are 
working for the Trust, you could have a specific 
mission, but you could also be a sleeper agent— 
gathering information and allies and waiting for 
the day when your skills will be put to use. 


Zit NAMES 


Zil society is divided into major houses, each of 
which is composed of multiple families. Each 
gnome has three names: their personal name, 
their family name, and their house name. For 
example, Alina Lorridan Lyrris and Tallian 
Talius Lyrris are members of different families 
within House Lyrris. Gnomish names are long 
and lyrical; a Zil proverb claims “the sweetest 
song is the name of a friend.” Personal and clan 
names average three syllables in length, and there 
is a strong tradition of alliteration. 

Male Names: Alian, Castar, Dorius, Elymar, 
Haliar, Hasal, Illian, Jassian, Lassius, Sanadal, 
Tallian, ‘Torius 

Female Names: Alina, Cassia, Dalia, Jandia, 
Lysse, Myssia, Ranadala, Saralyssa, ‘Talina, 
‘Tandria, Tassi, Vassilia 

Family Names: Alyre, Alysse, Canatar, 

Del, Dorian, Hal, Josilyn, Kan, Lin, Lorridan, 
Lyrriman, Sil, Suvius, Syrralan, ‘Talius, Til, 
Torralyn 

Clan Names: Adredar, Clebdecher, Dalian, 
Davandi, Harlian, Hebberdesh, Korrian, 
Lonadar, Lyrris, Nezzelech, Santiar, ‘Tarliach 


GNOMES OF THE Five Nations 


Gnomes are found across the Five Nations, and 
most are well-integrated into the local cultures. 
Gnomes are often encountered as merchants, 
magewrights, chroniclers, scholars, and 
scoundrels. While the gnomes of the Five Nations 
aren't as inherently devious as their Zil cousins, 
family is usually important to them. You may 
have a network of old favors and connections to 
the community you grew up in. But you might 


also have chosen to find your own path in life, 
avoiding the intrigues your cousins adore. 


GNOMES AND DRAGONMARKS 


The gnomes of House Sivis carry the Mark 
of Scribing. Members of the house are scribes 
and notaries, but they also maintain the 
sending stones that facilitate long-distance 
communication in Khorvaire. 


HALF-ELVEs 


‘Lm not ‘half anything. You humans come from 
Sarlona. The elves are from Aerenal. Me? Pm a true 


child of Khorvare.” 


—Nandon Tam, Khoravar activist 


Half-elves are spread across Khorvaire, from 
the ‘Towering Woods of the Eldeen Reaches 

to the slums of Sharn. New half-elves are born 
in every generation as a result of pairings 
between humans, elves, and half-elves, and these 
newborns typically cling to the cultures of their 
parents. However, over the course of centuries 
half-elves have developed their own communities 
and traditions; this sense of identity has been 
strengthened by the rise of House Lyrandar and 
House Medani. 

In making a half-elf character, think about 
whether you were born into a Khoravar 
community, or if you were born to parents of 
different races. Is your half-elf identity a source 
of pride, or something that has been difficult for 
you? The elves of Aerenal have never allowed a 
half-elf into the Undying Court, and the Valenar 
elves don’t consider half-elves to be capable of 
channeling a Valenar ancestral spirit. 


THE KHORAVAR 


When two half-elves conceive, the child is always 
a half-elf. Over the course of generations, families 
and communities of half-elves have developed 
their own cultural identity. Members of these 


CHAPTER 3 | HALF-ELVES 


77 


78 


families generally dislike the term “half-elf;” 
they call themselves Khoravar, an Elven term 
meaning “children of Khorvaire.” 

Khoravar culture places a strong emphasis on 
generosity and hospitality toward other Khoravar. 
You aren’t expected to put yourself in danger for 
a stranger, but when possible, half-elves do what 
they can to help other Khoravar and to share 
information. Khoravar communities have weekly 
unity dinners where local news and events are 
shared; if you’re playing a half-elf, a unity dinner 
is a good opportunity for you to hear about local 
events and rumors. Of course, this is a double- 
edged sword; should you gain a reputation as 
a capable adventurer, Khoravar in need may 
approach you and ask for your assistance. 

Khoravar speak both Common and Elven, 
and among themselves they often blend these 
two together. This pidgin makes perfect sense to 
anyone who speaks both languages, but someone 
who only speaks one of the two languages could 
have to make an Intelligence check (DC 10) to 
understand the full meaning of a statement. 

While some Khoravar prefer to follow their 
own paths, many espouse the idea of “the bridge 
between:” encouraging Khoravar to facilitate 
communication and cooperation between 
members of different cultures or species. Such 
Khoravar often become mediators, diplomats, 
translators, or bards. Others are fascinated by 
their distant connection to the Fey, becoming 
Greensinger druids or warlocks bargaining with 
Archfey. As a Khoravar, do any of these paths 
appeal to you? 


HaLF-ELVES AND DRAGONMARKS 


Half-elves families carry two dragonmarks. 
House Medani holds the Mark of Detection, 
and offers services related to investigation, 
threat assessment, and security. House Lyrandar 
carries the Mark of Storms. Lyrandar has long 
dominated the shipping industry, and the recent 
development of the airship has increased its 
power and potential. House Lyrandar presents 
itself as a pillar for the Khoravar, and even if you 
don’t have a dragonmark you could work for the 
house, whether as a sailor or a house agent. 


CHAPTER 3 | HALF-ORCS 


Hatr-Orcs 


“We're hunters in a world of sheep.” 


—Kalaash’arrna, 
Tharashk Inquisitive 


Half-orcs can be found anywhere orcs and 
humans meet. The Ghaash’kala orcs of the 
Demon Wastes are devout servants of the Silver 
Flame who devote their lives to containing 

the evils of the Wastes; as a half-orc paladin, 
you might have been sent south on a divine 
mission, hoping your human blood will help 
you deal with these soft creatures. You could 
be the orphan child of an unusual pairing, 
forced to find your own way in the world. But 
the greatest concentration of half-orcs is in the 
Shadow Marches, where humans and orcs have 
coexisted for centuries. With the rise of the 
dragonmarked House Tharashk, orcs and half- 
orcs have spread out through the Five Nations 
and beyond. 

Overall, the people of the Five Nations know 
little about half-orcs. The archetype of the 
Tharashk half-orc is that of a bounty hunter 
or inquisitive, though there’s also a touch of 
“simpleton from the swamps.” People may be 
uneasy around you or assume that you know little 
about the ways of civilization. With that said, 
while orcs are typically seen as primitives who 
live on the fringes of civilization, in Eberron orcs 
aren't inherently EVIL. People may be afraid 
of you because they think you’re a dangerous 
bounty hunter, but there’s no immediate 
assumption that you’re cruel or bloodthirsty... 
Most of the time. 


Hatr-Orcs oF THE SHADOW MARCHES 


Where the people of the Five Nations know 

little of your kind, in the swamps of the Shadow 
Marches half-orcs are celebrated. Human 
refugees settled in the Shadow Marches centuries 
ago, and the first half-orcs helped to cement the 
bond between these outsiders and the native orcs. 
Many Marchers feel that the half-orc carries the 


best traits of both races, with the strength of the 
orc and the cunning of the human. 

The rise of House Tharashk has brought 
prosperity to the Marches. Many of the Marcher 
clans work for the house in some capacity, and 
you could be an agent of the house even if you 
don’t carry the Mark of Finding, working as a 
bounty hunter or a clever investigator. But there 
are other paths you could follow. 


e The Gatekeeper druids of the Shadow 
Marches have defended Eberron from 
aberrations and the daelkyr for thousands 
of years. As a druid, ranger, or barbarian, 
you could be a Gatekeeper initiate pursuing 
a quest in the wider world. 


e The Cults of the Dragon Below also have 
deep roots in Shadow Marches. While 
cultists are often evil, the main thing about 
the Cults is that their beliefs generally seem 
like madness to others. You could be a half- 
orc barbarian who’s ventured beyond the 
Marches so you can find worthy enemies; 
slaying powerful foes is the only way to earn 
your passage to the paradise that lies within 
the heart of the hollow world. This is also a 
logical path for a warlock using the Great 
Old One pact. 


e You could be a simple hunter from the 
Shadow Marches. You might have fought 
as a mercenary in the Last War, or you 
could be seeking your fortune or a real 
challenge in the world that lies beyond. 


Hatr-Orcs AND DRAGONMARKS 


The half-orcs of House ‘Tharashk carry the Mark 
of Finding. House Tharashk licenses bounty 
hunters, inquisitives, and prospectors; if you want 
something found, turn to Tharashk. 


HALFLINGS 


“Zombies? Minotaurs? Those things don’t scare me at 
all. But a howling halfling warrior charging you on a 
clawfoot raptor? Most terrifying thing [ve ever seen.” 


—Sir Danton ir’Lain, 
Brelish knight 


The halflings of Eberron began in the east of 
Khorvaire, and nomadic tribes still wander 

the Talenta Plains. However, many halflings 
followed their dragonmarked houses into the 
lands to the west, and they’ve been a part of the 
Five Nations since before the rise of Galifar. 

In Eberron, halfling subraces represent 
personal aptitude as opposed to genetics. Most 
halflings are lightfoot, especially in the Talenta 
Plains, but stout halflings can be found in any 
community. Ghostwise halflings are extremely 
rare; in the Talenta Plains they are considered 
to be touched by the spirits and often become 
respected druids, while in the Five Nations they 
are generally seen as oddities. 


HALFLINGS AND DRAGONMARKS 


Halflings carry two dragonmarks. House Jorasco 
carries the Mark of Healing and dominates the 
business of medicine. House Ghallanda holds the 
Mark of Hospitality and runs inns, hostels, and 
taverns across Khorvaire. 


HALFLINGS OF THE Five Nations 


Halflings can be found in every city in Khorvaire. 
Quick and charming, halflings are often found as 
merchants, politicians, barristers, and bards. Of 
course, these same talents are useful for grifters 
and other criminals. 

Most notably, the halflings of the Boromar 
Clan are the most powerful criminal 
organization in Breland. They are based in 
Sharn, but their influence can be felt across the 
nation and even in the distant city of Stormreach. 
If you decide to play a halfling rogue—or 


CHAPTER 3 | HALFLINGS 79 


80 


any character with a criminal or charlatan 


background—you should decide if you have a 
connection to the Boromar Clan, and discuss 


this with your DM. You could be a freelance T ALENTA H ALFLINGS 


operative who occasionally gets jobs from a 


Boromar underboss. You could have a cousin in The Talenta Plains and its people are described 
the Boromar Clan, who occasionally pulls you in chapter 2. As a Talenta halfling, a critical 
into their problems. Or you could even be the question is why youve left the Plains. Perhaps 
reluctant heir of a powerful Boromar leader; you served as a mercenary scout in the Last 
you’ve gone on the run rather than taking your War and you’ve remained with the comrades 
place in this criminal empire, but someday your you met in the conflict. Maybe your tribe was 
past may catch up with you. wiped out by a foreign enemy—the Aurum, the 


TALENTA HALFLING QUIRKS 


1d10 
il 


mn AeA WN 


10 


Quirk 

You are constantly amazed by things the people of the Five Nations take for granted. 

You pattern your behavior on a particular species of dinosaur. 

You are extremely curious, and you’re always searching for new experiences. 

You love to boast, and you’re always telling exaggerated stories of your amazing adventures. 


You wear a mask that you believe holds the spirit of your former mount, and you talk to it when 
you are troubled. 


You don’t understand the concept of “truth.” To you, everything is a story and it’s all about how 
you tell it. 


You are annoyed by buildings and tools designed without consideration for small creatures. 
You seek vengeance for a wrong done to your tribe or family. 
You never forget an insult or injury. 


You see the hand of the spirits in everything that occurs around you. 


CHAPTER 3 | HALFLINGS 


Emerald Claw—and you are traveling the wider 
world in search of information and revenge. 
Perhaps you’re guided by the spirits, who send 
you whispers and visions driving you on your 
adventures. You could be an official envoy of 
your tribe seeking allies in the world, or simply 
sent to learn more about the lands beyond the 
plains. Are you amazed by the wonders of the 
Five Nations and their everyday magic, or do 
you take the world of the big folk in stride? The 
Talentan Halfling Quirks table provides ways to 
reflect your outsider perspective. 

Dinosaurs play an important role in Talentan 
culture. How does this affect you? Do you have a 
clawfoot companion? As a druid you can assume 
dinosaur forms; as a monk you could use fighting 
styles based on different dinosaurs. Likewise, 
in playing a Beast ‘Totem barbarian or Circle 
of the Shepherd druid, consider replacing the 
traditional totems with the following. 

Bear: Hammertail (ankylosaurus) 

Eagle: Glidewing (pteranodon) 

Wolf: Clawfoot raptor 


CLAWFOOT RAPTOR 
Medium Beast, Unaligned 


Armor Class: 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points: 16 (3d8+3) 
Speed: 50 ft 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 


17 (+3) 17(+3) 13 (+1) 2(-4) 12 (+1) 10 (+0) 


Skills Athletics +5, Perception +5, Stealth +5 
Senses passive Perception 15 

Languages — 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 

Pounce. If the clawfoot moves at least 30 feet 
straight toward a creature and then hits it with 
a claw attack on the same turn, that target must 
succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or 

be knocked prone. If the target is prone, the 


clawfoot can make one bite attack against it as a 
bonus action. 


ACTIONS 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 
ft., one target. Hit: 10 (2d6+3) slashing damage 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 8 (2d4+3) piercing damage 


o Wi fl? [fy } 
A Y 


’ 


CHAPTER 3 | HALFLINGS 


81 


82 


HUMANS 


“The dwarf is stoic. The elf is wise. The gnome is 
cunning. And humans? They can’t make up their 
mind, so they try to be all of these things at once.” 


—Kessler, Sharn bard 


Humans have dominated Khorvaire for 
thousands of years. ‘They founded the Five 
Nations and make up the majority of the 
population in these countries. Despite their 
relatively short lifespan—or perhaps because 
of it—humans are innovative, adaptable, and 
aggressive, always pushing their limits and 
pursuing new ideas. 

Humans are extremely diverse; a barbarian 
from the Demon Wastes has little in common 
with a Brelish rogue. When you're creating a 
human character, consider where you’re from 

and how that’s reflected in your class 
and background. Chapter 2 presents an 
overview of the nations of Khorvaire and 
ideas for characters tied to those nations. 
However, these are ideas— 
not restrictions. 


CHAPTER 3 | HUMANS 


Aundair is a logical origin for a wizard, but your 
wizard could be a down-and-out arcanist from 
the alleys of Sharn or a Lhazaar pirate with a 
knack for the mystic arts. 

The variant human presented in the Player’s 
Handbook provides an additional opportunity to 
capture some of the flavor of Eberron. Does your 
choice of skill proficiency and feat reflect the 
culture you were raised in? 


HUMANS AND DRAGONMARKS 


Humans possess a wide range of Dragonmarks, 
and their houses are spread across Khorvaire. 
House Cannith is one of the most powerful 
houses, creating both magic and mundane 
items with the Mark of Making. House Orien 
maintains the Lightning Rail and trade 
caravans that run across the continent. House 
Deneith brokers the services of bodyguards 
and mercenaries. House Vadalis uses the Mark 
of Handling to breed fine mounts and other 
creatures. House Tharashk produces bounty 
hunters, prospectors, and 
inquisitives. 


OTHER RACES 


The races described so far are those commonly 
found in the Five Nations. However, there are 
many other creatures in the world. Here’s a 
brief overview of some of these other races and 
what you might do with them. It’s always up 

to the DM to decide if an unusual race is an 
option for player character; there’s a place for 
dragonborn in Eberron, but if a DM doesn’t 
want to use them in a campaign, they remain 
hidden and unknown. 


AASIMAR 


In Eberron, aasimar aren’t a race as such. 
Rather, each aasimar is a unique individual 
touched by a celestial power. An aasimar bound 
to the Silver Flame has a couatl as an angelic 
guide, driving it to protect the innocent from 
supernatural evil. An archon from Shavarath 
could exhort its aasimar to fight tyranny and 
injustice in the name of Dol Arrah, while an 
angel from Syrania might encourage its aasimar 
to seek out knowledge and uphold the law as a 
servant of Aureon. On the other side of things, 
a fallen aasimar could have a bond to a spirit 

of Mabar or a cruel fiend from Shavarath. An 
aasimar could even be an elf channeling the 
power of the Undying Court, though they’d 
possess the standard aasimar traits in place of any 
elf traits. 

The appearance of an aasimar will depend on 
the nature of their angelic guide. An aasimar 
might appear to be a normal human or elf until 
they unleash their celestial gifts. Most people 
have heard stories of aasimars, but have never 
actually met one. 


DRAGONBORN 


Tens of thousands of years ago the dragons of 
Argonnessen established a garrison of dragonborn 
in what is now O’barra. These warriors were 
assigned to protect the region against the influence 
of the Lords of Dust. Over time they drifted away 


from their duties, building an empire in western 
Khorvaire and clashing with the Dhakaani 
goblinoids. This came crashing down when one 
of the ancient Overlords stirred, unleashing 
fiends and corrupting many of the dragonborn 
themselves. ‘Their empire collapsed and the 
dragonborn retreated to the darkness of Q’barra. 
They have remained their ever since, fighting the 
forces of the Poison Dusk and guarding against 
further corruption. 

To date the dragonborn have largely ignored 
the humans of O’barra, and the few humans 
who’ve encountered dragonborn believe they’re 
some exotic type of lizardfolk. If you’re a 
dragonborn PC, what has caused you to emerge 
from O’barra? Are you on a quest to help your 
people or to oppose the Lords of Dust? Are you 
driven by wanderlust or curiosity? Did you serve 
as a mercenary in the Last War? 


GITHYANKI AND GITHZERAI 


The githyanki city of Tu’narath lies in the Astral 
Plane, while the githzerai have established their 
stronghold in the chaos of Kythri. If you wish 

to have traffic between Eberron and the wider 
multiverse, Tuwnarath can lie between Eberron 
and the planes that lie beyond; an incursion by 
the githyanki could be the first sign of contact 
with the outer multiverse. On the other hand, 
it’s just as easy to say that the gith of Eberron are 
tied to the setting and have no traffic with the 
broader multiverse. 

The gith are a race enslaved by the mind 
flayers, who overthrew these cruel masters and 
raised fortresses in the planes. This story holds 
true in Eberron, with one twist. It was the daelkyr 
who invaded the world of the gith. The daelkyr 
created the first mind flayers from gith stock 
and turned these monsters against their own 
people. So it was the mind flayers who destroyed 
the gith—but worse still, the mind flayers are 
themselves a twisted reflection of the gith. 

To date, the githyanki and githzerai have 
played no significant role in the history of 
Eberron, and only the wisest sage would 
recognize one. If you play a gith character, 


CHAPTER 3 | OTHER RACES 83 


84 


consider what brings you to Eberron. Are you a 
githyanki scout gathering information for a future 
incursion... or a rebel who wants to protect the 
world from such a fate? Are you here to hunt 
mind flayers or to oppose the schemes of the 
daelkyr? Or are you just a curious explorer? 


GNOLLS 


In ancient times, the gnolls were servants of the 
fiendish Overlords. Some are savage creatures 
that remain in the thrall of these demons. But 
the largest population of gnolls is the Znir Pact 
of Droaam. ‘Thousands of years ago, these gnolls 
purged themselves of demonic influence and 
swore to never allow any other creature to hold 
dominion over them. The Znir Pact sell their 
services as soldiers and trackers. Most of the 
Pact currently serves the Daughters of Sora Kell 
in Droaam, but some fought in the Last War 

as agents of House ‘Tharashk, and Tharashk 
continues to broker their services. 

As a gnoll, you could be a former mercenary 
who’s chosen to stay with comrades you met 
during your service; as a rule, Znir gnolls are 
deeply loyal to those that they consider to be 
members of their pack. You might be driven 
by curiosity, eager to explore the world beyond 
Droaam. You could be driven by visions of a 
demonic power rising in the Five Nations or 
working on behalf of the Daughters of Sora 
Kell. Or you could be a mercenary still, insisting 
on regular payment for your ongoing services to 
the party. 


GoBLINOIDS 


The goblinoid species—including goblins, 
hobgoblins, and bugbears—were once the 
dominant civilization in Khorvaire. ‘The 
goblinoid Empire of Dhakaan ruled most of 
Khorvaire for thousands of years. It was crippled 
by a long and bitter conflict with the daelkyr and 
their aberrant armies; even though the daelkyr 


CHAPTER 3 | OTHER RACES 


were defeated, the seeds of madness took root in 
the empire and tore it apart. Today, there are 
four primary goblinoid cultures in Khorvaire. 


City GOBLINS 


Goblins are found in most of the major cities 

of the Five Nations. When humans first came 

to Khorvaire, they enslaved many goblins and 
built their cities on the foundations of Dhakaani 
ruins. Galifar ended the practice of slavery, and 
these goblins are technically citizens of the Five 
Nations, but most remain as an impoverished 
underclass found in slums and ghettos. However, 
gifted goblins can be found in all walks of life, 
and goblins served in the armies of the Five 
Nations during the Last War. 


THE GHAAL DAR 


The Ghaal’dar tribes arose from the remnants 

of the Dhakaani Empire. Hobgoblins are the 
leaders of the Ghaal’dar, enforcing their will 

on the goblins and bugbears. The history of the 
Ghaal’dar is filled with strife; when they weren’t 
fighting with Galifar or Zilargo, the tribes usually 
turned on one another. This came to an end with 
the Last War. House Deneith hired Ghaal’dar 
mercenaries, and this gave focus to the divided 
tribes. A brilliant hobgoblin, Haruuc, united the 
Ghaal’dar and under his leadership they seized 
control of what is now Darguun (see chapter 2). 
The aging Lhesh Haruuc remains as the ruler 

of Darguun, and many fear that his death could 
throw the region into chaos. 

Among the Ghaal’dar, you hold your place 
through cunning and strength. As a Ghaal’dar 
goblinoid, you may have been a former 
mercenary now seeking adventure. You could be 
working as an emissary for one of the Ghaal’dar 
tribes, or even Lhesh Haruuc himself. Or you 
could have been driven from your tribe by the 
actions of a rival; perhaps you’re seeking allies to 
reclaim your birthright. 


THE MARGUUL 


The Marguul bugbears threw off the yoke of 
the Ghaal’dar long ago, seizing territory in the 
Seawall Mountains in the south of Darguun. 
They are infamous raiders, and while they have 
brokered a truce with the Ghaal’dar, anyone 
venturing into the Seawall Mountains had best 
travel with a Marguul guide. 

As a Marguul bugbear, you are savage and 
proud of it. The Marguul worship the Mockery 
and believe in victory by any means necessary: 
there is no such thing as honor on the battlefield. 
It’s certainly an unusual choice for a player 
character, but if you’ve taken a liking to a 
particular group of the small folk, you could be a 
powerful ally. 


Tue Heirs oF DHAKAAN 


Though the Dhakaani Empire defeated the alien 
daelkyr, the war left seeds of madness strewn 
throughout the empire. As Dhakaan began 

to fall, a number of generals and governors 
gathered their forces and retreated into shelters 
deep within the earth, determined to preserve 
their civilization until the Empire could finally 
be restored. After thousands of years, their 
descendants have finally emerged. They are 
competing among themselves to determine which 
leader deserves the Imperial crown; once this is 
settled, they will turn to the conquest of Darguun 
and Khorvaire. 

The Dhakaani are far fewer in number than 
the Ghaal’dar; they had to carefully limit their 
population in their deep vaults. However, 
they have held onto the martial discipline 
and techniques that allowed their ancestors to 
dominate the continent. Their weaponsmiths 
are superior even to the artificers of House 
Cannith, and they are experts in the working of 
adamantine and other exotic metals. Anyone 
who takes goblinoids for granted should be 
surprised by the skills of the Dhakaani. 


The Heirs of Dhakaan are an agnostic society 
and don’t have clerics, paladins, or druids. Their 
focus is on martial excellence, and their spiritual 
leaders are bards, who inspire their warriors with 
tales of past glory. 

Among the Dhakaan, all goblinoids work 
together, using their talents for the greater good. 
Hobgoblins are the strategists and commanders, 
typically having the skills of fighters, bards, or 
rangers. Bugbears cultivate a focused battle rage 
and are typically barbarians, serving as shock 
troops. Goblins are largely artisans and laborers, 
but exceptional goblins join the khesh’dar (“silent 
folk”), learning the skills of rogue, monk, or 
ranger. The khesh’dar are spreading agents across 
the Five Nations, and you never know when a city 
goblin might turn out to be a deadly assassin. 

As an adventurer from a Dhakaani clan, why 
are you working with the other player characters? 
Are you a scout gathering information? Are 
you searching for allies to defeat a rival clan, 
or to support your own unlikely bid for the 
Imperial throne? Are you an exile... and if so, 
do you hope to regain your position, or have you 
abandoned your ties to the Dhakaani? 


KoBoLDs 


Many kobolds live in simple tribes scattered 
across Eberron. The Iredar kobolds claim 

to be descended from the Progenitor Dragon 
Eberron herself, and generally live in mountain 
caverns. The Irvhir claim kinship with Khyber 
and live in deep caverns. While these claims are 
unlikely, many kobolds do develop some degree 
of sorcerous ability. In addition to these tribal 
kobolds, there’s a large population of kobolds 
in the nation of Droaam. Traditionally these 
kobolds have been enslaved by more powerful 
creatures; now the Daughters of Sora Kell have 
granted them their own domain under their 
warlord Kethelrax the Cunning. Beyond this, a 
handful of Kobolds can be found scattered across 
Khorvaire, sometimes mingling with the city 
goblins in the great cities. 


CHAPTER 3 | OTHER RACES 


85 


86 


LIZARDFOLK 


The lizardfolk of Khorvaire dwell in the region 
known as Q’barra. Most are part of a tribal 
alliance known as the Cold Sun Federation. 
Their civilization is ancient, but they are quite 
primitive by the standards of the Five Nations 
and they’ve never sought to expand beyond 
Q’barra. Over the last thirty years humans have 
begun to settle O’barra. Treaties have been 
established with the Cold Sun Federation, but 
communication is difficult and there have been 
clashes started by forces on both sides. 

As a lizardfolk, you may be a scout sent out 
into the wider world to learn more about these 
mysterious soft-skinned creatures. You might be 
driven by a mysterious dream. You could have 
been driven from your tribe for a crime; what 
was it, and are you actually guilty? 


MINOTAURS 


In Eberron, minotaurs are found in the 
monstrous nation of Droaam. Most minotaurs 
worship an entity commonly called the Horned 
Prince, but each clan has its own personal 
interpretation and name for the Prince. Some 
present the Horned Prince as a savage demon 
who must be satiated with the blood of enemies. 
Other clans see the prince as a noble war god— 
analogous to Dol Dorn and Dol Arrah—who 
demands that his children display both courage 
and honor on the battlefield. While the cruel 
minotaurs are primarily encountered as raiders 
on the borders of Droaam, honorable minotaurs 
often work with House Tharashk and serve as 
mercenaries in the Five Nations. 

As a minotaur character, decide on your version 
of the Horned Prince and how this affects you. Are 
you a former mercenary seeking adventure? Are 
you following a divine mission? Are you working 
for House Tharashk, a minotaur warlord, or the 
Daughters of Sora Kell? 


CHAPTER 3 | OTHER RACES 


Orcs 


The orcs are an ancient race. Their ancestors 
were scattered by the Dhakaani goblins, and 
they largely live in harsh and unwanted lands: 
the swamps of the Shadow Marches, the Demon 
Wastes, the depths of the Ironroot Mountains. 

The orcs of Eberron weren’t formed by 
Gruumsh, and they aren’t inherently driven to 
evil. However, they are an extremely passionate 
and primal race, given to powerful emotion and 
deep faith. The Ghaash’kala orcs of the Demon 
Wastes are servants of the Silver Flame who 
devote their lives to battling the fiends of the 
Wastes. The Gatekeeper druids of the Shadow 
Marches were the first druids on Khorvaire. 
The Gatekeepers played a crucial role in 
defeating the alien daelkyr and binding this evil 
in Khyber, and their descendants continue to 
maintain the ancient seals and fight aberrations. 
However, many orcs were corrupted by the 
daelkyr and embraced the madness of the Cults 
of the Dragon Below. These cultists also live 
in the Shadow Marches, and battles between 
Gatekeepers and the servants of the Dragon 
Below have diminished both sides. 

Beyond the Gatekeepers and the cultists, the 
Shadow Marches are home to orcs who have 
joined with humans to create mixed clans. The 
dragonmarked House Tharashk arose from this 
union. While full orcs cannot carry the Mark of 
Finding they are an important part of the house 
and can be found across Khorvaire as part of 
Tharashk operations. 

As an orc, you could be a Ghaash’kala paladin 
seeking to protect the innocent from evil. You 
might be a Gatekeeper druid or ranger hunting 
aberrations working to prevent the return of 
the daelkyr. You could be a barbarian or a 
warlock driven by the mad dreams of the Cults 
of the Dragon Below. Or you could just be an 
unmarked member of House Tharashk, seeking 
your fortune in the wider world! 


TIEFLINGS 


Tieflings are rarely seen in Eberron, but there 
are a few paths for a tiefling characters. 

Many tieflings are born to the Carrion Tribes, 
the barbarians who live in the Demon Wastes. 
Such tieflings are touched by the fiendish forces 
bound beneath the Wastes and are considered 


to be blessed by the tribes. If you’re playing 
such a tiefling, why have you left the Wastes? It 
could be that you were destined to serve an evil 
purpose—perhaps even serving as an avatar for 
an imprisoned demon Overlord—and you are 
fleeing from that destiny. 

Other tieflings are shaped not by demonic 
powers, but by the influence of the planes. Such 


Rm ~ 
. 
Ly 
AS 
`” 
Ka 7 
> i PA 
€ A 
qe \ 2 e 
fi N 
v D 
i= 
td 


tieflings may be born in manifest zones when 
planes are coterminous. Planar tieflings are 
isolated oddities, often seen as exotic and strange, 
but not necessarily evil. 

There is one tiefling nation in Khorvaire: 
The Venomous Demesne, a city-state hidden 
on the far side of Droaam. The tieflings of 
the Venomous Demesne are descended from 
Sarlonan mages who bargained with dark 
powers, and the lords of the Demesne are 
powerful warlocks and wizards. The Venomous 
Demesne has had no significant contact with the 
Five Nations and few people know it exists; your 
character could be an envoy, an exile, or simply 
an adventurer driven by a desire to see what lies 
beyond your magical kingdom. 


CHAPTER 3 | OTHER RACES 


OTHERS 


What about kenku in Eberron? How about 
tritons or tabaxi? How do genasi fit into things? 
There’s a place for everything in Eberron, but it’s 
always up to the DM to decide how significant 
that place is. If you want to play a member of a 
race that hasn’t been addressed here, talk with 
your DM and come up with an option. What 
role do you want the race to play in the world? 

Widespread. It’s always possible to change 
the default assumptions of the setting. If both you 
and your DM like the idea that the Dhakaani 
Empire was a nation of goliaths rather than 
goblinoids, you can make that change. So there’s 
nothing wrong with adding a new race into the 
common population of the Five Nations, as long 
as everyone likes the idea of it. 

Exotic. There are many places in Eberron 
where a small population of unusual creatures 
could exist. Perhaps there’s a lost city of tabaxi 
in the jungles of Xen’drik, or a clan of Kenku 
dwelling at the top of Sharn’s tallest tower. The 
Mourning could have transformed a city of 
humans into bee-people. As with dragonborn or 
tieflings, this allows these races to have some sort 
of culture to interact with but keeps them from 
affecting the world in a significant way. 

Unique. When introducing a character of an 
unusual race, one option is to say that you’re 
the only member of that race. Perhaps you 
were created by the mysterious daelkyr 
or the brilliant transmuter Mordain 
the Fleshweaver. Maybe you’re 
the result of magebreeding 
experiments conducted by 
House Vadalis and House Jorasco. Perhaps you 
began life as a member of another race and were 
transformed by the Mourning. 

While the DM always has the final say as 
to whether to allow an unusual race into the 
campaign, the important thing is to determine 
the story you’re looking for! 


88 CHAPTER 3 | OTHER RACES 


CHAPTER 4: DRAGONMARKS 


A halfling healer touches a dying man; the 
mark on her forehead blazes with blue 
fire as his wounds close and vanish. 

A half-orc bounty hunter reaches out 
with the power of his mark to find 

his prey. A human artificer touches 

a creation forge and the symbol on 

her hand flares as the eldritch machine 
rumbles to life. 


ACH OF THESE PEOPLE 

possesses a dragonmark, 

a symbol etched on the 

skin in colors more vivid 

than any tattoo. This 
sigil is a source of mystical power. A 
dragonmark enhances the user’s ability 
to perform certain tasks. The Mark of 
Making guides the hands of the smith, 
while the Mark of Shadows helps its 
bearer avoid enemies. The power of a 
dragonmark can also manifest in more 
dramatic ways. An heir with the Mark of 
Storms can scatter enemies with a blast 
of wind, while someone with the Mark 
of Shadows can weave illusions. While 
these effects may function in the same 
way as spells, the power is drawn and focused 
through the dragonmark. 

You can’t buy a dragonmark, or simply 
choose to develop one. Each mark is tied to 
specific bloodlines. A dragonmark appears 
around adolescence, but not every heir 
manifests the mark. Long ago the families 
that carry the marks joined together to form 
the dragonmarked houses. Over the course of 
centuries, the houses have used their gifts to 
establish powerful economic monopolies. House 
Jorasco holds the Mark of Healing, and Jorasco 
maintains the vast majority of healing houses 


and clinics. Only House Lyrandar heirs with 
the Mark of Storms can pilot airships. Control 
over vital services—medicine, transportation, 
communication, manufacturing— gives the 
houses tremendous power. 

In the past, the dragonmarked houses were 
held in check by the united kingdom of Galifar. 
But in the wake of the Last War, people 
wonder if any one nation has the power to 
enforce its wishes on the houses. Some say the 
dragonmarked barons wield more power than 
kings and queens. 


CHAPTER 4 | DRAGONMARKS 89 


90 


CREATING A 
DRAGONMARKED CHARACTER 


Dragonmarks are associated with race, depicted 
by a combination of variant races and subraces. 
e For humans and half-orcs, a dragonmark 
is a variant race that replaces normal traits 
associated with those races. 


e For half-elves, a dragonmark is a variant 
race. You keep some of the standard half- 
elf traits and replace others with the traits 
associated with your mark. 


e For dwarves, elves, gnomes, and halflings, 
the dragonmark replaces your subrace. 


So, if you’re making an elf character, you can 
choose to take the Mark of Shadow instead of 
being a wood elf or high elf. 

There is another option related to dragonmarks 
if your group uses feats: the Aberrant 
Dragonmark feat grants potentially dangerous 
magical abilities. Aberrant dragonmarks aren’t 
tied to the dragonmark houses and can be taken 
by a character of any race. 


DRAGONMARKS AND HOUSES TABLE 


Dragonmark House Race 
Detection Medani Half-Elf 
Finding Tharashk Human, Half-Orc 
Handling Vadalis Human 
Healing Jorasco Halfling 
Hospitality Ghallanda Halfling 
Making Cannith Human 
Passage Orien Human 
Scribing Sivis Gnome 
Sentinel Deneith Human 
Shadow Phiarlan Elf 
Thuranni Elf 
Storm Lyrandar Half-Elf 
Warding Kundarak Dwarf 


DRAGONMARKS 
AND BACKGROUNDS 


Dragonmarks are bound to certain bloodlines, 
and by choosing a mark you are establishing 

that your character has a blood connection to 
one of the families in the dragonmarked houses. 
However, it’s up to you to decide on your 
relationship to the house. Were you brought up 
in the house? Or are you completely independent 
from it? This is best represented by your 
background. Consider the following options. 

Agent. You have a close, ongoing relationship 
with your house. The house agent background 
is a good choice if you are actively working for 
the house. Alternately, you could take the noble 
background to reflect a blood tie to the leaders of 
the house. 

Independent Scion. You were raised or 
trained by the house, but you’ve kept your 
independence. This means you don’t have 
many special privileges, but you also don’t have 
responsibilities. Guild artisan is a good choice to 
reflect basic house training, but you could choose 
entertainer for the Mark of Shadow, sailor for the 
Mark of Storms, soldier for the Mark of Sentinel, 
sage for the Mark of Scribing, and so on. 


Guild Specialties 

Bodyguards, Investigation, Risk Management 
Bounty Hunting, Investigation, Prospecting 
Animal Training and Breeding 

Healing 

Food, Lodging, Urban Information 
Manufacturing 

Land Transportation 

Communication, Translation, Verification 
Bodyguards, Mercenaries 

Entertainment, Espionage 

Entertainment, Assassination 

Air and Sea Transportation 

Banking, Storage, Prisons 


CHAPTER 4 | CREATING A DRAGONMARKED CHARACTER 


Excoriate. When a dragonmarked heir defies 
their house, they may be cut off from it. In the 
past, your mark would be flayed from your body. 
Although this mutilation is no longer practiced, 
such exiles are still called excoriates. If you’re an 
excoriate, consider what you did to deserve this 
punishment. Were you a criminal? A charlatan? 
Or perhaps a sage who engaged in forbidden 
research? 

Foundling. Your ancestors left the house 
long ago. You have no ties to the house and may 
not have known you were connected by blood 
before you manifested your dragonmark. As an 
outlander or an urchin you might know nothing 
about the houses. As an acolyte or hermit, you 
could have put your faith ahead of worldly 
things, choosing not to pursue a connection 
with the houses. Whatever you decide, this is an 
opportunity to talk with your DM about the role 
you'd like the house to play in a campaign. Do 
you want them to be your enemy? Would you 
prefer to avoid them completely? Or do you want 
to work your way into a position of power in the 
house, despite being an outsider? 


THE Powers OF THE MARK 


Each dragonmark grants a set of abilities that 
reflect the inherent powers of the mark. Your 
dragonmarked race gives you a set of traits 
derived from the magic of your mark. If you 
are a spellcaster, your dragonmark also fuels or 
channels some of your spells. Each dragonmark’s 
description includes a list of dragonmark spells 
that flow from the magic of the mark. If you play 
a character with the Spellcasting or the Pact 
Magic class feature, your dragonmark spells are 
added to the spell list for each of your spellcasting 
classes, thereby expanding the spell options 
available to you. 

You might also consider your dragonmark 
the source of any or all of your spells or class 
features. As a cleric with the Mark of Healing, 
for example, you could say your mark is the 
sole source of the healing and supportive spells 
you cast, or your magic might come from a 
combination of your mark’s power and your 
faith in the gods. As a warlock, your aberrant 
dragonmark might actually be your fiendish 
patron, the source of all your magic. ‘These 
descriptions add flavor to your character but 
don’t change your character’s abilities, beyond 
the dragonmark spells added to your spell list. 

Over the centuries, the houses have developed 
tools that enhance and channel the powers of a 
mark, and these items give the houses much of 
their economic power. 


CHAPTER 4 | THE POWERS OF THE MARK 


91 


DRAGONMARK APPEARANCE 


A dragonmark appears on the skin. There are 
twelve known dragonmarks, each unique in 
design and power. A dragonmark can appear on 
any part of the body. One half-elf could have the 
Mark of Detection across an eye, while another 
has it in the palm of the hand. Dragonmarks 
appear with vivid shades of blue and purple and 
shimmer or even move slightly. When used, they 
grow warm to the touch and sometimes glow 
(though this doesn’t produce useful illumination). 
A dragonmark can’t be removed—even if a 
lumb bearing a dragonmark is cut away, the 
mark eventually manifests on another part of the 
bearer’s body. All dragonmarks share a similar 
initial appearance, but a dragonmark can grow 
in size and complexity as a character gains levels 
and uses it to cast more powerful magic. 

While dragonmarks share the same general 
appearance, your dragonmark could have a 
unique quality. Roll on the Dragonmark Quirks 
table for inspiration. 


DRAGONMARK QUIRKS 
1d6 Quirk 


1 Your dragonmark is unusually small or 
remarkably large. 


2 Your dragonmark slowly moves 
around your body. 

3 Your dragonmark glows dramatically 
when you use it. 

4 Your dragonmark tingles when you’re 
near someone with the same mark. 

5 Your dragonmark tickles when you 
use it. 

6 Your dragonmark is an unusual color 
but a normal shape. 


92 CHAPTER 4 | THE POWERS OF THE MARK 


ALL ABOUT THE HOUSES! 


Every house has traditions, cabals, and 
secrets. Here’s a few facts that apply to most 
of the houses. 


Most Dragonmarked houses maintain 
enclaves in major cities. These serve 
as hubs for house businesses and 
strongholds for the house families. 

A city may also have any number 

of businesses tied to the house—a 
Ghallanda inn, a Cannith smith, a Sivis 
message station—but these are simply 
providing services and don’t have any 
direct connection to house leadership. 


Any heir of the house who develops 

a dragonmark is allowed to add the 

d’ prefix to the house name: Merrix 
d’Cannith. Regional leaders within the 
houses are called Barons. Most houses 
are led by a matriarch or patriarch, 
though some are led by councils. 


The Twelve is an organization 

that facilitates communication 

and cooperation between the 
Dragonmarked houses. Excoriates are 
dragonmarked heirs who have been cut 
off from their houses. Foundlings are 
people who develop a mark outside of 
a house and have no connection to it. 


Dragonmarks manifest around 
adolescence. Each house puts its 

heirs through a trial called The Test 

of Siberys. The specific trials vary 

by house, but they place the heir in 
circumstances where they are likely to 
manifest the mark, if they have it. About 
half of the members of a bloodline 
manifest the mark. 


The Korth Edicts prevent the houses 
from owning land, holding noble titles, 
or maintaining military forces (with an 
exception for Deneith). The Edicts were 
established long ago when the Five 
Nations were united. Today, many in 
the houses feel the Korth Edicts have 
become obsolete in the wake of the 
Last War. 


CHAPTER 4 | BACKGROUND 


93 


BACKGROUND ROLE 


You are always gathering information for your 
house. But when the barons come to you with a 
specific mission, what sort of work do you usually 
do? Choose your role or roll on the table below. 


Here is an important background for Eberron. 


House AGENT 


You have sworn fealty to a dragonmarked house, MOUSE AGENT HOLE 


one of the mighty mercantile guilds that shapes d8 Role 

Khorvaire. If you possess a dragonmark, you’re 1 Acquisition 

likely a member of one of the influential families 2 Investigation 

within the house, otherwise you’re an outsider 3 Research & Development 
who hopes to make your fortune by allying with 4 Security 

this great power. Your primary task is to observe, ere 

gathering useful information and serving as the = numidanon 

eyes of your house. But you could be called upon 6 Exploration 

at any time to act as a hand of the house. Such 7 Negotiation 

missions can be dangerous—but they’ll surely be 8 Covert Operations 


lucrative. 


Skill Proficiencies: Investigation, Persuasion 

Tool Proficiency: Two tools by house: 

e Camnith: alchemist’s supplies and tinker’s 
tools 


e Deneith: one gaming set and vehicles (land) 


e Ghallanda: brewer’s supplies and cook’s 
utensils 


e  Jorasco: alchemist’s supplies and herbalism 
kit 
e Kundarak: tinker’s tools and thieves’ tools 


e Lyrandar: vehicles (sea/air) and navigator’s 
tools 


e Medani: thieves’ tools and disguise kit 
e Orien: vehicles (land) and one gaming set 


e Phiarlan: disguise kit and one musical 
instrument 


e Swis: calligrapher’s tools and forgery kit 
e  Tharashk: thieves’ tools and one gaming set 


e  Thuranni: poisoner’s kit and one musical 
instrument 


e Vadalis: vehicles (land) and herbalism kit 


Equipment: A set of fine clothes, house signet 
ring, ID papers, and a purse containing 20 gp. 


94 CHAPTER 4 | BACKGROUND 


FEATURE: House CONNECTIONS 


As an agent of your house, you can always get 
food and lodging for your friends at a house 
enclave. When the house assigns you a mission, 
it will usually provide you with necessary supplies 
and transportation. Beyond this, you have many 
old friends, mentors, and rivals in your house 
and you may encounter one of them when you 
interact with a house business. As a Lyrandar 
agent you may know the captain of an airship; as 
a Ghallanda agent you know a lot of innkeepers 
and bartenders. The degree to which such 
acquaintances will be willing to help you out will 
depend on your current standing in your house. 


SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 


House agents are a diverse lot. Consider the 
house you serve and the type of work you do in 
developing or selecting characteristics. 


d8 Personality Trait 
| never let emotion complicate work. 
I’m always looking to improve efficiency. 
| share trivia about my house’s business 
(medicine, ships, warforged). 

4 | hold myself and anyone | work with to 
extremely high standards. 

5 | never forget an insult made against 
myself or my house. 

6 I’m very excited and enthusiastic about 
everything my house does. 

7 I’m representing my house and take great 
pride in my personal appearance. 

8 I’m critical of monarchies and opposed to 
any restrictions on the houses. 


d6 


d6 


d6 


Ideal 

Common Good. My house serves a vital 
function, and its prosperity will help 
everyone. (Good) 

Tradition. | uphold traditions of my house 
and bring honor to my family. (Lawful) 
Innovation. Abandon old traditions and 
find better ways to do things. (Chaotic) 
Power. | want to ensure the prosperity of 
my house and wield its power myself. (Evil) 
Discovery. | want to learn all I can, both for 
my house and for my own curiosity. (Any) 


Comfort. | want to ensure that me and 
mine enjoy the best things in life. (Any) 


Bond 

My house is my family, and I would do 
anything for my family. 

| love someone from another house, but 
such relationships are forbidden. 
Someone | love was killed by a rival 
faction within my house, and I will have 
revenge. 

| don’t care about the house as a whole, 


but I would do anything for my old 
mentor. 


| believe my house needs to evolve to 
survive, and | need to lead that change. 


| am determined to impress the leaders of 
my house, and to become a leader myself. 


Flaw 


I’m overly concerned with following 
established procedures and protocols. 

I’m obsessed with conspiracy theories and 
worried about secret societies and hidden 
demons. 


| believe that my house and bloodline 
makes me better than everyone else. 


I’m concealing a secret that could get me 
driven from my house. 


| have strong religious beliefs that aren’t 
shared by others in my house. 


I’m working for a hidden faction in my 
house that gives me secret assignments. 


CHAPTER 4 | BACKGROUND 95 


96 


THE Mark oF DETECTION 


‘Tf you want a wall of muscle to get between you 
and a blade, go to House Deneith. If you want 
someone to anticipate the threat and make sure you 
arent even in the room with whoever’s holding 
that blade... that’s what we do.” 


— Baron Trelib d’Medani 


The Mark of Detection is an inquisitive’s dream. 
It sharpens powers of observation and intuition, 
allowing the bearer to draw connections and in- 
terpret clues others might miss. By actively draw- 
ing on its powers, the bearer can detect poisons 
and study the energies of magic. 


House MEDANI 


The Warning Guild of House Medani brokers 
the services of bodyguards and inquisitives. 
Medani advisors specialize in risk assessment 
and management, protecting clients from both 
physical and social threats. While Medani over- 
laps with the inquisitives of House Tharashk and 
the bodyguards of House Deneith, the Warning 
Guild specializes in subtle threats and complex 
mysteries. 

The members of House Medani are half-elves 
with deep roots in Breland. Medani has little 
interest in the power struggles that sometimes 
break out between the other dragonmarked 
houses. Many Medani heirs are more interested 
in helping their communities than in profit, and 
Medani heirs often work with law enforcement or 
help those who can’t afford their services. 


DRAGONMARKED CHARACTERS 


Here are a few examples of characters with the 
Mark of Detection. 

House Agent Bard. With the kind of threats 
your house deals with, words are often more 
effective than weapons. You serve as one of the 
eyes of the house, listening for rumors and watch- 
ing for dangerous cabals and conspiracies. Along 
the way you do your best to mediate disputes and 
defuse dangerous situations. 


CHAPTER 4 | THE MARK OF DETECTION 


Rogue Folk Hero. You're an inquisitive 
trained by your house. You grew up in a bad 
neighborhood, and while you could make more 
gold solving the problems of nobles, you’re more 
interested in helping your community. 

Sage Wizard. You're a brilliant diviner and 
inquisitive. You have a knack for uncovering 
conspiracies, and you found one in House Med- 
ani. It might involve shape-changed demons or 
dragons—or both. You don’t know how deep it 
goes, but you’re certain that other dragonmarked 
houses and noble families have been infiltrated. 


Mark oF DETECTION TRAITS 


If your half-elf character has the Mark of De- 
tection, the following traits replace the half-elf’s 
Ability Score Increase and Skill Versatility traits 
in the Player’s Handbook. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score 
increases by 2, and one other ability score of your 
choice increases by 1. 

Deductive Intuition. When you make an 
Intelligence (Investigation) or a Wisdom (Insight) 
check, you can roll a d4 and add the number 
rolled to the ability check. 

Magical Detection. You can cast the detect 
magic and detect poison and disease spells with this 
trait. Starting at 3rd level, you can also cast the 
see invisibility spell with it. Once you cast any of 
these spells with this trait, you can’t cast that spell 
with it again until you finish a long rest. Intelli- 
gence is your spellcasting ability for these spells, 
and you don’t require material components for 
them. 

Spells of the Mark. If you have the Spellcast- 
ing or the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on 
the Mark of Detection Spells table are added to 
the spell list of your spellcasting class. 


MARK OF DETECTION SPELLS 


Spell Level Spells 
1st detect evil and good, detect poison 
and disease 
2nd detect thoughts, find traps 
3rd clairvoyance, nondetection 
4th arcane eye, divination 
5th legend lore 


THE Mark OF FINDING 


“My ancestors used their gift to track beasts in the 
swamps. I use mine to find fugitives in the slums of 
Sharn. Pm still a hunter. I always find my mark.” 


—Hondar Aashta, 
Tharashk bounty hunter 


The Mark of Finding sharpens the senses, 
guiding the hunter to prey. Alone among the 
dragonmarks, the Mark of Finding is carried by 
two races: humans and half-orcs. It first appeared 
in the Shadow Marches, where clan hunters 

used it to find their prey. The mark helped unite 
humans and orcs in the Marches and brought 
House Tharashk to the Five Nations. 


House THARASHK 


House Tharashk traditionally licenses inquisitives 
and bounty hunters. Recently the Finder’s Guild 
has expanded into dragonshard prospecting. 
Dragonshards are the lifesblood of the magical 
economy. A talent for finding this resource has 
given the house new wealth and influence. 
Tharashk is the youngest of the dragonmarked 
houses and hasn’t embraced all of the customs 
of the Twelve. Heirs often use family names 
instead of the house surname and many hold on 
to beliefs and traditions carried from the Shadow 
Marches—like the druidic faith of the Gatekeepers 
or secretive cults of the Dragon Below. 


DRAGONMARKED CHARACTERS 


Here are examples of characters with this mark. 
Druid House Agent. House Tharashk is 
home to an ancient order of druids who protect 
the world from aberrant threats. Although you 
are officially an operative of the house, you are 
truly an agent of the Gatekeepers, and investigate 
the activities of mad cultists and the Daelkyr. 
Criminal Rogue. You're an inquisitive who 
works the mean streets of Sharn. You’ve got 
friends on both sides of the law. Sometimes you 
walk a crooked line to unravel a tough case. 


Marx OF FINDING TRAITS 


If your half-orc or human character has the 
Mark of Finding, the following traits replace the 
character’s racial traits in the Player’s Handbook, 
aside from age, alignment, size, and speed. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score 
increases by 2, and your Constitution score 
increases by 1. 

Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 
60 feet of you as if it were bright light, and in 
darkness as if it were dim light. You can’t discern 
color in darkness, only shades of gray. 

Hunter’s Intuition. When you make a 
Wisdom (Perception) or Wisdom (Survival) check, 
you can roll a d4 and add the number rolled to the 
ability check. 

Finder’s Magic. You can cast the hunter’s 
mark spell with this trait. Starting at 3rd level, you 
can also cast the locate object spell with it. Once 
you cast either spell with this trait, you can’t cast 
that spell with it again until you finish a long 
rest. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for these 
spells. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write 
Common and Goblin. 

Spells of the Mark. If you have the 
Spellcasting or the Pact Magic class feature, the 
spells on the Mark of Finding Spells table are 
added to the spell list of your spellcasting class. 


MARK OF FINDING SPELLS 


Spell Level Spells 
1st faerie fire, longstrider 
2nd locate animals or plants, locate 
object 
3rd clairvoyance, speak with plants 
4th divination, locate creature 
5th commune with nature 


CHAPTER 4 | THE MARK OF FINDING 


97 


98 


THE Mark oF HANDLING 


“Don’t get sentimental. A beast is a tool. Our role 
as to find the right tool for the task and to make 
sure they're of the finest quality. Nature ts our 
kingdom; never forget that we were born to rule it.” 


— Baron Hella d’Vadalis 


The Mark of Handling gives its bearer a primal 
connection to beasts and the natural world, 
granting the power to calm and coax. 


House Vapaus 


The ranches of House Vadalis play a key role in 
daily life, producing meat, mounts, and more. 
Vadalis isn’t one of the most powerful houses, but 
its barons are generally content; they’re more in- 
terested in discovering new creatures than engag- 
ing in the politics of the dragonmarked houses. 
House Vadalis breeds and trains beasts for 
a range of purposes. While they maintain vast 
cattle ranches and train horses and hounds, 
the Mark of Handling allows Vadalis to work 
with more exotic creatures as well. Griffons, 
hippogriffs, and even bullettes can be bred and 
trained. Vadalis also works with more intelligent 
beasts, such as giant owls, displacers beasts, and 
pegasi. Even with the Mark of Handling, this is 
dangerous work; there’s a lot of turnover at the 
bullette ranch. But these exotic creatures aren’t 
enough to satisfy the most innovative members 
of the house, and this has led to the practice of 
magebreeding. Using the Mark of Handling and 
dragonshard focus items, Vadalis has found ways 
to create magical creatures. Typically, this results 
in a superior version of a mundane creature—an 
animal that is stronger, faster, and smarter. But 
rumors claim that Vadalis has crafted monsters 
of its own. Some rumors even insist that Vadalis 
has been trying to magebreed better humans. 


DRAGONMARKED CHARACTERS 


Some characters with the Mark of Handling: 
Noble Druid. Your family is one of the most 
powerful in the house. You’re a druid, but you 


CHAPTER 4 | THE MARK OF HANDLING 


don’t hold any druidic beliefs; rather, you believe 
that your mark gives you rightful dominion over 
the natural world. 

Ranger House Agent. You've been trained 
to track and handle the wildest monstrosities. 
You're still mastering your skills, but you want to 
get out into the world and discover new creatures 
that have never been harnessed. 

Outlander Druid. Your dragonmark gives 
you a powerful connection to the natural world. 
You hate what your house is doing with this 
power—turning this gift into a business, exploiting 
the creatures you’re connected to. 


Marx oF HANDLING TRAITS 


If your human character has the Mark of Han- 
dling, the following traits replace the human’s 
Ability Score Increase trait in the Player’s Handbook. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score 
increases by 2, and one other ability score of your 
choice increases by 1. 

Wild Intuition. When you make a Wisdom 
(Animal Handling) or Intelligence (Nature) check, 
you can roll a d4 and add the number rolled to 
the ability check. 

Primal Connection. You can cast the animal 
friendship and speak with animals spells with this trait, 
requiring no material component. Once you cast 
either spell with this trait, you can’t cast that spell 
with it again until you finish a short or long rest. 
Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for these spells. 

The Bigger They Are. Starting at 3rd level, 
you can target a beast or monstrosity when you 
cast animal friendship or speak with animals, provided 
the creature’s Intelligence score is 3 or lower. 

Spells of the Mark. If you have the 
Spellcasting or the Pact Magic class feature, the 
spells on the Mark of Handling Spells table are 
added to the spell list of your spellcasting class. 


MARK OF HANDLING SPELLS 


Spell Level Spells 
1st animal friendship, speak with animals 
2nd beast sense, calm emotions 
3rd beacon of hope, conjure animals 
4th aura of life, dominate beast 
5th awaken 


THE Mark oF HEALING 


“What's the price of a life? Well, I've got a rate 
sheet right over here. Pd be happy to discuss tt.” 


— Bessi d’Jorasco, Fairhaven healer 


A halfling with the Mark of Healing can save a 
life with a touch, restoring vitality and the will to 
live. When dealing with mundane medicine, the 
mark helps its bearer sense the nature of afflic- 
tions and find the best solution. When equipped 
with dragonshard focus items, the mark can even 
draw the dead back from the depths of Dolurrh. 


House Jorasco 


The Healer’s Guild provides a vital service to 
Khorvaire, and the Last War ensured that there 
was great need for healers. The guild runs the 
schools that teach medicine and houses of healing 
that provide both mundane and magical services. 
Ifit could save a life, it’s probably tied to Joras- 
co... and it will come with a cost. If you have 

the gold, Jorasco healers can remove a disease 
instantly with lesser restoration. If you can’t afford 
such a service, they will treat you with mundane 
techniques (the Medicine skill). House Jorasco is 
also the source of potions of healing. While many 
criticize Jorasco’s demands for payment, the 
leaders of the house maintain that it’s not about 
greed; it’s about ensuring the survival and pros- 
perity of the house, so they can continue to help 
future generations. 

While the public face of Jorasco is that of the 
healer, there are rumors that the house engaged 
in disturbing experiments during the Last War, 
working with House Vadalis to develop biological 
weapons and strange new creatures ... 


DRAGONMARKED CHARACTERS 


Here are a few examples of characters who carry 
the Mark of Healing. 

Noble Cleric. You are one of the heirs of 
Baron Ulara, the matriarch of House Jorasco. 
Your mark is remarkable (and the source of your 


clerical abilities) and you feel that you’re just 
beginning to unlock its power. Are you willing to 
devote your abilities to your house? Or do you 
think that you may have a greater calling? 

Folk Hero Bard. You served as a medic in 
the Last War, using humor and stories to keep up 
the spirits of your patients. You’ve seen too much 
suffering, and you need to do something about it. 
You’ve broken away from the house and you’ve 
been doing charitable work in your community. 
But you want to find a way to do more. 

Criminal Rogue. You grew up as an orphan 
in Sharn. One of your parents must have been 
tied to Jorasco, but you found a different fam- 
ily: the Boromar Clan, a criminal guild run by 
halflings. You’ve learned how to heal and how to 
hurt people. Now you need to decide which path 
you want to follow. 


Mark oF HEALING TRAITS 


If you’re a halfling with the Mark of Healing, you 
have this subrace, with the following traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score 
increases by 1. 

Medical Intuition. When you make a 
Wisdom (Medicine) check or an ability check 
using an herbalism kit, you can roll a d4 and add 
the number rolled to the ability check. 

Healing Touch. You can cast the cure wounds 
spell with this trait. Starting at 3rd level, you can 
also cast lesser restoration with it. Once you cast 
either spell with this trait, you can’t cast that spell 
with it again until you finish a long rest. Wisdom 
is your spellcasting ability for these spells. 

Spells of the Mark. If you have the 
Spellcasting or the Pact Magic class feature, the 
spells on the Mark of Healing Spells table are 
added to the spell list of your spellcasting class. 


MARK OF HEALING SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 


1st cure wounds, healing word 
2nd lesser restoration, prayer of healing 
3rd aura of vitality, mass healing word 


4th aura of purity, aura of life 
5th greater restoration 


CHAPTER 4 | THE MARK OF HEALING 


99 


100 


THE Mark oF HOSPITALITY 


“Welcome, welcome! So good to see you again. Let 
me get your drink—blackroot tal with honey, yes? 
And then you have to listen to this story I’ve heard 


J. 


about the strange things going on in the Cogs. ” 
— Alara d’Ghallanda, halfling bartender 


They may not always have gold, but a halfling 
with the Mark of Hospitality is sure to be rich in 
friends. The magic of the mark allows the bearer 
to keep a place clean and to heat, chill, and 
season food. But it also helps the bearer connect 
with others, setting troubled minds at ease. 


House GHALLANDA 


The majority of inns, taverns, and restaurants 
in the Five Nations are either directly owned by 
House Ghallanda or licensed by its Hosteler’s 
Guild. Most people give little thought to House 
Ghallanda; when compared to the soldiers of 
House Deneith and the factories of House Can- 
nith, an alliance of innkeepers seems harmless 
and inconsequential. But Ghallanda’s strength 
lies in charm and connections. A Ghallanda 
innkeeper hears many things—if you want to 
know what’s really going on in a community, talk 
to the halfling bartender. The leaders of House 
Ghallanda don’t sell information; they prefer to 
build friendship and deal in favors. But should 
a Ghallanda baron every truly need something, 
they likely have a favor they can call in. 

Ghallanda has a number of “bound business- 
es” —franchises run directly by the house. ‘The 
Gold Dragon Inn is such a business, and these 
inns can be found in every major city, each 
serving a familiar menu and providing similar 
services. But many Ghallanda heirs take pride in 
creating their own unique businesses. There are 
also many independent restaurants, inns, and 
taverns that are licensed by Ghallanda. ‘The blink 
dog seal is an assurance that a locale meets Gha- 
landa standards of health and quality—but not 
every inn is run by a halfling. 


CHAPTER 4 | THE MARK OF HOSPITALITY 


DRAGONMARKED CHARACTERS 


Here are some characters who carry this mark. 

Noble Warlock (Archfey). Your parents 
run a score of Gold Dragon Inns. You’ve never 
gotten your hands dirty with the family business; 
you've been too busy going to the best parties. 
Just the other day, you were dancing with dru- 
ids, and they summoned an Archfey from Thel- 
anis. You don’t remember all the details—it was 
one of those parties—but it seems like you made 
a deal with the fey prince. You’re not sure what 
you agreed to; you’d better find out! 

Guild Artisan Bard. You ran the finest bar in 
Cyre, until the Mourning destroyed it. You know 
a group of adventurers—regulars from your lost 
tavern—and youre tagging along with them until 
you figure out your next step. 


Mark oF Hospitaity TRAITS 


If you’re a halfling with the Mark of Hospitality, 
you have this subrace, with the following traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma 
score increases by 1. 

Ever Hospitable. When you make a Charis- 
ma (Persuasion) check or an ability check involving 
brewer’s supplies or cook’s utensils, you can roll a 
d4 and add the number rolled to the ability check. 

Innkeeper’s Magic. You know the prestidigi- 
tation cantrip. You can also cast the purify food and 
drink and unseen servant spells with this trait. Once 
you cast either spell with this trait, you can’t cast 
that spell with it again until you finish long rest. 
Charisma is your spellcasting ability for these spells. 

Spells of the Mark. If you have the Spellcast- 
ing or the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on 
the Mark of Hospitality Spells table are added to 
the spell list of your spellcasting class. 


MARK OF HOSPITALITY SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 
1st goodberry, sleep 


2nd aid, calm emotions 

3rd create food & water, Leomund’s tiny hut 

4th aura of purity, Mordenkainen’s private 
sanctum 

5th hallow 


THE Mark oF MAKING 


“My house built the modern world. Orien may 
drive the hghtning rail, but it’s Cannith who 
builds the cars and lays the stones it travels on. 
Cannith makes the everbright lanterns hold the 
night at bay. Smith, carpenter, alchemist—the 
best all carry my seal.” 


— Baron Merrix d’Cannith 


The bearer of the Mark of Making can mend 
broken things with a touch and imbue a weapon 
with touch. An artificer or a wizard will get the 
most out of the mark, but anyone can find a use 
for an enchanted blade. 


House CANNITH 


House Cannith forgeholds use streamlined forms 
of production to quickly produce common goods. 
Even independent artisans often learn their trade 
at Cannith academies and adhere to Cannith 
standards. The House of Making builds the tools 
the other houses rely upon, and it has always 
been the unspoken leader of the Twelve. 

The Last War was a time of opportunity for 
Cannith. Every nation wanted weapons and 
warforged, along with mundane arms and armor. 
The war raised the house up and then tore it 
down. House Cannith was based in Cyre, and the 
Mourning destroyed the house leadership and key 
facilities. Now three barons jockey to fill the lead- 
ership vacuum: the alchemist Jorlanna of Fairhav- 
en, weaponsmith Zorlan of Korth, and warforged 
innovator Merrix of Sharn. It remains to be seen 
whether one of these leaders will unite the house, 
or if it will shatter under the strain. If you’re an 
heir of House Cannith, you should decide which 
of these barons you serve—or if you have other 
ideas about the future of the house. 


DRAGONMARKED CHARACTERS 


Some characters with the Mark of Making: 
Noble Wizard. Born to one of the most 
powerful families in House Cannith, you’re a 


diletante who has so far squandered your arcane 
training. Will you find purpose in your life as an 
adventurer? Or will the house demand that you 

live up to the duties of your rank? 

Criminal Artificer. Your parents were 
excoriated from House Cannith for engaging in 
forbidden research. They died when you were 
young. You’ve never learned what they were 
working on. But you inherited their talent for 
artifice and you’ve been hiding in the shadows of 
Sharn. It’s time to pursue your parents’ legacy. 


Mark oF MAKING TRAITS 


If your human character has the Mark of Mak- 
ing, the following traits replace the human’s Abil- 
ity Score Increase trait in the Player’s Handbook. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Intelligence 
score increases by 2, and one other ability score 
of your choice increases by 1. 

Artisan’s Intuition. When you make an 
Arcana check or an ability check involving arti- 
san’s tools, you can roll a d4 and add the number 
rolled to the ability check. 

Maker’s Gift. You gain proficiency with one 
type of artisan’s tools of your choice. 

Spellsmith. You know the mending cantrip. 
You can also cast the magic weapon spell with this 
trait. When you do so, the spell lasts for 1 hour 
and doesn’t require concentration. Once you 
cast the spell with this trait, you can’t do so again 
until you finish a long rest. Intelligence is your 
spellcasting ability for these spells. 

Spells of the Mark. If you have the Spellcast- 
ing or the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on 
the Mark of Making Spells table are added to the 
spell list of your spellcasting class. 


MARK OF MAKING SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 


1st identify, Tenser’s floating disk 

2nd continual flame, magic weapon 

3rd conjure barrage, elemental weapon 
4th fabricate, stone shape 

5th creation 


CHAPTER 4 | THE MARK OF MAKING 


101 


102 


THE Mark OF PASSAGE 


“We get things where they need to go. It doesn’t 
matter uf it’s a letter, a person, or a hundred tons of 
steel. Whether we have to cross mountains, rwers, 
or the Mournland itself, Orien finds a way.” 


— Bali d’Orien, veteran courier 


The Mark of Passage governs motion, allowing 
its bearer to move with uncanny speed and 
precision. Running, leaping, climbing—the Mark 
of Passage enhances every form of movement. 
The bearer of the mark can even slip through 
space, leaping from point to point in the blink of 
an eye. 


House ORIEN 


The House of Passage manages land 
transportation. The Lightning Rail is the house’s 
most dramatic tool, but Orien runs caravans 
and coaches across the length of Khorvaire. 
Dragonshard focus items ensure that the fastest 
vehicles are those driven by heirs with the Mark 
of Passage, but the house also licenses unmarked 
teamsters. The Courier’s Guild of House Orien 
delivers mail and packages and has a branch that 
handles more covert and dangerous deliveries. 
Orien has dominated transportation for 
centuries, but now the house is facing challenges. 
The Mournland is a dramatic obstacle for 
ground transportation, and the expanding role 
of Lyrandar airships threatens Orien’s business. 
Long distance teleportation is a service only the 
strongest Orien heirs can provide. Now Orien, 
seeking to expand its use of teleportation, 1s 
working with Cannith to find ways to unlock 
and enhance this ultimate gift of the Mark 
of Making. Orien heirs may be caught up in 
these experiments or in the rivalry with House 
Lyrandar, or they may stay close to the ground 
and just keep moving. 


CHAPTER 4 | THE MARK OF PASSAGE 


DRAGONMARKED CHARACTERS 


Here are examples of characters with this mark. 

Outlander Ranger. You're a courier who 
specializes in dangerous deliveries to exotic 
locations. Your assignments take you into the 
wilds, the Mournland, and worse. Hopefully you 
have a team of capable friends! 

Rogue Urchin. You grew up as a foundling 
in the worst slums of Sharn. For you, the city 
is a vast vertical jungle, and you love climbing 
towers and leaping between bridges. You value 
friendship and freedom. You’re more interested 
in having fun and helping your companions than 
in joining up with some stuffy house. 


Marx OF Passace TRAITS 


If your human character has the Mark of Pas- 
sage, the following traits replace the human’s 
Ability Score Increase trait in the Player’s Hand- 
book. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity score 
increases by 2, and one other ability score of your 
choice increases by 1. 

Courier’s Speed. Your base walking speed 
increases to 35 feet. 

Intuitive Motion. When you make a Dex- 
terity (Acrobatics) check or any ability check to 
operate or maintain a land vehicle, you can roll 
a d4 and add the number rolled to the ability 
check. 

Magical Passage. You can cast the misty step 
spell once with this trait, and you regain the abili- 
ty to cast it when you finish a long rest. Dexterity 
is your spellcasting ability for this spell. 

Spells of the Mark. If you have the Spellcast- 
ing or the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on 
the Mark of Passage Spells table are added to the 
spell list of your spellcasting class. 


MARK OF PASSAGE SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 
1st expeditious retreat, jump 
2nd misty step, pass without trace 
3rd blink, phantom steed 
4th dimension door, freedom of movement 
5th teleportation circle 


THE MARK OF SCRIBING 


“Communication is the foundation of civilization.” 


— Lysse Lorridan d’Sivis, 
House Matriarch 


The Mark of Scribing deals with communica- 
tion—both the written and spoken word. A gnome 
who bears the mark can feel words as though 

they are living creatures, struggling to make their 
meaning known. The mark provides a range of 
gifts. It translates languages, but it also allows its 
bearer to communicate with others at a distance. 


House Sivis 


The gnomes of House Sivis facilitate communi- 
cation. This is seen most literally in speaking stones, 
magic items allowing a Sivis heir to send a short 
message to another speaking stone; House Siv- 
is’s network of message stations is the backbone 
of long-distance communication. But Sivis also 
trains and licenses scribes, notaries, interpreters, 
cartographers, barristers, heralds, bookbinders 
and more. House Sivis has an especially close 
relationship with House Kundarak, as Kundarak 
letters of credit must be notarized with a Sivis 
arcane mark. 

House Sivis has taken great pains to maintain 
the trust of its clients and takes a position of ab- 
solute neutrality in all disputes, whether between 
houses or nations. Gnomes have a natural love 
of intrigue, and the different families within the 
house often engage in subtle schemes and feuds, 
but these are never allowed to threaten the house 
as a whole. Sivis gnomes are typically friendly, 
curious, and engaging; but that kindly exterior 
may conceal a scheming mind. 


DRAGONMARKED CHARACTERS 


Here are examples of characters who carry the 
Mark of Scribing. 

House Agent Bard. The Draconic Prophecy 
is one of the greatest mysteries of all. You’re an 
observer tasked to keep your eyes open for any 
sort of manifestation of the Prophecy. You are 


part detective, part spy. Always keep your eyes 
open for leads and see where they take you. 

Sage Wizard. You started out as a scribe and 
discovered a talent for arcane magic and a love 
of history. You’re eager to explore ancient ruins 
and lost civilizations, and you’re especially inter- 
ested in uncovering old records, spellbooks, and 
ancient lore. 

Hermit Warlock (Great Old One). The 
Mark of Making allows you to read the code of 
reality itself, to understand voices no one else can 
hear. You have no interest in the business of your 
house; you are on a grander quest, unraveling a 
secret that lesser minds can’t comprehend. Your 
patron could be a daelkyr or your mark may tru- 
ly be connecting you to some primordial force. 


Marx OF SCRIBING TRAITS 


If you’re a gnome with the Mark of Scribing, you 
have this subrace, with the following traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma 
score increases by 1. 

Gifted Scribe. When you make an Intelli- 
gence (History) check or an ability check using 
calligrapher’s supplies, you can roll a d4 and add 
the number rolled to the ability check. 

Scribe’s Insight. You know the message can- 
trip. You can also cast comprehend languages once 
with this trait, and you regain the ability to cast 
it when you finish a short or long rest. Starting 
at 3rd level, you can cast the magic mouth spell 
with this trait, and you regain the ability to cast 
it when you finish a long rest. Intelligence is your 
spellcasting ability for these spells. 

Spells of the Mark. If you have the Spellcast- 
ing or the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on 
the Mark of Scribing Spells table are added to 
the spell list of your spellcasting class. 


MARK OF SCRIBING SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 


1st comprehend languages, illusory script 
2nd animal messenger, silence 

3rd sending, tongues 

4th arcane eye, confusion 


5th dream 


CHAPTER 4 | THE MARK OF SCRIBING 


104 


THE MARK OF SENTINEL 


“Protection is my purpose. I defend the innocent 
from those who would do them harm. For my 
siblings, this is a job; for me, it’s a calling.” 
— Harric d’Deneith, Sentinel Marshal 


The Mark of Sentinel warns and protects. It 
heightens senses and reflexes, allowing an heir 

to respond to threats with uncanny speed. It can 
shield its bearer from harm. Whether on the bat- 
tlefield or the ballroom, someone who carries the 
Mark of Sentinel is prepared for danger. 


House DENEITH 


House Deneith was born in Karrnath, and war 
flows in its veins. For centuries, the Blademarks 
Guild of House Deneith has governed the mer- 
cenary trade. While warriors with the Mark of 
Sentinel are among its most elite forces, House 
Deneith brokers the services of a wide range of 
soldiers, including Valenar warbands and the 
goblins of Droaam. Beyond the battlefield, the 
Defender’s Guild provides exceptional body- 
guards for those who can afford their services. 
House Deneith is also renowned for its Sentinel 
Marshals, agents that hold the authority to pur- 
sue criminals and enforce the law across Khor- 
vaire. The Sentinel Marshals hold the honor of 
the house in their hands. Being a Marshal is a 
privilege, and it comes with high expectations. 

The dragonmarked houses aren’t allowed to 
own land or hold noble titles. House Deneith 
has always abided by these edicts, maintaining 
neutrality and selling its services to all sides of a 
conflict. However, there’s a faction that feels that 
Deneith should use its power for its own purpos- 
es. House Deneith is also caught in an escalating 
rivalry with House ‘Tharashk, which is edging 
into the mercenary trade. 


DRAGONMARKED CHARACTERS 


Some examples of characters with this mark: 
Paladin Soldier. You're a Sentinel Mar- 
shal, and you feel a divine calling to the cause of 


CHAPTER 4 | THE MARK OF SENTINEL 


justice. You may follow Dol Arrah or the Silver 
Flame, but your paladin abilities could reflect 
the powers of your mark and your devotion to 
justice. Your “military rank” benefit reflects 
your authority as a marshal and is recognized 
by law enforcement, rather than soldiers. 
Monk Entertainer. You love being in the 
thick of battle, but you’ve never had an interesting 
in being a mercenary. Instead, you found your 
path as a gladiator. You draw your Ki through 
your mark, enhancing your reflexes and speed. 
You love life in the arena and the fans love you, 
but perhaps it’s time to find a greater purpose. 


MARK OF SENTINEL TRAITS 


If your human character has the Mark of Senti- 
nel, the following traits replace the human’s Abil- 
ity Score Increase trait in the Player’s Handbook. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution 
score increases by 2, and your Wisdom score 
increases by 1. 

Sentinel’s Intuition. When you make a 
Wisdom (Insight) or Wisdom (Perception) check, 
you can roll a d4 and add the number rolled to 
the ability check. 

Guardian’s Shield. You can cast the shield 
spell once with this trait, and you regain the abili- 
ty to cast it after you finish a long rest. Wisdom is 
your spellcasting ability for this spell. 

Vigilant Guardian. When a creature you 
can see within 5 feet of you is hit by an attack 
roll, you can use your reaction to swap places 
with that creature, and you are hit by the attack 
instead. Once you use this trait, you can’t do so 
again until you finish a long rest. 

Spells of the Mark. If you have the Spellcast- 
ing or the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on 
the Mark of Sentinel Spells table are added to the 
spell list of your spellcasting class. 


MARK OF SENTINEL SPELLS 


Spell Level Spells 
1st compelled duel, shield of faith 
2nd warding bond, zone of truth 
3rd counterspell, protection from energy 


4th death ward, guardian of faith 
5th Bigby’s hand 


THE MARK OF SHADOW 


“The illusions that I weave dazzle and deceive. 
Sometimes that deception eases your burdens, 
letting you forget your troubles for a moment. But 
I can also ease your burdens by ending your life.” 


— Lady Elara d’Thuranni, 
shadow dancer 


The Mark of Shadows lets an elf weave illusions 
from shadows, crafting sounds and images to 
distract or delight. The mark also allows its 
bearer to draw on the shadows, making it an 
easy matter to avoid detection or even disappear 
while in plain sight. It is a valuable tool for an 
entertainer, a spy, or an assassin. 


THE Houses oF SHADOW 


The elves have carried the Mark of Shadow for 
thousands of years. The families that carry the 
mark left Aerenal after the conflict that wiped 
out the Mark of Death and established House 
Phiarlan in Khorvaire. These elves are the finest 
entertainers in the land, giving them access to all 
manner of places and secrets. But the elves do 
more than entertain. There has always been an 
elite force of spies and assassins within the house. 
Common folk know nothing of this. Only special 
clients—powerful nobles, merchant lords, and the 
like—have access to these shadow-marked spies. 
‘Toward the end of the Last War, a bitter feud 
broke out between the major families of the 
house. Known as the Shadow Schism, it resulted 
in a split withinin Phiarlan—and the foundation 
of House Thuranni. House Phiarlan continues to 
offer entertainment and espionage in the lands 
west of the Mournland, while Thuranni operates 
in Karrnath, the Lhazaar Principalities, and the 
eastern lands. As a rule, Phiarlan elves are the 
better spies and Thuranni agents are superior 
assassins. On the surface Thuranni and Phiarlan 
maintain a peaceful relationship, but rivalries 
run deep. 


DRAGONMARKED CHARACTERS 


Here are a few examples of characters who carry 
the Mark of Shadow. 

House Agent Rogue. You're a young agent 
in House Thuranni. You’ve studied the perform- 
ing arts, but you’re far more interested in the 
darker side of the house. At the moment you’re 
building your skills and reputation as an observer 
and investigator, but once you prove yourself you 
hope you'll get to be a player in the shadow war. 

Bard Entertainer. You're a rising star. Your 
performances have already earned you a name 
across the Five Nations, and your fame will surely 
only increase as you develop your talents. The 
house has helped with your career, and they’ve 
dropped hints to see if you want to get involved 
in the other side of the house, but at the moment 
you're just in this for the music. 


Mark oF SHADOW TRAITS 


If you’re an elf with the Mark of Shadow, you 
have this subrace, with the following traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma 
score increases by 1. 

Cunning Intuition. When you make a Cha- 
risma (Performance) or Dexterity (Stealth) check, 
you can roll a d4 and add the number rolled to 
the ability check. 

Shape Shadows. You know the minor illusion 
cantrip. Starting at 3rd level, you can cast the znvis- 
ibility spell once with this trait, and you regain the 
ability to cast it when you finish a long rest. Charis- 
ma is your spellcasting ability for these spells. 

Spells of the Mark. If you have the Spellcast- 
ing or the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on 
the Mark of Shadow Spells table are added to the 
spell list of your spellcasting class. 


MARK OF SHADOW SPELLS 


Spell Level Spells 
1st disguise self, silent image 
2nd darkness, pass without trace 
3rd clairvoyance, major image 
4th greater invisibility, hallucinatory 
terrain 


5th mislead 


CHAPTER 4 | THE MARK OF SHADOW 


105 


106 


THE MARK OF STORM 


“Sovereigns and Firstborn, grant me the four 
blessings promised to our people: dominion over 
the air, dominion over the water, fortune for my 
family, and fortune for my future.” 


— From the Oath of Lyrandar 


Wind and water welcome the half-elf who carries 
the Mark of Storms. The wind catches them 
when they fall, and they swim with remarkable 
speed. Those who possess dragonshard focus 
items can call on even greater powers, shaping 
the weather and calling on the power of the 
storm. 


House LYRANDAR 


House Lyrandar has long ruled the seas. ‘Their 
galleons harness air and water elementals and are 
faster than any mundane vessel. Control of the 
sea and river trade gave Lyrandar considerable 
power. Now they reach out to the skies. Merely a 
decade old, Lyrander airships are already shifting 
the balance of power in overland travel, previously 
dominated by House Orien’s lightning rail. 
House Lyrandar also controls the air in a more 
literal way. The Raincallers’ Guild can use the 
Mark of Storms to control the weather for its 
clients, but at a considerable price. 

House Lyrandar is made up of half-elves. For 
many of its members, it’s more than simply 
family or business—1t is the closest thing their 
people have to a homeland. House Lyrandar is 
ambitious and often acts in what it sees as the 
interests of all half-elves. Lyrandar heirs have 
been helping the Valenar elves run their young 
kingdom, and some believe that Valenar could 
become a true homeland for the Khoravar. 


DRAGONMARKED CHARACTERS 


Here are a few examples of characters who carry 
the Mark of Storms. 

Noble Sorcerer. You are heir to one of the 
oldest families of Lyrandar, a direct descendant 


CHAPTER 4 | THE MARK OF STORM 


of the Firstborn. You can draw on your mark and 
your bloodline to wield power beyond those of 
other heirs. You’re a noble of the house: are you a 
carefree celebrity, or are you driven by duty and a 
deep desire to help your house and your people? 

Sailor Fighter. You served on the first 
airship that went into service, and spent the Last 
War fighting in the skies. You know your way 
around the clouds and on the water, and you’re 
looking for adventurers that will take you back to 
either of them. 

Criminal Rogue. You’ve never been one to 
play by the rules. You always dreamed of being a 
smuggler or a sky pirate, and when you were old 
enough, you stole a small airship and headed to 
Sharn. You and your DM will have to decide how 
that worked out and if you still have the airship; it 
turns out they’re hard to hide. Either way, you’ve 
been kicked out of the house and you’re looking 
for jobs that cater to your sense of adventure. 


MarK OF STORM TRAITS 


If your half-elf character has the Mark of 
Storm, the following traits replace the half-elf’s 
Ability Score Increase and Skill Versatility traits 
in the Player’s Handbook. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma 
score increases by 2, and your Dexterity score 
increases by 1. 

Windwright’s Intuition. When you make a 
Dexterity (Acrobatics) check or any ability check 
involving navigator’s tools, you can roll a d4 and 
add the number rolled to the ability check. 

Storm’s Boon. You have resistance to lightning 
damage. 

Headwinds. You know the gust cantrip. 
Starting at 3rd level, you can cast the gust of 
wind spell once with this trait, and you regain 
the ability to cast it when you finish a long rest. 
Charisma is your spellcasting ability for these 
spells. 

Spells of the Mark. If you have the 
Spellcasting or the Pact Magic class feature, 
the spells on the Mark of Storm Spells table are 
added to the spell list of your spellcasting class. 


MARK OF STORM SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 


1st 
2nd 
3rd 
4th 
5th 


Gust 


Transmutation cantrip 


Casting Time: | action 
Range: 30 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You seize the air and compel it to create one of 
the following effects at a point you can see within 


range: 


e One Medium or smaller creature that you 
choose must succeed on a Strength saving 
throw or be pushed up to’ 
5 feet away from you. 


e You create a small blast of air 
capable of moving one object 
that is neither held nor carried 
and that weighs no more than 5 
pounds. This object is pushed up to 10 
feet away from you. It isn’t pushed with 
enough force to cause damage. 


e You create a harmless sensory effect using 
air, such as causing leaves to rustle, wind to 


feather fall, fog cloud 

gust of wind, levitate 

sleet storm, wind wall 

conjure minor elemental, contro! water 
conjure elemental 


slam shutters closed, or your clothing to a 


billow impressively in a breeze. 


Ea’ 


CHAPTER 4 | THE MARK OF STORM 107 


108 


THE Mark oF WARDING 


“My family has the finest vaults you can imagine. 
They forge the locks that secure the jewels of kings 
and queens. And I learned to pick those locks 
when I was barely out of the crib.” 


— Cutter, burglar and 
Kundarak excoriate 


The Mark of Warding helps its bearers protect 
things of value. Using the mark, a dwarf can 
weave wards and seal portals with mystic force. 

It also provides its bearer with an intuitive under- 
standing of locks and mechanisms used to protect 
and seal. The decision each heir has to make is 
whether they'll use this power to keep things safe, 
or whether they’re more interested in opening 
locks and taking what’s inside. 


House KUNDARAK 


If you want to keep something safe —jewels, se- 
crets, prisoners—Kundarak is there to help. The 
Defenders Guild of House Kundarak trains lock- 
smiths, security specialists, and more. It main- 
tains the infamous prison of Dreadhold, along 
with a number of smaller prisons. As useful as 
these services are, it’s the Banking Guild that 
truly defines the house. Kundarak’s lands in the 
Mror Holds include deep veins of precious met- 
als and stones, and the dwarves have used this 
wealth to establish the banking industry of Khor- 
vaire. Anyone who makes a living from coin— 
from bankers to goldsmiths—likely learned their 
skills at House Kundarak. The security of Kund- 
arak banks is legendary. The house also provides 
a special service to those who can afford it: a sys- 
tem of extradimensional vaults, allowing a client 
to store their goods in one location and retrieve 
them at any other Kundarak enclave. 


CHAPTER 4 | THE MARK OF WARDING 


House Kundarak has a close alliance with 
House Sivis. Like the House of Scribing, Kunda- 
rak has worked to earn the trust of its clients and 
to establish a reputation for unshakable integrity. 
The house has no love of renegade dwarves using 
their marks to turn a profit, and such rogues will 
want to avoid the eye of Kundarak. 


DRAGONMARKED CHARACTERS 


Here are examples of characters with the Mark 
of Warding. 

Artificer House Agent. Some people want 
to build a better mousetrap. Better isn’t enough 
for you—you want to build the best. Your basic 
job: go out in the world, find the finest and most 
unusual security systems, and see what you can 
learn from them. When you go into an ancient 
ruin, you’re hoping there are traps. 

Criminal Rogue. It’s not that you’re a bad 
person. You’ve just never met a lock you didn’t 
want to open. It’s like they speak to you, whisper- 
ing “Free me! Free me!” You're not even in it for 
the gold; you’ve just fallen in with a bad crowd 
because most people who like opening locks are 
criminals. Perhaps it’s time to make some new 
friends. 


Mark oF Warpine Traits 


If you’re a dwarf with the Mark of Warding, you 
have this subrace, with the following traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Intelligence 
score increases by 1. 

Warder’s Intuition. When you make an In- 
telligence (Investigation) check or an ability check 
using thieves’ tools, you can roll a d4 and add the 
number rolled to the ability check. 

Wards and Seals. You can cast the alarm and 
mage armor spells with this trait. Starting at 3rd 
level, you can also cast the arcane lock spell with it. 
Once you cast any of these spells with this trait, 


you can’t cast that spell with it again until you MARK OF WARDING SPELLS 


finish a long rest. Intelligence is your spellcasting Spell Level Spells 

ability for these spells, and you don’t need ma- 1st alarm, armor of Agathys 

terial components for them when you cast them 2nd arcane lock knock 

ee ae 3rd glyph of warding, magic circle 
Spells of the Mark. If you have the Spellcast- , 7 , 

ing or the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on ath teomunas PPAT nest Margenkain: 

the Mark of Warding Spells table are added to ail sud a 

the spell list of your spellcasting class. au EA 


= 


iy} 


| 
f 
j 
j 
i 
i 
a 
1 
j 
Į 
| 
' 
l 


CHAPTER 4 | THE MARK OF WARDING 109 


110 CHAPTER 4 | THE MARK OF WARDING 


ABERRANT DRAGONMARKS 


“Your sigil creates, child of Gannith. Mine holds 
the power to destroy.” 


—Rotting Bal, 
‘Tarkanan Enforcer 


The twelve dragonmarks are tied to specific 
bloodlines and passed down through families. 
They are reliable and predictable, and their 
powers are constructive. They create; they heal; 
they protect. 

But there is another kind of dragonmark: 
marks that are unpredictable and dangerous to 
both the bearer and the people around them. 
Someone with such a mark can kill with a 
touch or control minds with a glance. Aberrant 
marks often appear when people from different 
dragonmarked families produce a child, and for 
this reason such unions are absolutely forbidden 
by the Twelve. But aberrant dragonmarks 
can appear on members of any race, at any 
age, regardless of bloodline. No two aberrant 
dragonmarks are exactly alike—even if they 


grant the same power, they may appear and 
manifest in different ways. If two aberrant marks 
might grant fire bolt, one mark may be formed 
from scar tissue while another is traced on the 
skin in lines of cold fire. 


While aberrant dragonmarks can be disturbing, 


on the surface an aberrant mark seems no more 
dangerous or threatening than the powers of a 
sorcerer. So, what makes them significant? First 
of all, aberrant marks always have flaws. These 
may not actively hurt a character, but they are 
always a burden in some way—a burden that 
could drive a weak-willed person to madness. 

It takes time for a character to learn to control 
their mark, and in time people may be hurt. If 
an aberrant mark grants fire bolt, the person who 
carries it might have severely burned or even 
killed a loved one. Imagine having the power 
to cast charm person but being unable to control 
it and having people you care about suddenly 
becoming slavishly devoted to you. All of these 
factors have led to the general superstition 
that people with aberrant dragonmarks are 
dangerous, that their marks drive them crazy or 
turn them into sociopaths. ‘These are things that 


can happen; people have a right to be afraid. 


But it is possible for an aberrant to 
learn to control their mark and 
to endure the flaw. 
Aberrant marks are 
feared for another 
reason, too. Long 
ago aberrant marks 
were more frequent 
and some people 
had aberrant 
marks that held 
greater powers. 
Aberrant leader 
Halas Tarkanan 
could devastate 
cities with powerful 
earthquakes, while 
the Dreambreaker 
shattered minds. 
The Lady of the 
Plague wielded 


CHAPTER 4 | ABERRANT DRAGONMARKS 


lll 


112 


disease and commanded hordes of 
vermin. The dragonmarked houses 
united in an inquisition called The 
War of the Mark. Some say that 
this was a persecution of innocents; 
but most feared the aberrants and 
stood by as the houses hunted them 
down. Ever since the War of the 
Mark, aberrant dragonmarks have 
been few in number and relatively week. 
But since the Mourning aberrant marks have 
been appearing in greater numbers, and people 
wonder if those who carry them could develop 
greater power. 


FEAT: ABERRANT DRAGONMARK 


Prerequisite: No other dragonmark 


You have manifested an aberrant dragonmark. 
Determine its appearance and the flaw associated 
with it. You gain the following benefits: 
e Increase your Constitution score by 1, to a 
maximum of 20. 


e You learn a cantrip of your choice from the 
sorcerer spell list. In addition, choose a 1st- 
level spell from the sorcerer spell list. You 
learn that spell and can cast it through your 
mark. Once you cast it, you must finish 
a short or long rest before you can cast it 
again through the mark. Constitution is 
your spellcasting ability for these spells. 


e When you cast the Ist-level spell through 
your mark, you can expend one of your Hit 
Dice and roll it. If you roll an even number, 
you gain a number of temporary hit points 
equal to the number rolled. If you roll an 
odd number, one random creature within 
30 feet of you (not including you) takes 
force damage equal to the number rolled. 
If no other creatures are in range, you take 
the damage. 


You also develop a random flaw from the 
Aberrant Dragonmark Flaws table. 


CHAPTER 4 | ABERRANT DRAGONMARKS 


ABERRANT DRAGONMARK FLAWS 
d8 Flaw 
1 Your mark is a source of constant physical 
pain. 
2 Your mark whispers to you. Its meaning can be 
unclear. 


Ww 


When you’re stressed, the mark hisses audibly. 
4 The skin around the mark is burned, scaly, or 
withered. 
Animals are uneasy around you. 
You have a mood swing any time you use your 
mark. 
7 Your looks change slightly whenever you use 
the mark. 


8 You have horrific nightmares after you use 
your mark. 


OPTION: GREATER ABERRANT POWERS 


At the DM’s option, a character who has the 
Aberrant Dragonmark feat has a chance of 
manifesting greater power. Upon reaching 10th 
level, such a character has a 10 percent chance 
of gaining an epic boon from among the options 
in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide. If the 
character fails to gain a boon, they have a 10 
percent chance the next time they gain a level. 
If the character gains a boon, the DM chooses 
it or determines it randomly. The character 
also permanently loses one of their Hit Dice, 
and their hit point maximum is reduced by 
an amount equal to a roll of that die plus their 
Constitution modifier (minimum reduction of 1). 
This reduction can’t be reversed by any means. 


CHAPTER 5: MAGIC ITEMS 


RCANE MAGIC PLAYS A VITAL ROLE 
in the Five Nations. Common 
magic items are widespread in 
the world. The crystals known as 
dragonshards serve as the fuel 
of the magical economy and are used in focus 
items that amplify the powers of dragonmarks. 


DRAGONSHARDS 


Dragonshards are crystals imbued with raw 
mystical energy. They are the fuel that drives 
the magical economy, playing a vital role in the 
creation of magic items and the performance of 
arcane rituals. 
Dragonshards come in three distinct 
varieties, each of which are found in different 
environments. Eberron dragonshards are 
found in shallow soil, and often encased in 
geode-like stone shells. Eberron shards can be 
found almost anywhere, but the most significant 
deposits have been discovered in jungle 
environments, notably O’barra and the distant 
land of Xen’drik. In their raw form, Eberron 
shards are rosy crystals with crimson swirls 
flowing their depths. 
Eberron shards are the most common form of 
dragonshard. They are primarily 
refined into a glowing 
powder. This dragonshard 
dust can be used to fuel 
almost any act of magic. 
When casting a spell, you 
can use dragonshard 
dust in place of any 
spell component 
that has a cost, 
unless the DM 
says otherwise. 
Dragonshard dust 
is used in the 


creation of magic items, and 
many powerful tools—such 
as the lightning rail and 
elemental airships—require 
an ongoing expenditure of 
Eberron dragonshards to 
maintain their enchantments. 

Khyber dragonshards are 
found deep in the earth, often 
near layers of magma. ‘These living 
crystals typically grow on cavern 
walls, and superstition says they 
flourish in areas with significant fiendish 
activity. Khyber dragonshards are deep 
blue or dark violet, laced with gleaming veins. 

Khyber dragonshards have a affinity for 
binding magics. Elemental binding—which 
is behind airships, the lightning rail, and 
elemental galleons—requires a Khyber shard 
to hold the elemental. Khyber shards are 
used for phylacteries, planar binding, any 
other effects that trap or manipulate spirits. 
Khyber dragonshards are also used for many 
necromantic rituals. 

Siberys dragonshards fall from the Ring 
of Siberys, the ring of crystals that encircles 
the world. While rare in Khorvaire, there 
are significant shard fields in the continent of 
Xen’drik, and this is a potential source of great 
wealth for explorers. Siberys dragonshards are 
amber in color, with swirling golding veins 
gleaming within. 

Siberys dragonshards have a close 
aflinity to dragonmarks 
and are a vital 
part of any 
dragonmark 
focus item. 
Larger shards 
may be required 
for eldritch 
machines or used in 
the creation of legendary 
items or artifacts. 


CHAPTER 5 | MAGIC ITEMS 113 


Macic ÍTEMS 


Consider how these magic items from throughout 
Khorvaire can add to your campaign. 


ARCANE Focuses 


Go to the Bazaar in Sharn or any enclave of 
House Cannith and you'll find a wide selection 
of arcane focuses to choose from. For a 
wandslinger, the choice of an arcane focus carries 
the same weight as a duelist deciding between a 
rapier or a maul. Do you use a wand of Ferman ash 
to focus your fie bolt, or do you harness defensive 
energies with a Reszan orb? 

An arcane focus is a tool, and only provides its 
benefits while you’re actively using it. An orb of 
shielding provides no protection when it’s in your 
pack; you must have it in your hand. 

In Khorvaire, arcane focus items are 
recognized as weapons: if guards are securing 
swords and bows, they'll also require you to turn 
over your staff. 


IMBUED Woop 


Wondrous item, common (requires attunement) 


An imbued wood focus is a rod, staff, or wand cut 
from a tree infused with extraplanar energy. If 
you're a spellcaster, you can use this orb as a 
spellcasting focus. 

When you cast a damage-dealing spell using 
this item as your spellcasting focus, you gain a +1 
bonus to one damage roll of the spell, provided 
the damage is of the type associated with the 
item’s wood. The types of wood and their 
associated damage types are listed in the Imbued 
Wood Focus table. 


CHAPTER 5 | MAGIC ITEMS 


IMBUED WoobD Focus 


Wood Damage Type 
Fernian Ash Fire 
Irian Rosewood Radiant 


Kythrian Manchineel 
Lamannian Oak 


Acid or poison 
Lightning or thunder 


Mabaran Ebony Necrotic 
Risian Pine Cold 
Shavarran Birch Force 
Xorian Wenge Psychic 


ORB oF SHIELDING 


Wondrous item, common (requires attunement) 


An orb of shielding is a polished, spherical chunk 
of crystal or stone aligned to one of the planes of 
existence. If you’re a spellcaster, you can use this 
orb as a spellcasting focus. 

If you’re holding the orb when you take 
damage of the type associated with the orb’s 
material, you can use your reaction to reduce 
the damage by 1d4 (to a minimum of 0). The 
materials and their associated damage types are 
listed in the Orb of Shielding table. 


ORB OF SHIELDING 


Planar Material Damage Type 
Fernian basalt Fire 
Irian quartz Radiant 


Kythrian skarn Acid and poison 


Lamannian flint Lightning and thunder 


Mabaran obsidian Necrotic 
Risian shale Cold 
Shavarran chert Force 
Xorian marble Psychic 


Common Macic ÍTEMS 


Ban oF LoYALTY 


Ring, common (requires attunement) 


If you are reduced to 0 hit points while attuned 
to a band of loyalty, you instantly die. These rings 
are favored by spies who can’t afford to fall into 
enemy hands. 


CLEANSING STONE 


Wondrous item, common 


A cleansing stone is a sphere 1 foot in diameter, 
engraved with mystic sigils. When touching the 
stone, you can use an action to activate it and 
remove dirt and grime from your garments and 
your person. 

Such stones are often embedded in pedestals 
in public squares in Aundair or in high-end 
Ghallanda inns. 


EVERBRIGHT LANTERN 


Wondrous item, common 


This bullseye lantern contains an Eberron 
dragonshard that sheds light comparable to that 
produced by a continual flame spell. An everbright 
lantern sheds light in a 120-foot cone; the closest 
60 feet is bright light, and the farthest 60 feet is 
dim light. 


FEATHER TOKEN 


Wondrous item, common 


This small metal disk is inscribed with the image 
of a feather. When you fall at least 20 feet while 
the token is on your person, you descend 60 

feet per round and take no damage from falling. 
The token’s magic 1s expended after you land, 
whereupon the disk becomes nonmagical. 


GLAMERWEAVE 


Wondrous item, common or uncommon 


Glamerweave is clothing imbued with harmless 
illusory magic. While wearing the common 
version of these clothes, you can use a bonus 
action to create a moving illusory pattern within 
the cloth. 

Uncommon glamerweave can have the pattern 
rise from the cloth. For example, a glamerweave 
gown might be wreathed in harmless, illusory 
flames, while a glamerweave hat might have illusory 
butterflies fluttering around it. 

When you make a Charisma (Performance) or 
Charisma (Persuasion) check while wearing the 
uncommon version of glamenweave, you can roll a 
d4 and add the number rolled to the check. Once 
you use this property, it can’t be used again until 
the next dawn. 


SHIFTWEAVE 


Wondrous item, common 


When a suit of shzftweave is created, up to five 
different outfits can be embedded into the cloth. 
While wearing the clothing, you can speak its 
command word as a bonus action to transform 
your outfit into your choice of one of the other 
designs contained within it. Regardless of its 
appearance, the outfit can’t be anything but 
clothing. Although it can duplicate the look 

of other magical clothing, it doesn’t gain their 
magical properties. 


SPELLSHARD 


Wondrous item, common 


This polished Eberron dragonshard fits in the 
hand and stores information similar to a book. 
The shard can hold the equivalent of one book 
that’s no more than 320 pages long. A shard 
can be created blank or already filled with 
information. When the shard is created, the 
creator can set a passphrase that must be spoken 
to access the information stored within. 


CHAPTER 5 | MAGIC ITEMS 


115 


116 


While holding the shard, you can use an action 
to open your mind to the shard, seeing its content 
in your mind. On subsequent rounds, reading the 
text or scribing new text on blank “pages” in the 
shard requires concentration (as if concentrating 
on a spell) and takes the same amount of time it 
takes you to read and write normally. Thinking 
of a particular phrase or topic draws you to the 
first section in the shard that addresses it. 

A wizard can use a spellshard as a spellbook, 
with the usual cost in gold and time to “scribe” a 
spell into the shard. 


DRAGONMARK Focus ITEMs 


These items harness and expand the powers of a 
dragonmark, allowing the dragonmarked houses 
to provide a wide range of useful services. You 
must possess a particular dragonmark in order to 
use or attune to a dragonmark focus item. 

Many dragonmark focus items have unique 
effects related to their marks, as described in this 
section. Alternately, a dragonmark focus item can 
duplicate the power of an existing magic item with 
a power Closely related to the mark. For example: 


e A cape of the mountebank or boots of speed tied 
to the Mark of Passage, or horseshoes of speed 
that only function if the rider has the Mark 
of Passage. 


e <A cloak of elvenkind or deck of illusions tied to 
the Mark of Shadows. 


e Dimensional shackles that can only be 
activated by someone with the Mark of 
Warding. 


e <A gem of seeing that requires the Mark of 
Detection. 


It’s easier to produce an item that amplifies an 
existing power than one that generates it on its 
own, and generally a focus item costs half as much 
as the standard version of that item. However, the 
Siberys shards required to make focus items are 
rare, and it’s always up to the DM to decide what 
focus items are available in the world. 


CHAPTER 5 | MAGIC ITEMS 


Bac oF Bounty 


Wondrous item, uncommon 


This is a sturdy leather sack with tiny Siberys 
shards embedded into the lining. If you have the 
Mark of Hospitality you can use an action to cast 
create food and water, drawing a feast from within 
the bag. You shape this meal with your thoughts. 
You can create the standard bland fare without 
requiring any sort of check, but you can attempt 
to create finer food by making a Charisma check; 
if you’re proficient with cook’s utensils, add your 
bonus to this check. A failed check results in a 
sour and squalid meal. 


Food Quality Difficulty 

Poor No roll required 
Modest 10 
Comfortable d3 

Wealthy 15 

Aristocratic 18 


A bag of bounty can be used up to three times over 
the course of a day. After that, the bag can’t be 
used again until the next dawn. 


INOUISITIVE’S GOGGLES 


Wondrous item, uncommon (requires attunement) 


The lenses of these goggles are carved from 
Siberys dragonshards. While garish in 
appearance, these goggles are a boon to any 
Tharashk inquisitive. To attune to the goggles, 
you must possess the Mark of Finding. As long 
as this condition is met, you gain the following 
benefits. 


e You can add your Intuition die from the 
Hunter’s Intuition trait of the mark when you 
make Wisdom (Insight) checks. 


e When you examine an object, you can 
make a Wisdom (Perception) check to 
identify the aura of the last living creature 
to touch the object. The DC is 13 + the 


number of days since the last contact 
occurred. If the check is successful, you 
learn the species of the creature and you 
can immediately use your Imprint Prey ability 
to target this creature. 


KEYCHARM 


Wondrous item, common (requires attunement by a 
creature with the Mark of Warding) 


This small stylized key plays a vital role in the 
work of House Kundarak. If you cast the alarm, 
arcane lock, or glyph of warding spell, you can tie 

the effect to the keycharm so that whoever holds 

it receives the notification from the alarm spell, 
bypasses the lock of the arcane lock spell, or avoids 
triggering the glyph placed by the glyph of warding 
spell. In addition, the holder (who needn’t be 
attuned to the item) can take an action to end 
any one spell tied to it, provided the holder 
knows the command word you set for ending 
the tied spells. The keycharm can have up to three 
tied spells at one time. 


RINGS OF SHARED SUFFERING 


Ring, uncommon (requires attunement) 


These rings come in linked pairs. It you possess 
the Mark of Sentinel, you can use a bonus 
action to form a link to the creature 
attuned to the other ring; from then on, 
whenever that creature suffers damage, 
they only suffer half of that damage and 
you take the rest. This effect continues 
until you end it as a bonus action or 
until you or the other creature removes 
their ring. This effect isn’t limited by 
range. A creature cannot be attuned 

to more than one ring of shared suffering. 


SCRIBE 'S PEN 


Wondrous item, common (requires attunement by a 
creature with the Mark of Scnbing) 


You can use this pen to write on any surface. You 
decide whether the writing is visible or invisible, 
but the writing is always visible to a person with 
the Mark of Scribing. 

Any creature with the Mark of Scribing can use 
an action to touch the invisible writing, making it 
visible to all. 

If you use the pen to write on a creature that 
isn’t a construct, the writing fades after 7 days. 


CHAPTER 5 | MAGIC ITEMS 117 


WHEEL oF WIND AND WATER 


Wondrous item, uncommon 


When mounted at the helm of an elemental 
galleon or airship, this wheel allows a creature 
that possesses the Mark of Storm to telepathically 
control the elemental bound inside the vessel. 

If a wheel of wind and water is mounted on a 
mundane sailing ship, a creature with the Mark 
of Storm who is using the wheel can create 
an area of ideal conditions around the vessel, 
increasing its speed by 5 miles per hour. 


CHAPTER 5 | MAGIC ITEMS 


ELpRITCH MACHINES 


In a Cannith enclave, a team of artificers 
maintain the creation forge that produces the 
warforged. In the Shadow Marches, druids guard 
the seals that hold the Daelkyr at bay. In the 
sewers below Sharn, a mad genius puts the final 
touches on a device that will turn the people of 
the city into undead monstrosities. 

All of these are eldritch machines. They are 
wondrous locations: magic items of immense 
power, but so large that they cannot be moved. 
Eldritch machines always require rare components 
but creating an eldritch machine could require one 
or more planes to be coterminous or it might 
only be possible to build it in a manifest zone. 

Ultimately, eldritch machines are plot devices. 
Their powers are far beyond the standard level 
of what is possible in Eberron, but such a device 
can reflect the culmination of a villain’s master 
plan or a last defense against evil that must be 
protected at all costs. 


DIMENSIONAL SEAL 


A dimensional seal is a massive stone slab 
covered with a complex pattern of runes and 
sigils. ‘The seal projects an invisible field in 

a 2-mile radius. This field blocks all forms 
of conjuration magic and any other effect 
that involves teleportation or planar travel. 
Dimensional seals are usually found in the 
Eldeen Reaches and the Shadow Marches— 
reminders of the conflict between the 
Gatekeepers and the daelkyr. The techniques 


used to create these seals have been long lost. It’s 
said that as a whole, the dimensional seals keep 
the daelkyr bound in Khyber and prevent Xoriat 
from becoming coterminous with Eberron. If 
enough of these seals are destroyed, there could 
be dire consequences for the world. 


MABARAN RESONATOR 


This dread device draws on the power of Mabar, 
infusing the dead with the malign energy of the 
Endless Night. While it is active, any humanoid 
that dies within 2 miles of the resonator 
reanimates | minute later as a zombie (see the 
Monster Manual for its stat block) under the control 
of the creature controlling the device. 


Master’s CALL 


While this looks like a scrap heap assembled 
from shattered constructs, this eldritch machine 
possesses great power. A creature in control 

of it can sense the presence and location of all 
warforged within 10 miles of the device and 
can, as an action, send a telepathic message to 
them laced with enchantment magic. Such a 
message can be sent no more than once every 
24 hours. A warforged who receives the message 
is compelled to follow one command contained 
within it, unless the warforged succeeds on a DC 
12 Wisdom saving throw. The affected warforged 
breaks free of the command after 24 hours. 


SPELL SINK 


This device emanates an antimagic field (same 
effects as the antimagic field spell) in a radius of 1 to 
3 miles. The field can be activated or deactivated 
as an action with a touch by its controller. 

The form that the device takes depends on 
the nature of its creator. The Ashbound druids 
despise unnatural magic, so a spell sink created 
by them might be a living artifact, such as a 
twisted tree that consumes the magical energy 
around it. Conversely, a spell sink created by a 
mad artificer might be a massive vessel composed 
of dragonshards and exotic metals. 

A variant device called the spell siphon not only 
neutralizes magic but also absorbs all magical 
energy in the area, storing that power for a 
cataclysmic effect. 


STORM SPIRE 


This eldritch machine can only be controlled by 
creatures that bear the Mark of Storm. Storm 
spires allow House Lyrandar to influence the 
weather, which can be a boon for the local 
population or a curse if a Lyrandar baron 
chooses to demand payment for ideal weather. 


CHAPTER 5 | MAGIC ITEMS 


119 


120 


WarForGED COMPONENTS 


The warforged are living constructs. House 
Cannith has designed a number of magic items 
that can interface directly with the body of a 
warforged. Once attached, a component cannot 
be removed unless the warforged allows it. 

The armblade is an example of an item created 
by House Cannith. Docents are mysterious 
wondrous items discovered in Xen’drik. These 
are just a few of the components that can be 
encountered in the world. 


ARMBLADE 


Weapon (any one-handed melee weapon), common 
(requires attunement by a warforged) 


An armblade is a magic weapon that attaches to 
your arm, becoming inseparable from you as 
long as you're attuned to it. To attune to this 
item, you must hold it against your forearm for 
the entire attunement period. 

As a bonus action, you can retract the armblade 
into your forearm or extend it from there. While 


it is extended, you can use the weapon as if you 
were holding it, and you can’t use that hand for 
other purposes. 


CHAPTER 5 | MAGIC ITEMS 


Docent 
Wondrous item, rare (requires attunement by a warforged) 


A docent is a small metal sphere, about 2 inches 
across, studded with dragonshards. To attune to 
a docent, you must embed the item somewhere on 
your body, such as your chest or your eye socket. 

Sentience. A docent is a sentient item of any 
alignment with an Intelligence of 16, a Wisdom 
of 14, and a Charisma of 14. It perceives the 
world through your senses. It communicates 
telepathically with you and can speak, read, and 
understand any language it knows (see “Random 
Properties” below). 

Life Support. Whenever you end your turn 
with 0 hit points, the docent can make a Wisdom 
(Medicine) check with a +6 bonus. If this check 
succeeds, the docent stabilizes you. 

Random Properties. A docent has the 
following properties: 


e Languages. The docent knows Common, 
Giant, and 1d4 additional languages chosen 
by the DM. Ifa docent knows fewer than six 
languages, it can learn a new language after 
it hears or reads the language through your 
senses. 


e Skills. The docent has a +7 bonus to one of 
the following skills (roll a d4): (1) Arcana, (2) 
History, (3) Investigation, or (4) Nature. 


e Spells. The docent knows one of the 
following spells and can cast it at will, 
requiring no components (roll a d6): (1—2) 
detect evil and good or (3—6) detect magic. The 
docent decides when to cast the spell. 


Personality. A docent is designed to advise 
and assist the warforged it’s attached to. One 
of the simple functions of a docent is to serve as a 
translator. The docents properties are under its 
control, and if you have a bad relationship with 
your docent, it might refuse to assist you. 


CHAPTER 5 | MAGIC ITEMS 


121 


122 


WAND SHEATH 


Wondrous item, common (requires attunement by a 
warforged) 
A wand sheath clamps onto your arm and imparts 
the following benefits: 
e The wand sheath can’t be removed from you 
while you’re attuned to it. 


e You can insert a wand into the sheath as an 
action. The sheath can hold only one wand 
at a time. 


CHAPTER 5 | MAGIC ITEMS 


e You can retract or extend a wand from the 
sheath as a bonus action. While the wand 
is extended, you can use it as if you were 
holding it, but your hand remains free. 


Ifa sheathed wand requires attunement, you 
must attune to the wand before you can use 
it. However, the wand sheath and the attached 
wand count as a single magic item with regard 
to the number of magic items you can attune to. 
If you remove the wand from the sheath, your 
attunement to the wand ends. 


CHAPTER 6: SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


Ive been here a week, and it’s stall hard not to be 
overwhelmed by the city. The towers rise up until 
they disappear into the clouds. Lights gleam in a 
thousand windows. Skycoaches work their way 
through the maze of bridges connecting the massive 
towers, and up above I can see the burning ring of 
an elemental airship. 


Staring into the sky, I nearly walk into a masswe 
warforged juggernaut. It’s my first time seeing 
one... but there’s so many things Dve never seen 
in this place. A tattooed elf hageles with a masked 
halfling, arguing about the price of lizard meat. A 
gargoyle watches from a high perch. I gather my 
senses and keep moving. 


It’s not until I reach the hft that I realize... that 
warforged stole my purse. 


LL OF THE THEMES OF THE SETTING 
are made manifest in the great 
city of Sharn. It’s a place of 
magic, with skycoaches circling 
mile-high towers and mystic 
forges toiling endlessly in the bowels. It’s a 
place of adventure and intrigue. A fallen angel 
is gathering minions in the ruins below the 
city. A gang war is unfolding in Callestan. 
The corpse of a murdered nobleman has 
just been discovered in his floating mansion. 
A Cannith artificer is experimenting with a 
planar gateway—and something is about to go 


terribly wrong. 

All of these adventures and a hundred more are 
waiting in the City of ‘Towers. 

This chapter provides an overview of Sharn, 
with a host of story hooks to help you get started. 
For more information about the city and its 
inhabitants, refer to the sources in the Appendix. 


CHAPTER 6 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


123 


124 


SHARN BACKGROUNDS 


The City of Towers draws people from across the 
world. What’s brought your character to Sharn? 
Do you have deep roots in the city, or have you 
just stepped off the lightning rail? 

Backgrounds provide a strong foundation 
for building a story. If you’re a noble, are you 
tied to one of the founding families of Sharn, 
or are you a scion of another nation visiting 
the City of Towers for the first time? If you’re 
an entertainer, are loved in the upper wards or 
a favorite in Sharn’s lowest dives? The tables 
provide a range of ideas that can be used for PCs 
or NPCs with strong ties to Sharn; work out the 
details with your DM. 


CHAPTER 6 | SHARN BACKGROUNDS 


ACOLYTE 


Shrines and temples can be found across Sharn. 
The Pavilion of the Host is Breland’s largest 
temple to the Sovereign Host, and the Cathedral 
of the Cleansing Flame is the bastion of the Silver 
Flame in Breland. Of course, Sharn’s churches 
are infamous for harboring corruption. Are you 
part of the local establishment, or have you come 
to Sharn from afar? 


1d4 Acolyte 


íl 


You’ve come to Sharn to investigate 
corruption in your church. Have you 
been sent by authorities in your faith, 
or are you driven by a divine vision? 


You’re tied to a small temple in one of 
the lower wards of Sharn. It’s poor and 
dilapidated, but it’s a true bastion of 
your faith and doing good work for the 
struggling people of the ward. 


You’re here on a pilgrimage, seeking an 
audience with the head of your faith 

in Sharn... but the intermediaries have 
demanded a small fortune to set up 
this meeting. 

You’re a minor acolyte at one of the 
major temples. It’s a maze of intrigue, 
graft, and politics. You’re playing the 
game, working with a patron within the 
church. Do you hope you can improve 
things once you rise up in hierarchy? Or 
are you only interested in power and 
influence? 


CHARLATAN 


Whether you’re a grifter or a spy, there’s plenty 
of opportunities in Sharn. 


1d4 Charlatan 


1 


You’re a con artist from the lower wards, 
but you’ve established a false identity as 
an upper ward noble. 


You’ve crafted the identity of a prophet 
driven by holy visions. If you are a 
divine spellcaster, your actual faith may 
be entirely different from the one you 
profess. 


You’ve adopted the identity of a refugee 
from the war, but in fact you’re running 
from an infamous past. Are you a war 
criminal? An agitator? A former spy 
hiding from your employers? 

You’re a covert operative working 

for another nation, or for a powerful 
agency (a dragonmarked house, the 
City Watch, a criminal organization). Are 
you carrying out missions, or are you a 
sleeper agent building a deep cover? 


ny 


CRIMINAL 


Sharn is home to a number of powerful 
criminal organizations, and your background 
gives a tie to one of them. Work with your DM 
to decide which group you’re connected to, and 
use this table to determine the nature of that 


connection. 
1d4 Criminal 
1 You have family or friends in the 


organization, but you’ve still got to 
prove yourself to the gang. 

You retired from the criminal life long 
ago. But you still have deep roots with 
the organization, and now they’re 
pulling you back in. 


You’re secretly working for the City 
Watch or a foreign crime agency, trying 
to worm your way into the underworld 
of Sharn. 

You’re an independent agent working 
with more than one of Sharn’s gangs. 
While you value your freedom, if you’re 
not careful you could make enemies on 
all sides. 


CHAPTER 6 | SHARN BACKGROUNDS 


125 


126 


ENTERTAINER 


As an entertainer, you can find a place to 
perform anywhere in Sharn. But where are you 
recognized? Another thing to consider: House 
Phiarlan and House Thuranni train and license 
entertainers. Do you have a license with one of 
the houses, or are you entirely independent? 


1d4 Entertainer 


1 You’re a favorite in the toughest 
taverns of the lower wards. The darker 
the dive, the better. 

2 You’re an understudy at one of the 
grand theaters in Upper Menthis. 

3 You specialize in religious music and 
performance. You will usually be 
welcomed at any temple of your faith. 


4 You’re preserving an unusual artistic 
tradition through your work. You have 
an eccentric patron who’s driving you 
to explore the roots of this tradition. 


CHAPTER 6 | SHARN BACKGROUNDS 


Fork Hero 


As folk hero, you have your roots among the 
common people. Where are you from, and who 
do you fight for? 


1d4 Folk Hero 


1 You grew up in the lower wards. You 
fight to protect your people both from 
the depredations of gangs and abuse at 
the hands of the wealthy. 


2 You’re working to improve the image of 
a marginalized minority group (goblins, 
changelings, warforged) in Sharn. 


3 You're a refugee driven from your 
home by the war. You want to protect 
other refugees, but you’re also an 
opponent of the monarchies that drove 
the nations into war. 


4 You're celebrated for an amazing 

feat of heroism, which may have 
happened in Sharn or during the war. 
The problem is that you didn’t actually 
do it. Can you live up to everyone’s 
expectations and become the hero 
they believe you to be? 


GUILD ARTISAN 


There’s always work for a talented individual 

in Sharn. Masons work on the towers. Smiths 
hammer away in the cogs. Bakers and brewers 
tend to the endless appetites of the common folk. 
The largest guilds are tied to the dragonmarked 
houses. The Fabricator’s Guild of House Cannith 
deals with manufacturing trades, while the 
Hosterler’s Guild of House Ghallanda covers 
inns, taverns, and restaurants. Are you part of 
one of these international guilds, or tied to a 
smaller local organization? 


1d4 Guild Artisan 


1 You're a young prodigy. You’ve just 
joined the guild, but your comrades are 
amazed at your early talent and push 
you to excel. 

2 While you’ve still got your guild ties, 
you retired from the business some 
years ago. You hate the newfangled 
techniques the kids are using today. 


3 You’re a respected member of one 
of the dragonmarked guilds, but 
you’re concerned about the policies 
of the house and the direction of its 
leadership. 

4 You’re a member of a small alliance of 
independent artisans. You’re fighting 
to keep your collective from being 
crushed by the dragonmarked houses. 


HERMIT 


As a hermit, you spent a considerable time in 
seclusion before making a discovery that drew 
you back to the world. Were you isolated in 
Sharn, or did you discover something that’s 
drawn you to the City of Towers? 


1d4 Hermit 


1 You spent the last ten years meditating 
ona pillar on one of the highest points 
in Sharn. A recent revelation has 
brought you down from your perch; 
what is your quest? Over the course of 
your isolation you became something 
of a tourist attraction; a gnome 
merchant used to sell plaster statues 
of you on your pillar. 


2 You spent your life in a hidden 
monastery in Sharn. Did the master of 
your order send you out on a mission? 
Or are you the lone survivor of an 
attack that destroyed your monastery? 


3 You were the lone survivor of an 
airship crash and spent years in a 
remote location until you were found. 
In that time, you experienced a 
remarkable revelation. Did you have a 
religious experience, or did you have 
an arcane insight into the workings of 
the universe? 


4 You’re a librarian. You’ve spent your 
entire life in the labyrinth of books 
below Morgrave University. A few 
weeks ago you stumbled on a secret 
buried in the vaults—something so big 
that it’s driven you from your beloved 
books and into a life of adventure. Is it 
a fragment of the Draconic Prophecy? 
A complex puzzle leading to an ancient 
treasure? 


CHAPTER 6 | SHARN BACKGROUNDS 


127 


NOBLE OUTLANDER 


Are you part of one of the noble families of You are unfamiliar with the ways of civilization. 
Sharn, or you a scion of a distant line? If you So what’s drawn you to the greatest city in 
have your roots in Sharn, you likely have a family Khorvaire? Are you dazzled by the wonders of 
estate in an upper ward. However, being so close Sharn, or do you find the city to be disturbing 
to your family means that you'll have to deal and unnatural? 


with their demands and expectations... and your 


actions could tarnish your family’s reputation. ‘44. Outlander 


1 You were born in the ruins of Fallen and 


1d4 Noble grew up feral in Sharn, hunting in the 

1 You’re ashamed of your family. Were cogs and sewers. What finally drew you 
they war profiteers? Are they taking out into civilization? 
advantage of refugees? Whatever the 2 You served as a mercenary scout in the 
cause, despite being an heir to wealth Last War and followed your comrades 
and power, you're currently keeping to Sharn in the wake of the war. 
younlineageialsecret: 3 You were brought to Sharn as a 

2 You're a local celebrity. You delight curiosity. You were exhibited in the 
in slumming in the lower wards, but upper wards for a time until people 
wherever you go in Sharn, gossip is grew tired of you. 
sure to follow. 4 You are an exile from your homeland. 

3 Your family is involved in a long-term Did you commit a terrible crime? Was 
plot to overthrow the monarch of your your tribe wiped out in a feud? Are you 
homeland. Your job is to find capable following a divine vision? 


comrades to help you with your quest 
and to gain the support of other 
powerful people. 

4 While you are still recognized as a 
noble, your lands were lost in the war 
and your title is all but meaningless. 
Can you find a way to regain your 
birthright? 


128 CHAPTER 6 | SHARN BACKGROUNDS 


SAGE 


You're well versed in history and arcane 

lore, and you have a gift for uncovering the 
information you need. What is it that drives your 
pursuit of knowledge? 


1d4 
1 


Sage 

You’re an untenured researcher at 
Morgrave University. You’re fascinated 
by history, and you’re desperate to 
delve into actual ruins. 


People think you’re crazy. Yes, you 
have a lot of unorthodox theories. 
You’re certain that hidden dragons 
and disguised fiends are manipulating 
governments and that the Mourning 
was an inside job. And sure, maybe 
your “library” is a collection of rotting 
books and old issues of the Sharn 
Inquisitive pasted on the walls of a 
burnt-out bookstore. But what if you’re 
right? Hmm? 

You’re with the press. You’re a 
freelance chronicler for the Sharn 
Inquisitive, always on the lookout for 
breaking news. You know your history 
and you know how to research a story. 
But if you want to make headlines, you 
need to be on the scene for something 
big. 

You’re on the cutting edge of arcane 
theory. House Cannith, Arcanix— 
they’re all idiots. You’re on the verge 
of a major discovery (The cause of the 
Mourning? The nature of warforged 
souls? Establishing a connection to 
new realms of existence?) but the 
pieces you need are out there in the 
world. 


SAILOR 


Sharn is one of the most important ports in 
Eberron. It’s the gate to the Thunder Sea, and 
ships come in from across Eberron. Are you a 
local, or did you come to Sharn on a Lhazaar 
vessel or an Aereni galleon? 


1d4 
1 


Sailor 


You’ve got deep ties in Sharn. Your 
family owns a ship, and you’ve 

spent as much time on the water as 
you have on land. Are your people 
merchants? Explorers? Or privateers? 


Your family works the docks in Sharn. 
You know everything there is to know 
about ships, and you know half of the 
captains who pass through the port, 
but you’ve never had the chance to 
take to the open sea. 


When you were a child, you served as 
a deckhand ona ship that explored 
the coast of Xen’drik. You saw many 
wondrous things... including a secret 
location you’ve never forgotten. Now 
you’re a capable adventurer in your 
own right. Someday you'll lead a ship 
back to that forgotten cove! 


You’re an infamous pirate. You never 
harmed a Brelish vessel, but you were 
the terror of the Thunder Sea, raiding 
merchants and smugglers alike. At 
least, you were... until your crew 
mutinied, leaving you humiliated and 
stranded in Sharn. But you are sure 
new fortune lies just ahead! 


CHAPTER 6 | SHARN BACKGROUNDS 


129 


SOLDIER URCHIN 


The echoes of the Last War can still be heard ‘The lower wards of Sharn are riddled with 
across Khorvaire. Many player characters may poverty. You had to find your own path in 
have served in the Last War, but your Military the harsh city. Are you an orphan, or were 
Rank feature means that you still have clout from you scavenging to help ailing parents or needy 
your service. Did you fight for Breland, or did siblings? Are you still young, or is your time as an 
you serve in a foreign army? urchin a thing of the past? 
1d4 Urchin 

1d4 Soldier 1 You grew up on the streets of Lower 

1 The war is never over. You know Dura. You had to find or steal the 
your enemies are still plotting, and things you needed to survive. You 
you’re going to do whatever it takes don’t trust anyone or anything... 
to protect your nation. If you’re not except the few friends you've made 
from Breland, that means serving the over the years. You’d do anything 
interests of your nation in Sharn— for your friends—even become an 
whatever those may be. adventurer. 

2 You're an old soldier: you served with 2 As an orphan, you were recruited by 
distinction and retired with honor a gang of thieves. The rest of your 
decades ago. You’ve got an endless crew was wiped out in a brutal gang 
supply of stories of your heroic deeds. war, and now you're looking for a 
It’s been a long time since you’ve new team. 
been in combat and your skills are a 3 You grew up crawling the walls, 
little rusty. But you’re sure that if you and you know the city better than 
pick up a sword, it will all come back anyone. The world’s a ugly place, 
to you soon enough. but there’s a lot of wonders in these 

3 You’re an officer of the Cyran army. towers... and you're happy to share 
You once held a fairly high rank, but those secrets with your friends. 
your nation is destroyed and your 4 You’re a refugee. You were put in the 
soldiers scattered. Do you still feel camp in High Walls, but no walls can 
bound to protect your people, are you hold you. Sharn itself is an adventure, 
only looking out for yourself? and you’re dealing with the horrors 

4 Your ties aren’t to the traditional of your past by exploring your new 
military; they’re to the Sharn Watch. home. 


You were forced out of the Watch by a 
group of corrupt officers. You still have 
friends among the guards, but there’s 
a lot of bad apples in the barrel. Do 
you want to clean up the Watch, or 
are you content to enforce justice on 
your own? 


130 CHAPTER 6 | THE SHAPE OF SHARN 


THE SHAPE OF SHARN 


When you hwe on the inside low, you never see the 
sun. People hear ‘towers’, they think of graceful 
little spires, the sort of thing you see poking up in 
the corner of your lord’s keep. We've got those, and 
lots of ‘em. But the foundation of the city ts the 
core towers. The walls of these towers are so thick, 
you could fit your lord’s entire castle in one. 


You've got your outside districts where you get the 
open arr, built on the bridges and platforms that 
connect the core towers together. You've got the 
little turrets, built on the core tower walls and the 
bridges between. You've got the folk in the middle, 
who lwe and work in the walls themselves. And 
then you've got those of us on the inside, our 
districts entirely contained in the hollow well of 
a great tower. You look up in Callestan, you see 
twinkling lights, to be sure. But those aren’t stars, 
and that isn’t the sky. You're looking up through 
a mule of bridges and platforms crossing the well, 
looking up at the districts above you. 


You live up high, you can touch the sky. In the 
middle you can still see the sun. Down on the 
inside low, all we have is gloom and the constant 
drip, water and worse flowing from down from the 
streets above us. 


Sharn is the largest city in Khorvaire, with a 
permanent population of approximately 210,000 
people. Humans make up about a third of that 
number, and dwarves are a sixth of it; the rest 

is a blend of every race found across Khorvaire. 
Halflings, elves, and gnomes have a significant 
presence in the city, but even kalashtar and 
changelings have communities in Sharn. Beyond 
the permanent population, tens of thousands of 
people pass through Sharn every day. Refugees 
from the war still find their way to Sharn, along 
with tourists, spies, merchants, and people 
hoping to find their fortune in the grandest city in 
Eberron. 


Sharn stands above the Dagger River. It’s an 
important port for anyone dealing with Aecrenal, 
Xen’drik, or Sarlona. Mountains line the shores 
of the Dagger, and Sharn can’t spread out... so 
instead it’s grown ever upward. 

Sharn is broken into five “quarters”: Central 
Plateau, Dura, Menthis Plateau, Northedge, and 
Tavick’s Landing. Each of these quarters is a hub 
of massive core towers. A web of bridges and 
platforms connects these vast spires, and a host 
of smaller turrets sprout from the edges of the 
core towers. The district of Skyway floats above 
the highest towers, while the tunnels of the Cogs 
stretch out below the lower city. 

Sharn is a vertical city, and height is a simple 
indicator of status and wealth. Each quarter 
is roughly divided into three levels, and the 
combination of quarter and level defines a 
ward. Thus, wards include Lower Dura, Upper 
Central, and Middle Menthis. This distinction 
gives a general sense of the tone of a ward. 

e Upper wards are home to the wealthy 
and powerful. Here you'll find the finest 
goods and the most expensive services. The 
typical quality of meals and inns is wealthy 
or aristocratic, and rough adventurers may 
be treated with suspicion. Violence is rare; 
the City Watch is active in these areas, and 
if they’re corrupt, they’re at least taking 
bribes from people richer than you. 


e Middle wards are home to the middle 
classes. Here you'll find bustling markets 
and taverns, along with a wide range of 
entertainment and housing. Services range 
from modest to comfortable, with a few 
wealthy-grade options tucked away. The 
City Watch has a presence, but not as 
strong as in the upper districts. 


e Lower wards house the hard-working 
laborers, but they’re also home to the 
destitute and the desperate... refugees 
who’ve lost everything in the war, orphans 
and urchins who never had anything to 
begin with. Modest services can be found, 
but overall the lower districts are squalid 
and poor; a visitor in fine clothes might 
attract unwanted attention. The City 


CHAPTER 6 | THE SHAPE OF SHARN 131 


132 


Watch pays little attention to the lower 
districts, making them a haven for criminals 
and gangs. 


This is a broad stereotype that doesn’t apply to 
all wards. Dura is a particularly poor quarter, 
and Upper Dura is effectively a middle ward; 
meanwhile, Central is a center of wealth and 
power, and Lower Central is also effectively a 
middle ward. 

Each ward is further subdivided into districts, 
neighborhoods defined by an economic role, a 
specific community, or both. Lower Northedge 
includes the districts of Stonegard, Longstairs, 
and North Market. Lower Dura includes seven 
distinct districts. This book doesn’t delve deeply 
into unique features of each district; the broad 
flavor of a ward is enough to drive an adventure. 
If you’d like to know more about the districts of 
Sharn—along with more information about its 
many factions, plots, and locations—refer to the 
sources presented in the Appendix. 


GETTING AROUND 


Sharn is an enormous city and traveling from 
one side to the other can be quite an ordeal. As a 
rough guideline... 
e It takes up to 30 minutes to move around 
within a particular ward. 


e Ifyou’re traveling between wards, add 30 
minutes for each ward you pass through. 


e Dura and Tavick’s Landing are especially 
large; double the time to move through one 
of these quarters. 


So traveling from Lower Menthis to Upper 
Central involves passing through three wards 
(Lower Menthis to Lower Central, then 
ascending two levels) and can take up to 90 
minutes. If you want to add a little color to your 
travels, you can roll on the Street Encounters 
tables when you pass through a district. The 
Central quarter is only connected to Northedge 
and Menthis, and there’s no bridges between 
Dura and Northedge. 


CHAPTER 6 | THE SHAPE OF SHARN 


SKYCOACHES 


Skycoaches are small flying vessels. They 
come in a wide range of shapes and sizes. 
A typical air taxi might resemble a rowboat, 
while a touring vessel could be the size of 
a longship and have an enclosed cabin for 
guests. 

Unlike airships, skycoaches don’t make 
use of bound elementals. Sharn is located in 
a manifest zone that enhances magics tied 
to flight and levitation, and this is what makes 
both skycoaches and the towers themselves 
possible. If a skycoach is taken more than a 
mile away from Sharn, its enchantments will 
fail and it will crash. 

House Lyrandar maintains and licenses 
most of the skycoaches in Sharn, but you 
don’t have to have the Mark of Storms 
to pilot an skycoach. It does require 
specialized training—a tool proficiency with 
air vehicles—so if you’re planning to steal an 
airship you’ll need to make sure you’ve got 
someone who can pilot it. 


Traveling from district to district involves 
lots of bridges and ramps, along with magic 
lifts—-vast floating disks that slowly ascend and 
descend along threads of mystical energy. Lifts 
are designed to move cargo and can be up to 30 
feet in diameter. Most lifts have rails but aren’t 
fully enclosed; when fighting on a lift, pushing 
someone off the edge is always a possibility. 
Should this happen to you, the section on falling 
later in this chapter may prove useful! 

There are many ways to speed up travel 
in Sharn. House Orien manages a system of 
coaches; taking an Orien coach cuts travel 
time in half and costs 2 CP per ward travelled. 
Flight is the prefered way to get through Sharn, 
cutting travel down to a sixth of the usual time 
(5 minutes per ward). It’s also more expensive: 
2 SP per ward involved. The most common 
form of flight is the skycoach, but many flying 
mounts can also be encountered in Sharn: 
hippogriffs, griffons, glidewings (a small Talentan 
pteranodon), and giant owls can all be found 
around the city. 


Sy Urbain lary ere 


IVa 


DIE 


Mip 


HE 


IE TRUE CONTOURS OF 


SHARN 


Y gea tar eA 


mans æ a ae oe 


THE CITY OF TOWERS 


HOUSE SIVIS PRESENTS A CUI-AWAY MAP 


REVEALING 1 


*(GTIFFSIDE 


= 


CITY. 


THE LOWER 


ilt 


The H 


THE Cocs 


LAVA POOLS 


CENTRAL PLATEAU QUARTER 


The power and wealth of Sharn are concentrated 
in the Central Plateau. It’s the safest place in 

the city, combining the most capable units 

of the City Watch with the headquarters of 
Sharn’s elite forces. Whether you’re looking to 
deal with powerful merchants, city councilors, 
dragonmarked barons, or the ambassadors of 
other nations, Central Plateau is a place where 
deals are made and gold changes hands. 


Upper CENTRAL 


Both gold and power flow down from Upper 
Central. The Council Hall is the seat of city 
government, while the Korranath—the grand 
temple of Kol Korran—1is the heart of Sharn’s 
financial district and the location of House 
Kundarak’s largest bank... along with the 
legendary Kundarak Vaults. Upper Central 
houses the mansions and estates of powerful 
nobles, along with businesses that cater to them. 
Between the Sharn Watch and private security 
forces, this is a bad place to start trouble, and 
player characters who appear suspicious may be 
challenged by guards. 


MIDDLE CENTRAL 


A center for intrigue and espionage. The district 
of Ambassador ‘Towers includes embassies and 
consulates from the Thronehold Nations, along 
with Aerenal and Sarlona. Ambassador ‘Towers is 
also home to the King’s Citadel, headquarters of 
Brelish intelligence. Across the ward, the district 
of Dragon Towers holds the primary enclaves 

of the dragonmarked houses. Rounding things 


CHAPTER 6 | CENTRAL PLATEAU QUARTER 


out, the district of Sovereign ‘Towers is home to 
Sharn’s greatest monuments of faith, including 
the Pavilion of the Host (Sovereign Host) and 
the Cathedral of the Cleansing Flame (Silver 
Flame). While it’s a middle ward, services are 
comfortable to wealthy in quality. 


Lower CENTRAL 


This district is peaceful and largely residential; it’s 
the safest and most pleasant of the lower wards. 
Services are largely comfortable in quality, and 
the Sharn Watch is plentiful and well paid. 


THINGS TO Do IN CENTRAL PLATEAU 


Attend an Auction. The Aurora Gallery 
(Upper Central) is the finest auction house in 
Sharn and specializes in auctions of exotic magic 
items and relics from Xen’drik. You never know 
what’s going to be available—or who will be 
bidding against you. 

Plan a Heist. Rob the Kundarak Bank of 
Sharn (Upper Central) or the Brelish Museum of 
Fine Art (Middle Central). 

Go to Jail. The Citadel in Middle Central is 
also Sharn’s high-security prison. 

Pray. The primary temples of the Sovereign 
Host and the Silver Flame are located in Middle 
Central, along with a host of shrines to specific 
Sovereigns and lesser faiths. Take part in a 
festival or drop in for some spiritual guidance! 

Espionage! Whether you work for your 
nation or get entangled in the schemes of the 
dragonmarked houses, there’s a lot of powerful 
people in Middle Central with a use for capable 
agents. 


Dura QUARTER 


Sharn began with Dura, but the city has left 
it behind. Dura is the oldest quarter of Sharn, 
and many consider it to be a blight on the 
City of Towers. There are cracks in the stones 
and places where enchantments have failed 
and never been restored. Dura is riddled with 
poverty and crime, and overall, it’s the most 
dangerous section of the city. But it also holds 
opportunities you can’t find anywhere else... 
and if you’re looking for smuggled goods or a 
place to lay low, head to Dura. 


Upper Dura 


This ward is full of life, home to talented artisans 
and successful merchants. There’s a seedy 

edge to Upper Dura, and in general it has the 
qualities of a middle ward. But it’s a place that 
welcomes all manner of suspicious customers... 
which makes it a haven for adventurers. Clifftop 
is a home away from home for explorers and 
mercenaries. The Sharn Watch maintains a 
fortress garrison in Daggerwatch. The Highhold 
district is an upscale dwarven neighborhood; 

it’s said that the strongest spirits in Sharn are 
served at Morragin’s Tavern. Hope’s Peak is 

a temple district, notable for the Citadel of the 
Sun. Dedicated to Dol Arrah, this church is 
considered to be a true bastion of light. Finally, 
the Overlook district is home to most of the 
kalashtar in Sharn. 


MippLe Dura 


Middle Dura caters to the working class of Sharn. 
It’s inns and taverns are modest in price, but 
there’s gold among the dross. The Bazaar is the 
largest commercial district in Sharn, though it’s 
certainly shadier than the other major markets 

in the city. Middle Dura is home to a host of 

inns and taverns. The King of Fire is a popular 
tavern and reputable gambling establishment. 
Ghallanda Hall has the only comfortable rooms 


in the ward; this old inn was the first Ghallanda 
enclave in Sharn, and it also has modest and 
poor rooms for the common folk of Dura. 


Lower Dura 


The district of Precarious is the gateway to 
Cliffside and the docks of Sharn. The Sharn 
Watch maintains an active presence in Precarious, 
securing passage to the docks and watching the 
many warehouses. The rest of Lower Dura has 
been left to rot. Ignored by the Watch, it is the 
domain of gangs and crimelords. The district 

of Fallen is a haunted ruin; this temple district 
was abandoned after a floating tower collapsed 
onto it. Malleon’s Gate is home to the goblins of 
Sharn, along with other monstrous immigrants 
from Droaam and Darguun. Callestan is a center 
for criminal activity. 


THINGS to Do In Dura 


Talk About the Race. The inhabitants of Dura 
are devoted to the Race of Eight Winds and are 
always willing to discuss the latest news. 

Gamble. Legal gambling is heavily taxed and 
limited in its scope. Dura is home to a wide range 
of shadier and more profitable games. 

Go Shopping. If you’re looking for expensive 
goods shop elsewhere. But the Bazaar of Middle 
Dura is an excellent source for exotic goods... 
legal or otherwise. Clifftop caters to adventurers 
and has a reasonable selection of magical goods. 

A Little Crime. Looking for a fence? Need 
to find a smuggler or an assassin? Do you want 
to set up a meeting with a Boromar lieutenant? 
Lower Dura is the nexus for criminal activities 
in Sharn. 

Suffer A Terrible Accident. The Sharn 
Watch ignores Lower Dura, and even in the 
higher wards they’re spread thin. There are even 
stories of dragonmarked houses and mad wizards 
conducting dangerous experiments in Lower 
Dura... who’s going to stop them? 


CHAPTER 6 | DURA QUARTER 


135 


136 


MENTHIS PLATEAU QUARTER 


The hub of Sharn’s entertainment industry and 
home to Breland’s largest university, Menthis 
Plateau is one of the most diverse quarters in 
Sharn. Whether you’re looking for classical 
theater, a fine bookstore, or an illegal fighting 
ring, Menthis has something to offer. 


Upper MENTHIS 


Elegant and civilized, Upper Menthis is home 

to four of the finest theaters in Breland: The 
cutting-edge Art Temple, colorful Khavish 
Theater, traditional Grand Stage, and the open- 
air Stargazer Theater, along with the Kavarrah 
Concert Hall. It’s the location of Morgrave 
University. It includes upscale shops with a focus 
on fine food and fashion; the most remarkable 
glamerweave in Sharn can be found in Den/iyas, 

a gnome district known as “Little Zilargo.” 
Adventurers who visit Den’iyas should be careful 
not to get involved in the many intrigues and feuds 
that play out between the gnome residents. 


MippLe MENTHIS 


This ward is the most diverse in Sharn, and 
includes communities drawn from across 
Khorvaire. The Little Plains district draws 
halfling immigrants from the Talenta Plains. 
Cassan Bridge has a significant population of 
orcs and half-orcs from the Shadow Marches. 
Immigrants from the Lhazaar Principalities 
have settled in Warden Towers. And Smoky 
Towers had a significant Cyran community even 
before the Last War; this has become a haven 
for Cyrans wealthy enough to avoid the refugee 
camps of High Walls. ‘This results in a diverse 
array of cuisine, entertainment, and services 
drawing on the traditions of these places. 

The Everbright district may be of particular 
interest to adventurers. This is a hub for mystical 
goods and services. There’s a wide assortment of 
magewrights, and the shops have a good selection 
of common and uncommon magic items. With 


CHAPTER 6 | MENTHIS PLATEAU QUARTER 


that said, the people of Middle Menthis are 
law-abiding folk; if you’re looking for spellcasters 
to help you with illegal activities or want to sell 
stolen artifacts, you should turn to Lower Dura. 


Lower MENTHIS 


Providing cheap entertainment to the masses, 
Lower Menthis is crowded. It’s filled with sketchy 
taverns and theaters ranging from the innocent to 
the risque. There are gambling halls, brothels, and 
spontaneous performances in the streets. Lower 
Menthis is also home to the Burning Ring, a fight 
club where spectators bet on amateur gladiators. 
Technically illegal, the Burning Ring moves 
around the ward. Competitors are armed but 
unarmored; matches continue until a contestant 
yields, but fatalities do happen. 


THINGS to Do In MENTHIS PLATEAU 


Consult a Sage. Morgrave University may not 
be the finest institute of learning in Khorvaire, but 
it’s the best Sharn has to offer. Whether you want 
to conduct your own research in the library or to 
find a specialist in goblin history or the theory of 
manifest zones, Morgrave is your best option. 

Show Business. Menthis has a host of 
performance venues, from the Grand Stage to the 
many taverns of Lower Menthis. Spontaneous 
street performances are common throughout the 
quarter. In addition to enjoying the entertainment, 
you could always try to find work—either 
showcasing your artistic talents on stage or 
displaying your prowess in the Burning Ring. 

Join an Expedition. Scholars at Morgrave 
often sponsor expeditions to Xen’drik and into 
the ruins below Sharn. Cyran nobles in Smoky 
Towers look for brave souls to venture into the 
Mournland to reclaim lost treasures. 

Cultural Exchange. Den’iyas brings a touch 
of Zilargo to Sharn. You might find a clawfoot 
raptor running down the streets in Little Plains, 
or a Gatekeeper druid casting bones on Cassan 
Bridge. 


NorTHEDGE QUARTER 


The residential area is the quietest quarter of 
Sharn. At first glance there’s little to attract 
adventurers, unless you’re interested in quality 
real estate. On the other hand, you never know 
when this charming and innocuous quarter could 
be hiding a nefarious cult or devilish plot! 


Upper NorTHEDGE 


This is the perfect place for the noble who can 
afford a manor in the clouds but wants to avoid 
the bustle of Upper Central. It’s also home to 
most of the elves of Sharn. In particular, the 
district of Shae Lias is a bastion of Aereni culture 
and traditions. The heart of Shae Lias is Gates 
of Passage, which serves as the Aereni embassy 
and a temple to the Undying Court. The Oaks is 
one of the finest restaurants is Sharn (aristocratic 
quality... at aristocratic prices). The Veil of 
Flesh specializes in body art, both traditional 
tattoos and temporary illusions woved directly 
into the skin. 


MippLe NorTHEDGE 


This ward caters to the middle class of Sharn, 
with a wide range of comfortable housing. 
Dwarves make up the majority of the population, 
especially in the district of Holdfast. In contrast 
to Highhold in Upper Dura, the dwarves of 
Holdfast have deep roots in Sharn and feel 

no strong connection to the Mror Holds or its 
traditions. High Hope is a temple district; while 
the most impressive churches and shrines are 
located in Upper Central, it’s commonly known 
that if you’re looking for a truly devoted priest, 
you should go to High Hope. 


Lower NorTHEDGE 


While poor, Lower Northedge is a significant step 
up from the slums of Lower Dura. The people 

of Lower Northedge don’t look for trouble, and 
they don’t like it coming to their doorstep. North 
Market is one of the largest markets in Sharn, 
though it specializes in simple, everyday goods. 
The Stoneyard district has a significant shifter 
population; the Rat’s Nest is a tavern catering to 
shifters, while the Bear’s Rest is a shifter inn. 


THINGS To Do In NORTHEDGE 


Settle Down. If you’re looking for a place 

to live in Sharn, Lower Northedge combines 
reasonable quality and price with more security 
than Lower Dura. 

Die in Style. The elves of Shae Lias are 
experts in funerary customs and embalming. In 
addition, Mayne Jhaelian of the Gates of Passage 
is one of the few people in Sharn capable of 
raising the dead. 

Find a Patron. There are many eccentric 
nobles in Upper Northedge. A patron of the arts 
could take an interest in the career of a bard 
or entertainer. A collector might keep capable 
adventurers on retainer with the understanding 
that they'll deliver any Dhakaani artifacts they 
come across in their travels. You never know 
what benefits a patron will provide; at the least, 
they can give you an introduction to high society. 


CHAPTER 6 | NORTHEDGE QUARTER 


137 


Tavick’s LANDING QUARTER 


If you come to Sharn by land or air, you'll enter 
the city through Tavick’s Landing. The quarter 
took on a martial aspect during the Last War, 
and this can still be felt today. On the positive 
side, the Watch Commander Tyanna ir’Talan has 
gone to great efforts to purge corruption in the 
local garrisons of the Sharn Watch; this is one of 
the few districts where the Watch is both helpful 
and competent. On the downside, citizens of any 
nation that fought against Breland during the 
war may be greeted with suspicion or hostility. 


Upper Tavick’s LANDING 


This ward is effectively a self-contained city 
catering to the nobles that live there. It has fine 
housing, skilled services, a luxurious mercantile 
district, and even an entire district—Sunrise— 
devoted to the servants of the nobles. Services 
and lodging in Sunrise are poor to modest, as 
opposed to the wealthy to aristocratic goods 
found elsewhere in the district. During the war, 
fears of attacks by foreign agents resulted in the 
establishment of a number of laws that affect 
adventurers. 

e The soldiers of House Deneith have full 
authority to act as agents of the Sharn 
Watch within Upper ‘Tavick’s Landing, 
and a hundred elite Blademark mercenaries 
maintain checkpoints at the district’s edges. 


e You need a license to carry a weapon in 
Upper Tavick’s Landing. This costs only 5 
gp, but you'll have to plead your case to a 
clerk; it’s generally understood that this is 
a tool to keep undesirables out of the ward. 
Any Blademark or member of the Watch 
can demand to see your license and may 
confiscate unauthorized weapons. 


e You also need a license to cast spells in the 
ward. This costs 10 gp and you must specify 
the spells you wish to cast. A fine can be 
levied for any unauthorized use of magic. 


CHAPTER 6 | TAVICK’S LANDING QUARTER 


e Inhabitants must dress “in a manner 
that upholds the solemn dignity of this 
proud ward.” Blademarks and officers of 
the Watch can choose how to interpret 
this. Typically, armor is considered 
inappropriate unless you’re tied to House 
Deneith, the Sharn Watch, or you’ve served 
with the Brelish military. Anyone held to be 
in contempt of this law is escorted out. 


e Any sort of unruly behavior—fighting, 
shouting in the streets, etc—earns a fine of 
up to 5 gp and temporary expulsion from 
the ward. 


For those willing to put up with these restrictions, 
Upper Tavick’s Landing has many fine features. 
Wyredd’s Spirits is the best source for wine in 
Sharn. The Crystals of Denion buys and sell rare 
magic items, though it only has a handful of such 
items at any given time; it also sells expensive 
magical works of art. Transmutation is the name 
of a renowned beauty salon. House Deneith 
maintains a fortified garrison and training facility 
in the Copper Arch district. To get licenses for 
weapons or spellcasting, you'll have to go to the 
courthouse in the Twelve Pillars district. 


MIppLE Tavick’s LANDING 


In contrast to the upper ward, Middle Tavick’s 
Landing welcomes travelers and tourists. ‘There’s 
a host of lively taverns and excellent inns. 

The Cornerstone is a massive arena that hosts 
everything from circuses to aerial jousting. The 
Deathsgate district caters to adventurers, much 
like the Clifftop district of Upper Dura. Like 
Clifftop, it has an adventurer’s guild—though 
the Deathsgate Guild has a dark reputation, 

and its members often pick fights with Clifftop 
adventurers. House Jorasco has a large house of 
healing in the ward, and House Deneith has a 
recruiting station for would-be mercenaries. The 
Graywall district has deep roots in Karrnathi 
culture that predate the Last War, and Slogar’s 
and The Bloody Mug are places where you 

can find blood sausage and Nightwood ale. 
Tavick’s Market is one of Sharn’s main market 


districts; it’s right above Terminus station and 
is a source for produce and goods brought in by 
local farmers. 


Lower TAVICK’S LANDING 


Visitors arrive at Wroann’s Gate or ‘Terminus, 
but they leave through Black Arch, the gateway 
to the rest of Sharn. This is a heavily fortified 
garrison district, designed to withstand a full 
siege. The ward includes other services catering 
to travelers; the Dragoneyes district is a maze 
of taverns, inns, brothels, and gambling halls. 
Dragoneyes is also noteworthy for having one of 
the few changeling communities in Breland. 

These days, Lower Tavick’s Landing is best 
known for High Walls—a former residential 
district converted into a home for refugees from 
the Last War. High Walls is filled past capacity, 
mostly with Cyrans displaced by the Mourning. 
Today, the gates are open; but High Walls is 
designed to serve as a fortress prison if need be, 
and the Sharn Watch keeps an eye out for any 
signs of unrest. 


THINGS to Do IN Tavick’s LANDING 


Gamble. Dragoncyes is filled with opportunities 
to lose your wages, both in established halls and on 
street corners. One especially noteworthy venue 

is Chance. If you believe the rumors, Chance can 
arrange and cover almost any sort of contest. 

Hug a Shifter. Middle and Lower Tavick’s 
Landing are home to much of Sharn’s shifter 
population. Middle Tavick’s Landing has the 
only official court for the shifter sport hrazhak. 

Find Refuge. While most of the refugees in 
High Walls come from Cyre, the district is a 
haven for anyone displaced in the war, including 
Brelish victims of the war. It’s over-crowded and 
resources are stretched thin. Tensions are high, 
and there are feuds and power struggles among 
the refugees. If you’re from Cyre, you might have 
a cot in High Walls with your name on it; even if 
you don’t, you could have friends or family living 
in High Walls. 


CHAPTER 6 | TAVICK’S LANDING QUARTER 139 


140 


SHARN: ABOVE AND BELOW 


The five quarters of Sharn make up the bulk of 
the city, but here are additional regions that you 
may wish to explore during your time in Sharn. 


SKYWAY 


There are a number of floating towers orbiting 
the upper wards of Sharn, but these are dwarfed 
by Skyway, an entire district that floats above 
and between Central Plateau and Menthis 
Plateau. Built on an island of solidified clouds, 
Skyway holds the estates of the wealthiest people 
in Khorvaire—nobles whose feet need never 
touch the ground. Skyway contains a host of 
aristocratic boutiques and restaurants, along with 
astonishing mansions. Chief among these is Tain 
Manor, home to most powerful family in Sharn. 
Celyria ir’Tain is the queen of high society. She 
holds a ball at the manor each month, and the 
guest list at the Tain Gala defines the social order 
in the city. If you need to mingle with celebrities, 
find a way to wrangle an invitation to the Tain 
Gala. And if you’re looking to pull off a heist on 
some of the richest people in Eberron, Skyway is 
the place to start. 


CLIFFSIDE 


This small ward contains the docks of Sharn. 
Cargo is hoisted up to the city with magical 
cranes, and people take levitating lifts. All 

traffic into Sharn passes through the district of 
Precarious in Lower Dura, and Cliffside has 
much in common with Lower Dura. It’s rough 
and poor, filled with sailors and dockworkers. On 
the other hand, some people swear that Cliffside 
has the finest taverns in Sharn. 


THE DEPTHS 


Sharn was built on the foundations of an older 
city, which was itself built atop goblin ruins. 
This old city was destroyed by dark magic— 


CHAPTER 6 | SHARN: ABOVE AND BELOW 


the elemental powers of the infamous Halas 
Tarkanan and his consort, the Lady of the 
Plague. It’s said that vile powers still linger in 
these ruins, and for this reason King Galifar I 
had all passages to this undercity sealed with 
gates of metal and magic. These portals remain 
sealed today, and it’s illegal to tamper with them. 
But it’s generally assumed that there may be 
many treasures hidden in the ruins of Old Sharn, 
along with untold secrets of the past. 


Tue Coes 


The Cogs lie deep below Sharn, below 
the sewers and even beyond the Depths. 
Incorporating natural tunnels and ancient goblin 
ruins. Streams of Fernian lava flow beneath 
Sharn, and over the centuries House Cannith 
has helped Breland establish vast foundries 
that tap this mystic resource. Ashblack and 
Blackbones are industrial districts, largely 
inhabited by warforged laborers and miserable 
workers of other races. It’s said that House 
Cannith maintains a massive forgehold in the 
depths, and that this is where Baron Merrix 
d’Cannith conducts his arcane experiments. 
In addition, The Red Hammer is Sharn’s only 
tavern catering specifically to warforged. 
Beyond Ashblack and Blackbones lies 
Khyber’s Gate, a maze of tunnels and 
tenements carved into the stone. The Sharn 
Watch has no presence in Khyber’s Gate, 
and the closest thing to an authority is the 
criminal organization known as Daask. Many 
of the inhabitants of the Gate are goblins and 
immigrants from Droaam, but it’s also home to 
fugitives and other desperate people. You can 
find mad cultists, undead, and even demons, 
along with a handful of hermits and visionaries 
seeking to escape the city above. Shamukaar is 
the most successful tavern in Khyber’s Gate. ‘This 
bar is a safe haven for all within it, regardless of 
species or politics; once you make it through the 
door, you can breathe easy. 


THINGS To Do IN SHARN 


Sharn is the largest and most cosmopolitan city 
in Khorvaire. Covering all the things that you 
could do in Sharn could fill an entire book (and 
does, as covered in the Appendix!). But here’s 
a few things you might want to do during your 
time in Sharn. 


CELEBRATE 


There’s always a celebration in Sharn, whether 
it’s a parade in a single district or a festival across 
the entire city. Here’s a few to put on your 
calendar. 

The Ascension (1 Sypheros). A celebration of 
the sacrifice of Tira Miron, who gave her life to 
serve as the Voice of the Silver Flame. There are 
services at all Silver Flame churches and shrines, 
and the faithful are encouraged to find some way 
to help their communities. 

Aureon’s Crown (26 Dravago). A celebration 
of knowledge. Elders share their knowledge 
with the young. Morgrave University holds its 
graduate services on this day, and there are 
public lectures at the Great Hall of Aureon in 
Upper Menthis. 

Boldrei’s Feast (9 Rhaan) is a celebration of 
community. There are gatherings across the city, 
and the wealthy compete to throw the grandest 
parties. 

Brightblade (12 Nymm). The festival of Dol 
Dorn, celebrated across the city with prizefights, 
wrestling matches, archery contests, and other 
tests of strength and skill. This culminates with a 
grand contest of champions at the Cornerstone in 
Middle ‘Tavick’s Landing. 

Crystalfall (9 Olarune). During the Last War, 
saboteurs caused a floating tower to fall into 
Lower Dura. This devastation can still be seen 
today in the district now known as Fallen. On 
9 Olarune, people gather to commemorate this 
tragedy. There’s a tradition of crafting elaborate 
ice sculptures and throwing them into the Dagger 
River. 


The Day of Mourning (20 Olarune). The 
nation of Cyre was destroyed four years ago 
on the Day of Mourning. While the Mourning 
had an impact on everyone in Khorvaire, this 
day is especially important for Cyran survivors. 
It is a time when Cyrans come together to 
remember their lost kingdom. Some tell stories 
or sing traditional songs, ensuring their culture 
isn’t forgotten. Others seethe with anger at the 
enemies who brought Cyre to this place, and it 
can be a time for riots or violence. 

Fathen’s Fall (25 Barrakas) commemorates a 
priest of the Silver Flame martyred while exposing 
hidden lycanthropes in Sharn. It is a time when 
followers of the Flame come together, but often 
causes tensions with the shifter community. 

The Hunt (4 Barrakas). In honor of the 
Sovereign Balinor, a fierce beast is brought to 
the city and released into an isolated section of 
the Depths. Anyone can participate in the Hunt 
by making a donation of 5 gp; the hunter (or 
hunting party) who brings down the beast wins a 
purse of 500 gp and the blessing of Balinor. The 
Hunt can vary; some years multiple beasts are 
released and the hunter who catches the most of 
them is marked as the victor. Often, though, the 
other hunters are a greater threat than the beast! 

Long Shadows (26-28 Vult). It’s said that the 
power of the Shadow—-sinister deity of the Dark 
Six—is at its height on these three nights. Wise 
people spend these nights indoors with friends, 
but those who celebrate the darkness may take to 
the streets to prey on the weak and foolish. 

The Race of Eight Winds (23 Lharvion) 
is an aerial race that takes place around Dura 
Quarter. See the sidebar for more information. 

Sun’s Blessing (15 Therendor). The festival 
of Dol Arrah, this is a day of peace and a time 
for enemies to find a peaceful resolution to their 
conflicts. It’s one of the safest days in the city. 

The Tain Gala (First Far of each month). The 
ir’ Pains are the richest and most powerful family 
in Sharn. Each month, Celyria ir’Tain holds a 
ball at her Skyway mansion. The guest list defines 
the social order of the city; those families with 
permanent invitations—known as the Sixty—are 


CHAPTER 6 | THINGS TO DO IN SHARN 141 


142 


the royalty of Sharn. However, Celyria does 
invite unusual guests each month, and an up- 
and-coming entertainer or a renowned folk hero 
might get the call! 

Thronehold (11 Aryth) is the day that the 
Treaty of Thronehold officially ended the Last 
War. This year (998 YK) is only the third time 
this event has been celebrated, and the Lord 


Mayor of Sharn has promised a truly epic festival. 


Wildnight (18-19 Sypheros). Supposedly the 
Fury—Sovereign of Passion and Madness— 
reaches the height of her power on this night. 
Emotions run high and impulse control runs 
low. Shy and superstitious folk stay indoors, 
while others see it as a time to cast aside all 
inhibitions. The streets fill with raucous revelry 
and wild celebrations stretch into the night... 
though riots, brawls, and other crimes are all 
too common on Wildnight. 


THE RACE OF EIGHT WINDS 


Legends say King Galifar Il used Dura as a 
proving ground for aerial cavalry. Over the 
centuries this evolved into the sporting event 
known as the Race of Eight Winds. Dura 

is divided into eight regions for the race, 
each of which is represented by a particular 
creature. The beasts of Lower Dura include 
the Gargoyle, the Glidewing, and the Griffon. 
Middle Dura fields the Owl, the Hawk, 

and the Eagle. Upper Dura supports the 
Hippogriff and the Pegasus. 

The race takes place on the 23rd day of 
Lharvion, but the inhabitants of Dura are 
devoted to the event. Preparations and 
debates are ongoing throughout the year, 
and as the race grows closer there are 
feasts, parades, and ever more serious 
arguments between the people of different 
districts. The race is an easy topic of 
conversation with anyone from Dura, but 
professing support for the wrong beast can 
be a dangerous thing. 


CHAPTER 6 | THINGS TO DO IN SHARN 


COMMUNICATE 


Need to get a message to someone? If you’re 
not in a hurry, the Orien post has boxes across 
the city; you can mail a letter for | cp. Hiring 
a courier generally costs between 5 cp to 5 gp, 
depending on the size of the package and where 
you need it delivered. You can find Sivis message 
stations in every upper and middle ward, and if 
you absolutely have to get a message to someone 
instantly, the Sivis enclave in Dragon Towers 
(Middle Central) can perform sending for 200 gp. 
House ‘Tharashk has brought a new innovation 
to message delivery in Sharn: gargoyles. 
Tharashk has licensed a score of gargoyles, and 
these flying couriers are a quick way to get a 
message across the city. If you spot a gargoyle 
you can flag it down, and it costs 5 gp to deliver a 
letter or small package. 


Have A Great FALL 


Sharn is the City of Towers, but it’s also a city of 
bridges and balconies. These can be extremely 
narrow or remarkably wide. ‘There are entire 
districts largely spread across vast bridges. While 
there are walls and rails on most bridges, there’s 
always the chance that your time in Sharn will 
end with someone going over the edge. So, what 
does that mean? 

Those who can afford it usually carry a feather 
token (see chapter 5) as insurance. No token? 
Don’t panic! Because of the maze of bridges and 
spans connecting the towers, there’s an excellent 
chance that you won’t fall more than a hundred 
feet before hitting a lower bridge. While this 
may seem like small comfort, the major bridges 
in the upper and middle wards are enchanted 
with feather fall enchantments that trigger 
automatically... keeping you from crushing an 
innocent passerby in your fall. 

Of course, there are many things that could 
happen during a lengthy fall. It’s always up to 
the DM to decide if you have a straight fall to the 
bottom. But the Falling in Sharn table presents a 
few of the many possibilities. 


10 


Falling in Sharn 


You fall hundreds of feet before 
striking the ground at the base of 
the towers. 


You fall 3d6x10 feet before striking 
a bridge. A major bridge in an upper 
or middle ward will have a feather 
fall enchantment, otherwise it’s 
going to be a hard landing. 


You fall 2d4x10 feet and land ina 
passing skycoach. Do you crush an 
innocent passenger? 

You fall 4d4x5 feet and strike an 
outcropping, flagpole, or projecting 
statue. If you survive, you’re still 
stranded on the edge of a tower or 
bridge. 

You fall past a hippogriff—make a 
Dexterity (Acrobatics) check (DC 15) 
to catch its leg! 


A giant owl catches you... and 
threatens to drop you if it doesn’t 
get a reward. 


You can fly! Actually, a nearby 
magewright cast feather fall to save 
you, but for a moment it feels like 
you can fly. 

You strike a small air elemental that 
was drawn to the city. This cushions 
your fall... but now you’re on top of 
an air elemental. 


A guardian angel manifests and 
catches you. Is this sheer luck due 
to Sharn’s proximity to Syrania? Or 
does this celestial have a purpose 
for you? 

You slip through the manifest zone 
surrounding Sharn and find yourself 
in the plane of Syrania. 


CHAPTER 6 | THINGS TO DO IN SHARN 


143 


144 


CRIMINAL ACTIVITIES 
IN SHARN 


Crime takes many forms. Any sort of theft is 
illegal, including “malicious theft of identity” —the 
use of shapeshifting abilities or illusion magic to 
impersonate someone with the intent to cause 
harm. Assault, murder, and fraud will all land 
you in hot water. Other crimes walk the edge 
of legality. Both gambling and prostitution are 
legal in Sharn, but these industries are heavily 
taxed and regulated; the most profitable games 
are found in the shady halls that operate off the 
books. Likewise, smuggled goods include strictly 
illegal things—uillicit drugs, mystical explosives— 
but also highly taxed goods from Xen’drik or 
other nations. 

While crime occurs throughout Sharn, it is 
most visible in Lower Dura and the Cogs. The 
Sharn Watch has a minimal presence in these 
wards, and these are the easiest places to sell 
stolen goods or to hire an assassin. Of course, 
they’re also good places to get robbed or caught 
up in a street brawl. 

Sharn is home to a host of minor gangs and 
independent criminals. However, most criminal 
activities ultimately fall under one of four 
criminal organizations; even independents will 
usually have an arrangement with one of these 
major powers. If your character has the criminal 
background, you should work with the DM to 
determine which of these organizations you’re 
connected to. 


CHAPTER 6 | CRIMINAL ACTIVITIES IN SHARN 


THE BoroMAR CLAN 


e —... 1s the oldest and most powerful criminal 
organization in Sharn. 


e ... dominates gambling, theft, and 
smuggling, including the dreamlily trade. 


* ... governs a wide network of lesser gangs 
and crimelords reaching across Sharn. 


e ... has halflings in many leadership roles 
but includes members of all races. 


e... is facing a serious challenge from Daask. 


The Boromar Clan began with a family of 
halfling immigrants from the Talenta Plains. 
Today the Boromars are one of Sharn’s most 
influential families. There’s a Boromar on the 
City Council. The Boromars have close ties by 
marriage to the local branch of House Jorasco. 
Boromars can be seen at every Skyway gala. But 
it’s an open secret that they've been running 
crime in Sharn since the first days of the city. 
They’ve been bribing the Sharn Watch for so 
long that in many districts, the Watch effectively 
works for the clan. 

Having a connection to the Boromar Clan 
makes you part of the established power in 
Sharn. It’s an organization that values tradition 
and prefers to avoid violence. However, you'll be 
expected to respect the hierarchy and follow the 
rules... and you may be targeted by Daask. 


DAASK 


¢ ... is led by monsters from Droaam. 

e... is based in the Cogs but has been 
recently expanding into the lower wards. 

e ... specializes in violent crime and 
extortion. 

e ... is aggressively targeting the Boromar 
Clan. 


Formed by monstrous immigrants from Droaam, 
Daask has been building its power for a decade 
and has recently begun an aggressive campaign 
of expansion. Humans, shifters, goblins, and 
changelings are all found in Daask, but the 
organization is built around a monstrous core: 
gnolls, ogres, minotaurs, harpies, even a handful 
of trolls. The leaders of Daask include oni and 
medusas. Daask doesn’t have the connections or 
infrastructure of the Boromar Clan, but the sheer 
physical force it can bring to bear is impressive. 

Daask has almost no influence in the middle or 
upper wards, but it is a powerful and dangerous 
force below. It’s a simple organization with few 
traditions or layers of leadership. Having ties to 
Daask gives you allies in the undercity and few 
restrictions. But it sets you against the Boromar 
Clan and makes you complicit in Daask’s 
increasing aggression. 


House TARKANAN 


e is a small, elite force of thieves-for-hire 
and assassins. 


e... is comprised of people with aberrant 
dragonmarks. 

e ... has a rivalry with the dragonmarked 
houses. 

* ... remains neutral in the brewing gang 
war. 


The members of House Tarkanan all possess 
aberrant dragonmarks. Rumors say that the gang 
began as a secret Brelish black ops team. ‘True 

or not, the members of this small gang are skilled 
thieves and assassins whose natural talents are 
enhanced by their aberrant marks. 

The organization takes its name from Halas 
Tarkanan, an aberrant-marked leader who 
fought against the dragonmarked houses 
centuries ago. In addition to its criminal 
activities, House ‘Tarkanan is known to offer 
shelter to people with aberrant dragonmarks, and 
protects persecuted aberrants. 

While anyone can have a contact with the 
House, you must have an aberrant dragonmark 
to join it. House Tarkanan remains neutral in the 
conflict between the crimelords and won’t accept 
contracts against gang leaders. 


CHAPTER 6 | CRIMINAL ACTIVITIES IN SHARN 145 


146 


THE TYRANTS 


e ... include members of all races, but 
primarily changelings and doppelgangers. 


e |.. specialize in information, forgery, 
blackmail, and fraud. 


e ... remain neutral in the Boromar-Daask 
conflict. 


The Tyrants are forgers and grifters, specialists 

in deception and the acquisition of information. 
The majority of the Tyrants are changelings, who 
use their shapeshifting abilities to fool marks and 
acquire secrets. There are magewrights among 
the Tyrants who can permanently alter your 
appearance. So, the Tyrants can steal someone’s 
identity, but they can also provide a fugitive with 
a new life. 

The Tyrants are an enigmatic organization. 
They act to protect the changelings of ‘Tavick’s 
Landing and they pursue schemes that generate 
profits. But they also gather secrets they might 
never use and, sometimes, even provide 
assistance when they don’t appear to benefit from 
it themselves. 

They have an longstanding truce with the 
Boromar Clan and remain neutral in the current 
struggles. 

Having a connection with the Tyrants gives 
you access to expert forgers—and could provide 
you with unexpected secrets. One of the tricky 
issues with the Tyrants is that many of its 
members maintain shared identities. A particular 
persona is a job and different changelings may 
take it on from day to day. So if you have a 
contact in the Tyrants, the contact you meet 
seems consistent, but you may actually be 
speaking to a different changeling each time you 
meet with the organization. 


CHAPTER 6 | CRIMINAL ACTIVITIES IN SHARN 


OTHERS 


The four organizations mentioned here are the 
ones people have heard of. The Boromar Clan 
is well known in Sharn. The Tyrants have been 
around for centuries and are often considered an 
urban myth by people who haven’t encountered 
them. Daask and House Tarkanan have both 
appeared within the last decade, but both are 
known to anyone who’s spent much time in the 
lower wards. 

These are the major players in Sharn’s 
underworld, but there’s a host of minor players. 
Both the Boromar Clan and Daask support 
a number of smaller gangs and criminal 
organizations, and it may not be immediately 
obvious who a gang is working with. And there’s 
always new people looking for opportunities, 
who haven’t yet been noticed by the Boromars. 
So, this is a partial list. Don’t assume you know 
everything about crime. 


DREAMLILY 


A psychoactive liquid that smells and tastes 
like your favorite beverage, essence of 
dreamlily is a Sarlonan opiate. First imported 
to manage pain during the Last War, it’s now 
the most commonly abused illegal substance 
in Sharn. Dreamlily dens can be found 
across the lower wards. 

Dreamlily causes disorienting euphoria and 
remarkable resistance to pain. While under 
the effects of dreamlily you are poisoned; 
you are immune to fear; and the first time 
you drop to 0 hit points without being killed 
outright, you drop to 1 hit point instead. 

A dose of dreamlily typically costs 1 gp, 
and the effects last for one hour. However, 
there are many varieties, and this may affect 
the duration or the price. 


STARTING POINTS 


Sharn holds the potential for endless adventures. 
The City of Towers can serve as the foundation 
of a single adventure or an entire campaign. 
Defining a starting point is a way to give an initial 
focus to the campaign—setting a tone and giving 
players an initial investment in the story. The 
player characters may be meeting in a tavern— 
but it’s their favorite tavern. The bard performs 
twice a week and the barbarian has a huge bar 
tab to resolve. 
This section explores three different starting 
points. 
e Callestan is in Lower Dura. It’s a 
dangerous district riddled with crime and 
gang conflict. A Callestan campaign is a 
dark neo-noir story. 


e Clifftop in Upper Dura is a district 
catering to established adventurers. This 
is a place for pulp heroes, established 
explorers whose services are in demand. 


e Morgrave University is in Upper 
Menthis Plateau. This is a college for 
adventurers, and an opportunity to add a 
little levity to your story. 


Choosing and developing a starting point should 
be a collaborative process between the players 
and the DM. A starting point sets a tone; if 

half of the players want a light-hearted romp, 
Callestan is a poor choice. 

Once you've agreed on a starting point, the 
next step 1s to work together to develop the story. 
This section provides details about each district, 
including prominent NPCs and locations. Using 
this as a foundation, each player should work 
with the DM to answer the following questions. 

Why Are You Here? What has drawn your 
character to this place, and what keeps you here? 
The idea of using a starting point is that it’s your 
home—what does it say about your character that 
this place is your home? 


Friends and Rivals. Who do you know in 
the district? The DM should work with each 
player to develop a friend or rival in the area... 
or both. A character’s background 1s always 
a good place to start. If you’re a criminal, do 
you have a friend in a local gang? If you’re an 
entertainer, do you have a professional rival? 

If you’re a folk hero, did you deal with a thug 
causing trouble in your favorite tavern—earning 
you the gratitude of the owner and the enmity of 
the villain? 

This is a collaborative process and the goal is 
to enhance the story, not to spoil it. You may 
be friends with a Morgrave professor, but that 
doesn’t mean they'll magically solve all your 
problems; more likely, they might ask you to 
help solve one of their problems. If you’re having 
trouble coming up with ideas, the DM can 
propose something and have you flesh out the 
details: “Youve made an enemy of a Daask ogre named 
Brokentooth. How'd that happen?” 

You Meet at a Tavern ... But Which 
Tavern? Where do you spend your off hours? 
As a group, once you settle on a location, each 
player can add one cosmetic detail about it. ‘This 
could involve a staff member (“The bartender is an 
old dwarf named Clanky; he’s got a prosthetic arm. ”). 

It might be something about the food, or about 
events hosted at the location (“Once a week, the local 
mediums hold a public seance. ”). All of these ideas are 
subject to DM approval. 

You don’t have to have a starting point, and 
even if you pick one, you don’t have to answer 
all of these questions. The goal of this is to set a 
tone—if this campaign is a movie, what kind of 
movie is it?—and to give each player a personal 
investment in that story. 


CHAPTER 6 | STARTING POINTS 


147 


STARTING Point: CALLESTAN 


The Sharn Watch won’t set foot in Callestan. 
Located at the base of Lower Dura, it’s been 
abandoned by the city above. Colors are faded, 
stones are cracked, and half the buildings should 
be condemned. The closest thing this district has 
to law is the Boromar Clan... and now they’re 
being challenged by the monsters of Daask. 
Every day there’s the chance that a war will 
break out on the streets. 

A Callestan campaign combines gritty dark 
fantasy with the classic Western. Callestan 
is effectively a frontier town in the middle of 
Sharn. The law is what you make it and brigands 
walk the streets. But it offers freedoms and 
opportunities you won’t find in the towers above! 


SETTING THE TONE 


Callestan is a district shaped by poverty and 
neglect. People come to Callestan to engage 
in criminal activities: visiting dreamlily dens, 
buying or selling stolen goods, negotiating with 
a Boromar lieutenant or hiring a Tarkanan 
assassin. The thing that holds the district together 
on a daily basis is personal reputation and 
relationships. ‘The reason no one robs the Anvil is 
because people love Eranna... and because they 
know Ilsa Boromar would hunt them down. 
Poverty is a part of a Callestan campaign. Most 
of the people in this district have never seen 
a platinum piece, and a single gold piece has 
considerable value. Maintaining a comfortable 
lifestyle can be a challenge, and an uncommon 
magic item is a significant treasure. The material 
rewards of adventure should be lower than in 
a heroic fantasy campaign. But reputation and 
relationships are the true treasures of this style of 
campaign. If you save Ilsa Boromar, she might 
give you a purse with 10 gp for your trouble... 
but her favor may provide you with far more 
protection than a set of +/ armor. 
An important piece of the tone is that no one 
cares what happens to Callestan. Things can occur 
here that would never happen in the upper 


CHAPTER 6 | STARTING POINT: CALLESTAN 


towers. Daask might release a gorgon into the 
streets. The necromancers of the Emerald Claw 
could test a necrotic weapon or a new form of 
undead. A pack of wererats could take root, 
unnoticed by the Church of the Silver Flame. It’s 
a grim truth that anything can happen here... 
but it’s also a great source of adventure. 


Way Are You Here? 


What brought you to Callestan, and should your 
fortunes change, why would you stay? 

You may have roots in the district. Perhaps 
your mother ran a small gang that was wiped out 
when you were a child. Maybe your family still 
lives here, running a struggling business. 

For many people, the appeal of Callestan is 
its freedom. If you’re a criminal or a charlatan, 
youre likely connected to one of the gangs and 
you appreciate the opportunity to ply your trade. 
As a sage you could be engaging in research that 
your compatriots feel is dangerous. As an acolyte 
you might harbor heretical beliefs. 

A variation of this is that you’re hiding. 

As a devout cleric or paladin, you may have 
made enemies of the corrupt authorities in 

the local churches. If you use the haunted one 
background, you may have seen something in 

the upper wards that has driven you into the 
darkness. Any character could have run afoul of 
the Sharn Watch, a powerful noble, or a sinister 
conspiracy; if you leave the lower wards, you may 
have to evade this enemy. 

Another option is that you’ve taken on a role 
in the community. Your cleric is the preacher for 
the district, trying to help these troubled people 
find the light. Your soldier or folk hero serves as 
the unofficial sheriff, protecting the innocent as 
best you can. You might work as a ratcatcher, a 
healer, or a private inquisitive solving mysteries. 
Callestan may be miserable, but it’s your home 
and these are your people. 


Waar Do You Want? 


Once you know what you’re doing in Callestan, 
the next question is where you want to go from 


here. What motivates your character? What 
could drive you to place yourself in danger? 

Do you want to help your friends, or protect 

the innocent people of the neighborhood? Are 
you seeking revenge on a powerful enemy or 
organization? Are you trying to establish your 
own business, or make an arcane breakthrough? 
These can be long-term goals or general themes, 
but it’s good for both player and DM to know 
what motivates the characters. 


THE SHAPE OF THE DISTRICT 


The heart of Callestan is the plaza called the 
Bridge. ‘This central square serves as an open 
market and speaker’s corner. It’s not on a bridge; 
rather, the center of the plaza contains the 
wreckage of a bridge that fell from one of the 
higher wards. 

More recently, the Bridge has taken on 
another meaning: it’s the line between Boromar 
territory and the wilds. Everything to the west 
of the Bridge is still under Boromar dominion. 
Fences, dreamlily dens, gambling holes—if it’s 
Westbridge, the Boromars take a cut and will 
act to protect it. The halfling Ilsa Boromar 
is the local clan leader. She despises needless 
cruelty but is ruthless in protecting her family’s 
interests. Eastbridge is a blend of Boromar 
loyalists, Daask insurgents, refugees and veteran 
soldiers driven here by war, even a small band of 
warforged. Westbridge is as safe as Callestan gets, 
while anything goes in Eastbridge. 

Westbridge has a significant halfling population. 
In Eastbridge, a group of goblins, kobolds, and 
gnolls have taken up residence in a block of 
condemned tenements known as the Kennels. 
Aside from this, Callestan is incredibly diverse, 
and members of any race can be found here. 

Callestan is an inner district, which means 
that it’s largely enclosed in one of the massive 
core towers of Dura Quarter. However, it’s large 
enough that it extends out to the walls of the 
tower. Many people live in or on the walls, in 
tenements or shops carved into the thick stone. 


INTERESTING LOCATIONS 


The Anvil was once The Golden Anvil, House 
Ghallanda’s flagship inn in Sharn. Now it’s 
faded and forgotten, but it still has traces of its 
former glory. There’s a few gaming tables and 
a small stage; there’s a dwarf comedian who’s 
been doing the same act for sixty years. While 
most services are modest or poor in quality, 
there is a single comfortable room. Eranna 
d’?Ghallanda runs the inn; she’s kind, honest, 
and much beloved in the district. The Anvil is 
on the west side of the Bridge and 1s a common 
hangout for Boromar allies. 

The Broken Mirror is an inn run by a family 
of changelings; the theme and tone of the inn 
changes every week. It’s said to have ties with the 
Tyrants, which keeps troublemakers away. 

The Butcher’s is a combination butcher 
shop and bar in Eastbridge. It’s popular with 
the local gnolls and is the best place to find 
Daask soldiers, though not all monsters in the 
region have ties to Daask. 

The Crooked Cat is home to dozens of cats, 
and this odd feature draws tourists from the 
higher wards. The proprietor 1s a shifter named 
Whiskers. He runs a side business as a fence, 
buying and selling unusual goods. Rumors say 
that Whiskers is some sort of warlock or druid, 
and that he can see through the eyes of his cats as 
they wander the city. 

The General is a headless statue in a small 
square in Eastbridge. It’s hundreds of years old, 
and no one actually knows who it represents. 
The statue radiates the effects of a sanctuary spell 
within a 15-foot radius and serves as a refuge for 
those in danger. The most destitute inhabitants of 
the district often sleep around the General. 

The Silvermist Theater stands on the 
west side of the Bridge. Like the Anvil, it’s a 
remnant of Callestan’s glory days; a fine theater 
that’s a rotting shadow of its former self. The 
current owners have grand ideas about future 
productions, but it’s the dreamlily parlor in the 
basement that keeps the theater open. 


CHAPTER 6 | STARTING POINT: CALLESTAN 


149 


150 


STARTING Point: CLIFFTOP 


Sharn is a city with an appetite for adventure. 
It’s the gateway to Xen’drik, a land filled with 
mystery and danger. Eccentric nobles and 
dragonmarked barons alike need capable agents 
for their many intrigues. So Sharn has a steady 
demand for adventurers, and Clifftop is where 
you go to find them. 

A Clifftop campaign focuses on heroic 
fantasy. You’re a professional adventurer with a 
reputation established, and you’re always ready 
for the next challenge. When you live in Clifftop 
every day brings a new thrilling challenge—a 
new chance to put your life on the line in pursuit 
of fame and fortune. 


SETTING THE TONE 


Clifftop runs with the idea that the player 
characters are known as adventurers. They’ve 
accomplished remarkable feats and beaten 
impossible odds. One way to reflect this is to start 
the characters off at a higher level than usual. 
With the DM’s approval, use the following rules 
to create a Clifftop adventurer. 

e You begin at 5th level. 


e You start with 600 gp in addition to your 
normal starting equipment. 


e You have two common magic items and 
two uncommon magic items. 


All magic items are subject to the approval of the 
DM, and the DM may choose whether to assign 
these items or to allow you to select the items 
you want. Either way, take a moment to come 
up with the story behind these items. How did 
you acquire them? Were they treasures found on 
your adventures? Heirlooms from your family 

or your time in the Last War? Or just something 
you bought with your earnings?One point 

about a Clifftop campaign is that you won’t stay in 
Clifftop. This district is your base of operations, 
home to valued comrades and rivals. It’s 

where you get your next job. But as a Clifftop 
adventurer you'll be venturing to exotic locales. 


CHAPTER 6 | STARTING POINT: CLIFFTOP 


You may delve into the ruins below Sharn or 
crash an airship into Skyway. You may head to 
Xen’drik or other distant lands. Wherever you 
go, adventure awaits! 


Way Are You Here? 


As a resident of Clifftop, you’ve got a reputation. 
What is it, and how did you earn it? Are you a 
new prodigy, or an old retired hero who’s just 
getting back into the game? 

As always, consider your background. If you’re 
a soldier, you might have had a celebrated 
career. As an entertainer, you might perform 
at one of the theaters of Upper Menthis 
between adventures. If you’re a sage you could 
be considered an expert in arcane lore or the 
history of Xen’drik, giving lectures at Morgrave 
University in your spare time. 

One question to consider is if you’re part of the 
Clifftop Adventurers’ Guild. ‘This is serves 
as a social club for adventurers and a one-stop 
marketplace for anyone seeking to hire a capable 
and reliable champion. If you’re part of the 
CAG you have access to the guild hall and a 
host of potential friends and allies. Perhaps you 
have a mentor at the guild, a retired adventurer 
who regales you with tales of her epic deeds. Or 
maybe you’ve take a novice under your wing and 
you're teaching him the ropes. A critical point 
is that the CAG has a positive reputation and 
doesn’t condone evil behavior; if you’re part of 
the Clifftop Adventurers’ Guild, you’re expected 
to adhere to its codes of conduct. Less reputable 
characters can find work with the Deathgate 
Adventurers’ Guild in Middle Tavick’s 
Landing. There’s a long-standing rivalry between 
the two guilds, and if you’re part of the CAG you 
might work with the DM to develop a particular 
nemesis in the Deathsgate guild. 


Waar Do You Want? 


As a Clifftop adventurer, you’re regularly putting 
your life on the line. What is it that brought you 
to this risky line of work? Is it just about the gold? 
Are you driven by academic curiosity? Are you 


seeking the answer to a particular mystery, or 
searching for clues about an ancient threat? Are 
you primarily interested in your reputation— 
perhaps hoping to gain entry to the legendary 
Wayfinder’s Foundation, or to prove yourself 
to your family or your true love? 


THE SHAPE OF THE DISTRICT 


Clifftop sits atop Dura Quarter. While it’s an 
upper ward, it’s still part of Dura Quarter. The 
stone is drab granite and the towers are simple 
and functional. It’s no match for the splendors 
of Upper Central or Skyway... but the colorful 
inhabitants more than make up for the somewhat 
dingy surroundings. 

In Clifftop, a ring of simple apartments and 
hostels circle the pinnacle, a high peak filled 
with shops and services catering to adventurers. 
The laborers and artisans who keep the district 
running are usually ready to drop their daily 
tasks and serve as hirelings. 

The Clifftop Adventurer’s Guild is the 
physical and social heart of the district. You don’t 
have to be a member of the CAG to get work 
in Clifftop, but it certainly helps. The current 
leader of the guild is a dwarf named Sumara 
Korranor, but she goes by Summer. If you’re 
part of the CAG, the DM and the players should 
work together to add additional details about 
Summer: what are her traits and quirks? What’s 
an interesting encounter you’ve had with her, or 
a story you've heard about her? 

Violence and crime are relatively rare in 
Clifftop; the members of the CAG usually 
handle any troubles that arise. However, the 
district is under the jurisdiction of Watch 
Commander Lian Halamar, a halfling who 
runs the Daggerwatch garrison in Upper Dura. 
Halamar has no love for adventurers and is 
always happy to catch a member of the CAG on 
the wrong side of the law. It’s generally assumed 
that Commander Halamar is working for the 
Boromar Clan, though he’s never committed the 
Dura Watch to their struggles with Daask. 


INTERESTING LOCATIONS 


The Augury is home to a circle of magewrights 
who specialize in divination magic, including 
augury (50 gp), divination (200 gp), identify (150 

gp) and speak with dead (200 gp). The master of 
the Augury is an elf named Kestia. She has 

ties to a number of angels of Syrania, and if she 
chooses she can perform commune. However, as 
this requires her to call in a celestial favor, it’s not 
something she offers as a standard service. 

The Drunken Dragon is a legendary 
watering hole. While the service is slow and the 
food is modest at best, it has the widest selection 
of beverages and spirits in Sharn... and maybe 
Khorvaire. From Lhazaar mead to the fermented 
honey-milk favored by the shifters of the Eldeen 
Reaches, if it’s strong and strange you can find 
it at the Drunken Dragon. The proprietor, 
Hascal d’Ghallanda, has the Greater Mark of 
Hospitality and can give his favorite customers 
access to his magnificent mansion. 

House Sivis maintains a small enclave in 
Clifttop. In addition to the speaking stone, this 
outpost specializes in translating exotic texts and 
providing legal services to adventurers in trouble 
with the law. Josilian Tarli d’Sivis is one of 
the best barristers in Sharn, though certainly one 
of the most expensive. 

Kawv’s is quieter than the Drunken Dragon, 
but the food is far better. Saza and Taji Kavv 
are immigrants from the city of Stormreach in 
Xen’drik, and use many exotic ingredients and 
spices the people of Khorvaire have never tasted. 
The Kavvs have many friends in Stormreach, 
and their insights and contacts could be useful to 
adventurers heading to Xen’drik. 

The shops of the Mystic Market deal in 
magic items, whether locally produced or bought 
from explorers. The Mithral Blade produces 
fine and uncommon weapons and armor. Wise 
Wood buys and sells arcane focuses and other 
wands. The Moonlit Loom deals in magical 
clothing; the Dragon’s Hoard sells wondrous 
items; and Boldrei’s Tears and Good Spirits 
are a source of reliable potions. 


CHAPTER 6 | STARTING POINT: CLIFFTOP 


151 


STARTING POINT: 
Morcrave UNIVERSITY 


Morgrave University is the largest institute of 
learning in Breland. While it’s not as prestigious 
as Arcanix or the Library of Korranberg, 
Morgrave is known for its unorthodox methods 
and hands-on style of teaching. If you want to 
learn about the history of Sharn, what better 
way than to explore the ancient ruins below the 
city? Critics say that Morgrave is a college of 
tomb robbers, and much of its endowment does 
come from the sale of artifacts recovered on its 
expeditions. 

Morgrave University can be a useful resource 
in any style of campaign. It’s an asset for sages 
conducting research and a source of potential 
patrons. But it can also be the foundation of a 
campaign: heroic fantasy seen through the eyes 
of students at the university. 


SETTING THE TONE 


A Morgrave campaign is a coming of age story 
in a fantasy world. In between delving into ruins 
and uncovering demonic schemes, the player 
characters need to decide what to do with their 
lives, humiliate their rivals, and figure out what 
to wear to the Crystalfall dance. You can play up 
the humor in this scenario, but it can be just as 
dark as Callestan if you choose. 

A Morgrave campaign isn’t driven by material 
wealth. Even when you go on expeditions, the 
University will lay claim to most of the treasures 
you find. Instead, the rewards of Morgrave 
adventures are measured in relationships and in 
learning. Can you earn a professor’s trust? Can 
you get unrestricted access to the library stacks? 
Can you impress that mysterious stranger? 

At the DM’s discretion, accomplishing these 
sorts of side goals can provide concrete benefits. 
A wizard who has access to the library may be 
able to swap one of their known spells at start 
of each session. As a simple reward, a character 
who accomplishes a meaningful personal goal 


could receive one to five hero points, as described 
on page 264 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide. 

Another twist that works well with a Morgrave 
campaign is to use story-based advancement 
instead of standard XP. Level advancement 
could be based on time: player characters gain 
one level each semester, leveling up after finals. 
Alternately, advancement could be tied to 
achieving specific goals: You'll all gain a level as 
long as your professor survives the expedition! 
See page 261 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide for 
more information. 


Way Are You Here? 


As a Morgrave student, you’re not an adventurer 
yet. You’ve got talent, but you’re learning. 
Consider how your background ties into this. 

As a noble, are you an entitled rich kid who 
thinks youw’re better than everyone else? As an 
urchin, did you somehow earn a scholarship, 

or are you literally sneaking into your classes? 

As a criminal, you could be the daughter 

of a Boromar crime boss, or you might be an 
entrepreneur selling dreamlily to the nobles. A 
charlatan could be a brilliant drama student 

or an undercover spy trying to root out enemy 
agents in the faculty. If you’re an entertainer 
you might be a prodigy whose talent is only just 
emerging. A Morgrave story is about coming of 
age and unlocking your potential. So think about 
your background as a way to set up the person 
you're becoming, as opposed to representing 
adventures that you’ve already had. 


Waar Do You Want? 


Figuring out what you want in life is one of the 
main goals of a Morgrave campaign. As wizard 
you've got remarkable arcane talents. But what 
are you going to do with them? 

You can establish a grand goal from the 
beginning. Perhaps your wizard needs to master 
magic to summon and destroy the demon that 
killed your parents. The bard is determined to 
play on the Grand Stage. The paladin keeps 
having a divine vision... but what does it mean? 


CHAPTER 6 | STARTING POINT: MORGRAVE UNIVERSITY 


But such goals should be something that guide 
you down the path of knowledge—things that 
can evolve and change with your character. 


THE SHAPE OF THE DISTRICT 


Morgrave University is located in Upper Menthis 
Plateau, where it occupies the aptly named 
University district. The university itself occupies 
the massive Dalannan Tower; this includes a 
number of layers. 
e The tower is crowned by Lareth Hall, 
a beautiful domed structure than holds 
administrative and faculty offices. 


e (Classrooms and auditoriums occupy 
Dalannan Proper, the levels directly 
below the dome. 


e The Dezina Museum of Antiquities 
occupies a number of levels below 
Dalannan Proper. This showcases many 
wonders recovered from Xen’drik and 
other expeditions, though anything truly 
valuable tends to be sold by the university. 


e The Morgrave University Library 
stretches down below, with levels and levels 
of stacks below the public reading rooms. 
While the library has its lumits—including 
a level of disorganization that results in 
texts being randomly lost in the stacks for 
decades—1t 1s the most extensive collection 
in Breland. 


e Below the Library lie the Vaults. 
These hold crates of relics waiting to be 
catalogued, shelves of oddities deemed to 
have little monetary or academic value, and 
a few heavily secured chambers holding 
artifacts deemed too valuable or dangerous 
to be put on display. 


Breland Spire is adjacent to Dalannan Tower 
and holds the standard student dormitories. The 
Commons is a large open-air plaza situated 
atop Breland Spire. This massive rooftop garden 
serves as a space for reflection, public events, and 
meals; vendors at the edge of the Commons offer 
a wide range of culinary options. A wide bridge 


connects the Commons to Dalannan Proper. 
One side of this bridge holds little shops and 
vendors catering to students, while the opposite 
side is the standard place to display notices of 
interest to students. 


INTERESTING LOCATIONS 


Upper Menthis is a center for entertainment, 
and a number of Sharn’s finest theaters are 
located in the University District, including the 
edgy Art Temple, more traditional Grand 
Stage, and the legendary Kavarrah Concert 
Hall. Of course, few students can afford to 

go to the Kavarrah, and they may go down to 
Middle Menthis for the more affordable shows 
and dinner theater. Students feeling bold may 
descend as far as Lower Menthis, home to a wide 
variety of illicit entertainments... including the 
prizefights of the Burning Ring. But for those 
who stay close to home, here’s a little of what the 
University district has to offer. 

Detention. This tavern celebrates its 
reputation as a watering hole for the worst 
students in Morerave. There’s always an exotic 
drinking game or a lively debate on the current 
state of the Race of Eight Winds. Detention is 
run by a halfling who calls herself Brandy. She 
claims to be a excoriate, driven from House 
Ghallanda after refusing to water down her ale, 
but some say she’s the Ghallanda patriarch’s 
heir. The warforged bouncer Bumper keeps the 
rowdiest students under control. 

Golden Horn. This wealthy inn includes a 
library, a few large meeting rooms, and a small 
concert hall. Rumors say that this is an outpost 
of the secret Circle of Song, a society of bards 
and entertainers spread across Khorvaire; 
others swear that House Thuranni and House 
Phiarlan regularly send talent scouts to the 
Golden Horn. Many aspiring musicians perform 
at the Horn in the hopes of being noticed by 
one of these organizations. 

The Great Hall of Aureon. Devoted to the 
Sovereign of Law and Lore, this grand temple is 
an architectural marvel as well as a sacred site. 
Many scholars and sages make the pilgrimage 


CHAPTER 6 | STARTING POINT: MORGRAVE UNIVERSITY 


153 


and spend one night in the Great Hall, hoping 
that inspiration will strike them as they sleep; 
stories say that Merrix d’Cannith first conceived 
of the warforged after spending the night in the 
temple. The staff of the temple are devoted to 
their faith—a rarity in Sharn—as well as to the 
general acquisition of knowledge. Most priests 
are also experts in a particular field of study and 
are usually happy to share their knowledge with 
students. 

Honors. The counterbalance to Detention, 
Honors is both bar, bookstore, and reading 
room. Many of the more respectable faculty 
members take their meals in Honors, and it’s a 
good place to find a debate on the cosmology of 
Eberron or the morality of the Last War. 


CLASSES AT MoRGRAVE 


Morgrave’s physical education classes cover 
everything from acrobatics and athletics to 
archery, dueling, and various other forms of 
combat. ‘The arcane studies program covers 
the Arcana skill, as well as honing the abilities 
of arcane casters. Divine magic can’t simply be 
taught, but Morgrave has classes in theology and 
religious history—essentially, the Religion skill. 

While these classes may not make for 
interesting adventures, Morgrave is famous for 
its hands-on teaching style. ‘This often involves 
competitions against other students. It can also 
involve a professor’s personal projects: Why don’t 
you come help with this conjuration? Trust me, nothing 
will go wrong. Once students have proven their 
competence, it can involve expeditions—trips 
into the Depths of Sharn, or even to distant 
countries or lands. 

Although Morgrave professors are experts 
in their fields, this doesn’t mean they have all 
the abilities of high level player characters! Just 
because that conjuration professor can perform 
a summoning ritual doesn’t mean he can cast 
fireball. Always remember that player characters are 
exceptional—and as that talent begins to show, 
people are sure to take an interest in you. 


154 CHAPTER 6 | STARTING POINT: MORGRAVE UNIVER 


A Quick SHARN Story 


Use these tables as inspiration for the weary DM 
who needs to put together a story in a hurry. 
Don’t feel bound to use any of these details 
exactly as presented—this is purely a source of 
ideas. The Villain table suggests an archetype 
along with an organization; consider both as 

as possibilities. A local crimelord could be tied 
to House Tarkanan or the Tyrants instead of 


Daask. The sinister cultist could be a priest of the 


Mockery—or a mind flayer serving the Daelkyr. 
Make every story your own! 


THE HOOK 
1d8 = Plot Hook 
1 One of the PCs is nearly crushed when 


a man falls from a high bridge, striking 
the ground near them and dying 
instantly. He’s carrying a sealed bag 

of holding and the badge of an agent 
of the Argentum, a Thrane agency 
dedicated to the retrieval of dangerous 
artifacts. 


The PCs are caught in the middle of a 
pitched battle... and they don’t know 
the people on either side. 


The PCs notice a corpse in an alley... a 
corpse that looks exactly like one of the 
player characters. 

A former comrade in arms shows up. 
She’s badly injured, and her enemies 
are right behind her. 

A gargoyle courier delivers a 
mysterious package. 

A delirious street preacher has an 
apocalyptic vision concerning one of 
the player characters. 

The PCs discover a bound-elemental 
explosive device in their quarters. They 
have three rounds to flee or attempt to 
disarm the device. 

A skycoach crashes through the wall. 

Is this an attack, or the result of 
sabotage? 


THE VILLAIN 


1d12 Villain 


1 


O ON DN FW YN 


12 


A dragonmarked baron 
An eccentric noble (Aurum) 
A local crimelord (Boromar Clan) 


A nefarious necromancer (Emerald Claw) 


A sinister cultist (Dragon Below) 

A misguided paladin (Silver Flame) 

A clever doppelganger (Tyrants) 

A vengeful warforged (Lord of Blades) 
A possessed innocent (Dreaming Dark) 
An oni mastermind (Daask) 

An enigmatic rakshasa (Lords of Dust) 
A disguised dragon (The Chamber) 


THE PLOT 


1d10 Plot 


1 


O ON DN FW YN 


m. 
jo) 


Arrange a dangerous alliance. 

Acquire a powerful artifact. 

Assemble and use a magical weapon. 
Defeat a rival. 

Open a planar portal. 

Summon fiends or undead. 
Overthrow a peer or superior. 

Cause a riot in the Cogs. 

Start a war between two allies. 
Collapse Skyway or one of the towers. 


CHAPTER 6 | A QUICK SHARN STORY 


155 


156 


THE TWIST 
1d8 Twist 

1 A friend or former ally is working with 
the villain. 

2 The villain is not who they appear to 
be. 

3 A third party shows up with their own 
agenda. 

4 There’s a hostage, or an ally of the PCs 
is directly at risk. 

5 A manifest zone or planar conjunction 
has an unexpected effect. 

6 The villain has a personal connection 
to one of the PCs. 

7 The initial plot was just a distraction 
from the actual plot. 

8 The villain is fighting a greater evil, 


and their plot is an important part of 
that. 


CHAPTER 6 | THE STREETS OF SHARN 


SY? Ty 


THE FINAL SCENE IS IN... 


1d8 


10 


Finale Location 


An invisible floating fortress above 
Sharn. 

The heart of Khyber’s Gate in the 
Cogs. 

The Bridge in Callestan in Lower Dura. 


A Cannith forgehold seized by the 
villain’s forces. 


The heart of the High Walls refugee 
camp in Lower Tavick’s Landing. 


A festival at the Pavilion of the Host in 
Upper Central Plateau. 


A noble’s mansion in the restricted 
districts of Upper Tavick’s Landing 


The vaults of Morgrave University in 
Upper Menthis Plateau. 


An abandoned foundry in the Cogs. 
A demiplane with unusual properties. 


n 


THE STREETS OF SHARN 


The player characters are making a trip from 
Lower Dura to Upper Menthis. What happens 
along the way? The tables on the following pages 
are filled with ideas for random things and people 
you might encounter while wandering around 
Sharn. These could be used as pure color, or you 
could expand any one of these ideas to spark a full 
scene if the initial situation attracts the players’ 
interest. Not every result from the table needs 

to be the beginning of something in your story. 
Simply showing that Sharn lives and thrives 
around the players’ characters—that it’s full of 
stories happening all the ttme—helps bring the 
city to life for everyone. 

Use these tables as sources of inspiration. They 
reflect the general activities and flavor of the 
different levels of Sharn, but you can tailor the 
results to be a better match for any ward. 


BEHIND THE RESULTS 


The entries in the following tables depict things 
that adventurers in Sharn might encounter 

by chance or happenstance. Each of these is 

an immediate, visible part of someone’s life in 
Sharn. Each entry also has room to imply or 
imagine backstory or history—and to encourage 
players to ask “What happens next?” 

What happens next depends on their 
involvement. What led up to this moment is fuel 
for the ever-burning fire of Sharn’s own history 
and character. Consider answering one or more 
of these questions to add another dimension to 
each entry in the table: 

e Where did participants in this moment start 

off? Where did they wake up today? 


e Why aren’t other locals participating? 
What’s complicating things here? 


e What do participants in this moment hope 
will happen? What are they afraid might 
happen? Why now? 


CHAPTER 6 | THE STREETS OF SHARN 157 


158 


LOWER SHARN STREETS 


2d20 Streets of Lower Sharn 


2 


10 


11 


12 


13 


14 


You find a newly-painted mural of a 
halfling standing atop the bloody corpse 
of an ogre. 

A dwarf is selling kebabs from a cart. 
“Crispy spiced rat!” He cries. “The best 
in the tower!” 


A changeling street performer adopts 
your face and begins to match your 
actions. 

An old goblin has goods laid out for 
sale, odds and ends salvaged from the 
sewers. 


A pack of children clusters around you, 
begging for copper or food. Do you help 
them? 

An attractive young human presses a 
small pamphlet into your hand. “Come 
to Chance in Dragoneyes! All bets will 
be covered!” 

A sudden, horrible stench makes you 
gag. 

You come upon a minotaur with a 
broken horn and a spiked club in one 
hand. He’s urinating against a wall, and 
snarls when he notices you watching. 


A half dozen rats are clustered around 
a bloody bundle of cloth. They scurry 
away as you approach. 

A young half-elf with a crimson 
eyepatch offers a fine set of pens and 
parchment for sale, at a price of 3 
sovereigns (3 sp). “Top notch! And not 
stolen or anything.” 


You step into a shallow puddle... and 
then realize it’s a pool of fresh blood. 


You nearly walk into a well-dressed 
halfling. She studies your face carefully 
and scowls. Other onlookers carefully 
turn away. 

A large black and white cat watches you 
from an alley. It’s caught a surprisingly 
scaly rat. 


CHAPTER 6 | THE STREETS OF SHARN 


15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


21 


22 


23 


24 


25 


Hungry people stand in line outside a 
shrine to Boldrei, waiting for conjured 
bread. 


You bump into a medusa, causing her 
to drop the package she’s carrying. 

You freeze for a moment, then realize 
she has a leather band covering her 
eyes. Her serpent mane hisses as she 
retrieves her belongings. 

Fresh graffiti shows a Cyran crown with 
a sword through it. The text reads “Cyre 
is dead, no place for Mourners.” 


A group of shifter children take turns 
trying to make the biggest howl, 
laughing in between. 


Two shifters are arguing in the street. 
One of them snarls, and sharp fangs 
extend from her gums. 

A young woman is repairing a damaged 
everbright street lantern, muttering 
curses under her breath. 

A well-dressed elf from Aerenal walks 
along the filthy street, accompanied by 
a dour ogre hauling a large trunk. The 
elf’s face is hidden behind a brass mask, 
but he looks lost. 


A group of drunken soldiers are singing 
a warbling Brelish anthem from the 

Last War. A few of them spot you and 
demand that you join in. Do you? 

A dwarf and a goblin are arguing 

about the Race of Eight Winds, a local 
sporting event. The goblin insists that 
the Gargoyle will win this year, while the 
dwarf supports the Griffon. 


A warforged skirmisher and a Valenar 
elf are engaged in an argument. The 
elf takes a step back and draws her 
scimitar. 

A trio of hobgoblins walk through a 
makeshift market as though they’re 
hunting for something. 


26 


27 


28 


29 


30 


31 


32 


33 


You’re drenched by a sudden gout of 
water—you hope—from a bridge above 
you. 

A group of Cyran refugees are gathered 
in a circle, singing a haunting song. 

You see a tall, thin woman pulling a 
body—Dead? Drunk?—into an alley. Her 
arm is covered with the blood-red lines 
of an aberrant dragonmark. 


The window of a bakery holds a display 
of impossibly beautiful cookies. What is 
this quality of goods doing down here? 
Outside a shop, a grimy halfling 
promises better deals just down the 
alleyway. 

A dragonmarked gnome walks down 
the street, carrying a small stone in his 
hand. Every few yards, he raises the 
stone to his lips and says, “Can you hear 
me now? Good.” 

An austere monk of the Silver Flame 
makes their way down the street, 
handing provisions to beggars. 


You hear someone softly singing the 
Bear’s March, a Brelish battle anthem 
from the Last War. The singer is a young 
man leaning against the wall; he’s 
missing his left arm. 


34 


35 


36 


37 


38 


39 


40 


A headless warforged sits in an alley 
begging for coin. It waves in a signal of 
thanks whenever someone drops a coin 
in its bowl. 


A crowd is gathered around a young 
adept of the Silver Flame. She’s 
performing a ritual to purify a pool of 
run-off water. 

You notice a large metal hatch in the 
ground, engraved with warding symbols 
and a ancient proclamation that it 
should never be opened. 


A group of goblin children chatter and 
shout at one another. They scatter when 
they see you approach. 


A goblin tumbles out of a nearby tavern. 
A warforged juggernaut steps out of the 
door and snarls “Don’t come around 
here until you can pay!” 

A trio of Morgrave students take notes 
and they ask a goblin about “the goblin 
experience.” 


Near one of the entrances to the Cogs, 
you come upon a large mob chanting 
slogans and shouting. The carry signs 
protesting the use of warforged 
laborers. 


CHAPTER 6 | THE STREETS OF SHARN 


159 


MIDDLE SHARN STREETS 


2d20 Streets of Middle Sharn 


2 


10 


11 


12 


13 


“Best tours! All the facts!” crows a 
kenku guide, trying to catch your eye. 


An Aundairian man in a glamerweave 
vest—patterned with blazing flames— 
interrupts your travel. “You know the 

best place to play cards around here?” 


A cheerful gnome offers olfactory 
illusions. “For just five crowns, | can 
make the most dismal districts smell 
like roses!” 


A clump of hippogriff dung falls from 
the sky. 


A halfling vendor is selling dried lizard 
jerky from a wagon. “Talentan style!” 
she says. “Just like elipa used to make!” 
A crowd stands outside a rundown 
building. A grim quartet of halflings 
wearing the insignia of the Ratcatcher’s 
Guild head inside. 


A half-chewed drumstick falls from an 
passing skycoach, nearly hitting you in 
the head. 

A dragonmarked half-orc holds what 
appears to be a dowsing rod, slowly 
passing it over doors and passerby on 
the street. The rod begins to shake 
violently as you approach. 


A human merchant argues with a giant 
owl. 


As you cross a bridge, you notice a 
pair of stonemasons studding a crack 
running through the stone span. 


Two people are arguing in front of a city 
guard, and you hear accusations that 
someone is a changeling. 


A Karrnathi couple step off a lift, a large 
map in their hands. They turn and 
rotate the paper several times, trying to 
make heads or tails of the directions. 


160 CHAPTER 6 | THE STREETS OF SHARN 


14 


15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


21 


22 


23 


24 


A warforged waves at you from a dingy 
cart piled high with a frightening array 
of foods. “Hungry? | could use some 
taste testers. As in, what does food 
taste like?” 

A scaled humanoid—one of the 
lizardfolk or dragonborn of Q’barra—is 
delighting onlookers with displays of 
firebreathing. 


You hear screaming above you. When 
you look up, you see a well dressed 
noble gently floating to the ground. 


A young child sits crying on the stairs of 
Tharashk inquisitive’s office. If you ask, 
he sobs that they won’t help find his 
dog. 

You spot a moss covered warforged 
sitting in a small park overlooking the 
Dagger River. Birds are nesting in an 
small, open compartment in the torso 
of the warforged. 


Two veteran soldiers—a Karrn anda 
Thrane—are shouting at one another. 
The Karrn draws a dagger. 


The crowds part, making room for 
a halfling warrior riding a snarling 
clawfoot raptor. 


Three children follow a warforged 
juggernaut, giggling and throwing 
garbage at it. The warforged stoically 
ignores them. 


A squad of the Sharn Watch pushes 
past you, urging people to get out of 
the way. 

An Aereni stops you to ask for 
directions to “Shae Lias.” She wears a 
silver mask and a glamerweave robe, 
and carries a sizeable purse. 


A cheerful man sells a wide variety of 
souvenirs to commemorate your visit 
to Sharn: sketches, crystal globes, and 
small plaster towers. 


25 


26 


27 


28 


29 


30 


31 


32 


33 


You pass by a shifter and a dwarf 
merchant arguing with a member 

of the Sharn Watch. Apparently, the 
shifter believes he was charmed into 
making a foolish purchase. 


You come across a wall where people 
have written the names of friends lost 
during the Last War. 


A halfling wearing the livery of House 
Jorasco argues with a member of the 
Sharn Watch, apparently trying to 
absolve a friend of an accusation of 
pickpocketing. 

The smell of fresh, buttered bread 
wafts through the middle of the 
thoroughfare, but you cannot find the 
source. 


A street performer dressed as King 
Boranel offers to knight tourists for a 
copper piece. 


A well-dressed human floats down from 
a balcony above, his fall slowed by a 
feather fall spell. He bids you, “good 
day” and walks off quickly as you hear 
guards shouting and pointing from a 
bridge above. 

A gargoyle swoops overhead, landing 
on the street in front of you. It pulls 

a piece of folded parchment out of a 
leather satchel and heads into a nearby 
shop. 

A one-eyed half-elf opens up his cloak 
to reveal a selection of wands carved 
from different woods. “Eight galifars (8 
gp) each! Top quality. And not stolen or 
anything.” 

A human fishmonger and a half-elf are 
arguing about the Race of Eight Winds, 
a local sporting event. The human 
thinks that the Hawk can’t lose, while 
the half-elf insists that this is the year 
of the Owl. 


34 


35 


36 


37 


38 


39 


40 


Fresh graffiti proclaims “The crown dies 
with Boranel!” 

A well-dressed gnome offers to sell you 
an invitation to the Tain Gala. “It’s the 
grandest celebration in Sharn! I’m too 
busy to go this month, but it’s a bargain 
at 10 pieces of gold!” 


A man in faded finery extols the virtues 
of a miracle elixir to a small crowd. “It’s 
the secret House Jorasco doesn’t want 
you to know!” 


With a loud cry and wildly pinwheeling 
arms, a child plummets from a crowded 
bridge above. 


“They’re eroding our traditions! Don’t 
let these thieves tell our king what 

to do!” A young woman stands on a 
corner shouting about the threat posed 
by the dragonmarked houses. 


A panicked gnome runs out of an 
oracle’s tent. “We’re doomed! 
Dooooomed! 

A man begs for coins outside a Jorasco 
house of healing. “One galifar, please! 
| know it’s a lot, but if | can’t raise the 
money today, she’ll die!” 


CHAPTER 6 | THE STREETS OF SHARN 


161 


162 


UPPER SHARN STREETS 
2d20 Streets of Upper Sharn 


2 You’re nearly run down by a gilded 
carriage, pulled by a team of warforged 
gilded in the same patterns. 


3 A magewright offers to use a simple 
charm to polish the coins in your purse 
for just 3 crowns (3 cp). “We wouldn’t 
want anyone to get grime on their 
gloves from handling filthy coins from 
the lower wards.” 


4 An illusion of a warforged butler 
appears as you pass by the sealed 
gates of a mansion. “I’m afraid my 
mistress isn’t receiving guests today.” 

5 A dragonmarked halfling offers a 
cleansing enchantment for 5 crowns 
(5 cp). “Gets rid of the dirt, brightens 
your brights, puts a little bounce back 
in your hair! Just the thing to make a 
good impression.” 

6 “Make way! Make way!” A young boy 
clears a path for a jewel-encrusted 
warforged wearing a lovely fur cloak. 


7 A flustered gnome carrying stacks 
of paper and parchments taller than 
himself. He is oblivious to the trail 
of smoke coming from inside a tall, 
rolled-up scroll on his back. 


8 Two nobles are locked in a bitter 
argument. They’re wearing similar 
cloaks—glamerweave garments 
imbued with the illusion of shifting 
clouds—and this seems to be the 
problem. 


9 A regal woman with auburn hair held 
back in a silver diadem waits for a 
skycoach. She holds a darkwood staff 
encrusted with dragonshards, and she 
taps it impatiently. 

10 Agray-bearded sage argues witha 
pale tiefling, whose horns appear to 
be carved from ice. They seem to be 
debating the dangerous effects of 
Risian planar influence. 


CHAPTER 6 | THE STREETS OF SHARN 


11 


12 


13 


14 


15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


21 


A Morgrave professor leads a pack of 
chattering students on an expedition. 
From their spelunking gear, you 
imagine they’re heading down into the 
Cogs. 

As you pass by a fancy inn, a nobleman 
hands you a copper piece and the reins 
of his griffon. “Do take care now, she 
bites.” 

A tour group pauses to marvel at the 
gates of a mansion. Apparently, it’s 

the home of one of the divas of Upper 
Menthis. 


An enchanted mirror allows you to 
view the streets below you, to see how 
the less fortunate live. 


A kalashtar storyteller shares a tale of 
life in Sarlona and the endless struggle 
between the peaceful monks of Adar 
and the cruel soldiers of the Inspired. 


A half-elf wearing a jeweled eyepatch 
offers a fine spellbook for just forty 
galifars (40 gp). “Really interesting 
stuff! And not stolen or anything.” 
You come upon a gilded statue of 
Queen Wroaan, the queen who 

led Breland into the Last War (“and 
freedom!” the plaque proclaims). 


A warforged with roses twined around 
her limbs offers to sell you a bouquet 
for five sovereigns (5 sp). 

A string quartet gives an impromptu 
performance—publicity for the new 
season of the Kavarrah Concert Hall. 


A dragonmarked elf dazzles passerby 
with a illusionary tableau of two 
dueling dragons. 

A mansion has a few gargoyles sitting 
on its walls. They’re probably there 
as security, but they offer lively 
commentary about everyone who 
passes by. 


29. 


23 


24 


25 


26 


27 


28 


29 


30 


31 


32 


33 


A street performer is drawing patterns 
on the ground in chalk. As each picture 
is completed, it starts to move. 
Someone’s painted the crown dies 
with Boranel across the gates of a 
noble’s mansion. A member of the 
Sharn Watch is talking to the servants. 
A girl wearing the colors of House 
Vadalis chases her miniature chimera. 


A team of handlers from House Vadalis 


walk alongside a small gelatinous cube. 


“We're trying it out, seeing if it can 
keep things clean,” they say. 

It starts to drizzle. A well-dressed 
half-elf glares at the sky and snaps 
his figures, and the rain immediately 
stops. 

A vendor offers a selection of mouth- 
watering Aundairian entrees from a 
floating cart—only 8 sovereigns (8 sp) 
for a magical meal! 

A member of the Sharn Watch stops 
you. “Can | help you? Are you sure 
you're in the right ward?” 

You pass the open doors of a smithy. 
Inside, a number of hard-working tools 


are moving and floating independently. 


A nearby smith waves a wand as if 
conducting an orchestra. 


A priest explains how the best way to 
earn the blessings of Kol Korran is to 
donate. “For each coin you give, you'll 
surely get a hundred in return!” 

You come upon a fountain of cold 

fire. In the center, a brass dragon spits 
brilliant flames into the air, and the 
spill down and out into the pool below. 
A trio of elves perform perform a 
remarkable display of athletics and 
illusion magic, advanced publicity for 
the Carnival of Shadows. 

A lovely mosaic displays the seal of the 
united Galifar. 


34 


35 


36 


37 


38 


39 


40 


A large statue commemorates Lord 

Dalian ir’Tain Il, a noble philanthropist 
lost at sea. He holds a spyglass in one 
hand and a dragon turtle in the other. 


You pass by a Hope Well. Supposedly, 
any coins you throw in the well are 
transported down to help the troubled 
people of the lower wards. 


A half-elf noblewoman strides by 
wearing a fancy red dress and carrying 
a matching parasol. Both the dress and 
umbrella are decorated with Siberys 
dragonshards. 


You come upon a beautiful garden 

at the edge of a tower. An elf in fine 
mourning clothes looks out over the 
edge. 

A gnome in nautical outfit offers tickets 
for a ‘celebrity skycoach tour’ for just 5 
galifars (5 g) a head. 

You spot a unit of the Redcloak 
Battalion, the elite soldiers of the 
Sharn Watch. They’re talking to the 
owner of a local tavern. 

A half-elven poet loudly recites 

a lengthy poem about the tragic 
destruction of Cyre. 


CHAPTER 6 | THE STREETS OF SHARN 


163 


164 


APPENDIX A: FURTHER READING 


After reading this Wayfinder’s Guide, you may 

have questions. What’s the Aurum? Who are 
the Daughters of Sora Kell? Just how many 
districts are there in Sharn, and what happens 

to adventurers in the Mournland? What’s in 
Xen’drik? Until new material becomes available 
for the fifth edition of the DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 
Roleplaying Game, you can find the answers to 
these questions and many more in the resources 
created in previous editions of the game. 


EBERRON SOURCEBOOKS 


These resources are currently available as ebooks 
via the Dungeon Master’s Guild at: 


DMsGuild.com 


The Eberron Campaign Setting and Eberron Campaign 
Guide both provide an overview of the world, 
including advice on creating adventures and 

a deeper look at the nations of Khorvaire and 
the lands beyond it. Either of these books can 
be useful for a Dungeon Master who wants 
further insight into the setting. The other books 
are largely tied to specific subjects. If you want 
to run a campaign in the mysterious lands of 
Xen’drik, Secrets of Xendrik and City of Stormreach 
have a lot to offer. If you’re going to stay home, 
Five Nations reveals more information about 

the nations at the heart of Khorvaire, while 
Dragonmarked expands on the dynasties that 
dominate the magical economy. 

All of these books were written for the revised 
third edition (3.5E) or the fourth edition (4E) of 
the Dungeons & Dragons Roleplaying Game. 
The setting material in these books is suitable to 
any Eberron campaign but the monsters, spells, 
classes, feats, or other game material in these 
books require adaptation for use in modern 
campaigns. 


City of Stormreach (3.5E): Stormreach is an 
adventurer’s first stop when exploring the distant 
land of Xen’drik. ‘This book describes the shadowy 


THE WAYFARER’S GUIDE TO EBERRON 


ruins, sinister organizations, and treasure-laden 
dungeons of Stormreach. In addition to providing 
Dungeon Masters with a richly detailed city for 
their Xen’drik based campaigns, this supplement 
presents information on the movers and shakers of 
Stormreach, ready-to-use adversaries, adventure 
hooks, and location maps. 

Dragons of Eberron (3.5E): This supplement 
delves into the mysterious Draconic Prophecy. 

It explores the continent of Argonnessen, 
homeland of the dragons, and describes various 
new adventure sites. This book also investigates 
dragons on the continents of Khorvaire, Sarlona, 
and Xen’Drik. 

Dragonmarked (3.5E): This supplement 
explores each of the thirteen dragonmarked 
houses in detail and presents advice for playing 
dragonmarked characters within a house or guild. 
It also introduces new options for dragonmarked 
characters, including prestige classes, feats, and 
spells. Finally, it discusses aberrant dragonmarks 
and their role in a campaign. 

Eberron Campaign Guide (4E): Designed for 
the fourth edition of the DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 
Roleplaying Game, this book presents a historical 
and geographical overview of the setting; 
information on key locations, personalities, and 
organizations; an introductory adventure; and a 
bestiary of monsters and villains. 

Eberron Campaign Setting (3.5E): The 
first sourcebook for the setting, this provides a 
general overview of the world. This includes the 
artificer class and statistics for monsters unique 
to Eberron (deathless, daelkyr, quori), along with 
a host of spells, feats, prestige classes, and other 
game material. 

Eberron Player’s Guide (4E): This book 
presents Eberron from the point of view of the 
adventurer exploring it. This includes everything 
a player needs to create Eberron characters in 
the fourth edition of the DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 
Roleplaying Game. 

Explorer’s Handbook (3.5E): This book 
gives players everything they need to explore a 


variety of sites across Eberron, including modes 
of travel, exploring tips, and rules for joining 
organizations such as the prestigious Wayfinder 
Foundation. For DMs, the book describes 
several likely “launching pads” and destinations, 
complete with maps, ready-to-play encounters, 
and pregenerated NPCs. 

Faiths of Eberron (3.5E): This supplement 
presents detailed descriptions of the major 
religions of Eberron, including the rival 
pantheons of the Sovereign Host and the Dark 
Six, the young faith of the Silver Flame, and the 
mysterious Blood of Vol. 

Five Nations (3.5E): This provides 
comprehensive overviews of Aundair, Breland, 
Karrnath, Thrane, and the Mournland, 
including postwar status, government, and 
economy, as well as important locations, 
communities, organizations, and NPCs. 

Forge of War (3.5E): This comprehensive 
overview of the Last War provides all you need to 
know about the events, armies, battlefields, and 
themes of Eberron’s greatest clash of nations. 

Magic of Eberron (3.5E): In addition to 
presenting new arcane and divine spells, feats, 
prestige classes, and magic items, this book offers 
new options and infusions for artificers, explores 
dragon totem magic and the twisted experiments 
of the daelkyr, sheds light on the process of 
elemental binding, and touches on other types of 
magic present in the world. 

Player’s Guide to Eberron (3.5E): An 
overview of important locations, events, 
organizations, races, and features of the Eberron 
campaign setting, this gives a sense of what a 
player character might know about the world, 
while providing additional character options. 

Races of Eberron (3.5E): This sourcebook 
delves deeply into changelings, kalashtar, shifters, 
and warforged. It provides detailed information 
on the psychology, society, culture, behavior, 
religion, folklore, and other aspects of these races, 
as well as exploring the role of other core D&D 
races in the setting. 

Secrets of Sarlona (3.5E): This sourcebook 
explores the continent of Sarlona, home to the 
kalashtar and the villainous Inspired. It explores 


the mountain refuge of Adar, the vast empire of 
Riedra, and the mysterious lands of Syrkarn and 
the ‘Tashana ‘Tundra. 

Secrets of Xen’drik (3.5E): This book 
delves into the mysteries of Xen’drik, including 
encounters, exotic locations, and new monsters, 
magic items, and more. 

Sharn: City of Towers (3.5E): This book 
provides an in-depth exploration of the City of 
Towers. In addition to describing more than 
100 city districts, it delves into the organizations 
that are active in Sharn and explores the laws 
enforced in the city... and the many forces 
that break them. It includes maps of Sharn and 
locations within it, along with NPCs, spells, 
prestige classes, magic items, and more. 


EBERRON NOVELS 


There are dozens of novels that explore the world 
of Eberron. Here are a few that are currently 
available as ebooks or audiobooks: 

The Draconic Prophecy trilogy by James 
Wyatt: Storm Dragon, Dragon Forge, Dragon War. A 
half-elf seer with the Mark of Storms discovers 
his role in the mysterious Draconic Prophecy—a 
destiny that will take him from the dungeons of 
Dreadhold to Aundair and Argonnessen. 

The Dragon Below trilogy by Don 
Bassingthwaite: The Binding Stone, The Grieving 
Tree, The Killing Song. Beginning in the gloom of 
the Shadow Marches, this series draws in the 
Gatekeeper druids, the daelkyr, the kalashtar, 
and the Cults of the Dragon Below. 

The Dreaming Dark trilogy by Keith 
Baker: City of Towers, The Shattered Land, Gates 
of Night. In the wake of the Mourning, a band 
of Cyran soldiers travel to the city of Sharn. 
Trouble in the City of Towers leads them to the 
ruins of Xen’drik and the planes of ‘Thelanis and 
Dal Quor as they unravel the schemes of the 
Dreaming Dark. 

The Heirs of Ash trilogy by Rich Wulf: 
Voyage of the Mourning Dawn, Flight of the Dying Sun, 
Rise of the Seventh Moon. This series follows the 
crew of an airship on a journey across Eberron in 
pursuit of a mysterious superweapon. 


APPENDIX | FURTHER READING 


165 


166 


The Legacy of Dhakaan trilogy by Don 
Bassingthwaite: The Doom of Kings, Word of 


Traitors, The Tyranny of Ghosts. The shifter Geth is 


drawn into the intrigues of the goblin nation of 
Dhakaan, dealing with the precarious balance 
between the Ghaal’dar, the Dhakaani, and the 
elves of Valenar. 

The Thorn of Breland trilogy by Keith 
Baker: The Queen of Stone, The Son of Khyber, 
The Fading Dream. A member of the elite Dark 
Lanterns, ‘Thorn clashes with House Tarkanan 
in Sharn; pursues a dangerous mission in the 
monstrous nation of Droaam; and follows a 
mysterious lead deep into the Mournland. 

Eberron: Inquisitives is a series of stand- 
alone novels focusing on inquisitives— 
Eberron’s answer to the private investigator. 


APPENDIX | FURTHER READING 


Bound By Iron by Edward Bolme follows a 
mystery in the grim nation of Karrnath. 


The Night of Long Shadows by Paul Crilley. 
Inquisitive Abraxus Wren investigates a 
murder at Morgrave University, uncovering 


a mystery that reaches to the highest towers 
of Sharn. 


Legacy of Wolves by Marsheila Rockwell is 
set in the nation of Thrane, and deals with 
shifters and the dark history of the Church 
of the Silver Flame. 


The Darkwood Mask by Jeff LaSala explores 
the politics of Breland and Karrnath 


through the fallout of an ambassador’s 
murder in the city of Korth. 


APPENDIX B: GLOSSARY 


Aberrant Dragonmark. A mark that 
manifests on the skin and grants magical abilities 
to the bearer. Aberrant dragonmarks are diverse 
in their effects and appearance, but generally 
grant destructive abilities. Superstition leads 
many people to distrust those who carry aberrant 
dragonmarks. Chapter 4. 

Adept. A divine spellcaster who knows 1-4 
cantrips or rituals. Chapter 2. 

Aerenal. An island nation in Eberron. 
Homeland of the elves and the Undying Court. 
Chapter 2. 

Arawai. The Sovereign of Life and Love. A 
deity of the Sovereign Host often associated with 
the Life and Nature domains. Chapter 2. 

Arcanix. The finest institute for arcane 
research in Khorvaire, located in the nation of 
Aundair. Chapter 2. 

Aundair. A nation in northwestern Khorvaire. 
Known for education and arcane magic. One 
of the Five Nations that formed the Kingdom of 
Galifar. Chapter 2. 

Aureon. The Sovereign of Law and Lore. A 
deity of the Sovereign Host often associated with 
the Knowledge and Order domains. Chapter 2. 

Aurum. A powerful conspiracy operating in 
Khorvaire. Chapter 1. 

Balinor. ‘The Sovereign of Horn and Hunt. A 
deity of the Sovereign Host often associated with 
the Nature domain. Chapter 2. 

Blood of Vol. A grim religion that believes 
that death is oblivion, but that mortals have a 
spark of divinity in their blood. Associated with 
the Life and Death domains. Chapter 2. 

Boldrei. The Sovereign of Hall and Hearth. A 
deity of the Sovereign Host often associated with 
the Life and Protection domains. Chapter 2. 

Boromar Clan. A powerful criminal 
organization with deep roots in Sharn. Primarily 
associated with theft, gambling, and smuggling. 
Chapter 6. 


Breland. A nation in southern Khorvaire. 
Known for industry and pragmatism. One of 
the Five Nations that formed the Kingdom of 
Galifar. Chapter 2. 

Callestan. A district in the Lower Dura ward 
of Sharn. A dangerous and lawless region of the 
City of Towers. Chapter 6. 

Cannith. A dragonmarked house associated 
with the Mark of Making. Chapter 4. 

Changeling. A race of shapeshifters found in 
Khorvaire. Chapter 3. 

Clifftop. A district in the Upper Dura ward 
of Sharn. Known as a reliable source of capable 
adventurers. Chapter 6. 

Crown. A copper coin with a value of 1 cp. 
Chapter 2. 

Cyre. One of the Five Nations that formed the 
Kingdom of Galifar, Cyre was known for art and 
artifice. Cyre was destroyed by the Mourning 
and is now known as the Mournland. Chapter 2. 

Daanvi. The plane of order. Chapter 2. 

Daask. A criminal organization with ties to 
the monstrous nation of Droaam. Primarily 
associated with violent crime and extortion. 
Chapter 6. 

Dark Six. The sinister counterpart to the 
Sovereign Host. The deities of the Dark Six 
embody dangerous forces: death, darkness, 
destruction, treachery, chaos, passion. Most 
followers of the Sovereign Host view the Dark 
Six as evil, but their followers believe that the 


forces they represent are important aspects of life. 


Chapter 2. 
Daelkyr. Powerful fiends from the plane 
of Madness. Daelkyr create aberrations and 
brought mind flayers and beholders to Eberron. 
The daelkyr are currently bound in Khyber by 
seals created by the Gatekeeper druids. Chapter 1. 
Dal Quor. The plane of dreams. Chapter 2. 
Darguun. A nation in southeast Khorvaire. 
Primarily populated by goblins who seized the 
region from Cyre during the Last War. Chapter 2. 


APPENDIX | GLOSSARY 


167 


168 


Demon Wastes. A barren region in 
northwestern Khorvaire. The Demon Wastes 
are twisted by dark powers and home to a wide 
variety of fiends. Chapter 2. 

Deneith. A dragonmarked house associated 
with the Mark of Sentinel. Chapter 3. 

Devourer, the. A deity of the Dark Six, often 
associated with the ‘Tempest domain. Chapter 2. 

Dhakaan. A goblin empire that existed 
before humanity came to Khorvaire. Destroyed 
thousands of years ago after fighting the daelkyr. 
Chapter 3. 

Dol Arrah. The Sovereign of Sun and 
Sacrifice. A deity of the Sovereign Host often 
associated with the Light and War domains. 
Chapter 2. 

Dol Dorn. The Sovereign of Strength and 
Steel. A deity of the Sovereign Host, often 
associated with strength, courage, and the War 
domain. Chapter 2. 

Dolurrh. ‘The realm of the dead, where 
mortal souls go after death. Many faiths believe 
that Dolurrh is a gateway to a higher level of 
existence. Chapter 2. 

Draconic Prophecy. Signs of the Prophecy 
manifest in the movement of the moons and 
planes, in the manifestation of dragonmarks 
and natural phenomena. The Prophecy doesn’t 
define the future, but it reveals paths that it can 
take. Chapter 1. 

Dragonmark. A mark that manifests on 
the skin and grants magical abilities to the 
bearer. There are twelve known dragonmarks. 
Dragonmarks are hereditary and tied to a specific 
set of bloodlines. Chapter 4. 

Dragonmarked Houses. An alliance of 
families that carry a particular dragonmark; 
House Cannith carries the Mark of Making, 
House Sivis holds the Mark of Scribing. Each 
dragonmarked house has used the power of its 
marks to gain influence over a particular element 
of the magical economy of Khorvaire. Chapter 4. 

Dragonshard. A form of crystal with mystical 
properties. Eberron dragonshards are found in 
upper earth and are the primary fuel of the 
magical economy. Ahyber dragonshards are found 


APPENDIX | GLOSSARY 


deep below the surface and used with binding 
enchantments. Siberys dragonshards fall from the sky 
and amplify magical energies. Chapter 5. 

Droaam. A nation in western Khorvaire. 
Droaam was formed ten years ago and isn’t 
recognized under the Treaty of Thronehold. 

Its inhabitants are largely creatures considered 
to be “monsters”: ogres, trolls, gnolls, harpies, 
medusas, and similar creatures. Chapter 2. 

Dreaming Dark. An alliance of fiends said to 
be manipulating mortal dreams. Chapter 1. 

Eberron. |. One of the legendary Progenitor 
Dragons, said to be the source of natural life and 
druidic magic. 2. The natural world. Chapter 1. 

Eldeen Reaches. A nation in western 
Aundair, formed by an alliance between the 
druids of the western woods and farmers who 
broke away from Aundair. Chapter 2. 

Emerald Claw. The Order of the Emerald 
Claw is a group of Karrnathi patriots who serve a 
mysterious figure known as the Queen of Death. 
Many follow the Blood of Vol faith, but most 
followers of the Blood of Vol don’t support the 
Emerald Claw. Chapter 1. 

Excoriate. A dragonmarked heir who’s been 
cut off from their house, usually due to a crime 
against the house. Chapter 4. 

Everice. An arctic continent in Eberron. 
Chapter 2. 

Fernia. The plane of fire. Chapter 2. 

Five Nations. Aundair, Breland, Cyre, 
Karrnath, and Thrane. These five nations served 
as the foundation of the Kingdom of Galifar and 
were the primary combatants in the Last War. 
Chapter 2. 

Forgehold. A Cannith workshop focusing on 
arcane production or innovation. Chapter 4. 

Foundling. Someone who develops a 
dragonmark without having any established ties 
to one of the dragonmarked houses. Chapter 4. 

Frostfell. An arctic continent in Eberron. 
Chapter 2. 

Fury, the. A deity of the Dark Six, associated 
with passion, madness, and vengeance. Chapter 2. 

Galifar. A human civilization that once 
dominated the continent of Khorvaire, named 


after the king who established it. Galifar came 
to an end when the Five Nations turned on one 
another, triggeering the Last War. Chapter 2. 

Ghaal’dar. The alliance of goblin clans that 
established and currently rule the nation of 
Darguun. Chapter 3. 

Ghallanda. A dragonmarked house associated 
with the Mark of Hospitality. Chapter 4. 

Greater Dragonmark. A dragonmark that 
has grown in size and grants greater powers to 
the character that possesses it. Chapter 4. 

Irian. The plane of light and hope. The source 
of positive energy in Eberron. Chapter 2. 

Jorasco. A dragonmarked house associated 
with the Mark of Healing. Chapter 4. 

Kalashtar. A hybrid race formed by a bond 
between humans and renegade spirits from the 
plane of dreams. Primarily found in the nation of 
Adar in Sarlona. Chapter 3. 

Karrnath. A nation in northeastern 
Khorvaire. Known for stoicism and martial 
discipline. One of the Five Nations that formed 
the Kingdom of Galifar. Chapter 2. 

Keeper, the. A deity of the Dark Six, often 
associated with the Death and Grave domains. 
Chapter 2. 

Khoravar. The half-elves of Khorvaire use 
this term—Elvish for “child of Khorvaire”—as 
the name of their race. Chapter 3. 

Khorvaire. A continent in Eberron. Home of 
the Thronehold nations. Chapter 2. 

Khyber. |. One of the legendary Progenitor 
Dragons, said to be the source of fiends and other 
evil creatures. 2. The Underdark of Eberron. 
Chapter 1. 

Kol Korran. The Sovereign of World and 
Wealth. A deity of the Sovereign Host associated 
with trade and travel. Chapter 2. 

Kundarak. A dragonmarked house associated 
with the Mark of Warding. Chapter 4. 

Kythri. The plane of chaos. Chapter 2. 

Lamannia. The plane of nature. Chapter 2. 

Last War. A conflict fought to determine 
which of the Five Nations would rule Galifar. 
The Last War began in 894 YK. The Last War 
officially ended in 996 YK with the signing of the 
Treaty of Thronehold. Chapter 1. 


Lhazaar Principalities. An alliance of 
city-states in northeastern Khorvaire. Known for 
ships and sailors, and for both merchants and 
pirates. Chapter 2. 

Library of Korranberg. Located in Zilargo, 
the Library of Korranberg is widely considered 
to be the most extensive collection of literature 
and general knowledge in Khorvaire. Chapter 2. 

Lyrandar. A dragonmarked house associated 
with the Mark of Storms. Chapter 4. 

Mabar. The plane of darkness and entropy. 
The source of negative energy in Eberron. Serves 
the role of the Shadowfell in Eberron. Chapter 2. 

Magewright. Someone who uses arcane 
magic as part of their occupation. A typical 
magewright knows | to 4 practical cantrips or 
rituals. Chapter 2. 

Manifest Zone. A region where one of 
the planes influences Eberron. A manifest 
zone usually displays traits associated with the 
connected plane, and it can serve as a portal to 
that plane. 

Medani. A dragonmarked house associated 
with the Mark of Detection. Chapter 4. 

Mockery, the. A deity of the Dark Six, often 
associated with the Trickery and War domains. 
Chapter 2. 

Morgrave University. Located in the Upper 
Menthis Plateau ward of Sharn, Morgrave 
University is the largest institute of learning in 
Breland. Chapter 6. 

Mournland. Formerly the nation of Cyre, the 
Mournland is an unnatural wasteland created 
by the Mourning. It is home to many dangerous 
creatures and unpredictable magical effects. 
Chapter 1. 

Mourning. The mystical cataclysm that 
destroyed the nation of Cyre and transformed 
it into the Mournland. The Mourning took 
place on 20 Olarune 994 YK. The cause of the 
Mourning remains a mystery. Chapter 1. 

Mror Holds. A mountainous nation in 
eastern Khorvaire. Primarily inhabited by 
dwarves. Known for its mines and mineral 


wealth. Chapter 2. 


APPENDIX | GLOSSARY 


169 


170 


Olladra. The Sovereign of Feast and Fortune. 
A deity of the Sovereign Host often associated 
with the Life and Trickery domains. Chapter 2. 

Onatar. The Sovereign of Fire and Forge. A 
deity of the Sovereign Host often associated with 
the Forge and Knowledge domains. Chapter 2. 

Q’barra. A nation in eastern Khorvaire. 
Home to lizardfolk and dragonborn, it was 
colonized by settlers from the Five Nations 
during the Last War. Chapter 2. 

Orien. A dragonmarked house associated with 
the Mark of Passage. Chapter 4. 

Path of Light. A kalashtar religion that seeks 
to guide Eberron through an age of darkness 
and into light. Often associated with the Life and 
Light domains. Chapter 2. 

Phiarlan. A dragonmarked house associated 
with the Mark of Shadows. Chapter 4. 

Risia. The plane of ice. Chapter 2. 

Sarlona. A continent in Eberron. Home of 
humanity and the kalashtar. Dominated by the 
Inspired lords of Riedra. There is limited contact 
between Khorvaire and Sarlona. Chapter 2. 

Shadow, the. A deity of the Dark Six, often 
associated with the Knowledge domain. Chapter 2. 

Shadow Marches. A region of swamps in 
southwestern Khorvaire. Primarily inhabited by 
orcs, humans, and half-ores. Chapter 2. 

Shifter. A race thought to have ties to 
lycanthropes, primarily found in the Eldeen 
Reaches. Chapter 3. 

Siberys. |. One of the legendary Progenitor 
Dragons, thought to be the source of celestials 
and magic. 2. The ring of dragonshards that 
circles the world. Chapter 1. 

Silver Flame. A source of divine energy, the 
Silver Flame binds fiends and empowers those 
who fight evil. Often associated with the Life, 
Light, and War domains. Chapter 2. 

Sivis. A dragonmarked house associated with 
the Mark of Scribing. Chapter 4. 

Skycoach. A small flying vessel found in the 
city of Sharn. Skycoaches are sustained by the 
manifest zone around Sharn and can’t be used 
elsewhere in Khorvaire. Chapter 6. 

Sovereign. |. One of the deities of the 
Sovereign Host; occasionally used to describe 


APPENDIX | GLOSSARY 


the Dark Six. 2. A coin with a value of one silver 
piece (1 sp). Chapter 2. 

Sovereign Host. The most widespread 
religion in Khorvaire. The Host is a pantheon of 
nine deities. Followers believe the Sovereigns are 
omnipresent, guiding and influencing all things. 
Most people worship the pantheon as a whole, 
but there are variations that focus on subsets of 
the host. Chapter 2. 

Stormreach. The largest human colony in 
Xen’drik. Chapter 2. 

Syrania. The plane of peace. Known for its 
floating citadels. Chapter 2. 

Talenta Plains. A nation in eastern 
Khorvaire. Primarily inhabited by halflings. 
Chapter 2. 

Tarkanan. House Tarkanan is a criminal 
organization primarily associated with theft 
and assassination. Members have aberrant 
dragonmarks. Chapter 6. 

Tharashk. A dragonmarked house associated 
with the Mark of Finding. Chapter 4. 

Thelanis. The Faerie Court. This plane serves 
the role of the Feywild in Eberron. Chapter 2. 

Thrane. A nation in central Khorvaire. 
Known for devotion and the Church of the Silver 
Flame. One of the Five Nations that formed the 
Kingdom of Galifar. Chapter 2. 

Thronehold. This island city was the former 
capital of Galifar. The treaty that officially ended 
the Last War was negotiated and signed here. 

Thronehold Nation. A nation in Khorvaire 
recognized by the Treaty of Thronehold 
and bound by the terms of the treaty. The 
Thronehold nations are Aundair, Breland, 
Darguun, the Eldeen Reaches, Karrnath, the 
Lhazaar Principalities, the Mror Holds, Q’barra, 
the Talenta Plains, Thrane, Valenar, and 
Zilargo. Chapter 1. 

Thuranni. A dragonmarked house associated 
with the Mark of Shadow. Chapter 4. 

Traveler, the. A deity of the Dark Six, often 
associated with the Forge and Trickery domains. 
Chapter 2. 

Treaty of Thronehold. The agreement that 
brought the Last War to an end. Chapter 1. 


Tyrants, the. A criminal organization 
primarily comprised of changelings and 
doppelgangers. Associated with forgery, 
blackmail, and fraud. Chapter 6. 

Twelve. An organization that facilitates 
communication and cooperation between the 
Dragonmarked Houses. Chapter 4. 

Undying Court. The council of deathless 
elves that guides and protects the elves of 
Aerenal. As a source of divine power, often 
associated with the Grave, Knowledge, and Light 
domains. Chapter 2. 

Valenar. |. A nation in southeastern 
Khorvaire. Established by elf mercenaries who 
seized the territory from Cyre. 2. One of the elves 
who seized this region. Valenar elves known for 
their devotion to the arts of war. Chapter 2. 

Wandslinger. Someone who uses an arcane 
focus as a primary weapon. NPC wandslingers 
typically know 2 cantrips, and up to three 
additional cantrips or spells. Chapter 2. 


Warforged. A race of sentient golems created 
by House Cannith during the Last War. The 
Treaty of Thronehold granted freedom to 
the warforged and forbid the creation of new 
warforged. Chapter 3. 

Xoriat. The plane of madness. Chapter 2. 

YK. “Year of the Kingdom.” A calendar 
abbreviation used to mark the foundation of 
the Kingdom of Galifar. By default, an Eberron 
campaign begins in 998 YK. Chapter 2. 

Xen’drik. A continent in Eberron. Once 
home to an empire of giants, it’s now a nation of 
ruins and mysteries. Chapter 2. 

Zilargo. A nation in the southern Khorvaire. 
Primarily populated by gnomes. Known for 
elemental binding and the pursuit of knowledge. 


Chapter 2. 


APPENDIX | GLOSSARY 


171 


APPENDIX C: DRAGONMARKED HOUSE CRESTS 


APPENDIX | DRAGONMARKED HOUSE CRESTS 


172 


APPENDIX | DRAGONMARKED HOUSE CRESTS 173 


AD aa 


BIS ALUDI] 


sos 1S0] JO BIS BIS zed 


MIUN IX 


NISSINNODYAN | 


\ BOIS Jopuny] 


asey JO LƏŞ 


EREN 


s 
4 ' UDLƏIUOSLIC] AY], 
VN OUS a 
NRS NOD ae pos uueg 
URE SS R 
aA 
</@ 2 TF PIG eezey] 


BIS MYM 


’ a 
BIS INIH E: p> 


— 


176 


CLASS: ARTIFICER 


Masters of unlocking magic in everyday objects, artifi- 
cers are supreme inventors. They see magic as a com- 
plex system waiting to be decoded and controlled. Artifi- 
cers use tools to channel arcane power, crafting magical 
objects. To cast a spell, an artificer could use alchemist’s 
supplies to create a potent elixir, calligrapher’s supplies 
to inscribe a sigil of power on an ally’s armor, or tinker’s 
tools to craft a temporary charm. The magic of artificers 
is tied to their tools and their talents. 


ARCANE SCIENCE 


In the world of Eberron, arcane magic has been har- 
nessed as a form of science and deployed throughout 
society. Artificers reflect this development. Their knowl- 
edge of magical devices, and their ability to infuse mun- 
dane items with magic, allows Eberron’s most miracu- 
lous projects to continue. 

During the Last War, artificers were marshaled on a 
massive scale. Many lives were saved because of the in- 
ventions of brave artificers, but countless lives were also 
lost because of the mass destruction unleashed by their 
creations. 


SEEKERS OF NEw LORE 


Nothing excites an artificer quite like uncovering a new 


metal or discovering a source of elemental energy. In 
artificer circles, new inventions and strange discoveries 
create the most excitement. Artificers who wish to make 
their mark must innovate, creating something fresh, 
rather than iterating on familiar designs. 

This drive for novelty pushes artificers to become ad- 
venturers. Eberron’s main travel routes and populated 
regions have long since been explored. Thus, artificers 
seek the frontiers of civilization in hopes of making the 
next great discovery in arcane research. 


CREATING AN ARTIFICER 


When creating an artificer, think about your character’s 


relationship with the artisan who taught them their craft. 
Does the character have a rival? Talk to your DM about 
the role played by artificers in the campaign and the sort 
of organizations you might have ties to. 


ARTIFICERS IN OTHER WORLDS 


Eberron is the world most associated with artificers, yet 
the class can be found throughout the D&D multiverse. 
In the Forgotten Realms, for example, the island of Lantan 
is home to many artificers, and in the world of Dragon- 
lance, tinker gnomes are often members of this class. The 
strange technologies in the Barrier Peaks of the World of 
Greyhawk have inspired some folk to walk the path of the 
artificer, and in Mystara, various nations employ artificers 
to keep airships and other wondrous devices operational. 
In the City of Sigil, artificers share discoveries from 
throughout the cosmos, and one in particular—the gnome 
inventor Vi—has run a multiverse-spanning business from 
there since leaving the world of her birth, Eberron. In the 
world-city Ravnica, the Izzet League trains numerous artifi- 
cers, the destructiveness of whom is unparalleled in other 
worlds—except, perhaps, by the tinker gnomes of Krynn. 
mia, ie 


APPENDIX | CLASS: ARTIFICER 


Quick BUILD 

You can make an artificer quickly by following these 
suggestions. First, put your highest ability score in Intel- 
ligence, followed by Constitution or Dexterity. Second, 
choose the guild artisan background. 


OPTIONAL RULE: MULTICLASSING 

If your group uses the optional rule on multiclassing in 
the Player’s Handbook, here’s what you need to know if 
you choose artificer as one of your classes. 

Ability Score Minimum. As a multiclass character, 
you must have at least an Intelligence score of 13 to take 
a level in this class, or to take a level in another class if 
you are already an artificer. 

Proficiencies Gained. If artificer isn’t your initial 
class, here are the proficiencies you gain when you take 
your first level as an artificer: light armor, medium ar- 
mor, shields, thieves’ tools, tinker’s tools. 

Spell Slots. Add half your levels (rounded up) in the 
artificer class to the appropriate levels from other classes 
to determine your available spell slots. 


CLASS FEATURES 


As an artificer, you gain the following class features. 


HIT POINTS 

Hit Dice: 1d8 per artificer level 

Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constitution modifier 

Hit Points at Higher Levels: 1d8 (or 5) + your Constitu- 
tion modifier per artificer level after 1st 


PROFICIENCIES 

Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields 

Weapons: Simple weapons 

Tools: Thieves’ tools, tinker’s tools, one type of artisan’s 
tools of your choice 


Saving Throws: Constitution, Intelligence 
Skills: Choose two from Arcana, History, Investigation, 
Medicine, Nature, Perception, Sleight of Hand 


EQUIPMENT 
You start with the following equipment, in addition to the 
equipment granted by your background: 


* any two simple weapons of your choice 

e alight crossbow and 20 bolts 

« your choice of studded leather armor or scale mail 
e thieves’ tools and a dungeoneer’s pack 


If you forgo this starting equipment, as well as the 
items offered by your background, you start with 5d4 x 
10 gp to buy your equipment. 


OPTIONAL RULE: FIREARM PROFICIENCY 

The secrets of creating and operating gunpowder weap- 
ons have been discovered in various corners of the D&D 
multiverse. If your Dungeon Master uses the rules on 
firearms in chapter 9 of the Dungeon Master's Guide and 
your artificer has been exposed to the operation of such 
weapons, your artificer is proficient with them. 


THE ARTIFICER 


—Spell Slots per Spell Level— 


Proficiency Infusions Infused  Cantrips 

Level Bonus Features Known Items Known Ist 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 
Ist +2 Magical Tinkering, Spellcasting — — 2 2 — — — — 
2nd +2 Infuse Item 4 2 2 2 

3rd +2 Artificer Specialist, 2 2 3 — — — — 

The Right Tool for the Job 

4th +2 Ability Score Improvement 4 2 2 3 

5th +3 Artificer Specialist feature 4 2 2 4 2 — — — 
6th +3 Tool Expertise 6 3 2 4 2 — — — 
7th +3 Flash of Genius 6 3 2 4 3 — — — 
8th +3 Ability Score Improvement 6 3 2 4 3 — — — 
9th +4 Artificer Specialist feature 6 3 2 4 3 2 — — 
10th +4 Magic Item Adept 8 4 3 4 3 2 — — 
With +4 Spell-Storing Item 8 4 3 4 3 3 — — 
12th +4 Ability Score Improvement 8 4 3 4 3 3 — — 
13th +5 — 8 4 3 4 3 3 1 — 
14th +5 Magic Item Savant 10 5 4 4 3 3 1 — 
15th +5 Artificer Specialist feature 10 5 4 4 3 3 2 — 
16th +5 Ability Score Improvement 10 5 4 4 3 3 2 — 
17th +6 = 10 5 4 4 3 3 3 1 
18th +6 Magic Item Master 12 6 4 4 3 3 3 1 
19th +6 Ability Score Improvement 12 6 4 4 3 3 3 2 
20th +6 Soul of Artifice 12 6 4 4 3 3 3 2 

MAGICAL TINKERING SPELLCASTING 


At 1st level, you learn how to invest a spark of magic 
into mundane objects. To use this ability, you must have 
tinker’s tools or other artisan’s tools in hand. You then 
touch a Tiny nonmagical object as an action and give it 
one of the following magical properties of your choice: 


« The object sheds bright light in a 5-foot radius and dim 
light for an additional 5 feet. 

« Whenever tapped by a creature, the object emits a re- 
corded message that can be heard up to 10 feet away. 
You utter the message when you bestow this property 
on the object, and the recording can be no more than 6 
seconds long. 

« The object continuously emits your choice of an odor 
or a nonverbal sound (wind, waves, chirping, or the 
like). The chosen phenomenon is perceivable up to 10 
feet away. 

- A static visual effect appears on one of the object’s 
surfaces. This effect can be a picture, up to 25 words of 
text, lines and shapes, or a mixture of these elements, 
as you like. 


The chosen property lasts indefinitely. As an action, 
you can touch the object and end the property early. 

You can bestow magic on multiple objects, touching 
one object each time you use this feature, though a single 
object can only bear one property at a time. The maxi- 
mum number of objects you can affect with this feature 
at one time is equal to your Intelligence modifier (mini- 
mum of one object). If you try to exceed your maximum, 
the oldest property immediately ends, and then the new 
property applies. 


You have studied the workings of magic and how to chan- 


nel it through objects. As a result, you have gained the 
ability to cast spells. To observers, you don’t appear to be 
casting spells in a conventional way; you look as if you're 
producing wonders using mundane items or outlandish 
inventions. 


TOOLS REQUIRED 
You produce your artificer spell effects through your 
tools. You must have a spellcasting focus—specifically 
thieves’ tools or some kind of artisan’s tool—in hand 
when you cast any spell with this Spellcasting feature. 
You must be proficient with the tool to use it in this way. 
See chapter 5, “Equipment,” in the Player’s Handbook 
for descriptions of these tools. 

After you gain the Infuse Item feature at 2nd level, you 
can also use any item bearing one of your infusions as a 
spellcasting focus. 


CANTRIPS (0-LEVEL SPELLS) 
At 1st level, you know two cantrips of your choice from 
the artificer spell list. At higher levels, you learn addi- 
tional artificer cantrips of your choice, as shown in the 
Cantrips Known column of the Artificer table. 

When you gain a level in this class, you can replace one 
of the artificer cantrips you know with another cantrip 
from the artificer spell list. 


PREPARING AND CASTING SPELLS 

The Artificer table shows how many spell slots you have 
to cast your artificer spells. To cast one of your artificer 
spells of 1st level or higher, you must expend a slot of the 


APPENDIX | CLASS: ARTIFICER 


177 


178 


eel ilies 
THE MAGIC OF ARTIFICE 
As an artificer, you use tools when you cast your spells. 
When describing your spellcasting, think about how you’re 
using a tool to perform the spell effect. If you cast cure 
wounds using alchemist’s supplies, you could be quickly 
producing a salve. If you cast it using tinker’s tools, you 
might have a miniature mechanical spider that binds 
wounds. When you cast poison spray, you could fling foul 
chemicals or use a wand that spits venom. The effect of 
the spell is the same as for a spellcaster of any other class, 
but your method of spellcasting is special. 

The same principle applies when you prepare your 
spells. As an artificer, you don’t study a spellbook or pray 
to prepare your spells. Instead, you work with your tools 
and create the specialized items you'll use to produce 
your effects. If you replace cure wounds with heat metal, 
you might be altering the device you use to heal—perhaps 
modifying a tool so that it channels heat instead of heal- 
ing energy. 

Such details don’t limit you in any way or provide you 
with any benefit beyond the spell’s effects. You don’t have 
to justify how you’re using tools to cast a spell. But de- 
scribing your spellcasting creatively is a fun way to distin- 
guish yourself from other spellcasters. 

aaa 


spell’s level or higher. You regain all expended spell slots 
when you finish a long rest. 

You prepare the list of artificer spells that are avail- 
able for you to cast, choosing from the artificer spell 
list. When you do so, choose a number of artificer spells 
equal to your Intelligence modifier + half your artificer 
level, rounded down (minimum of one spell). The spells 
must be of a level for which you have spell slots. 

For example, if you are a 5th-level artificer, you have 
four 1st-level and two 2nd-level spell slots. With an Intel- 
ligence of 14, your list of prepared spells can include four 
spells of 1st or 2nd level, in any combination. If you pre- 
pare the 1st-level spell cure wounds, you can cast it using 
a 1st-level or a 2nd-level slot. Casting the spell doesn’t 
remove it from your list of prepared spells. 

You can change your list of prepared spells when you 
finish a long rest. Preparing a new list of artificer spells 
requires time spent tinkering with your spellcasting fo- 
cuses: at least 1 minute per spell level for each spell on 
your list. 


SPELLCASTING ABILITY 

Intelligence is your spellcasting ability for your artificer 
spells; your understanding of the theory behind magic 
allows you to wield these spells with superior skill. You 
use your Intelligence whenever an artificer spell refers 
to your spellcasting ability. In addition, you use your 
Intelligence modifier when setting the saving throw DC 
for an artificer spell you cast and when making an attack 
roll with one. 


Spell save DC = 8 + your proficiency bonus + your 
Intelligence modifier 


Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus + your 
Intelligence modifier 


RITUAL CASTING 
You can cast an artificer spell as a ritual if that spell has 
the ritual tag and you have the spell prepared. 


APPENDIX | CLASS: ARTIFICER 


ARTIFICER SPELL LIST 

Here’s the list of spells you consult when you learn an 
artificer spell. The list is organized by spell level, not 
character level. If a spell can be cast as a ritual, the ritual 


tag appears after the spell’s name. 
These spells are from the Player’s Handbook. If a 


spell’s name is followed by an asterisk, the spell is in- 


stead from Xanathar’s Guide to Everything. 


CANTRIPS (0 LEVEL) 
acid splash 
create bonfire* 
dancing lights 
fire bolt 
frostbite* 
guidance 

light 

mage hand 
magic stone* 
mending 
message 
poison spray 
prestidigitation 
ray of frost 
resistance 
shocking grasp 
spare the dying 
thorn whip 
thunderclap* 


1ST LEVEL 

absorb elements* 
alarm (ritual) 
catapult* 

cure wounds 

detect magic (ritual) 
disguise self 
expeditious retreat 
faerie fire 

false life 

feather fall 

grease 

identify (ritual) 
jump 

longstrider 

purify food and drink 
sanctuary 

snare* 


2ND LEVEL 
aid 

alter self 
arcane lock 
blur 

continual flame 
darkvision 
enhance ability 
enlarge/reduce 
heat metal 


invisibility 

lesser restoration 
levitate 

magic mouth (ritual) 
magic weapon 
protection from poison 
pyrotechnics* 

rope trick 

see invisibility 
skywrite* (ritual) 
spider climb 

web 


3RD LEVEL 

blink 

catnap* 

create food and water 
dispel magic 
elemental weapon 
flame arrows* 

fy 

glyph of warding 

haste 

protection from energy 
revivify 

tiny servant* 

water breathing (ritual) 
water walk (ritual) 


4TH LEVEL 

arcane eye 

elemental bane* 
fabricate 

freedom of movement 
Leomunda’s secret chest 


Mordenkainen’s faithful hound 


Mordenkainen’s 

private sanctum 
Otiluke’s resilient sphere 
stone shape 
stoneskin 


5TH LEVEL 
animate objects 
Bigby’s hand 
creation 

greater restoration 
skill empowerment* 
transmute rock* 
wall of stone 


MARK BEHM 


INFUSE ITEM 


At 2nd level, you gain the ability to imbue mundane items 
with certain magical infusions. The magic items you 
create with this feature are effectively prototypes of per- 
manent items. 


INFUSIONS KNOWN 
When you gain this feature, pick four artificer infusions 
to learn, choosing from the “Artificer Infusions” section 
at the end of the class’s description. You learn additional 
infusions of your choice when you reach certain levels in 
this class, as shown in the Infusions Known column of 
the Artificer table. 

Whenever you gain a level in this class, you can replace 
one of the artificer infusions you learned with a new one. 


INFUSING AN ITEM 

Whenever you finish a long rest, you can touch a non- 
magical object and imbue it with one of your artificer 
infusions, turning it into a magic item. An infusion works 
on only certain kinds of objects, as specified in the infu- 
sion’s description. If the item requires attunement, you 
can attune yourself to it the instant you infuse the item. If 
you decide to attune to the item later, you must do so us- 
ing the normal process for attunement (see “Attunement” 
in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master's Guide). 

Your infusion remains in an item indefinitely, but when 
you die, the infusion vanishes after a number of days 
have passed equal to your Intelligence modifier (mini- 
mum of 1 day). The infusion also vanishes if you give up 
your knowledge of the infusion for another one. 

You can infuse more than one nonmagical object at 
the end of a long rest; the maximum number of objects 
appears in the Infused Items column of the Artificer ta- 
ble. You must touch each of the objects, and each of your 
infusions can be in only one object at a time. Moreover, 
no object can bear more than one of your infusions at a 
time. If you try to exceed your maximum number of infu- 
sions, the oldest infusion immediately ends, and then the 
new infusion applies. 


ARTIFICER SPECIALIST 


At 3rd level, you choose the type of specialist you are. 
One option, the Alchemist, appears later in this class de- 
scription. Your choice grants you features at 5th level and 
again at 9th and 15th level. 


THE RIGHT TOOL FOR THE JOB 


At 3rd level, you learn how to produce exactly the tool 
you need: with tinker’s tools in hand, you can magically 
create one set of artisan’s tools in an unoccupied space 
within 5 feet of you. This creation requires 1 hour of un- 
interrupted work, which can coincide with a short or long 
rest. Though the product of magic, the tools are nonmag- 
ical, and they vanish when you use this feature again. 


ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT 


When you reach 4th, 8th, 12th, 16th, and 19th level, you 
can increase one ability score of your choice by 2, or you 


ALCHEMIST 
WITH 
HOMUNCULUS 
SERVANT 


can increase two ability scores of your choice by 1. As 
normal, you can’t increase an ability score above 20 us- 
ing this feature. 


TOOL EXPERTISE 


Starting at 6th level, your proficiency bonus is doubled 
for any ability check you make that uses your proficiency 
with a tool. 


FLASH OF GENIUS 


Starting at 7th level, you gain the ability to come up with 
solutions under pressure. When you or another creature 
you can see within 30 feet of you makes an ability check 
or a saving throw, you can use your reaction to add your 
Intelligence modifier to the roll. 

You can use this feature a number of times equal to 
your Intelligence modifier (minimum of once). You regain 
all expended uses when you finish a long rest. 


MAGIC ITEM ADEPT 


When you reach 10th level, you achieve a profound un- 
derstanding of how to use and make magic items: 


e You can attune to up to four magic items at once. 

« If you craft a magic item with a rarity of common or un- 
common, it takes you a quarter of the normal time, and 
it costs you half as much of the usual gold. 


SPELL-STORING ITEM 


At 11th level, you learn how to store a spell in an object. 
Whenever you finish a long rest, you can touch one sim- 
ple or martial weapon or one item that you can use as a 


APPENDIX | CLASS: ARTIFICER 179 


180 


spellcasting focus, and you store a spell in it, choosing a 
1st- or 2nd-level spell from the artificer spell list that re- 
quires 1 action to cast (you needn't have it prepared). 
While holding the object, a creature can take an action 
to produce the spell’s effect from it, using your spellcast- 
ing ability modifier. If the spell requires concentration, 
the creature must concentrate. The spell stays in the ob- 
ject until it’s been used a number of times equal to twice 
your Intelligence modifier (minimum of twice) or until 
you use this feature again to store a spell in an object. 


MAGIC ITEM SAVANT 


At 14th level, your skill with magic items deepens more: 


- You can attune to up to five magic items at once. 
e You ignore all class, race, spell, and level requirements 
on attuning to or using a magic item. 


Maaic ITEM MASTER 


Starting at 18th level, you can attune to up to six magic 


items at once. 


SOUL OF ARTIFICE 


At 20th level, you develop a mystical connection to your 


magic items, which you can draw on for protection: 


e You gain a +1 bonus to all saving throws per magic 
item you are currently attuned to. 

e If you're reduced to 0 hit points but not killed out- 
right, you can use your reaction to end one of your 
artificer infusions, causing you to drop to 1 hit point 
instead of 0. 


ARTIFICER SPECIALIST 


Artificers pursue many disciplines. Here is a specialist 
option you can choose at 3rd level. Other options appear 
in the book Eberron: Rising from the Last War. 


ALCHEMIST 


An Alchemist is an expert at combining reagents to pro- 


duce mystical effects. Alchemists use their creations to 
give life and to leech it away. Alchemy is the oldest of ar- 
tificer traditions, and its versatility has long been valued 
during times of war and peace. 


TOOL PROFICIENCY 

When you adopt this specialization at 3rd level, you gain 
proficiency with alchemist’s supplies. If you already have 
this proficiency, you gain proficiency with one other type 
of artisan’s tools of your choice. 


ALCHEMIST SPELLS 

Starting at 3rd level, you always have certain spells pre- 
pared after you reach particular levels in this class, as 
shown in the Alchemist Spells table. These spells count 
as artificer spells for you, but they don’t count against the 
number of artificer spells you prepare. 


APPENDIX | CLASS: ARTIFICER 


ALCHEMIST SPELLS 
Artificer Level Spell 


3rd healing word, ray of sickness 

5th flaming sphere, Melf’s acid arrow 
9th gaseous form, mass healing word 
13th blight, death ward 

17th cloudkill, raise dead 


EXPERIMENTAL ELIXIR 

Beginning at 3rd level, whenever you finish a long rest, 
you can magically produce an experimental elixir in an 
empty flask you touch. Roll on the Experimental Elixir 
table for the elixir’s effect, which is triggered when some- 
one drinks the elixir. As an action, a creature can drink 
the elixir or administer it to an incapacitated creature. 

Creating an experimental elixir requires you to have 
alchemist supplies on your person, and any elixir you 
create with this feature lasts until it is drunk or until the 
end of your next long rest. 

When you reach certain levels in this class, you can 
make more elixirs at the end of a long rest: two at 6th 
level and three at 15th level. Roll for each elixir’s effect 
separately. Each elixir requires its own flask. 

You can create additional experimental elixirs by ex- 
pending a spell slot of 1st level or higher for each one. 
When you do so, you use your action to create the elixir 
in an empty flask you touch, and you choose the elixir’s 
effect from the Experimental Elixir table. 


EXPERIMENTAL ELIXIR 


d6 Effect 

1 Healing. The drinker regains a number of hit points 
equal to 2d4 + your Intelligence modifier. 

2 Swiftness. The drinker’s walking speed increases by 10 
feet for 1 hour. 

3 Resilience. The drinker gains a +1 bonus to AC for 10 
minutes. 

4 Boldness. The drinker can roll a d4 and add the num- 
ber rolled to every attack roll and saving throw they 
make for the next minute. 

5 Flight. The drinker gains a flying speed of 10 feet for 10 
minutes. 

6 Transformation. The drinker’s body is transformed as if 
by the alter self spell. The drinker determines the trans- 
formation caused by the spell, the effects of which last 
for 10 minutes. 


ALCHEMICAL SAVANT 

At 5th level, you develop masterful command of magical 
chemicals, enhancing the healing and damage you cre- 
ate through them. Whenever you cast a spell using your 
alchemist’s supplies as the spellcasting focus, you gain 
a bonus to one roll of the spell. That roll must restore hit 
points or be a damage roll that deals acid, fire, necrotic, 
or poison damage, and the bonus equals your Intelli- 
gence modifier (minimum of +1). 


RESTORATIVE REAGENTS 
Starting at 9th level, you can incorporate restorative re- 
agents into some of your works: 


« Whenever a creature drinks an experimental elixir you 
created, the creature gains temporary hit points equal 
to 2d6 + your Intelligence modifier (minimum of 1 tem- 
porary hit point). 

e You can cast lesser restoration without expending a 
spell slot and without preparing the spell, provided you 
use alchemist’s supplies as the spellcasting focus. You 
can do so a number of times equal to your Intelligence 
modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all ex- 
pended uses when you finish a long rest. 


CHEMICAL MASTERY 

By 15th level, you have been exposed to so many chem- 
icals that they pose little risk to you, and you can use 
them to quickly end certain ailments: 


e You gain resistance to acid damage and poison dam- 
age, and you are immune to the poisoned condition. 

« You can cast greater restoration and heal without ex- 
pending a spell slot, without preparing the spell, and 
without material components, provided you use alche- 
mist’s supplies as the spellcasting focus. Once you cast 
either spell with this feature, you can’t cast that spell 
with it again until you finish a long rest. 


ARTIFICER INFUSIONS 


Artificers have invented numerous magical infusions, ex- 
traordinary processes that rapidly create magic items. To 
many, artificers seem like wonderworkers, accomplish- 
ing in hours what others need weeks to complete. 

The description of each of the following infusions 
details the type of item that can receive it, along with 
whether the resulting magic item requires attunement. 

Some infusions specify a minimum artificer level. 

You can’t learn such an infusion until you are at least 
that level. 

Unless an infusion’s description says otherwise, you 
can’t learn an infusion more than once. 


BOOTS OF THE WINDING PATH 
Prerequisite: 6th-level artificer 
Item: A pair of boots (requires attunement) 


While wearing these boots, a creature can teleport up 
to 15 feet as a bonus action to an unoccupied space the 
creature can see. The creature must have occupied that 
space at some point during the current turn. 


ENHANCED ARCANE FOCUS 
Item: A rod, staff, or wand (requires attunement) 
While holding this item, a creature gains a +1 bonus to 
spell attack rolls. In addition, the creature ignores half 
cover when making a spell attack. 

The bonus increases to +2 when you reach 10th level in 
this class. 


ENHANCED DEFENSE 
Item: A suit of armor or a shield 


A creature gains a +1 bonus to Armor Class while wear- 
ing (armor) or wielding (Shield) the infused item. 


The bonus increases to +2 when you reach 10th level in 
this class. 


ENHANCED WEAPON 
Item: A simple or martial weapon 


This magic weapon grants a +1 bonus to attack and dam- 
age rolls made with it. 

The bonus increases to +2 when you reach 10th level in 
this class. 


HOMUNCULUS SERVANT 
Prerequisite: 6th-level artificer 
Item: A Sem worth at least 100 gp or a dragonshard 


You learn intricate methods for magically creating a 
special homunculus that serves you. The item you infuse 
serves as the creature’s heart, around which the crea- 
ture’s body instantly forms. 

You determine the homunculus’s appearance. Some 
artificers prefer mechanical-looking birds, whereas some 
like winged vials or miniature, animate cauldrons. 

The homunculus is friendly to you and your compan- 
ions, and it obeys your commands. See this creature’s 
game statistics in the Homunculus Servant stat block. 


HOMUNCULUS SERVANT 


Tiny construct, neutral 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points equal the homunculus’s Constitution modifier + your 
Intelligence modifier + your level in this class 
Speed 20 ft., fly 30 ft. 
L 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
4 (-3) 15 (+2) 12(+1) 10(+0) 10(+0) 7 (-2) 
ĖĖĖĖ——————— 
Saving Throws Dex +4 
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +4 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages understands the languages you speak 
Č 


Evasion. lf the homunculus is subjected to an effect that allows 
it to make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, 

it instead takes no damage if it succeeds on the saving throw, 
and only half damage if it fails. It can’t use this trait if it’s in- 
capacitated. 


Might of the Master. The following numbers increase by 1 when 
your proficiency bonus increases by 1: the homunculus’s skill 
and saving throw bonuses (above) and the bonuses to hit and 
damage of its attack (below). 


ACTIONS (REQUIRES YOUR BONUS ACTION) 


Force Strike. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30 ft., one 
target you can see. Hit: 1d4 + 2 force damage. 


REACTIONS 


Channel Magic. The homunculus delivers a spell you cast that 
has a range of touch. The homunculus must be within 120 
feet of you. 


APPENDIX | CLASS: ARTIFICER 


181 


182 


In combat, the homunculus shares your initiative 
count, but it takes its turn immediately after yours. It can 
move and use its reaction on its own, but the only action 
it takes on its turn is the Dodge action, unless you take a 
bonus action on your turn to command it to take the ac- 
tion in its stat block or the Dash, Disengage, Help, Hide, 
or Search action. 

The homunculus regains 2d6 hit points if the mending 
spell is cast on it. If it dies, it vanishes, leaving its heart 
in its space. 


RADIANT WEAPON 
Prerequisite: 6th-level artificer 
Item: A simple or martial weapon (requires attunement) 


This magic weapon grants a +1 bonus to attack and 
damage rolls made with it. While holding it, the wielder 
can take a bonus action to cause it to shed bright light in 
a 30-foot radius and dim light for an additional 30 feet. 
The wielder can extinguish the light as a bonus action. 

The weapon has 4 charges. As a reaction immediately 
after being hit by an attack, the wielder can expend 1 
charge and cause the attacker to be blinded until the 
end of the attacker’s next turn, unless the attacker suc- 
ceeds on a Constitution saving throw against your spell 
save DC. The weapon regains 1d4 expended charges 
daily at dawn. 


REPEATING SHOT 
Item: A simple or martial weapon with the ammunition 
property (requires attunement) 


This magic weapon grants a +1 bonus to attack and dam- 
age rolls made with it when it’s used to make a ranged 
attack, and it ignores the loading property if it has it. 

If you load no ammunition in the weapon, it produces 
its own, automatically creating one piece of magic am- 
munition when you make a ranged attack with it. The 
ammunition created by the weapon vanishes the instant 
after it hits or misses a target. 


REPLICATE MAGIC ITEM 

Using this infusion, you replicate a particular magic 
item. You can learn this infusion multiple times; each 
time you do so, choose a magic item that you can make 
with it, picking from the Replicable Items tables below. A 
table’s title tells you the level you must be in the class to 
choose an item from the table. 

In the tables, an item’s entry tells you whether the item 
requires attunement. See the item’s description in the 
Dungeon Master’s Guide for more information about it, 
including the type of object required for its making. 

If you have Xanathar’s Guide to Everything, you can 
choose from among the common magic items in that 
book when you pick a magic item you can replicate with 
this infusion. 


APPENDIX | CLASS: ARTIFICER 


REPLICABLE ITEMS (2ND-LEVEL ARTIFICER) 


Magic Item 

Alchemy jug 

Armblade (detailed in chapter 5) 
Bag of holding 

Cap of water breathing 

Goggles of night 


Prosthetic limb (detailed in chapter 5) 


Rope of climbing 
Sending stones 

Wand of magic detection 
Wand of secrets 


Attunement 


REPLICABLE ITEMS (6TH-LEVEL ARTIFICER) 


Magic Item 

Boots of elvenkind 
Cloak of elvenkind 
Cloak of the manta ray 
Eyes of charming 
Gloves of thievery 
Lantern of revealing 
Pipes of haunting 

Ring of water walking 


Wand sheath (detailed in chapter 5) 


Attunement 


REPLICABLE ITEMS (10TH-LEVEL ARTIFICER) 


Magic Item 

Boots of striding and springing 
Boots of the winterlands 
Bracers of archery 

Brooch of shielding 

Cloak of protection 

Eyes of the eagle 

Gauntlets of ogre power 
Gloves of missile snaring 
Gloves of swimming and climbing 
Hat of disguise 

Headband of intellect 

Helm of telepathy 

Medallion of thoughts 

Periapt of wound closure 

Pipes of the sewers 

Quiver of Ehlonna 

Ring of jumping 

Ring of mind shielding 
Slippers of spider climbing 


Ventilating lung (detailed in chapter 5) 


Winged boots 


Attunement 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 


REPLICABLE ITEMS (14TH-LEVEL ARTIFICER) 


Magic Item Attunement 
Amulet of health Yes 
Arcane propulsion arm (detailed in chapter 5) Yes 
Belt of hill giant strength Yes 
Boots of levitation Yes 
Boots of speed Yes 
Bracers of defense Yes 
Cloak of the bat Yes 
Dimensional shackles No 
Gem of seeing Yes 
Horn of blasting No 
Ring of free action Yes 
Ring of protection Yes 
Ring of the ram Yes 


REPULSION SHIELD 
Prerequisite: 6th-level artificer 
Item: A shield (requires attunement) 


A creature gains a +1 bonus to Armor Class while wield- 
ing this shield. 

The shield has 4 charges. While holding it, the wielder 
can use a reaction immediately after being hit by a melee 
attack to expend 1 of the shield’s charges and push the 
attacker up to 15 feet away. The shield regains 1d4 ex- 
pended charges daily at dawn. 


RESISTANT ARMOR 
Prerequisite: 6th-level artificer 
Item: A suit of armor (requires attunement) 


While wearing this armor, a creature has resistance to 
one of the following damage types, which you choose 
when you infuse the item: acid, cold, fire, force, lightning, 
necrotic, poison, psychic, radiant, or thunder. 


RETURNING WEAPON 

Item: A simple or martial weapon with the thrown 
property 

This magic weapon grants a +1 bonus to attack 

and damage rolls made with it, and it returns to the 
wielder’s hand immediately after it is used to make a 
ranged attack. 


APPENDIX | CLASS: ARTIFICER 


183 


