Create your own Critical Role ¢ campaigns withtthis 
D, sourcebook for the world’s greatest ep aying game 
i E, 


EXPLORER’S GUIDE TO 


WILDEMOUNT 


CREDITS 


Lead Writer: Matthew Mercer 
Writers: James J. Haeck, James Introcaso, Chris Lockey 
Developers: Jeremy Crawford, Dan Dillon, Ben Petrisor, Kate Welch 


Managing Editor: Christopher Perkins 
Editors: Scott Fitzgerald Gray, Hannah Rose, F. Wesley Schneider 


Art Director: Kate Irwin 

Graphic Designers: Trish Yochum, Trystan Falcone 

Cover Illustrator: Karl Kerschl 

Interior Illustrators: Even Amundsen, Jonah Baumann, Mark 
Behm, Eric Belisle, Dan Bittencourt, Zoltan Boros, Wesley Burt, 
Clint Cearley, Jedd Chevrier, Chippy, David René Christensen, 
CoupleOfKooks, Joma Cueto, Alayna Danner, Kent Davis, Nikki 
Dawes, Axel Defois, Olga Drebas, Lars Grant-West, Julian Kok, 
Linda Lithen, Jessica Mahon, Andrew Mar, Marcela Medeiros, 
Robson Michel, Goñi Montes, Irina Nordsol, Stephen Oakley, 
Robin Olausson, Claudio Pozas, Livia Prima, Jenn Ravenna, 
Nick Robles, Caio E Santos, David Sladek, Brian Valeza, Anna 
Veltkamp, Richard Whitters, Shawn Wood, Zuzanna Wuzyk, 
Anna Zee 

Cartographer: Deven Rue 


620C7270000001 EN 
ISBN: 978-0-7869-6691-2 
First Printing: March 2020 


987654321 


Producers: Bill Benham, Lea Heleotis, Dan Tovar 

Product Engineer: Cynda Callaway 

Imaging Technicians: Sven Bolen, Carmen Cheung, Kevin Yee 
Art Administrator: David Gershman 

Prepress Specialist: Jefferson Dunlap 


Franchise & Global Brand Strategy: Nathan Stewart 

Director of Licensing & Publishing: Liz Schuh 

Licensing Manager: Hilary Ross 

Marketing and Communications: Bart Carroll, Pelham Greene, Chris 
Lindsay, Shauna Narciso, Emi Tanji, Greg Tito, Anna Vo 

D&D IP Development: Adam Lee, Ari Levitch, Mike Mearls, Richard 
Whitters, Shawn Wood 

Brand Manager: Shelly Mazzanoble 

Playtest Coordinator: Bill Benham 


Critical Role Team: Laura Bailey, Taliesin Jaffe, Ashley Johnson, Liam 
O’Brien, Marisha Ray, Sam Riegel, Rachel Romero, Ben Van Der 
Fluit, Travis Willingham 

Special Thanks: Ashly Burch, Mica Burton, Matt Colville, Tanya 
DePass, Brian Foster, Will Friedle, Todd Kenreck, Matthew Key, 
Sumalee Montano, Brennan Lee Mulligan, Khary Payton, Brittany 
Walloch, Deborah Ann Woll 


Thanks to the many, many groups of playtesters who helped us 
get the character options and adventures into their final form. We 
couldn’t have made this book without you! 


ON THE COVER 


Illustrator Karl Kerschl captures the stern visages of two sovereigns 
with a Luxon beacon between them. Bright Queen Leylas Kryn of 
the Kryn Dynasty and King Bertrand Dwendal of the Dwendalian 
Empire have never seen eye to eye—and their conflict will shape 
the futures and destinies of all life on the war-torn continent of 
Wildemount. 


Disclaimer: The continent of Wildemount and all peoples within are fictional and primarily 
exist to invite you and your friends into a world of exploration, imagination, and deep 
emotional catharsis through epic struggles and victories. We advise you to embrace failure 
as much as success, sadness as much as joy, and to remain vigilant when taking care of 
pets or animals you acquire on your adventures. Wizards of the Coast and Critical Role are 
not responsible for any mental traumasuffered by animal companions or domesticated 
fey creatures resulting from persistent danger and deadly challenges, nor are we responsi- 


ble for whatever lack of passive Perception might lead to a failure to notice the animals’ 
rapid escape 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, the dragon ampersand, Player's Handbook, Monster Manual, Dungeon Master's Guide, all other Wizards of the Coast product 
names, and their respective logos are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast in the USA and other countries. The world of Exandria, its groups of individuals, its elements, its distinctive 
characters, and its locations are the sole property of Critical Role. All rights reserved. All other characters and their distinctive likenesses are property of Wizards of the Coast. The ma- 
terials described in this statement are protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America and around the world under international intellectual property treaties. Any 
reproduction or unauthorized use of the materials contained herein or artwork contained herein is prohibited without the express written permission of Wizards of the Coast or Critical 


Role as applicable. 


Printed in the USA. ©2020 Wizards of the Coast LLC, PO Box 707, Renton, WA 98057-0707, USA. Manufactured by Hasbro SA, Rue Emile-Boéchat 31, 2800 Delémont. CH. 


Repr: Hasbr r 4 Th r kley P iddl 


l 


T 


CONTENTS 


Pre fae « nindo 4 
Welcome to Wildemount ......................... 5 
A New D&D Setting.......... 
Nations of Wildemount 
What’s in This Book?.... 
Wanten 288s exorcn ee eee 
Calendar and Mme eean eee oe 
MoonsoNExandria -eee e ee 
Daily Life in Wildemount 
Ch. 1: Story of Wildemount................... 11 
History of Wildemountt d agitur 11 
Wildemount after the Calamity.............. 14 
PantheontofBExandnias. 2004.25.05. 20 
PrimeMeittess. 2 e tee 20 
Betrayen Gods. ..s a 26 
Lesserildols-s24 233 ee 30 
Ch. 2: Factions and Societies............... a5 
Dwendaltan Empire... .c.ssascsssscc tes 35 
Krynn Dynasty tick a6. ia ina 38 
Cerberus ASsemblyerinis annman 41 
GClovisiConcordi nr ar e N 43 
TheiMyriade Ree ee eee 45 
Children of Malice..... 46 
Diarchy of Uthodurn........ 48 
Tribes of Shadycreek Run.. a50) 
Library.of the Cobalt: Soull.s.c..2...0042% 52 
Scarsiof Seal eand Toothi i srana 58 
Claret Ordeicm™=2 n Ee 54 
GoldemGrint 2. eee 56 
We REVEYE ee -ccsttesvsss- teases ser eee 56 
Ch. 3: Wildemount Gazetteer............... 59 
Menagetie(Coast-2.csnc ne ees 59 
Marrow Valley... 78 


Zemni Fields.......... 
Greying Wildlands 111 
1861 CROSS eee cae ccs 121 
Wastesiof Mhonhasy. acco eee eee 182 
Blightsh ones: ts.88.....50aes seek. ee 149 
Distant Lands of Exandria................ 158 
Ch. 4: Character Option...................... 161 
| PACD ten te ae es ee ee 161 
Dumarnnos ee. Sees cn eee ee 162 
Pies a a rece re seer i aa 162 
aeiiaaie ten Pree roth 164 


aiee treet pee rept 164 
Nana kota... cst nni erences 165 
Aa Simai: neea oa ikanga 166 
Dragon oina a ree a E cre 168 
BDO] eS Ae ea ea, ees 169 
Gena Siotcs wii het e S 170 
Gnomes ara. ae ee 173 
Gob! inksins ee. ee See 173 
Goat Sheets renieeneaat ae 175 
Half IVE Sie. aaen aaeeea iaaa 176 
Kkenkun e eee eee ee ene ere eee 176 
Orcs and Half-Orcs 
Taban eR 
Tieflings. 
Tortles........ 
Hollow One 
Subclasses 
Pienter ECHO K might earen 183 
Wizard: Chronurgy Magic............... 184 
Wizard: Graviturgy Magic................ 185 
Dünamanoy' Spall s ee. 186 
PERGE a ctereesetecaees 190 
SACK OROMNGSS ttt. steerer 200 
Gr MNENE. fc... .. 200 
Volstrucker Agent..... 7202 
Adapting Backgrounds.........eeeeee 203 
Ch. 5: Adventures in Wildemount ....205 
Using These Adventures..........cccceee 205 
MIGe7Of Eth DWliOM,..cer...ccerees.ereeseeeeceees 206 
Dangerous DESIGNS: «...:i0 secs. PA 
Frozen, OC komnar ae 235 
Unwelcome SPMS ee aae aan t 250 
Ch. 6: Wildemount Treasures............. 265 
Magic Items of Wildemount... -205 
Vestiges of Divergence......... 210. 
Arms Of HEBetrayetS naa a 274 
Ch. 7: Wildemount Bestiary................ 281 
Stat Blocks by Creature Type............. 281 
WildemountiNiP Gs... 88... a 281 
(Aeortam FIU niorS e eee aea arai steers eee 282 
Blood Hunter... .. 284 
Core Spawn........- 285 
Frost Giant Zombie... . 288 
Frost Worm.......... ..289 


Gearkeeper Consttrúct tah. 290 
Gloomistal kenisi n irae arare 291 
Horizonback Tortoise ...-........0s.:secssessc002 292 
Husk Zombie................. 3295 
Merrow Shallowpriest ..........:cseeeee 294 
MoorbounderSweis:mce.cusiaattum tn 295 
Nergaliid (Devil Road) ernea 296 
Sahuagin Warlock of Uk’otoa.........0..... 297 
DEA PUNY eamhan d ieena aa E entada 298 
Shadowg hast. aerer are aaae 299 
Swawain Basilisk anina a e 300 


Maps 

Continent of WIdemount siiis tf 
Map 3.1: Menagerie Coast... eee 61 
Mapis22 Foro Damal 1s. eee S 
Map 3.3: Marrow Valley iire.. 79 
Mapo Zemi Fielda nm a kenari 97 
Map 3:5: Rexxemtrum pegaria 105 
Map 3.6: Greying Wildlands............. 111 
Map 3.7: Eiselcross ........::s+ F) 
Map 3.8: Wastes of Xhorhas. -i87 
Map 3.9: Rosohnaissrist... 143 
Map 3- 103Blightshore.. tm.. maan 150 
Map5-lePalma Plora eee 209 
Map 5.2: Wavechaser...ar--.- ee ae 210 
Map 5.3: Ruined Palma Flora.............. 215 
Map 5.4: Lower Hupperdook................ 219 
Map 5.5: IronlotStreets.....::...2::.<f2.0 220 
Map 5.6: Nima Cinnarid’s House.........224 
Map 5.7: Silver Falls Cavern........ 22N 
Map 5.8: Stahlmast’s Lair.... = 229 
Map/5'9»Croaken Gave....<..9%..42 239 
Map S lO Salsvatilt-Gscect T 245 
Map 5.11: Brokenveil Marsh................ 254 
Mapioil2sFort Venture ma TE atom: 259 


Imagination drives innovation and inspires communal 
creation. For this geeky theater kid, imagination was 
my solace. 

Since before my granny began reading me to sleep 
with The Lord of the Rings and Piers Anthony at the 
age of seven, I found myself simultaneously lost in, and 
empowered by, imagination. From playing make-believe 
with my brother in our rainy, Florida yard as children, 
to mowing through video game RPG after RPG, I found 
myself drawn into stories, especially those I could shape 
alongside my friends. It wasn’t until I was introduced 
to DUNGEONS & DRAGONS during my freshman year of 
high school that I found an experience that entwined 
everything I loved about storytelling, collaboration, 
theater, and creativity. I began building worlds for my 
friends to play in and filling notebooks with strange 
ideas, quirky NPCs, and mediocre story threads (hey, ev- 
eryone has to start somewhere). I had found my favorite 
pastime, one that continues to lift me up and shape who 
I am today. 

All these years later, through a magical series of 
circumstances, a group of gaming friends and I began 
streaming our home game of D&D on the internet under 
the name Critical Role, expecting little to no interest 
after spending nearly a decade in web media being told 
anything longer than five minutes has little value to the 
“ADHD generation.” These myths were rapidly proven 
wrong, and our home game swelled into a community, 
then into an unanticipated phenomenon that has be- 
come something so deeply wonderful and important to 
me, and it seems, many others across the world. 

It is through the original campaign following the 
exploits of the adventuring party Vox Machina, with 
myself helming the narrative as the Dungeon Master, 
that I began crafting the continent of Tal’Dorei and the 
world of Exandria for my friends to explore. Expanding 
this world with each heroic venture my friends took on, 
each unique facet of their characters’ stories enriching 
this realm that otherwise existed entirely in my head, 
Exandria began to grow and mature, feeling at times 
like it was taking on a life of its own. By the end of that 
journey, as the heroes of Vox Machina completed their 
majestic tale, we all knew we had created something 
special. However, that was but the first of many tales we 
wanted to weave. 


“Imagination is a 
strange G wonderful thing. 


A second campaign began shortly thereafter, this 
time taking place in the neighboring continent of Wilde- 
mount, a land bound by dark history, political struggle, 
and dangerous secrets simmering beneath the surface 
of everyday life. Now knowing the complexity my players 
were willing to engage with, I developed Wildemount 
on a scale and level of intricacy I had not previously 
attempted. I excitedly watched as this region of Exan- 
dria took shape, and it was here the Mighty Nein (as 
they came to be called) began their adventures, which 
they currently continue to the day of my writing this 
foreword. Wildemount expanded into a vast, complex, 
and delightful setting that I continued to grow more and 
more proud of. Then the incredible opportunity arose to 
collaborate with Wizards of the Coast to bring this set- 
ting to you in printed form. 

I have been nothing short of humbled and ecstatic at 
this chance to be a part of something so important to 
me. It has been a profound honor to bring our world into 
the D&D multiverse and invite you to come play and 
create in it. Exandria continues to be one of my proudest 
achievements, with Wildemount my most accomplished 
aspect of this world to date. This continent is ripe with 
adventure and mystery. To work with such talented peo- 
ple to make this campaign sourcebook a reality is a joy 
I never thought I’d get to experience. Wildemount began 
with Critical Role, but this book is an invitation for you 
and your friends to make this world your own. 

I invite you all to come to Wildemount. Wander the 
dangerous valleys of Western Wynandir, sail up and 
down the Menagerie Coast, brave the wastes of Xhor- 
has’s scarred lands, and explore the ancient secrets in 
the regions beyond these war-embroiled realms. Follow 
the paths of the Mighty Nein or blaze your own trail. 
This is your Wildemount now. 


Matthew Mercer, 
Dungeon Master of Critical Role 


WELCOME TO WILDEMOUNT 


WO ARMIES CLASH ON A FOG-SHROUDED 
battlefield, heralded by the sound of trumpets 
and drums on one side, and by an eerie, chirp- 
ing whistle like countless thousands of wailing 
crickets on the other. A raven, its ebon feathers spattered 
with blood, alights on one of the fallen corpses and gently 
raps its beak on the soldier’s helmet. The raven looks up, 
curious, and flies into the sky. A land embroiled in war ex- 
pands beneath it, and yet, within the shroud of conflict, the 
raven sees twinkling pockets of light. 
The raven sees souls that shine bright with courage, kind- 
ness, and determination. It sees souls lustrous with greed, 
fear, and anger. And most of all, it sees souls radiating with 
a desire to discover their place in the world. The raven sees 
Wildemount. 


A NEw D&D SETTING 


Wildemount isa new setting for your DUNGEONS & 
DRAGONS campaign, originally created by Matthew 
Mercer as the setting for the second campaign of the 

hit series Critical Role. Though it’s just one continent 

in the larger world of Exandria, Wildemount is teeming 
with varied cultures, locales, peoples, and monsters. It 
is home to both avatars of evil and paragons of good, but 
it is defined by the common people who exist in between 
these two ideals. 

This book is for D&D players and Dungeon Masters 
of all experience levels. It is for newcomers and for 
hardcore fans of Critical Role alike. If you’ve watched 
every episode of Critical Role to date, this book will still 
contain surprises for you, as there are corners of Wilde- 
mount that even the Mighty Nein weren't able to explore 
in their adventures. 

If you’re a Dungeon Master, this book will help you 
create a D&D campaign set in a land of war, intrigue, 
and swashbuckling adventure. You could set your cam- 
paign entirely within one of Wildemount’s four regions, 
or you could follow the example set by Critical Role and 
create a campaign with a constantly evolving tone as the 
adventurers journey across the continent. You will also 
find brand-new monsters and introductory adventures 
that can help you start a campaign in any of Wilde- 
mount’s four regions. 


If you're a player, this book contains new options that 
will help your character fit in perfectly with this strange 
new land. You can use the heroic chronicle system to 
create a backstory that firmly roots your character in the 
lands of Wildemount. You'll also find new subclasses as 
well as new magic items that will help you attain greater 
and greater power as you travel the continent. 


NATIONS OF WILDEMOUNT 


Wildemount’s various regions are described in greater 
detail in chapter 3. Here’s a quick overview of the major 
civilizations of Wildemount. 


DWENDALIAN EMPIRE 


The raven soars over a massive city, sprawling outward 
from a somber, monolithic palace. Soldiers and war 
machines pour from the city, stretching across the land 
like innumerable grasping arms, greedily encircling the 
continent. The raven notes this hungry behemoth and 
alters course. 


The Dwendalian Empire is a young, ambitious state 
borne from decades of strife in Western Wynandir—the 
heartland of Wildemount. Its austere lands are dotted 
with tiny villages, ruins of ancient civilizations, and 
pockets of uncharted wilderness. 

Campaigns set in the Dwendalian Empire are bound 
to involve elements of war and political intrigue. The 
empire is at war with the Kryn Dynasty, a nation of sur- 
face-dwelling drow which occupies Eastern Wynandir 
and the wastes of Xhorhas. This war allows various 
Dwendalian factions, such as the power-hungry Cerbe- 
rus Assembly, to vie for political dominance. 


CLOVIS CONCORD 


Westward flies the herald of the Raven Queen. It bursts 
through the clouds above the western mountains and 
emerges into a land blessed by sun. A sea of lush jungle 
stretches out beneath the raven, until eventually green 
gives way to golden sand, and then to a boundless, sap- 
phire sea. Ships swarm on that sea like a cloud of gnats, 
engulfed by flames and the sound of cannon fire. They 
fight for freedom. 


WELCOME TO WILDEMOUNT 


OL 


The Clovis Concord is a republic of city-states lining 
the Menagerie Coast, the westernmost shore of 
Wildemount. This tropical region is rich with history 
and known for a lively, free-spirited culture that con- 
trasts sharply with Wildemount’s other, politically 
narrow-minded nations. 

Campaigns set on the Menagerie Coast are often nau- 
tical, exploring the conflict between the law of the Clovis 
Concord and the chaos of the Revelry pirates. They can 
also investigate the jungles that line the coast and the 
ancient ruins hidden within their verdant boughs. 


TRIBES OF SHADYCREEK RUN 


The raven, battered by ice and snow, sees petty warlords 


lead bands of slavers across the snowfields and under- 
stands that no law but power rules the north. It sees 
smugglers and thieves flee beyond the grasp of civiliza- 
tion and into the unknown. It sees the vast, roiling wil- 
derness act with a fell will of its own, claiming the lives 
of those who dare attempt to grasp power beyond their 
ken. They fight for survival, glory, and greed. 


The Tribes of Shadycreek Run are a fragmented coali- 
tion of thieves, slavers, and scoundrels who managed 
to amass power in the frigid backwater of Shadycreek 
Run. While they struggle to enrich themselves through 
crime, however, they fail to realize that malign, primor- 
dial powers are creeping into the north underneath 
their noses. 

Campaigns set in the Biting North often involve mor- 
ally gray characters butting heads with equally amoral 
organizations in a struggle to survive—and then explode 
into chaos as forces beyond mortal imagination make all 
these petty conflicts seem insignificant by comparison. 


KRYN DYNASTY 


Finally, the raven flies east. It sees beings that would 
be slain on sight in the other civilized nations of Wilde- 
mount, walking side-by-side with humans and gray- 
skinned elves. The raven sees that these people have a 
light within them—and it sees that, far to the east, there 
is a mighty fortress that contains a light unseen since 
the dawning of the world. Here, they fight for the revela- 
tion of the end of the world. 


The Kryn Dynasty is an empire made up of dark elves 
(drow) and other humanoids typically considered to be 
monsters by the other nations of Wildemount, such as 
minotaurs, goblinkin, and gnolls. The Kryn Dynasty 
rules over the wastes of Xhorhas, a land once blighted 
by the rule of the Betrayer Gods when immortals still 
walked the land. The Kryn safeguard a secret; if your 
players haven't seen any of Critical Role, revealing this 
secret could mark the turning point of a campaign. 

A campaign set in Xhorhas will doubtless involve the 
war between the Kryn Dynasty and the Dwendalian 
Empire, but it can also include traditional dungeon 
crawls, political intrigue within the courts of the dy- 
nasty, or even wilderness exploration that could unearth 
secrets lost since the fall of the Betrayer Gods. 


WELCOME TO WILDEMOUNT 


WHAT'S IN THIS BOOK? 


Chapter 1 of this book introduces the big ideas you'll 
need to know before creating a campaign in Wilde- 
mount: its history and its gods. 

Chapter 2 presents the major political players that 
shape daily life in Wildemount: its factions and societies. 
Depending on the choices made by your party of adven- 
turers, these organizations might become their allies or 
their enemies. Some characters might begin play with 
a history of involvement with one of these factions, and 
several backgrounds are included later on to represent 
this allegiance. 

Chapter 3 contains the Wildemount gazetteer, which 
details the cities and points of interest in each of the 
continent’s regions. The gazetteer includes NPCs, back- 
ground information, and even plot hooks that you can 
use as the seeds of your own adventures. It also gives 
a brief overview of the other lands of Exandria beyond 
Wildemount. 

Chapter 4 is for players first and foremost; combined 
with the Player’s Handbook, it contains everything you 
need to create a character for a Wildemount campaign. 

The final chapters of this book, chapters 5 through 7, 
give DMs starting adventures they can use to kick off 
their campaigns as well as new magic items and mon- 
sters to include in adventures of their own design. 


WAR! 


The continent of Wildemount is a powder keg about to 
explode. Tensions between the Dwendalian Empire and 
the Kryn Dynasty have just erupted into open war, and 
everyone in Wildemount, including the adventurers, 
must contend with the fallout of the conflict between the 
continent’s two imperial superpowers. 


THE WAR OF ASH AND LIGHT 


The war is only as important as you make it. If you place 
either the battles of the war or their consequences front 
and center, the war will be of chief concern to your 
players. If you keep the war and its consequences dis- 
tant, then the characters will be free to interact with or 
ignore the war as they see fit. With a little bit of creative 
tweaking of the setting, you could create a Wildemount 
campaign where the war has been called off or never 
even happened! 

If you want the war to be an important part of your 
campaign, you need to give your players a reason for 
their characters to care about it. The easiest way to get 
buy-in from your players is to discuss out-of-character 
how big of a factor they want war to be in this campaign. 
You can even dial the importance of the war up and 
down over the course of the campaign, depending on 
how you and your players feel over time. 


BRING IT ON! 

If you and your players find war to be dramatic and 
compelling, urge your players to create characters with 
strong ties to the conflict. For example, patriotic (or 
even jingoistic) characters will always fight for king or 


CONTINENT OF WILDEMOUNT 


queen and country. Likewise, greedy characters will 
fight for profit and glory. Once they’ve given you their 
reasons, turn those motivations into plot points in 
your campaign. 


IN THE BACKGROUND 

The adventurers don’t have to be active combatants for 
the war to affect their lives. See below for a list of ad- 
venture options that touch on the consequences of war 
without directly involving mass warfare. 


No War, PLEASE 

If you want the war to be completely absent, simply dial 
the timeline back by a year, or even just a few months. 
All the political tensions between the Dwendalian Em- 
pire and the Kryn Dynasty still exist, but now they’re 
just simmering instead of at a full boil. 


ADVENTURING OPTIONS 


Not all campaigns set in Wildemount need to deal with 


the war directly. That is, the characters aren’t expected 
to conscript with one army or another, or even serve as 
mercenaries. The effects of war are far-reaching and 
multifarious, and loose-cannon adventurers are the 
perfect people to get involved in the countless conflicts 
sparked by war. These schemes could include: 


Crime. In times of war, criminals and smugglers take 
advantage of lax law enforcement. Petty criminals and 


crime syndicates like the Myriad will need help mov- 
ing illicit goods in and out of Dwendalian and Xhor- 
hasian cities, and Revelry pirates will need loyal crew 
members to raid unprotected towns. 

Disaster. When a town is destroyed by advancing 
armies, or by a landslide caused by artillery, the 
common folk need help escaping. This could involve 
escorting noncombatants through no-man’s-land to 
a nearby town, or carving out a new settlement from 
the wilds. 

Law. When officers of the law are conscripted as sol- 
diers, local lawmasters suddenly find themselves in 
need of mercenary aid. Lawful characters might find 
great adventure in flushing criminals out of cities and 
busting their wilderness hideaways. 

Military. Obviously, characters can choose to join up 
with one of the sides in this conflict to embark on 
missions and take orders from a commanding officer. 
This is a good option if you want to run an episodic 
campaign, where most game sessions begin with a 
stated mission that the players must accomplish and 
ends with a reward and another mission. 

Upheaval. The explosions of artillery and the pounding 
of boots against the plains can spook monsters, and 
invasions can cause even powerful monsters such as 
giants and dragons to flee their lairs. Whenever an 
upheaval occurs, soldiers and commoners alike find 
their lives in danger—and only adventurers can deal 
with the threat. 


WELCOME TO WILDEMOUNT 


Vrms P a 
arna a enande 


HAWES 


Trade. Like the crime syndicates, opportunistic traders 
know that war is a chance to become rich. Adventur- 
ers are the perfect pawns for trade barons looking to 
sell high-value goods, especially if they have to cross 
dangerous land to reach their buyers. 


How To RUN A WAR CAMPAIGN 


If there’s one thing D&D adventurers hate, it’s being told 
what to do, but serving in an army is all about following 
orders. It’s up to the Dungeon Master to make sure the 
characters are aware of what they’re getting into if they 
decide to enlist. Similarly, if you force your players to 
join a military unit and then discover that the characters 
actually want to go on self-directed adventures without 
a commanding officer ordering them around, you and 
your players should talk out-of-game to figure out a way 
to turn the campaign around. 

Since D&D is primarily a game about a small group of 
characters going on adventurers alone, it can be difficult 
to simulate massive battles using D&D combat rules. 
Because of this, it’s generally best to keep the characters 
away from mass battles. However, huge conflicts with 
thousands of combatants are a cornerstone of epic fan- 
tasy, and your players might be disappointed if your war 
campaign doesn't have at least one climactic battle. 

Tosolve this problem, you can break down your mass 
combat into manageable chunks. Find a significant lo- 
cation that the characters can either defend or conquer 
with minimal reinforcements, like an overrun citadel. 
Then, have the major battle proceed in waves that 
guide the characters from one cinematic encounter to 
another. You can think of these encounters like rooms 
in a dungeon; some rooms have multiple doors that the 
characters can choose from, while others only havea 
single passage. 

For example, after capturing the ruined fortress, 
the characters learn that a garrison of soldiers has ar- 
rived to help hold onto the fort, and the characters are 
needed elsewhere on the battlefield. You could present 
them with just a single urgent target, such as an enemy 
warlord, or you could offer them options, such as three 
different allied battalions under attack. 

If you need to depict a lot of both allied and hostile 
NPCs battling in the same encounter as the players, you 
can simplify the encounter by ignoring dice rolls entirely 
a 

WHEN Does THIS BOOK TAKE PLACE? 

This book is setin a certain moment in the history of 

Wildemount, and thus setting a campaign in a different 

era—or even in a different decade—could make some 

information in the gazetteer invalid. The present year is 

835 PD (“Post-Divergence”). The history of Wildemount is 

described in more detail in chapter 1. 

From a real-world perspective, this book is set at a cer- 

tain point during the adventures of the Mighty Nein in 

Critical Role’s second campaign. Thus, the point at which 

the adventures you create using this book diverge from 

canon is at episode 50 of campaign 2. That’s okay! Look at 

it another way: by creating your own Wildemount adven- 

tures, you are boldly creating your own canon, from which 

all the events of Critical Role diverge into myth and rumor. 


SSS Sas 


WELCOME TO WILDEMOUNT 


and deciding when a creature dies based on your own 
instinct. This can work once in a while, but try to avoid 
doing this all the time, since seeing you simply decide 
the result of combat without dice can damage the believ- 
ability of your game world. 


CALENDAR AND TIME 


Keeping track of time using the Exandrian calendar 

can make your game world seem more realistic. It can 
also allow you to align game sessions with important in- 
game dates, such as holidays. A monster attack on a ru- 
ral village is a horrible and thrilling event, but the stakes 
are much higher if that monster attacks on the day of the 
Harvest’s Close festival, causing previously joyful com- 
moners to grab their children and flee to safety. 

The Exandrian calendar year is divided into 328 days, 
grouped into seven-day weeks over the course of eleven 
months. This calendar was originally established by the 
elves in an ancient age, and their names for the months 
and days of the week have stood the test of time. 

The names of the seven days of the week are Miresen, 
Grissen, Whelsen, Conthsen, Folsen, Yulisen, and 
Da’leysen. Each day is 24 hours long. 


EXANDRIAN CALENDAR 


Month Days Holidays 
Horisal 29 New Dawn (Ist), Hillsgold (27th) 
Misuthar 30 Day of Challenging (7th) 
Dualahei 30 Renewal Festival (13th), 
Wild’s Grandeur (20th) 
Thunsheer 31 Harvest’s Rise (11th), 
Merryfrond’s Day (31st) 
Unndilar 28 Deep Solace (8th), Zenith (26th) 
Brussendar 31 Artisan’s Faire (15th), 
Elvendawn (20th) 
Sydenstar 32 Highsummer (7th), 
Morn of Largesse (14th) 
Fessuran 29 Harvest’s Close (3rd) 
Quen’pillar 27 Hazel Festival (10th), 
Civilization’s Dawn (22nd) 
Cuersaar 29 Night of Ascension (13th) 
Duscar 32 Barren Eve (2nd), Embertide (5th) 
SEASONS 


Wildemount isa chilly continent—with the exception of 
the sunny, tropical Menagerie Coast—and each of the re- 
gions experiences the passing of the seasons differently. 
Western Wynandir suffers from dismal, rainy springs 
and bitter winters. The Menagerie Coast enjoys a long, 
balmy summer, but must endure a vicious, typhoon-rich 
winter. The Biting North is always blanketed by snow, 
but temperatures drop to deadly lows in the winter, 
then let up for a rainy, relatively mild summer. Finally, 
Eastern Wynandir enjoys level, temperate weather all 
year long across its lowland regions, save for the cutting 
winds that rip across the plains in spring and autumn. 


HOLIDAYS 


The different nations of Wildemount celebrate different 
holidays, though some of the gods’ holy days are consis- 
tent across the land. Notably, the Dwendalian Empire 
has banned the worship of certain gods within its bor- 
ders, and thus only celebrates the holidays of legal gods. 
These holy days are listed in chapter 1 of this book, 
along with the gods they celebrate. 

Holidays unrelated to the gods celebrated across the 
continent in some form include the following: 


Zenith. Summer begins at high noon on the 26th of Un- 
ndilar and is celebrated with games, displays of magic, 
and black powder fireworks. 

Harvest’s Close. Autumn begins on the 3rd of Fessuran 
and is typically celebrated with feasting in rural re- 
gions and with carnivals in the cities. 

Barren Eve. Winter’s longest night, the 2nd of Duscar, 
is a day of mourning for those lost in war. Come vic- 
tory or ruin in the war between the Dwendalians and 
the Kryn, countless candles will be lit on the next 
Barren Eve. 


MOONS OF EXANDRIA 


Exandria has two known moons that orbit the planet. 
Catha, the larger and closer of the moons, is the herald 
of night travel and shines a bright white when visible in 
the sky. Catha is considered to be intrinsically tied to Se- 
hanine, the Moon Weaver, and is regarded by some as a 
creation of the Moon Weaver to watch over the just and 
hide those who require obfuscation. Ruidus, the second 
moon of Exandria, is much smaller and farther away. 
With a slower rotation around the world and dark red- 
brown coloring, Ruidus is often difficult to see among 
the stars of the night sky and nearly impossible to spot 
during the day. Little is known of Ruidis, though older 
cultures and texts speak of it as an omen of ill tidings, 
or even a remnant of a Betrayer God plot left abandoned 
and unrealized. 


DAILY LIFE IN WILDEMOUNT 


Certain aspects of daily life in Wildemount remain the 
same across nearly all cultures. Any character native to 
Wildemount would be familiar with their nation’s cur- 
rency, languages, and relationship to technology. 


CURRENCY 


The nations of Wildemount all mint their own coins, and 
though some slight regional differences exist between 
currencies, all regions readily accept gold, silver, and 
copper coins. Spending money of Dwendalian mint in 
the Kryn Dynasty might turn heads, but a gold coin is 
still a gold coin. 

Platinum and electrum coins are rarely minted by 
modern nations, but enough of both of these currencies 
survived the Age of Arcanum that both are considered 
valid tender across the land. 


LANGUAGES 


All the typical languages found in the Player’s Hand- 
book and the Monster Manual are fair game in Wilde- 
mount. While Common is used across the continent and 
typically associated with human empires, it is not the 
language that most humans spoke in Wildemount be- 
fore the rise of Dwendalian Empire three centuries ago. 

This setting has three languages unique to the human 
cultures of Wildemount: Zemnian, Marquesian, and 
Naush. A human character can learn one of these lan- 
guages instead of a skill or tool proficiency granted by 
their background, class, or variant racial traits. Each of 
these languages is described below: 


Zemnian. This ancient language was spoken by the peo- 
ple of Zemniaz in the Age of Arcanum. That ancient 
culture has long since crumbled, but its language and 
its people live on in the Dwendalian Empire. Many 
ancient scrolls were written in Zemnian, but it is a lan- 
guage now largely spoken by farmers, as Common is 
the default language of the empire. 

Marquesian. The Menagerie Coast was settled by 
colonists from the arid land of Marquet, and their 
language now holds an unusual position in the Clo- 
vis Concord. It is the language of high society, as 
many Clovis elite are descended from Marquesians, 
but it is also the language of piracy, since countless 
lower-class Marquesians defected from the Concord 
and formed the Revelry pirates. 

Naush. Originally spoken by the Ki’Nau islanders native 
to the Menagerie Coast, Naush is a thriving language 
within the multicultural cities of the Clovis Concord. 
Even sailors who only speak Common incorporate 
dozens of Naush words into their nautical jargon. 


TECHNOLOGY 


The level of technology in Wildemount is generally con- 
sistent with the technologies found in the Player’s Hand- 
book. However, Dwendalian scientists in Hupperdook 
and Concordian tinkerers in Port Zoon have made in- 
credible advances in black powder technology. Cannons, 
mobile war engines, and even handheld pistols and mus- 
kets have begun to be used as weapons of war. 

Black powder weapons are not common, nor are they 
available to the general public. Only military engineers 
and special regiments within the Dwendalian armies 
and the Concordian navy have access to these powerful 
weapons, though some aspects of these designs are now 
finding their way into the Xhorhasian military. Statistics 
for weapons such as black powder barrels, pistols, and 
rifles are provided in chapter 9 of the Dungeon Master’s 
Guide. All items listed as “Renaissance Items” on the 
Firearms and Explosives tables exist in some form in 
Wildemount. Since these items can’t be purchased in a 
normal store, characters can only obtain them through 
theft, military service, or a quest of your own devising. 


WELCOME TO WILDEMOUNT 


A MONK OF THE COBALT SOUL SHEDS LIGHT ON WILDEMOUNT’S 
PAST FOR A BAND OF YOUNG ADVENTURERS. 


ORN FROM NOTHING, THERE WAS SOMETHING. 
Light, then thought, then life and fire. We who 
are born of the will of the gods keep these re- 
cords to preserve their deeds, their design, and 
their lessons. We who live by our own will shall keep these 
records to know where we walk and where not to tread. 
We who look to our inevitable end keep these records to 
teach those who succeed our footsteps how to be better 
than we could. 
—Archivist Adia Shu of the Cobalt Soul 


HISTORY OF WILDEMOUNT 


The continent of Wildemount has undergone many 

ages of discovery, conflict, and renewal. These bygone 
eras are more than ancient history. Whether the people 
of Wildemount know it or not, the struggles they face 

in their daily lives were set in motion by the turbulent 
events of past ages. This section explores this history 
and the major figures whose actions shaped the physical 
and cultural landscape of Wildemount. 


MYTH OF EXANDRIA 


Life ever seeks to understand its inception. Every civ- 
ilization has its own interpretation of where its story 
began. Even within the world of Exandria, different cul- 
tures have creation myths that eventually converge with 
recorded history, but there is no universally accepted 
story. Even so, the ancient city of Vasselheim on the dis- 
tant continent of Othanzia is largely considered to be the 
oldest surviving city, having endured a terrible war that 
wiped out most of civilization nearly a thousand years 
ago. Vasselheim houses the earliest known temples to 
the gods, as well as the earliest known records of his- 
tory that survived this catastrophic war. 

The most widely accepted tale of the world’s origins is 
the myth of the Founding. This is the interpretation held 
and embraced within most of Wildemount, as well as 
the vast lands of Exandria as a whole. 


THE FOUNDING 


Long ago, this world was one of tumultuous and chaotic 


forces, naught but unbridled fires and churning, jagged 


“Chapter 1 
STORY OF WILDEMOUNT 


rock. Through the ashen skies of Creation Primordial, 
the gods came from beyond the ether, new and formless. 
Looking on this roiling realm, they saw potential for 
great beauty, great strength, and the chance to learn 
their own place in creation. 

Thus, divine hands birthed the First Children, the 
elves, who embodied beauty and grace, to walk the 
verdant Green and know the music of the Blue. A 
second creation was wrought: the dwarves, a hearty 
people intent on taming the land, filled with the craft 
and invention of the divinity beyond the ashen void. A 
third people were given life: the humans, endowed with 
hearts of passion that burned as brightly as their spans 
of life were short, and infused with the need to celebrate 
and laugh. 

Other creations followed as the many races of Exan- 
dria were given form from the boundless inspiration the 
of the protean gods. These Children of Creation walked 
the land and, as their knowledge grew, attempted to 
build on it. But the land was fierce and treacherous, and 
the children were dashed on the rocks and consumed 
by the elements. Sorrow filled the hearts of the gods as 
these first races struggled against a land that did not 
want them, and the children looked to their creators for 
guidance and protection. Thus, the gods gave to them 
gifts, lending their own power to their children to create 
and shape the world around them; these were the first 
divine magics. 

With these magics, the various peoples learned to 
bend the angry earth to their will: to temper the flames 
that burst through the ground, to tame the floods that 
threatened their abundance, and to turn seedling into 
fruit and beast into meal. Language became common- 
place, culture was born, and governance replaced anar- 
chy. The protean creators, the divinity beyond the ashen 
skies, saw progress and saw that it was good, yet fragile 
and in need of guardians. 

Thus were born the First Protectors: the Dragons Me- 
tallic of Exandria, who safeguarded the gentler races. 
The realm grew quieter, the people multiplied, and new 
beings were given form and life. As culture grew, and 
the people further understood the world around them, 
they also looked up to their creators and gave them wor- 
ship, gave them form, gave them title and purpose. 

But this realm did not wish to be tamed. Quaking 
cliffs roared in defiance. Seas swelled and swallowed. 
Flames erupted from the land. Beneath the elements, 


CHAPTER 1 | STORY OF WILDEMOUNT 


unknown to the Creators beyond the ashen skies, lived 
ancient beings who had already claimed this world as 
their home: the Primordials. These great elemental 
titans that once dwelt deep within the world now rose 


from their unseen domain to sunder the land once more. 


The gods watched as their children, their joy, were 
flung against the broken rocks or fed to formless terrors 
unleashed by the destruction. Demonic entities spilled 
from the umbra of the Abyss to feast on the carnage, 
called forth by the violence and released to pick the car- 
rion clean. 

Some gods were so full of grief and anger that they 
wished to leave this world behind and start anew. They 
tried to convince their divine kindred to join with the 
Primordials, allowing chaos to reclaim the realm. Other 
gods wished to remain and subdue the Primordials, to 
tame the land for the sake of their creations. Thus was 
created a divide among the gods. Celestial sentinels 
once dedicated to battling the chaotic forces of the 
Abyss now fell to hate and tyranny, forging new hells 
under a fallen angel now claiming lordship over all the 
realms of sulfur and brimstone. 

The Creators that remained, wishing to salvage their 
home, their creations, and their realized selves, were 
forced to take up arms and learn to protect that which 
they valued most. They organized their followers and 
taught them how to draw from the powers of creation on 
their own: to build, to change, and to destroy, all without 
the aid of divine power. Mortals learned to defend them- 
selves through practices such as alchemy or by bending 
the very fabrics of existence, though on a smaller scale 
than that of their creators. 

This gift was the knowledge of arcane magic, which 
the good children used to drive away their traitorous 
kin, banish the turned Creators to their own prison-like 
planes, and ultimately destroy the Primordials, scat- 
tering the chaotic elements to their own planes of ex- 
istence. The world was at peace for the first time since 
its creation, and the first real civilization took root and 
grew into a grand city called Vasselheim. The Cradle of 
Creation. The Dawn City. 

Culture developed anew, the races ventured forth to 
discover and explore their own lands, and great music 
filled the air to give a name to this world once and for 
all: Exandria. 


AGE OF ARCANUM 


Over time, some of the people of Exandria grew arro- 


gant. Seeing their arcane gifts as proof that the gods 
held no sway over their fate, a belief developed that, with 
enough understanding, they too could become as pow- 
erful as the gods. Many began to shun faith in favor of 
their own pursuits. Though this hurt and surprised the 
Creators, they understood the willfulness of their chil- 
dren and endured out of love and hope for redemption. 
Great kingdoms sprung up across Exandria. Castles 
were built in a day, accelerated by the arcanists’ new- 
found power. Erudite cities hovered and drifted through 
the skies, shifting under the direction of scholarly magi 
to wherever their interests took them. Even though 
magic could be used to complete the most difficult 
tasks with hitherto unknown speed, magic-users strove 


CHAPTER 1 | STORY OF WILDEMOUNT 


always to innovate. As mages practiced and perfected 
their powers of creation, they soon unlocked the secrets 
of life itself, giving birth to wondrous, dangerous new 
creatures and power. Powerful archmages such as 
Vecna the Whispered One and Halas Lutagran began 
to carve their paths into history during this era of unbri- 
dled magical experimentation. 

The advent of the arcane seemed to be the key toa 
bountiful age of plenty but also proved to threaten it, 
as prosperity soon gave way to greed. Petty squabbles 
erupted over resources and wealth among the elite, 
while the rumor of immortality through perfected arca- 
num began to drive the greatest mages wild with a lust 
for unending power. One mortal mage, her name either 
lost or struck from history, crafted now-forbidden rites 
to challenge the God of Death, felling him and taking 
his place among the pantheon, making her the first and 
only mortal to ascend to godhood. The archmage Vespin 
Chloras was inspired by this display. Driven by his hun- 
ger, he sought the guidance and power of the banished 
gods, rending open the gates of their prisons and releas- 
ing the betrayers into the mortal world. 

During their imprisonment, these gods of hatred 
and despair twisted their prison into their own image, 
spawning unthinkable horrors that lived only to trans- 
form peace into suffering, and righteousness into arro- 
gance and greed. The Nine Hells and the Abyss began 
to push their way into Creation. The Betrayer Gods and 
their hateful children discovered a world unspoiled, 
save for the avarice of mortals. The urge to ruin was 
now replaced with the desire to dominate, and the Be- 
trayer Gods began by turning on the mage who freed 
them, making Archmage Vespin their first thrall. This 
corrupted divinity sought out the remnants of their off- 
spring, scattered across the world, and created a mighty 
and terrible new kingdom on the plains of Xhorhas, at 
the far end of the world from Vasselheim—Ghor Dranas. 

In this land of evil, where the twisted power of the 
lower planes seeped into Exandria, the lords of dark- 
ness tainted the minds of mortals, hungrily welcoming 
those who had lost their way, and offering great prom- 
ises and boons to hearts easily swayed. These poison- 
ous seeds found fertile ground in the hearts of mortals 
obsessed with the unlimited power of the arcane. With 
a legion of the damned behind them, the Betrayer Gods 
soon made their presence known to the world with an 
assault on Vasselheim itself. 

Though much of the city was reduced to rubble, Vas- 
selheim weathered the initial assault, saved by the inter- 
vention of the Prime Deities themselves, who descended 
to trade blows with their former brethren. The battle 
between divinity and mortals, between heroes and 
demons, raged ceaselessly for twenty days and nights 
until the dark forces, their surprise attack thwarted, 
were finally forced to retreat. 

Evil was repulsed momentarily, but with the revela- 
tion of such a terrible foe, a dangerous arcane arms 
race began. Trust was shattered indefinitely: if mortals 
could fall under the sway of the Betrayer Gods, who 
was an ally? If ruin like this could be unleashed under 
the watchful eyes of the gods, how were they relevant? 
Not trusting any but themselves, the self-interested and 


THe CaLamity 


singular humans reforged their instruments of cele- 
bration into instruments of incredible power—artifacts 
that could be wielded by worthy heroes. The dwarves’ 
fascination with rock and earth turned toward isolation 
as they burrowed deeper into the mountains, using their 
divine gifts to animate legions of autonomous golems 

to protect their ancestral halls. Elves used their under- 
standing of creation’s beauty and intricacies to weave 
spells of unimaginable destructive force, the likes of 
which Exandria had never seen before. 

For the first time since the Primordials were de- 
stroyed, the focus of magic was warfare. The gods them- 
selves agreed to join their children on the field of battle, 
descending from the heavens to take up arms once more 
for the war now referred to as the Calamity. 


THE CALAMITY 


The battlefields of the catastrophic showdowns of the 
Calamity were scattered across Exandria, butit was 
Wynandir that suffered the full destructive powers of 
the gods. Divided by the Ashkeeper Peaks, the fields of 
Wynandir were once home to several powerful ruling 
houses, squabbling over their own goals before being 
drawn into either side of the conflict of the gods, or 
abstaining for their own reasons. The immensity of 
power wielded by the Prime Deities and Betrayer Gods 
was enough to wound the landscape for eons, and the 
irresponsible use of arcane knowledge developed by the 
mortals ensured the ruin of their own legacy. 


Little record remains of the terrible war, but its effects 
are still felt today. The sheer magnitude of the energies 
unleashed in the ensuing battles by gods and mortals 
alike was enough to fray the boundaries holding back 
the elemental chaos, spilling unbridled destruction into 
the world. It completely rearranged the known flow of 
magical ley energy across Exandria. The dark kingdom 
of Ghor Dranas was reduced to ash, but the conflict 
devastated Exandria’s peoples, razing entire cities and 
inspiring in many a desire to flee from this plane of ex- 
istence entirely. So great was the loss of life during the 
war that historians believe no more than a third of Exan- 
dria’s population survived, leaving only one remaining 
bastion of civilization: the Dawn City, Vasselheim. 

The worldentered a long, dark period of regrowth. 
The Betrayer Gods were banished once more to their 
realms of deception and hate, but the threat of their 
return weighed heavily on the world. The Prime Dei- 
ties felt that their involvement in mortal conflict was to 
blame for the cataclysmic damage inflicted on Exandria. 
They knew that while the divine gateways were left 
open, the prison planes that held the banished Betrayers 
would remain imperfect and temporary. 

Thus, hoping to ensure that such ruin would not be- 
fall Exandria again, they left their children to fend for 
themselves. The Creators returned to their own realms, 
dragging both Betrayer and abomination with them and 
sealing the pathways to the mortal realm behind them 
with the Divine Gate. Only in this way could they pre- 
vent their corrupted brethren ffom physically returning 


CHAPTER 1 | STORY OF WILDEMOUNT 


14 


to the material plane. Sadly, for the Prime Deities, this 
action also carried with it a self-imposed sentence of 
exile. The Creators would henceforth never be allowed 
to visit their creation. 

The disappearance of the gods is known by many 
names: the Second Spark for those who study the ar- 
cane, and the Penance for those who seek closeness 
to their gods. The most common name for this time of 
warfare and divine separation is the Divergence, and it 
marked the end of the Age of Arcanum. 

Much time has passed since, and the world has been 
reborn once again. The gods still influence and guide 
from beyond the Divine Gate, bestowing knowledge and 
power on their worshipers, but the path of mortals is 
now their own to make. New cities, kingdoms, and cul- 
tures have retaken the world, building over the ashes of 
the old. New songs fill the air, and the hope of a brighter 
future drives people day after day, while buried ruins 
and ancient relics remind all people of a darker time of 
mistakes that should never be repeated. 


WILDEMOUNT AFTER THE 
CALAMITY 


In the wake of the vast destruction of the Calamity and 
the exile of the pantheon in the Divergence, the sur- 
vivors began to emerge from the ash and shadows to 
reclaim and rebuild Exandria. Across the continents, 
many took the pieces of their cultures and sought a 
place to forge a new age. This tome focuses on the 
rebirth of the deeply scarred land now known as 
Wildemount, the site of the most terrible conflicts of 
the Calamity, where the echoes of those deadly battles 
linger to this day. 


IN THE WAKE OF THE GODS 


After the Calamity, the lands of Wildemount became 
wild and perilous, filled with monstrosities and beasts 
that prowled its broken fields and shattered mountains. 
The land’s new denizens reclaimed the newly untamed 
realm, hunting any mortals not clever enough to hide. 
The masterless creations of the Betrayer Gods ruled 
their own territories, establishing themselves as a 

new pantheon. 

As the dust settled, surviving mortals grasped at what 
they could from their bygone lives and hid away in fear 
of what would come next. Those of faith dealt with their 
sense of failure and abandonment, while enlightened 
scribes mourned the loss of their research and the great 
magical secrets that had enabled the previous age to 
rise to such prominence. 

Others picked up what they could from the ruins 
and chose to start anew, hoping that their descendants 
would learn from their mistakes. Over those early centu- 
ries, the scattered survivors fought back the terrors that 
stalked the abandoned lands of Wildemount, continuing 
to endure and build new societies, civilizations that 
eventually reclaimed Wildemount and brought the world 
to this modern age. 


CHAPTER 1 | STORY OF WILDEMOUNT 


WESTERN WYNANDIR 


The lands of Western Wynandir were the epicenter of 
the Calamity’s destruction. Rocky ranges of mountains 
were sundered, entire landscapes burned, and hovering 
seats of power crashed down from the sky, their floating 
cities consumed beneath the hungry earth. 


GRIMGOLIR 

The dwarven clan of Grimgol that once helped hold the 
center of the Ashkeeper Peaks was nearly wiped out 
during the Calamity. The surviving families and war- 
riors burrowed deep beneath the surface of Exandria to 
wait out the chaos. Collapsing nearly every established 
tunnel used in the wars above, the clan found them- 
selves cut off from the rest of Exandria. For centuries, 
the dwarves of Clan Grimgol endured the darkness 
alone, defending against the dregs of the Betrayer Gods’ 
forces and adapting themselves into a hardy and stal- 
wart people. 

Half-remembered tales and myths of their forgotten 
history, mingled with worship of Moradin, began to stir 
an eagerness to return to their ancestral home and build 
anew. With new purpose, they carved their way back 
toward the surface, only to find the mountains of their 
home reduced to dust and pebbles. 

Not easily dissuaded, the dwarves returned to the 
surface for the first time in generations, finding the 
once-ruined world now recovering with renewed life 
and color. The resilient clan made their way north along 
the Brokenveil Bluffs and found a massive mountain to 
house their new city. They built their stronghold into 
this monolith among the Dunrock Mountains, and gave 
their new home the name of Grimgolir. 


RISE OF THE JULOUS DOMINION 

In the Marrow Valley, the numerous decades following 
the Divergence left the landscape blackened and inhos- 
pitable. The remaining people struggled for food and 
shelter as they wandered the rocky hills for centuries, 
avoiding the colder weather of the north. Nomadic 
sects of humans and halflings defended themselves 
against the hungry beasts and lingering evils threaten- 
ing their homesteads, and fought with each other over 
fertile land. 

Small civilizations began to form amid the chaos, but 
it wasn’t until the central township of Zadash was estab- 
lished as a safe outpost that the unification of the Mar- 
row Valley began. Helmed by the Julous family, suppos- 
edly of noble blood from before the Calamity, a guarded 
community with an organized military force was built in 
the center of the valley around four hundred years ago. 
It became both a haven for the struggling masses and a 
center for agricultural expansion. 

Increasing their strength with each generation, this 
movement guided by the Julous family became known as 
the Julous Dominion, stretching across the south end of 
Western Wynandir. Not all agreed to join the Julous Do- 
minion, however. Some outliers rejected the Julous in- 
terests, founding their own village of Kamordah on the 
boiling earth of the hills in the southwest Marrow Val- 
ley. In time, the people of Kamordah came to worship a 


being of primordial fire that lives beneath the mountains 
and speaks to them in dreams and visions. 


FOUNDING OF THE DWENDALIAN EMPIRE 

In the frigid fields north of the Marrow Valley, the survi- 
vors of the Arcanum city of Zemniaz scraped by in the 
snow forcenturies, clutching their surviving scrolls and 
fragments of cultural history. They established the dour 
outposts of Icehaven and Yrrosa, but it wasn’t until the 
Zemnian people wandered east to the Pearlbow Wilder- 
ness that they found fields that were fertile enough to 
nurture a new society. 

Founded atop the ruins of an ancient temple to the 
Dawn Father, the city of Rexxentrum rose to become the 
hub of Zemnian culture. Now that the Zemnian people 
no longer had to struggle for survival amid the harsh 
elements, their leaders argued over how to establish a 
centralized government. Some wished for a republic, 
while others sought a theocracy under the priests that 
shepherded the people into this new age. Eckhardt 
Dwendal, a well-respected merchant and tremendous 
force behind the development of Rexxentrum, wished to 
institute a monarchy and place his son Manfried on the 
throne. Debate spun wildly for over three years, while 
Eckhardt privately made deals with the heads of the 
emerging guilds, using promises or blackmail to secure 
their cooperation. With the resounding support of the 
flourishing guild heads, the throne was established. In 
the year 539 of the post-Divergence era, Manfried be- 
came the first emperor of the Dwendalian Empire. 


THE MARROW WAR 

It wasn’t long before the expanding borders of the 
Dwendalian Empire began to push up against the grow- 
ing Julous Dominion. An agreement was brokered to 
avoid conflict as long as favorable trade could be estab- 
lished and maintained. Even so, the resource-rich center 
of Western Wynandir was split between the two states, 
with both factions eager to discover the other’s weak- 
nesses. Rumors of the discovery of a massive platinum 
mine within the Julous Dominion further increased the 
empire’s desire to conquer their neighbor. 

At this time, religious leaders throughout the Dwen- 
dalian Empire rebelled against the emperor’s religious 
restrictions. After his coronation, Emperor Manfried 
Dwendal enacted laws limiting worship and prayer to 
subjects concerning the power, profit, and expansion of 
the empire. In the year 544 PD, internal strife and insur- 
gent action turned bloody when the zealous leaders of 
varying faiths attempted, and failed, to usurp the throne 
for their council. An angered Emperor Manfried Dwen- 
dal had the rebellious priests executed—an event that 
came to be known as the Admonition. 

The emperor spoke of abolishing all worship within 
his boundaries. This caused further uproar among the 
populace, but then Emperor Manfried’s spies discov- 
ered that the seeds of the uprising had been sown by 
Julous interests. Publicly exposing the plot, the emperor 
outlawed only select faiths that he felt threatened civ- 
ilized life. He redirected much of the people’s fury by 
also proclaiming the Julous Dominion an enemy of the 


CHAPTER 1 | STORY OF WILDEMOUNT 


empire later that year and declaring war on the neigh- 
boring nation. 

Meanwhile, the Julous Dominion was dealing with the 
refusal of the outlying villages near Kamordah to accept 
their rule in this time of brewing hostility. They eventu- 
ally drove the independent villagers back into the Cyrios 
Mountains, just in time to hear the horns of war blaring 
from the empire to the north. The violent conflict known 
as the Marrow War lasted over sixteen months and cost 
the lives of many soldiers and innocents on both sides of 
the Marrow Valley. 

The Julous Dominion lacked the unified military force 
of the empire. When a major military push left the cap- 
ital city of Zadash occupied by the empire, Baron Inock 
Julous and Baroness Tessandra Julous met with Em- 
peror Manfried to negotiate a peace. During this meet- 
ing, the baron and baroness were unceremoniously ex- 
ecuted. Their bodies were displayed publicly along with 
the narrative that they had attempted an assassination 
on the emperor during the peace talks. Disheartened 
and bereft of leadership, the Julous Dominion immedi- 
ately came to an end, as did the war. 

To prove his benevolence to the people of the newly 
conquered Julous Dominion, and to help avoid future 
uprisings, Emperor Manfried declared that all citizens 
of the dominion would keep their lands and homesteads. 
No soldiers would stand trial or be punished for their 
previous allegiance. Life would continue as it had, ex- 
cept for the implementation of imperial taxes, laws, and 
oversight across the valley under the new emperor. Out- 
lawed religious iconography was destroyed, crops and 
goods were redistributed according to the needs of the 
empire, and life slowly returned to normal for the Zem- 
nian people. 


A KING Is CROWNED 

With citizens of the former Julous Dominion tense 
beneath their new rule and a growing sentiment of 
frustration with imperial leadership building, Emperor 
Manfried sought a way to reform the nation under his 
banner. The propagandist minds who fought the social 
war with the Julous Dominion recommended a shift in 
public image and title, one that could command more 
respect within Western Wynandir while casting aside 
the oppressive connotations of the title of emperor. 
Still riding high on the victory against the Dominion, 
Emperor Manfried harkened back to the halcyon lore 
of the Age of Arcanum, recalling the beloved kings and 
queens of old. It was decided that the people would no 
longer have an emperor, but a king. Crowning himself 
the first of the line of Dwendalian kings, King Manfried 
insisted on maintaining the now-ominous national title 
of the Dwendalian Empire, famously proclaiming, “I am 
the Dwendalian king to my people, beloved and open to 
their wishes. To our enemies, we remain resolute and 
unstoppable. We are the Dwendalian Empire.” 


THE EVE OF CRIMSON MIDNIGHT 

Not a quarter century after the Marrow War ended and 
the line of kings was established, a smaller, internal 
conflict rocked the capital city of Rexxentrum. A number 
of noble houses with a strong history of studying arcane 


CHAPTER 1 | STORY OF WILDEMOUNT 


pursuits began to compete with other high-born magic 
practitioners from the Julous Dominion. Throughout 
the lands of the newly expanded empire, these houses 
escalated their subterfuge and espionage against one 
another, until the rivalry finally erupted into an all-out 
magical conflict in the streets of the capital itself. 

The events of the Eve of Crimson Midnight destroyed 
numerous buildings and maimed a number of innocents 
caught in the crossfire. The struggle ended with all 
involved shackled and brought before the king. After 
days of deliberation, an agreement was drawn up that 
would absolve those involved of the usual punishment 
in exchange for direct subservience to the Crown and 
the goals of the empire. Establishing themselves as the 
Cerberus Assembly, this council of mages became a 
powerful tool for the empire to maintain its position as 
the dominant force of Wildemount. 


MODERN DWENDALIAN EMPIRE 

For three hundred years, the empire has expanded 

and prospered under the rule of the Dwendalian line 

of kings. King Alfwin Dwendal increased the empire’s 
military power by establishing the stronghold of Blade- 
garden and assimilating Grimgolir into the empire, 
seeking to hold back the savage creatures of Xhorhas. 
King Theoderich Dwendal’s benevolent nature bro- 
kered the partnership with the Clovis Concord of the 
Menagerie Coast without bloodshed and ushered in new 
opportunities for trade with the rest of Exandria. King 
Willamar Dwendal established the initial prominence of 
House Truscan and granted them oversight of the Trus- 
can Vale, to the displeasure of the other noble houses. 

Other kings have come and gone, but few have made 
as immediate and lasting a mark as King Bertrand 
Dwendal. On assuming the throne in 790 PD, King 
Bertrand immediately demonstrated his love of specta- 
cle and social manipulation by instituting town criers 
across the empire to disseminate Crown-approved 
messages. With the aid of Master Ikithon Trent of the 
Cerberus Assembly, he captured the imagination of the 
masses with well-crafted tales of his deeds, proclaimed 
by the criers in every town square. 

Seeking to bury any dissent against the Crown, King 
Dwendal began to use the empire’s spy network to seek 
out sources of unrest in the public and punish those 
who sowed thoughts of rebellion. Public holidays and 
celebrations were given greater funding to quell the 
masses and distract the people from the increase in tax- 
ation implemented across the valley. This allowed King 
Bertrand Dwendal to rise in popularity while also ruling 
with a far more ruthless and self-serving agenda than 
most kings before him. 

King Bertrand maintains the isolationist world view of 
his predecessors, even in times of need. By ignoring po- 
litical alliances from distant nations, preventing the con- 
struction of any skyship docks within the empire, and ig- 
noring calls for aid—such as the fight against the rising 
threat of Vecna two decades before—the King believes 
he has made the empire stronger than it’s ever been. 

However, the king’s focus on isolationism fades as 
tensions with Xhorhas grow. Worry about his legacy 
mingles with the new and deadly threat of the Kryn 


Dynasty, now emboldened and pushing into his king- 
dom with strange magics and dangerous warriors. 
He mistrusts the very Cerberus Assembly that grants 
him so much influence and arcane might to combat 
the ever-darker world that barks at the borders of the 
empire. Public approval of his rule wanes with growing 
economic disparity, and the whisper of Myriad power 
returning under his nose only heightens his paranoia. 
When the Kryn orchestrated an attack on the Halls of 
Erudition in Zadash, the Cerberus Assembly pushed for 
a display of military power to rally the people and bring 
unity to the national identity of the empire. The king de- 
clared war on the Kryn Dynasty and the people of Xhor- 
has, embroiling the region in this new full-scale conflict, 
with the hope that, as history has proven, people are 
easier to unite against a common enemy. 


THE MENAGERIE COAST 


While destruction came to the farthest reaches of the 


world during the divine conflicts of the Calamity, the 
islands of the Lucidian Ocean off the western coast of 
Wildemount thought they might fare better than most. 
But though they were far removed from the central fury 
of the magics unleashed in the final battles, the region’s 
civilizations were instead wiped out by massive floods. 
Immense tidal surges left the coast drowned and empty, 
the islands consumed by the raging ocean, leaving be- 
hind only the most accomplished of sailors. Eventually, 
the waters settled once more, and nature swiftly re- 
claimed the lands with lush green jungles. 


Uk’OTOA ASSAULTS UNWELCOME SHIPS ON THE LUCIDIAN OCEAN. 


THE Ki’ NAU 

The few scattered survivors of the floods found shelter 
among the higher jungles of the Swavain Islands, gifted 
with the bounty of a more plentiful and tropical environ- 
ment. These seafaring people rebuilt among the islands 
and took the name Ki’Nau, meaning “the Water Chil- 
dren” in their language of Naush. Though the terrible 
floods of the Calamity had passed, the deadly seas and 
flourishing horrors of the wilds were still a persistent 
threat to the Ki’Nau. Each generation struggled to sur- 
vive the elements that sunk their boats and the preda- 
tors of the jungles and ocean depths. 

Over time, an older mind began to call from the wa- 
ters and entered their dreams. This powerful being, a 
leviathan creation abandoned by his creator Zehir in 
the Divergence, called himself Uk’otoa. He spoke of his 
divinity and promised protection to the Ki’Nau people 
in exchange for their worship. The Ki’Nau accepted 
the persuasive entity as an ally and protector, allowing 
Uk’otoa to rise up as the guardian of the islands and 
help the Ki’Nau become a proud society of warriors, es- 
tablishing dominance over the region for centuries. 


THE MARQUESIAN ALLIANCE 

Around the year 400 PD, an exploration vessel from the 
distant land of Marquet was nearing the end of its provi- 
sions when it reached the Swavain Islands. Discovered 
and captured by the ever-watchful Ki Nau, the desperate 
explorers made trade offerings of foreign gold, spices, 
and fine silks. This diplomatic approach won over the 


leaders of the Ki’Nau, and an alliance was made with 
the Marquesian travelers to return with trade goods 
and establish a Marquesian outpost, which was to be 
named Damali. 

During this time, a cruel seafaring culture called 
the Vukan discovered the Ki’Nau and coveted their 
lush homesteads and rich, sea-gathered jewelry. These 
Vukan began a series of coordinated assaults on the 
Ki’'Nau, killing and kidnapping a number of them under 
the shadow of night. The Marquesian guilds who had 
sent the exploration ship agreed to offer naval support 
to combat these attacks, but it was Uk’otoa whose fury 
ultimately annihilated the Vukan at their home villages 
and erased them from Exandria. 

Having lost a portion of their fleet in these fights, the 
surviving Marquesian naval ships remained to build 
small settlements along the coast to aid in their trade 
with the Ki’Nau. The Ki’Nau leader Tauan kept a tenta- 
tive peace with the foreign sailors, but Uk’otoa wanted 
to dominate the new arrivals who refused to renounce 
their old gods and bow to him. These tensions came to 
a head when a secret sect of Marquesian worshipers of 
the Cloaked Serpent Zehir were given a task by their 
enraged god from beyond the Divine Gate: to destroy 
Uk’otoa for his insolence. With the aid of a powerful cult 
leader within an archeological guild known as the Al- 
legiance of Allsight, a series of temples built to Uk’otoa 
were corrupted with Zehir’s influence and used to seal 
Uk’otoa deep beneath the rock of the ocean floor, rob- 
bing the Ki’Nau of their patron. 


BIRTH OF THE CLOVIS CONCORD 

Atthis time, the city of Ank’Harel in Marquet had just 
named the mysterious J’mon Sa Ord as their new em- 
peror. In the transition, the Marquesian colonists now 
living along the coast demanded independence from 
Marquet to begin building their own society and iden- 
tity alongside the Ki’Nau. Ord eventually accepted the 
request, and the emancipated Marquesians allied them- 
selves with the Ki’Nau to build a new civilization. Over 
the following centuries, numerous port towns sprung up 
and grew into city states, trade routes expanded along 
what is now known as the Menagerie Coast, and the 
emerging guilds consolidated enough power to become 
the region’s ruling class: the Clovis Concord. 

The concord works together to keep the surrounding 
Lucidian Ocean under their watch and rule, setting 
trade laws and guiding the fortunes of those who sail 
on the open waters. The blend of cultures that forms 
the Menagerie Coast creates a diverse community 
where the arts are lauded and coin is king. However, 
the shadow of the Myriad syndicate continues to infil- 
trate the streets, while the pirate alliance known as the 
Revelry has risen to harry the trade routes and rebel 
against the concord. Tensions are further escalated by 
the threat of expanding war to the northeast between 
the Dwendalian Empire and the Kryn Dynasty. 


THE GREYING WILDLANDS 


The fierce powers released in the conflicts of the Calam- 


ity tore through the heavily forested region now known 
as the Greying Wildlands, setting ablaze a slow-burning 


CHAPTER 1 | STORY OF WILDEMOUNT 


arcane forest fire that smoldered for nearly a century, 
burning through the hearty trees of the region like a 
plague of embers. The northern realm was left deso- 
late, ashes and dirt blown into dust and sand as the 

chill northern winds transformed the rolling hills into 

a desert of ice and pebbles. Fleeing remnants of the 
Grimgol dwarves delved into the snow-hooded Flotket 
Alps, many freezing to death in the wind-battered val- 
leys before finding safety in the natural caverns hiding 
deep in the mountain range. Within these icy depths, the 
dwarves cultivated fiery hearths and brought warmth to 
the heart of the mountain, establishing the new dwarven 
city of Uthodurn. 


MOLAESMYR 

Amid the charred remains of the burning forest that 
filled the sky with smoke for over a hundred years, one 
section of the woods defied the flames and held against 
the embers that battered it. This small patch of idyllic 
green endured, a sanctuary for the surviving wood elves 
that held fast and hoped for a miracle. Sensing that the 
blessings of Melora and Corellon had kept the heart 

of this forest alive until the fires burned out, the elves 
began to build anew home among the ancient trees 
and groves. 

This region became the Veluthil Forest, and from this 
verdant sanctuary, the elves would build the stunningly 
beautiful city of Molaesmyr. From the surrounding 
ashes, the fey magics of Veluthil brought forth new life 
and leaf, expanding the boundaries of the forest over 
centuries to eventually reclaim much of the Wildlands. 
Druidic forces and powerful fey enchantments were laid 
throughout the twisting paths of the forest to protect the 
elves of Molaesmyr as they expanded their towering city, 
the central trees reaching magically enhanced heights 
as homes and halls extended high into the boughs. The 
elven city stood as the height of reborn civilization on 
Wildemount. 


THE CORRUPTION 

It is still unclear what triggered the event. Whether 
some knowledge-hungry researcher or arrogant sor- 
cerer was delving in forgotten vaults between the 
planes, or some terrible power lying dormant beneath 
the forest was awakened, the source of the corruption 
is unknown. What is known is that in the year 585 PD, 
suddenly and without warning, a wave of purple-gray 
shadow rapidly crept from the center of Molaesmyr to 
engulf the entire city. 

Many elves choked and died on toxic fumes, while 
others were twisted and driven mad, transforming into 
terrifying fey abominations. Trees bent and warped, 
leaves withered and turned asickly purple, and strange, 
unknown bramble growths reclaimed the forest floor. 
This corruption slowly spread throughout the entire 
Veluthil Forest, decimating the home of the elves. Some 
survivors fled as fast as they could to the northwest, 
across the Frigid Depths, eventually settling the town- 
ship of Bysaes Tyl in the Pearlbow Wilderness. Others 
escaped to the northeast, seeking refuge in the Flotket 
Alps, freezing in the snowy mountains until they stum- 
bled on the dwarves of Uthodurn. 


me A 


~~ 


Taking pity on the survivors, the dwarves took in 
the elven refugees and offered them a home. This act 
of kindness changed the course of Uthodurn’s history, 
eventually forming a unique union of dwarven and elven 
culture that has endured for nearly three centuries. 
Craftsmanship within Uthodurn is second to none, but 
nothing is traded beyond the borders of the city, aside 
from the odd stolen artifact. Small excavation parties 
are often sent to the corrupted Veluthil Forest—now 
called the Savalirwood—to search the ruins of Molaes- 
myr, attempting to piece together what caused the cor- 
ruption and determine if the forest can be recovered. 

Unfortunately, a township of criminals and outlaws 
has sprung up on the southern edge of the Savalirwood, 
just beyond the Dwendalian Empire. In addition to the 
dangerous denizens of this wretched thicket, which is 
known as Shadycreek Run, there are numerous raiders 
and thieves seeking relics from the ruins of the forest, 
escalating conflict throughout the region. 


EASTERN WYNANDIR 


The once thickly forested landscape of Xhorhas was 
the site of the final battleground of the Calamity. It was 
subjugated to such intense destruction at the hands 

of the warring gods that when the dust of the Diver- 
gence cleared, Eastern Wynandir was naught but a 
cracked, ashen wasteland. Ghor Dranas, the citadel of 
the Betrayer Gods, lay broken, cursed, and abandoned, 
while lingering demons and monstrosities fled to the 
surrounding jagged cliffs and blackened marshlands. 


IN THE RUINS OF GHOR DRANAS, DROW FACE THE SUN FOR THE FIRST TIME. a rs yen 


Discarded abominations seeped from beneath the ru- 
ined earth of Xhorhas’s eastern shores, climbing past 
the Penumbra Range where the forgotten creations of 
the Betrayers were locked away. 

Throughout this wasteland, scattered bands of aim- 
less men, beasts, and goblinkin battled for shelter and 
sustenance. These tribes were confined to their desolate 
home by the Ki’Nau leviathan who guarded the waters 
past the southern shores and the surviving dwarves of 
Grimgolir, who prevented any Xhorhasians from moving 
farther west. The nomadic, warring clans fought against 
the harsh conditions of the valley for centuries, only able 
to develop small bastions of civilization within the harsh 
wilderness. 


THE Kryn DYNASTY 
Beneath the ruins of Ghor Dranas, a group of scaveng- 
ing drow turned from Lolth, their primary deity for cen- 
turies, finding renewed faith in an esoteric entity they 
called the Luxon. Guided by the light of their new deity, 
the drow survived their ascent from deep within the 
Underdark and reclaimed the halls of Ghor Dranas for 
themselves, naming their new home Rosohna, or “Re- 
birth.” The leading house of Kryn helped build a new na- 
tion of dark elves who sought the surface as part of their 
worship, and slowly began to reach out to the nearby 
nomads to unite under the light of the Luxon. 

As the first nation of post-Calamity Xhorhas, the 
Kryn Dynasty worked to expand its reach throughout 
the wasteland and bring unity to the ravaging hordes. 


CHAPTER 1 | STORY OF WILDEMOUNT 


19 


20 


Dormant evils continued to rise from beneath the 
marshes and badlands of Xhorhas, spreading chaos 
and battling with the warriors who called the desolate 
valley their home. The struggle to convert the denizens 
of Eastern Wynandir to the light of the Luxon continues 
to this day, while the agents of Lolth seek to spite and 
destroy her once-chosen for their arrogance. 

Meanwhile, the dragonborn have begun to reach out 
to Exandria’s sprawling political world, wishing to ex- 
change knowledge and trade their gold and jewels for 
powerful magics to better their standing. 


DRACONIA 

After the Calamity, a shard of the destroyed dragonkin 
city of Kethesk came to rest within the southern 
Dreemoth Ravine. The surviving dragonborn took ad- 
vantage of the ravine’s defensible layout to build a new 
city and made an alliance with the cave-dwelling, indig- 
enous dragonborn they called ravenites, beginning the 
reformation of civilized dragonborn society. 

With the ravenites as a labor force, the dragonborn 
harvested the massive brumestone crystals that had 
once held their city aloft, and the new city of Draco- 
nia began to take shape as a series of floating islands 
within the heart of the chasm. Calling themselves dra- 
conbloods, they spent hundreds of years slowly recon- 
structing their nation in seclusion, focusing entirely on 
their own enlightenment and pursuits. They eventually 
enslaved the ravenites to mine the ravine’s gold and 
gemstones, and to ensure draconblood dominance in 
the region, leaving their minds free to focus on internal 
politics and arcane advancement. 


THE CHROMA CONCLAVE 

In the year 815 PD, an unexpected assault on Draconia 
came in the form of a group of ancient chromatic drag- 
ons calling themselves the Chroma Conclave. The 
mighty city of Draconia was immediately destroyed and 
left to crumble in the Dreemoth Ravine. A powerful 
white dragon called Vorugal, the Frigid Doom, claimed 
the ravine as its new domain, while the rest of the drag- 
ons sought conquest elsewhere in Exandria. These 
events shook the nations of Wildemount, sending the 
Clovis Concord and the Dwendalian Empire into a state 
of alert, while the Kryn Dynasty temporarily withdrew 
to Rosohna, fearing another attack. 

As time passed, Vorugal and the entire Chroma Con- 
clave were slain and the danger seemed to have dissi- 
pated. With Draconia sundered, the no-longer enslaved 
ravenites greatly outnumbered their previous masters; 
they claimed their freedom and punished the surviving 
draconbloods. A handful of draconian nobles fled to the 
Menagerie Coast or the Dwendalian Empire to seek 
asylum, leaving the ravenites to rebuild Wildemount 
dragonborn society on the ruins of their oppressors. 


THE WAR OF THE ASH AND LIGHT 

In the past century, the Dwendalian Empire has clashed 
with the Kryn Dynasty. Small skirmishes and slain 
soldiers on both sides deter expansion beyond the Ash- 
keeper Peaks, with each faction keeping a close eye on 
the other. 


CHAPTER 1 | STORY OF WILDEMOUNT 


Recently, the empire's interest in growing Kryn influ- 
ence has led to increasing curiosity about the source of 
the Kryn’s mysterious arcane capabilities. Dwendalian 
spies successfully stole two of four artifacts known as 
“beacons,” which seemed to be powerful sources of 
the unique magical energy called dunamis. The Bright 
Queen Leylas Kryn began an initiative steal back the 
beacons and assault Dwendalian strongholds until 
these sacred relics are returned. Now, in 835 PD, the 
resulting skirmishes have escalated into all-out war. A 
fifth beacon has been recently uncovered by the Cerbe- 
rus Assembly, and the violence threatens to grow past 
the Ashkeeper Peaks and embroil other denizens of 
Wildemount in the conflict. 


PANTHEON OF EXANDRIA 


The Divine Gate, established during the Divergence, is 
a powerful barrier between the Material Plane and the 
divine realms. The Divine Gate sealed away both the Be- 
trayer Gods and the Prime Deities within their respec- 
tive domains in hopes of salvaging the new age and pre- 
venting another Calamity. If the Divine Gate were to be 
destroyed by the unanimous effort of the Prime Deities, 
all powers would be unleashed, threatening armaged- 
don. Thus, the gods patiently watch their creations from 
beyond the veil, lending what small power they can send 
through the gate to aid the goals of their faithful. In the 
absence of the gods, lesser entities seek to gain power 
and influence, making pacts with mortals and offering 
their own gifts in exchange for favor, worship, or deeds 
donein their name. 

The following gods, patrons, and titles are recom- 
mended as the existing pantheon, but they are only a 
recommendation. You are welcome to alter, supplement, 
or completely change the gods in your Wildemount cam- 
paign to fit your needs. The domains and pacts listed are 
the likely choices for clerics, warlocks, and followers of 
each entity, but these are not the only options, and many 
other domains can be attributed to your preferred deity. 
Talk with your DM about how best to dress your domain 
or pact choice to fit within the philosophies and com- 
mandments of your patron deity. 


PRIME DEITIES 


The circle of Prime Deities includes the leaders and 
luminary creators that battled the Primordials and 
instigated the Founding, forging the mortal races of Ex- 
andria. They represent a spectrum of light, protection, 
love, death, and all other facets of freedom and life in 
the world. While some gods may disagree and squabble, 
they exist in a subtle alliance to maintain the sanctity of 
life and their respective creations. 


AVANDRA, THE CHANGE BRINGER 

Also known as “She Who Makes the Path,” Avandra 
champions freedom, travel, trade, and adventure across 
the lands. Her will heralds open frontiers, and her call 
beckons her followers to discover that which awaits 
them beyond the known. There are few urban temples 
dedicated to the Change Bringer, but her shrines are 
often found along well-traveled roads and off the beaten 


path. Her worship is common among merchants, free 
spirits, and adventurers, and tavern cheers celebrate her 
as a bringer of luck and fortune. 

Avandra calls no domain in the planes her residence, 
instead eternally wandering through the Outer Planes 
where serenity can be found, distantly watching over the 
potential of mortals. 

Depiction. The Change Bringer is often depicted as a 
young woman of dark complexion and long, light brown 
hair that cascades to form the road left behind her. Most 
art shows her in constant motion, ever leading into 
the unknown. 

Holy Day. Avandra’s holy day, called New Dawn, takes 
place on the first day of the first month, when the old 
year gives way to the new. On the Menagerie Coast, peo- 
ple celebrate by having a feast on the shore at dusk to 
watch the sunset. They feast and discuss their hopes for 
the new year until the sun rises. 


COMMANDMENTS OF AVANDRA 

e Luck favors the bold. Your fate is yourownto grasp, and 
to do so is to have the Change Bringer behind you. 

e Changeis inevitable. The righteous can ensure that such 
change is for the better. 

e Rise against tyranny. Fight for the freedom of yourself and 
others when you can, and inspire others to fight when 
you cannot. 


PRIME DEITIES 


Deity Alignment Province 

Avandra (ag, Change, freedom, luck 
Bahamut LG Honor, justice 

Corellon CG Art, beauty, elves 

Erathis LN Civilization, law, peace 
foun N Knowledge, learning, teaching 
Kord CN Battle, competition, storms 
Melora N Seas, wilderness 

Moradin LG Craft, creation 

Pelor NG Healing, sun 

Raei NG Atonement, compassion 
The Raven Queen LN Death, fate, winter 
Sehanine CG Illusion, moonlight, night 


* The Order domain appears in Guildmaster’s Guide to Ravnica. 


*# The Arcana domain appears in Sword Coast Adventurer’s Guide. 


BAHAMUT, THE PLATINUM DRAGON 
The pillar of justice, protection, nobility, and honor, 


Bahamut is a beacon to paladins of order and good, and 
is revered by most metallic dragons as the first of their 


kind. The crest of the Platinum Dragon adorns many 


halls of high leadership and justice, invoking his will in 
all matters of justice. To follow him is to look after those 


who cannot look after themselves. 


When not wandering the Outer Planes, Bahamut re- 


sides within his magnificent, glittering palace of gold, 
platinum, and mithril hidden among the winds of the 
Seven Heavens of Celestia. 


Depiction. The Platinum Dragon is often seen embla- 
zoned on shields and armor, both functional and deco- 


rative, in the form of a brilliant dragon head in profile. 
Temples and works of art depict a massive, glittering 


dragon with vibrant platinum scales and seemingly end- 


less wingspan. 


Holy Day. Bahamut’s holy day is called Embertide, 


and is celebrated on the fifth day of Duscar. This is a day 


of remembrance, solemnity, and respect for those who 
have fallen in the defense of others. 


COMMANDMENTS OF BAHAMUT 

e Stand as a paragon of honor and justice. 

« Smite evil wherever it is found, yet show compassion to 
those who have strayed from the path of righteousness. 

+ Defend the weak, bring freedom to the persecuted, and 
protect the ideals of justice and order. 


Suggested Domains 
Nature, Trickery 


Life, Order,* War 
Arcana,** Light 


Knowledge, Order* 
Arcana,** Knowledge 
Tempest, War 

Life, Nature, Tempest 
Forge,***** Knowledge, War 
Life, Light, Nature 

Life, Light 


Death, Grave**** 


Arcana,** Nature, Trickery 


ye The Forge and Grave domains appear in Xanathar’s Guide to Everything. 


CHAPTER 1 | STORY OF WILDEMOUNT 


Common Symbol 

Woman’s profile embossed on a 
gold coin or pendant 

Silver dragon’s head in profile 
Two crescent moons facing each 
other atop a four-pointed star 
Double-headed axe inset with a 
pattern of scales 

Pair of open eyes crowned with a 
third open eye 

Four bolts of lightning radiating 
from the center of a shield 
Wreath of grass and grain affixed 
to a crook 

Hammer with ends carved in the 
likeness of dwarven heads 
Bright, eight-pointed star 
Humanoid, feminine phoenix 
White, humanoid mask framed in 
black feathers 

Crescent moon turned upward, 
strung like a bow 


2i 


22 


Bavamurt, 
THE PLATINUM DRAGON 


CORELLON, 
THE ARCH HEART 


AVANDRA, 
THE CHANGE BRINGER 


Eratuis, 
THE Law Bearer 


CORELLON, THE ARCH HEART 

Guardian of spring, beauty, and the arts, Corellon is 
the patron of arcane magic and the fey. The Founding 
inspired them to wander the twisted lands, seeding 
them with the first arcane magics and raising the most 
ancient of forests. It was by the Arch Heart’s hand that 
the first elves wandered from the Feywild, and for this 
reason they are considered the Mother and Father of 
all elves. Those who seek art in all their work, whether 
magical or mundane, often worship at the altar of Corel- 
lon. They loathe the Spider Queen and her priestesses 
for leading the drow astray. 

Corellon watches the business of mortals and gods 
from within the palace of Crescent Grove in the beau- 
tiful realm of Arborea, surrounded by towering white 
trees and pillars of marble. 

Depiction. Most modern tapestries and tomes depict 
the Arch Heart as an elven being of impossible grace 
and beauty, androgynous and alluring, framed by long, 
wavy, golden hair. They were the inspiration for many 
early elven art pieces, and elements of their visage or 
symbol are included in most elven architecture. 

Holy Day. Corellon’s holy day is called Elvendawn, 
or Midsummer. It is celebrated on the twentieth day 
of the sixth month, and commemorates the elves’ first 
emergence from the Feywild. Though the Dwendalian 
Empire doesn’t promote the worship of the Arch Heart, 
the elves of Bysaes Tyl quietly celebrate in private by 
opening small doors to the Feywild and having a little 
more wine than usual. 


COMMANDMENTS OF CORELLON 

¢ Create, inspire, and find beauty in all that you do. 

e Follow the echoes of lost magics, forgotten sites, and an- 
cient art, for within these lie the Arch Heart’s first works. 

e Combat the followers of Lolth wherever they might be. 


ERATHIS, THE LAW BEARER 

The inspiration behind many great inventions, the cre- 
ation of vast cities, and law and order within society, 
Erathis claims dominion over civilization. Judges and 
rulers pay respect at her temples, which are central 
structures in many cities across Exandria. Peace and 
order through structure and law guides the will of her 
devout followers. The Law Bearer has a tempestuous 
romance with Melora the Wild Mother, a furious love 
that is tempered only when civilization and nature are 
in balance. 

Erathis resides within the glorious divine metropolis 
of Hestavar, the Bright City. This glowing oasis coasts 
through the Astral Plane, as the Law Bearer watches 
over the denizens bathed in the endless daytime that 
illuminates the busy streets. 

Depiction. Erathis is shown in most texts and statues 
as a hooded, armored woman sitting atop a throne of pil- 
lars. Her face is generally obscured or depicted without 
expression, giving her presence an impartial yet impos- 
ing nature. 

Holy Day. The Law Bearer’s holy day is Civilization’s 
Dawn, which is celebrated on the autumnal equinox, 
usually the twenty-second day of the ninth month. In the 
Dwendalian Empire, people celebrate by having feasts 


in honor of the laws of the Dwendal bloodline. One seat 
at every table is left open for the king, who eats in spirit 
with the people he rules. 


COMMANDMENTS OF ERATHIS 

e Utilize the company and aid of others. The efforts of 
the individual often pale against the capabilities of the 
community. 

e Strive to tame the wilds in the name of civilization, and 
defend the points of light and order against the chaos 
of darkness. 

e Uphold and revere the spirit of invention. Create new set- 
tlements, build where inspiration strikes, and expand the 
edicts of the Law Bearer. 


IOUN, THE KNOWING MENTOR 

Revered by seers, sages, and teachers of all walks of 
life, loun guided the growth of civilization throughout 
the Age of Arcanum like sunlight guides the branches 
of a tree. Grievously wounded by the Chained Oblivion 
during the Calamity, her followers are now hunted by 
agents of her ancient foes as she recovers. Her devout 
now worship in private, spreading knowledge, philoso- 
phy, and lore anonymously through traceless channels. 

Ioun sits among the infinite library that fills the hidden 
realm of the Endless Athenaeum, her celestial servants 
cataloging all known things as she inspires those who 
pray for her insight and guidance. 

Depiction. Common representations show the Know- 
ing Mentor as a graying, mature woman with a welcom- 
ing, matronly smile, swathed in billowing robes and 
scarves that fan into books and scrolls. Some colloqui- 
ally refer to loun as the Knowing Mistress, revering her 
as a headmistress of knowledge among the gods. 

Holy Day. loun has no public holy day, for her public 
worship was shattered during the Calamity, and she 
has since fallen into half-remembered myth. Only in the 
monasteries of the Cobalt Soul has the Knowing Men- 
tor’s faith been resurrected—though her worship by the 
intellectuals of the city bears little resemblance to that 
of the knowledge-seekers of old. 


COMMANDMENTS OF JOUN 

e Unmask those who would destroy loun. Learn their se- 
crets and unveil them to the world. 

e Uphold and teach the importance of reason, perception, 
and truth in guiding one’s emotions and path. 

e Condemn those who lie without moral cause, for evil folk 
gain power when their followers obscure the truth. Never 
stoop to the level of selfish liars. 


KORD, THE STORM LORD 
Where thunder booms and conflict rises, prayers to the 
Storm Lord are shouted into the maelstrom. Reveling 
in all tests of strength, Kord blesses those who prove 
themselves on the battlefield. Worshiped by athletes 
and warriors all across Exandria, he exalts those whose 
force of spirit and desire for victory call his attention. 
He brings tumultuous storms over land and sea, and 
those who wish for clearer skies offer their praises and 
prayers to appease him. 

Korddwellsamong the roving settlements and battle- 
fields within the rugged and glorious realm of Ysgard, 


where struggle, victory, and celebration shape the land- 
scape and those who reside there. 
Depiction. Within his temples, Kord is shown as 
a quintessential warrior, often nude with a beard 
and short, curled hair. As the epitome of muscle and 
strength, most art depicts the Storm Lord in a stance of 
dominance, and perhaps wrestling a terrible beast. 
Holy Day. Kord’s holy day is the Day of Challenging, 
which is celebrated on the seventh day of the second 
month. The Day of Challenging is one of the most rau- 
cous holidays in Port Damali, and thousands of specta- 
tors attend the annual Godsbrawl held in the Temple of 
Kord to root for their favored deity’s champion, particu- 
larly the chosen champions of the Storm Lord and the 
All-Hammer. 


COMMANDMENTS OF KORD 

e Bravery above all. There is no glory in cowardice. 

e Strength is the path to greatness, but greatness is the re- 
sponsible use of strength. 

e The glory of the Storm Lord lives through your own glory 
on the battlefield. 


MELORA, THE WILD MOTHER 

The realm of Melora extends to wherever the seas shift 
and the land grows wild. As the keeper of the wilder- 
ness, Melora represents the wild creatures of nature, 
the rush of the angry rapids, and the heat-heavy stillness 
of the desert. Elves worship her, as do hunters, accept- 
ing her guidance to exist harmoniously within savage 
lands. Those seeking safe passage across dangerous 
waters pray to her to guide them. 

Followers of the Raven Queen also show respect to 
the Wild Mother as the caretaker of what remains when 
the Matron of Death’s work is done. Those of Ki’Nau 
descent often make offerings to Melora, considering her 
a collective entity that represents their ancient nature 
gods within a singular feminine form. Druids of Melora 
the Wild Mother and clerics of her lover, Erathis the 
Law Bearer, work together to preserve the balance of 
nature and civilization. However, worship of Melora 
was outlawed in the Dwendalian Empire, causing dis- 
agreement between clerics of Erathis within Western 
Wynandir, where many blame poor weather and natural 
disasters on the ire of their deity’s partner. 

Eschewing a permanent realm, Melora prefers to 
wander the planes to oversee natural life. She is often 
found among the unearthly beauty of Arvandor’s infinite 
expanse of deep woods, hunting unnatural things that 
corrupt the wilds. 

Depiction. Immortalized through wooden reliefs 
and carved idols in hidden, overgrown groves and 
rural shrines, the Wild Mother is shown as a beautiful 
woman with green skin nearly swallowed by a wild, 
tangled wreath of hair, leaves, and vines that dwarf her 
lithe form. 

Holy Day. Melora’s holy day is Wild’s Grandeur, which 
is celebrated on the vernal equinox, usually the twenti- 
eth day of the third month. The people of the Menagerie 
Coast set aside this day to sail for no reason other than 
the pleasure of observing the natural beauty of their 
surroundings. Those who still partake in elements of 


CHAPTER 1 | STORY OF WILDEMOUNT 


23 


Ki’Nau culture take this day to appreciate the fruits and 
foods granted by the sea, leaving offerings of delica- 
cies and small handmade crafts at temporary altars of 
twisted roots and grasses. 


COMMANDMENTS OF MELORA 

e Protect the untamed wilderness from exploitation and 
destruction. 

e Slay abominations and other mockeries of nature. 

¢ Embrace and respect the savage nature of the world. Exist 
in harmony with it. 


MORADIN, THE ALL-HAMMER 

Moradin is worshiped by smiths, artisans, and miners 
alike, granting inspiration in exchange for respect and 
prayer. He shaped the mountains from the chaos of the 
Founding, and stands as the patron protector of home 
and family. The devotion to the AllHammer is strongest 
in dwarven communities, and many temples to Moradin 
mark the center of a mighty dwarven stronghold. 

Moradin lords over the soul forges within the massive 
tunneled mansion of Erackinor, deep beneath the slopes 
of Solania on the plane of Celestia. 

Depiction. Many guild halls and workshops contain 
images of Moradin, a faceless, stout dwarven being 
of immense strength, hunched over a flaming heart 
clasped within his massive hands. 

Holy Day. Moradin’s holy day is Deep Solace, which 
is celebrated on the eighteenth day of the fifth month. 
Especially devout followers of the All: Hammer spend 
the day in isolation, meditating on the meaning of family 
and how they may be better mothers, fathers, siblings, 
and children. The dwarven community in Grimgolir cel- 
ebrates with a full day of feasting and drinking. 


COMMANDMENTS OF MORADIN 

e Remain stoic and tenacious in the face of catastrophe. 

e Uphold and promote loyalty to your family, loyalty to your 
clan, and loyalty to your people. 

e Legacy is paramount. To create something that lasts is to 
change the world for the better. 


PELOR, THE DAWN FATHER 

Pelor rules over sun and summer, his vigil encircling the 
ages as the keeper of time. As lord of agriculture and 
harbinger of the harvest, he is worshiped by farmers 
and most common folk, and his priests are welcomed 

in many lands. Supporter of the needy and destroyer of 
evil, the Dawn Father is often the patron of paladins and 
rangers who follow a similar creed. He is also known 
for his defeat of the Chained Oblivion and is revered by 
those who hunt aberrations. 

Pelor is often found within the Fortress of the Sun, a 
shining, golden citadel that brings vibrant life to the lim- 
itless orchards of the Blessed Fields of Elysium. 

Depictions. Tapestries of old match early texts de- 
scribing Pelor as a paternal figure in silver and gold 
armor, his head a beacon of light and fire so bright that 
his face can barely be seen. Many statues in holy places 
use the head as a brazier, lit with each dawn and extin- 
guished at dusk. 

Holy Day. Pelor’s holy day is called Highsummer, and 
takes place on the fifteenth day of the seventh month. 


CHAPTER 1 | STORY OF WILDEMOUNT 


While other parts of Exandria feast, the Dwendalian 
Empire uses this day as an opportunity to enlist more 
soldiers in its army. The military holds great feasts and 
hands out toy soldiers and other propaganda, encourag- 
ing people to enlist and help fight against the evil that 
threatens the king. 


COMMANDMENTS OF PELOR 

« Be ever vigilant for evil. People are quick to forget the les- 
sons of the past. 

e Help relieve the suffering of the innocent. 

e Deliver the light of Pelor where darkness dwells, with 
kindness, compassion, and mercy. 


RAEI, THE EVERLIGHT 

God of atonement and compassion, Raei spreads the 
message of understanding and optimism in even the 
darkest of places. She believes that the corrupt can be 
redeemed, a mindset that led to a betrayal by the Lord of 
the Nine Hells, who decimated her followers during the 
Calamity. This misplaced trust caused many priests to 
strike her name from historical records, leaving her title 
and faith scattered to obscurity for much of the recent 
age. Only recently has her faith been rediscovered and 
her temples returned to prominence. The Everlight’s 
followers are often rural healers and community philos- 
ophers, offering a voice of reason and empathyin angry 
and cynical times. 

Raei guides her people from within her temple be- 
side the crystal beaches of the Island of Renewal, a 
hidden sanctuary of flame alongside the Blessed Fields 
of Elysium. 

Depiction. Those who bring the Everlight’s words 
back to the light unearth her image from ruined tem- 
ples, or create new art to inspire others with her mes- 
sage. Raei is represented as a beautiful, strong woman 
with dark skin and light hair, rising betwixt a set of an- 
gelic ivory wings. 

Holy Day. The Everlight’s holy day has been long for- 
gotten, and her followers have yet to decide when her 
festival should be held and what the festivities should 
be. The debate has gone on for years, and no great 
miracles have yet been performed to unify the squab- 
bling clerics. 


COMMANDMENTS OF RAEI 

e Lead with mercy, patience, and compassion. Inspire oth- 
ers to unite in fellowship. 

e Aidthosewho are without guidance. Heal those who are 
without hope. 

« Those who are beyond redemption, who revel in slaugh- 
ter and remorseless evil, must be dispatched with 
swift justice. 


THE RAVEN QUEEN, MATRON OF DEATH 

Master of the skein of fate and the mistress of winter, 
the Raven Queen is the god of death. Her gaze follows 
and marks the end of each mortal life, watching over the 
border between life and death and ensuring the natural 
transition is undefiled. Many funerals ask her blessing to 
protect the deceased from the terrible curse of undeath. 
Those who study ancient lore believe that the Matron of 
Death was once mortal herself and is the only known 


mortal to have ascended to godhood. Her rise instantly 
obliterated the previous, now-forgotten god of death, 
and the other gods quickly and fearfully destroyed the 
secrets to the rites of ascension. 

The Raven Queen tugs at the threads of fate from her 
stronghold of black ice within the frozen realm of Leth- 
erna, nestled in a frigid corner of the Shadowfell. 

Depiction. Few existing visual depictions of the Ra- 
ven Queen exist; many temples merely use the raven 
as a symbol of her blessing. The few illustrations of her 
portray a tall, pale woman wrapped in dangling black 
linens, with her face obscured by a white porcelain 
mask and her onyx-black hair straight and neverending. 

Holy Day. The Raven Queen’s holy day is called the 
Night of Ascension, celebrating her apotheosis. The 
actual date of the her rise to divinity is unclear, but the 
Night of Ascension is celebrated on the thirteenth day 
of the tenth month. What was once a night of cheery 
celebration of the dead in the Dwendalian Empire has 
recently become an occasion to burn effigies and de- 
cry the Kryn Dynasty for their unnatural relationship 
with death. 


COMMANDMENTS OF THE RAVEN QUEEN 

e Death is the natural end of life. There is no pity for those 
who have fallen. 

¢ The path of Fate is sacrosanct. Those who pridefully at- 
tempt to cast off their destiny must be punished. 

e Undeath is an atrocity. Those who would pervert the tran- 
sition of the soul must be brought down. 


SEHANINE, THE MOON WEAVER 

Sehanine is the god of moonlight and the autumn sea- 
son, as well as the patron of illusions and misdirection. 
Widely worshiped in halfling and elven cultures, she is 
considered to be the deity of love, protecting the trysts 
of lovers with shadows of her own making. Those who 
work in darkness and trickery often ask for her blessing. 

Sehanine is found among the verdant tangles of the 
realm of Arborea, watching over the elven courts, or 
wandering among the colorful fields of the Feywild. 

Depiction. The Moon Weaver's depictions are as 
numerous as the myths and stories of her meddling 
with the unions of mortals. She is most often painted 
as a young girl with light-blue skin and white hair, her 
body and limbs merely wavy silk strands of silver moon- 
light that caress and create the edges of the shadows 
around her. 

Holy Day. Sehanine has no holy day but is celebrated 
by the elves on the night of the decade’s largest full 
moon. Elven astronomers track the moon’s phases and 
how it grows closer and farther to Exandria to predict 
these days with great accuracy. Many haughty elves 
use this festival as an excuse to be sly and mischievous, 
while younger elves use costumes and illusions to prank 
their peers. Some elves of Bysaes Tyl hold a secret fes- 
tival in the Pearlbow Wilderness during the full moon, 
since the Dwendalian Empire doesn’t allow worship of 
the Moon Weaver. 


loun, 
THE KNOWING MENTOR 


MELORA, 
THE WitD MOTHER 


Sor 


Koro, 
THE STORM LORD 


MoRADIN, 
THE ALL-HAMMER 


N 
o1 


Rael, 


THE EvERLIGHT 


SEHANINE, 
THE Moon WEAVER 


PELOR, 


THE Dawn FATHER 


THe Raven Queen, 
MATRON oF DEATH 


COMMANDMENTS OF SEHANINE 

e Seize your own destiny by pursuing your passions. 

« Let the shadows protect you from the burning light of fa- 
natical good and the absolute darkness of evil. 

¢ Walk unbridled and untethered, forging new memories 
and experiences. 


BETRAYER GODS 


The Betrayer Gods are the deities who strayed from the 
ideals of the Founding and embraced the destructive 
chaos of the Primordials or grew selfish of their own 
creations. The Betrayer Gods rarely work together, since 
they see each other as threats to their own plots and 
goals. This very weakness allowed the Prime Deities to 
defeat and banish them, ending the Calamity. 


ASMODEUS, THE LORD OF THE NINE HELLS 
The devil god of the Hells is the master of tyranny 

and domination. His words are honeyed and carefully 
crafted, soothing and corrupting the mortal heart. As- 
modeus rules his domain with an iron fist, and the pun- 
ishments awaiting those that cross him are the basis of 
nightmares. Evil entities pay him tribute alongside his 
devils, and many warlocks are drawn to his power. 

Asmodeus lords over his fiendish hordes from within 
his fortress of Nalsheem, nestled in the depths of Nes- 
sus, the ninth and deepest of the Nine Hells. 

Depiction. A twisted image of the celestial blood that 
once bore him, the Lord of the Nine Hells is revealed 
in many tomes and murals as a handsome humanoid 
with deep, red skin and long, black hair. Two curling 
horns rise from his brow, and his lips bear an eternal, 
knowing grin. 

Enemies. Asmodeus’s enemies are numerous, even 
among the Betrayer Gods, many of whom only follow 
the archdevil for fear of his immense power. His arch- 
nemesis is Avandra, the Change Bringer, whose mis- 
chief and cunning has vexed him throughout the eons. 
It was she who defeated him in the Calamity by tricking 
his fiendish armies into attacking one another. The 
Devil Lord’s greatest triumph during the Calamity was 
fooling and betraying the Everlight and slaughtering all 
her followers in one fell stroke—an act that has united 
the followers of Raei and Avandra in a bond of unbreak- 
able fellowship ever since. 


COMMANDMENTS OF ASMODEUS 

e Assert dominance and power over others. Show your 
strength of will in the image of the Asmodeus. 

e Repay cruelty done unto you with further evil. If others 
show you kindness, exploit it. 

« As you ascend to power, do not pity or show mercy 
to those you climb over to get there. Compassion is 
for the weak. 


BANE, THE STRIFE EMPEROR 

Blood-drenched armies of brutal warriors oft crush 
their foes in the name of Bane, the evil patron of war 
and conquest. To serve his will is to accept the call to 
conflict, seeking lesser people to break and subjugate. 
Warmongering nations and goblinoid tribes worship the 
Strife Emperor as they strike out at the world to bend it 


beneath them. Bane twists all living things to his iron 
will, forcing even nature itself to bow to his whims. 

Bane plots his conquest of the planes from within the 
bastion of Banehold, towering among the blood-soaked 
battlefields of Acheron. 

Depiction. Bane is often depicted as a brutish, ogre- 
like man clad from head to toe in jagged black armor. 
Heads dangle from his belt, and the shadows that ob- 
scure his helmeted face do not hide his yellow eyes. 

Enemies. The Strife Emperor’s greatest enemy is 
Melora, who defeated him at Rifenmist during the Ca- 
lamity. The Strife Emperor grew his armies by corrupt- 
ing noble creatures into monsters and destroying the 
wilds to fuel his terrible engines of conflict, and the two 
deities clashed many times during the war before his 
defeat at Beynsfal Plateau. 


COMMANDMENTS OF BANE 

e Fear is your ally. Conquer your fear and inspire it in 
your foes. 

e Disorder and rebellion are to be punished severely. 

e Combat is the greatest gift, and perfecting your skills to 
master it is the greatest pursuit. 


GRUUMSH, THE RUINER 

Gruumsh commands hordes of barbaric marauders 

to destroy, pillage, and slaughter for the sheer joy of 

it. Orderless and without honor, the creeds of the evil 
hordemaster urge savage creatures to devour the world 
around them, giving in to the chaotic and selfish nature 
of the predator. A number of violent clans of humanoids 
and beasts across Xhorhas pay homage to Gruumsh, 
asking him to bless their hunts and gift them with spoils 
worth ruining. 

Gruumsh rules the barren plains of Nishrek in the 
chaotic realm of Acheron, where he stokes the fury of 
his twisted armies and prepares to wage a violent war 
across the planes. 

Depiction. Primitive clay representations in barbaric 
communities of his followers show the Ruiner as a hulk- 


BETRAYER GODS 


ing, bulbous behemoth of an orc. His missing eye has 
shifted, and the prominent eye is now centered in his 
face, like a nightmarish cyclops. 

Enemies. Corellon shot out Gruumsh’s right eye 
during the Calamity, and the god of slaughter longs 
for the day he can return the favor twofold. Those who 
serve the Ruiner are sometimes hypnotized by his 
hateful rage from across the Divine Gate and fall into a 
strange bloodlust, longing to slaughter elves and those 
who worship magic at the altar of the Arch Heart. 


COMMANDMENTS OF GRUUMSH 
e Ruin. Conquer. Kill. 
e The weak exist to be crushed by the strong. Be the strong. 
e There are no emotions but fury and joy. The rest 
are weakness. 


LOLTH, THE SPIDER QUEEN 

The evil god of deceit, shadows, and spiders, Lolth 
weaves a complicated web of schemes and treachery 
through her worshipers, deceiving allies and enemies 
alike to gain power. It is said that the Spider Queen 

can see through the eyes of all spiders, and that she is 
truly all-knowing. Lolth’s worship is entwined with the 
society of dark elves across much of Exandria, but she 
has lost her influence in Wildemount since the Calamity, 
when her drow rejected her in favor of the ancient entity 
known as the Luxon. This slight has drawn her venom- 
ous hatred, and she now seeks vengeance against those 
who betrayed her. 

Lolth sends forth her corrupting poisons and whis- 
pers from her realm of the Demonweb, which is teth- 
ered to the Abyss and home to her many spider children. 

Depiction. Many Lolthite icons and idols show an 
alluring woman with dark purple skin and silver hair, 
her abdomen swelling into the terrifying body of a mon- 
strous spider. 

Enemies. Lolth holds a searing grudge against 
Kord, the Storm Lord, for with one throw of his mighty 
thunderspear he impaled her against a cliffside, leaving 


Deity Alignment Province Suggested Domains Common Symbol 

Asmodeus LE God of the Nine Hells Trickery, War Crown of spiked onyx and curved 
horns 

Bane LE Conquest, tyranny Forge,* Order; War Flail of chains, each ending in 
shackles 

Gruumsh CE Slaughter, warfare Death, Tempest, War Single, unblinking eye that bleeds 

Lolth CE Deceit, spiders Knowledge, Trickery jeweled spider 

Tharizdun GE Darkness, destruction Death, Grave,* Trickery Crooked, seven-pointed star made 
of chains 

Tiamat BE Dragon god of evil Order,** Trickery, War Taloned dragon claw 

Torog NE Enslavement, torture Death, Trickery Three pale arms clawing from a 
dark void 

Vecna NE Necromancy, secrets Arcana,*** Death, Grave,* Desiccated hand with an eye in the 

Knowledge palm 
Zehir GE Assassins, poison, snakes Nature, Trickery Coiled serpent 


* The Forge and Grave domains appear in Xanathar’s Guide to Everything. 
The Order domain appears in Guildmaster’s Guide to Ravnica. 
*** The Arcana domain appears in Sword Coast Adventurer’s Guide. 


CHAPTER 1 | STORY OF WILDEMOUNT 


28 


her drow armies leaderless during the Calamity. Lolth 
and Gruumsh also share a burning hatred for Corellon, 
whom she claims drove her children below the earth, 
and Lolth often manipulates Gruumsh’s followers into 
attacking her enemies so that the drow may remain 
safe. While Lolth cannot sense the will or power of the 
Luxon, the entity that is now worshiped by the dark 
elves of Xhorhas, she is bent entirely toward the destruc- 
tion of its followers and their memory. 


COMMANDMENTS OF LOLTH 

e It is better to be loved than feared, but you may certainly 
try to be both. 

e Misdirection, slander, and shadowed steps have more 
function than direct conflict. 

e Death to the elves who live under the sun, and death to 
all their allies! 


THARIZDUN, THE CHAINED OBLIVION 

It is darkness unending, less like agodand more like 
another world. Life and death do not exist within Thariz- 
dun, only utter destruction and madness. Even the other 
Betrayer Gods treat this mad god with caution. In its 
endless imprisonment, Tharizdun dreams the infinite 
depths of the Abyss into reality, along with all its de- 
monic legions. The Prime Deities had thought it locked 
away during the Founding until it nearly returned to 
ruin the world during the conflicts of the Calamity. 

Now, its chaotic mind has fallen into more frightful 
dreams, imagining nightmarish aberrations into exis- 
tence deep beneath Exandria. The Chained Oblivion’s 
demented cultists work without word from their twisted 
patron, awaiting the Epoch of Ends, when its freedom 
will be attained and all beings shall be consumed in 
deathlessness unending. 

Tharizdun is believed to be chained in the deepest 
pits of the Abyss, bound by divine shackles that slowly 
weaken, leaking its madness into the planes. 

Depiction. Few visual attempts to depict Tharizdun 
exist, but the texts speak of acreature of rolling, hungry 
ink and darkness, a spreading cloud of lightless destruc- 
tion born froma thousand ravenous mouths. Current 
references show the nightmare constrained by chains of 
gold and black, barely keeping the dark at bay. 

Enemies. The few remaining followers of Ioun are 
dedicated to ensuring that Tharizdun is never again un- 
chained. Ioun led the charge against the all-consuming 
destroyer god’s reemergence, and her bravery allowed 
the other Prime Deities to shackle their enemy, though 
the victory nearly cost her immortal life. Some say Ioun 
can only be fully restored if the Chained Oblivion is de- 
stroyed for good. 


COMMANDMENTS OF THARIZDUN 

e Offer and siphon power to Tharizdun until his libera- 
tion comes. 

« Uncover, restore, and exalt forgotten shrines and relics in 
his honor. 

e Ruin and raze the realms to prepare for the 
Epoch of Ends. 


CHAPTER 1 | STORY OF WILDEMOUNT 


TIAMAT, THE SCALED TYRANT 

The evil queen of dragons is a fearsome god of greed, 
envy, and hoarded wealth. While chromatic dragons are 
her foremost worshipers, Tiamat accepts the worship 
of any who crave wealth. All chromatic dragons have a 
fearful reverence for their tyrannical queen, but many 
dragons of near-deific power and ambition chafe un- 
der her rule. 

Tiamat remains imprisoned in Avernus, the first of the 
Nine Hells, influencing the souls of chromatic dragons 
across the planes and seeking the means to free herself. 

Depiction. Most representations of Tiamat exist as 
warnings within sanctuaries of the Platinum Dragon 
Bahamut. She is shown as a drake of frightful size, with 
massive leathery wings spreading clouds of poisonous 
mist, while she shouts from five vicious dragon heads, 
each one a chromatic color of her evil children. 

Enemies. The Scaled Tyrant’s hatred for Bahamut is 
as old as the Founding, and her cults are ever hunted by 
his justice. For centuries, the zealous paladins of Baha- 
mut have limited her worship to the chromatic dragons, 
but a rise in cult activity in the underbelly of Dwendalian 
society has priests of the Platinum Dragon on edge. 


COMMANDMENTS OF TIAMAT 

e Amass wealth, but spend little. The gold—and the power 
that comes with it—is sufficient reward in itself. 

+ Do not forgive nor forget an indignity to yourself. Let no 
affront go unpunished. 

e Take what you covet. Those without the strength to de- 
fend their dominion are not worthy to have one. 


TOROG, THE CRAWLING KING 

The dark god of the endless tunnels and caverns be- 
neath Exandria, Torog is the patron of torturers, slavers, 
and jailers across the realms. His violent tears carved 
the pathways under the world, and his realm of impris- 
onment is a network of deadly caves and manacles from 
which few return. Creatures that wander the desolation 
of Carceri often construct prisons in his image. Those 
who rob others of their freedom offer prayers to him in 
cellars and other subterranean domains, and many crea- 
tures who live in the darkness below worship him and 
seek his guidance. 

Torog remains banished within an unknown sliver 
of the Far Realm that now borders the deepest pits of 
the Underdark, where the boundaries between worlds 
grow thin and birth terrible abominations bent on 
subjugation. 

Depiction. The Crawling King is rendered as a swol- 
len, malformed worm that slithers through the dark be- 
low, with a screaming, hairless human head at the helm 
and three arms carving through the lightless rock. 

Enemies. Pelor and Raei defeated Torog during the 
Calamity by luring their nemesis above ground. Pelor 
pierced Torog’s tenebrous body with ten thousand 
lances of sunlight, and the Everlight imprisoned him 
beyond the boundaries of Exandria. The tears of pain 
and anger the Crawling King shed burned through Ex- 
andria, and his faithful fled into these tunnels to escape 
their enemies’ holy light. 


COMMANDMENTS OF TOROG 

e Seek and exalt places where no light touches. 

e Revel in the pain you inflict on others, and relish the pain 
you suffer yourself as an offering to Torog. 

e Imprison those who cannot resist you, and drag all life 
into the darkness. 


VECNA, THE WHISPERED ONE 

The lich lord Vecna presides over villainous mages, 
conspiring politicians, and envious servants as the dark 
god of necromancy, undeath, and secrets. Once a dan- 
gerously clever and powerful archmage-turned-lich, his 
hunger for dominion over all mysteries and obsession 
with conquering the pantheon led to his own disso- 
lution, leaving behind only his left hand and eye. His 
enduring spirit reformed through the ages and managed 
to reconstruct the Raven Queen’s rites of ascension to 
become the newest of gods to walk Exandria. Defeated 
by the legendary heroes Vox Machina and sealed behind 
the Divine Gate, the Whispered One now quietly rules 
over that which is not meant to be known. 

Vecna calls no place among the planes his home, 
instead wandering in search of powerful artifacts and 
secrets to further his unknowable plots. 

Depiction. Those who claim to have looked on Vec- 
na’s form speak of a tall, skeletal lich swathed in tat- 
tered robes and enchanted jewels, missing both his left 
hand and left eye. 

Enemies. While Vecna loathes all other gods and 
wishes to destroy them and become the sole divine 
power in the planes, he has a particular hatred for 
Ioun. loun seeks to share with the world the same se- 
crets Vecna guards for himself, and his followers work 
diligently to undermine and destroy the Library of the 
Cobalt Soul and any others who follow her path. The 
Raven Queen also despises Vecna, and sees his pres- 
ence as a mighty affront to her purpose. 


COMMANDMENTS OF VECNA 

e Learn all you can, and keep hidden that which you know. 
Reveal what pieces you must, but never the whole. 

e Express and cultivate the evil within yourself, and in 
doing so, recognize it in others to exploit them for your 
own benefit. 

e Seed the ruin of all who worship other deities, until only 
those who kneel before Vecna remain. 


ZEHIR, THE CLOAKED SERPENT 
A wanderer in the shadows and the creator of snakes 
and serpentkin, Zehir is the evil god of poisons, assas- 
sins, and darkness. The ancient serpentkin worship 
him over all other deities, dragging screaming offerings 
to their temples in his honor. Most of the Cloaked Ser- 
pent’s worshipers were annihilated during the Calamity, 
and the rest are either suspended in self-induced stasis 
or hunted for sport by the servants of Lolth and Torog. 
But perhaps Zehir is merely biding his time, waiting for 
the proper moment to unleash his hidden armies on the 
world once more. 

Zehir subverts and poisons Exandria from the shad- 
owed Towers of Night, hidden among the ever-shifting 
winds of the Astral Plane. 


pe sae ee 


am —— N a N y a N 


ASMODEUS, THE LORD 
OF THE Nine Hers 


Bane, THE 
STRIFE EMPEROR 


GRUUMSH, 
THE RUINER 


LOLTH, THE 
SPIDER QUEEN 


THARIZOUN, THE 
CHAINED OBLIVION 


ay SAV 


29 


30° 


TIAMAT, THE 
SCALED TYRANT 


ToROG, THE 
CRAWLING KING 


dy 


VECNA, THE 
WHISPERED ONE 


ZEHIR, THE 
CLOAKED SERPENT 


Depiction. Many forgotten temples were once built 
to the Cloaked Serpent, and within these chambers 
his image was embedded within much of the architec- 
ture. He is shown as a human body with six arms and 
a gargantuan serpentine head, fanged and frilled in 
aggression. Strands of thick, dark hair that sprout from 
his scaled body form layers of swirling shadow, obscur- 
ing his form. 

Enemies. Zehir loathes Erathis and Melora, for he 
despises life, order, and love above all things. His sur- 
viving worshipers use poison and fire to undermine civ- 
ilization and consume nature, hoping to infuriate both 
gods and cast Exandria into chaos. 


COMMANDMENTS OF ZEHIR 

e Keep your acts obfuscated and secret. The night is your 
greatest ally. 

e Strike quickly and without reason. Blind the target with 
their own confusion. 

e Kill slowly. Agonizingly. Or worse, make them enjoy it. 


LESSER IDOLS 


After the banishment of the pantheon in the Divergence, 
the mortal realm was left to its own devices. Beyond the 
trickle of divine assistance allowed by the Divine Gate, 
mortal creatures are now the keepers of the future of 
Exandria. This vacuum of influence has given rise to a 
number of powerful entities who may not rival the gods 
in their abilities or influence, but now unchallenged, 
can amass a modest following of their own. These idols 
present themselves in many different ways, some as 
honorable guardians of the helpless, and others as the 
tyrannical gods they aspire to be. Many of these beings 
have ambitions they wish to fulfill and can offer great 
power to mortals in exchange for their servitude. 


ARMS OF THE BETRAYERS 

Before the Calamity, eight of the Betrayer Gods each 
forged a sentient weapon using the life force of a greater 
fiend and gave the weapon to a chosen champion in the 
kingdom of Ghor Dranas. The Calamity flung these 
weapons across Wildemount, burying them in moun- 
tains, forests, fields, and underground. Several of these 
weapons have been recovered, but a few have never 
been found and are highly sought-after. The weapons— 
or more properly, the fiends bound inside them—attract 
their own followings of mortal worshipers. 

When an Arm of the Betrayers is found, it grants its 
wielder some of the power of the Betrayer Gods and the 
wisdom of the fiend within. The bound fiends know that 
their war was lost long ago, but they still desire to be 
used in battle, win victories, and spill blood in the hands 
of skilled warriors. As a weapon’s wielder becomes 
more powerful, so too does the weapon, which in turn is 
able to lend even more magic to the wielder. Whenever a 
weapon’s wielder dies, the weapon disappears and reap- 
pears elsewhere. 

The Betrayer Gods made the following weapons, 
which are described in more detail in chapter 6: 


Blade of Broken Mirrors. This stone dagger of Thariz- 
dun has yet to be found after the Calamity. It has the 
power to warp reality around its wielder. The life 


force of a glabrezu named Ragazuu was used to forge 
the weapon. 

Grovelthrash. This obsidian warhammer carries the 
tortured will of Torog and can raze whole structures 
with a single strike. The life force of an ultroloth 
named Ciria was used to forge the weapon. 

Lash of Shadows. This Zehir-touched whip ends in five 
serpent heads that pump poisons of varying effects 
into the wielder’s foes. The life force of a marilith 
named Sizlifeth was used to forge the weapon. 

Mace of the Black Crown. This mace with a fiend’s 
head of ruby carries the boon of Asmodeus, capable 
of summoning devils for the wielder to command and 
burning hot enough to melt steel. The life force of an 
erinyes named Xartaza was used to forge the weapon. 

Ruin’s Wake. This Gruumsh-blessed ivory spear can 
effortlessly pierce armor and transforms into lightning 
when hurled. The life force of a balor named Yarrow- 
ish was used to forge the weapon. 

Silken Spite. This rapier has a blade forged from spider 
silk that gives the wielder Lolth’s blessing. The life 
force of a yochlol named Sinnafex was used to forge 
the weapon. 

The Bloody End. This adamantine morningstar bears 
the boon of Bane, and has yet to be found after the 
Calamity. It has the power to subjugate the wielder’s 
enemies. The life force of a pit fiend named Izeelzee 
was used to forge the weapon. 

Will of the Talon. This war pick bears the mark of 
Tiamat and makes the wielder impervious to the ele- 
ments and grants them the power of dragon breath. 
The life force of an bone devil named Ashtyrlon was 
used to forge the weapon. 


CERATOS 

A being that slipped from the Far Realm into Exandria 
before the Founding, Ceratos is one of the oldest crea- 
tures in the world. A single creature of many minds, 
Ceratos reveled in chaos. When the Elemental Chaos 


LESSER IDOLS 


Deity Alignment Warlock Patron 

Arms of the NE The Fiend, the Hexblade* 

Betrayers 

Ceratos CN The Great Old One 

Desirat LE The Fiend, the Undying** 

Naviask NG The Archfey 

Quajath CN The Fiend, the Great Old One 

The Hag Mother NE The Fiend 

The Luxon N — 

The Traveler CN The Archfey 

Uk’otoa NE The Great Old One, the 
Hexblade* 

Vesh NE The Archfey, the Undying** 

Xalicas LG The Archfey, the Celestial* 


was divided into four planes, Ceratos retreated under- 
ground, their minds unraveling as they entered a night- 
marish slumber. 

The digging of the Crawling King woke Ceratos a 
long time after. Though their minds were scattered, 
each desired the return of chaos to unite themselves. So 
Ceratos sent thoughts to the surface, offering magic to 
those who could create chaos in the land above, so that 
they might one day regain their full power. Ceratos tells 
their followers that chaos brings clarity and destruction 


begets rebirth. 


Appearance. Ceratos is thought to be a massive 
skinless sphere of flesh covered in mismatched eyes, 
mouths, and tentacles. They can project their minds’ 
thoughts into other creatures, especially those who de- 
sire to bring chaos to the world. 


DESIRAT, THE TWILIGHT PHOENIX 

Desirat was the companion and mount of Asmodeus 
during the great wars of the Calamity. Before the Diver- 
gence, she was torn from her master by the remnants 
of the original Cerberus Assembly, who wished to study 
and harvest the phoenix’s fiendish form for their own 
purposes. After the assembly was destroyed in the war 
and the pantheon was banished from Exandria, the 
phoenix remained chained beneath the Cyrios Moun- 
tains. Her shadowed flames have scalded and scarred 
the realm above for centuries, giving birth to the ther- 
mal phenomena surrounding Mount Metiri in West- 


ern Wynandir. 


Desirat’s sanity has fractured in isolation, lending 
to delusions of divinity, which she perpetuates in the 
hearts of those who carry a seed of fiery vengeance 
by reaching out to them through dreams and visions. 
Though she once amassed a following with the aid of 
Uk’otoa’s worshipers, who nearly dug deep enough 
to free her, her followers were then subjugated and 
scattered when the Julous Dominion took power in the 
Marrow Valley. She now speaks to the minds of those 


Suggested Domains 
Death, War 


Knowledge, Tempest 


Light, Trickery 
Life, Nature 


Nature, War 
Knowledge, Trickery 
Arcana,** Light 
Nature, Trickery 


Knowledge, Tempest 


Death, Life 
Life, Light 


* The Celestial and Hexblade warlock patrons appear in Xanathar’s Guide to Everything. 


Common Symbol 

Blade thrust downward through an 
eight-eyed skull 

Three mismatched eyes 
surrounded by teeth 

Burning purple feather 

Wreath of flowers shaped into 
demon horns 

Ring of teeth 

Single red horn 

Hollow dodecahedron 

Arched doorway over a road that 
vanishes into the distance 
Yellow, slitted eye 


Crimson ring hanging from a chain 
Single blackened wing 


*** The Undying warlock patron and the Arcana domain appear in Sword Coast Adventurer’s Guide. 


CHAPTER 1 | STORY OF WILDEMOUNT 


31 


32 


who lie spurned and angry at night, calling them to un- 
lock their inner flame and let Desirat aid them in their 
vengeance. 

Appearance. Desirat is depicted as a giant phoenix of 
dark purple down, wreathed in purple-black flames. Her 
sword-like beak is pointed and smooth, while her three 
onyx eyes peer from beneath bright, burning lids. 


NAVIASK 

Once a powerful balor pursuing total annihilation of the 
Feywild, Naviask was transformed into a fey spirit by 
Queen Titania of the Summer Court after falling into 
one of her traps. Titania’s magic changed Naviask’s mis- 
sion to destroy into a quest to heal scarred lands with 
nature. After the Calamity, Naviask was drawn to Ex- 
andria, where he currently remains, seeking to heal the 
devastation and ruin that still plague the world. 

Naviask’s followers say that the strange demon- 
turned-fey wanders the wastes of Xhorhas but is only 
glimpsed by those he wishes to see him. He aims to heal 
the land, but the magics that destroyed Ghor Dranas do 
not easily fade. He searches for those of similar heart 
and offers to share his power, so that the land might fi- 
nally be healed. 

Appearance. Naviask retains his balor shape, but his 
demonic profile is softened by a verdant hue, and the 
flowers and vines that adorn his body. The former de- 
mon’s inner fire has been replaced with sunlight, and he 
wields a whip made of pure radiance. 


QuaAJATH, THE UNDERMAW 

The mystery of whether Quajath is a creation or the 
direct progeny of Torog is unknown, but the deranged, 
gargantuan worm creature that scouted the Crawling 
King’s advances in the Calamity was thought to have 
been slain in the ferocious final battles. Leaving a siz- 
able portion of its wounded body behind, a slimy frag- 
ment of Quajath burrowed deep beneath the surface 
and slumbered in the cold earth beneath Eiselcross to 
recover and regrow. When the Undermaw attempted to 
rise once more, the elemental ice of Eiselcross proved 
too strong, and Quajath remains entombed within the 
frozen north to this day. 

Some of the wildfolk of Eiselcross have discovered an 
exposed segment ofthe Tomb ofthe Worm, and after 
generations of feeding on its eternally regrowing flesh, 
the will of the Undermaw has suffused their minds. 
Some of these wormkin now wander the world as ves- 
sels of Quajath’s primal drive and alien mind, helping 
him psychically reach those whose shattered minds can 
find purpose in following Quajath, taking its gifts of raw 
magic and fractured secrets. They seek to one day re- 
turn and free it from its icy prison. 

Appearance. Quajath’s recovered body resembles a 
monstrous, muscular worm of folded, bulbous skin cov- 
ered in tooth-like scales. Its jagged mouth is surrounded 
by a ring of pointed teeth, with a thrice-forked tongue 
bearing its three ivory eyes. 


THE HAG MOTHER 


Rumored to be the oldest hag and progenitor of all 
other hags in Exandria, the Hag Mother arrived in the 
world just after the Founding. She has a soft spot for 


CHAPTER 1 | STORY OF WILDEMOUNT 


humanoids in peril that caused her original coven to 
exile and bind her to Exandria with a magical curse. 
She wanders the land, making deals with people in dire 
straits, offering the power to save themselves in return 
for their service. The tasks the Hag Mother asks of 
those who accept her deals are always dangerous and 
sometimes grotesque and cruel. Some of these quests 
save lives, while others end them. Others still result in 
the creation of more hags. Many of the missions seem 
to serve no purpose, but the Hag Mother always has a 
plan. Whether her endgame is to destroy her enemies, 
break her curse, or rule Exandria is known only to the 
Hag Mother herself. 

Appearance. The Hag Mother can take any female hu- 
manoid form she chooses and often travels in disguise, 
but her true form is that of a gnarled, purple-skinned 
crone with stringy black hair, yellow eyes, and red ram's 
horns that curl back from her forehead. 


THE LUXON, THE FIRST RADIANCE 

Very few throughout Exandria have heard ofthe Luxon, 
and fewer still believe they even exist. The Luxon is the 
central deity of the Kryn Dynasty and their way of life, 
but study of the Luxon beyond the borders of Xhorhas 
has only recently begun—and such study is mostly mo- 
tivated by the Dwendalian Empire’s desire to gain an 
advantage in the war. 

The Luxon doesn’t have an active consciousness or 
personality. The worship of them is largely a system of 
pure faith, backed by scientific and metaphysical truths 
that stem from the discovery of the beacons and the 
Umavi who interpret their meaning (see “Kryn Dynasty” 
in chapter 2). Priests of the Luxon often study dunamis 
and its primal arcane nature, while others are born 
with dunamantic gifts granted by the reality-bending 
powers of the beacons. Those that do call on the rarer 
threads of divinity use the beacons themselves as a 
source of magic. 

Appearance. By all accounts, the Luxon’s original 
form is believed to be a colossal, shapeless body of im- 
possibly bright light, like a burning star. Followers of the 
Luxon carry small, often hollow, dodecahedrons as a 
symbol of their faith. 


THE TRAVELER 

This powerful archfey of selfish and anarchic intent, 
who was once known by the name Artagan, drew the 
ire of Corellon a millennium ago when his prank-like 
dabblings on the Material Plane left an entire nascent 
elven culture worshipping a whale carcass. Banished 
to the Feywild and barred from the mortal realm, Art- 
agan wandered his home plane for hundreds of years, 
sowing chaos for his own enjoyment—until he struck a 
deal with the heroes of Vox Machina that enabled him 
to return to the Material Plane. There, he embarked on 
his latest plot of dubious divinity under a new identity: 
the Traveler. 

Eccentric, fickle, and prone to whimsy and impulse, 
the Traveler wanders Exandria, seeking allies and 
followers who entertain him. Lending his powerful 
fey magics in the guise of divine boons and weaving a 
spreading myth surrounding his secretive purpose, the 


Traveler appears when least expected and leaves when 
least preferred. Those who hear of his tenets are prone 
to disbelief, but the occasional “miracle” serves to rein- 
force his influence. Does he wish to become a new god, 
or is this all still just a game? 

Appearance. The Traveler is often depicted as a tall 
elf man hidden within a billowing green cloak, the hood 
obscuring his face except for his knowing grin. 


Uk’OTOA, THE LEVIATHAN LORD 

Uk’otoa was created by Zehirand terrorized the seas 

of Wildemount until the Divergence left the leviathan 
without master or purpose. The surviving indigenous 
people of the Swavain Islands, the Ki’Nau, took Uk’otoa 
as their guide and god to rule the waters and bring them 
prosperity. The leviathan elevated the Ki’Nau to conquer 
the southern coasts of the continent until the jealous 
will of Zehir reached beyond the Divine Gate and dis- 
covered the insolence of his creation, commanding his 
followers to seal away Uk’otoa in the bedrock beneath 
the Lucidian Ocean. 

Uk’otoa now reaches out to the dreams of nautical 
wanderers and shipwrecked sailors, lending his power 
to those who wish to rule the sea as he once did, beck- 
oning them to free him from his suboceanic prison 
with promises of arcane gifts and the blessing of the 
blade known as the Sword of Fathoms, an extension 
of Uk’otoa’s will and influence. His consciousness has 
found the minds of Desirat and Quajath, and the three 
have a tenuous accord to convince mortals to find and 
free them from their binds. 

Appearance. Uk’otoa takes the form of an incredibly 
massive sea serpent. His coiled and twisting length is 
covered with fins, scales, and amber eyes, with a head 
ending in a pointed, fanged jaw and a face of three 
amber eyes. 


VESH, THE BLOODY SIREN 

None know whether Vesh is a witch or a demigod, 

but she has walked Exandria for centuries, seducing 
those who pry into forbidden magics and drawing them 
to her as possible suitors. Acolytes cultivate sects of 
worshipers who engage in ritualistic orgies and mas- 
ochistic rites, these hedonistic rituals culminating with 
her selection of a mate. Vesh feeds on the unchosen 

in a bloody massacre before laying with her selected 
survivor and vanishing to her realm. Their essences 
intertwined, she then lends her strength to her mate, 
watching over them for life. 

A being with conflicting duality, Vesh has moods 
that demand sacrifice and pain, and others that ask 
for benevolence and mercy. Because Vesh’s whims are 
truly unknown, many who wish to gain her favor and 
attention commit terrible acts. While she has many 
partners, she is a jealous patron who demands the true 
heart of her chosen. Those who stray are never heard 
from again. 

Appearance. Vesh resembles a nude woman with 
faintly glowing gray skin, long purple hair, and un- 
naturally long arms and fingers that end in claw-like 
nails. Her eyes are pale white with no iris, and her ex- 
pression varies from alluring to monstrous depending 
on her mood. 


XALICAS 


The Calamity took the lives of mortals and immortals 
alike. Many angels that fought with the Prime Deities 
were Slain, and most that survived were wounded. The 
solar Xalicas, the right hand of the Arch Heart, was so 
injured that even the magic of the gods cannot help the 
angel regain the ability to see, fly, or leave Exandria. For 
over a century, Xalicas lay broken and blinded in the 
Greying Wildlands, moss and plants covering her body, 
until she had the strength to move, blaming herself for 
the small part she played in the Calamity. 

Now Xalicas wanders Wildemount to make up for the 
sins of the Calamity and prevent another devastating 
war. Her followers attempt to heal war-scarred lands 
and repair the natural world. Xalicas knows that alone 
and in her injured state she cannot stop all the evils in 
the world, so the angel lends her power to those she 
finds worthy: creatures who wish to stop unnecessary 
war, stand up to tyranny, and defend the innocent. 

Appearance. Xalicas is a silver-skinned solar who 
wears a clean white bandage around her eyes. Her body 
is covered in scars, and one of her wings is blackened 
and burned. 


ee eS 


ORIGINS OF THE LUXON 


According to the teachings of the Kryn and the Umavi who 
scribe their faith, it is believed that long before the gods of 
Exandria came to shape this world, there was a time when 
a single Light came from the dark nothingness. Other 
lights came into being around them, settling as the stars 
in the cosmos. This one Light, however, resisted the force 
that beckoned them to burn like their star-fated brethren. 
This one Light wanted to understand what they were and 
chose to wander alone, choosing a different path. This 
choice led to endless stretches of lonely dark, the voices 
of the stars silent to the Light that walked away. Lonely, 
they wandered until they found a cold, dark rock: a world. 
The Light grew fond of this rock, seeing it as lonely as they 
were, and embraced it. They sparked a fire within, cracking 
the surface and giving fiery life to the cold world. 

From within the fiery core, the Light began to watch the 
world change and turn, the chaos giving birth to the first 
souls: the Primordials. Amazed with their children, the 
Light wanted to guide them to learn of themselves, which 
in turn would help the Light discover their own purpose— 
but the children warred amongst themselves and killed 
one another, their souls born of the Light becoming lost 
to the dark beyond. Confused but determined, the Light 
decided that a time of learning was required, and that a 
cycle of trial and error must be enacted for their children of 
chaos to better themselves. Sacrificing a majority of their 
own essence, the Light created beacons of their own self, 
crystals of great power that enacted a cycle of rebirth for 
those who were bound to the Light. 

This act exhausted the Light, and they fell into a deep 
slumber within the core of the world, awaiting a time 
where the children of their own mind would learn from life 
to life, through eons of struggle and self-reflection, until 
the knowledge had matured enough to reassemble them, 
awaken them, and the children could grant the answer to 
the question the Light had sought from the very beginning: 
what are they and what was their purpose? This Light is 
now referred to by the mortal followers of the Kryn as 
the Luxon. 


An 


CHAPTER 1 | STORY OF WILDEMOUNT 


33 


INSPIRED BY THE LIGHT OF THE LUXON, THE BRIGHT QUEEN AND 
HER COURT CHART THE DESTINY OF A CONTINENT. 


°Chapter 2 


FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


UEENS, KINGS, EMPERORS, NOBLES ... BENEATH 
the rhetoric, it’s all the same. They say they fight 
to protect your families. They say they fight to 
enforce your beliefs, your honor. Fight for a 
better tomorrow. Fight for virtue, for prosperity. Bottom 
line, it’s all about fighting, and it’s you that dies fighting for 
their cause. 
—Unknown soldier, 
Collected Tales of the Marrow War 


From the ashes of a land devastated by the Calamity 
grew the civilizations of a new age. The survivors 
claimed land across the continent, forged alliances, and 
made enemies as they fought for power and influence. 
Wildemount is shaped by the ideals and interests of its 
factions, from powerful governments to covert societies. 
This war-torn continent is a fertile landscape for adven- 
turers on a quest for greatness. 


DWENDALIAN EMPIRE 


The Dwendalian Empire has reigned over Western 
Wynandir for over twelve generations. Imperial rule is 
maintained through its powerful military, its policy of 
religious restriction, and the support of the secretive 
Cerberus Assembly. Though these institutions nomi- 
nally exist to ensure the safety of the populace from for- 
eign threats, terrible dangers that wander the wilds, and 
lingering evils that seep from the scars of the Calamity, 
they also allow the empire to maintain strict social order 
within its territories. 

King Bertrand Dwendal is now two months past his 
sixty-eighth birthday, and his iron will has not wavered 
with age. A tall, powerful man, King Dwendal rewards 
loyalty and swiftly punishes insolence and failure. His 
family has developed a totalitarian rule that reaps heavy 
taxes and looms over society with a military presence 
that only grows stronger with proximity to the capital 
city of Rexxentrum. While civic unrest does rise be- 
yond mere mutterings from time to time, reminders of 
the dangerous creatures that live beyond the guarded 
borders of each city and the protections offered within 
the empire generally keep the populace in line. Those 
that rebel often find themselves in chains or forgotten in 
a dungeon. 


Dwendalian society has a rigid caste system, in which 
denizens who have mastery over the arcane are con- 
sidered elite members of society. Many Dwendalian 
ladies and lords came from a sorcerous bloodline or 
studied the arcane arts within the walls of the Soltryce 
Academy. Those who especially excel in their magics 
or were born into prominent families can come to hold 
power as a member of the Cerberus Assembly, a council 
of extremely powerful mages that works directly with 
King Dwendal and his councilors to develop and enforce 
laws throughout Western Wynandir. However, distrust 
between the king and the Cerberus Assembly runs 
deep, for they both wish to eliminate the other and enjoy 
uncontested power. 

Most cities and townships throughout the empire are 
ruled by a local government under the leadership of a 
starosta, usually a native baron appointed by the Crown 
and the Cerberus Assembly. Reporting directly to the 
king’s council, the starosta is given absolute control over 
local government, appointing and maintaining responsi- 
bility for the heads of the city guard (watchmaster), the 
regional military (warmaster), local commerce (coin- 
master), infrastructure (pithmaster), religious practices 
(idolmaster), and the courts of law (lawmaster). Twice a 
year, tithe collectors (nicknamed “Reapers’) visit each 
imperial city to inspect households for records and proof 
of income, collecting a percentage of their earnings in 
coin as determined by the tithe collector. 

The empire’s military force currently stands at around 
35,300 Righteous Brand soldiers across all regiments, 
and 5,200 Crownsguard across all cities. The majority 
of the Righteous Brand forces were deployed to fortifi- 
cations along the Xhorhasian border at the onset of the 
current war. 

Soon after the Dwendalian bloodline came into 
power, there was a short-lived rebellion helmed by reli- 
gious civilians. It was swiftly quelled and the rebel lead- 
ers were executed in an event known as the Admonition. 
The ruling class has regarded religion with suspicion 
ever since, believing that faith inspires the unworthy 
to rise above their station and spark fruitless rebellion. 
Instead of abolishing all religious practices, the empire 
regulates worship within its boundaries. All temples are 
owned and run by the government, and must be dedi- 
cated to deities approved by the Crown. Priests and cler- 
ics are on the Crown’s payroll to preach only approved 
religious texts. Keeping private shrines or worshiping 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


36 


= 


eo 


DweNDALIAN EMPIRE CREST 


outside official temples is punishable by fines or im- 
prisonment. The only deities that are approved by the 
empire are Erathis the Law Bearer, Bahamut the Plati- 
num Dragon, Moradin the All-Hammer, Pelor the Dawn 
Father, Ioun the Knowing Mentor, and the Raven Queen, 
Matron of Death. 


GOALS 


The empire uses the plentiful resources of the Marrow 
Valley and sizable tithes gathered from citizens to pro- 
tect their people and maintain control over Western 
Wynandir, while keeping a keen eye out for opportuni- 
ties to expand their influence across the continent. 

The empire’s religious proscriptions are proving more 
and more difficult to enforce in this time of conflict. 
Theolocrat Kon Bruda is helming a new directive to 
align religious texts with less oppressive terminology, in 
an attempt to redirect discontent away from the Crown 
and onto the heretics beyond the borders. 

Now that tensions with Xhorhas have erupted into all- 
out war with the Kryn Dynasty, the Crown is spreading 
propaganda through all aspects of daily life to unite the 
people of the empire against their common enemy. They 
hope to garner support for the war by reinforcing ru- 
mors about the kidnapping of Dwendalian children and 
the Kryn’s violent and cannibalistic nature. 


RELATIONSHIPS 


Though many citizens gripe about the empire’s restric- 
tive laws, the majority have grown accustomed to a 
comfortable lifestyle under imperial protection. Fear 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


of the evils that stalk the edges of civilization generally 
outweighs any frustrations about civil liberties, and the 
relative peace provided within the confines of Western 
Wynandir is welcomed. However, dissidents have begun 
to speak loudly of their discontent, and the growing 
trend of uproar is making King Dwendal quite irritable. 

Landlocked and reliant on the trade avenues of the 
Menagerie Coast, the Dwendalian Empire maintains a 
respectful and mutually beneficial relationship with the 
Clovis Concord. Agents of both nations watch the bor- 
ders, and an occasional political gesture of good faith 
satisfies those in power. Still, the empire doesn’t trust 
the concord by any stretch of the imagination, and a 
secret world of subterfuge is alive and well. 

Historically, the Cerberus Assembly has been respon- 
sible for much of the empire’s acquisition and retention 
of power, but the royal bloodline has always harbored a 
paranoid dislike of the council of mages. Handshakes 
and smiles hide distrust, and the king correctly assumes 
that the assembly is merely biding their time to attempt 
to challenge his power. 

The King and his chamber ignore most foreign pow- 
ers. Requests for alliances from the Council of Tal’Dorei 
and the distant city of Ank’Harel have been met with 
indifference, and efforts to install a skyport in Rexxen- 
trum to enable easier foreign travel have been continu- 
ously shut down. 


FIGURES OF INTEREST 


A number of personages maintain the power and influ- 
ence of the empire, some working to expand its power, 
while others seek to redeem their country. 


KING BERTRAND DWENDAL 
Lawful neutral, male human 


King Bertrand was raised with the strict beliefs of the 
Dwendalian royal family, and his mounting responsibil- 
ities as the leader of one of Exandria’s greatest nations 
weighs heavily on him. Bertrand is a dark, clever, and of- 
ten paranoid king—and a lonely one since his wife Duvia 
passed away nearly ten years ago. Fiercely nationalistic 
and proud of his heritage, the king harbors a disdain for 
outsiders and their challenges to imperial rule; he often 
has emissaries thrown from the borders or imprisoned 
until a replacement is sent to barter for their release. 
Bertrand does genuinely wish to protect the lives of his 
people and be remembered as the best of his bloodline. 
However, civil unrest is brewing, and his frustrations 
with the Cerberus Assembly only intensify his forceful 
demeanor. His only living son, Eidys, has been unable to 
produce an heir, and King Bertrand fears that his family 
line will come to an end, an obsession which drives him 
to seek out a way to prolong his life. 


CHAMBERLAIN QUESELIA VIR 
Neutral good, female elf 


Chamberlain to the previous king and now to Bertrand, 
Queselia handles all affairs regarding the management 
of the house of Dwendal. Trusted deeply by the king, 

Queselia refuses to give into the brooding tendencies of 


her monarch and hopes to guide him toward a more just 
rule. Although she is unable to protect him from his own 
unreasonable impulses, she hopes to find a way to curb 
his self-destructive behavior. 


PRINCE EIDYS DWENDAL 
Neutral good, male human 


Heir to the throne of the empire, Eidys has shown great 
strength in physical combat and war games, but little 
cunning in social or political matters. Though he was 
once eager to please his father, the consistent lack of ap- 
proval has left Eidys jaded. Happy to live an extravagant 
life free from crushing responsibility, he’s been eager to 
produce a child to whom he could abdicate should his 
father pass. However, he and his wife, Princess Suria 
Dwendal, have been unable to conceive. The king has 
all but given up on his son, leaving the prince dejected 
and bitter. 


PRINCESS SURIA DWENDAL 
Chaotic neutral, female human 


Wed into the royal family from her own noble house of 
Saugiss, Suria was filled with pride to bring honor to 
her family. Unfortunately, the unexpected difficulty in 
producing an heir has put her and her husband out of 
favor with the king. Unwilling to give up, Suria is seek- 
ing to remedy the situation by any means necessary, no 
matter how unnatural. 


PRIME ARBITER SYDNOCK TRUSCAN 
Lawful evil, male human 


The Truscan family are longtime allies of the Dwenda- 
lian bloodline, and Sydnock managed to advance his 
family’s influence within the empire above most other 
noble houses. Rising to become the Prime Arbiter of 
Rexxentrum, Sydnock has final say on all matters of law 
that do not require the king’s attention. A brutal man 
with a grudge against religious empowerment, Sydnock 
is constantly attempting to sniff out corruption within 
the approved structure of worship within the empire. 
His estranged daughter Lydia disagrees with his ruth- 
less methods and now lives in Zadash as an advocate for 
civilian rights. 


CROWN MARSHAL HAYDEN DAMURAG 
Lawful neutral, nonbinary human 


As a decorated veteran of the imperial military who has 
served for nearly twenty years, Hayden is a highly re- 
spected soldier and clever tactician who is instrumental 
in the campaign against the Kryn Dynasty. Known to be 
stern but adaptable in the face of adversity, they've risen 
through the ranks and now directly advise the king on 
all major military actions. Hayden prefers to avoid court 
life, especially as their practicality often clashes with 
Sydnock Truscan’s cold cynicism. Currently assigned to 
oversee the defense of the besieged eastern front at the 
Rockguard Garrison, the Crown Marshal is doing their 
best to keep their soldiers safe and the enemy at bay. 


EXCHEQUER AETHIA DROOZE 
Lawful neutral, female dwarf 


Aethia is in charge of the tithes from the various cities 
within the empire and is the overseer of the biannual 
collections by her tithe collectors. She absolutely loves 
numbers and wealth, taking joy in squeezing every cop- 
per she can from those who are legally obliged to pay. 
Obsessed with efficiency and intolerant of sloppy work, 
Aethia will even comb through the ledgers of her subor- 
dinates late into the night in order to achieve numerical 
perfection. 


GUILDMASTER KAI ARNESS 
Lawful evil, male human 


Kai came to prominence within Rexxentrum through 
the Arness family’s illustrious connections within the 
merchant guilds of the empire. He earned the nickname 
“Goldfang” for his penchant for sneaking missing profit 
from the pockets of businesses unable to pay member- 
ship fees and taxes. Respected and feared for ruthlessly 
governing the many guilds and organizations that drive 
the Dwendalian economy, his private worship of As- 
modeus guides his ambition to mingle with dangerous 
figures in the empire. The guildmaster often works with 
Exchequer Drooze to maintain the proper flow of gold 
into the coffers of the empire. 


ARGONOMIST JUNE WISTON 
Chaotic good, female half-elf 


June is seen as a studious spitfire, and she has unex- 
pectedly proven to also be a masterful bureaucrat with 
a talent for exploiting legal loopholes. Driven by a youth 
in poverty, she swore to help repair a broken system of 
agricultural distribution. By making the right moves and 
the right friends—and making a loud fuss when neces- 
sary—she eventually became a folk hero to the under- 
privileged. Hoping to watch her eat her words and col- 
lapse under the pressure of imperial politics, the Crown 
offered her chief management over all agriculture in 

the position of Argonomist. Much to their chagrin, she’s 
proven both driven and capable, pushing for advanced 
change in the empire. Unable to discard someone so 
high profile during a time of general unrest, the Crown 
instead endures her work while attempting to bury her 
in red tape. 


‘THEOLOCRAT KON BRUDA 
Lawful neutral, male human 


Once a monk of the Cobalt Soul, Kon Bruda’s faith in 
the Knowing Mentor has waned since accepting the 
office of Theolocrat. Kon is a specialist in the histor- 
ical and social workings of modern religion. When 

the previous Theolocrat passed away, he accepted the 
post out of a sense of duty, then became accustomed 

to the lavish lifestyle afforded by his position. He helps 
the Crown alter existing religious texts and write ap- 
proved sermons and prayers for distribution throughout 
the empire. 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 37 


EMISSARY LORD ZEDDAN GRAF 
Neutral Sood, male human 


A beloved noble and socialite from the House of Graf, 
Zeddan showed prowess in gathering rumors for his 
own entertainment. The cunning Sydnock Truscan saw 
promise in Zeddan’s talents and recommended him to 
the king to become the empire’s lead emissary. Now 
acting as the diplomatic contact to the world beyond 

the empire’s boundaries, Zeddan is eager to do the 
Crown’s bidding while rooting out gossip that may prove 
politically expedient. In his travels, Lord Zeddan often 
crosses paths with Lord Athesias Uludan of the Cer- 
berus Assembly, and the pair loathe each other deeply. 
Zeddan is desperately trying to convince the king to 
install a Skyship Tower in Rexxentrum to make his trav- 
els easier. 


OLIVER SCHREIBER, RETAINER TO THE CROWN 
Lawful neutral, male gnome 


Most know Oliver as the immediate head servant to the 
king and the royal family for nearly three generations, 
but Oliver is also the secret head of the Augen Trust, 

the Crown's elite spy network. The Augen Trust uses 
extreme secrecy, false identities, and infiltration into 
allied and opposing societies to acquire information and 
inform the Crown of any threats to its goals. As one of 
the most trusted members of King Bertrand Dwendal’s 
circle, Oliver holds more power than his compatriots 
would believe. 


p — eee ee 


LAWS OF THE DWENDALIAN EMPIRE 

As judged by the eyes of the local lawmaster, appointed 
hands of that lawmaster, or the Law Bearer herself, any 
criminals discovered and/or convicted of crimes within 
local halls of judgment throughout the empire are sub- 
ject to punishments befitting the crime. All fines and 
punishments for crimes against a Crownsguard member, 
Righteous Brand soldier, or noble are doubled. All fines 
and punishments regarding crimes against an imperial of- 
ficial or associate of the Cerberus Assembly are tripled. 


Theft: 5-10 days incarceration and/or a fine of twice the 
worth of the stolen goods. 

Worship of non-empire gods: 30 days incarceration and a 
fine of 250 gp. 

Ownership of another intelligent humanoid creature: 
12-20 months incarceration and a fine of 1,800 gp. 

Trespassing: 12 days incarceration and/or a fine of 215 gp. 

Failure to pay taxes to the Crown: 5-30 days incarcer- 
ation and a repossession of property equal to the 
amount owed. 

Damage to private property: 5-15 days incarceration or a 
fine of twice the worth of property destroyed. 

Damage to Crown property: 15-60 days incarceration and 
a fine of twice the worth of property destroyed. 

Kidnapping: 60 days incarceration and/or a fine of 800 gp. 

Assault with intent to injure: 30 days incarceration and/or 
a fine of 350 gp. 

Assault with intent to kill: 250 days incarceration and/or a 
fine of 1,800 gp, or execution. 

Murder: 8-15 years incarceration and/or a fine of 6,000 gp, 
or execution. 

Treason: execution. 


NS ee 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


KRYN DYNASTY 


The Kryn Dynasty rules the northern wastes of Xhor- 
has, and has only revealed itself to the wider world 
within the past century. Centered around—and under— 
the ruins of Ghor Dranas in Eastern Wynandir, the dy- 
nasty governs many townships and small villages where 
the Kryn have helped establish a modicum of civilized 
living among the nomadic wastefolk. They believe that 
beings not yet beyond redemption can be turned to the 
light of the Luxon, and often struggle with the unruly 
denizens of the wastes, hoping to gain converts to their 
cause and faith. Those that do accept the dynasty often 
do so because they seek protection from the dregs of the 
Calamity that wander the wastes, as well as the scouts 
of the Dwendalian Empire. 

Dark elves are the most populous race within the 
Kryn Dynasty. The drow were the first people to un- 
cover the first buried Luxon beacon many ages ago, ina 
time before they turned from Lolth and escaped enslave- 
ment from the Betrayer Gods. The dark elves claimed 
the dread citadel of Ghor Dranas as their own, as well 
as the massive network of underground caverns that 
make up the Underdark of Wildemount. The Kryn are 
stealthily becoming a force to be reckoned with. 

The Kryn drow who emerged from the shadowed 
depths of the caverns beneath Xhorhas now endure peri- 
ods of sunlight as part of their worship, though their cit- 
ies are shaded by umbral magic during daylight hours. 
When hunting, or in times of conflict, the warriors of the 
Kryn don their signature chitinous armor. A series of 
small airways woven through this armor can be opened 
to emit a loud, clicking buzz to intimidate their foes as 
they charge. This noise has inspired outsiders to call the 
Kryn “cricks,” referring to this cricket-like din. 

Artifacts left behind by the Luxon that hold its es- 
sence are known as Luxon beacons and are coveted 
by the Kryn Dynasty as central to their civilization. Ifa 
proven soul is ritualistically bound to a Luxon beacon, 
they can enter a process called the consecution: when a 
mortal bound to the Luxon dies within a hundred miles 
of a beacon, the beacon ensnares their soul from its 
intended afterlife and prepares it to be reborn in a new 
child within that same vicinity. When that child then ma- 
tures into adolescence, they begin to recall subtle knowl- 
edge from their past life’s experiences, a process called 
anamnesis. Through meditation with a guide, they can 
unlock the memories of their past lives and become a 
more complete being. When a soul has cycled enough to 
believe they are ready to greet the Luxon, they are called 
an Umavi, or “perfect soul,” and are revered within the 
Kryn society. Some beings that naturally reincarnate, 
such as the phoenix, are considered holy creatures that 
carry a shard of the Luxon within themselves. 

If a life continues long enough to achieve a state of 
clarity called achess, where they believe that they’ve 
learned all they can learn from their current life, they 
can choose to partake in a ritualistic termination of 
their current life, assisted by an Umavi in proximity to a 
beacon, thereby setting them on the path to a new birth. 
While considered an honor within the Kryn Dynasty, 
this practice is misunderstood and seen as barbaric out- 
side their culture. 


The Kryn Dynasty is a society restructured from the 
Lolthite history they rejected. The people of the dynasty 
stand under the first Umavi, known as Bright Queen 
Leylas Kryn. Beneath the first Umavi, there are twelve 
noble Dens that mark families of souls who have lived 
together through generations: Dens Kryn, Mirimm, 
Thelyss, Hythenos, Icozrin, Biylan, Tasithar, Duen- 
dalos, Daev’yana, Omrifar, Beltune, and Zolaed. When 
someone is believed to be experiencing anamnesis, 
they submit to a deep meditation with a guide trained 
in the ways of consecution. This process helps restore 
memories of the past life, which then mingle with cur- 
rent memories. 

The awakened soul is then reunited with their Den. 
Dens do grow as new souls enter the consecution and 
join their ranks, and new Dens are established with 
each generation. The oldest Dens, especially those 
helmed by an Umavi, are held in the highest esteem, 
and generally answer directly to the Bright Queen. The 
older the soul, the more prestige it holds in the dynasty. 
Beneath the Dens of Rosohna, guilds and Den represen- 
tatives govern the other cities of the dynasty that stretch 
across Xhorhas, spreading the faith of the Luxon and 
watching over all Xhorhasians who seek the safety of 
civilization. 

This seemingly benevolent societal structure does 
have a dark side. A closely guarded secret of the highest 
Umaviis a challenge in the consecution called typhros: 
some souls that have undergone multiple cycles of the 
consecution are driven mad when their minds cannot 
reconcile the memories of many lifetimes. Those who 
fall to typhros are quietly removed from the dynasty and 
either left in the wastes or mercifully slain away from 
the beacons. Signs of madness are beginning to show in 
the Bright Queen herself, but those closest to her do all 
they can to shield others from such portents. 

It is believed that the Luxon cherishes unity in com- 
munity, but also values free choice and the power of the 
individual mind. For each soul to carve a unique path is 
the best way fora soul to learn about the world. Casting 
off the teachings of Fate and Destiny taught by some of 
the current pantheon, the followers of the Luxon are 
taught that the real power of the universe comes from 
the power of choice. Many possible futures all await 
your path, and the universe trembles with anticipatory 
power as you approach every decision. This power is 
called dunamis, the energy of potentiality, and the co- 
alescing architecture of the multiple futures leading into 
each moment is released when an outcome is brought to 
reality. It is the energy that suffuses every Luxon beacon 
to prepare the lives to come, and it is the basis of the 
Kryn’s unique divine crafts and arcane abilities. 

The Kryn Dynasty has uncovered four beacons and 
is certain that more remain to be discovered. It is be- 
lieved that once all the beacons are brought together, 
the Luxon will be summoned from their slumber to ask 
their children the great question and impart the truth. It 
is said that at this time, the Luxon will take those who 
entered the consecution and abandon this lesser world 
to start a new world elsewhere. 


KRYN DYNASTY CREST 


The Aurora Watch legionnaires of the Kryn currently 
number around 21,600 in total. Around 13,200 Aurora 
Watch are divided among the cities under the dynasty’s 
protection, with another 3,300 Aurora Watch stationed 
in and around the capital of Rosohna—formerly known 
as Ghor Dranas—to keep the peace and defend the 
region. Approximately 5,100 soldiers are scattered 
throughout the Underdark beneath Wildemount at dif- 
ferent locations of interest, many employing magically 
controlled purple worms to allow elite units to navigate 
the caverns quickly. The remainder of the watch is sta- 
tioned along the border of Western Wynandir to prevent 
the empire’s incursions—and to seize land from the em- 
pire as they advance. 


GOALS 


The primary objective ofthe Kryn Dynasty is to seek 


out and recover the Luxon beacons presumed to be scat- 
tered across Exandria. Not only does each beacon bring 
them closer to the eventual rebirth of the Luxon, they 
also help broaden the boundaries of the Kryn society 

as a new center of the consecution, allowing expansion 
into new lands and the continued conversion of others. 
With two of their four beacons now missing, the Bright 
Queen and her people are desperate to discover more of 
these sacred artifacts. 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


39 


4.0 


The Bright Queen and her fellow Umavi see the 
strength dormant in the roving beastfolk and goblinoids 
of Xhorhas, and have taken to teaching these nomadic 
peoples their ways, helping them build villages under 
the banner of the dynasty, and converting them to their 
faith. Even so, not all ruling Dens like the idea of in- 
troducing what they consider lesser creatures into the 
consecution, leading to tensions between the people 
of Rosohna and the scattered villages in the Xhorha- 
sian wilds. 

With some beacons stolen by operatives of the Dwen- 
dalian Empire, the entire Kryn Dynasty has mobilized 
to retaliate. They are gathering armies to assault 
Western Wynandir while sending assassins and spies 
through the subterranean paths of the Underdark, hop- 
ing to recover the beacons and simultaneously weaken 
the evil and blasphemous empire. 

The Kryn Dynasty has spent a generation training 
and preparing a select group of volunteers to gather 
information on their enemies and find routes through 
both political and physical borders. These agents are 
collectively known as the Lens, a network of spies and 
infiltrators who can bypass boundaries and assimilate 
into foreign nations to gather intelligence, help the 
Bright Queen protect their people, and seek out beacons 
across Exandria. 


RELATIONSHIPS 


Open war has recently broken out between the Kryn 
Dynasty and the Dwendalian Empire—a conflict that 
neither nation can afford to lose. Those bearing the 
colors of the enemy are subdued and questioned before 
i — 
LAWS OF THE KRYN DYNASTY 
Within the sight of the Luxon, the Umavi, and the Dens 
who protect the lands of Xhorhas and its people, any who 
are presented for judgement before the presiding officials 
entrusted with the wisdom of the Bright Queen are to 
have their sentence carried our accordingly. All fines and 
punishments for crimes against an Aurora Watch soldier 
or noble are doubled. All fines and punishments regard- 
ing crimes against a Den official or member of the Bright 
Queen’s council are tripled. 


Theft: 2-5 days incarceration and a fine equal to the 
worth stolen. 

Ownership of another intelligent humanoid creature: 
10-20 months incarceration and a fine of 1,500 gp. 

Trespassing: 5 days incarceration and a fine of 120 gp. 

Damage to private property: 5-20 days incarceration or a 
fine of twice the worth of property destroyed. 

Damage to dynasty property: 12-50 days incarceration and 
a fine of twice the worth of property destroyed. 

Kidnapping: 60 days incarceration and/or a fine of 800 gp. 

Worship of Betrayer Gods: 150 days incarceration, or 
execution. 

Assault with intent to injure: 12 days incarceration and a 
fine of 200 gp. 

Assault with intent to kill: 200 days incarceration and a fine 
of 1,200 gp, or execution. 

Murder: 5-10 years incarceration and/or a fine of 4,000 gp, 
or execution. 

Treason: execution. 


z ee a eee ey 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


being punished and sometimes executed. Judgment is 
swift against the perceived imperial oppressors, and the 
forces of Rosohna will continue to push until their foes 
yield the stolen relics. 

Though the Kryn have remained fairly isolated 
throughout their history, they are now reaching out to 
other factions in the hopes of making alliances against 
the Dwendalian Empire. The Kryn Dynasty has begun 
hiring mercenaries through the Tribes of Shadycreek 
Run and purchasing dangerous weapons of war from 
the Myriad. Rumors of strange magics and powerful 
relics in northern Eiselcross have reached the dynasty’s 
ears, and they are willing to seek out any potential ad- 
vantage over their Dwendalian foes. 

There are many humanoid tribes that roam the 
southern reaches of Xhorhas that have declined to ally 
themselves with the Kryn—or to be assimilated by them. 
While the Bright Queen has allowed them to continue 
their neutrality for the time being, she watches them 
closely, lest they be courted by the empire’s coin and 
empty promises. 


FIGURES OF INTEREST 


There are many powerful figures that guide the faith 
of the Luxon and the expansion of the Kryn Dynasty’s 
power and influence. 


BRIGHT QUEEN LEYLAS KRYN 
Lawful neutral, female dark elf 


Leylas was present when the first beacon was found a 
millennium ago, and has lived eight lifetimes of intense 
struggle and self-discovery since. She built the dynasty 
around her journey, spearheaded the recovery of the 
four beacons known to the Kryn, and died numerous 
times in the defense of her people. Leylas Kryn is deeply 
revered and respected as a mighty warrior, an empathic 
leader, and the elder Umavi who guides her people in 
the light of the Luxon. Her behavior has grown erratic 
at times, worrying her trusted inner circle, but she 

is far too driven to acknowledge such weakness in a 
time of war. 


Dusk CAPTAIN QUANA KRYN 
Neutral good, female dark elf 


An extremely powerful echo knight and general of the 
forces of Rosohna, Quana has been Leylas’s partner 
for three of her lifetimes, and five of Leylas’s. She is 
wholly devoted to her people—and her queen. Quana 
holdsa private hope that the Kryn might one day leave 
the inhospitable wastes of Xhorhas and find a proper 
place in the world among the other peoples of Exandria. 
The Bright Queen was once receptive to her ideas, but 
Leylas Kryn has no time for idealism in this age of war. 
Quana is disappointed, but she is more worried by the 
strange shifts in her partner’s usually wise and con- 
trolled demeanor. 


SHADOWHAND ESSEK THELYSS 
Neutral evil, male dark elf 


Just over a hundred and twenty years old and still within 
his first life, Essek is a prodigy who displays an unprec- 
edented talent for the manipulation of dunamis energy. 
Essek is both respected and feared for his intelligence 
and cunning, and he carefully plots each step he takes 
to further his and his Den’s climb up the hierarchy of the 
dynasty. Essek is more interested in dunamancy magic 
than worshiping the Luxon, and he is strangely excited 
for the war with the empire. He is eager to use the 
conflict as an excuse to practice the deadlier aspects of 
dunamancy, and also curious to see what the powerful 
minds of the Cerberus Assembly may have gleaned from 
their research into the beacon they stole. 


SUNBREAKER OLOMON 
Neutral, male minotaur 


Having lived a number of lifetimes as an early follower 
of Leylas, Olomon has settled into this recent life as a 
massive minotaur, embracing the abilities granted to 
him on the battlefield and taking his place as a cham- 
pion on the front lines. His presence inspires his fellow 
warriors, and his cunning has led the armies of the 
Kryn to many victories against the empire. 


TASKHAND VERIN THELYSS 
Lawful good, male dark elf 


An acclaimed soldier and talented leader, Verin Thelyss 
is the younger brother of Essek and the youngest soul 
of Den Thelyss. Verin lacks his older brother’s ambi- 
tion but possesses a keen sense of justice and honor. 
Recently given command of Kryn forces in Bazzoxan, 
Verin hopes to bring about a victory for the dynasty that 
will grant him respect and acceptance from his accom- 
plished family. 


SKYSYBIL ABRIANNA MIRIMM 
Lawful neutral, female goblin 


Seen by many within the dynasty as a talented diviner 
and voice of reason, Abrianna is an Umavi nearly as old 
as the Bright Queen herself. The beloved Skysybil has 
spent her current lifetime as a goblin, a fact that has 
drawn both ire and jests from the Bright Queen’s court 
for decades. This experience has given Abrianna a new 
perspective on the wastefolk under the dynasty’s ban- 
ner; she is now one of the few councilors in the Lucid 
Bastion who bother to vouch for the goblinkin. 


PROFESSOR Tuss WACCOH 
Neutral, female half-orc 


A scatterbrained scholar whose subtle brilliance has 
increased the effectiveness of the dynasty warmachines, 
Professor Waccoh usually oversees a number of aca- 
demic programs and private research projects at the 
Marble Tomes Conservatory within the Firmaments of 
Rosohna. Recently obsessed with the desolate, cursed 
lands of Blightshore and the mysteries that lie hidden 
within, Tuss is actively seeking allies and mercenaries 
to send into the dangerous lands to recover information, 
relics, and specimens for further study. 


CERBERUS ASSEMBLY 


The Cerberus Assembly was established nearly three 
hundred years ago, when strife and competition be- 
tween warring mage lords threatened to unravel the so- 
cial order of the Dwendalian Empire. The house leaders 
of this conflict nearly destroyed one another in what was 
called the Eve of Crimson Midnight, an arcane battle 
within the capital of Rexxentrum that leveled two wards 
of the city, killing hundreds of civilians. At the peak of 
the violence, a parlay was called, and the mage lords 
decided to put aside their differences and avoid mutu- 
ally assured destruction, instead joining as a unified 
conclave. When brought before the king for judgment of 
their crimes, they offered an accord to instead officially 
instate the conclave and submit entirely to king’s rule. 
Taking the name the Cerberus Assembly, a reference to 
a powerful, historical union of mages during the Age of 
Arcanum, the mages took the empire to new heights of 
power and expansion. 

In the centuries since, the Cerberus Assembly has 
subtly ingrained itself within most facets of the empire’s 
government, becoming a force of political and military 
power that many say could rival the king himself. This 
reality is not lost on the royal council, and tensions 
often simmer between the assembly and the Crown. 
The mages of the assembly are known for their extrav- 
agant lifestyles and intimidating history of political and 
economic control, and much of the populace mistrusts 
them, though no one dares to cross them or the king. 
There are eight ruling positions within the assembly, 
and the families of each member are appointed as lesser 
members without responsibility, called “annexes.” 
Mages of the assembly wander throughout the empire 
with little fear of argument or resistance. 

Members are elevated into one of the eight major 
offices on the death of a member that leaves an office 
vacant, or when a standing member abdicates their posi- 
tion. The remaining members then recommend replace- 
ments and vote on the mage to fill the newly open office. 


GOALS 


The assembly plays the long game, working to subtly in- 
crease its power across the empire and beyond. Popular 
decisions are often publicly presented as the will of the 
assembly, while conflicted issues are tailored to seem 
purely the “will of the Crown,” driving a wedge between 
the two bodies. The assembly seeks to write history to 
favor its members as the architects of modern law and 
culture, with the eventual goal of subverting the power 
of the king, turning him into yet another puppet of the 
assembly’s goals. Assembly mages believe that only they 
have the knowledge and talents to truly guide the em- 
pire into greatness. 

Aside from political matters, the assembly is focused 
on locating and excavating powerful relics and magic 
lost to the Age of Arcanum. Its members believe that 
their original namesake was the apex of society across 
all history, and they seek to reclaim their place as 
paragons of mortal rule. Thus, all salvaged texts and 
artifacts of power from that era are to be recovered at 
all costs. 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


The curious discovery of the power behind the Kryn 
Dynasty has recently drawn much of the assembly’s 
attention. The mysterious, primal force known as duna- 
mis could change the world’s understanding of magic 
itself—and could even be the key to placing the assembly 
above all other rulers and nations. In pursuit of this 
goal, agents of the assembly stole two Luxon beacons 
from the Kryn Dynasty, though they subsequently lost 
one to a band of adventurers called the Mighty Nein. 
The assembly has dedicated immense effort to studying 
and exploiting this new form of magic, knowing full well 
that stealing the beacons is what caused the current war 
in the first place. 


RELATIONSHIPS 


The assembly has worked directly with the king and his 
chamber for so long that the two factions have become 
deeply intertwined, frustrating both of them. Though 
they rely heavily on each other, every smile and agree- 
ment barely conceals an undercurrent of venomous 
loathing. Some members of the assembly feel that it is 
far too soon to overtly challenge the Crown, while others 
believe it would be foolish to miss the opportunity the 
war is creating. 

The assembly has established itself as the more for- 
ward-thinking face of the empire to the outside world, 
with Lord Athesias Uludan going out of his way to 
upstage the Crown at every diplomatic opportunity, all 
“in the name of the king.” Most foreign officials happily 
deal with the assembly instead of the Crown, especially 
those of the empire’s closest trade partner, the Clovis 
Concord. The assembly ensures that such meetings are 
recounted to the king with embellished tales of their dip- 
lomatic success. 

The acquisition of a Luxon beacon and the hunger 
among assembly mages to unlock its powers have 
drawn the animosity of the Kryn Dynasty, triggering 
their attacks on the empire. 


FIGURES OF INTEREST 


The mysterious minds of the Cerberus Assembly often 
quarrel over goals and methods, but ultimately these 
eight mages are united by their heritage and a shared 
thirst for knowledge. 


MASTER TRENT IKITHON, 
ARCHMAGE OF CIVIC INFLUENCE 
Chaotic evil, male human 


Trent is respected as the acclaimed Propagandist of the 
empire and the third oldest member of the assembly. 
Once an instructor at the Soltryce Academy, he only 
returns every few years to collect young students for his 
experiments in the mental conditioning that he calls 
“awakening.” Many of these students go mad and are 
locked away, but those who endure become zealots for 
the assembly and join the Volstrucker, an elite group 

of arcane thugs commonly known as Scourgers, who 
perform the assembly’s dirtiest work under Trent’s 
direction. 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


MARTINET LUDINUS DA’ LETH, 
ARCHMAGE OF DOMESTIC PROTECTIONS 
Lawful evil, male elf 


Ludinus is the oldest and only original member of the 
assembly, as well as the master of warfare and conflict. 
Charged with overhauling the military structure of the 
Dwendalian Empire, Ludinus directed the construction 
of the garrisons on the Xhorhasian border and often 
oversees their maintenance. He was one of the mages 
who survived the destruction of Molaesmyr and fled 

to Bysaes Tyl, but he saw the opportunity to achieve 
greatness within the empire and left his culture behind 
to continue his arcane pursuits. Wise, if emotionless, he 
bears a deep hatred for the Kryn Dynasty and spares no 
effort gathering information on their weaknesses and 
secrets. Ludinus spends most of his time developing ar- 
cane weapons of war and shoring up the military might 
of the empire, while subtly challenging the leadership of 
Crown Marshal Damurag. 


BARONESS JENNA IRESOR, 
ARCHMAGE OF INDUSTRY 


Neutral doppelganger 


One of the younger members of the assembly, Jenna is 
known for her business acumen and her extravagant 
lifestyle. By hiding her nature as a doppelganger and us- 
ing memory-altering magics at a young age to fabricate 
a false past, Jenna constructed her human persona from 
the ground up, leveraging her powers of deception to 
essentially write herself into history as a Clovis Concord 
expatriate. She helps oversee central guild business in 
Rexxentrum under Guildmaster Kai Arness, and helps 
Exchequer Aethia Drooze organize the collection of 
tithes through starostas across the empire. 


MASTER DOOLAN TVERSKY, 
ARCHMAGE OF DySOLOGY 
Chaotic neutral, female gnome 


The second-oldest member of the assembly, Doolan is 
in charge of the study and understanding of abnormal 
creatures and deviants of arcane creation that might 
threaten the empire’s way of life. She is an absent- 
minded yet brilliant gnome who is obsessed with all 
beasts, aberrations, and creatures of legend. Doolan 
imports creatures from around the world to study, disas- 
semble, and use in her attempts to revolutionize magical 
practices. She resents the Library of the Cobalt Soul, 

as her reputation has caused them to bar her from their 
facilities. She wishes to catalog the unstudied horrors 
of Xhorhas and has covertly obtained the services of the 
Myriad to retrieve new specimens. 


LORD ATHESIAS ULUDAN, 
ARCHMAGE OF DIPLOMATIC UNION 
Neutral good, male human 


Athesias’s charm and bombastic personality serve him 
well as a diplomat. His duty is to foster a positive rela- 
tionship with people of power both within and beyond 
the borders of the empire. He was originally one of the 
most effective instructors at the Soltryce Academy, but 
his penchant for spectacle and his rampant narcissism 


made him a difficult ally to trust with state secrets. 
When the office of Diplomatic Union opened, he was 
quickly and quietly reassigned. Athesias finds great plea- 
sure in ruining or usurping the plans of his counterpart 
in the Crown’s employ, Emissary Lord Zeddan Graf. 


LaDy VESS DE ROGNA, 
ARCHMAGE OF ANTIQUITY 


Neutral evil, female hal f-elf 


A public recluse for most of her life, Vess is both a 
brilliant mage and dedicated historian. She assumed 
this post after replacing her criminal predecessor, 
Lady Delilah Briarwood. As an instructor at the Sol- 
tryce Academy for over two decades, Vess has studied 
and unraveled a number of historical mysteries and 
pre-Calamity riddles—and hoarded some of the spoils 
for herself. Always eager to pursue forgotten lore and 
artifacts of eons past, Vess has been known to quietly 
vanish to Xhorhas for weeks at a time, returning with 
fewer guards and more uncovered secrets. 


HEADMASTER ZIVAN MARGOLIN, 
ARCHMAGE OF CONSCRIPTION 
Lawful neutral, male human 


Zivan Margolin inherited the position of headmaster 
from his father, the lateJorma Margolin. Zivan has been 
the headmaster of the Soltryce Academy in Rexxen- 
trum for nearly twenty years. Calm, patient, and quietly 
imposing, Zivan walks the halls of the Academy with 

a keen eye for talent. He is in charge of the curriculum 
and also watches for any latent powers that may be 
worth grooming as future allies of the assembly, dan- 
gers to be monitored, or prospective minds for Ikithon to 
conscribe into the Volstrucker. Zivan has rarely had the 
opportunity to demonstrate his full power, for he is typi- 
cally busied with keeping the peace between the feuding 
members of the assembly. Those who have witnessed 
his true might, however, now know that his words are 
backed by some of the most powerful magics within the 
Cerberus Assembly. 


HEADMASTER OREMID Hass, 
ARCHMAGE OF CULTIVATION 


Lawful neutral, male earth genasi 


The current headmaster of the Hall of Erudition in 
Zadash, Oremid is tasked with watching and grooming 
the next generation of mages and arcane specialists 
outside Rexxentrum. While he himself is a gentle soul 
who adores animals, he puts on the façade of a strict 
man with no sense of humor, which is further enhanced 
by the elemental influence of his earth genasi blood. He 
teaches students that failure is not an option, and that 
emotion is a barrier to one’s true ability. Equally feared, 
respected, and privately loathed by the students (and 
some instructors), Oremid personally dismisses those 
who break under his school’s curriculum and heaps joy- 
ous praise on those who endure their training. 


CLOVIS CONCORD 


Nearly four hundred years ago, an alliance of the Ki'Nau 
islanders and foreign Marquesian traders founded a 
new nation on the tropical Menagerie Coast. The Clovis 
Concord is a democratic nation that enforces law and 
order, and regulates commerce along the length of the 
coast. The nation is composed of eight independent city- 
states, each ruled by its own marquis, which operate as 
one union under the banner of the Clovis Concord. This 
arrangement ensures uniform laws, regulation of trade, 
and mutual protection between the city-states. These 
eight cities are Port Damali, Port Zoon, Gwardan, Tus- 
soa, Othe, Feolinn, Nicodranas, and Brokenbank. 

Open shipping lanes and inviting tropical scenery 
have made the domain of the Clovis Concord a cultural 
melting pot and a popular place to live or visit. Knowing 
this, the respective marquises uphold a long tradition of 
welcoming all weary travelers and providing an atmo- 
sphere of color and delight. If there is gold to be spent, 
the concord is eager for you to spend it within their cit- 
ies. Between the venues for entertainment and vice, and 
the ample business opportunities, the concord hopes to 
convince those with wealth to spend it here, outside the 
gates of the Dwendalian Empire. 

Internally, each marquis of the Clovis Concord keeps 
a tight grip on the shipping and trade that comes though 
their cities, overseeing all guilds that organize imports 
and exports and managing a handful of guildmasters 
that form the backbone of local commerce. When a mar- 
quis dies or is impeached by the other members of the 
concord, the remaining members choose a successor. 

Warriors who prove their might through gladiatorial 
bouts during times of celebration and ceremony are 
asked to join the Zhelezo, a well-paid guard force that 
works for the governing marquis to enforce the laws. 
Cities have one or more magistrates that oversee judg- 
ment on legal matters and criminal punishment. 

While the cities do work together for the good of the 
concord, they are also each in silent competition with 
each other, flaunting their affluence and clientele at ev- 
ery opportunity. When a prominent figure from the far 
reaches of Exandria finds their way to the Menagerie 
Coast, it’s not uncommon for them to be courted by mul- 
tiple marquises in an attempt to convince the personage 
to stay as a guest of their city. 

In recent times, the Myriad has subtly infiltrated the 
Clovis Concord, often with the unwitting aid of greedy 
local politicians. Rumors of criminal collusion have 
raised suspicion amid members of the concord. Sooner 
or later, the tension will have to break—and the fallout 
won't be pretty. 

Despite the concord’s cordial relationship with the 
Dwendalian Empire, their proximity to the imperial 
power is a lingering source of unease. Currently, the 
concord maintains a standing military of 7,800 Shore 
Warden soldiers across the coast, a nautical fleet of 370 
ships, and 5,200 Zhelezo divided between the cities. 
Some of the Shore Wardens are posted inland, scat- 
tered around and within the Cyrios Mountains, where 
they maintain forts along the border with Western Wyn- 
andir and the Dwendalian Empire. 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


43 


44 


Crovis CONCORD CREST 


GOALS 


The Clovis Concord is concerned with maintaining 

the trade and commerce that ensures their continued 
influence, both in Wildemount and the rest of Exandria. 
Anything that might jeopardize business is viewed as a 
major threat to the sanctity of life along the Menagerie 
Coast. Faced with the hazards of dangerous creatures 
that lurk in the nearby jungles and beneath the waves, 
as well as piracy on the open waters, the concord is 
employing substantial numbers of adventurers and 
mercenaries. 

Forty years ago, when the concord worked to enforce 
rising taxation on independent merchant companies 
operating within the Menagerie Coast, the outrage led a 
small union of angry enterprises to turn to piracy, call- 
ing themselves the Revelry. These pirates have claimed 
the island of Darktow and terrorized the shipping lanes 
for four decades, all while deftly avoiding pursuit and 
naval retribution. The concord is eager to destroy the 
Revelry in its entirety, and have put massive bounties on 
the heads of the so-called scourges of the ocean. 


RELATIONSHIPS 


After the fall of the Julous Dominion and the rise of the 
Dwendalian Empire, the concord was eager to reach 

a diplomatic arrangement with the victorious empire. 
The empire recognized the difficulty of conquering the 
Clovis Concord and the challenge of managing their 
immense network of international trade, and acquiesced 


CHAPTER 2 { FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


to a treaty. This loose alliance has been mutually ben- 
eficial for many generations, and the concord city of 
Nicodranas acts as a common ground for people of both 
nations. Both imperial Crownsguard and local Zhelezo 
keep the peace in Nicodranas, and both imperial and 
concord laws hold sway within the city. While this ar- 
rangement occasionally causes strain between the two 
governments, the marquises of the concord are happy 
to have the buffer of the empire between them and the 
ravenous wastes of Xhorhas. As the war between the 
empire and Xhorhas continues to grow, the concord is 
determined to stay neutral. This has caused some ten- 
sion with the empire, but nothing the concord worries 
will overshadow their long-standing treaty. 


FIGURES OF INTEREST 


Though the marquises of the Clovis Concord outwardly 
embrace the spirit of cooperation on which their nation 
was founded, most scheme and conspire against one 
another to attain ever-greater power. 


OLESYA LAPIDUS, MARQUIS OF PORT DAMALI 
Neutral good, female human 


The Lapidus family’s work in protecting and continuing 
the prosperity of the city for four generations has kept 

a Lapidus as Marquis of Port Damali for just as long. 
Olesya was raised as a boy, but quickly discovered that 
she identified as female and transitioned in her youth. 
As the fourth and current leader of Port Damali, Olesya 
takes pride in her charge and is respected by the rest 
of the concord. However, with the growing distraction 
of the Revelry, Olesya failed to notice the infestation of 
Myriad agents throughout her city and the guilds be- 
neath her. Now realizing the dangerous web surround- 
ing her and the interests of her city, she is seeking a way 
to turn the tide. 


ZHAFE ULUDAN, MARQUIS OF NICODRANAS 
Lawful neutral, male human 


Zhafe is a distant relative of Lord Athesias Uludan of the 
Cerberus Assembly; his placement within the concord 
was primarily a diplomatic concession to maintain a 
positive relationship with the empire. However, Zhafe 
shuns this notion, insisting that he earned his role on 
his own merits, and eagerly organizing small galas and 
parades to ensure his popularity among the citizens of 
Nicodranas. Even so, he secretly fears the assembly and 
bows to Athesias’s requests whenever they meet, mak- 
ing him a useful pawn. 


ALAMADS HADDOU, MARQUIS OF PORT ZOON 
Neutral good, male dwarf 


The old, crotchety, and honorable leader of the industrial 
city of Port Zoon, and head of the Silverbone Smithing 
Guild that operates all along the coast, Alamads is 
widely known for his insurmountable will and strong 
sense of duty to his people. As a former Shore Warden 
and a legendary ironsmith, his skill with a hammer— 
both on and off the battlefield—has earned him great re- 
spect, as well as the whispered nickname of “Ironpuss.” 


VASAN ATRITH, MARQUIS OF GWARDAN 
Lawful good, female elf 


Unflappable and driven to protect the people of her city, 
Vasan is a bit of an outsider among the other marquises 
of the Clovis Conchord for her standoffish nature and 
the way she unapologetically prioritizes the wellbeing 
of her city over that of the whole coast. Though Vasan 
presents herself as aloof and uninformed, much of her 
political persona is intended to sow underestimation of 
how informed and clever she may be. 


PORTCALLER MAZIN “FAT FISH” FAHREED 
Neutral, male tabaxi 


Tough as nails and quick to bite back, Mazin is an hon- 
orable tabaxi and dependable leader in times of trouble. 
This led to his rise as the Portcaller of the island village 
of Brokenbank, the first major trade junction along the 
Menagerie Coast. Though the village is small, Mazin 
deals with a perpetual string of smugglers and pirates 
while also organizing the incoming and outgoing 
shipping lanes for much of the coast. Even so, Mazin is 
rarely included in major concord business, to his obvi- 
ous and public frustration. 


THE MYRIAD 


Any civilized society will turn the people it has failed 
into criminals, and the societies of Wildemount are no 
exception. The continent’s largest criminal organization 
took shape about eighty years ago, when a shipping 
company in the Dwendalian city of Yrrosa turned to 
smuggling contraband to make ends meet. This tight- 
knit group of clever smugglers soon began to bargain 
with their competitors, employing blackmail and offer- 
ing membership to their organization as an alternative 
to elimination. 

The syndicate grew with alarming speed, infiltrating 
the criminal underbelly of every major city in Western 
Wynandir. Masquerading as purveyors of antiquities 
and foreign textiles, the Myriad focuses on providing 
their clients with exotic goods, such as illicit substances 
and magical beasts, or supplying hired muscle to intim- 
idate their clients’ rivals. The worst of the Myriad even 
deal in human merchandise. 

Originally centered in Yrrosa, the Myriad now oper- 
ates across the continent as a loose network of gang 
bosses who run their own local sects without direct 
oversight from the mysterious heads of the syndicate. 
Each satellite group is expected to regularly deliver 
information and a cut of their profits to the leadership. 
Those who fail to pay up receive quiet threats of enslave- 
ment or assassination—and the Myriad always makes 
good on its threats. 

Members of the Myriad are sworn to keep their syndi- 
cate secret by pretending that their chapter is still just 
another local gang. This has given the Myriad a sinister 
and enigmatic reputation, which further obfuscates its 
activities from the authorities. Since members of the 
the Myriad prefer coercion to public displays of violence, 
officers of the law often fail to recognize Myriad activity 
until it’s too late. 


The empire scored a major victory fifteen years ago 
when they discovered and raided the central Myriad 
stronghold in Yrrosa, forcing the surviving leadership 
to scatter across the continent. The Myriad has em- 
phasized the narrative of its own fall in order to keep 
a low profile, though in fact it has retained most of its 
power. Its influence has stretched to the distant corners 
of Wildemount as it bide its time and waits to reinstate 
its control within the empire. Shifting tactics, the Myr- 
iad has now begun seeding major factions with double 
agents, who turn the most foolish or corrupt of their col- 
leagues into the Myriad’s unwitting pawns. 


GOALS 7 inf. 


The loss of their headquarters taught the surviving Myr- 
iad leaders to temper their arrogance with caution. Now 
a decentralized network of allies and informants, the 
Myriad is reconnecting with their temporarily dormant 
contacts, not all of whom are happy to see their cruel 
masters return. 

Beyond the borders of the Dwendalian Empire, the 
Myriad has deftly utilized the chaos of the Revelry’s 
decades-long reign of piracy to infiltrate the guilds of 
the Clovis Concord. Between the war in the east and the 
distractions on the western waters, there has never been 
a better time for the Myriad to strike. 


i m 
Laws OF THE CLOVIS CONCORD 
Allwho are found by the esteemed Zhelezo to have broken 
the fair laws of the Clovis Concord are judged and sen- 
tenced by the local magistrate and are subject to punish- 
ments befitting the crime. All fines and punishments for 
crimes against a Zhelezo official or a noble are doubled. 
All fines and punishments for crimes against a Clovis Con- 
cord official are tripled. 

Permits must be purchased and owned to do business 
for more than 15 days in Menagerie Coast cities. Permits 
are approved and purchased from the Compass Lodge in- 
stallations. 

All religions are legal to practice in private, but public 
worship of Betrayer Gods is considered dangerous to pub- 
lic discourse and is strictly forbidden. 


Theft: 3-10 days incarceration and/or a fine of twice the 
worth stolen. 

Public worship of Betrayer Gods: 10 days incarceration 
and/or a fine of 300 gp. 

Ownership of another intelligent humanoid creature: 6-12 
months incarceration and/or a fine of 1,000 gp. 

Trespassing: 7 days incarceration, and/or a fine of 100 gp. 

Failure to pay taxes to the Clovis Concord: 3-15 days 
incarceration and a repossession of property equal to 
the amount owed. 

Damage to private property: 5-15 days incarceration or a 
fine of twice the worth of property destroyed. 

Damage to concord property: 30-60 days incarceration 
and a fine of twice the worth of property destroyed. 

Kidnapping: 30 days incarceration and/or a fine of 500 gp. 

Assault with intent to injure: 15 days incarceration and/or 
a fine of 250 gp. 

Assault with intent to kill: 170 days incarceration and/or a 
fine of 1,000 gp. 

Murder: 5-10 years incarceration and/or a fine of 5,000 gp. 


ee 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


45 


RELATIONSHIPS 


Merely mentioning Myriad activity within the Dwenda- 


lian Empire or the Menagerie Coast is enough to draw 
unwanted attention; members of the local law enforce- 
ment might investigate the rumors—and the person 
who started them. Those involved with the Myriad often 
vanish into the darkest prisons, or worse. Though the 
Myriad has apparently scattered since the raid on their 
base in Yrrosa, the authorities still keep an eye open for 
cell activity. 

Twenty years ago, the Myriad established satellite 
cells in the distant lands of Tal’Dorei and Marquet. 
Since their headquarters in Wildemount was destroyed, 
some have suggested sending agents across the oceans 
to reinforce their foreign operatives. If the network can 
quickly regain its former strength, there will eventually 
be little chance of stopping the spread of its power and 
influence. 

In the supposed absence of the Myriad, the Tribes of 
Shadycreek Run have begun to push into the empire to 
stake their claim in Myriad territory. The leaders of the 
Myriad watch from the shadows and plot ways to con- 
script (or, if necessary, to destroy) the prideful families 
of Shadycreek Run. 


FIGURES OF INTEREST 


The dangerous aspirations of the Myriad are driven by a 


curiously scattered collective of intelligent liars. 


IRIS BETHELAS 
Lawful evil, female human 


This lovely, elderly woman is deeply respected and 
beloved for her wise, spiritual guidance and seemingly 
gentle demeanor. This persona kept her safe in Yrrosa, 
and now in Rexxentrum, where she is one of the mas- 
terminds planning the return of the Myriad. Insightful, 
clever, and unhesitating in her cruelty, Iris has long 
been considered the driving force behind the Myri- 
ad's success. 


DOCTOR WALDORF PERIFEATHER 
Lawful evil, male halfling 


A talented physician and healer, Waldorf often travels 
between Port Damali and Zadash, tending to affluent 
patients with rare diseases. His proximity to powerful 
figures in their most vulnerable moments grants the 
good doctor a source of highly sensitive information and 
a reputation as a savior. This combination of influence 
and access makes him a key information broker for 

the Myriad. 


THE GENTLEMAN 
Neutral evil, male water Senasi 


The Gentleman has held a position of influence in the 
shadows of Zadash for nearly two decades, using his 
charm and connections throughout the city to carve a 
sizeable niche for himself in the Underworks beneath 
the city. These days, he’s respected as a suave crime 
lord with dozens of reliable cutthroats and thieves at his 
beck and call. 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


KORSHAD SEDDIKI 
Neutral evil, male human 


A patient and intimidating figure in the underground of 
Deastok for over forty years, Korshad is often known as 
the “debtkeeper.” He sends agents and missives to indi- 
viduals throughout the empire who fall behind on their 
payments to the Myriad. Korshad is a mysterious figure 
by his own design, and he shrouds himself in illusion 
magic for his own protection and prestige, feeding the 
whispered myths about him that are legendary in un- 
scrupulous circles. 


CHESSIA WAKIAM 
Lawful neutral, female elf 


A talented songstress and dancer renowned throughout 
the Menagerie Coast for her sweet voice and enchanting 
allure, Chessia is a popular performer in many opulent 
social circles across Port Damali. Chessia uses her 
charming persona to deflect suspicion as she weaves 
her way into the lives of politicians and guild masters to 
steer them toward Myriad interests. 


CHILDREN OF MALICE 


In the echoing stillness that followed the Divergence, 
the ruined lands of the surface retained remnants of 
civilizations trying to rebuild their world from the ashes. 
Below, however, the surviving children of Lolth could 
feel her presence fade with her banishment. The chains 
she held over her drow were weakened, and those who 
had found renewed faith and purpose in the discovery of 
the Luxon abandoned their terrible mistress and slowly 
climbed their way to the surface to reclaim Ghor Dranas 
and be rid of their spiteful god for eternity. 

Still reeling from her banishment to the Abyss, Lolth 
felt a rapid shift in her influence as these drow turned 
from her. Her fury burned with a poisonous hate, and 
she seethed in her webs as she plotted vengeance on 
her ungrateful and treasonous progeny. As time passed 
and her dark divinity gradually recovered, the Spider 
Queen set aside her pride in favor of her wish to punish; 
she began seducing the minds of goblinoids, beastfolk, 
and the wayward people of the wastes, creeping into 
their dreams and convincing them to love her, bending 
them to join in her violent hate for the rising Kryn Dy- 
nasty. She found drow who felt spurned by the Dens of 
the dynasty and preyed on their fears and insecurities, 
amplifying their xenophobia as the dynasty recruited 
more and more outsiders to their cause. Gradually, 
Lolth developed a new network of scattered worshipers, 
spies, and assassins. She calls them her Children of 
Malice, and they will gladly serve as the instruments of 
her revenge. 

The Children of Malice aren’t numerous, but they 
are clever, driven, and directed by a god of pure hatred. 
They established hidden cabals throughout the fringes 
of Xhorhasian society, forming motley bands of Lolth- 
ite bugbears and hobgoblins who raid outlying Kryn 
settlements. Drow agents of Lolth have infiltrated even 
the highest echelons of Kryn society, slowly poisoning 
the dynasty both metaphorically and literally. The true 
extent of this infiltration is only now being uncovered 


within Rosohna, spreading fear throughout the dynasty 
as the war against the Dwendalian Empire continues 
to divide the attention of the Bright Queen between the 
enemy outside and the enemy within. 


GOALS 


The primary goal ofthe Children of Malice is to subju- 
gate and dismantle the flourishing, Luxon-worshiping 
dark elf society in Xhorhas. They wish to raze every- 
thing the Kryn have built, crush their will, ruin the holy 
implements of the Luxon, and drag these broken, traitor- 
ous drow back under Lolth’s influence and command. 

Toachieve this goal, Lolth and her children know 
well the necessary tenets of secrecy, lies, and patience. 
Most of their spies are sleeper agents who wait in the 
shadows, quietly gaining converts while worming their 
way into the heart of Rosohna and awaiting the order 
to strike. 


RELATIONSHIPS 


The Children of Malice have no formal alliances; they 
prefer to infiltrate other factions as part of their design 
to undermine the dynasty. Keeping their true nature hid- 
den, members of the Children trade with outlying camps 
and townships across the Wastes for supplies and in- 
formation. Thus, their informants are usually unaware 
they are informants as they trade gossip for goods and 
conversation, unwittingly feeding the enemy. 


FIGURES OF INTEREST 


The Children of Malice vary dramatically in both ap- 
pearance and methods. 


ZYN DAEV’YANA 
Lawful evil, male dark elf 


Zyn was born in squalor in the Coronas of Rosohna. 
Lolth found him at his nadir and showed him how to 
refine himself into a true liar. He’s since risen to be- 
come one of the more even-tempered members of Den 
Daev’yana, climbing the ranks as a respected strategist 
and writer. Using his position to sew discord and doubt 
amongst the Dens, he privately communes with the Spi- 
der Queen as one of her most trusted operatives. 


ERELDRA ICOZRIN 
Neutral evil, Sender-fiuid dark elf 


A talented harpist lauded throughout Rosohna for their 
musical gifts, Ereldra worshiped the Luxon before they 
were betrayed by their own brother, who sabotaged 
their marriage to their wife. Lolth found Ereldra in their 
despair and molded them into a valuable spy. Ereldra 
weakens in the social foundation of the Dens by spread- 
ing rumors and telling lies. 


A DWENDALIAN FARMER, A TRADER OF THE KRYN DYNASTY, AND A 
FISHERMAN OF THE CLovis CONCORD 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


kS 


48 


IRONEYE JAGLORD BRUKK 
Lawful evil, male hobgoblin 


A feared warlord who guides a nomadic band of Lolthite 
hobgoblin warriors, Jaglord honed the skills of his ma- 
rauders in the broken lands of the Barbed Fields, where 
they brazenly attacked Kryn trade caravans and supply 
wagons before vanishing into the deadly fields. As his 
war band grew larger and more capable, he boldly led 
them farther south, eventually coming to rest within the 
Ghostlands outside Rosohna, where they now patiently 
await further orders from the Spider Queen. 


HEAD MATRON VIVURK TONN 
Neutral evil, female dark elf 


Vivurk commands the drow houses and the hobgoblin 
horde that claim the mountainside stronghold of Duma- 
ran. She rules with a bloody, iron fist in the image of her 
god to impose the same love and fear that characterized 
the drow societies of old. Ruthless and demanding, 
Head Matron Vivurk builds, trains, and prepares her 
forces to one day help Lolth strike down the Kryn Dy- 
nasty with delicious brutality. 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


ARISTOCRATS ANO NOBLES FROM 
THE DWENDALIAN EMPIRE, THE KRYN 
Dynasty, ANO THE CLovis CONCORD 


DIARCHY OF UTHODURN 


When the elven city of Molaesmyr unearthed a terrible 
curse that ruined the Savalirwood, many survivors fled 
to the north. They endured the blizzards and dangers of 
the Flotket Alps, clinging to the hope that the withdrawn 
dwarves of Uthodurn would find enough mercy to aid 
them. Though many perished in the harsh elements, the 
elven refugees finally located the iron doors of the sub- 
terranean stronghold and requested asylum. It was with 
only mild hesitation that the dwarves accepted their des- 
perate guests, taking them into the warm halls of their 
city and giving them a place to stay. 

Many years passed, with little information on the 
cause of the cataclysm that shattered the elven home- 
land, and everyone gradually realized that their new sit- 
uation was permanent. Social tensions rose as cultural 
differences and forced proximity placed the denizens of 
Uthodurn into rising discomfort. This growing divide 
worried Judessa Fruunast, the queen of the dwarves 
of Uthodurn. She met with the throneless elven king, 
Imathan Talviel, and unexpectedly offered to instate a 
diarchy within the city. Months of deliberation followed 
as the monarchs discussed how best to establish social 
harmony, where new homes would be built, and how 
to expand the discs of the city to fit a more permanent 
populace. Eventually, the two came to an agreement that 
the majority of both dwarves and elves felt was fair and 
tolerable. 


A DWENDALIAN CROWNSGUARD, RIGHTEOUS BRAND SOLDIER, A 


CLovis CONCORD ZHELET.O, AND A SHORE WARDEN SOLDIER 


The process of restructuring the stubborn societies 
of this new Uthodurn forged a long partnership and 
deep friendship between the two leaders until Queen 
Judessa’s death in 794 PD. Judessa’s daughter, Simone 
Fruunast, took up her mother’s mantle, and the bonds 
of friendship forged in her mother’s time flourish under 
her rule. The benefits that were uncovered through the 
unity of these disparate cultures birthed new prosperity 
throughout the city, and the new dual society has grown 
into a synergistic civilization over the centuries. 

Now spreading beyond the underground halls of 
Uthodurn, the people under the Dual Monarchs seek 
to build a brighter future, and perhaps even resolve the 
mysteries of their past. 


GOALS 


Many historians and prominent members of both halves 
of Uthodurn’s society are investigating the source of the 
corruption that persists in the Savalirwood, hoping to 
one day heal the forest and reclaim the homeland of the 
elves. Shreds of evidence have been recovered by scout- 
ing parties sent into the deadly thicket surrounding the 
ruins of Molaesmyr to uncover signs of the curse and its 
origins. However, looters and thieves from Shadycreek 
Run have discovered the ruins as well, stealing relics 
and selling them to private interests. These thefts, cou- 
pled with recent research indicating that the corruption 
is slowly spreading, have accelerated the need to find 
answers to the mystery of the Savalirwood. 


The growing population of the city has a constant 
need for more resources, so the diarchy agreed on the 
need to expand beyond the mountain pass. The village 
of Uraliss was founded using experimental magic de- 
signed to thaw snowfields, with the goal of developing 
sections of the Rime Plains into farmland. Unfortu- 
nately, the ground beneath the snow turned out to be un- 
tillable rock, so the settlement was abandoned. The dual 
monarchs then established the northern fishing village 
of Palebank, which supplies new goods and a coastal 
outpost in spite of the grueling cold. 

Small vessels built to withstand the icy waters of the 
Frigid Depths began to explore the shores surrounding 
the region, discovering the lands of Eiselcross. In these 
frozen wastes, the settlers of Uthodurn uncovered signs 
of scattered arcana from a pre-Calamity era buried 
beneath the snow. These discoveries have piqued the 
interest of Molaesmyr researchers and Uthodurn’s mon- 
archs alike. As the conflict in the south escalates, the 
leaders of Uthodurn are eager to gain whatever power 
or protection might be gained from the secrets hidden in 
the treacherous tundra of Eiselcross. 


RELATIONSHIPS 


Uthodurn has little affiliation with other factions across 
Wildemount. Aside from the occasional explorers and 
adventurers who pose no threat, most people who come 
to Uthodurn are met with skepticism and avoided. The 
locals want nothing to do with the war in the south. 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


Anyone who might be from Shadycreek Run is treated 
as a lowlife brigand and immediately captured and in- 
terrogated. Any information about the powers behind 
the criminal civilization is considered useful, and once 
non-violent prisoners expend their usefulness, they are 
unceremoniously stripped of their equipment and set 
loose in the snowy fields of the Rime Plains. 


FIGURES OF INTEREST 


Distanced from the political bustle of Western and East- 


ern Wynandir, these figures within the Uthodurn diar- 
chy are beginning to seek their place in the wider world 
of Exandria. 


QUEEN SIMONE FRUUNAST 
Lawful good, female dwarf 


Daughter of the previous queen, Judessa Fruunast, and 
the current ruler of the dwarven people of Uthodurn, 
Simone is a respected, charismatic leader known for 
her endless compassion and warrior spirit. Often driven 
more by her heart than her wits, she has come to rely on 
Imathan for guidance and clarity. While a diplomat by 
nature, Simone has certainly proven her mettle with an 
axe in times of conflict. 


KING IMATHAN TALVIEL 
Lawful good, male elf 


The elder king of the surviving elves of Molaesmyr, 
Imathan is as candid as he is graceful in his old age. Pa- 
tient but stern, he guides the elven people of Uthodurn 
with a calm strength and wisdom that helps maintain 
the continuing peace between the dual communities 

of Uthodurn. Imathan was a priest of Corellon in his 
younger days; now he maintains the faith among his 
people and shares the light of the Arch Heart with the 
dwarves of Uthodurn. 


PROFESSOR GULRIM SHALEBROW 
Lawful good, male dwarf 


Gulrim is praised as the brazen—though perhaps 
crazy—explorer who convinced Queen Fruunast to 
allow his team to cross the Frigid Depths. He and his 
surveyors found the mysterious banks of Eiselcross, es- 
tablished the Syrinlya outpost, and recovered fragments 
of ancient relics previously lost in the ice and snow. 
Professor Gulrim now helms the Uthodurnian efforts 

to expand Syrinlya and learn more about the mysteries 
hidden among the glacial fields. 


‘TRIBES OF 
SHADYCREEK RUN 


The collection of rival criminal families known as the 
Tribes ran Shadycreek Run for nearly a century before 
losing much of their dominance to violent infighting and 
internal power struggles. Comprised of the Mardoon 
family, the Uttolot family, the Trebain family, and the 
Jagentoth family, the Tribes still control most of the busi- 
ness that transpires in the city as they work against each 
other in secret. While each family center is usually com- 
prised of relatives by blood or marriage, their employees 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


are also considered to be “within the family,” so long as 
they remain loyal. The Tribes operate without a unified 
symbol or banner, and their interests lie in fencing sto- 
len goods, importing and providing vice, and controlling 
the populace through confusion, intimidation, and fear. 

The Mardoon family is a powerhouse of crime within 
the Graying Wildlands, thanks to its vast network of 
foreign contacts as well as its prosperous alliance with 
the Myriad. Known for relentless business acumen and 
a love of enforceable contracts, the Mardoons would 
rather shake hands than swing blades. Even so, when 
contracts are broken, examples must be made, and such 
circumstances demand a bloody show. The family for- 
tune is made from brothels, jewels, and the slave trade, 
often specializing in exotic finds from Xhorhas and be- 
yond. Leadership is shared between Lord Anselm Mar- 
doon, Kriemhilde Mardoon, Ophelia Mardoon, Demis 
Mardoon, and Rufus Mardoon. 

The Uttolot family rose to prominence through a 
network of familial trade alliances, making it the fore- 
most importer of goods difficult to find this far north of 
the empire. It controls the gates through the Quannah 
Breach, and anyone who passes into or out of the region 
must pay tolls to the Uttolots, making them a necessary 
partner to the other families whether they like it or not. 
They dabble in poaching dangerous beasts and mon- 
sters, and often clash with the hunters of the Greytrader 
Union, a collective of citizens who want to improve life 
for the people of Shadycreek Run. Unlike the other fami- 
lies, the Uttolots rely on the Grudge Gang of Shadycreek 
for most of their muscle. Leadership is shared between 
Lord Milos Uttolot, Mira Uttolot, and Jagoda Uttolot. 

The Trebain family is the most covert of the houses, 
preferring to do its business through intermediaries 
and hired muscle. It lives beyond the boundaries of the 
city, deep within the Savalirwood, in a network of home- 
steads surrounding a stronghold. The Trebain family 
focuses on controlling hunting grounds and harvesting 
relics from the ruins of Molaesmyr. The family’s inter- 
ests put it in constant conflict with the Uttolot family 
and the Greytrader Union. The triangle of animosity 
between the Uttolots, Trebains, and Greytraders some- 
times makes for strange alliances—after all, the enemy 
of my enemy is my friend, no matter how temporary that 
bond might be. Leadership of the family is shared be- 
tween Lord Darko Trebain, Juraj Trebain, Tatia Trebain, 
and Zorka Trebain. 

The Jagentoth family has earned a reputation for being 
especially brutal and unforgiving. Its members publicly 
execute perceived traitors and high-profile competitors, 
but promise great rewards in exchange for absolute 
loyalty. The family’s most successful business ventures 
include assassination, cultivating and distributing illicit 
substances, and slavery (which puts them in direct com- 
petition with the Mardoon family). Leadership is shared 
between Lady Sulia Jagentoth, Reese Jagentoth, Numa 
Jagentoth, and Ionos Jagentoth. 


GOALS 


Conflict between the families is a constant in Shady- 
creek Run, but the apparent absence of Myriad activity 
has given the Tribes a unique opportunity to expand 


their horizons—and their influence. Lately, the Tribes 
have occasionally endured each other long enough to 
embark on joint ventures into the empire to rekindle old 
alliances with the Myriad. 

Some see this age of tenuous cooperation as a chance 
to escape from the long shadow of the Myriad and stand 
alongside them as equals, but others fear that forging 
new bonds with the Myriad will just give it the freedom 
to destroy the Tribes from within. 


RELATIONSHIPS 


The Tribes endure each other in order to maintain a 


level of civility within the otherwise cutthroat streets of 
Shadycreek Run, but they are each on the lookout for 
ways to subvert or weaken their opposition and become 
the city’s dominant family. 

All members of the Tribes are documented criminals 
within the empire, with bounties to match. Travel within 
the borders of Western Wynandir is dangerous for 
these criminal overlords, but each family has their own 
connections within the major cities of the empire that 
enable business. 

In the past, the Myriad has oft attempted to subjugate 
the Tribes, but it has been rebuked time after time. The 
Tribes are too proud of their well-oiled engine of vice to 
permit the Myriad to take over. Even though the Tribes 
are pursuing new alliances with the Myriad, the people 
of Shadycreek Run fear that conflict between these 
shady powers is inevitable. 


FIGURES OF INTEREST 


Life in Shadycreek is perpetually dangerous for the 
members of the Tribes, where every smile hides 
ill intent. 


OPHELIA MARDOON 
Neutral evil, female tiefling 


One of the most prominent members of the Mardoon 
family, Ophelia commands the Estate Sybaritic to the 
north of Shadycreek Run. Hedonistic and forceful, she 
does not enjoy being denied and has the skills and con- 
nections to ensure that she gets whatever she desires. 
One of the more ambitious members of the house, Oph- 
elia has made a number of contacts in the Wildemount 
criminal world outside the Greying Wildlands. 


JAGODA UTTOLOT 
Chaotic evil, male half-orc 


Jagoda is a master hunter and expert on the terrifying 
beasts that wander through the Savalirwood, using his 
skills to track and capture rare creatures for his family 
to sell. Gleeful in his brutality and prone to ignore the 
graces of diplomatic relations, Jagoda has occasionally 
gotten himself into trouble that the rest of his family has 
had to dig him out of. 


LORD DARKO TREBAIN 
Lawful neutral, male human 


The elder of the Trebain family, Darko helms the efforts 
to excavate the ruins of Molaesmyr from within his 
museum-like mansion. He is obsessed with the secrets 


5 or 
A | | 
€ a j 
CERBERUS ASSEMBLY | A 
Ah L 
$ ae 


THe Myriad 


CHILOREN 
oF MALICE 


© 


DiarcHyY 
OF UTHODURN 


51 


52 


of the blight on the Savalirwood, and he’s convinced 
that it was caused by the elves of Molaesmyr tampering 
with misunderstood magics. He hopes to discover the 
source of the corruption and learn how to weaponize it. 
With such power at his disposal, the rise of the Trebains 
would be unstoppable. 


IONOS JAGENTOTH 
Lawful evil, male half-elf 


Known for his skills in negotiation and deceit, Ionos has 
proven himself the master of the family’s distribution 
network. Inspired to expand the business alliances 

of the Jagentoth family far beyond the northern edges 

of the Dwendalian Empire, Ionos has been making 
arrangements with Myriad operatives while simultane- 
ously rooting out Myriad influence in those same circles. 
Either the noose is about to tighten, or he’s designed a 
brilliant ploy to eliminate the competition. 


LIBRARY OF THE 
COBALT SOUL 


Under the enlightening scriptures of loun, the Knowing 
Mentor, teachers, priests, and monks who have been 
drawn to the calling of truth and knowledge spend their 
lives training within the Library of the Cobalt Soul. 
Rather than a single physical building, the Library of 
the Cobalt Soul is a collective term for the universal 
knowledge and philosophies upheld by those who follow 
Ioun’s teachings. The Cobalt Soul is guided by a central 
belief that true strength is found in understanding the 
world around you. Despite their idealism, the pursuit of 
truth is hampered by the realities of life in the empire: 
politics, propaganda, and the dangers of the wilderness. 

The Cobalt Soul is based in Rexxentrum but operates 
throughout the empire and across the whole of Exan- 
dria. Temples to Ioun under the management of the 
Cobalt Soul act as massive libraries called archives, 
usually located in larger cities and cultural centers. Its 
members come from all walks of life and are expected 
to assist in the maintenance, organization, and protec- 
tion of the archives. Its satellite archives collect artifacts 
and research information both historical and contempo- 
rary along the Menagerie Coast and in the distant lands 
of Tal’Dorei, Issylra, and beyond. 

Archivists act as administrators at each Archive, delin- 
eating tasks, overseeing the training of new members, 
and even negotiating for or purchasing artifacts and 
records—often from those unaware of their true value. 

The monks of the Cobalt Soul are the enlightened 
knowledge-seekers of their order. They research places 
where ancient knowledge could be hidden and lead 
large-scale expeditions to these places. 

Expositors are the covert agents of the Cobalt Soul. 
These enlightened infiltrators extract information 
that others would keep secret and use their newfound 
knowledge to better the world. As masters of acquisi- 
tions, expositors answer only their High Curator. 

At the top of each Archive is a High Curator, who dic- 
tates the Archive’s goals to subordinates and uses this 
power to assign marks to expositors, outline allies and 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


enemies to their archivists, and approve the expeditions 
proposed by monks. 

The Cobalt Soul was founded within the Julous Do- 
minion before the nation fell to the armies of the Dwen- 
dalian Empire. The Dwendalian Crown permitted the 
Cobalt Soul to be assimilated into the social hierarchy of 
the empire rather than destroying it. This was not an act 
of mercy, but a political maneuver; the Cobalt Soul was 
allowed to survive only to provide a sense of normalcy 
and appease the restless populace. 

The Library has continued to work with and under 
the empire out of necessity, but its archivists are savvy 
political players—whenever possible, they avoid making 
moves that could put them in danger of being exploited 
by the Crown or the Cerberus Assembly. Nowhere is 
this tension more apparent than in the very existence of 
the militant truth-seekers of the Cobalt Soul: the expos- 
itors, rigorously trained to root out corruption and false- 
hoods. Behind the scenes, a silent war is brewing as 
expositors bring the dark secrets of the empire’s social 
elite out into the light. 


GOALS 


Untold knowledge was lost when the Calamity brought 
the Age of Arcanum to its fiery end, and so too was the 
case when loun was mortally wounded in that terrible 
war. Since that day, the Cobalt Soul and their progen- 
itors have sought to recover what was lost. They hope 
that, in time, their tireless effort will eventually usher all 
societies to an enlightened future. 

Ioun is still wounded, but her wisdom and grace 
has returned to the world—at least in part. Under the 
guidance and wisdom of their patron god, members of 
the Cobalt Soul seek to enlighten themselves through 
study and research. They devote their lives to studying 
the mysteries of the world, and turning that knowledge 
to protect it from another Calamity. To this end, the Li- 
brary makes the immense breadth of knowledge within 
their archives available to anyone and everyone who 
seeks to educate themselves—though some secrets are 
so potent that they must remain hidden from the public 
until the proper time. 

Empires thrive on misinformation and propaganda, 
yet it is necessary for the Cobalt Soul to operate within 
the Dwendalian Empire. As such, the Cobalt Soul works 
to provide the truth to those who will listen, to covertly 
update revisionist history, and to remove false informa- 
tion before it can spread too far. Unfortunately, imperial 
agents and even spies from foreign powers have suc- 
cessfully infiltrated the Library over the centuries, and 
some of their attempts to rewrite fact and history in fa- 
vor of their own interests have succeeded. In response, 
the Library has had to construct a powerful, hidden 
force of expositors to defend their texts from manipula- 
tion and uncover truths that remain guarded. 


RELATIONSHIPS 


The Library tries to remain autonomous, but their 
agents within the empire are under constant siege by 
Theolocrat Kon Bruda, a once-respected monk of the 
Cobalt Soul who is now just another corrupt lackey of 


the Crown. Bruda and the archivists wage a quiet battle 
of wills and subterfuge, each trying to outsmart and 
undermine the other. This situation, combined with the 
empire’s efforts to prevent the education of their people, 
has created palpable unrest within the Library. 

The perceptive ears of the expositors often hear ru- 
mors of unwholesome practices behind closed doors 
within the Soltryce Academy and other places under 
the Cerberus Assembly’s oversight. The Library is con- 
cerned about the assembly’s secretive cabal but has thus 
far been unable to infiltrate deep enough to uncover any- 
thing damning. 

Meanwhile, a small number of volunteers from within 
the Library have agreed to travel deep into Xhorhas in 
the hopes of communicating with the Kryn Dynasty to 
learn more about their mysterious society, and to under- 
stand the level of threat they pose to the people of West- 
ern Wynandir and beyond. None of the volunteers have 
yet returned. 


FIGURES OF INTEREST 


Operating under the will of Ioun, and driven by curiosity 
and the desire to further universal understanding, the 
diverse agents of the Cobalt Soul seek to change the 
world for the better. 


HIGH CURATOR LOMAN TURRAY, HERALD OF 
THE ZADASH ARCHIVE 


Lawful neutral, male human 


Curator Turray has held the position of High Curator 

of the Valley Archive in Zadash and the title of Herald 
of the Archive under the Crown for over forty years. He 
faces increasing pressure to instill his subordinates 
with loyalty to the Crown, and he is slowly giving in to 
imperial indoctrination. He fears that enforcing the 

will of the Crown when it contradicts the philosophies 
of the Library will cause his own colleagues to depose 
him—which only leads him further into the Crown’s pro- 
tective embrace. 


HIGH CURATOR YUDALA FON, HERALD OF THE 
REXXENTRUM ARCHIVE 


Lawful good, agender half-elf 


Yudala is a wise and respected figure who has spent 
most of their life fighting to protect and maintain the 
Rexxentrum Archive. They have mastered the art of par- 
rying the Crown’s and the assembly’s attempts to sub- 
jugate the Archive and bring it under state control. For 
nearly two decades, they have been engaged in a battle 
of wills with the infuriated Theolocrat Kon Bruda—and 
they fear that Kon’s patience is at an end. His vengeance 
will be elaborate, exacting, and swift, or so Yudala fears. 
Their network of spies and expositors is frantically 
seeking to find and publicize evidence of Kon’s unlawful 
dealings and end the feud before it escalates further. 


EXPOSITOR SIA KRESH 
Neutral, female halfling 


As Yudala Fon’s secret right-hand, Sia organizes the ex- 
positors of the Rexxentrum Archive. She is determined 
to root out the infiltrators who would seek to undermine 


the leadership of the Library and grab power for the 
Crown, and she is swift and brutal in her work. Those 
that know of her fear her, and many wonder if her meth- 
ods are crossing a line. 


SCARS OF 
SCALE AND TOOTH 


For hundreds of years, the small, cloistered dragonborn 
nation of Draconia reigned over the Dreemoth Ravine to 
the south of Xhorhas, removed from the troubles of the 
wastes. The erudite draconbloods of the ruling houses, 
marked by their intellect, jeweled tails, and ostentatious 
wealth, looked down from the floating chain of islands 
that formed their capitol while the droves of tailless 
slave dragonborn, known as ravenites, toiled away 

in the ravine below, gathering resources and serving 
their masters for generations. This structure collapsed 
around twenty years ago, when the Chroma Conclave, 

a union of ancient dragons, destroyed Draconia and left 
the city ruined in the ravine below. 

When the Conclave was destroyed, the surviving 
dragonborn ravenites outnumbered their previous 
masters, who were bereft of their former privilege and 
power. In the uprising that followed, many draconbloods 
were executed for their crimes, and others fled to the 
empire for asylum. Thus freed from their shackles, the 
ravenites built a new society adjacent to the ruins of the 
old nation of Draconia. 

The past two decades have seen the rise of a new 
society, known as the Scars of Scale and Tooth, and it 
is wracked by the growing pains inherent to the dawn 
of a new nation. The Scars’ leadership is tenuous, as 
many seek to claim the prestige of leading their people, 
and disagreements have led to bloodshed between the 
newfound councilors. This has made the building of the 
new city of Xarzith Kitril slow and fraught. Some heroic 
figures are seeking to establish a better direction for the 
ravenites, while others fled to the empire to seek better 
fortunes away from the infighting in their homeland. 
The war between the Kryn and the empire has closed 
the border pass into Western Wynandir, so the ravenites 
must find a way to coexist and thrive before the strife of 
warfare engulfs them. 


GOALS 


The conflicting goals of the Scars’ leaders have placed 
their nascent settlement in peril. Every would-be ruler 
wants something different for their people and has suf- 
ficient support within their faction to cause the streets 
of Xarzith Kitril to run red with ravenite blood, if they 
so desired. 

Some amid the Kitrilians are outraged over news that 
a massive number of ravenite and draconblood refugees 
have been relocated to a shantytown called Talonstadt. 
Not only is the treatment of their kin unfair and inhu- 
mane, but this makeshift settlement practically strad- 
dles the Dwendalian Empire’s eastern border, and they 
fear that Talonstadt will soon become the first casualty 
of a Kryn invasion. 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 53 


Meanwhile, the monstrosities of the Xhorhasian 
wastes can sense the power vacuum left in the wake of 
Draconia’s fall. Xarzith Kitril has no formal military, just 
a loose militia of hunters and trappers. This leaderless 
force is stretched to its limits, and more hunters are lost 
every day to opportunistic monsters. Outside aid is ur- 
gently required, but the squabbling councilors of Xarzith 
Kitril can’t agree on whose aid they should request. 


RELATIONSHIPS 


Rumors of the Dwendalian Empire mistreating dragon- 
born ravenites have bred a heavy distaste for King 
Dwendal and his nation. The empire has recently sent 
emissaries to request an alliance against the dynasty, 
but Kryn diplomats have also arrived in Xarzith Kitril, 
seeking friendship and offering to aid the dragonborn in 
their efforts to rebuild. The Scars have heatedly debated 
which power they should side with—or if they can afford 
to aid either. 

Ships from the Clovis Concord have docked on Kitri- 
lian shores in recent years, eager to resume trade with 
the dragonborn people. In particular, Nicodranas has 
welcomed the emerging nation, and a few emissaries 
from Marquis Zhafe Uludan currently reside within Xar- 
zith Kitril to keep an eye on the developing city-state and 
to aid to whatever limited extent they can. 


FIGURES OF INTEREST 


The former slaves of Draconia are eager to forge their 
own destiny in the world. Some have risen to the 
challenge with glee, while others have had leadership 
suddenly thrust on them, but all the bearers of this 
charge hope to create a new beginning for the dragon- 
born people. 


DruvIS KOOTHALOK 
Lawful good, male ravenite dragonborn 


Once a trained combatant in draconblood gladiatorial 
games, Druvis gained notoriety when he refused to 
strike his foes dead. His skill and creed garnered atten- 
tion, and he was quickly sold to a wealthy noble house 
atop the floating islands of Draconia. In the chaos after 
Draconia’s fall, Druvis became widely respected for 

his courage and sense of morality, and has hesitantly 
become a champion for the downtrodden people of 
Xarzith Kitril. 


VEMOSI RUNEK 
Chaotic neutral, female dragonborn 


Vemosi is a zealous and militant priest of the Storm 
Lord, and her tempestuous fervor and blistering ser- 
mons in the aftermath of Draconia’s fall made her a 
popular voice of the people, though her detractors call 
her little more than a demagogue. Vemosi’s brutal sense 
of justice has earned her—and the Storm Lord—many 
followers, all of whom are determined to hunt down 
and exact retribution from the surviving draconbloods. 
Vemosi has become a powerful figure within the Scars, 
and now she seeks to cement her place as a leader of 
her people. 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


TROKA, THE SCOUNDREL KING 
Neutral good, male dragonborn 


Druvis first noticed Troka for his silver tongue, and 
tasked him with infiltrating the empire and appraising 
the situation in Talonstadt. Frustrated by the meager 
living conditions and demeaning treatment of his peo- 
ple, Troka has retaliated by sowing chaos throughout 
the surrounding Dwendalian territories. Troka and his 
troupe of slippery thieves steal from the Crown, con- 
fuse the local military, and keep a watchful eye on the 
dragonborn refugees, making him a folk hero among 
their community. 


CLARET ORDERS 


Centuries ago, the high cleric of the Julous Dominion 
made secret pacts with a devil of the Nine Hells, hoping 
to gain enough power to repel the aggressive Dwenda- 
lian Empire. However, he failed to read the fine print of 
the devilish contract—he succeeded in his mission, but 
his people paid a terrible cost. The empire was indeed 
repelled, but it was because the lands of the Marrow 
Valley were brimming with devils and undead. The 
common folks hid in their homes, and the valley grew 
unhallowed and gray. In this brief era of terror, a humble 
priest of the Raven Queen named Trence Orman prayed 
for a way to protect his flock, his people, and the lands 
they called home. The Matron of Death blessed him 
with the ancient secrets of blood magic. Trence trained 
his most trusted friends in the techniques of hemo- 
craft, and they sacrificed a portion of their humanity in 
exchange for the power to defend the dominion. This 
marked the origin of the Claret Orders. 

Using their forbidden skills, the Claret Orders man- 
aged to seal away the source of this dark deal, free the 
high cleric from his torturous form, and clear the coun- 
tryside of the evil that pervaded it. Unfortunately, before 
the Claret Orders could be celebrated as saviors, the 
armies of the empire swept into the freshly purged Mar- 
row Valley and crushed the Julous Dominion. 

The newly installed Dwendalian lords blamed the 
Claret Orders for inviting fiends into the Marrow Val- 
ley. While some knew the truth and tried to clear their 
name, it quickly became clear the Claret Orders were no 
longer welcome in their own homeland. Trence and his 
troupe of blood-tithed warriors went into hiding. Even in 
the face of such opposition, they never stopped protect- 
ing their lands from the shadows, seeking and destroy- 
ing evils that emerged from the scars of the Calamity. 

The orders have spread to the outskirts of Western 
Wynandir and beyond. They maintain small keeps to 
train new generations of protectors who are willing to 
take the Hunter’s Bane and embrace their inner dark- 
ness to combat the outer darkness in the world. 


GOALS 


The creed of the Claret Orders asks its followers to 
commit their lives to hunting monsters that threaten the 
sanctity of life and joy. While the sacrifice is great, the 
reward is the continued existence of purity and good in 
the world. The orders strive to protect those who cannot 
protect themselves from the terrors that go unseen by 


their noble lords and ladies. Most take little credit for 
their services, beyond means to live and travel. Some 
have strayed, using their skills to amass a fortune, but 
the heads of the orders deliver swift justice unto those 
who exploit the people they are sworn to protect. 


RELATIONSHIPS 


The existence of the Claret Ordersis largely rumor and 


myth in most places, as the orders have no alliance with 
or allegiance to any standing government or group. The 
empire is well aware of their presence and makes a 
point to ignore their heroic deeds while publicizing mis- 
deeds of those few hunters that succumb to the corrupt- 
ing influence of their powers. 

Some splinter orders have traveled beyond the bound- 
aries of the empire, seeking more welcoming folk and 
more unique challenges in lands across Exandria. Still, 
no matter where the guardians of the Claret Orders 
travel, they know they will never be free from the hatred 
of those that misunderstand them. 


FIGURES OF INTEREST 


Weeding out the terrors that feed at the edges of civiliza- 


tion, the members of the orders work for little more than 
the satisfaction of a deadly job well done. 


CLARET DIRECTOR JETTE BRASHAN 
Neutral, male half-orc 


An elderly priest of the Raven Queen who's as revered 
as he is feared, Jette has a powerful will and a tactician’s 
mind. Jette never makes direct eye contact, and it seems 
that his attention is scattered among a dozen points at 
any given time, yet his ability to read patterns and calcu- 
late the hidden nature of evil leaves his compatriots in 
awe. Absolutely dedicated to the eradication of fiendish 
influence on the mortal plane, Jette has sacrificed much 
in his pursuit— all who serve him suspect that, one day, 
he will gladly make the ultimate sacrifice. 


ELIAS DE CORVO 
Neutral good, male human 


A famed blood hunter across the orders, Elias has suc- 
cessfully hunted some of the vilest creatures in all the 
planes and lived to tell the tale, though his scars show 
the cost of his victories. In his later years, Elias is now 
focused on training and mentoring new members of the 
orders, trying to instill in them morals that anchor them 
to their better nature. 


LILYANA CAYD 
Chaotic good, female werewolf (halfelf) 


A sarcastic spitfire who joined the orders to help gain 
control over her lycanthropy, Lilyana has become a mas- 
terful blood hunter in an impressively short period of 
time. She leads many hunts with her keen, lycanthropic 
senses, and is known for being more personable than 
most who undergo the Hunter’s Bane. Lilyana is spoken 
of with equal parts irritation and awe within the circles 
of the orders. 


LIBRARY OF THE 
CosBart Sour 


Scars OF 
SCALE AND TOOTH 


THE 
CLARET ORDERS 


THE GOLDEN GRIN 


56 


GOLDEN GRIN 


When the lands of Tal’Dorei were ruled by the tyrant 
Drassig, a hidden society of muses, storytellers, bards, 
and folk heroes assembled to oppose their despotic 
king. The Golden Grin has endured since those dark 
years, and it has secretly guided the just, inspired the 
common folk, and planted the seeds of discontent and 
rebellion amid tyranny ever since. 

Each member, known as a grinner, pledges to uphold 
the ideal that every individual has the power to change 
the world. They seek out places where hope is faint and 
the soul grows dim without inspiration, lifting the spir- 
its of the downtrodden and heartening those who feel 
forgotten. Little is known about the Golden Grin aside 
from myths and rumors, and its members prefer it this 
way. The grinners listen for whispers and information 
using fabricated personas they create when they join 
the faction. 

The Golden Grin arrived in Wildemount by follow- 
ing the trade routes from Tal’Dorei to the Menagerie 
Coast, where its members discovered a land plagued 
by warring despots. A sect of the Golden Grin has 
spent the past generation spreading its roots through- 
out the Clovis Concord. Now firmly established, the 
Grin has set about undermining corruption within 
the concord and has begun working their way into the 
Dwendalian Empire. 


GOALS 


The Golden Grin—or simply the Grin—exists to en- 
lighten and inspire, keeping ears and eyes out for the 
murmurs of tyranny and cruelty and deposing those 
responsible through social upheaval, or occasionally 
direct intervention. The idea that each person is capable 
of great things permeates its mantras and beliefs, and 
the wandering storytellers of the Grin are known to 

pay handsomely for tales of local heroes and majestic 
deeds of courage to add to their repertoire of stories and 
songs. If the people’s hearts grow cold enough to reject 
words and poems, the noblest of grinners will often rise 
to the occasion and get their hands dirty to display such 
an act of heroism themselves. 


RELATIONSHIPS 


The Grin claims no formal allies, since its members 
never reveal themselves to others except in the direst 
of circumstances. They uplift and bolster other groups 
that work with the people’s best interests at heart. Some 
grinners occasionally find their way into government po- 
sitions, granting them a platform to disseminate the ide- 
als behind their cause. While some may not agree with 
their rather anarchistic views, grinners are generally 
regarded as idealistic paragons of individual virtue. 

The Grin’s mischief in Wildemount began relatively 
recently, so it is largely unknown and able to conduct 
its work unimpeded; however, those versed in historical 
lore might know of its deeds and read the signs of its 
meddling. The Golden Grin currently is seeking an alli- 
ance with the Library of the Cobalt Soul to root out the 
untrustworthy within the Cobalt Soul and align their 
interests to aid the people of Wildemount. 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


FIGURES OF INTEREST 


In a world where strife and struggle often define one’s 
life, it takes a certain quality of hero to step up and an- 
swer the call of the Grin. 


Sir Linus DENWALLOP 
Neutral good, male gnome 


A wandering minstrel who claims a sourceless knight- 
hood, Sir Linus travels all across the Menagerie Coast 
with his lyre and bag of illusions to astound and excite 
the children and poor folk of the countryside. Sir Linus 
intends to make up for his years of villainy as a smuggler 
and thief by subtly undermining the same sects of the 
Myriad with whom he once did business. 


SHAKASTE (Hus) 
Chaotic good, male human 


A warm, gentle soul with blind eyes and a heart over- 
flowing with patience, Shakdste was quick to learn the 
harsh realities of the world around him. After finding 
faith in the storms that shake the coast where he grew 
up, he was gifted with a hummingbird companion that 
serves as his eyes. Armed with a talent for going unno- 
ticed and powers granted by his willful love of freedom, 
Shak4ste has operated under the name “Hush” since 
joining the Golden Grin, quietly seeking out those in 
need of a little guidance. 


MASTER DUASAD KEEF 
Chaotic Sood, male human 


An affluent noble among the upper crust of the Clovis 
Concord, Duasad is an inheritor of the Keef family’s 
ancient, generational wealth. Duasad was raised as a 
woman, but realized as a young adult that something 
wasn't right, and sought a mage to help him transi- 
tion—a fairly simple task in the concord, at least for 
those with affluence. 

These days, Duasad has become well known asa 
powerful empath who uses his psychic talents to help 
others deal with trauma or seek a more fulfilling path in 
life. He has become one of the most influential and effec- 
tive members of the Golden Grin in Wildemount. How- 
ever, the radical shifts in his clients’ life choices have not 
gone unnoticed, and Duasad is aware that the watchful 
gaze of the Clovis Concord is now firmly fixed on him. 


THE REVELRY 


The Revelry’s allies within the Clovis Concord will tell 
you that they turned to piracy because of the concord’s 
excessive taxes and unjust laws. Perhaps it began that 
way, but over time, a movement that began as public dis- 
sent turned to lawful protest, which then became violent 
action. Eventually, a union of disenfranchised salvage 
ships and trade vessels fought their way into the Drag- 
shallow Reef and violently overthrew the small sanctu- 
ary port of Darktow. 

After establishing a lawless base of operations on the 
isle of Darktow, these pirates began stalking the well- 
known shipping routes of the Menagerie Coast to harry, 
intimidate, steal from, and destroy passing ships that 


flew under the concord’s banner. Calling themselves 
The Revelry, these “free folk of the sea” have now spent 
over forty years terrorizing the Lucidian Ocean. With 
loose morals and a twisted code of honor, they take what 
they want from less protected targets while living a life 
of debauchery in the well-guarded haven of Darktow. 
The Revelry lacks a uniform symbol, instead changing 
the colors and symbols of its banner regularly to avoid 
counterfeiting and infiltration. 

The Revelry is governed by a collective of captains, all 
of whom defer to the final word of the Plank King, a ca- 
pricious monarch who never leaves Darktow. The orig- 
inal Plank King, Hunnis Breeah, ruled for twenty-five 
years before a goliath named Wyatt Maranoss chal- 
lenged him for his increasingly lackadaisical attitude— 
and won. Now Breeah is dead, and Wyatt claims the title 
of Plank King. 


GOALS 


While the Revelry’s original goal was to scare the con- 
cord into revoking their soaring taxes, its charter has 
changed. The Clovis Concord refused to change its 
laws, and the pirates found a certain dark joy in theft 
and murder on the waves. The original members of the 
Revelry (and now their children) have no plans to return 
to their former lives as legitimate traders. They intend to 
maintain and grow their operations across the Lucidian 
Ocean, while continuing to defend and improve their 
fortress in Darktow, finding intricate ways of reinforcing 
the reefs with dangerous traps and impassable barriers. 
The Revelry has since expanded their interests be- 
yond mere piracy. Relics and secrets dating back to 
the Age of Arcanum and beyond are rumored to be 
scattered all across the coast and the Swavain Islands. 
Some scavengers have returned to Darktow with proof 
of such artifacts, and a new kind of aspiring treasure 
seeker has emerged within the Revelry: one who seeks 
to plunder from the dead rather than the living. The 
drive to outdo their fellow sailors has already placed sev- 
eral ships in serious danger. 


RELATIONSHIPS 


Each member of the Revelry known to the Clovis 
Concord is considered a major criminal, amassing an 
ever-growing bounty with each infraction they commit 
and every ship they raid. Those arrested are generally 
executed and strapped to the rocks outside Brokenbank 
as a warning. 

Some of the more affluent Marquesian merchant 
guilds that have little investment in concord shipments 
use back-channels to pay off the Revelry and fly spe- 
cific colors when crossing their territory to avoid be- 
ing boarded. 


FIGURES OF INTEREST 


Whether it be for glory, for gold, or for freedom from 
law on the ocean waves, the banner of the Revelry calls 
many to join the cause. 


WYATT MARANOSS, THE PLANK KING 
Chaotic evil, male goliath 


After seizing the mantle of Plank King, Wyatt quickly es- 
tablished his position with displays of tactical brilliance, 
fair judgment, and brutal retribution. Wyatt is eager to 
maintain the approval of his captains and often throws 
bawdy, drunken celebrations for his subordinates and 
the people of Darktow to offset periods of unrest or frus- 
tration. Initially friendly and welcoming to an almost 
unsettling degree, Wyatt has a reputation for abruptly 
turning into a cruel and violent dictator when his trust 
and hospitality are violated. 


CAPTAIN ALYSON PAIJ 
Chaotic good, female human 


Known to many as the “Screaming Knuckle,” Alyson is 
the loud and joyful captain of the ship The Ili Hand who 
enjoys a good brawl as much as she appreciates a stiff 
drink. Paij took to piracy because of her hatred for the 
Clovis Concord, but she is driven by an uncompromising 
sense of moral duty to the downtrodden. She never raids 
civilian vessels, and she does her best to rein in the Rev- 
elry’s cruelest captains and focus their efforts on those 
who deserve to have their goods stolen. 


ee eee > 
Cutts: DuBious WORSHIP FROM THE SHADOWS 


While this chapter outlines the major players across the 
continent operating in ways that directly affect the political 
landscape of Wildemount, there are numerous smaller 
factions that can be introduced in your own Wildemount 
campaigns. Among these lesser powers are countless ca- 
bals, cults, and leaderless groups of people who fall under 
the influence of the numerous Betrayer Gods and other 
entities who corrupt and manipulate mortals. These may 
operate on their own or within larger factions, providing 
challenges, villains, and an element of chaos that can 
make your Wildemount campaign unique. 

Below are a few examples of cults deeply rooted through- 
out Wildemount, and their respective goals. 

The Remnants. When Vecna’s physical form was de- 
stroyed during the Age of Arcanum, his most devoted 
followers founded the Remnants, a collection of secretive 
sects dedicated to realizing Vecna’s plan to ascend to god- 
hood, despite his death. The cult succeeded in aiding his 
resurrection and ascension, but they were scattered when 
the heroes of Vox Machina banished and sealed Vecna be- 
yond the Divine Gate. The Remnants now seek new ways 
to restore their god to his promised position of absolute 
dominance over creation. 

The Caustic Heart. The leaders of the Caustic Heart are 
dedicated to Tiamat and eager to free her from the hells- 
cape of Avernus. The Caustic Heart uses social leverage 
and binding contracts, as well as seductive promises of 
power and vice, to ensnare the weak-willed and greedy 
within their plots and expand their influence. 

The Harbingers of the Core. These aberrant cultists wor- 
ship the terrors born from the dreams of the Elder Evils: 
impossibly ancient, malevolent entities who exist within 
the Far Realm and the spaces beyond the known planes. 
Touched by madness, their bodies often subtly mutated 
by their contact with the horrors to whom they pray, the 
Harbingers of the Core gather in the broken lands of 
Blightshore to summon and unleash the terrible children 
of their masters. 


CHAPTER 2 | FACTIONS AND SOCIETIES 


THE BEAUTY AND DANGER OF WiLDEMOUNT ARE ALL BUT LOST ON A 
PARTY OF ADVENTURERS TRAVERSING THE BROKENVEIL BLUFFS. 


°Chapter 3 
WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


‘VE CERTAINLY SEEN MUCH OF IT, AND IT IS VERY 
beautiful. Beautiful, and terrifying, and cold, 
and humid, and deadly, and joyous, and full of 
strife, struggle, and hope. It’shome, and that’s 
enough for me. Doty, did you get all that?” 
—Taryon Darrington, The Daring Trials and Tribulations 
of Ser Taryon Darrington 


Along the western shores, turbulent ocean currents bat- 
ter trade ships as they ride the winds toward port cities 
that shine like diamonds on the verdant coastline. Mon- 
strous behemoths plod across the cracked and blighted 
barrens of the eastern valley. The desolate northern 
tundra is a lawless wilderness where power-hungry 
scavengers hunt for ancient artifacts buried beneath the 
ice. Wildemount is a vast and varied landscape brim- 
ming with possibilities for any adventure. 

This chapter presents the various areas of Wilde- 
mount, broken into seven major regions: the Menagerie 
Coast; the Zemni Fields and Marrow Valley, which to- 
gether form Western Wynandir; the Greying Wildlands 
and Eiselcross, which shape what is known as the Bit- 
ing North; and lastly the Wastes of Xhorhas and Blight- 
shore, which comprise Eastern Wynandir. Each section 
describes the region’s important locations and includes 
plot hooks for adventurers who travel there. 

Adventure hooks presented within this chapter are 
broken down into recommended ranges of adventuring 
party level: low level (1-6), mid level (7-11), high level 
(12-16), and epic level (17—20). Adventure hooks labeled 
as “any level” can be presented at any point in your par- 
ty’s journey, with a little planning. You are welcome to 
adjust the difficulty of any of these adventure hooks to fit 
your campaign. 


MENAGERIE COAST 


Spanning the length of Wildemount’s southwest 
coastline along the Lucidian Ocean, the Menagerie 
Coast is a lush, rain-swept, tropical region filled with 
scattered forests and jungles, rocky seaside cliffs and 
beaches, overgrown islands, and bustling trade routes 
that traverse the perilous seas. The coast is ruled by a 
nation comprised of seven city-states whose cultural 


and political leaders have united to form the Clovis 
Concord. This land is known far and wide as a place 
for lively trade, vibrant art, performance, and excellent 
food—as well as the indulgence of vice, piracy, and il- 
licit business. 

Five of the seven cities have open shipping ports, sup- 
porting a robust economy of goods, services, and contra- 
band. The Myriad crime syndicate has had its hands in 
the affairs of the concord for decades, and while officials 
publicly deny that the Myriad is still active along the 
Menagerie Coast, local guildmasters and politicians fear 
that the Myriad is stronger than ever. 

The major cities that comprise the Menagerie Coast 
are Port Damali, Feolinn, Othe, Nicodranas, Gwardan, 
Port Zoon, and Tussoa. Beyond the coastal cities, the 
Swavain Islands are scattered across the Lucidian 
Ocean, bearing shipping posts, dangerous reefs, and 
ancient secrets hidden in the bellies of hungry jungles. 
The pirates of the Revelry stalk the oceanic trade lanes, 
hassling merchants, marines, and adventurers alike. 

As any adventurer will attest, all this danger guaran- 
tees that travel along the Menagerie Coast is an anx- 
ious, thrilling, and profitable experience—if you know 
where to look. 


BARREN SHORES 


The northern edges of the Cyrios Mountains drop off 
into dark pebble beaches known as the Barren Shores. 
Many believe that an ancient being of immense strength 
pulverized the edge of the mountains with a series of 
mighty blows. Others speculate that the shore is some- 
how related to the Pallid Grove. Whatever the case, 
these stories of forgotten magic exert an undeniable 
pull on the curious minds of adventurers and historians 
alike. Traversing the icy waters of the Frigid Depths is 
nearly as dangerous as climbing the uncharted expanse 
of the Cyrios Mountains, and those who survive the 
journey are greeted by monstrous, twisted crustaceans 
and seaside cults eager to torment trespassers. Some 
divine historians theorize that something ancient and 
cruel might have been released into the nearby sea 
when the mountains were sundered; they speculate that 
the strange ring of small islands surrounding the nearby 
inlet to the west may be connected to the being’s where- 
abouts and purpose. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


60 


BARREN SHORES ADVENTURES 
Adventurers might seek out the secrets of the Barren 
Shores through archaeological curiosity or find them- 
selves stranded during an unfortunate sea voyage. 

Be Our Guest (Low Level). The characters discover 
a wrecked smuggler’s ship, its ruined structure washed 
on shore. Inside, they find the long-dead bodies of the 
smugglers who once manned it, as well as the mysteri- 
ous animated cargo that slew the previous sailors. Fly- 
ing swords, rugs of smothering, and animated armor 
haunt the interior, while the baleful spirit that grants 
them life remains tethered to a golden chair hidden 
within the depths of the hull, seeking release from the 
curse that binds it there. 


BISAFT ISLE 


The largest island in an archipelago southwest of Port 
Damali, Bisaft Isle is a lush expanse of jungle, nut 

and fruit trees, exotic creatures, and thick mangroves. 
Swarming with denizens that call the dense foliage 
home, Bisaft has become a favored location to hide con- 
traband or conduct unlawful activity beyond the sight of 
the Clovis Concord. Bisaft is dotted with abandoned ru- 
ins of the Ki’Nau who once ruled this jungle, and some 
believe that these villages hide knowledge and gifts 
granted to the Ki’Nau by their elemental patrons. 

Along the southern shore of the island lies a single 
bastion of civilization, known as Bisaft Post. A small 
village of no more than eight hundred people, the har- 
bor town is a tropical escape for concord citizens and a 
surprisingly busy place of business for ships in need of 
resources and repairs while passing through the trade 
lanes of the Swavain Islands. 


BROKENBANK 


Population: 1,520 (74% humans, 9% tabaxi, 6% 
dwarves, 11% other races) 

Government: The settlement is run by the portcaller 
and his personal Zhelezo soldiers. Minor power strug- 
gles occur with local business leaders. 

Defense: Beyond the Zhelezo, there is a small volunteer 
militia of fishers and ex-military locals. 

Commerce: Basic supplies are available, though 
sources are limited to a few inns and places of trade. 


Some merchant sailors bring rarer goods on occasion. 


Organizations: Aside from scattered shrines, no full 
temples exist in Brokenbank. The settlement is too 
small to support independent guilds; large businesses 
control internal commerce. 


Brokenbank is a coastal settlement built along the beau- 
tiful northern beaches of the island of the same name. 
Its bustling docks that are filled with foreign ships com- 
ing and going at a moment’s notice. Despite its muddy 
streets, Brokenbank plays an important role in the trade 
business of the coast. It is the first major entry port for 
the Menagerie Coast; most trade ships and shipping 
vessels check in at Brokenbank to resupply and submit 
to official inspection before entering any of the coastal 
ports. However, since Brokenbank lacks the strong 
cultural identity of the mainland city-states, the concord 
doesn’t recognize it as an official city with a marquis. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


The constantly shifting clientele, who often arrive af- 
ter many weeks at sea, leads to fruitful and rowdy nights 
in Brokenbank’s crowded taverns and brothels. 


GOVERNMENT 

Since Brokenbank has no marquis, its de facto leader 
is Portcaller Mazin Fahreed (described in chapter 2). 
Mazin performs the duties of a marquis without the 
title or respect, and he often gets ornery when dealing 
with other members of the Clovis Concord. He has been 
known to severely punish those who question his au- 
thority. He retains a garrison of hardened Zhelezo who 
maintain the peace among sailors and peddlers, while 
aiding the port inspectors to handle any fishy business 
among the ships in port. 


CRIME 

Sailors carrying goods across the ocean often attempt 
to skim a few goods off the top of their cargo to make an 
extra silver at market. This is considered normal unless 
one gets too greedy. Less acceptable is outright stealing 
from other ships in port before setting sail. The local 
Zhelezo mete out stern punishment to petty thieves, 
cross-referencing all documentation to ensure that the 
sterling reputations of the shipping guilds and Broken- 
bank itself aren’t tarnished. 


GEOGRAPHY 

The busy port consists of a curved main street that fol- 
lows the shape of the inlet, forming a stretched half-cir- 
cle facing the northern ocean. It’s not uncommon to see 
the port full of docked vessels while other ships weigh 
anchor in the harbor, eager for spots to open up. The 
strong sea breeze keeps the denizens cool under the 
glaring sun that bakes the dirt and sand along the banks 
of the settlement. 


BROKENBANK ADVENTURES 

The characters could come to Brokenbank to buy or sell 
a ship or exotic items, or to find a merchant hiring ad- 
venturers for protection. 

For the Myriad (Low Level). Agents of the Myriad 
hire the characters to find information they can use to 
blackmail Portcaller Mazin Fahreed. What evidence 
might the characters find of the portcaller’s dirty deeds? 


BWUALLI 


Bwualli is the largest of the Swavain Islands, and its 
volcanic peak, Itaa, is said to have been one of the many 
thrones of Kord the Storm Lord while he walked Ex- 
andria. The active volcano is a smoldering monolith of 
black rock and gray smoke that shakes the surrounding 
lands with sporadic eruptions. Where the glass and rock 
has cooled, a crowded jungle teeming with aggressive 
wildlife and lurking pitfalls awaits those who brave the 
untamed isle. The smugglers and pirates of the Revelry 
take advantage of Bwualli’s dangerous and unstable 
reputation to hide their plunder on the island, carving 
out lairs to hide their gains. The recent tales of a name- 
less horror that stalks the volcanic crags only embolden 
the pirates. They jeer that the Clovis Concord’s officers 
lack the guts to investigate. 


eee SS 
j Bort Damali- 


oe) 
a 


(s 
ie 
My 
ee 
BISAFT ISLE 
GRAVID 
ARCHIPELAGO 


a 
a Eaa 

~ ei SS Brokenbank 

= Se Po a 

K GI) 

BROKENBANK 


o 
Diver's Grave 


K A 
VIDE CAY 


Mar 3.1: MENAGERIE Coast 


COPIA LAKE 


North of Tussoa, the sparkling waters of Copia Lake 
are nestled within the Copia Wildwood, a thousand feet 
up in the Cyrios Mountains. The lake is considered a 
sacred pool where Ki'’Nau warriors and priests would 
ascend to purify themselves of terrible dreams and spir- 
its. As such, the concord has outlawed fishing or diving 
except for of ceremonial purposes. However, the lake is 
isolated and only sparsely guarded by Zhelezo, so the 
area has become a favored drop point for contraband, 
and passing smugglers have decided to pick up some ex- 
tra coin by poaching the sacred fish unique to the lake. 


CoPIA WILDWOOD 


The Copia Wildwood winds through the Cyrios Valley 


north of the city of Tussoa, and wraps around the base 
of the mountains like a coiling verdant serpent. While 
the outer edges of the forest provide strong timber for 
the surrounding cities, deep beyond the welcoming tree 
line lie the swaths of heavyspruce and fir trees infested 
with all manner of large, hungry predators. Locals 
spread tales of an intelligent behemoth who lives in the 
nearby mountains and devours or enslaves any who 
wander too far into the woods. 


TWINWARD ISLES 


ISS 
RUMBLECUSP 


Copia WILDWOOD ADVENTURES 
This dangerous forest is the perfect spot for characters 
to face powerful predators. 

Something Wicked This Way Comes (Mid Level). 
Something is forcing the giants of the mountains to mi- 
grate southward into the wildwood. The party is hired 
by the foreman of the Shekis Timber Company to elim- 
inate these unwelcome brutes, offering gold for each 
giant head delivered. However, when the characters face 
one of these towering giants, they might notice their sal- 
low figures and the look of fear in their eyes—they’re not 
attacking, they’re running from something. 


CyRIOS END FOREST 


Along the southern edge of the Cyrios Mountains is a 
dense timberland of softwood trees and jungle vegeta- 
tion. The Cyrios End Forest provides lumber used to 
create quality paper, but those who harvest from the 
woodland generally keep to the perimeter. Deep within 
the twisting paths and fern-cluttered floor, deadly crea- 
tures hunt in the shadows, while abandoned huts and 
lodges crumble around a toppled temple, now mostly 
reclaimed by the forest. Adventurers and historians have 
helmed expeditions into the remnants of this Ki’Nau 
village and the temple, but have often returned wounded 
or diseased, or have never returned at all. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 6 
I 


62 


CyRIOS MOUNTAINS 


The largest mountain range in Wildemount, the Cyrios 
Mountains wind across the western side of the conti- 
nent, dividing the Menagerie Coast from Western Wyn- 
andir and the Dwendalian Empire. The jagged moun- 
tains make overland travel between the neighboring 
continents of Wildemount and Tal’Dorei all but impossi- 
ble—to say nothing of the nightmarish beasts that hunt 
amid the craggy cliffs and gnarled trees. 


CYRIOS MOUNTAINS ADVENTURES 
The vast mountain range harbors all kinds of challenges 
for those who value treasure more than their own lives. 
The Unlucky Few (Low Level). The characters are 
hired by a minor official from the Dwendalian Empire 
to find a small community of Righteous Brand deserters 
who have set up an encampment deep into the Cyrios 
Mountains and bring them to justice. When they locate 
these fugitives, the adventurers discover that the entire 
community is afflicted with lycanthropy, the reason for 
their desertion. The characters can attempt to capture 
or slay the former soldiers to complete their contract, 
make allies with them and keep their secret, or even 
search for a cure and help them reintegrate into society. 
Many Eyes for Many a Prize (Mid Level). Rumors 
reach the coast that a hidden mountain valley holds a 
mysterious collection of statues. The characters are 
hired to accompany a curator of the Cobalt Soul to 
investigate the nature of this strange menagerie, only 
to discover that numerous curators have already been 
added to this display by an eccentric beholder called 
Enxanash who wants to build a beautiful museum 
of zoology. The characters must defeat the beholder, 
convince it to relinquish its collection, or steal the petri- 
fied victims. 


DARKTOW ISLE 


The volcanic rock that forms the jagged cliffs of Darktow 
Isle is wildly varied in height and shape, creating the 
impression of a massive, toothy maw. These rocks hide 
many caverns and tunnels that have inspired numerous 
local myths of secret hideouts and legendary beasts. 
The island is barren of greenery, save for the verdant 
basin in its center, known to locals as the Pit. This 
small pocket of jungle is the largest source of natural 
resources on the isle, and its fruit, game, and timber 
sustain the pirate haven in lean times. 

The Dragshallow Reefs that surround Darktow 
Isle have claimed many ships over the years. Their 
wrecked skeletons have been dragged atop the rocks 
as an additional barrier to intruders and as a warning 
to trespassers. A dragon turtle named Idok stalks the 
reefs, but an accord between the cunning creature and 
the Plank King himself keeps Idok away from pirate 
vessels. In return, the dragon turtle can do whatever 
it wishes with any other ships that enter the island’s 
twisted waterways. The denizens of Darktow have fur- 
ther fortified the reefs with sentry posts, hidden weap- 
onry, and deployable pitfalls to prevent unauthorized 
entry through the southern channel. The defenders of 
the channel have orders to fire without warning on any 
ships that do not fly the colors of the Revelry. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


DARKTOW 


Population: 1,306 (61% humans, 12% elves, 9% 
dwarves, 18% other races) 

Government: The island is ruled by the Plank King, 
whose power is maintained through the pirate lords 
loyal to him. 

Defense: Numerous hidden ballistae, siege weapons, 
explosives, and magical wards guard the waterway to 
the city. The harbor holds a powerful navy of pirate 
vessels, and most Darktow denizens are accomplished 
cutthroats, ready to fight any threat to their city. 

Commerce: Most goods and services can be found here, 
as well as all kinds of rare, exotic, and dangerous sup- 
plies that find their way here from far-off raids. 

Organizations: Most homesteads have small personal 
shrines, but only two rickety temples to Kord and 
Melora stand along the shoreline. Each ship is its 
own independent organization, but all work as part of 
Darktow’s community. 


This eerie, fog-shrouded town is built into the southern 
cliff of Darktow Isle. Over a century ago, Darktow was 
established as a sanctuary for sailors traveling to Wilde- 
mount from Marquet or Tal’Dorei. About forty years ago, 
a group of aggrieved sailors and traders within the Clo- 
vis Concord rebelled against their government's exces- 
sive taxation of independent nautical businesses. The 
rebellious pirates conquered Darktow and claimed it as 
their headquarters, making this town the beating heart 
of piracy in the Lucidian Ocean. This union of thieves 
and pirates, known as the Revelry, plunders ships on the 
surrounding waters then retreats to their reef-encircled 
base, amassing wealth and influence through intimida- 
tion and cleverness. 


By LAND OR SEA 

While most Revelry pirates are sailors by trade, many 

of the isle’s residents never take to sea. Instead, they 
maintain the town’s defenses, repair ships in port, enter- 
tain pirates on shore leave, or sell goods and services. A 
large number of these landlocked folk were denizens at 
the time of the town’s capture or are their descendants, 
having been granted safety in exchange for their alle- 
giance to the Revelry. 


GOVERNMENT 

Within the Revelry, each captain is the lord of their own 
ship, but all business must be reported to the Plank 
King, the leader of the Revelry as a whole. Though the 
Plank King rarely leaves the Throne Roost in the town 
of Darktow, he oversees operations, organizes raids, 
protects the island, and punishes traitors. 


CRIME 

One would think a landscape of law-breakers would be 
rife with crime, but the rule of the Plank King heavily 
punishes thievery within Darktow. A number of bird- 
picked skulls adorn the rocky shore aside his lair as a 
warning to play nice with one’s fellow pirates. Even so, 
some folks do push those boundaries should they feel 
confident in their ability to get away with it. Theft and 
conflict beyond the boundaries of the Dragshallow Reef 
is reviewed and judged by the Plank King. 


ARRIVAL AT DARKTOW 


GEOGRAPHY 

The town’s many ramshackle structures sprawl across 
numerous rock shelves and caverns, connected by 
bridges, tunnels, and rickety platforms. A vast shipyard 
surrounds the southern cliffs with a winding network 

of docks and bridges, while other fortifications bristle 
with cannons. Other siege weapons dot the jagged edges 
of the isle. 

A series of watchtowers keeps vigil over the inlet, their 
torches flickering within the midnight fog. A precarious, 
winding cliffside stair leads to the Throne Roost, the 
cavern where the Plank King makes his home. Atop 
that same cliff, a mysterious arcane device is under con- 
struction; some believe that it is intended to defend the 
Revelry’s stronghold in case some fool from the Clovis 
Concord attempts to bring askyship over their heads. 


DARKTOW ADVENTURES 

Darktow is a pirate settlement, making it the perfect 
starting place for an adventure on the high seas. The 
characters might come to the town to join a crew, chal- 
lenge a pirate captain, or hunt down criminals. 

Bloody Maggie’s Crew (Mid Level). The characters 
are hired by Bloody Maggie (chaotic neutral, female 
human bandit captain) of the pirate ship Dragon Turtle 
to find out who or what keeps murdering members of 
her crew. The characters eventually catch the culprit, 


Blue Martita, a revenant who wants revenge on Bloody 
Maggie and her crew for leaving her behind during a 
Clovis Concord raid on one of their safe houses. The 
revenant tries to recruit the characters to her cause. 

Heroes ona Dragon Shell (High Level). The arrange- 
ment between the Plank King and the dragon turtle 
Idok of the Dragshallow Reefs has broken down, so the 
creature is now also sinking Revelry ships that attempt 
to enter or leave Darktow. The Plank King hires the 
characters to parley with Idok and find a way to meet the 
creature’s demands, convince it to end its assaults, or 
slay it in its lair for a share of its treasure hoard. 
A a 

SONG OF DASHILLA THE DREADFUL 

Where once the waters rolled calmly by, 

Where ocean’s heart did sing, 

There stalked a lass with a hungry eye, 

And claws that grasp and wring. 

With lantern lure of a glimmer pot, 

With treasure in their eyes, 

Below they swam to the gold they thought, 

Would await them as their prize. 

Yet each of them went to surely die, 

Their graves to not be found, 

For Dashilla and her hungry eye, 

Collects the lost and drowned. 

—Brokenbank folk ballad 


= —----—_- —xs< — eeavavXx—Xnx=——— OO 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


DIVER’S GRAVE 


Deep beneath the waves of the open Lucidian Ocean 
lies a terrifying graveyard of wrecked, merrow-infested 
ships scattered across the ocean floor. This sunken cem- 
etery of broken vessels is strewn over miles and miles, 
and each salvage ship that tries to reclaim cargo from 
the Diver’s Grave only adds another corpse to its hun- 
gry sands. The Grave seems to sense ships as they ap- 
proach and sends out a storm to consume them. At the 
heart of the Grave is an underwater maze of carnivorous 
seaweed, and within this dread labyrinth lives Dashilla 
the Dreadful, a terrible sea fury (see chapter 7) who hun- 
grily awaits her next shipment of wayward sailors. 


DOLITHIL MINE 


Northeast of the elven city of Gwardan lies the Dolithil 
Mine, owned and operated by the Dolithil Orekeepers 
Guild from within the city. The entrance to the mine 
remains hidden from view thanks to simple illusions 
put in place to deter thieves. While the mine yields a 
respectable amount of gold and platinum, it is notably 
rich in iron, tin, copper, zinc, and other more common 
metals that are used in the secret trade of steamcasting 
(see “Gwardan” later in this chapter). 


DOLITHIL MINE ADVENTURES 

Dolithil Mine is such a critical location for the Clovis 
Concord that adventurers could be hired to find the 
mine for the organization’s enemies, or they might 
be paid to protect the place from threats outside 

and within. 


THE GLOOMY DEPTHS OF Diver’s GRAVE 


k 


) 


Revelry Razing (Mid Level). The Revelry knows that 
finding and destroying Dolithil Mine would be an excel- 
lent way to hinder their enemies in the Clovis Concord. 
The characters could be hired by the Revelry to find and 
destroy the mine, or by the concord to defend the mine 
from Revelry invaders. 


DORALLE WOODS 


The Doralle Woods are tucked away at the base of the 
Cyrios Mountains. The woodlands are a major source 
of game, timber, and herbal medicines for the nearby 
elven city of Gwardan and the surrounding coast, fed by 
the watershed of the nearby mountain range. Fishers 
often follow the path alongside the Doralle River into the 
northern lake to catch rare fish and silt-born shellfish 
only found within those crystal waters. Travelers and 
hunters that traverse the woods are advised to bring 
offerings of fresh bread, tropical fruits, and even pearls 
for the woodland spirits that are rumored to call the for- 
est home. A community of fey beings watch over these 
woods, stepping from the veil of the Feywild to meddle 
with trespassers who show disrespect, or terrorize 
those who seek to rob the wilds of their boons. Local 
stories speak of a crew of unsanctioned loggers from 
Tussoa who vanished naught but a week into their ven- 
ture, only to return a month later aged thirty years, with 
no memory of what occurred in the interim. 


EVERPLUME 


Those who brave the waters surrounding the Torrid 
Reef, south of the Shearing Channel, find their view of 
the horizon broken by an endless column of jet-black 
smoke rising from beneath the ocean. Hidden under 
the rolling waves is the monstrous volcano Everplume, 
which fills the surrounding waters with murky soot, 


toxic fumes, and boiling heat. Elemental energy swirls 
around this ominous peak, leading many experts to 
believe that a rift to the Elemental Plane of Fire might 
sit at its heart, unknown to the Ashari people, who 
safeguard breaches between the Material Plane and 

the Elemental Planes elsewhere in Exandria. Natural 
creatures of the deep have been slowly twisted into fiery 
mockeries of their original selves, and regular tremors 
suggest that the mountain may be growing. 


FEOLINN 


Population: 12,700 (73% humans, 10% elves, 5% 
gnomes, 12% other races) 

Government: Marquis Hector Soliva runs the city, with 
wealthy, non-competitive businesses operating as an 
unofficial council. 

Defense: Local Zhelezo keep the peace and protect the 
city perimeter. Affluent members of society also keep 
a hired guard. 

Commerce: Most basic supplies are readily available in 
taverns, inns, and the marketplace. 

Organizations: Shrines and temples to the Prime Dei- 
ties are present, if downplayed in prominence. Local 
merchant families vie for financial and political domi- 
nance, leaving room for growing Myriad corruption. 


Smaller than its nearest coastal neighbors, Feolinn is 
widely referred to as the Garden City for its rural aes- 
thetic, proximity to the Plumgroves, and well-kept parks 
and gardens. Feolinn acts as a harbor for the plentiful 
fishing around the Mother’s Sigh Reef, as well as a 
destination for travelers looking to escape the chaos of 
Exandria’s woes. Feolinn is a popular destination for 
wealthy socialites, and it is filled with businesses that 
specialize in indulgence and self-pampering. 


TREE AND VINE 

The abundance of fruit and sweet roots harvested from 
the Plumgroves has given rise to a competitive wine and 
spirits industry. Feolinn wines and ciders are renowned 
throughout Exandria. The vintners of Feolinn are 
known for their intense pride—and for the disdain they 
have for other vineyards, such as those in the Dwenda- 
lian city of Kamordah. Classic vintages auction well in 
Port Damali, while high-end liquor is presented as a fine 
gift in noble circles. Competition between the local win- 
eries and distilleries is cutthroat, with major organiza- 
tions such as the Soliva Winery, the Laffath & Legrand 
Vineyards, the Leoleoa Cellars, and the Purple Breast 
Company all vying for local and international renown. 


GOVERNMENT 

Feolinn’s reputation for vanity is well-deserved; even 

its leaders believe in their city’s superiority. Marquis 
Hector Soliva of the Soliva Winery family is the third 
marquis of his bloodline to maintain the city’s luxurious 
image, while also doing his best to elevate the prestige 
of his family’s business. Local Zhelezo are often tipped 
by businesses to pay particular attention to their safety, 
or to pry into the affairs of competitors. This culture 

of bribery has caused Feolinn’s Zhelezo to neglect the 
concerns of their city’s underclass in favor of lining their 
pockets with “tips” from merchants. 


CRIME 

Visible, violent, and unbecoming criminal activity is 
swiftly quelled to avoid tarnishing the reputation of the 
fair city. However, quiet lawbreaking occurs within back 
rooms of wineries and the mansions of the upper class. 
A number of powerful local businesses have even fallen 
in with the Myriad to unseat their competitors, and 
though few are aware of it, Feolinn is now nearly as cor- 
rupt as Port Damali. 


GEOGRAPHY 

Buttressed against the southern tree line of the 
Plumgroves and surrounded by a number of small fam- 
ily farms, Feolinn is replete with rural charm. The city 
itself is comprised of four main roads that form a large 
rectangle, with each corner ending in a promenade filled 
with shops and pubs, while the city center is mostly 
made up of residential homes and affluent estates. Sua- 
malie Way specializes in food and fine dining, while 
Alt’afi Avenue sports theaters, bathhouses, gambling 
halls, and other venues for private entertainment. 
Minceli Road contains administration buildings and 
Zhelezo barracks, and Soyer Street is home to many of 
the local harvesters and working class folk. 


FEOLINN ADVENTURES 
Feolinn is a good place for adventurers to get caught up 
in shady business deals and cutthroat competition. 

Loose Lips (Low Level). The characters are invited to 
a citywide alcohol fair, where Feolinn’s wineries and dis- 
tilleries enter their products to compete for prizes. The 
fair is secretly sponsored by the Myriad, which plans to 
get the city’s most influential people drunk and learn 
their secrets to use as blackmail. The characters get 
wind of this plan and must decide whether to stop the 
Myriad or get in on the plan. 

Celebrity Endorsement (Any Level). After the char- 
acters gain recognition for their deeds, the competing 
wineries and distilleries in Feolinn attempt to convince 
them to become official spokespeople of their brands, 
offering money and free booze. If the characters accept 
an offer, the rejected companies turn on them, trying to 
embarrass the characters at every turn and hiring rival 
adventurers to take credit for their accomplishments. 

MA [MN 

WINES OF FEOLINN 

Tropical weather and fertile lands have enabled Feolinn 

to develop a prosperous wine trade across the Menagerie 

Coast and beyond. There is fierce competition between 

local families as well as the rival wineries of Kamordah in 

the empire, and the numerous wines exported from Feo- 

linn can claim a respectable bit of coin, though the prices 

might vary depending on the market. 


Solvia Groves Diamond Plum Wine: 60 gp per bottle. 
Oveso Family Dark Red: 35 gp per bottle. 
Rustlecall’s Evening Dream Plum Wine: 40 gp per bottle. 
Solvia Groves Sunset White Wine: 30 gp per bottle. 
Cuthras Silver Vineyard Premium Red Wine: 50 gp 

per bottle. 


b a a 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


66 


FESTERWILL POOL 


Festerwill Pool’s bubbling waters emit a powerful sul- 
furous smell that fills the valley, while the nearby rock 
is discolored by mineral buildup. The pool itself is a 
green lake choked by algae and weeds at the base of a 
ragged mountain valley, surrounded by moss-covered, 
leafless trees. This lake and the surrounding rocky cliffs 
are home to the grotesque and ravenous gorefeather 
harpies. Screeching through the air, the harpy troupes 
bring their prey here to devour, the bloody remnants 
falling into the brackish waters below. Under their 
matron, Uada, the gorefeathers claim this region as 
their territory, hiding baubles and trinkets among their 
filthy nests. 


GILDED ROADWAY 


Running nearly the entire length of the Menagerie 
Coast, the Gilded Roadway is a ribbon of civilization 
that links every major city in the Clovis Concord. This 
well-traveled highway is too long to be constantly pa- 
trolled, but small bands of Zhelezo do move from city 
to city, giving travelers at least the illusion of security. 
The Gilded Roadway is a symbol of unity between the 
coastal cities of the Clovis Concord and is even repre- 
sented on the concord’s official seal. 


GRAVID ARCHIPELAGO 


These three islands are comprised of steep, volcanic 
peaks with sheer cliff faces, pock-marked with numer- 
ous caves housing blood hawks, harpies, and (rumor 
has it) an impossibly big roc. There are only small pock- 
ets of trees and jungle, so resources are scarce and few 
ships have a legitimate reason to stop here. However, 
this does not stop the Revelry from using the region for 
storage, ambushes, and meetings outside Darktow. 


GWARDAN 


Population: 18,900 (63% elves, 16% humans, 11% 
gnomes, 10% other races) 

Government: The city is governed by the four Noldar, 
one of whom must act as marquis. 

Defense: Gwardan has a respectable force of Zhelezo, 
mercenaries, and trained citizen militia. Elders and 
prominent figures keep a small personal guard. 

Commerce: Most basic goods and facilities can be 
found within the city, while rarer commodities are 
scarce. Inns and taverns are limited compared to 
other coastal cities. 

Organizations: The Houses of Sagacity (see “Geogra- 
phy” below) are the center of worship, though small 
shrines dot the city. The Clovis Concord is involved in 
the city’s affairs, though kept peripheral by the Noldar. 
Myriad interests are slowly invading. 


After the sea guardian of the Ki Nau was banished, the 
Menagerie Coast received an influx of travelers from 
Marquet. Many Ki’Nau of elven heritage joined the des- 
ert elves of Marquet to seek a new home. They traveled 
inland toward the protection of the Cyrios Mountains, 
where precious metals and stones lay unclaimed, and 
paid their respects to the fey folk of the Doralle, taking 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


only what lumber they felt was needed. Together, they 
built a new center for elven culture among the fields out- 
side the forest. 

When the Clovis Concord was established, Gwardan 
was the force that mandated autonomy between each 
city-state. The elegantly carved wooden arches of 
Gwardan rise out of the fields like the waving grass writ 
large, with neighborhoods of domed yurts rising into tall 
spires of brass and silver. The Houses of Sagacity allow 
a limited number of students annually to join their halls 
to seek higher knowledge. 


STEAMCASTING 

The elves of Gwardan built sprawling mines throughout 
the nearby mountains, becoming the most renowned 
metallurgists and smiths across the Menagerie Coast. 
The mingling of elven cultures has occasioned the 
guarded development of a unique style of metalworking. 
Blending organic designs with super-heated caustic 
mists, the “steamcasting” process imbues metal witha 
prismatic shimmer and enables cheap, brittle materials 
to become as workable and as strong as steel. Gwardan 
is known across Exandria for its unique steamcast 
goods, and no one else has managed to get the style 
quite right, making Gwardan’s decor, jewelry, and weap- 
ons coveted throughout the world. 


GOVERNMENT 

General city affairs are overseen by the Noldar, a coun- 
cil of four figures who represent the larger facets of 
Gwardan society. Though the Noldar were established 
in the interest of fairness, they were forced to select one 
of their number as their marquis when Gwardan en- 
tered into the Clovis Concord. Currently, Marquis Vasan 
Atrith has led the Gwardan people for just under a cen- 
tury, and is seen as both just and forthright. 


CRIME 

While Marquis Atrith has been willing to allow outsid- 
ers to visit and live within the city, rising crime and ru- 
mors of the Myriad’s return to the Menagerie Coast have 
set her on edge. Thieves have tried numerous times to 
uncover the secret process of steamcasting, causing her 
to increase the number of Zhelezo patrolling the city 
streets. These Zhelezo were drawn from Port Damali, 
and their presence has given Port Damali’sleaders the 
power to interfere in local affairs, to the Noldar’s con- 
sternation. 


GEOGRAPHY 

Gwardan is a beautifully rustic yet elegantly refined city 
of stained wood and gold that rises from the windswept 
tallgrass fields, cultivated farm land, and clustered trees 
of the chilly northern plains. The outer ring of the city, 
called the Anorans Ring, is comprised of numerous 
domed abodes of bowed lumber and carved bark where 
families make their homes. The Houses of Sagacity 
form a prestigious region where three temples built for 
worship also provide a variety of advanced studies to a 
limited student body. These are the House of Enlighten- 
ment under Ioun, the House of Invention under Moradin, 
and the House of Enchantment under Corellon. 


The Korrwa Ring is the inner ring of Gwardan, where 
business is conducted between peddlers, merchants, 
and craftsmen. Within that ring stands the Ornatora, 

a massive tower of latticed wood spiraling upward like 
acrafted, leafless tree. Disc-like homes and chambers 
protrude from the tower at varying intervals, granting 
the wealthy folk of the city a magnificent view. The 
peaks of the tower house the Noldar, as well as the cen- 
tral meeting chambers where local political discussion 
takes place. 


GWARDAN ADVENTURES 
Characters could come to Gwardan seeking steamcast 
goods or any of the city’s strange crafting secrets. 

Bring ‘em Back (Low Level). Talamin Raanan 
(chaotic neutral, female, high elf bandit captain) once 
worked for the tribes of Shadycreek Run as an assassin. 
The elf disappeared five years ago, but spies report that 
she resides in Gwardan under the name Valemis Tirdra. 
One of the Shadycreek Tribes, or a faction that wants to 
see Talamin pay for her crimes, hires the characters to 
capture the elf. When the characters find Talamin, they 
learn that all she desires is to leave her violent past be- 
hind and live out her days with her new family, including 
her two young children. 


HEARTHSTAR PEAKS 


Visible even from the ocean, the Hearthstar Peaks area 
compact, dizzyingly tall cluster of mountains near Port 
Damali. The highest peak, known as the Hearthstar, 
has a giant column of ever-burning arcane fire. The 
Hearthstar is a beacon that warns nearby ships of the 
rough and unwelcome rocky coast in the region, guiding 
them eastward to the Edgepoint Lighthouse at the tip 

of the peninsula and onward to the safe harbor of Port 
Damali. The sheer slopes of the mountains are incredi- 
bly dangerous to climb, but some do enjoy the challenge, 
and there are occasional rumors of arcanists who float 
to the highest peaks to hide away their secrets in the 
topmost caverns. 


LUSHGUT FOREST 


Choking the valley floor between the Stonecage Cliffs 
and the entire northwest region of the Menagerie Coast, 
the Lushgut Forest is a monument to the fury and anger 
of Melora. It is said that a terrible battle between Melora 
and Zehir took place during the Calamity, when the 
Cloaked Serpent plotted an ambush by a shrine to the 
Wild Mother. This ambush poisoned and slaughtered 
an innumerable number of Melora’s chosen. In her an- 
guish and rage, Melora’s scream shook the heavens and 
birthed a twisting, thorny woodland that crushed and 
consumed the serpentfolk of Zehir, sending the dark 
god fleeing the valley. The Lushgut Forest remains a 
physical manifestation of the Wild Mother’s vengeful 
nature; her wrath is embodied in the tall, curling boughs 
that still ooze toxins from the poison left in Zehir’s 
wake. The poisonous denizens of the labyrinthine wil- 
derness of shadow and fumes are rumored to protect 
something that lingers near its center, and scholars still 
debate if these slithering sentinels are born from the 
will of Melora or the spite of Zehir. 


The deep woods of the Lushgut Forest are also home 
to a civilization of goblins and bugbears known as the 
Vinewreathed Enclave. This druidic order is led by 
bugbears who have used their natural magic to break 
the control which Bane, the Strife Emperor, holds over 
their westward goblin kin. They are devotees of the Wild 
Mother, whom they know as an-Melzidanye. 


LUSHGUT ADVENTURES 
Whether traveling from Tal’Dorei or wandering far 
north of the Menagerie Coast, adventuring parties can 
find unique challenges within these deep woods. 
Venomous Request (Low Level). Wandering deep 
into the shady heart of the forest, the characters dis- 
cover a hidden society of yuan-ti who worship the Wild 
Mother instead of Zehir. However, they bear a cancer- 
ous curse that cuts their lives short, which they believe 
stems from the poisonous sunken temple they choose to 
guard in Melora’s name, slaying the twisted creatures 
that spill from its corruption. The village leader asks the 
characters for aid in venturing deep into the deadly tem- 
ple to seek the source of these terrors, and perhaps their 
own curse, in hopes of destroying it once and for all. 


NICODRANAS 


Population: 31,900 (68% humans, 13% halflings, 8% 
dwarves, 10% other races) 

Government: The city is ruled by Marquis Zhafe Ulu- 
dan, who maintains his position through his family’s 
ties with the Dwendalian Empire. 

Defense: A respectable army remains stationed within 
Nicodranas to dissuade empire foolishness. Zhelezo 
mingle with small squads of imperial Crownsguard. 
Powerful nobles and diplomats also keep hired 
swords and guards. 

Commerce: The Dwendalian Empire is Nicodranas’s 
primary foreign trade partner, and Nicodranas is 
renowned as a city where foreign travelers can find 
respite and entertainment. 

Organizations: The port is home to many places of 
worship, though temples to the gods approved by the 
empire are kept to the north side of the city, separated 
from those of banned gods. The Dwendalian Empire 
has a strong presence among high society. The Myr- 
iad is very quiet but unquestionably present. 


The easternmost city of the Menagerie Coast, Nicodra- 
nas (meaning “gathering of colors” in Draconic) sits 
close to the Dwendalian Empire’s southern border. The 
proximity to the empire has made Nicodranas as an em- 
bassy state between the two powers, and the city hosts 
most diplomatic relations between the Clovis Concord 
and the Dwendalian Empire. The second-largest city of 
the coast, Nicodranas is similar to its larger sister city, 
Port Damali. Although it lacks the bustle of the unoffi- 
cial capital, Nicodranas is preferred by travelers who 
dislike the crowds and rapid pace of Port Damali. 

A lighthouse of the Wild Mother overlooks the docks 
of the Restless Wharf, where traders and sailors maneu- 
ver their goods in and out of the harbor. Many of the lo- 
cal businesses are connected with either the ruling Ulu- 
dan family or the entrepreneurial mage Yussa Errenis 
in the Tidepeak Tower, creating an additional level of 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


68 


competition. Those with coin to spend eventually find 
themselves drawn to the delights of the Opal Archways, 
where dens of indulgence are plentiful, though they are 
always under the supervision of the local Zhelezo guard. 


THE NEAREST ESCAPE 

Sitting just beyond the southern borders of the empire, 
Nicodranas has been nicknamed “the Escape” for many 
who seek to enjoy the simple pleasures of the tropics— 
but also because other folk come here to flee from the 
dreary realities of daily life in the city’s plentiful gam- 
bling houses. Some successful Dwendalian merchants 
have even gained the Cerberus Assembly’s approval to 
relocate to Nicodranas. 


GOVERNMENT 

Nicodranas is currently led by Marquis Zhafe Uludan, 

a powerful guildmaster who is related to Lord Athesias 
Uludan, a respected member of the Cerberus Assem- 
bly. This connection has enabled Zhafe’s family line to 
maintain the tenuous truce between the empire and the 
Clovis Concord, including the controlled trade and travel 
between borders. The Zhelezo who guard the city inter- 
mingle with assigned Dwendalian sentries, though the 
overlapping jurisdiction occasionally causes conflict. 


CRIME 

The awkward intersection of Dwendalian and concord 
law makes Nicodranas an especially dangerous place to 
delve into criminal activity. Both factions are competi- 
tive in their enforcement of the laws, so the local crimi- 
nals are extremely cautious to avoid attention. However, 
many things considered unlawful within the empire are 
carefully regulated but nonetheless legal here, giving 
Nicodranas the dubious honor of being the safest place 
in Wildemount to indulge in one’s vices. 

The Myriad is quiet here but unquestionably present, 
manipulating the black market to maneuver their con- 
traband throughout both the Clovis Concord and the 
Dwendalian Empire. 


GEOGRAPHY 
This vivid, lively port city is built below the mouth of the 
Wuyun Valley, where the Cyrios Mountains form the 
southeastern border of the Dwendalian Empire. The 
districts within the city vary in architecture and atmo- 
sphere, meshing colorful Menagerie pavilions with the 
gothic, brooding Dwendalian aesthetics as the cultures 
clash and mingle. Divided into four loose regions, each 
section is further divided by the lifestyles of the deni- 
zens based on which side of the valley they hail from. 
The Restless Wharf marks the eastern end of the 
city’s shoreline, with a number of docks, warehouses, 
and a massive shipping bay run by the Glisteners Guild, 
a privately owned subsidiary of the Uludan family. Many 
ships are guided into port by the Mother’s Lighthouse, 
a colossal lighthouse carved in the image of Melora. In 
perpetual competition with the Open Quay docks, the 
Restless Wharf is filled with cheap entertainment, pam- 
phlets for services, and false promises of competitive 
prices. The dock yard in the wharf has managed to keep 
a tight hold on repair supplies coming into the city, leav- 
ing the Open Quay starved for materials. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


On the western side of the city, the Open Quay is 
privately owned by Yussa Errenis, a wealthy merchant 
mage who purchased the land two centuries ago after 
most of it burned down. He ignored offers to sell the 
land to the Uludan Family, and instead built an afford- 
able bastion of rentable business space out of spite for 
the monopolizing family. Considerably seedier than the 
Restless Wharf, the Open Quay is known for the mer- 
chants’ loyalty to Yussa and the diversity of work found 
throughout the area. 

The Opal Archways, a loop of eleven stone arches 
placed seemingly at random, were created when 
Nicodranas was founded centuries ago to mark the 
edges of the city, before it expanded far beyond its 
original boundaries. Now the Archways are markers 
for the lively social center of the city, glowing with 
multicolored torches and incense at dusk when music 
and evening commerce fill the streets. Housing is quite 
expensive in this vibrant district, so only nobles, well-off 
merchants, and political figures can afford to call the 
Archways home. It’s also common for foreign diplomats 
and moneylenders to own a part-time leisure home 
within the area. 

The Skew encompasses the residential sprawl of the 
city, a colorful collection of mismatched homesteads 
whose varying heights and sizes create a jagged skyline. 
The streets are safer the closer to the Archways they 
are, but at night the lack of well-lit walkways makes it 
dangerous to walk through this region alone. 


NICODRANAS ADVENTURES 

Characters looking to relax in Nicodranas might stum- 
ble into an adventure involving the Myriad, the Clovis 
Concord, or the Cerberus Assembly. 

Vine Shine (Low Level). Overnight, heavy vines grow 
over the lighthouse of the Wild Mother, and anyone who 
cuts their way through to investigate the sacred place 
doesn’t return. The characters are hired to investigate 
and find an infestation of vine blights in the temple. 
How did the blights come to be? Are they part of a plan 
to corrupt the lighthouse for dark purposes, or are they 
a priest’s experiment gone terribly wrong? 

Chaos Companions (High Level). While the char- 
acters visit the city, they witness a noble drop dead as 
a slaad tadpole bursts from her chest. More nobles die 
in the same way as the characters investigate. They 
eventually discover that the victims all visited the same 
brothel, an establishment run by a death slaad in dis- 
guise with several slaad bouncers. 


OTHE 


Population: 8,320 (64% humans, 16% halflings, 11% 
half-orcs, 9% other races) 

Government: Matters of state are managed by Othe’s 
marquis, while local industrial and religious leaders 
govern on a smaller scale. 

Defense: Zhelezo guards and volunteer citizen warriors 
maintain the law and protect the city. 

Commerce: Basic needs can be readily tended to 
through a trading post or inn. Some traveling 
merchants bring outside goods, but rarer commodities 
are sparse. Othe exports herbs with natural medicinal 
properties at high cost. 


ke esi elles 


STREETS OF NICOORANAS 


Organizations: A collection of small temples resides in 
the Apa-feids. Merchant guilds are small but work in 
conjunction with one another. Myriad agents are em- 
bedded in numerous elements of the city. 


Established around 410 PD by the Ki’Nau as a sha- 
manistic site for meditation and medicinal ritual, the 
location expanded into the village of Othe when Marque- 
sian explorers discovered the unique properties of the 
Othemoor and the flora it sustains. Othe is the smallest 
of the coastal Clovis Concord domains, and the local 
leaders are generally left to their own devices. This 
makes the social environment of Othe extremely insular 
and less hospitable to outsiders who don’t go out of their 
way to engage with the locals. 


A SPIRITUAL ELITE 

While the bogs surrounding Othe aren't the most pictur- 
esque of settings, the city is a regional center for spir- 
itual guidance. Within the Apa-feids of Othe lie many 
humble temples, where numerous holy guides welcome 
travelers who seek a comforting word or a moment 

of clarity. The spiritual traditions of the native Ki’Nau 
people are alive and well here, and have melded with 
worship of the gods to create a unique religious prac- 
tice. Here, connections are forged between the modern 
tenets of the gods and the animistic faiths of the Ki’Nau 
people in search of universal truth. 


GOVERNMENT 

The Marquis Mata Laau-afu is a respected spiritual sha- 
man who has followed in his family’s tradition for gener- 
ations. While he acts the part of the wise and mysterious 
guide to the people of the marsh, Mata is also a shrewd 
negotiator and clever bureaucrat when dealing with 

the other marquises and the politics of the Menagerie 
Coast. Bolstering his Zhelezo with a handful of faithful 
druidic guardians of the Othemoor, Mata remains vigi- 
lant in the protection of his people and their interests. 


CRIME 

As watchful as the marquis intends to be, the growing 
demand for Othe’s unique medicinal herbs has drawn 
the attention of opportunists and swindlers. Myriad 
agents masquerading as potential investors and part- 
ners in small family businesses have tried to abscond 
with herbal cuttings, but haven’t yet been able to break 
into the highly secretive society that cultivates them. 
Those that are caught trying to steal or counterfeit 
Othenian herbs are usually thrown into the Bogpit 
prison, and weightier crimes come with severe penal- 
ties, such as being left tethered and submerged in the 
most putrid swamps of the Othemoor. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 69 
J 


GEOGRAPHY 
Shaped like a large crescent, this settlement is built 
across a series of five small land masses that rise above 
the waterline of the Othemoor. These landmasses are 
all connected by bridges, and each of the city’s districts 
is built atop one or more of these islands. First, the 
Rudwashes are a residential district whose houses have 
been built using bricks made of red clay from the marsh. 
The port, known as the Stark Docks, is where small 
boats and storage buildings are used by the laborers of 
the city to gather resources. The Apa-feids form the cen- 
tral bulk of the city, with more modern buildings and the 
elevated hall where the marquis resides. Here, a circle 
of small temples represents the prime pantheon. 

While the winds are often earthy and mingled with 
marsh air, the simpler, pastoral lifestyle of Othe is more 
relaxed and spiritual than other locales along the coast. 


OTHE ADVENTURES 
The characters may come to Othe to seek guidance from 
one of the city’s many temples. 

Seeking Misguidance (Any Level). A ranking official 
of the Clovis Concord is in Othe seeking guidance on 
handling the Myriad. The criminal organization hires 
the characters to pose as holy guides and convince the 
official to work with the Myriad instead of against them. 


OTHEMOOR 


Thick with humid air stinking of stale water and mil- 
dewed wood, the marshland of the Othemoor is consid- 
ered by most outsiders to be an unpleasant place filled 


HERBS OF THE OTHEMOOR 

The rich, primal nature of the Othemoor marsh nurtures a 
number of rare and highly sought-after grasses and herbs. 
Herbalists, alchemists, and spice traders often visit Othe 
to bolster their stores. Below are a number of the herbal 
goods often found for sale within Othe: 


Theki Root. This thick marsh root tastes bitter but is 
thought to aid digestive health. When you use an action 
to consume a dose, you gain advantage on saving 
throws against the effects of poisonous or toxic sub- 
stances for 8 hours. Cost: 3 gp per dose. 

Muroosa Balm. This paste made from the muroosa bush 
is known to help prevent sunburn, but it is also a fire 
retardant. After spending 1 minute applying a quarter 
pint of muroosa balm to your skin, you gain resistance 
against fire damage for 1 hour. Cost: 1 gp per dose for 
sunburn, 100 gp for a full application against fire. 

Olisuba Leaf. These dried leaves of the Olisuba tree, 
when steeped to make a tea, can help a body recover 
from strenuous activity. If you drink a dose of Olisuba 
tea during a long rest, your exhaustion level is reduced 
by 2 instead of 1 at the end of that long rest. Cost: 50 
gp per dose. 

Willowshade Oil. A dark blue oil can be extracted from the 
rare fruit of the willowshade plant. A creature can use its 
action to apply the oil to another creature that has been 
petrified for less than 1 minute, causing the petrified 
condition on that creature to end at the start of what 
would be that creature’s next turn. Cost: 30 gp per dose. 


ee 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


with nasty creatures and sinister trees. As unwelcoming 
as the landscape might be, the minerals of the bog mud 
are known to have restorative properties, and a number 
of extremely rare plants and roots that only grow in the 
Othemoor have become popular in modern medicine, as 
well as meals within affluent social circles. The marsh is 
large and ancient, and has swallowed many secrets over 
the millennia, some of which have been known to rise to 
the top of the muck unexpectedly. 


OTHEMOOR ADVENTURES 
The muck of Othemoor is filled with bodies, treasure, 
and even more mysterious things. 

Blood Diamonds (High Level). When several dia- 
monds are revealed by the shifting of Othemoor’s muck, 
many adventurers, including the characters, head for 
the swamp, hoping to strike it rich. The diamonds were 
actually planted by Pillia Ravenosa, a vampire, to bring 
prey into the Othemoor for her vampire spawn. 


PALLID GROVE 


Hidden near the northern heart of the Cyrios Moun- 
tains, the valley known as the Pallid Grove is cut off 
from the rest of Wildemount by deadly peaks. Once a 
beautiful, untouched woodland atop a mountain plateau, 
the grove was home to reclusive elves who worshiped 
Sehanine, protected by the illusory magics of their 
moon priests. 

During the Calamity, Torog and his loathsome min- 
ions pierced the elves’ obfuscating barriers and bur- 
rowed beneath the grove, causing the plateau to sink 
into a shadowed valley. His servants lapped at the roots 
of the trees from below, sucking the life and color from 
them, while many of the denizens of the wood were 
dragged beneath the earth to be tortured in the bladed 
halls of the Crawling King. Now, nearly a millennium 
later, the bleached, broken, petrified forest remains an 
eerie specter of the natural world, and its cursed history 
keeps travelers at bay. 


PALE SURVIVORS 

It was thought the elves of the wood had been annihi- 
lated during the destruction of what is now known as 
the Pallid Grove, but a number of them survived among 
the sunken roots. Living in fear of the Crawling King’s 
cruelty and hiding from the destruction of the Calamity, 
these enduring elven clans kept to the shadows of the 
valley and persisted through the ages. The blessings of 
the Moon Weaver shielded them from harm, and over 
time, these blessings mingled with their natural adap- 
tion to the blighted forest and gave rise to a new subrace 
of elves known as the pallid elves. Only in recent years 
have these timid survivors begun to step out into Exan- 
dria, curious and confused about the new world that has 
developed without them. 


PALMA FLORA 


Population: 1,780 (68% humans, 13% halflings, 11% 
dwarves, 8% other races) 

Government: An elder manages settlement-wide issues, 
but most people tend to their own affairs. 


Defense: An untrained militia composed mostly of 
shark hunters defends the settlement from pirates 
and sahuagin. 

Commerce: The settlement exports some fish, 
fruits, and alcohol, but makes most of its money 
through tourism. 

Organizations: Local farmers and brewers established 
the Palma Flora Traders to collectively barter with 
larger, more powerful ports. 


The community of Palma Flora occupies the southern 
tip of the Vezdali Peninsula, and is a favorite vacation 
destination for merchants and Zhelezo from nearby Port 
Damali. While this settlement is small, it’s famous for its 
annual shark hunting tournament and a popular cock- 
tail that bears the settlement’s name. 

Most tourists are familiar with Flora Isle, which is 
home to the port and a shimmering beach. Most vaca- 
tioners stay in the Riptide Inn and Tavern, sipping on 
fruity drinks while watching the shark hunters practice 
on the southern shore. The island is separated from the 
rest of the peninsula by a wide channel spanned by a 
wooden bridge. Most residents of Palma Flora live and 
work in the northern half of the settlement and retire to 
the southern island after a hard day’s work. 


PALMA FLORA ADVENTURES 
Though Palma Flora is the perfect place for a vacation, 
it’s not without trouble. 

Tide of Retribution (Low Level). Palma Flora’s 
shark-hunting tradition has earned its people the ire 
of a sahuagin clan living in the Sharkfeather Abyss, 
a nearby undersea trench. The sahuagin tend to their 
flock of sharks peacefully and view the shark-hunters as 
cruel poachers. One sahuagin has made a pact with the 
leviathan Uk’otoa and sworn vengeance on the people 
of Palma Flora. This adventure hook is expanded into a 
full introductory adventure in chapter 5. 


PLUMGROVES 


The Plumgroves are a luscious woodland filled with soft 
grass, swaying tropical trees with white bark and purple 
flowers, and numerous varieties of delicious, celebrated 
fruit. Nowhere else is there such a condensed collection 
of sought-after berries and fruit throughout the conti- 
nent, and the people of Feolinn have based their identity 
and lifestyle around this abundance. 

Local laws limit the hunting of wild game to ensure 
a controlled ecosystem, and Zhelezo patrol the forest 
pathways to prevent poaching. The Plumgroves are both 
beautiful and safe, and it’s not uncommon for families 
and children to be seen strolling through the pub- 
lic trails. 


PORT DAMALI 


Population: 82,110 (51% humans, 16% halflings, 15% 
elves, 18% other races) 

Government: The city is helmed by Marquis Olesya 
Lapidus, who works with local guildmasters and 
nobles, bolstered by the distant support of the other 
Clovis Concord members. 


Defense: Port Damali maintains a sizable army along- 
side the many Zhelezo who guard the city. Nobles and 
wealthy merchants keep bodyguards. 

Commerce: Nearly any sort of goods or services can be 
found here, legal and otherwise. The high volume of 
travelers means that there are plentiful inns, taverns, 
underground markets, and rare auctions. 

Organizations: Temples to the Prime Deities are 
common, and some notable shrines to the Betrayer 
Gods are secreted away within this large city. The 
numerous merchant guilds run most businesses, 
but the Myriad is the real power behind the guilds 
themselves. 


The jewel of the Menagerie Coast, the original Marque- 
sian colony, and the unofficial capital of free trade out- 
side the empire, Port Damali is a bustling city filled with 
music, color, and commerce. The massive port hosts 
ships from all around the world, creating a mishmash 
of cultures and trades that mingle to form the society of 
Port Damali. Trade routes splinter from all other sides 
of the city to ensure rapid transport of goods to destina- 
tions throughout Wildemount and beyond. 

The city’s architecture is varied and inconsistent; the 
inner wards display their own historical roots or lavish 
opulence, while the outer wards attempt to combat the 
slum-like atmosphere with cheap, colorful banners 
and street buskers. The city has a roiling underbelly of 
crime, murder, and corruption that many say is regretta- 
ble but necessary for the city to function. 


GUIDED THROUGH THE DARKER WATERS 

The waters along the Menagerie Coast are rampant with 
piracy and roving ocean creatures, threatening trade 
and travel routes throughout the region. The concord 
has established a formal navy of nearly four hundred 
warships to maintain the sanctity of the surrounding 
ocean. These ships are scattered along the coast, with 
many stationed in Port Zoon or situated in the waters 
south of Nicodranas to prevent the current war from 
bleeding into concord territory, but a quarter of the en- 
tire navy is maintained within and around Port Damali. 


TO THE HIGHEST BIDDER 

A popular destination within Port Damali for wealthy 
merchants, nobles, and collectors from all across Ex- 
andria is the Exalted Collection Auction House within 
the Gilded Esplanade. Run by the esteemed Lord Ga- 
briel Rymmer of the influential Rymmer family, this 
grandiose, if gaudy, establishment has all manner of 
rare items, collectibles, and historical artifacts brought 
from around Exandria to be sold to whomever offers 
the most gold, with a small portion of the sale filling the 
family’s coffers. Socialites, nobility, celebrities, and the 
fabulously wealthy of Exandria travel here from all over 
the world, forging bonds of rivalry with each purchase. 
When particularly powerful relics find their way to the 
auction house, it’s rumored that beings from the Outer 
Planes will masquerade as merchants to snatch up 
such prizes. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


A STEAMY SHIFT 

Until recently, many of the businesses in Port Damali 
were heated and powered by a system of steam-powered 
engines, which were installed beneath the city’s streets. 
Unknown to most citizens, a marid had been shackled 
within the sewers to power the steam engines for de- 
cades. Recently, another marid in Nicodranas was freed 
from a similar situation, inspiring an anonymous adven- 
turer to free the marid in Port Damali from its shackles, 
leaving the engines inert and many businesses without 
power. A large group of hired druids and mages are 
maintaining what functionality they can, but Marquis 
Olesya Lapidus is desperately looking for an alternative 
energy source or a replacement for the steam engines. 


PorT OF SKY AND SEA 

Port Damali is the central city for most seafaring busi- 
ness and shipping throughout the Lucidian Ocean and a 
popular destination for those with gold, but it is also the 
only city in Wildemount with a skyport. While the em- 
pire refuses to establish a skyport within Rexxentrum, 
in what many believe to be a symbol of their dedication 
to their isolation, Port Damali occasionally receives sky- 
ships from Tal’Dorei or Marquet, drawing crowds that 
rush to see the majestic display. 


i | 


SKYSHIPS 


Luxurious passage through the clouds themselves—it’s a 
romantic idea cultivated to appeal to the wealthiest citi- 
zens of Exandria. As an added bonus, skyship travel avoids 
the inherent dangers of a journey by land or sea, and is 
more readily available than teleportation magic. These 
beautiful airships range in size but generally are the same 
size as a merchant coaster. Skyships are held aloft and 
guided with the help of three or more enchanted crystals 
called brumestones, which are installed along the hull or 
topside of the ship. The enchantments required to produce 
and maintain these brumestones are closely guarded by 
the Alsfarin Union within the distant city of Ank’Harel. 
While the Alsfarin Union occasionally sells skyships to 
foreign businesses, they retain absolute control over the 
maintenance of skyships in operation. 

Skyships are reserved for goods and individuals who 
want to circumvent the slow speed or danger of an ocean 
voyage and can afford the exorbitant cost of air travel. No 
commoner can afford to charter a skyship, and the lower 
classes of Exandria generally see air travel as just another 
way for the wealthy elite to lord their superiority over the 
poor. Others, however, see the majestic craft as aspira- 
tional and long to become rich enough to afford one, or 
skilled enough to pilot one. 

Port Damali is the only city in Wildemount with an open 
skyport. The others are in the cities of Ank’Harel, Vassel- 
heim, Emon, and Whitestone. Few skyships in service will 
deviate from the dedicated shipping routes between these 
major cities. 


Skyship 

Purchase Cost: 100,000 gp 

Speed: 10 mph 

Maximum Cargo: 10 tons 

Crew: 6-10 

Maximum Passenger Occupancy: 30 

Personal Travel Cost: 2 gp per mile per passenger 
Shipping Cost: 1 gp per 100 pounds per mile 


= = a 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


GOVERNMENT 

The laws of the Clovis Concord are enforced with vary- 
ing stringency within each city. Nowhere is this more 
true than in Port Damali, where the law can be bought 
like any other commodity. Anything can be purchased 
here, even the ear of Marquis Olesya Lapidus, the cele- 
brated leader of Port Damali. 

The Lapidus family rose to prominence over a century 
ago, when they shifted from employing merchants to de- 
ploying mercenaries. In time, anyone who sought safety 
on the waves turned to Lapidus family privateers. As the 
fifth in her family to lead Port Damali, Marquis Olesya 
steadfastly collaborates with the other leaders of the 
Menagerie Coast to keep the concord an independent 
nation, free from imperial control. 

However, Marquis Lapidus faces threats on all sides. 
When she was distracted by the rise of the Revelry, the 
long-dormant Myriad swooped in and conscripted many 
of the guilds she was supposed to oversee. Now she 
struggles to excise the Myriad claws embedded within 
the belly of her city. 


CRIME 

Port Damali has been a pivotal nexus of Myriad activity 
for some time, and nearly all elements of major com- 
merce within the city are tied to the crime syndicate in 
some way. Many of the powerful merchants and com- 
pany owners are either part of the Myriad or are inden- 
tured to it. As such, the city is the beating heart of Exan- 
dria’s slave trade, with slavers passing through often to 
discreetly move their bounty. 

Those who fail the Myriad are shackled and shipped 
off as living contraband. Myriad operatives are plentiful 
within the law enforcement of Port Damali, so most ille- 
gal activity is covered up or allowed to slide, unless such 
crime interferes with Myriad interests. 


GEOGRAPHY 

The largest city on the western coast of Wildemount, 
the resplendent seaside metropolis of Port Damali is 
nestled against the Tyodan River where it meets the 
Lucidian Ocean. The city is built atop a cluster of leveled 
hills, and slight changes of elevation physically mark 
the variation between wards. Past the farmsteads, be- 
yond the tents and ramshackle homes that mark the 
boundaries of the city, lies the Prism Path, a series of 
connecting main roads made of smooth, multicolored 
stones reclaimed from the ocean shores. These roads 
carve through the interior wards: the Tumbledowns, the 
Beaded Alley, the Crescents, the Gilded Esplanade, and 
the Larboard Light. 

The Tumbledowns. Within the Tumbledowns, the 
majority of citizens live in cramped structures of varied 
shape and design, from clay domes to thatched huts to 
warped wooden shacks. The architecture resembles a 
mishmash of cultures from all over Exandria, which, 
along with the Prism Path, creates a pleasant patch- 
work atmosphere even in the more run-down regions. 
A number of small temples are also situated in the 
Tumbledowns. 


SP 


i= = Farmland 


= Watchtower 


a PW 
® =Steam Vent : ‘ f LT 


® = Market Stall 
= Dock/Pier 
= Moon Statue 


NN = Waterway 
= Garden 


YN 


The Beaded Alley. The Beaded Alley is the center of 
general commerce and trade within Port Damali, named 
for the decorative cords that hang over each intersection 
bearing all manner of streamers and dangling beads. 
Businesses both young and old all mingle here, compet- 
ing for the attention of anyone with coin. Many bards 
and performers bring an air of lively irreverence to the 
bustling atmosphere. 

The Crescents. The ward known as the Crescents 
was named in reference to the seven large, moon- 
shaped statues that were a gift from the Alkamar family 
when the city was founded. This affluent area houses 
competing guild families and well-connected nobles 
who wish to live near the politics of the city or the de- 
lights of the port. The beautiful Pearl Shrine temple to 
Avandra and the Sunfall Sanctuary temple to Pelor re- 
side within the Crescents. 

The Gilded Esplanade. The Gilded Esplanade is defi- 
nitely the most extravagant locale within Port Damali. 
Each street is lined with the most lauded of artists and 
performers, with markets lush with expensive wares 
and high-end imports from around the world. Home 
to the Auction House and venues for recurring festivi- 
ties, as well as the spire-like skyport, the Esplanade is 
known to be the sparkling locale that comes to mind 
whenever people mention Port Damali. 

The Larboard Light. The massive harbor that forms 
the southern edge of the city is known as the Larboard 
Light. This upscale dockside region is as lavish as docks 
come. Dozens of ships come into port every day, carry- 
ing goods and gold from all over, and many visitors com- 
ing to briefly live like a king with the many amusements 
the city has to offer. The office of the marquis is located 
on the northern end of this ward. 


PORT DAMALI ADVENTURES 

Between the Clovis Concord, the Myriad, the Revelry, 
skyships, auctions, and more, adventure abounds within 
the colorful city of Port Damali. 

Mephit Madness (High Level). The marid who was 
freed beneath the city isn’t pleased about its incarcera- 
tion. Every day, it summons steam mephits to terrorize 
eee 


THE GOLDEN CHAIN MERCENARY COMPANY 


The sheer volume of trade and travel along the Menagerie 
Coast creates plentiful opportunities for sellswords, body- 
guards, and adventurers seeking to make some coin and 
a name for themselves. One crew in particular established 
itself within Port Damali nearly sixty years ago and has be- 
come the most sought-after, expensive, and efficient mer- 
cenary band on this side of the Lucidian Ocean. Known as 
the Golden Chain, it prides itself on having no affliations, 
no morals, and no tolerance for failure. Those who can 
afford its services earn the temporary loyalty of the most 
ruthless hunters and enforcers on the coast, no questions 
asked. The Golden Chain is organized and led by Duos 
Sabado, son of the famed bounty hunter Quan Sabado 
who founded the company. Few ever dare to cross the 
Golden Chain, let alone fail to pay it, for those who have 
challenged these mercenaries are remembered mostly for 
their bloody demise. 


<= Oooo 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


the people of Port Damali with pranks and mischief. 
The characters are hired to discover the source of the 
mephit problem and solve it. They must face the marid 
in its lair, where they might learn the truth of the city’s 
steam power. 

Hot Purchase (Epic Level). The characters aim to 
legally or illegally acquire a powerful item from the 
Exalted Collection Auction House. They could want 
this item for themselves or be hired to acquire it for the 
Revelry, the Myriad, or another faction. While the char- 
acters attempt to claim the item, they are confronted by 
a balor and a crew of demons who were charged by a 
demon lord to claim the same item. 


PORT ZOON 


Population: 19,120 (80% humans, 7% halflings, 13% 
other races) 

Government: Marquis Alamads Haddou collaborates 
closely with his trusted Zhelezo captains. Numerous 
crafting guilds guide major facets of industry and 
influence. 

Defense: A strong force of dedicated Zhelezo and paid 
militia keep order in and around the city. Artisans and 
guild heads keep bodyguards, while newly designed 
defense weapons are employed along watchtowers. 

Commerce: Common supplies and businesses are 
abundant, as are inns and taverns. Esoteric goods 
can be hard to find, as many of the rare materials im- 
ported are already spoken for by the crafting guilds. 

Organizations: Temples across the pantheon are pres- 
ent, but the crafting guilds are tied to worship of Mora- 
din, and are second in power only to the marquis. 
Myriad activity is present and steadily growing. 


Settled between Feolinn and Nicodranas, Port Zoon 

is the industrial center of the Clovis Concord. Wealthy 
merchant guilds employ dozens of arcane and scientific 
experts, and the cityscape is dotted with strange towers, 
pillars of smoke, and exhaust from raging furnaces. 
Though it’s less vibrant than the other coastal cities 

and jokingly referred to as “New Othe” by outsiders, 
what Port Zoon lacks in liveliness and splendor it more 
than makes up for in manufacturing and cutting-edge 
science. Entire districts dedicated to metallurgy and 
smithing produce some of the best anvil mastersin the 
region, and the majority of the goods and tools created 
here are sold along the Gilded Roadway to support 

the rest of the Menagerie Coast. A gargantuan temple 

to Moradin looms over the city, with large cables that 
tether his towering statue to other high points across the 
city. Dangling from these cables are glowing lanterns 
that light the evening sky with flickering flames. A quar- 
ter of the docks here are home to the Clovis Concord’s 
reserve fleet, while a sizable portion of the concord’s 
soldiers remain within the northern barracks in times of 
peace, often taking up small trades of their own. 


A CITY OF TRAINING 

Most artisan crafts and skills can be learned in Port 
Zoon under various schools and halls run by the guilds 
of the Clovis Concord. Many consider Port Zoon to be 
the best place for common folk to learn a trade. Training 


programs generally have moderate to high fees, depend- 
ing on the promise of the student, or an agreement that 
a percentage of the profits from the student’s future 
work will belong to the guild. Many students end up find- 
ing work within the guilds that trained them, increasing 
the appeal of apprenticeships in Port Zoon while also 
strengthening the stranglehold that the guilds have on 
production and business along the coast. 


GOVERNMENT 

Often referred to as “Ironpuss” by those not in his pres- 
ence, Marquis Alamads Haddou is an older dwarf, a 
master of ironworking, and the head of the Silverbone 
Smithing Guild. Ornery but passionate about the city 
and its people, Alamads rules with clear intent, and 
swiftly punishes anyone who crosses his laws or endan- 
gers the people of Port Zoon. His Zhelezo are trained to 
be naturally mistrusting of idle hands. Convicted crim- 
inals are chained and forced into labor for the various 
guilds, doing the harshest jobs in each industry. 


CRIME 

The sheer volume of equipment and goods produced 
within the city draws the attention of opportunists and 
counterfeiters from all over. An entire industry has de- 
veloped to differentiate true work from fakes, and the 
laws of Port Zoon are especially strict when it comes 
to forgeries. Unfortunately, Marquis Haddou’s attention 
has been divided across issues of production and supply 
with the growing war to the northeast, diverting his 
attention from the growing Myriad influence over the 
city’s businesses and political leaders. 


GEOGRAPHY 

Port Zoon is a compact metropolis of tall stone struc- 
tures, metal beams and towers, layers of drifting ex- 
haust dust, and rising plumes of industrial soot. The city 
is separated into three smaller “spheres,” or districts, 
connected to the central Genesis Sphere through main 
thoroughfares lined by homes and warehouses. 

The Harbor Sphere is an oblong district where the 
docks, seafaring businesses, and warehouses reside, as 
well as naval housing and weapon storage. The Assay 
Sphere is home to smelters, coal refinement factories, 
and the most mysterious of experimental towers, called 
the Timuafa, where experiments in controlling the 
nearby weather patterns have led to varying—and some- 
times undesirable—results. 

The eastern Sentry Sphere is divided between impov- 
erished homes, humble temples, and the barracks of the 
Sentry Keep, where many Shore Wardens of the Clovis 
Concord’s army remain until called. 

The central Hammer Sphere is the largest district and 
the nexus for the others. Crammed hovels and student 
housing form the outer ring, while the most industrious 
factories, forges, and schools cluster around the center 
Temple Genesis of the All-Hammer. 


PorT ZOON ADVENTURES 

The characters could come to Port Zoon seeking incred- 
ible arms and armor, then get caught up in adventures 
throughout the city. 


Criminal Uprising (Low Level). While the characters 
visit Port Zoon, captured bandits forced to work for the 
guilds break out of their bonds, overpower their cap- 
tors, and free other brigands working in the city. These 
criminals take control of vital industries in Port Zoon, 
threatening to destroy industrial sites unless given their 
freedom. The characters are hired to quell the uprising. 
Who is behind this revolt? Maybe the criminals planned 
it themselves—or perhaps an outside organization engi- 
neered it for their own purposes. 

Smith Contest (Any Level). The characters get wind 
of a smithing contest to be held in Port Zoon. The win- 
ner gets a set of magic smith’s tools and free tutelage 
from a master in the craft. If any characters participate, 
they should be wary: the Myriad wants those tools, and 
the competition is literally cutthroat. 


QuORASKA JUNGLE 


This incredibly dense tropical jungle wraps around the 
southernmost reaches of the Ashkeeper Peaks, engulf- 
ing a massive portion of the southeastern Menagerie 
Coast. The region is filled with treacherous vine-covered 
trails stalked by all manner of jungle monsters and 
venomous vermin. The mist-filled air smells of ancient 
earth and fresh rain, while carnivorous plant life hides 
among the roots and brush, waiting for a foolish meal to 
wander by. The regions surrounding Raska Lake con- 
tain a number of small fishing villages populated mostly 
by the jungle-dwelling tabaxi. 

Numerous secrets lurk within the ravenous rainforest, 
from lost clans of the Ki’Nau to smuggler dens aban- 
doned by brigands who were unprepared to survive in 
the hungry jungle. Growing interest in the Quoraska 
Jungle stems from recently recovered writings of the lost 
people of Quoraska that seem to hint that they might 
have known of the long-lost city of Obarra and where it 
vanished to after the Age of Arcanum. 


RUINS OF SEPESCA 


In the centuries that followed the Calamity, the Ki’Nau 
people established Sepesca, meaning “Nature’s End,” 
as their holiest of burial temples, built over a lush grove 
where the blood of the Wild Mother is said to have 
spilled before the Divergence. Every Ki’Nau priest and 
king that passed was interred within Sepesca’s massive 
stone structure. 

An ancient feud between the goblinkin of the Lush- 
gut Forest and the Ki’Nau came to a head a few cen- 
turies ago, when the goblins stormed the region and 
desecrated the Wild Mother’s temple. The Ki’Nau 
protectors fled from the worshipers of Gruumsh, and 
the abandoned holy site fell into ruin. Vengeful spirits 
and gnarled monstrosities are said to stalk its sunken 
halls, guarding the seeds of darkness left by the Ruin- 
er’s faithful. 

A few descendants of the Ki’Nau across the Menagerie 
Coast still seek the means to cleanse this holy location 
and finally bring peace to the forgotten line of kings. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


“I 
[Sr] 


RUMBLECUSP 


The isle of Rumblecusp is a beautiful paradise of sparse 
trees and white sands, topped by the single mountain 
that gives the island its name. Only a few dozen indig- 
enous folk call the island home. The shallow shores of 
the island often fall beneath the sea during high tides, 
and a small trail of smoke frequently rises from the 
volcano. Be that as it may, the waters surrounding the 
island make for fine fishing, and it’s not uncommon for 
fishing vessels from Nicodranas to travel to Rumblecusp 
during unfavorable fishing seasons. 


SILTBASIN PASS 


A muddy forest of coastal swamp trees and mangroves 
that occasionally dips just below sea level, the Siltbasin 
Pass is a well-traveled portion of the Gilded Roadway 
between Gwardan and Port Damali, as well as one of 
the major coastal locations to harvest seaside fruit and 
clay. Small clusters of huts and hovels line the edges of 
the Siltbasin every few miles where the locals gather 
their yields and prepare them for travel to any of the 
major Clovis Concord cities. Bad weather can often 
make the pass extremely difficult to traverse, so some 
caravans have to camp for several nights while waiting 
for the pass to open once more. Their travels are further 
threatened by the many swamp creatures and night 
predators that also call the Siltbasin home. 


LOST PATHS OF THE QUORASKA JUNGLE 


Ee 
ore 
~ 


STONECAGE CLIFFS 


A craggy, nigh-impassable range of coastal mountains 
and bluffs that wraps around the entire northeast pen- 
insula of Wildemount, the Stonecage Cliffs have been 
a natural barrier between Wildemount and Tal’Dorei 
since before the societies of each continent first began to 
communicate. The cliffs enclose the dense and perilous 
Lushgut Forest, and this combination of deadly terrain 
has rendered most of the cliffs unfit for the construction 
of towns or cities. As such, the region has remained a 
monster-infested wilderness since time immemorial. 
The frothing waters of the Shearing Channel churn 
against the towering cliffs, and thousands of years of 
tempestuous wind and water have pockmarked them 
with caves that harbor terrible flying and climbing 
beasts. It is said that only the bravest—or stupidest—ex- 
plorers attempt to seek what secrets might lie among 
the rock and tides of the Stonecage Cliffs. 


TUSSOA 


Population: 15,110 (74% humans, 10% elves, 8% hal- 
flings, 8% other races) 

Government: Beneath the just rule of Marquis Tusila 
Latu, community leaders and wealthy families helm 
guild business. 

Defense: A small force is maintained for the defense of 
the city alongside the protection of the Zhelezo. City 
leaders often keep bodyguards. 

Commerce: This rural city can provide most common 
services and products, though exotic goods might 


prove difficult to obtain. Outside exporting lumber, the 
biggest businesses in the city are food, lodging, and 
entertainment. 

Organizations: Humble temples are found near and 
around the Lotoe Plaza. Family businesses work be- 
neath the marquis and the local guild masters. 


Tussoa began as a Ki’Nau freshwater fishing village 
along the Tyodan River, but it has grown into a respect- 
able city in the centuries following the creation of the 
Clovis Concord. The central district where the two main 
streets of the city meet has larger, more modern struc- 
tures and bustling streets, but the outer regions are still 
dominated by humble homes of river reeds and straw. 
Tussoa boasts a more relaxed way of life than most 
of the other coastal cities. Its people try to live a simple 
life, unburdened by business or politics, but they still 
grapple with issues of cultural identity. Tussoa’s most 
immediate problems are the threats of the natural world 
that menace this frontier city on a daily basis. 


LOGGING A PROFIT 

The competing Majest and Regver timber guilds are the 
leading suppliers of lumber to Port Damali. They work 
along the Copia Wildwood and send their trunks down 
the Tyodan to their mills at the port, usually accompa- 
nied by hired hands to protect their goods. Because the 
prime logging sites of the forest are hotly contested and 
not overseen by the Zhelezo, both guilds hire mercenar- 
ies to guard their work and clear out nearby monsters 
stalking the shadows of the wood. 


GOVERNMENT 

Marquis Tusila Latu currently directs the rule of law in 
Tussoa, taking particular pride in her Ki’ Nau heritage— 
and the Ki’Nau heritage of her people and her city. The 
marquis treats her Zhelezo and constituents well, eager 
to build loyalty in a time of creeping Myriad interests. 
Marquis Tusila insists on being involved in all trials 
where life and death are concerned and is renowned as 
a champion of justice, unlike her corrupt predecessor, 
Marquis Maros du Simmas. 


CRIME 

Try as the marquis might, the comparatively rural loca- 
tion and understaffed Zhelezo of Tussoa make the city a 
breeding ground for petty thieves, charlatans, and forg- 
ers. Independent crime rings operate in small bursts, 
then halt their work for weeks or months to cover their 
tracks. There are some thugs within the city with con- 
nections to the Myriad, but their current intention is to 
watch and wait until the time is right. 


GEOGRAPHY 

Laid out in the shape of a large V, this bustling fishing 
city of lively docks and a hard-working populace is 
spread out over two main roads that meet at the north- 
east edge, with numerous smaller roads connecting the 
major thoroughfares. The northern road is Pulum Road, 
and most of the city’s shops, inns, and storage houses 
are kept to the road’s eastern edge, interspersed with 
neighborhoods made up of simple shacks. The south- 
western road is Vaigvasa Road, built along the edge of 


the Tyodan River. Here, more homes and businesses fill 
the inner regions, while fishing huts and river logging 
stations line the southern, outer side. The two roads 
meet at the Lotoe Plaza, home to the Olo, the repur- 
posed temple to Uk’otoa that now acts as the court of 
the marquis. All holidays and celebrations are centered 
in the Lotoe Plaza, which is known to become crowded 
enough with people on such days that the streets can 
barely be seen. 


TussoA ADVENTURES 

Tussoa’s bustling logging industry, minimal presence of 
Zhelezo, and location near the Copia Wildwood make it 
an excellent place for urban adventures to overlap with 
wilderness expeditions. 

Log Wars (Low Level). A business war turns physical 
when a camp of Regver loggers is murdered and evi- 
dence points to a nearby camp of Majest loggers as cul- 
prits. Regver responds by burning Majest vessels, and 
the violence continues to escalate. The marquis fears 
that the war might spill into Tussoa’s streets, so she 
hires the characters to negotiate a peace. They might 
find that the Revelry committed the inciting murders as 
a way to cause chaos in the city. 


TWINWARD ISLES 


A sacred location to the native people of the coast, this 
pair of surprisingly tall islands are all cliffs, with no 
beaches. While the surrounding waters are often choppy 
from the waves that crash against the nearby Mother’s 
Sigh Reef, the seaside cliffs are filled with healthy fruits 
and game to hunt. At the inception of the Clovis Con- 
cord, the Ki’ Nau people demanded that the islands’ nat- 
ural resources were to always remain untouched. This 
agreement has been dutifully upheld over the centuries. 

While open to common use, the dangers of the trek 
still limit those who choose to make use of the land 
here. Tales tell of a couatl spirit bound to the inner 
reaches of the jungles, willing to bestow wisdom and 
insight to those who bring a mighty offering. 


URUKAYXL 


The island of Urukayxl was once the site of the temple of 
the leviathan Uk’otoa. Many centuries ago, the spiteful 
followers of Zehir murdered Uk’otoa’s Ki’Nau adherents 
and used the temple as the seal preventing Uk’otoa from 
returning to the Material Plane. 

Forgotten in the years since, the fallen temple is 
surrounded by jungles that now harbor feuding clans 
of lizardfolk and yuan-ti. These yuan-ti are servants 
of the Cloaked Serpent and still maintain the crooked 
temple in the image of their banished god. Between 
the disease-carrying insects, the deadly jungle, and the 
treacherous Inkclaw Reef, many consider the region 
cursed and avoid it at all costs. 


VEZDAWEALD 


The Vezdaweald is a bright and sunny tropical forest 
composed of softwood trees that loggers from Port 
Damali commonly harvest for smaller crafts and goods. 
The beautiful woods are full of vibrant tropical flowers 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


“NI 
“I 


and birds that fill the air with a symphony of mingling 
music and calls—but it’s at night that the forest truly 
comes to life. Millions of glowing insects emerge and 
transform the canopy into a dancing starscape. 

Weddings and religious ceremonies of all faiths take 
place amid the stars of the forest—but the lights are 
not always a friendly omen. The glowing insects also 
summon forth the nocturnal dinosaurs, amphibious 
Swavain basilisks (see chapter 7), and other night 
beasts that call the forest home. 


VEZDAWEALD ADVENTURES 

The softwood trees and beautiful scenery of the 
Vezdaweald attract loggers in need of the characters’ 
protection from the forest’s denizens. 

Dinosaur Ivory (Mid Level). A wealthy artist in Port 
Damali wants to use dinosaur bones for her next sculp- 
ture, so she sponsors a contest. The adventurers that 
bring her the most dinosaur bones by weight will be 
gifted 5,000 gp and immortalized in the sculpture. 


VIDE CAY 


The isle of Vide Cay is completely surrounded by vicious 


coastal rocks and choppy waters, so most ships avoid 
it. The island itself is a series of large, craggy hills that 
surround a small valley where a small society of fey live 
within an enchanted tropical forest. Revelry captains 
who try to use the island complain of a faerie witch that 
protects the isle, scrambling the minds of those who at- 
tempt to rob or enslave the denizens of the trees. 


WUYUN GORGE 


The dry, rocky valley that divides the southern pass be- 


tween the Cyrios Mountains and the Ashkeeper Peaks 
is known as the Wuyun Gorge, home to the Wuyun Gate 
that acts as the transition point between the Dwenda- 
lian Empire and the Menagerie Coast. The road through 
the gorge is well-traveled, seeing carts and caravans 
throughout the year. Wandering creatures, violent giant- 
kin, and hungry monsters occasionally descend from 
the mountains to prey on travelers. As such, it’s common 
practice for people of means to hire mercenaries in 
Nicodranas or Trostenwald—the closest settlements on 
either side of the Wuyun Gorge. 


MARROW VALLEY 


The southern slopes between the Ashkeeper Peaks and 
the Cyrios Mountains are filled with the beautiful green 
grasslands of the Marrow Valley. This rural expanse of 
lush farmsteads and formative industry welcomes the 
majority of travel and trade from outside the empire. 
Fields of grains and grasses stretch into verdant forests 
and crystal lakes within this southern region of Western 
Wynandir. The central metropolis of Zadash is a major 
nexus for business and travel within the region, call- 

ing people from all walks of life to find work, bargain, 
and carouse among the many vendors and guilds that 
run the city. The imperial military is headquartered in 
Bladegarden, on the eastern edges of the Marrow Valley, 
where the bulk of the standing legions await orders and 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


train the next generation of imperial soldiers to join the 
conflict against Xhorhas. While the war keeps many 
eyes turned eastward, the Marrow Valley has its own 
host of unspoken threats and dark secrets hiding be- 
neath the veneer of everyday rural life. 


ALFIELD 


Population: 3,410 (61% humans, 22% halflings, 11% 
gnomes, 6% other races) 

Government: Starosta Kosh Clearbarker cravenly 
delegates the responsibilities of governance to the 
local watchmaster and lawmaster. 

Defense: A small cadre of Crownsguard keep the peace 
as the empire focuses on larger settlements. 

Commerce: Alfield is a minor stop for traders, with little 
beyond basic supplies and a couple of inns. 

Organizations: Minor public shrines offer solace to the 
faithful. Businesses are small and independent, re- 
quiring no guild oversight. 


Alfield is a rural town nestled into a scattered patch of 
trees near the Amber Road. The old mines winding be- 
neath the nearby hills yield a fair amount of tin, copper, 
and quartz that supplement the town’s economy. Small 
in size compared to the surrounding townships, Alfield 
is regarded by most travelers as a stop on the route to 
more important business elsewhere. This frustrates 
some proud residents and local entrepreneurs, but most 
prefer the small-town lifestyle and are happy to see the 
passing traders and travelers move on. Alfield is cur- 
rently recovering from a recent assault by a roving band 
of violent gnolls, so a number of buildings are still being 
repaired or rebuilt. 


GOVERNMENT 

The starosta, a middle-aged gnome named Kosh Clear- 
barker, leans heavily on his dutiful watchmaster, the 
half-elf Bryce Feelid. Bryce personally shoulders the 
town’s burdens while the starosta continues to oversee 
the town from within his quarters, excusing himself 
from any hands-on governance. 


CRIME 

Since Alfield is both overlooked and under-protected by 
the Crown, charlatans and thieves often sweep through 
town in an attempt to relieve the townsfolk of any loose 
coin. The relatively small Crownsguard presence is 
perpetually frustrated with the lack of support from the 
empire; they must split the attention of their small force 
between policing the borders and watching for hooli- 
gans who seek to abuse the civilians within the town. 


GEOGRAPHY 

The welcoming farming community and beautiful coun- 
tryside surrounding Alfield often call to those who want 
a simpler life in the empire. Flanked to the north and 
east by the Alfield Wood, the town is shaped like a small 
diamond in shape, only a couple of miles across on all 
sides. The Dustway and Harvest Path roads divide the 
town into four quarters, meandering lazily through the 
ramshackle wooden buildings until they meet at the re- 
cently rebuilt Candleglow Inn at the center of town. 


anist0ad eS 


“ea a 


— 
lone eS. 


e Blumenthal 


Br 


ae 
=< Pride's Ge 


ab 


Stk 


Pesok Herathis Mines = z 


Trostehwald 


e 


Mar 3.3: Marrow VaLtEyY 


ALFIELD ADVENTURES 

Between the recent gnoll attack, overburdened town 
leaders, and numerous criminals, the people of Alfield 
need the aid of adventurers. 

Yeenoghu’s Army (High Level). While the characters 
are staying in Alfield, they learn the truth of the recent 
gnoll attack. The first battle was just a way to test the 
town’s defenses for the real war: one fought by demons! 
The gnolls sacrificed the townsfolk captured during 
their raid to open a portal to the Abyss, letting demons 
loyal to Yeenoghu, the Gnoll Lord, invade the Material 
Plane. With so few defenses in the settlement, the char- 
acters are the only people who can truly defend Alfield 
from the threat. 

Myriad Takeover (Any Level). Overworked leader- 
ship and weak law enforcement mean that Alfield is ripe 
for Myriad takeover. The characters could be hired to 
lead the Myriad forces, bringing the town’s leadership 
and petty criminals to heel, or they could fight against 
the takeover, waging battles both physical and political 
to keep the town out of the syndicate’s grasp. 


ASHGUARD GARRISON 


Population: 5,720 (74% dark elves, 26% other races) 

Government: The garrison is currently helmed by 
the acting general of the Kryn forces holding the 
stronghold. 


ae a 


guy 
W fe 


peoy 4 


mney 


o 


Ee 
Mug 


Hupperdook 4, a 


Lien oe 


Defense: The vast majority of the occupants are front- 
line soldiers and deadly combatants. Mobile siege 
engines stand at the ready. 

Commerce: Beyond the rations needed to survive and 
small-scale trade between the soldiers, little com- 
merce is available. 

Organizations: The outpost is currently held by the 
Kryn Dynasty. Temporary shrines to the Luxon have 
been installed. 


The Ashguard Garrison is the partner fortress to the 
newer Rockguard Garrison, and the two strongholds 
flank the city of Bladegarden. On the south side of the 
Brokenveil Bluffs, Ashguard sits atop a steep mountain 
pass that slides into the Brokenveil Marsh of Xhorhas, 
making it near impossible to assault from the front. 
Although the garrison successfully repelled the dan- 
gers beyond for many years, it fell to a series of clever 
assaults from the Kryn—they used magic to darken the 
sky and cause confusion while their forces burrowed 
beneath the battlements. Over a thousand Dwendalian 
soldiers were slain, and the army was pushed back to 
Bladegarden. 

Now occupied by the forces of the Kryn Dynasty, this 
garrison has been refitted to defend against the very 
people who built it, its walls darkened by the shadows of 
perpetual twilight. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


Q 


[e10] 


ASHGUARD GARRISON ADVENTURES 

If the characters are at Ashguard Garrison, they're likely 
either reclaiming the garrison for the empire or working 
for the Kryn Dynasty on the front lines of the war. 

Take Back Ashguard Garrison (Mid Level). The 
characters are tasked with taking back the stronghold 
for the empire. Since a direct assault on the stronghold 
would likely end in the characters’ demise, they are en- 
couraged to use magical disguises, infiltrate the outpost, 
and form a strategy over a period of months while they 
gather intelligence. During this time, the characters 
might learn that the Kryn Dynasty isn’t the evil threat 
it was made out to be, prompting them to question their 
loyalties. 


ASHKEEPER PEAKS 


This grand mountain range extends northward from 

the Lucidian Ocean through the center of Wildemount, 
marking the boundary between the Dwendalian Empire 
and the wastelands of Xhorhas. The Ashkeeper Peaks 
reach skyward in a jagged array of steep mountaintops, 
like the pikes of ashadowy army looming over the Mar- 
row Valley. The mountains house the treacherous paths 
to the Gehen Basin and the hidden valley of the Verst- 
glade—secret lands that only the truly courageous or 
truly desperate attempt to reach. 

The hostile landscape of the Ashkeeper Peaks has 
prevented any attempts to install an imperial presence, 
and the peaks are teeming with all kinds of monsters 
and terrible beasts. Most of the cities bordering the 
Ashkeepers request a reinforced assignment of Crowns- 
guard to protect their citizens from the many roving 
mountain predators. 

Beneath the surface of the mountains, huge networks 
of caverns and tunnels weave between subterranean civ- 
ilizations and the deadly shadows of the Underdark. Un- 
known to the empire, a massive fire giant citadel rests at 
the northern heart of the mountain range. 


BERLEBEN 


Population: 3,230 (63% humans, 17% halflings, 12% 


gnomes, 8% other races) 

Government: Starosta Carliyle Vesperwind has left 
most of the governing to idolmaster Julienne Droogba 
and other community figures. 

Defense: Though a bare-bones garrison of Crowns- 
guard guards the town, sellswords protect travelers 
within the Labenda Swamp. 

Commerce: Supplies beyond basic goods and tools are 
uncommon. A handful of meager inns provide lim- 
ited lodging. 

Organizations: The idolmaster maintains the small 
shrines within the city. Local business is thriving, 
but few outsiders are willing to invest in this lopsided 
backwater. 


Near the green waters of the Ounterloch, the marsh 
town of Berleben is nestled deep in the Labenda 
Swamp. Berleben was settled early in the expansion of 
the Dwendalian Empire, and the town initially showed 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


promise with a booming industry in the cultivation 

of unique swamp plants sought after by healers and 
mages alike. However, the watershed from the Silber- 
quel Mountains runs into the Labenda Swamp, and the 
land slowly grew unstable, causing half of the town to 
begin sinking into the surrounding marsh. Those who 
remained in the town have had to adapt over the years, 
as much of the settlement now sits uncomfortably under 
inches of swamp water. 

Other regions of the empire regard Berleben with 
distaste and ridicule, colored by exaggerated stories of 
rampant illness, a perpetual plague of buzzing insects, 
and the failing landscape it was built on. Berleben is 
sometimes call “the Sog Sticks,” a moniker used by 
outsiders to ridicule the town and by its denizens with 
sarcastic pride. 

The ragged swampfolk that call this place home have 
remained due to familial ties, impoverished necessity, 
or the promise of work harvesting what natural com- 
modities the swamp offers. The dangers of the swamp 
and the isolated location have bred a tight-knit and nosy 
community. Neighbors frequently pry in each other’s 
business, aggressive curiosity taking hold whenever 
something new or out-of-the-ordinary occurs within the 
murky streets. 


GOVERNMENT 

Atop the Stilts region of the settlement lies the Summit 
House, home to Starosta Carliyle Vesperwind. Ves- 
perwind greatly despises his assignment and quietly 
resents his inability to protest his appointment. He 
spends most of his time locked within his abode or trav- 
eling to neighboring locales to avoid responsibility. The 
governance of the town is mostly left in the hands of the 
Mossmire Temple’s idolmaster, Julienne Droogba. 


CRIME 

Without an active starosta or a well-staffed Crowns- 
guard, crime in Berleben is fairly common and rarely 
punished. Most folk who live within the town carry 
their own means of self-defense and are slow to trust 
outsiders. 


GEOGRAPHY 

Built over unsteady, stinking swampland, the some- 
what miserable and half-sunken town is divided into 
thirds. The three districts correspond to different ages 
of construction in the empire and visually differ based 
on whatever construction materials the townsfolk had 
access to at the time. 

The Puddles are the oldest and poorest region of 
Berleben, with numerous old stone and wood buildings 
that now sit in several inches of marsh water. The Mid- 
way Docks are the central region of Berleben, where 
the workers and fishmongers do business and where a 
majority of locals socialize. The Stilts are, for what little 
it’s worth, the newest and most affluent part of town, 
marked by sturdier houses atop heavy load-bearing 
stilts that raise the buildings a few feet above the swamp 
in hopes of outlasting the rest of the sinking settlement. 


THE TRAINING GROUNDS AT BLADEGARDEN 


BERLEBEN ADVENTURES 

Berleben is an all-but-lawless settlement that needs he- 
roes to help keep the peace. Likewise, it is a wonderful 
place for unscrupulous sellswords, since no one takes 
notice of petty crime. 

A New Drink (Low Level). People in Berleben are 
obsessed with swamp swill, a new whiskey that gets folk 
drunk more quickly and for longer. Some claim to have 
wonderful reveries while intoxicated by swamp swill, 
and many have become addicted to the stuff, resorting 
to violence to get their next drink. If the characters in- 
vestigate, they find that a tribe of lizardfolk is making 
the swill and giving it to a merchant in Berleben to sell. 
The lizardfolk plan to take over Berleben once enough 
people are dependent on the swill, but only because 
trolls threaten the lizardfolk’s territory. 


BLADEGARDEN 


Population: 9,910 (32% half-orcs, 21% orcs, 25% hu- 
mans, 22% other races) 

Government: General Kruth Doorav and Starosta Le- 
man TuFinn are often at odds, but work together to 
manage Bladegarden. 

Defense: The city, which houses a large number of 
Crownsguard, is perpetually host to a large legion of 
Righteous Brand soldiers and soldiers-in-training. 

Commerce: There are many modest inns and taverns. 
Armaments and basic supplies are readily available, 
but more luxurious services and goods are extremely 
difficult to find. 


Organizations: The Righteous Brand maintainsa 
strong presence within Bladegarden. Small temples 
dot the knotted streets. 


When the Julous Dominion was defeated, the expanding 
empire saw the nomadic Odakar orc clan, formerly un- 
der Julous rule, as an opportunity to secure their hold on 
the eastern border. The empire reached out to the more 
approachable members of the orc settlement of Blade- 
garden, offering them wages, resources, and access to 
imperial goods and services. A number of them became 
the cornerstone of the eastern branch of the Righteous 
Brand and emboldened the empire’s military techniques 
with the prowess of the border-hardened orcs. Other orc 
clans who rejected these ideals were forced eastward 
into the Brokenveil Marsh and forgotten. 

From this accord, the new Righteous Brand training 
facility in the central Marrow Valley was established. 
Bladegarden was the site of one of the bloodiest bat- 
tles of the Calamity; its name referred to the volume 
of weaponry scavenged by orcs from the war-ravaged 
earth, and has since been adapted to the idea that war- 
riors are grown within its walls. Bladegarden is both a 
training complex and the core of orcish society in West- 
ern Wynandir. Contests of skill and might are common- 
place among the recruits and their trainers. Even the 
merchants come from sturdier stock and often partake. 
A sense of honor and pride fills the ranks here, stoked 
by the rivalry between Bladegarden and Grimgolir. 

As scuffles with the Kryn escalated and a growing 
number of dragonborn refugees left Talonstadt to join 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 81 


82 


the military, a certain belligerent mirth filled the war- 
riors of Bladegarden. This oddly jovial wartime atmo- 
sphere was shaken when the Xhorhasian assault on the 
Ashguard Garrison proved far more swift and brutal 
than anyone predicted. However, now that the surviving 
Ashguard forces have retreated to Bladegarden and 

the scattered armies of the empire have moved east to 
join them, the city is as crowded and lively as ever—but 
morale is tenuous. One more defeat like the one at Ash- 
guard could crack Bladegarden like a nut. 


GOVERNMENT 

While Bladegarden is technically a military settlement 
under the watch of General Kruth Doorav, the Crown 
also assigned a starosta, Leman TuFinn, to oversee the 
day-to-day minutiae of imperial governance. 


CRIME 

As the chaos of the war grows more frenzied with each 
passing week, the overworked Crownsguard pay little 
attention, and the distracted populace make easy marks 
for petty criminals. However, those who are caught find 
themselves among many well-trained soldiers who often 
deal out punishment themselves in times of crisis, so 
pursuing crime in Bladegarden is a very risky, if some- 
times rewarding, endeavor. 


GEOGRAPHY 

Aside from the impressive halls of the sprawling Righ- 
teous Brand barracks that loom over the eastern edge of 
the city, Bladegarden is considered by many a remark- 
ably drab place. The oval settlement is threaded by wan- 
dering dirt roads that seemingly stop and start without 
reason, and there is little color in the streets. Beyond the 
western walls, there are a number of farmsteads where 
local produce is gathered to aid in feeding the populace, 
but the majority of food is brought via cart from other 
sources across the Marrow Valley. 


BLADEGARDEN ADVENTURES 

Bladegarden is an excellent base of operations for 
characters fighting in the war on the side of the empire, 
or for Xhorhasian spies who wish to infiltrate their 
enemies’ ranks. With the Crownsguard overworked, 
there are also plenty of adventures fighting crime 
within the city. 

Morale Pals (Any Level). The Crown sends the Mo- 
rale Pals, a famous comedic halfling duo, to keep spirits 
up in Bladegarden. But when the curtain goes up on 
opening night, it reveals the decapitated bodies of the 
Morale Pals! The characters are hired to answer the 
question everyone is asking: who killed the halflings? 

It might be Xhorhasian spies determined to keep mo- 
rale low, thieves who wanted the halflings’ purses, or 
perhaps a rogue killer who wanted to send a message to 
the whole city that this is just the beginning. 


BROKENVEIL BLUFFS 


Long ago, the Brokenveil Bluffs were once a section of 


the Ashkeeper Peaks that linked to the nearby Dunrock 
Mountains. The mountain ranges were sundered in 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


the final battles of the Calamity, creating two mountain 
passes—the only land route that connects Eastern and 
Western Wynandir. 

The bluffs are known for their sheer cliff faces and 
brisk winds that loudly whistle through the network of 
caves and channels between the cracked rock. This re- 
gion is home to many winged monstrosities, sure-footed 
terrors, and swamp creatures who wait at the bound- 
aries of the Marrow Valley to swoop in and snatch the 
wayward traveler or soldier. The stories of the Broken- 
veil Bluffs are nearly as ominous as those told about the 
Xhorhasian landscape beyond. 


CRISPVALE THICKET 


To the east of the Silberquel Ridge, surrounding the 
juncture between the Glory Run Road and the Crispvale 
Roadway, the shady Crispvale Thicket marks the center 
of the eastern valley. A haven from the bustling lifestyles 
of the empire, the dense elms and tall underbrush shel- 
ter a handful of firbolg clans living away from the eyes 
of the Crown. As long as one sticks to the roads, it’s nor- 
mally a peaceful place to pass through, but the deeper 
areas of the thicket are stalked by hungry behemoths 
and bandits. 


CYRENGREEN FOREST 


At the southwestern end of Wynandir, the Cyrengreen 
Forest hugs the base of the Cyrios Mountains. The for- 
est is the second-largest source of lumber in the empire, 
with logging companies from Deastok and Trostenwald 
working the north and south sides, respectively. Most 
logging is limited to the outer tree line due to dangers in 
the shady interior of the Cyrengreen. The lush heart of 
the forest is home to some wilder families who brave the 
dangers of the forest to live a freer life, as the tax reap- 
ers are reticent to visit too often. There are also scores 
of abandoned cabins scattered throughout the deep 
woods where it is believed folks were either forced to 
flee or were killed by the wild denizens of the forest. To 
stumble on such a site is considered terrible luck; local 
tales speak of hungry fey spirits and shapeshifting hunt- 
ers that stalk the dark shadows of the forest in search 
of prey to toy with. The Cyrengreen Forest is also one of 
the wild sanctuaries of those cursed with lycanthropy, 
though the sects of those shackled with this terrible 
affliction are divided between those who struggle to 
contain their feral hunger and those who embrace their 
predatory instincts. The conflict between these factions 
builds with each passing moon cycle, threatening to spill 
into the nearby cities. 


A SUPERSTITIOUS SHADE 

While the dangers of the Cyrengreen include the more 
common threats such as subterranean ankheg nests 
and packs of displacer beasts, mischievous fey also call 
the forest home, wading through errant moonbeams 
on bright evenings in search of distraction. Also hidden 
within the forest is the obscured garrison of the Claret 
Order of the Lycan, where outcasts cursed with lycan- 
thropy train to control and harness their feral burden 
away from the judging eyes of society. 


CYRENGREEN FOREST ADVENTURES 

Crossing through the Cyrengreen Forest is an adven- 
ture that has travelers looking over their shoulders at 
every stray sound. The creatures in the shady depths of 
Cyrengreen love to toy with travelers. 

Lumberjack Madness (Low Level). Lumber jacks 
from Deastok and Trostenwald working in the Cyren- 
green have reported strange events. They fall asleep ran- 
domly on the job, witness twinkling lights, see horrific 
nightmarish creatures for mere moments—and some 
even turn into beasts such as frogs and rabbits for short 
periods of time. The loggers are spooked and refuse to 
return to their work until the characters deal with the 
problem. The problem is pixies—they’re upset that the 
loggers are tearing their forest apart! The good fey are 
stubborn but might cut a deal with the loggers if the 
characters agree to negotiate. 

More Perfect People (Mid Level). Reports of wolves 
attacking travelers on the road from Deastok, Kamor- 
dah, and Trostenwald have become more frequent. All 
travelers tell the same story: the beasts tear through 
caravans, biting as many people as possible before mov- 
ing on. There is never a death toll. The reason for the 
strange attacks becomes obvious during the next full 
moon when the bite victims turn into werewolves. The 
characters are hired to find and stop the lycanthropes 
spreading the curse. 

The instigating werewolves live in the dark heart of 
the Cyrengreen. They call themselves the Brotherhood 
of the Moon and aim to spread their curse throughout 
the Dwendalian Empire. They believe their mission 
will make humanoids evolve into a stronger, more per- 
fect people. 


DEASTOK 


Population: 10,090 (60% humans, 26% dwarves, 10% 
halflings, 4% other races) 

Government: Starosta Deter McGinneas is nothing 
more than a puppet who answers to Prime Arbiter 
Truscan in Rexxentrum. 

Defense: Deastok enjoys the protection of the Crowns- 
guard. The city supplements its defenses with a small 
army of sellswords and private bodyguards. 

Commerce: Basic goods and services can be found 
alongside comfortable lodging. Some imported, rare 
goods can be sought by those with black market 
connections. 

Organizations: A single temple to Bahamut is the only 
official religious locale. The Truscan family and their 
allies hold tight to their power, while Myriad influence 
grows in secret. 


Travelers in the Truscan Vale find the city of Deastok 
at the southwestern edge of the Dwendalian Empire. 
The sister city of Kamordah to the north, Deastok is 

a borough that appears unusually affluent for its size, 
largely because the Truscan family has called the city 
home for many generations. Fine cobblestone streets 
connect numerous modern buildings and charming 
country shops, while elegant entertainment venues and 
picturesque views make the city a quaint holiday loca- 
tion for many wealthy travelers. 


GOVERNMENT 

While Starosta McGinneas is the Crown-appointed 
leader of the city, it is no secret that the Truscan family 
is the real guiding force in Deastok. The starosta and 
all titled subordinates within the city were assigned at 
the behest of Prime Arbiter Sydnock Truscan, and it is 
widely assumed that anyone in power is somehow re- 
lated to the Truscans by marriage or blood, or is deeply 
indebted to them. 


CRIME 
The clean, well-maintained streets are surprisingly 
free of crime for a city so socially stratified. There’s a 
good reason that precious few petty criminals exist in 
Deastok: they’ve all been recruited by the Myriad! 
Under the guidance of local crime boss Corshad Du- 
mon, this city has been a major Myriad hub for decades, 
with secret subterranean bases and pathways beneath 
the city that enable the organization to go about its busi- 
ness unimpeded. Those that attempt to blow the whistle 
on Myriad activities vanish or meet a terrible end, so 
most city folk turn a blind eye to organized crime. 


GEOGRAPHY 

Deastok is a tidy city bordering the Cyrengreen Forest, 
with a beautiful collection of quaint homes, fine goods, 
and affluent citizens. The central metropolitan por- 

tion of the city is divided into three areas. Most of the 
residential homes are located in the Garden Grounds, 
framed by curling parks and greenery. The Bursar Plaza 
marks the industrial district where shops, markets, and 
busking spots are carefully arranged for both commerce 
and atmosphere. The perimeter of the city is known as 
the Jeweled Gates, where the Crownsguard barracks 
and small military reserve are located. The soldiers 
guard the city and take shifts atop the Cyrios Mountain 
watchtower. 

Most of the city is built atop a large, leveled hill, sur- 
rounded by farms that continue for hundreds of acres on 
the western, northern, and eastern sides. At the south- 
ern end of the city, where the hills slope down toward 
the Cyrengreen Forest, a number of lumber mills bus- 
tling with gnomish technology harvest timber from the 
forest with impressive efficiency. 


i D 
THE DARRINGTON BRIGADE 


Following his incredible journey as a member of the leg- 
endary adventuring group Vox Machina, famed artificer 
and writer Taryon Darrington returned to his home of 
Deastok and founded the Darrington Brigade, a nonprofit 
adventuring group modeled after Vox Machina. Under 
Taryon and his husband Lawrence Darrington, the brigade 
has gained notoriety in the past twenty years, both for the 
deeds accomplished and the series of mostly-non-fiction 
books published by Taryon himself. 

The Darrington Brigade welcomes eager wanderers and 
adventurers with open arms, and they sponsor a number 
of small adventuring parties across Western Wynandir and 
beyond. Even so, Taryon can often be found helming an 
adventure or two himself, with his trusty automaton Doty 
and Lawrence by his side. 


D a a a 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


DEASTOK ADVENTURES 

Elements of intrigue, noble finery, and the Myriad define 
adventures in Deastok. Characters might have adven- 
tures centered around grand parties, social gatherings, 
and whispered rumors. 

Merry Spouses of Deastok (Mid Level). A member of 
the nobility in Deastok is murdered, and the characters 
are hired to find the killer. During the investigation, 
more nobles and prominent members of society are 
slain. It seems the victims cannot be connected, and 
each murder employs a different grisly method. The 
truth is that a group of incubi and succubi married into 
the Truscan family over the past decade. These fiends 
are committing murders for the thrill of it. 

Kryn-filtration (Any Level). The Kryn Dynasty wants 
to infiltrate the nobility of Deastok to manipulate and 
steal information from wealthy Dwendalian citizens. 
The Kryn could hire the characters to accomplish this, 
or the characters could uncover the Kryn plot and try to 
find the spies. In either case, the Myriad’s involvement in 
the city adds another dimension to the conflict between 
the Dwendalian Empire and Kryn Dynasty, making the 
characters wondering who—if anyone—they can trust. 


EGELIN QUARRY 


This centuries-old strip mine was the primary source of 
stone used in the construction of Zadash by the Julous 
Dominion, but it was largely abandoned when the plat- 
inum-rich Herathis Mine was discovered to the south- 
east. Now this gaping chasm is only worked by a small 
group of miners who still collect errant stone and rocks 
to sell to masons. Under the watchful gaze of the gnome 
prospector Lason de Weeler, the self-appointed foreman 
of the quarry, are a number of rock-breakers who toil in 
the mines in hopes of discovering some hidden cache of 
gems or precious ore. 


FELDERWIN 


Population: 8,180 (58% halflings, 21% humans, 6% 
dragonborn, 15% other races) 

Government: The locally elected starosta, Theanor 
Whisperthin, works with the Crown-appointed law- 
master to organize and distribute the harvests. 

Defense: A sizable regiment of Crownsguard is now bol- 
stered by a patrolling legion of Righteous Brand sol- 
diers, while guildmasters keep personal bodyguards. 

Commerce: Basic supplies and general goods are pro- 
duced locally, and humble rooms and amenities are 
available to travelers. 

Organizations: Shrines to the Dawn Father bless 
the outer fields, while most worship takes place in 
homesteads within the city. The farming families and 
guilds aren't independent, but are operated directly by 
the Crown. 


Felderwin is the heart of halfling society in Wynandir. 
The settlement itself is surrounded by fertile farmland— 
the sprawling Felderwin Tillage that has been cultivated 
by the halfling community for over seven centuries. 

In the wake of a sudden and vicious attack from the 
Kryn Dynasty, the Crownsguard presence has recently 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


increased, and paranoia has gripped the citizens of Fel- 
derwin. Taverns and shops are filled with hushed whis- 
pers about the fate of the empire. 


A TILLING TRADITION 

This area was originally settled by the halfling Felder 
clan many centuries ago, and the community has al- 
ways valued the simple, grounded life of a farmer. The 
exceedingly fertile soil surrounding Felderwin is known 
throughout the empire, and the best farmers and stu- 
dents of agriculture in the land have settled here. As 
such, the agricultural skills taught in Felderwin are 
second to none. 

Some family bloodlines have tilled the earth for as 
long as Felderwin has existed and fiercely guard their 
plots against any incursion—be it from other farmers, 
local goblins, or invading dark elves. Nomadic goblin 
camps moving through the nearby Cyrios Mountains 
often encroach in the dark of night during harvest time. 


GOVERNMENT 

Without Felderwin, the Dwendalian Empire—and the 
imperial military—would surely starve. Recognizing the 
importance of Felderwin’s fertile fields, the Crown has 
allowed the settlement’s starosta to be selected by the 
local community instead of appointing a leader from 
Rexxentrum. When the starosta dies or is deposed, the 
community votes on their replacement. The current sta- 
rosta, Theanor Whisperthin, has served the community 
for over thirty years and does his best to maintain order. 
However, Theanor is under pressure by his assigned 
overseer on the Cerberus Assembly, Marquis Jenna Ire- 
sor, to expand the settlement’s contributions to the war 
effort—or be replaced. 


CRIME 

Felderwin is not a haven for unlawful activity, but the 
importance of the local crops have prompted the empire 
to assign a large number of Crownsguard to prevent 
any danger to agricultural production. The crime that 
does exist within Felderwin tends to involve small scale 
larceny, burglary, and the occasional attempt to forge of- 
ficial documents to avoid taxes and tithes to the Crown. 


GEOGRAPHY 

This rustic settlement is home to the beating heart of 
the Marrow Valley’s farming community. Felderwin 

is built around three small hubs, each surrounding a 
communal gathering site called a Hall, which give the 
settlement a roughly triangular shape. Each section is 
filled with intersecting dirt roads, large barns, store- 
houses, lively taverns, and livestock pens that give the 
streets their unique, shifting smell of fresh grass, sweet 
pollen, and animal dung. The Green Hall calls forth 
trade meetings and day celebrations, while the Sunset 
Hall acts as a massive tavern for evening festivities and 
diplomatic events. The Lake Hall is built at the edge of 
the Scymir River and helms the small fishing commu- 
nity within the city. 


FELODERWIN AND THE TILLAGE 


FELDERWIN ADVENTURES 

Felderwin is an excellent location for new adventurers. 
The war has visited the settlement, and there are crimi- 
nals and goblins aplenty for the characters to defeat. 

Short Uprising (Any Level). The characters find 
themselves in Felderwin when Starosta Theanor gives 
in to the Cerberus Assembly and raises taxes. The 
people of Felderwin, still trying to recoup their losses 
from the Kryn attack, begin to riot, demanding that the 
starosta step down so they can elect a replacement. 
Both sides pressure the characters to join them in 
the conflict. 

A Price Paid in Blood (Low Level). A series of ma- 
cabre murders have shaken the denizens of Felderwin. 
The watchmaster has heard rumors that a blood hunter 
(see chapter 7) recently arrived in the city and hires the 
characters to hunt down the possible murderer. When 
they finally find the blood hunter, she tries to convince 
them that the murders are the fault of a rakshasa that’s 
secretly living within the settlement as the watchmaster. 
The characters must either help the blood hunter take 
down the watchmaster or capture the blood hunter to 
claim their reward. 


FELDERWIN TILLAGE 


The Tillage, as it’s called by locals, is the expanse of 
fertile farmland surrounding Felderwin, west of the 
Ashkeeper Peaks. This sprawling network of farms 


cultivates most of the empire’s crops and livestock used 
and consumed across Western Wynandir. Crops are 
cultivated and harvested in the Tillage, while most busi- 
ness and shipping is handled within Felderwin itself. 
Farming families frequently travel between their acre- 
age and the settlement of Felderwin to sell their goods 
and distribute their tithes to the empire. 

While most conflicts throughout these rural home- 
steads involve disputes over land, the open and remote 
nature of the farms makes them easy targets for bur- 
glary and theft. Stories of such dangers continue to 
grow as financial strife in the empire pushes working 
folk to extremes. Increasing mistrust of outsiders and 
even some neighbors has led to some families becoming 
quite hostile. For the most party, however, there are few 
communities known to be as welcoming and hospitable 
as those of the Felderwin Tillage. 

Astealth unit of Kryn warriors recently sneaked into 
the Marrow Valley from below the earth and set fire toa 
number of fields before being repelled. With large plots 
in ashes, many farming families are trying to rebuild, 
while the leaders of Felderwin are seeking ways to bet- 
ter defend their populace. 


FELDERWIN TILLAGE ADVENTURES 

The characters could aid or stop Kryn raids on Fel- 
derwin Tillage, or defend the farms against burglars 
and monsters. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


sn 


Adee 


86 


Kryn Spy (Low Level). The characters are hired by a 
farming family in the Tillage to get to the bottom of re- 
cent arsons that burned crops in Felderwin Tillage. The 
culprit behind the fires is difficult to find because they 
are a doppelganger working for the Kryn, masquer- 
ading as multiple absent members of the community. 
Moreover, once the characters ask too many questions, 
the doppelganger begins hunting them as well. 

A Friend in Need (Mid Level). Stumbling on a secret 
gathering of cultists of Tiamat preparing to sacrifice 
a woman to their evil goddess, the adventurers must 
stop the ritual and free the captive, who aids them in 
the battle. She introduces herself as Calianna, a half-elf 
sorcerer with a draconic lineage that covers half of her 
body in black scales. She breathlessly describes this ter- 
rible cabal, known as the Cult of the Caustic Heart (see 
chapter 2), and requests the characters’ aid in vanquish- 
ing it once and for all. 


GRIMGOLIR 


Population: 19,090 (81% dwarves, 8% humans, 6% hal- 


flings, 5% other races) 

Government: Underbaron Brock Dummaroff rules 
the city with a council of dwarf lords and ladies. The 
Crown-appointed starosta is effectively just another 
councilor. 

Defense: A fair Crownsguard presence is overshadowed 
by the impressive force of elite dwarf soldiers known 
as Monoliths that protect the city. Private Monolith 
warriors are hired to protect merchant families. Most 
civilians are trained in basic combat. 

Commerce: A majority of services can be found, as well 
as raw ore, materials, gems, and goods. Taverns and 
inns are plentiful. 

Organizations: Local merchant guilds and conglomer- 
ates control the flow of business. Temples to Moradin 
and Bahamut are prominent, followed by the other 
Dwendalian gods. All answer to the Crown, but it 
holds less political influence here than in other cities. 


The dwarven stronghold of Grimgolir sits at the core 

of an immense network of tunnels carved throughout 
the southern Dunrock Mountains, perfectly situated to 
watch over the eastern border with Xhorhas. Though 
the Dwendalian Empire and the Grimgol dwarves have 
clashed in the past, the empire now counts the disci- 
plined armies of Grimgolir as one of its staunchest as- 
sets in the war against the Kryn Dynasty. The predomi- 
nantly dwarven society of Grimgolir prizes fine metals, 
finer craftsmanship, and proven skill on the battlefield, 
and their culture drills these virtues into every young 
dwarf, human, and halfling born in their city. Since days 
long past, the people of Grimgolir have waged eternal 
war on the monstrous denizens of the lightless caverns, 
in order to mine the precious mineral veins that suffuse 
the Dunrock Mountains. 

All soldiers from Grimgolir have stories of their first 
patrol along the Brokenveil Bluffs. Every new recruit’s 
first station is atop the dizzying cliffs, as an introduction 
to the hostile terrain of Xhorhas and to the monstrosi- 
ties that wander out of the marsh below. The Grimgolir 
reputation for martial excellence soon reached the ears 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


of the Dwendalian military, and the Crown made over- 
tures to the ruling elders of the Grimgol dwarves, invit- 
ing them to peacefully become citizens of the empire. 
The negotiations were nearly spoiled by the Crown’s 
simultaneous courtship of the ores of Bladegarden, but 
a concordance was eventually reached. The empire 
granted Grimgolir an extremely generous trade agree- 
ment and all the benefits of imperial citizenship, along 
with unprecedented autonomy for an imperial vassal 
state, in exchange for the ability to marshal the Grimgol 
warriors to fight for the empire. As part of the empire’s 
unified eastern front against Xhorhas, Grimgolir has 
aided in the training of the soldiers of Bladegarden, as 
well as the Rockguard and Ashguard Garrisons. 


A SOCIETY OF SERVICE 

Life under the mountain has never been easy. Every 
bountiful cavern is home to a deadly beast, and ancient 
tunnels once used by the armies of the Betrayer Gods 
now are haunted by lingering evils. This has shaped the 
core value of Grimgol society: to succeed is to struggle. 
Worth in oneself is measurable by what one has over- 
come. This has built a philosophy that breeds generation 
after generation of dwarves seeking ways to challenge 
themselves and prove their capability. Everyone born 
within the city learns the basics of armed and unarmed 
combat as a child—often making outsiders, merchants, 
and travelers somewhat uneasy with the knowledge that 
any native Grimgoliran could take them in a fight. 

Early combat training combined with a cultural rever- 
ence for wars of ages past creates immense pressure for 
native-born Grimgolirans to join the city-state’s military: 
the Monoliths. This is especially true for the Grimgol 
dwarves, for most can trace their family lineage back to 
a famous warrior or two. However, other Grimgolirans 
find their calling as storytellers and artisans. Those un- 
able to make a living as a warrior or as an artisan often 
find themselves as laborers in the service of the Bleed- 
ing Stone Syndicate, a massive business enterprise that 
controls the entire pipeline of ore excavation to weapon 
manufacture. The Bleeding Stone maintains mining 
facilities beneath the Dunrock Mountains, a network of 
railcart lines between the mines and Grimgolir, a cut- 
ting-edge blast furnace for ore smelting, and an army of 
smiths hammering ingots into blades, shields, and mail. 


GOVERNMENT 

The agreement between the Crown and Grimgolir is 
the only treaty that has ever guaranteed a city-state 
autonomous rule while under the empire’s banner. 
While Grimgolir does indeed have an appointed sta- 
rosta, currently Starosta Ichabod Ashelon, the treaty be- 
tween Grimgolir and the empire relegates the starosta 
to little more than an advisor of the ruling Underbaron 
of Grimgolir. As such, Underbaron Brock Dummaroff 
oversees the city and its goals with his own council and 
appointed officials. This arrangement has caused a few 
frustrations on both sides, and with the war against the 
Kryn now in full swing, these disagreements continue to 
grow larger and more frequent. 


CRIME 

Culturally, denizens of Grimgolir genuinely believe that 
crime is a waste and a dark mark on one’s life’s work. 

If someone struggles, others lift them up until they can 
walk on their own. As such, it is very rare for an individ- 
ual raised in Grimgol society to turn to a life of crime 
unless absolutely necessary. There is some criminal ac- 
tivity within and around the city, but most of it is helmed 
by foreign, outside forces. 


GEOGRAPHY 

From outside, Grimgolir is an impressive series of 
battlements and crenelations built into the side of the 
Dunrock Mountains, with granite staircases and bridges 
adjoining them. Within the mountain, the city is divided 
into two massive, cavernous wards, one sitting at an an- 
gle above the other in a gradual grade. 

The interior cavern of the top ward, known as the 
Cage Ward, resembles a giant, angled ribcage. The 
Cage Ward contains numerous levels of structures that 
house civilians, businesses, and guard posts for Mono- 
liths to watch over the area. Farther down the sloping 
tunnels lies the Heart Ward, a gargantuan, spherical 
cavern with dozens of elevated walkways crossing at 
multiple heights, connecting many of the hundreds of 
open tunnels. The Heart Ward is the hub of all mining 
and gathering operations throughout the mountain, sur- 
rounded by Monolith barracks embedded in the outer 
edges of the ward. Many barracks adjoin wide tunnels 
that breach the surface at the base of the mountain, with 
the exit point heavily guarded and shrouded in illusory 
stone to prevent discovery. 


GRIMGOLIR ADVENTURES 
With monsters aplenty and war atits doorstep, 
Grimgolir has no shortage of adventures. 

Mimics in the Mine (Low Level). Monsters are killing 
Grimgolir’s miners. The typically tough and unbeatable 
Grimgolir soldiers can’t seem to find the creatures. 
Looking for a fresh perspective, they hire the characters 
to hunt the monsters in the abandoned mine while op- 
erations are shutdown. The monsters are mimics that 
turn into pickaxes, railcars, and other mining equip- 
ment. They strike at the characters with hit-and-run 
tactics, retreating into darkness and using their unique 
powers to blend in with the environment. 

Rise of the Worms (Epic Level). While the characters 
are in Grimgolir, several purple worms tunnel into the 
city, causing mass destruction. After the worms are 
killed or driven off, Kryn forces come through the tun- 
nels created by the monstrosities, razing strategic mil- 
itary outposts while the city is already in disarray. The 
Kryn Dynasty knows how critical the city is to training 
Dwendalian troops, so they mobilized the worms and 
followed behind to deal Grimgolir a decisive blow. 


HERETHIS MINES 


Platinum is as rare as it is beautiful, so when a very 
bountiful vein of the precious metal was discovered east 
of Deastok within the bounds of the Julous Dominion, 
the greedy lust for such a financial wellspring finally 
pushed the empire to break their agreements and 
conquer the dominion. Within the Crown’s control, a 
vast mine has since expanded to extract the extremely 
valuable metal. However, the mine’s proximity to the te- 
nacious ankheg population that infests the Cyrengreen 
Forest continues to be a challenge. In addition, the 
Myriad has slowly infiltrated the operations of the mines 
over the past fifty years, regularly skimming from the 
platinum haul to fund its endeavors. 


HUPPERDOOK 


Population: 12,090 (76% gnomes, 10% dwarves, 8% 
humans, 6% other races) 

Government: Starosta Emma Zezbok, who has ruled 
fortwo centuries, works with elected officials and the 
major houses of industry. 

Defense: A small number of Crownsguard are backed 
by a larger civilian militia of volunteer soldiers. Many 
war machines and engines also defend the city. 

Commerce: A strong industry around metals, mining, 
tinkering, and entertainment makes most basic sup- 
plies and some rarer goods available. Upper Hupper- 
dook has many taverns, inns, and places of revelry. 

Organizations: Industrial families are heavily in- 
vested in the city and its business. Temples to 
empire-approved gods, especially Moradin, are 
easy to find. 


The gnomish community of Hupperdook is built along 
the eastern base of the Silberquel Ridge, marked by the 
ever-rising columns of dark smoke and steam. Predat- 
ing the empire, Hupperdook remained autonomous until 
the Crown absorbed the community through diplomatic 
agreements over two centuries ago. This smoke-stacked 
city is now the heart of industry in the empire, manufac- 
turing technological marvels and large-scale weapons of 
war for the Dwendalian Empire. 

The gnomish culture within Hupperdook prizes hard 
work and hard play. Family trades vary from coal min- 
ing and clockwork development to practical enchant- 
ment and the brewing of zesty libations. Within the 
bounds of the city, a general air of upbeat anticipation 
frames the day-to-day activities of residents as they 
bound their way toward dusk. 


CARPE NOCTIS 

For as long as the people of Hupperdook have lived 

on the mountain, they’ve been pushing to better their 
respective trades. The ten-hour work days are long and 
sometimes arduous, as sparks fly and clangs of metal 
ring through the city, but when dusk comes, the whistles 
blow and the carousing begins. Nearly every evening is 
a wild party celebrating the end of a productive day. Mu- 
sic, fireworks, dancing, and lots and lots of alcohol have 
given Hupperdook a reputation as one of the rowdiest 
locales within the empire. Such a lifestyle can be taxing 
on folk not used to such grueling labor and formidable 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


merriment, but as the saying goes, “ya come here for an 
early grave worth earning.” 

The traditional nighttime drink is called fuse, a mix- 
ture of strong liquor and an energy-boosting herbal 
concoction that is considered by the hardest workers as 
a necessity to properly embrace an evening of revelry, 
though some visitors complain of the rather unpleas- 
ant aftermath of imbibing the powerful substance. A 
jet-black coffee with the consistency (and some say, the 
taste) of lantern oil is customary the following morning. 


THE CORE OF WARFARE 

The Crown understands the benefit of keeping Hupper- 
dook and its citizens happy through relative autonomy, 
as no other city can develop and produce weapons like 
the ones found here. A sizable portion of Hupperdook’s 
industry is allocated to the production and development 
of defense weaponry, siege engines, and firearms. Fin- 
ished implements of war are shipped across the valley 
to Bladegarden or Rockguard Garrison, with a few left 
stockpiled within the city. 


GOVERNMENT 
As per the accord enabling it to become part of the 
Dwendalian Empire, Hupperdook is one of the only 
imperial cities allowed to choose its own leadership. 
Starosta Emma Zezbok is a bombastic gnome who ne- 
gotiated the absorption of the city into the empire and 
has held her seat for two centuries. Emma has sharp 
mind for problem solving and a love of debauchery—and 
cares little for politics outside the city walls or for the 
short-lived “Kings of Men,” so long as they leave her and 
her people alone. 

Due to the independent nature of the city, the Crowns- 
guard presence is relatively small, and the volunteers 
of the Citizens’ Watch pick up the slack. This has led 
to some tension between the two law enforcement fac- 
tions, but many of the Crownsguard forgive any slights 
when the evening drinks begin to flow. 


CRIME 

The diligent days are almost completely free of crime as 
every nook and cranny of the city buzzes with business, 
but the nights lend themselves to lackluster oversight 
and intoxicated Crownsguard. Lawful folk tend to travel 
in pairs at night, lest their drunkenness be exploited by 
a cutpurse. While most criminals native to Hupperdook 
disdain pickpocketing people on the street, burglary is 
seen as anoble and skilled pursuit among thieves. 


GEOGRAPHY 
Hupperdook is divided into four distinct areas across 
two levels built against the mountain base. 

Lower Hupperdook sits at ground level and is divided 
into two sections. The soot-stained, dusty Ironlot is 
where the majority of mining, metalwork, and small- 
scale production takes place amid residential neigh- 
borhoods peppered with a dozen ash-piping smoke 
stacks. The larger war machines and siege engines are 
constructed in the Assembly Yard, while more volatile 
projects are tested within the pock-marked turf known 
as the Craterfield. 


FIREWORKS OVER IWUPPERDOOK 


The more charming, residential region of Upper Hup- 
perdook sits about two hundred feet above the ground 
atop a platform of leveled rock. This level of the city 
has two regions: Silver Falls Grove, where the massive 
Silver Falls descend from atop the mountainside and 
spill into a small lake surrounded by residential living 
towers, and the Idleworks Shelf, a recreational region 
of sprawling commerce, colorful markets, and social 
gatherings. 


HUPPERDOOK ADVENTURES 

The nearby Silberquel Ridge is a ready source of dan- 
gerous beasts and unnatural dangers, while the evening 
celebrations of the city conceal all sorts of shenanigans. 

Life Is a Drag (Any Level). The annual Iron Runway 
celebration is seeking entertainers to wow the nobility 
with show-stopping, gender-bending performances and 
delightfully bawdy humor. The characters can choose 
to participate for an impressive top prize, or be hired to 
guard the event, which is known to get a little rowdy. 

A Hungry Problem (Low Level). An illegally trans- 
ported rust monster escaped from its cage in the night, 
nested within the Silberquel Mines, and gave birth to a 
small brood. The hungry creatures now threaten to con- 
sume the veins of ore needed for the empire’s war effort, 
unless the characters manage to slay or capture them. 


KAMORDAH 


Population: 7,440 (58% humans, 23% halflings, 13% 


dwarves, 6% other races) 

Government: Starosta Brennan Keef oversees his 
network of appointees, but his true loyalty is to the 
Truscan family. 

Defense: Crownsguard and hired mercenaries protect 
independent business interests. 

Commerce: Basic supplies are available, but imported 
goods are more difficult to obtain. Rare plants, herbs, 
and wines support a profitable and well-guarded lo- 
cal industry. 

Organizations: A few small, family-run temples are 
open to travelers, but the local businesses are fearful 
of outsiders. 


Kamordah was built within the Bromkiln Hills by a 
collection of zealous followers of Desirat the Twilight 
Phoenix (described in chapter 2). They were eventually 
driven out by the Julous Dominion, who claimed the 
city and attempted to harness the intense geothermal 
activity in the area. When the dominion was conquered 
by the Dwendalian Empire, it was discovered that this 
phenomenon infused the local earth with minerals that 
support a number of rare plants, ones that normally 
would not survive in Wildemount. This has led to a very 
profitable, carefully guarded industry of farming exotic 
herbs and fauna, as well as local vineyards that produce 
exquisite wines with flavors not found elsewhere in Ex- 
andria. Unfortunately, the ground water here is undrink- 
able, forcing denizens of the city to survive off captured 
rainfall and fresh water imported from outside the city. 


A FIRE BELOW 

While the majority of Western Wynandir and the Mar- 
row Valley is filled with rolling fields of green grasses 
and tall, vibrant trees, the Bromkiln Hills that surround 
the city of Kamordah are gray and rocky, unable to sus- 
tain the vegetation. Patches of gray, bubbling mud form 
between the hills, where natural vents perpetually re- 
lease lazy plumes of sulfurous gases that give the region 
its unmistakable smell. Mineral shelves surrounding 
areas of intense seismic or thermal activity sometimes 
produce rings of vibrant colors, and many locals study 
these minerals for their medicinal and arcane proper- 
ties. Others worry that the source of this activity is a 
portent of terrible things to come, whether it be an im- 
minent eruption or some slumbering elemental power. 


GOVERNMENT 


Starosta Brennan Keef isthe Crown-appointed governor 
of Kamordah. Though his close ties to the Truscan fam- 
ily grant him good standing with the Crown and local 
traders in the Truscan Vale, locals grouse that he puts 
Truscan interests before those of his own people. 

Coinmaster Dela Folger has a long-standing feud with 
Exchequer Aethia Drooze. Folger, a staunch supporter 
of Kamordan wineries and their local businesses, re- 
sists Drooze’s attempts to squeeze every last copper out 
of Kamordah and into the Crown's coffers. 


CRIME 


The businesses in Kamordah carefully guard their rare 
goods. Crownsguard mingle with hired mercenaries to 
keep a watchful eye on business deals, making the few 
criminals within the city extremely cautious. 


GEOGRAPHY 


Kamordah is a strange settlement built from pale stone 
mined from nearby Mount Mentiri and petrified wood 
from the surrounding forest. Constructed over the 
prismatic mud of the Bromkiln Hills, it resembles a 
collection of pearls against a smear of colored paints. 
The settlement is loosely broken up into two regions 
based on industry. The Rainbow Vineyards wind along 
the northern end, twisting up the base of the mountain 
paths, while the massive central Mudfields harbor 
greenhouses and research facilities alongside the scat- 
tered homes that comprise the remainder of the city. 
a SENSENTE AERP 
WINES OF KAMORDAH 
The natural phenomenon that churns the mud and earth 
surrounding Kamordah has helped its people cultivate a 
valuable collection of vineyards. Wines produced by these 
families are some of the best in Exandria, often presented 
as extravagant gifts or a display of wealth. These bottles 
fetch a healthy sum of gold, with some of the finest listed 
below, though the prices vary depending on the market. 


Stassman’s Thistle Branch Dark Blood Red Wine: 85 gp 
per bottle. 
Wagner & Waltz Emerald Embrace Green Wine: 65 gp 
per bottle. 
Stassman’s Truscan Sunrise White Wine: 45 gp per bottle. 
Lionett Vineyard Purple Cinder Red Wine: 50 gp per bottle. 
Errenath Family Private Wish Red Wine: 75 gp per bottle. 


a eee 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


90 


KAMORDAH ADVENTURES 

Adventurers in Kamordah might become embroiled in 
squabbles over local goods, politics, or speculation con- 
cerning the source of Kamordah’s geothermal activity. 

Broken Earth (Low Level). While the characters 
are in Kamordah, an earthquake topples buildings and 
releases lava from beneath the earth. The broken earth 
also opens the way for magma mephits that cause mis- 
chief around the settlement. If the characters manage 
to save themselves from the chaos, there are plenty of 
other citizens in need of rescue. 

Twilight Phoenix (Epic Level). The truth of Kamor- 
dah’s geothermal activity is far more sinister and fan- 
tastical than many know. The ancient and mad twilight 
phoenix Desirat (see chapter 1) is chained beneath 
Mount Mentiri. A cabal of archmages who worship As- 
modeus seek to free the Lord of the Nine Hells’ steed, 
secretly gathering components for a ritual to sunder the 
mountain and unleash the crazed entity to incinerate 
the countryside. If the characters cannot stop the ritual, 
they must combat the twisted, primal phoenix herself. 


LEBENDA SWAMP 


The sprawling marsh known as the Labenda Swamp 
encompasses the valley along the southern side of the 
Silberquel Ridge and is fed by frequent rainfall. Sur- 
rounding the Ounterloch, this immense swampland is 
humid for much of the year, making travel uncomfort- 
able. The incessant hum of buzzing insects mingles 
with the musky stench of decaying plants and stagnant 
water, and thick fog obscures much of the muck-laden 
region. The marsh is home to trolls, carnivorous plants, 
and a host of other deadly creatures. Only the most ex- 
perienced travelers dare wander too deep into the soggy 
reaches of the inner swamp, where it is said that rare 
plants and ancient ruins hide behind the mists. 


MOUNT MENTIRI 


Mount Mentiri is a sky-piercing crimson monolith and 


an ever-present visual landmark within the Truscan 
Vale. Thin wisps of steam rise from numerous vents 
scattered throughout the massive mountain. The nearby 
Bromkiln Hills and the northern lands around Pride’s 
Call have been altered by the elemental power that radi- 
ates from the rock beneath Mentiri. 

The source of this subterranean heat is a mystery 
to the people of the empire. Scholars have proposed 
many theories, suggesting that Mentiri may be a young 
volcano—or that it sits atop a rift to the Elemental 
Plane of Fire. 

None of their theories are correct. The truth is that 
Desirat the Twilight Phoenix, prized steed of Asmo- 
deus, is imprisoned deep within the curling caverns 
beneath the mountain, and her prison is surrounded 
by the fire giant city of Vuthos. The presence of Desirat 
has affected the people of Kamordah since the city was 
founded, and her messages call to the weak-minded in 
dreams, urging them to delve beneath the mountains to 
worship her as a god. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


OUNTERLOCH 


The mossy green waters of the Ounterloch lie brackish 
and foul in the center of the Labenda Swamp. Home 

to swamp beasts and malevolent forces drawn to the 
mystic secrets buried beneath the algae and stones, this 
lake is a source of myths for folk all across the Marrow 
Valley. Many speak of the temple that once sat at its 
northern shore before the quaking of the Calamity sent 
it sinking down into the dark water. Others tell tales of 
the Marsh Siren who calls to people in their dreams 
and draws them into the swamp with her song. These 
unfortunate souls are lost to the marsh, or they drown in 
her embrace beneath the waters. Most who discuss the 
Ounterloch, however, just speak of how miserable it is. 


TTALONSTADT 


Population: 1,810 (82% dragonborn, 11% humans, 4% 
halflings, 3% other races) 

Government: Talonstadt’s refugees are organized by 
community leaders who manage to work together, 
despite their bickering. 

Defense: A small but functional band of volunteer 
fighters keeps watch alongside a minimal Crowns- 
guard presence. 

Commerce: General goods and arms are available, if 
somewhat scarce beyond what the populace requires. 
Trade is minimal, and lodging is hard to find. 

Organizations: There are makeshift shrines to Baha- 
mut in public gathering places. The Scars of Scale 
and Tooth have representatives present to help protect 
the interests of ravenite refugees. 


The fall of Draconia at the hands of the deadly chro- 
matic dragon sect known as the Chroma Conclave sent 
the region into chaos. The ravenite resistance rose up 
against the surviving draconbloods in a bloody rebel- 
lion, while the dangerous creatures that stalked the 
Dreemoth Ravine closed in when the arcane defenses of 
Draconia fell. While many remained to rebuild from the 
ruins of the fallen city, dozens of ravenite refugees and 
survivors fled across the dangerous lands of Xhorhas, 
climbing over the mountains into the Marrow Valley. 
The Crown wasn't eager to offer clemency to a number 
of foreign revolutionaries who overthrew an allied na- 
tion, but the Cerberus Assembly managed the develop- 
ment of a ramshackle shantytown for the dragonborn at 
the base of the Ashkeeper Peaks. 

Although it is part of the Dwendalian Empire, Talon- 
stadt receives very little support from the Crown. In- 
stead, the Cerberus Assembly pays meager wages to the 
refugees while promising that their hard work will one 
day allow them to earn imperial citizenship and a better 
quality of life for their families. With tensions between 
the refugees and the empire escalating, and a Crowns- 
guard that consistently turns a blind eye to crimes 
within the community, very few residents believe these 
empty promises. 

Amid the chaos, a handful of Draconian sympathizers 
within the refugees actively undermine the ravenites’ 
community leaders. 


TTALONSTADT ADVENTURES 

The people of Talonstadt have great need of adventurers 
to protect them from crime, monsters, and each other. 
The community can’t offer much in the way of monetary 
rewards, but they can provide forgotten stories and 
describe (relatively) safe routes through Xhorhas to the 
characters. 

Chroma Council (Low Level). A secret group of Dra- 
conian sympathizers, who call themselves the Chroma 
Council, tempts the young adults of Talonstadt with 
promises of wealth and a better life if they adhere to the 
commandments of Tiamat. Their recruits disappear into 
the Ashkeeper Peaks to meet with the cult leaders, who 
plan to raid passing caravans for money and supplies. 
The characters are hired by the recruits’ families to 
steal them back from this seditious cult. 


‘TROSTEN WALD 


Population: 8,900 (66% humans, 13% halflings, 8% 


half-elves, 13% other races) 

Government: Starosta Fryda Langer works alongside 
resident nobles and small local guilds to maintain the 
affairs of the city. 

Defense: A respectable number of Crownsguard protect 
Trostenwald, occasionally bolstering their defenses 
with hired mercenaries. 

Commerce: Most basic supplies and services are avail- 
able, with occasional rare goods from the Menagerie 
Coast. The city’s brewing industry is prominent and 
celebrated. 

Organizations: Small temples and shrines to 
empire-approved gods are present. The brewing fam- 
ilies compete for dominance while Myriad activity 
simmers in secret. 


The settlement of Trostenwald lies at the southern out- 
skirts of the Dwendalian Empire, on the banks of the 
Ustaloch. The seeds of civilization were planted here 
nearly two centuries ago when the fair weather and 
stretching grain fields gave rise to a booming brewing 
economy. Three major families of brewers and alewives 
earned fame throughout the empire by producing some 
of the best and most unique ales Dwendalians had 

ever tasted. 


A FINER, SWEETER GRAIN 

Ordering a “trost” has become common terminology in 
many taverns that serve the unique, sweeter ales of the 
settlement’s breweries. Many attribute the distinctive 
flavor to the waters of the nearby Ustaloch, while others 
attribute the flavor to an enchantment on the nearby 
soils hearkening back to the Age of Arcanum. Regard- 
less, the ale has become the flagship export for the set- 
tlement, causing tension between competing families. 
The reigning three breweries fight for dominance over 
farmland and promotion of their products, while occa- 
sionally allying to squash out any upstarts who wish to 
encroach on the already crowded market. The known 
family brands that produce Trostenwald ale are Hussel- 
dorf, Bambauch, and von Brandt. 


GOVERNMENT 

The city is headed by Starosta Fryda Langer, daughter 
of the last starosta who fell to illness two years ago. Her 
family has strong ties to the Bambauch family, leading 
some to mutter of favoritism, though they have no power 
to challenge her. Starosta Langer enjoys her position, of- 
ten making public shows of her power by holding small 
celebrations and contests in her honor. Those she did 
not favor before taking office are rumored to have disap- 
peared or been driven into poverty. 


CRIME 

Crime in Trostenwald usually involves petty thefts of 
shipments and burglaries rather than any major con- 
flicts. The Crownsguard have their pockets padded by 
the three brewing families to pay special mind to their 
wares. The Myriad has agents in Trostenwald, but the 
settlement is too sleepy to become an effective center of 
criminal activity. Myriad operatives do their part to push 
contraband smuggled in from the Clovis Concord north 
toward Zadash and Rexxentrum. 


GEOGRAPHY 

Trostenwald is a rural borough of simple homes, 
competing breweries, and fishing huts that form a 
kidney-shaped layout, wrapping around the western end 
of the Ustaloch. Travelers from the south consider Trost- 
enwald a simple and folksy welcome to the empire. 

The city is broken into three main sections. The 
Northward borders the wind-kissed grain fields, and 
houses the privately owned breweries and other local in- 
dustries. The Lochward forms the eastern portion of the 
settlement, comprised of residential neighborhoods and 
lakeside fishing communities. The southwest region is 
the Hillward, where the affluent and noble-blooded live 
among the guild halls, easily protected by the nearby 
Crownsguard barracks. 


‘TROSTENWALD ADVENTURES 
Characters in Trostenwald could get caught up in ad- 
ventures with the three brewing families or the Myriad. 
They might suddenly get called to action while deep in 
their cups. 

Grain Hijackers (Low Level). The characters are 
hired by one of the brewing families to find out who 
tore into their silo and stole their grain. The characters 
might suspect one of the other brewing families, but that 
notion is quickly dashed when a second family’s silo is 
similarly vandalized. The true culprits behind these at- 
tacks are two owlbears that meet each night and devour 
grain from a new silo as part of a courtship ritual. 

Find the Formula (Any Level). The characters are 
hired by an anonymous entity to uncover the secrets 
of Trostenwald’s ale. This means investigating all the 
rumors, infiltrating the brewing families to find recipes, 
and examining all the ingredients. The brewing families 
keep their secrets under lock and key. The plot thickens 
when the characters’ anonymous patron wants to make 
sure the recipe doesn’t get out, so they attempt to kill the 
characters when the mission is complete. This patron 
could be a member of the Myriad, a family from Shady- 
creek Run, or a rival brewery in another settlement. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


USTALOCH 


This beautiful lake is the largest body of fresh water 

in the southern reaches of the empire and the largest 
source of fish in the Marrow Valley. The city of Trosten- 
wald rests firmly against the western banks, tending to 
its waters and the bounties they provide. Clear waters 
aid fisherman in their trade, and the purity of the lake 
water is thought to be a key ingredient in Trostenwald’s 
sweet ales. Crownsguard patrol the shores of the lake 
at all hours to prevent anyone from tampering with the 
ecosystem that the locals depend on. 


MYTHS AND MURMURS 

The Ustaloch is not without dangerous creatures that 
stalk the deeper waters, and it has developed a number 
of myths, the most popular of which stems from the 
larger of its two islands, known as Crooked Stone. This 
island contains a small grove where the abandoned 
hovel of a feared witch still stands in disrepair. Many 
youth paddle out to the island to conduct rites of passage 
or pranks, though others warn that the witch still re- 
turns to her home for the colder seasons. 


USTALOCH ADVENTURES 

From fishing for food to hunting a witch, there are 
adventures aplenty for the characters to find in and 
around Ustaloch. 

Witch’s Amulet (Mid Level). Something in Ustaloch 
is turning the fish and crabs in the lake into skeletal 
abominations that attack boats and people near the 
shore. The characters are hired to uncover the source 
of this curse, which happens to be an amulet from the 
witch’s island grove that a group of children discovered 
and threw in the water. If the characters can find and 
retrieve the amulet, the witch (a night hag) might soon 
come looking for it. 

Tocreate the skeletal creatures in this adventure, take 
any aquatic beast and make the following changes to it: 


- The creature is undead and doesn't require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 

e It has immunity to poison damage and exhaustion, 
and it can’t be poisoned. 

e It has vulnerability to bludgeoning damage. 


VOLANTIM 


Population: 3,890 (96% aarakocra, 4% other races) 

Government: Vol’antim is ruled by a council of twelve 
elders known as the Horizon. 

Defense: The settlement’s perilous surroundings make 
it easily defensible, and trained aarakocra warriors 
vigilantly protect it from above and within. 

Commerce: General arms, simple supplies, and natural 
goods can be purchased or traded here. Lodging for 
guests is sparse. 

Organizations: Dual temples to both Melora and 
Erathis mark the cliff face and interior caverns. No 
major organizations make their home here. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


The hidden cliffside settlement of Vol’antim is nestled 
deep within the heart of the Cyrios Mountains. Tucked 
beneath an unreachable mountain precipice that soars 
over a thousand feet in the air above jagged rocks and 
brush, the community is home to aarakocra who live 

in relative seclusion. Few ever see these aarakocra, as 
they keep to the Cyrios Mountains and watch intently for 
uninvited guests. 

The denizens of Vol’antim are proud of their isolation- 
ism and their adherence to the ancient ways of Melora 
the Wild Mother. For generations, they have carved 
their homes into the mountain cliffs. There are over a 
hundred caves adorned with colorful banners that mark 
the entrances to tunnels. These tunnels twist into a vast 
cavern, which houses the town proper. 


AERIAL ENEMIES 

The skies above the Cyrios Mountains are a battle- 
ground between the aarakocra of Vol’antim and their an- 
cient enemies, the gorefeather harpies. Despite the bird- 
folk’s best efforts, the gorefeather clan has only grown 
larger over time. Some fear that their matron has forged 
a pact with an evil power that has granted her people a 
stronger brood with each passing generation. 


MYTHICAL GUARDIANS 

While the more learned people of Wildemount know 
of and understand the nature of the winged citizens of 
Vol’'antim, the common folk often only catch occasional 
glimpses of them in the sky, and few people can claim 
to have met one. A handful of rural communities in the 
Truscan Vale refer to the flying creatures as their pro- 
tectors and leave them small offerings before making 
dangerous treks in the region. The rare arrival of an 
aarakocra in one of these communities is a major event 
for the locals, and they shower the winged herald with 
gifts, much to the aarakocra’s embarrassment. 


GOVERNMENT 

The community is led by a dozen elders called the Hori- 
zon. Each elder chooses their successor on their death- 
bed; if no successor is named before the elder expires, 
one is chosen by the remaining Horizon members. 
When there is disagreement within the Horizon, the el- 
dest member makes the final decision and all others re- 
spectfully follow. The community’s laws are structured 
around the tenets of Melora and the respect that she has 
for her lover, Erathis the Law Bearer. Their foremost 
creed is that natural life is sacred within the ways of na- 
ture and must be protected. 


CRIME 

The culture of Vol’antim eschews criminal behavior and 
acting outside the interests of the community. However, 
there are tales of past aarakocra who fell from the grace 
of Melora and followed a selfish path, and these figures 
were often punished with exile. Visiting outsiders have 
also been known to bring criminal activity to the city, 
contributing to the mistrust of those who come to the 
cliffs unbidden. 


GEOGRAPHY 

Standing high above a rocky valley, the mountain spire 
curls at its peak, forming a protective lip over the cliff 
face where the numerous cave entrances to the city are 
visible. Only accessible via flight, each entrance bears 
a small shelf or lip for arrival, often bearing banners or 
thatched decor to signify what is found within. Beyond 
these caves lies a network of small tunnels that open 
into a shared interior cavern, in the middle of which a 
one-hundred-foot-tall stalagmite merges with a match- 
ing stalactite to form a great pillar riddled with caves 
that connect to homesteads in the cavern walls via 
bridges and ropes. 


VOL'ANTIM ADVENTURES 

If the characters earn the respect of the aarakocra of 
Vol’antim, they could be asked to help keep the Cyrios 
Mountains free from evil. If the characters instead 
earn their ire, they would do well to steer clear of the 
mountains. 

Break a Few Eggs (Low Level). The characters are 
asked by the aarakocra of Vol’antim to help destroy a 
nest of gorefeather harpies. During the quest, the char- 
acters uncover a clutch of harpy eggs, which the aarako- 
cra believe should be destroyed, since legends say that 
each generation of harpies is stronger than the last. If 
the characters destroy the eggs, they will drive the har- 
pies to greater acts of destruction. But they refuse, how 
might the aarakocra react? 


WUYUN GATE 


The southernmost boundary of the Dwendalian Empire, 


the Wuyun Gate rests within the Wuyun Gorge where 
the Ashkeeper Peaks meet the Cyrios Mountains. This 
imposing gate stands roughly twenty feet tall and fifteen 
feet wide, opening when passage is given to travelers 
seeking to enter or exit the empire. A wall of stone 
twenty-five feet tall continues from each side of the gate, 
stretching to meet the nearby mountains. These walls 
are topped by patrolling Crownsguard whose weapons 
are always at the ready. Originally built as a military for- 
tification to prevent the Clovis Concord from assaulting 
the empire, it now acts as a waypoint on the trade route, 
and occasionally as a Righteous Brand outpost when 
dangerous creatures begin to wander too far from the 
nearby mountain ranges. 


WUYUN GATE ADVENTURES 
The characters could help defend the Wuyun Gate out- 
post when monsters attack and hold the gate until rein- 
forcements arrive, or they could reclaim the gate for the 
empire after it falls. 

Take Back the Gate (Mid Level). As the characters 
travel through the region, they need to pass through 
the gate. When they get to the outpost, they learn that 
monsters from the mountains (gnolls, hobgoblins, orcs, 
or trolls) murdered the Crownsguard and have claimed 
the gate as their own. From this secure position, they 
launch more raids into the Marrow Valley. Someone has 
to stop them and take back the gate. 


ZADASH 


Population: 89,210 (70% humans, 11% halflings, 9% 
dwarves, 10% other races) 

Government: Starosta Wyatt Fedar is the city’s nominal 
leader, but nothing gets done without the assent of the 
lawmaster, other Crown-appointed officials, and the 
wealthy elite. 

Defense: An impressive host of Crownsguard is inte- 
grated throughout the city, while a sizable legion of 
Righteous Brand soldiers is stationed within the Sig- 
net Ramparts. Political figures and nobles also employ 
personal guards. 

Commerce: Nearly all goods and services are available 
in Zadash, including magic items. Illegal imports and 
contraband are found in underground circles. 

Organizations: Major temples to empire-approved gods 
are scattered throughout the city. The Cerberus As- 
sembly holds great sway, as do the high nobility and 
the guildmasters. The Myriad, once thought banished, 
is still deeply entrenched in the city’s businesses. 


Zadash was the capital of the Julous Dominion before it 
was conquered by the Dwendalian Empire nearly two 
centuries ago. Now the city is the central crossroads of 
the southern region of the empire and a smaller sister 
city to the capital of Rexxentrum. Zadash accommo- 
dates heavy traffic through its winding streets, serving 
noble diplomats, countless trade caravans, and rushing 
messengers from all across Western Wynandir and the 
Menagerie Coast. The city’s ruling class is comprised 
of powerful merchant lords and ladies who oversee the 
guilds that control the markets throughout the city. 
Zadash is a bastion of law, civilization, and military 
might in the Marrow Valley, whose small townships 
often escape imperial scrutiny. The city is home to the 
Hall of Erudition, an extension of the Soltryce Academy 
and foothold of power for the Cerberus Assembly. As 
a common waypoint for travelers to and from Rexxen- 
trum, the city offers many forms of entertainment and 
recreation. It also boasts the largest military force in the 
southern end of the empire. 


GOVERNMENT 

The majority of day-to-day business and politics are 
overseen by Starosta Wyatt Fedar, Lawmaster Orentha 
Stonegrasp, and High-Richter Dolan Thyme, who must 
work closely to manage the large, sprawling city. How- 
ever, it is common knowledge that the starosta is deep 
in the pockets of the city’s wealthiest families, and is 
often manipulated by those powers without the people’s 
best interests at heart. Community leaders are rightfully 
furious about the starosta’s corruption, but Starosta Wy- 
att is finding it difficult to gain support from the capital, 
which is focused on the war with Xhorhas. The growing 
hum of unrest makes him increasingly nervous. 


CRIME 

Criminal elements are part of the very fabric of the city. 
Independent swindlers make their way through the 
poorer districts, pickpocketing freely behind the backs 
of overworked Crownsguard. The Myriad has patsies in 
every industry and most political offices, too. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


A crime boss known in some circles as the Gentleman 
runs a thieves’ guild based in a network of underground 
tunnels called the Underworks. Crime is extremely 
profitable in Zadash, and has been fine-tuned for genera- 
tions to be efficient, hard to trace, and largely invisible to 
the untrained eye. 


GEOGRAPHY 

Zadash has a mix of older Julous architecture and mod- 
ern Dwendalian construction, giving the picturesque, 
triangular city a varied and mismatched look. Zadash 

is broken into five major districts: the Outersteads, the 
Pentamarket, the Innerstead Sprawl, the Tri-Spires, and 
the Signet Wall. 

The Outersteads. Divided into the East and West Ou- 
tersteads, this area is home to the poor and powerless of 
the city, a collection of slums and neighborhoods of hov- 
els that cluster around and beyond the city walls. The 
majority of folks who live within these areas are hum- 
ble crafters hoping to catch the eye of traders passing 
through, workers who handle the less desirable careers 
that keep the city functioning, or the destitute who are 
trying to regain control of their lives. Many sections are 
humble but welcoming, with family communities who 
work together to keep the peace when the Crownsguard 
are too sparse or too uncaring to watch over them. The 
regions beyond the walls are equal parts farming com- 
munities and tent cities. However, some areas of the 
Outersteads have become hotbeds for criminal activity, 
with locals disappearing often enough to cause discon- 
tent with the empire’s indifference. 


PENTAMARKET OF ZADASH 


The Pentamarket. The Pentamarket is the bustling 
heart of commerce, a massive bazaar that rests at the 
junction of the city’s five main roads. Here, all man- 
ner of guild shops and businesses provide both wares 
and lodging for droves of weary travelers. During 
many calendar holidays, this region of the city is 
flamboyantly decorated, and music and games fill the 
streets surrounding the crafters’ temple, Hearth of the 
All-Hammer, and the massive gladiatorial arena known 
as the Victory Pit. 

The Innerstead Sprawl. A labyrinth of houses owned 
by the working-class people of Zadash, the Sprawl 
bends between the other districts, acting as the bound- 
ary between them. Except for a few of the temples, such 
as the Valley Archive of the Cobalt Soul, the Platinum 
we R E 

THE INVULNERABLE VAGRANT 


There are few locations in the empire where enchantments 
and arcane protections are readily available for sale, as the 
cost of such devices is prohibitive for the majority of the 
populace. Most recovered magic items find their way to 
black markets, are sold through auction houses, get taken 
by deft thieves, or wind up in the collection of some afflu- 
ent family. 

This makes the success of the Invulnerable Vagrant, one 
of the few magic item retailers in Wildemount, unique. The 
Vagrant, established in 814 PD, is owned and operated by 
a city-bred firbolg called Pumat Sol and his team of identi- 
cal quadruplets—that is, his three arcane simulacra. Many 
visitthis establishment simply to marvel at the curious 
atmosphere and equally curious staff. 

Pumat Sol was trained by Headmaster Oremid Hass of 
the Halls of Erudition, but he tends to keep quiet about the 
specifics of his ties to the Cerberus Assembly. 


sag" a Satie 


House, and the King’s Hall, much of the architecture is 
simple and built for function. 

The Tri-Spires. The Tri-Spires are known throughout 
the walls of Zadash as the neighborhood of the noble 
elite and the wealthy. Built on the ruins of the old Pious 
District after the fall of the Julous Dominion, the Tri- 
Spires now stand as the center of aristocracy and higher 
learning within the city—and, indeed, throughout the 
empire, second only to Rexxentrum. The region takes its 
name from the three large, uniquely constructed towers 
that lord over the skyline: the Zauberspire, the Constel- 
lation Bridge, and the Triumph Chime. The Zauberspire 
is the central tower of the Halls of Erudition, a beautiful 
ivory campus that is an extension of the Soltryce Acad- 
emy. The Constellation Bridge looms over the Gilded 
Willows neighborhood as an extremely tall, thin watch- 
tower that offers an incredible view of the entire city and 
the Marrow Valley beyond. Once a temple to Avandra, 
The Triumph Chime is now a squat, seven-story belfry 
outfitted with sleeping chambers, bars, and a raucous 
gambling hall. 

The Signet Wall. The Signet Wall encloses the east- 
ern end of the city and houses Zadash’s reserve force 
of Righteous Brand soldiers. The Signet Ramparts 
are a collection of four simple stone and wood build- 
ings that act as barracks and living quarters for all 
local Crownsguard. The clangs of training blades and 
blacksmiths’ hammers fill the air for half the day, while 
drinking songs and bawdy rhymes fill the other half. 
Beyond those grounds lies the dark stone entrance to 
the impressive, eight-floor, subterranean prison known 
as the Umber Dungeon, where criminals from the 
streets of Zadash are held and punished, with the most 
dangerous imprisoned in the deepest cells. The Shrine 
of the Dawn, a temple of pale stone and stained glass 
dedicated to Pelor the Dawn Father, where both civil- 
ians and soldiers can worship, marks the center of the 
district. The eastern wall ends in the Marrow Keeps of 
the Righteous Brand, a massive stronghold surrounded 
by a half-dozen smaller fortifications that make up the 
southern bastion of the Crown’s military power. 


ZADASH ADVENTURES 
As a large city full of travelers, criminals, and politi- 
cians, Zadash has plenty of opportunities for adventure. 

Send a Message (Mid Level). The characters are 
hired—or blackmailed—by the Myriad to convince Sta- 
rosta Wyatt Fedar to let the Myriad quell unrest in the 
city in exchange for favors from the city leader. If the sta- 
rosta accepts, the Myriad asks the characters to crack 
down on non-Myriad crime in the city. If the starosta 
refuses, the Myriad asks the characters to run amok, 
causing and inspiring as much chaos as possible until 
the starosta relents. 

Victory Breakout (High Level). The characters are 
in Zadash when several monsters are freed from their 
confines in the Victory Pit. These monsters—an abomi- 
nable yeti, a behir, a hydra, a tyrannosaurus rex, and 
others, tear through the streets, leaving carnage in their 
wake. Did these monsters escape by themselves, or did 
someone else free them to distract the Crownsguard 
and characters while another crime took place? 


ZEMNI FIELDS 


Along the frost-dappled fields of the northern plains, 
the heart of the Dwendalian Empire is formed by a 
sprawl of dirt-packed roads, dense forests, and austere 
townships that fight back the dangerous creatures of the 
wilderness. Divided from the southern Marrow Valley 
by the mountains of the Silberquel Ridge, this region is 
known for its gray skies, fits of cold rain, and occasional 
snowfall, keeping the feet of the denizens muddy and 
their crops healthy. The Dunrock Mountains shield the 
people from the threats that loom beyond the boundar- 
ies of the king’s rule, with the Rockguard Garrison to 
the east holding firm against the deadly armies of the 
Kryn Dynasty and the dangers that brew beyond the 
Ashkeeper Peaks. Home to the mighty imperial capital 
of Rexxentrum, these fields are the seat of power and 
commerce for the empire. Diplomats often find them- 
selves traveling to and from the Zemni Fields, while 
traders and merchants from around the world traverse 
the long roads in hopes of making their fortunes in the 
capital city. Even so, the growing ferocity from beasts 
and creatures that share this region mingle with the 
whispers of a recovering criminal element and the es- 
calating war with the Kryn to create a perpetual air of 
tension and anxiety. 


AMBER CROSSROADS 


The Amber Road and the Havenpath Road merge with 
the Cloakjaunt Path and the Glory Run road to form a 
great crossroads, where a small makeshift marketplace 
has sprung up. Mercenaries flock here to find work 
among traveling caravans, and merchants exchange 
goods in the absence of imperial oversight before head- 
ing into the nearby cities to set up shop. Wandering 
performers bring color and life to the crossroads, while 
charlatans of all walks of life take advantage of the fact 
that the market has no Crownsguard presence. 


AMBER CROSSROADS ADVENTURES 
The conjunction of trade and travel creates a location 
rife with mystery, danger, and the need for adventurers. 

Rob from the Rich (Low Level). Arriving just in time 
for a semiannual bazaar known as the Carnival of Coin, 
the characters begin to notice a strange, trance-like 
state that temporarily overtakes a number of wealthy 
merchants, who then sell off their most expensive wares 
for next to nothing. These merchants hire the charac- 
ters to find the source of this enchantment, which turns 
out to be a wandering band of charlatans who seek to 
redistribute wealth to the poor of the Marrow Valley. 
The characters must decide whether they wish to turn 
in these thieves for rewards from the merchants, or let 
them go and risk becoming hunted alongside them. 

War Plans (Mid Level). The characters are hired by 
the Myriad or the Kryn Dynasty to intercept imperial 
documents as they travel from Rexxentrum to Zadash. 
The first courier takes the documents as far as the 
crossroads before handling them off to a second courier. 
Both couriers are knights of the Crownsguard mounted 
on warhorses. The documents are war plans bearing 
magical wards and the seal of the king. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


95 


9 6 


BLUMENTHAL 


Population: 3,850 (71% humans, 12% dwarves, 11% 
elves, 6% other races) 

Government: Starosta Judus Olessia is the appointed 
leader of Blumenthal, but the countless directives 
from Rexxentrum often bypass him entirely. 

Defense: A respectable cadre of Crownsguard and a 
small body of Righteous Brand soldiers keep the farm- 
steads of Blumenthal safe. 

Commerce: While food, produce, and basic supplies 
are available, little else can be found since most trade 
heads straight to the capital. 

Organizations: A temple to Pelor stands vigil over the 
heart of the farmland. The farming guilds all work un- 
der the strict expectations of the Crown. 


A sprawling collection of rural farmsteads connected by 
administration buildings, Blumenthal is Rexxentrum’s 
main source of produce and meat. Numerous govern- 
ment-owned fields and orchards harvest cold-weather 
crops and livestock, and families chosen to tend to the 
land are paid by the Crown to gather their goods and 
deliver them to the gates of the capital. Some who till 
the land are frustrated that they don’t own their plots 
outright, but with generational incentives for those who 
keep to the family plot like their ancestors, others see it 
as investment toward eventually living in greater com- 
fort than the typical farmer. 

As Rexxentrum’s survival depends on Blumenthal’s 
fields, the Crown has erected dozens of Crownsguard 
watchtowers at the corner farmers’ plots to watch for 
thieves, scavengers, and monstrous predators. The 
people of Blumenthal can’t help but feel the watchful 
eye of the Crown on them at all times, looming over 
their work and dampening their spirits. Yet even in such 
troubled times, StarostaJudus Olessia works directly 
with Argonomist June Wiston to improve the lives of the 
hard-working farmers who support the success of Blu- 
menthal—and thus of the empire. 


BLUMENTHAL ADVENTURES 

Since Blumenthal’s fields are critical to the survival of 
the people of Rexxentrum, adventurers might be hired 
by the empire to investigate disappearing or dying 
animals or crops, or to stop monster raids from the 
Silberquel Ridge. Adventurers who work for the Kryn 
Dynasty could be asked to destroy crops or poison 
goods headed for Rexxentrum. 

Bad Beef (Low Level). Tainted beef from three differ- 
ent cattle farms in Blumenthal has killed several people 
in Rexxentrum. Crownsguard investigators concluded 
that the meat was intentionally poisoned and hire the 
characters to find the culprits. Why hire outsiders? The 
Crownsguard in Blumenthal is on the list of suspects, 
since they escorted the meat to Rexxentrum. Of course, 
the list of suspects doesn’t stop there. Did the farmers 
work together because they abhor living under imperial 
rule? Is there an agent of the Kryn within Blumenthal? 
Is someone using enchantment magic ffom afar to make 
farmhands poison beef? One thing is for sure: the cul- 
prits are willing to kill and won't come quietly. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


BYSAES TYL 


Population: 19,090 (83% elves, 7% humans, 10% 
other races) 

Government: The Ring of Three reluctantly cooperates 
with the appointed starosta, Uther Prent, to govern the 
city. Exalted elven houses also work with the Ring of 
Three to preserve their culture under imperial rule. 

Defense: Both local and assigned Crownsguard stand 
ready to defend the city. 

Commerce: Nearly any equipment, goods, or services 
are available, though rarer supplies are generally kept 
from non-elven travelers. 

Organizations: While smaller temples dedicated to the 
empire-approved gods are present, shrines to Corel- 
lon, Melora, and Sehanine hide in plain sight. The 
beginnings of Myriad influence are taking hold. 


The rustic elven city of Bysaes Tyl is tucked away in the 
northern region of the Pearlbow Wilderness. Built syn- 
ergistically within the tangled boreal forests, this hidden 
settlement of tall wooden arches and warm hearths sits 
below a massive network of treehouses and bridges that 
form the canopy and upper levels of the city. The streets 
are made of smooth stones set in packed earth, gently 
enchanted to warm the pathways and melt the frequent 
snow. Large, bowed tutoring halls hold lectures for the 
masses, while cleared patches of forest facilitate the 
training of warriors in the defense of both the city and 
the empire. 

Bysaes Tyl was founded by elves who fled the destruc- 
tion of Molaesmyr in the Savalirwood and quietly began 
to build a new home away from the eyes of the expand- 
ing empire. The elves of Bysaes Tyl struggled through 
the harsh winters for many years as they constructed 
their homestead, leaving the past behind to look to the 
future of their society. Adversity bred a hard, guarded, 
and tight-knit people. 

When the Crown discovered that an independent 
city-state had formed within imperial territory, an im- 
perial envoy was dispatched to present the elves with 
an ultimatum: accept Dwendalian rule or prepare for 
the empire to claim sovereignty over Bysaes Tyl by 
force. The Ring of Three, the elven elders, convened 
and agreed not to fight. Many of their kind would die in 
a senseless war—and perhaps the elves would outlive 
their imperial rulers many years hence. They agreed to 
submit and follow imperial laws and pay imperial taxes, 
under the condition that they could maintain some level 
of cultural autonomy within their city. 

The elves guard the secrets of their culture as best 
they can, maintaining a tenuousrelationship with the 
Crown that holds to this day. 


LEVERAGING A LEGACY 

Bysaes Tyl remains the only city of elven creation within 
the Dwendalian Empire. The denizens feel an intense 
need to protect and maintain their cultural legacy, and 
to search for clues surrounding the mysterious destruc- 
tion of their ancestral home. As per the agreement 
between Bysaes Tyl and the empire, the Ring of Three 
has incorporated some elements of imperial society into 
their own and shared a number of arcane secrets and 


Ef Z 


DWEND AE] N = 


DN 
4 _Kaltenloch oe 


F Ys 
E R a 
he O, 


Ha Venp, 


y 
SZ 
Pas ed 


= 5 
ZS we 
m= LeEMND 


4 


= 
> Bromkiln 


Mare 3.4: Zemni FieLos 


recovered artifacts from Molaesmyr with the empire in 
exchange for their city’s cultural autonomy. The elves 
wish to preserve their unique art and music, their craft- 
ing skills and techniques, and knowledge gleaned from 
the ruins of Molaesmyr that might decide the future of 
their people. The rumors that secrets and relics within 
Bysaes Tyl still remain hidden from the Crown and the 
Cerberus Assembly heighten the tension between the 
starosta and the Ring of Three, in addition to the slowly 
increasing imperial oversight. 


GOVERNMENT 

As part ofthe agreement that brought the city into the 
fold of the Crown, the Ring of Three, comprised of the 
elven nobles Allusus Dawyne, Gwey Yethneiros, and 
Amra Balleei, still oversee most aspects of city life. They 
must, however, work very closely with Starosta Uther 
Prent and his appointed counselors when governing 
the infrastructure and enforcement of law and order. 
Uther’s prejudice against elves is well-known through- 
out the empire, and many believe this is why he was 
chosen for his position. The Ring of Three continues to 
deftly undermine Uther’s leadership while simultane- 
ously stroking his ego, a dance that they have thus far 
executed with grace but which cannot continue forever. 


NK 
Ruinsof» 
Molaesmyry 
A J 


Ne AADA < 


‘Dunroc 
y NENIES 
at 


©) Blumenthal, E 


filebenda Swamp. 
A 


esl 


: = 
an io 
Berleben\o V 
` a 


“ Egelin — 4 
Quarry 4 


hee 5 
| E 2 
; H mE a 


J, 


CRIME 

The elves ofthe city rarely engage in criminal activity, 
but escalating theft and brutality from non-elven impe- 
rial citizens living within—or passing through—Bysaes 
Tyl is a problem that the starosta largely ignores. Agents 
of the scattered Myriad have offered to help the Ring 
of Three manipulate the starosta and his council. The 
Ring of Three are weighing the benefits of letting an 
unlawful organization into their midst to help their op- 
pressed people against the long-term consequences of 
working with such untrustworthy allies. 


GEOGRAPHY 

The city exists partially on the forest floor and partially 
within and around the trees, giving the settlement an 

air of rustic nostalgia that tempers its elven mystique. 
The walled surface streets are known as the Rough, 

or Talan, where structures weave between rocks and 
wide-trunked trees, giving a slanted octagonal shape 

to the tall, wooden exterior walls of the city. Nearly all 
structures here are built from pine and other taiga trees, 
favoring designs that resemble a bowed arch rising to an 
apex. Spiraling staircases known as the Shrouds, or Ha- 
lya, twist around and within trees, climbing up to the el- 
evated walkways and buildings amid the forest canopy. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


TAND R A A S 4d -ruan ži £ : 


98 


Bysaes Tyl 


BYSAES TYL ADVENTURES 

The tension between the Crown andthe elves in Bysaes 
Tyl plays a part in any of the city’s adventures. Elves 
trying to maintain their cultural connection with nature 
and their lost homeland of Molaesmyr could look to 
adventurers for aid, the Crown could use help keeping 
the peace, and the Myriad could hire the characters to 
infiltrate the city. 

Elves, Arise (Mid Level). A group of elf assassins 
unhappy with the Crown's leadership hatch a plot to 
simultaneously assassinate the Ring of Three, Starosta 
Uther Prent, and other important figures in Bysaes Tyl. 
They believe that with the Crown distracted bythe war, 
now is a perfect time to rise up and take back their city. 
The characters get wind of the plot and must decide 
whether to ignore, stop, or support the assassins. 

Evil, Arise (Epic Level). A powerful artifact of the 
long-deceased Archmage Oleyahs has been recovered 
from the ruins of Molaesmyr and is secretly in transit 
to Bysaes Tyl. Researchers hope that this object holds 
a key to understanding the destruction of their ances- 
tral home, but when the object arrives, it is revealed to 
instead be a deceptive casing for the archmage’s demi- 
lich form. A plague of arcane terror rains on Bysaes 
Tyl, and the characters are tasked by the Ring of Three 
to destroy or banish the demilich Oleyahs from the 
burning city. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


DRUVENLODE 


Population: 12,110 (70% humans, 14% dwarves, 9% 
elves, 7% other races) 

Government: The city is run by Starosta Uvilia Whek, 
who oversees the mining guilds. Her rule is sup- 
ported by Watchmaster Quin Theramast and her 
Crownsguard. 

Defense: A regiment of Crownsguard help protect the 
city, as well as the mines. Guildmasters and nobles 
also maintain personal guards. 

Commerce: Basic supplies, inns, and taverns are easy 
to find here. Ore and ingots are readily available, and 
rough, rare metals are traded on occasion. 

Organizations: Several temples can be found across 
the city. While smaller organizations exist within the 
city, the mining guilds are by far the most powerful 
and wealthy merchant groups. 


Established in the early years following the Calamity, 
Druvenlode is the primary source of precious metal in 
Western Wynandir. Located at the western base of the 
Silberquel Ridge by the mouth of the largest silver vein 
ever found on the continent. Dusty from wind-swept 
mountain dirt that turns to mud in the wetter seasons, 
Druvenlode is a far cry from beautiful Rexxentrum or 
any of the pastoral villages of the empire. Though the 
city is wealthy, buildings here were designed for func- 
tion and storage while the talented architects focused on 
the noble homesteads and wards of the capital, leaving 
Druvenlode seemingly rough and rustic by comparison. 


GOVERNMENT 

Starosta Uvilia Whek oversees all major mining opera- 
tions, and the larger mining guilds report directly to her. 
Maintenance of these mines also requires constantly 
protecting the workers and battling the dangerous crea- 
tures of the Silberquel Ridge, creating a thriving market 
for mercenary work when the Crownsguard are too 
busy—or too cowardly. The majority of the population 
works directly in or adjacent to the mining industry, 
laboring within the mines and tunnels, categorizing 

and smelting recovered minerals and metals, or forging 
materials into useful tools for distribution across West- 
ern Wynandir. 


CRIME 

The local Crownsguard do their best to keep the peace, 
but with most eyes looking east to the war, the streets 
are ripe for criminal activity. Theft of goods and ore 

is increasing, and a call for additional, outside aid 
grows with it. 


GEOGRAPHY 

Druvenlode is divided into three main areas. Most 
citizens live in the ramshackle Dustbellows, where 

the clustered mass of simple hovels and retrofitted 
warehouses house those living hand-to-mouth. In these 
dreary streets, the need for distraction leads to a pleth- 
ora of experimental music and dance at street corners 
and simple taverns. Silverstreet is a long thoroughfare 
where the talented folk of Druvenlode hawk their wares, 
advertise their skills, and seek legal ways to earn an 
income under the watch of the empire. The street is 
bookended bytwo massive gambling taverns that vie for 
dominance: the Sterling Satchel and the Cabin of For- 
tune. The Pillars is the industrial part of the city, where 
dark columns of smoke and exhaust belch forth from 
the massive smelting operations that dot the landscape. 
Most miners and physical laborers work in this area, 
and many of them live in the same soot-dusted factories 
where they toil. 


DRUVENLODE ADVENTURES 

Adventure can be found in Druvenlode’s mines, which 
occasionally fill up with burrowing beasts, as well as in 
the city proper, where shady characters are often found 
indulging in gambling or petty theft. 

Fire inthe Mines (Mid Level). A being made of fire 
attacked miners from the Surgoth Guild who were 
working a vein of silver ore. The miners survived but 
are too scared to go back into the mine. Instead, they 
gamble their savings away at the Sterling Satchel. If the 
characters investigate, they find a path of destruction in 
the mine that leads to a fire elemental under the control 
of Casper Windmouth (neutral evil, male, human mage). 
Casper is a gambler with many debts to pay, so he took a 
job from an anonymous source to scare the miners out. 
Was it a rival miner’s guild? Was it the proprietors of the 
Sterling Satchel, looking to hang on to their customers 
day and night? Or was it the owner of the Cabin of For- 
tune, hoping to bankrupt their competitor’s clients? 


DUNROCK MOUNTAINS 


The snow-dusted peaks of the Dunrock Mountains 
encircle the northern end of Western Wynandir, separat- 
ing the Dwendalian Empire’s territory from the scarred 
northern region of the Greying Wildlands. This majestic 
chain of rocky mountaintops is a snow-dappled bulwark 
against the corruption that torments the Savalirwood. 
The steep grades and icy terrain make the Dunrock 
Mountains perilous to traverse, and few beyond smug- 
glers and gutsy hunters find reason to climb far into 
these sierras. Dappled with clusters of dense pine trees 
and cold streams, these beautiful mountains would be 
picturesque were it not for the roaming giants and wild 
griffons that hunt among the peaks. 

Beneath the surface, the Dunrock Mountains contain 
a vast network of tunnels and caverns carved by the 
dwarves of Grimgolir before the Calamity, as well as 
hidden, collapsible passages utilized by the Kryn Dy- 
nasty to infiltrate the empire during this time of war. 


DUNROCK MOUNTAINS ADVENTURES 
These rocky peaks are home to many creatures and se- 
crets beyond the empire’s influence. 

The Crawling Caverns (Mid to High Level). Hidden 
deep in the heart of the Dunrocks are the forgotten 
depths of the Bastille of Torment, a massive, multilevel 
dungeon where Torog tortured the enemies of the Be- 
trayer Gods during the Age of Arcanum. This horrifying 
abandoned prison is now run by a cabal of spirit nagas, 
who guard the many arcane secrets and treasures left 
by the Betrayers. 


ERDELOCH 


The Erdeloch is the largest lake in Western Wynandir, 
often used as a landmark for travelers making their 
way toward the capital. Its chilled waters are the most 
prolific site for freshwater fishing in the empire, and the 
south side of the Erdeloch sees quite a number of large 
and small fishing vessels moving in and out of Odessloe 
daily. The many rivers that intersect with the lake make 
it a nexus of river transport within the empire, espe- 
cially for loggers. The north shores, nestled within the 
Pearlbow Wilderness, are known to be filled with local 
wildlife and indigenous monsters, so few dare make 
landfall near the treeline at night. 


ICEHAVEN 


Population: 5,090 (71% humans, 12% elves, 10% 
dwarves, 7% other races) 

Government: Though technically run by Ernath Noack, 
the Crown-appointed starosta, the town is mostly 
ruled by a committee of locals who pay little mind to 
the will of the Dwendalian Empire. 

Defense: A small company of Crownsguard keeps the 
peace, while a fresh group of Righteous Brand sol- 
diers have been assigned to the docks. 

Commerce: Resources are limited, so mostly basic 
supplies and standard arms are available. Relics 
recovered from Eiselcross can occasionally pass 
through, providing strange and exotic curiosities for 
acquisition. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 99 


100 


Organizations: Simple temples mark city squares, 
while hidden shrines to Crown-forbidden gods lurk 
on the outskirts of the town. The empire continues 
to push for stronger influence, and Myriad operatives 
interested in Eiselcross’s mysteries are also beginning 
to work their way into Icehaven. 


Along the icy northeastern shores of the Zemni Fields 
stands the only port in Western Wynandir. Icehaven is 
home to the dozen or so ships in the region outfitted 

to wander the ice floes of the Frigid Depths, and is the 
central trade post and only open port for hunters and 
adventurers who brave the Saltwallow Bog or the frozen 
north toward Eiselcross. The inhabitants of Icehaven 
earn their living ice fishing within the oft-frozen Kalten- 
loch, or are trappers who stalk the Velvin Thicket or 
edges of the Pearlbow Wilderness and return to peddle 
their furs and meats. Some more confident individuals 
might try their hand at netting some Eiselcrosscrab, a 
rare delicacy throughout the empire, but the shifting, 
freezing weather makes such endeavors dangerous. 


A SUDDEN CONCERN 

Asthe war with the Kryn Dynasty escalated far to the 
east, few eyes were on the backwater port of Icehaven 
until fishers and explorers began to return from ex- 
peditions to Eiselcross with stories of odd ruins and 
even odder creatures. Rumors of pre-Calamity artifacts 
began to spread among the nobles of Rexxentrum, un- 
til the king and the Cerberus Assembly suddenly took 
an interest. With an influx of soldiers, sellswords, and 
fortune-seekers looking to make their way to the myste- 
rious landmass, Icehaven and its residents are trying to 
adapt to the unexpected attention. 


GOVERNMENT 

While Icehaven is rarely of concern to the Dwendalian 
Empire, the town has a starosta. Currently the office is 
held by Ernath Noack, an older man who survived an 
extensive forty-year career as an Eiselcross crab fisher- 
man. The local government is mostly left well enough 
alone except when it comes time for the Crown’s tithe 
collectors to exact taxes. This yearly event has become 
something of an occasion to the lower-class fisher 
folk, who harangue the tithe collectors with fusillades 
of insults and endless pranks, each more humiliating 
than the last. 


CRIME 

Due tothe relative lack of imperial oversight and the 
harsh weather, many of the Crownsguard assigned to 
Icehaven put minimal effort into their watch, leaving 
room for laws to be bent or broken. The general sense 
of being at the end of the world during the long winter 
makes many within the town feel disconnected from 
the empire and its laws, which is both liberating and 
disconcerting. 


GEOGRAPHY 

Surrounding the small inlet harbor, Icehaven is a 
cramped, crescent-shaped town of snow-coated log cab- 
ins and lantern-lined street corners. The city is divided 
into two main areas: the Harborline, where the docks 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


house the fishing vessels and the few ice-ready ships, 
and the Haven, where the crowded buildings seem to be 
clustered together for warmth. The streets shift between 
snowy mud and slicks of ice, curving through twisting 
alleys in a haphazard layout. 


ICEHAVEN ADVENTURES 

As a remote port town, Icehaven has need of adventur- 
ers to enforce the law, escort caravans, and find supplies 
in the wilderness. 

Snowed In (Any Level). While the characters are in 
Icehaven, a terrible blizzard strikes, leaving many resi- 
dents to fend for themselves inside their homes. As the 
snowdrifts rise and wind howls, a gang of criminals or 
monsters comes in to cause mayhem and take whatever 
they like. If the characters don’t brave the snow to stop 
these villains, no one will. 


KALTENLOCH 


The harsh winters in the region cause the Kaltenloch to 
remain frozen over for three to four months out of the 
year, but the cold lake provides fish to the community of 
Icehaven year-round. With the ice comes a mysterious 
low mist that many say is made up of the spirits of fallen 
Calamity soldiers, looking for warmth to steal. 


NOGVUROT 


Population: 15,270 (70% humans, 17% dwarves, 8% 
elves, 5% other races) 

Government: Starosta Brumae Luddie handles the 
affairs of the city with the support of the lawmaster’s 
regiment of Crownsguard. Nobles under the starosta 
handle in local administration. 

Defense: A number of Crownsguard share protective 
duties with a regiment of Righteous Brand soldiers 
called the Last Aegis. 

Commerce: Well-stocked trading posts and inns make 
most supplies readily available, though rare or exotic 
goods are difficult to locate. 

Organizations: There are temples to empire-approved 
gods, and most businesses are independently run 
without the oversight of a guild. 


A major stop along the Glory Run Road heading east- 
ward from the capital, Nogvurot hosts travelers making 
their way through the empire, many of whom need 
provisions and like to buy locally made trinkets as sou- 
venirs of their journey. There is some business to be had 
in a small mine at the base of the Dunrock Mountains to 
the north of the city, but most Nogvurot folk earn their 
keep by crafting, farming, or joining the local military. 


A HEALTHY DEFENSE 

Originally founded as a guard post near the Quannah 
Breach to watch for deadly creatures wandering from 
the Savalirwood, this settlement has since grown to be 
a fair-sized military reserve for the Righteous Brand. 
The regiment of the Righteous Brand stationed within 
the city would be the defending army against any assault 
headed for the capital, granting them the title of the last 
Aegis. Nearly half of the city’s population is military 
reserve, with just over six thousand troops present at 


any given time. The bored or restless soldiers, seeking 
distraction and entertainment, developed the barracks 
of the Aegis Block into a place of sport and competitive 
game, often with impressive amounts of coin wagered 
on the outcomes. However, between reports of the Kryn 
taking the Ashguard Garrison and rumors of unex- 
plained Kryn attacks within the Marrow Valley itself, 
the Aegis is very much on edge. 


GOVERNMENT 

Starosta Brumae Luddie, a retired general of the 
Righteous Brand, has watched over the city for fifteen 
years. Brumae is driven by a strong sense of duty and 
pride in the empire, never questioning the words of the 
king. Because Brumae is regarded by most as a fair and 
just starosta, some fear that his advanced age will soon 
bring an end to his tenure and allow less-scrupulous fig- 
ures to vie for his position. 


CRIME 

The strong military presence within Nogvurot keeps 
petty crime within the city to a minimum. Unfortunately, 
the Crownsguard often puff out their chests and try to 
one-up the soldiers of the Righteous Brand—and some 
local criminals have taken advantage of this petty rivalry 
to keep the soldiers distracted and continue their crimi- 
nal behavior unimpeded. 

Corruption is also becoming a problem, as Last Aegis 
soldiers use their sway within the city to make easy coin 
by turning a blind eye to smuggling to and from Shady- 
creek Run and other criminal hotspots in the Greying 
Wildlands. 


GEOGRAPHY 

The oblong city is divided between the eastern Aegis 
Block, which houses the bulk of the stationed soldiers, 
and the western region of the city that is broken into two 
sectors: the northern Scatters and the southern Ped- 
dler’s Row. The Scatters is the larger region, housing 
dive taverns, simple temples, and a majority of the popu- 
lace, who live in numerous neighborhoods of rickety do- 
miciles. In contrast, Peddler’s Row is a bustling home to 
local craft guilds and a colorful, if muddy, marketplace 
where the Glory Run Road passes through the city. 


NoGvuROT ADVENTURES 

Characters could go to Nogvurot to find someone in the 
city or to join the Righteous Brand. The city is also a 
good place for adventurers looking to test their mettle in 
competitive games against trained soldiers. 

Traitors in the Midst (Low Level). The characters are 
approached by Telva Cornwrath (neutral, female, human 
spy), who claims to work for the Augen Trust. She hires 
the characters to infiltrate the ranks of the Righteous 
Brand in Nogvurot and discover which soldiers are ac- 
cepting bribes from the Tribes of Shadycreek Run. She 
wants to know which criminal family pays each crooked 
official. She could be who she claims, or she might be 
a spy for the Myriad or one of the Tribes in Shadycreek 
Run looking to remove competition. In the latter case, 
she might not want the characters sticking around as 
loose ends. 


ODESSLOE 


Population: 6,970 (73% humans, 12% elves, 8% 
dwarves, 7% other races) 

Government: Starosta Vesdan Wothassic is eager to 
please the Crown and demands huge harvests from 
the fishers of Odessloe. As resentment builds, the few 
noble families who have business interests here work 
with Watchmaster Lein Untgaf to maintain order. 

Defense: A small cadre of Crownsguard watch over the 
city under the direction of the watchmaster. 

Commerce: As a popular trade stop on the way to 
the capital, Odessloe has many taverns and hostels. 
General stores provide basic supplies and occasion- 
ally offer strange relics pawned by cash-strapped 
adventurers. 

Organizations: The city harbors many small shrines 
to empire-approved gods. Most businesses are run by 
locals but owned by absentee nobles. The Myriad has 
a quiet presence here. 


Adjacent to the clear waters of the Erdeloch, Odessloe 

is a prominent fishing and logging settlement, supplying 
Rexxentrum and the surrounding townships with fresh 
fish and lumber. The only major stop on the Cloakjaunt 
Path for those traveling between Bysaes Tyl and the cap- 
ital, Odessloe also acts as a supply stop for traders and 
drifters moving through the shaded trees of the Pearl- 
bow Wilderness. 


THE WATERS ABIDE 

The bounty provided by the Erdeloch is a source of local 
pride as well as the backbone of the local economy. The 
people of Odessloe are a superstitious lot, and many 
believe that the lake is home to a spirit that must be 
kept happy if they are to continue to receive its bounti- 
ful blessings. They leave offerings at the shores of the 
lake to appease this unseen entity. Imperial officials, 
including the starosta, find this practice childish and 
actively dissuade citizens from indulging in “unlawful 
idol worship.” 


GOVERNMENT 

Starosta Vesdan Wothassic has held his position for a 
year, since the passing of the beloved Starosta Ruell. 
Vesdan has big shoes to fill and is eager to prove his 
worth to the Crown. He has demanded resource yields 
from his citizens and enforced penalties on those who 
fail to meet his standards. Unsurprisingly, the people 
are already voicing their dissatisfaction with the new 
starosta. The nobles who profit from the local busi- 
nesses grow worried that their investments are in dan- 
ger—and are working with the watchmaster to try and 
suppress any talk of outright insurrection. 


CRIME 

The city sees its small share of petty thefts and solitary 
criminal activity, but lacks the size and infrastructure 
to house an organized criminal element. This works to 
the advantage of the Myriad, which has been using the 
rivers that connect to the Erdeloch as smuggling routes, 
with Odessloe acting as a hub for transactions and stor- 
age, all without the government’s knowledge. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER Tor 


| 102 


GEOGRAPHY 

Built along the eastern shore of the Erdeloch, this 
kidney-shaped city is comprised of three major areas. 
The muddy Lakeside region on the western end houses 
the docks, river-based storage buildings, and scattered 
housing for denizens of the district. Verdant and clean, 
the Greenset region on the eastern side of the settle- 
ment holds numerous logging camps and most of the 
residential homesteads for working families. The Cross- 
mark region is the smaller center of the city, where the 
other regions meet at the juncture of the two largest 
thoroughfares, Cedarline Street and Hogmarshal Road. 
The smell of starchy foods and fresh fish suffuses the 
inns and market stalls of this sleepy intersection. 


ODESSLOE ADVENTURES 

With the Myriad lurking in Odessloe, there are plenty 
of opportunities for characters who want to work for or 
against the organization. The settlement also makes an 
excellent base of operations for adventurers exploring 
the Pearlbow Wilderness. 

Feeling Crabby (Low Level). The residents of 
Odessloe fear that they somehow angered the spirit of 
the Erdeloch. Starving giant crabs from the lake have 
terrorized the Greenset region of the settlement every 
night for the past week. The cityfolk have left expensive 
offerings for the spirit on the lake’s banks. These offer- 
ings are taken, but the crabs continue to attack. If the 
characters investigate, they find a group of bandits who 
are capturing and starving the crabs before releasing 
them into the settlement, and stealing the offerings for 
themselves. Are these ruffians connected to the Myriad? 
Could the stolen offerings anger the actual spirit of the 
lake enough to punish the settlement for the disrespect? 


PRIDE’S CALL 


Population: 16,090 (81% dwarves, 8% humans, 6% hal- 


flings, 5% other races) 

Government: Starosta Ghuldi Demosk walks the fine 
line of honoring imperial rule without undermining 
dwarven tradition. Small guilds run by dwarf nobles 
support his rule. 

Defense: Watchmaster Hildas Cliffhollow oversees the 
local Crownsguard, which is sometimes bolstered by 
mercenaries. 

Commerce: Most goods and services are available here, 
including room and board for travelers. Pride silk is a 
popular commodity. 

Organizations: Empire-approved gods have humble 
temples alongside the local guilds and businesses, 
while Myriad agents lurk within the shadows 
of the city. 


Within the rolling hills of the southern Zemni Fields 
lies the dwarven city of Pride’s Call. Established in the 
ashes of the Calamity and slowly rebuilt as the center 
of hill dwarf culture in Wildemount, Pride’s Call chose 
to ally with the Dwendalian Empire during the empire’s 
expansion nearly two centuries ago. Their favor as the 
empire’s first allies eventually waned when the dwarven 
city of Grimgolir was absorbed a century later, leaving 
Pride’s Call overshadowed by the new, impressive, and 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


strategically significant dwarf city. However, Pride’s Call 
is nonetheless respectable in martial might and histori- 
cally rich in culture, music, and their coveted pride silk. 
The city is a bright spot in the otherwise cold and dour 
northwestern Wynandir. 


EVEN FAVOR FADES 

During the invasion of the Julous Dominion, the empire 
saw many great deeds done under the banner of Pride’s 
Call. After helping the empire achieve victory, the people 
of Pride’s Call enjoyed a period of celebratory attention. 
Their fame subsided, however, as Dwendalian attention 
turned to the mounting threat of Xhorhasian terrors 
boldly crossing the Brokenveil. Talks had already been 
privately underway to bring the dwarven stronghold 

of Grimgolir under imperial rule, given their military 
might and advantageous proximity to the brewing dan- 
ger. With the combination of Grimgolir’s power and 

the empire’s plentiful resources, victory was ensured 
and a strong sentinel force at the Xhorhasian border 
was established. Grimgolir became the new favored 
home of the dwarves in Wynandir, and many Pride’s 
Call dwarves who lived through those years still hold 

a grudge—a fact that the Crown deftly wields to exploit 
both cities. 


SQUEEZING SILK FROM A STONE 

The dwarves of Pride’s Call produce a number of useful 
exports, but none are as unique nor as sought after as 
pride silk. This remarkable fabric can only be woven 
from materials found in the unique ecosystem of the 
geothermically active hills around Pride’s Call. A spe- 
cial breed of silkworms has developed in these strange 
conditions. These fist-sized silkworms produce abnor- 
mally thin and incredibly resilient strands, and a secret 
process of reinforcing the threads creates a material 
similar in texture and appearance to thick silk, but with 
the strength of treated leather. Affluent folk across Ex- 
andria pay handsomely for garments made of pride silk, 
but rumors are beginning to spread that outsiders have 
uncovered the secret, and the tradition might be slipping 
from the grasp of Pride’s Call. 


GOVERNMENT 

Pride’s Call is governed by the dwarf who signed the 
original pact with the empire. Starosta Ghuldi Demosk 
spends his twilight years doing what he can to maintain 
his culture in the face of an increasingly invasive rule. 
Idealistic and unable to see any error in his judgment, 
Ghuldi is seen by many as hardheaded among even the 
most stubborn of dwarves. Many of his people are loudly 
voicing their discontent, and younger politicians such as 
Usula Starsburn are rising in popularity to succeed as 
starosta when Ghuldi eventually passes away. Fearing 
that he will have to choose between his legacy and the 
opinions of younger generations, Ghuldi is beginning to 
exhibit more totalitarian behaviors, slowly becoming a 
petulant dictator. 


CRIME 

While the city’s colorful veneer makes it seem a place 
of plenty, the economy of Pride’s Call has been in slow 
decline for some time. The landscape’s strange mineral 


composition makes its produce a healthy but unsavory 
and unpopular export, while other goods that previously 
brought the city prosperity are now more readily and 
quickly available from traders on the Menagerie Coast. 
This economic downturn has led to a rise in crime in 
the impoverished regions of the city, and also opened 
the door for bolder Myriad activity. 


GEOGRAPHY 

The city is comprised of four boroughs built atop and 
within a cluster of large hills that wrap around the base 
of the Cyrios Mountains. The two largest boroughs, 
known as the Tillers and Crafters, are twin sections of 
mixed residential neighborhoods with areas of concen- 
trated commerce. The Tillers cultivates produce and 
meats for the city, though most local food has a bland 
and bitter taste, making spices a popular import. The 
Crafters contains numerous forges, tanneries, and the 
well-guarded subterranean silk-production warehouses. 
Nearest to the mountains is the Vigil borough, where 
the locally trained Crownsguard mingle with those 
assigned from Bladegarden to watch over the hillside. 
The western branch of the Righteous Brand are also 
stationed in the Vigil borough. Between Vigil and Craft- 
ers lies the fourth and smallest borough, called Moot, 
which is marked by a circular road surrounded by the 
wealthier houses. The Moot itself is an open, stone 
forum for discussion and debate that long predates the 
empire's rule. 


Hiris oF Prioe’s Cart 


PRIDE’S CALL ADVENTURES 
If the characters seek pride silk or master artisans, 
Pride’s Call is where they should go. In a city experienc- 
ing political and economic turmoil, there is no end to the 
intriguing adventurescharacters might experience. 
Worm Your Way In (Low Level). The characters 
encounter a traveling textile merchant named Cardorn 
Brentahill (neutral evil, male, human noble), who lives 
in Yrrosa. He’s seeking bodyguards to help him escort 
his cart back to his home, paying 100 gp per hired hand. 
Oe ees 
PRIDE SILK 


The hearty silk unique tothe region has long been a point 
of pride with the locals. When processed and woven prop- 
erly, the resulting cloth is pride silk: an extremely flexible 
material with the durability of tanned leather. Pride silk has 
become a favorite cloth for use on military ship sails, war 
banners, and other utilitarian applications, but has also 
gained popularity in affluent circles. High-end clothing 
made from pride silk is both fashionable and protective, 
leading many nobles and wealthy merchants to seek full 
outfits and formal gowns made with it. The tailors skilled 
enough to create such outfits are few and far between, so 
while pride silk might be expensive as a raw material, out- 
fits made of the cloth are prohibitively expensive for most 
common folk. 

One square yard of pride silk weighs 1 pound and costs 
100 gp. An outfit made of pride silk weighs 4 pounds and 
costs 500 gp. If you aren’t wearing armor, your base Armor 
Class is 11 + your Dexterity modifier while wearing it. 


SS a 


104. 


Along the journey, the characters and their employer 
are attacked by a crew of mercenaries representing 
the Durrodan family, claiming that Cardorn stole silk 
worms from their silk farm. Cardorn offers to increase 
the characters’ pay if they defend him. If they side with 
the Durrodan family, Cardorn is taken prisoner but the 
Durrodans grant them a small reward and the promise 
of future work. If they side with Cardorn, fight off the 
mercenaries, and escort Cardorn home, he introduces 
the characters to Gothad Miskal (neutral evil, male, 
halfling bandit captain), a Myriad taskmaster from 
Yrrosa who is interested in offering better pay for less 
legal work. 


RASTUM DEN 


Hidden among the Dunrock Mountains, north of the 


Pearlbow Wilderness and Rexxentrum, is an encamp- 
ment for breeding and training military griffons. These 
mighty beasts are used by the Dwendalian griffon riders 
of the Righteous Brand, some of the best-respected sol- 
diers in the empire. 

Known as Rastum Den, this moderately sized en- 
campment is nestled in a small valley four thousand 
feet up in the mountains. The area’s dizzying heights 
and tumultuous weather make it all but inaccessible to 
those without a griffon rider’s prowess. This location 
was originally home to the largest griffon population in 
Wildemount, making it natural terrain to quickly condi- 
tion any young mounts bred for the Righteous Brand. 


REXXENTRUM 


Population: 205,200 (81% humans, 8% dwarves, 6% 


halflings, 5% other races) 

Government: King Bertrand Dwendal rules the city 
and the Dwendalian Empire from Rexxentrum. He 
delegates lesser matters to Arbiter Sydnock Truscan, 
while citywide guild business falls under the purview 
of Guildmaster Kai Arness. 

Defense: Crownsguard patrol all major streets, while 
the bulk of the Righteous Brand soldiers within the 
empire are stationed in the King’s Bastion to defend 
the capital city. 

Commerce: Rexxentrum is the largest city in Wilde- 
mount and the seat of the Dwendalian Empire’s 
power, enabling massive volumes of trade in and out 
of the city. Most any goods, services, and places of 
business can be found within the city walls. 

Organizations: Grand temples to empire-approved 
gods can be found throughout the city, while the most 
powerful guilds in the empire vie for power and influ- 
ence. The Cerberus Assembly takes an active role in 
political affairs, while the deep-rooted Myriad weaves 
tapestries of crime and corruption throughout the city. 


The majestic capital of the Dwendalian Empire was 
founded in the year 514 PD. The central location and 
plentiful surrounding resources of the region made 
Rexxentrum the most favorable place to oversee the rule 
and expansion of the freshly established Dwendalian 
Empire. Over the next three centuries, Rexxentrum 
grew to become the largest city in Wildemount, and the 
cultural and military center of Western Wynandir. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


At the core ofall imperial politics are the nobles, poli- 
ticians, and wealthy elite who live within the city or own 
property there. Grandiose displays of wealth and power 
are common among the inner wards, while sprawling 
poverty consumes the outer districts and slums beyond 
the protective walls of the city. Cobblestone streets twist 
and mingle through the bustling neighborhoods, cart 
merchants and street performers vying for the attention 
and patronage of passersby throughout the cold sum- 
mer months and the even colder winter. 

Glowing orbs of arcane fire flicker at the tops of dark 
iron lamp poles at major intersections, lighting the eve- 
ning air, while colorful flowers adorn the inner archways 
of each neighborhood entryway. Buildings cluster close 
and reach toward the sky, often snow-dappled with long 
wooden slats placed between rooftops for riffraff to skit- 
ter across the city unseen. Although the city teems with 
life and activity, it is also full of lawkeepers and military 
watch, with griffon riders occasionally circling overhead 
above the ever-patrolling Crownsguard and the nearby 
Righteous Brand headquarters. 

The massive and beautiful center for arcane study 
known as the Soltryce Academy is located in the Can- 
dles, a thin crescent of a neighborhood marked by the 
tall and imposing tower homes of all eight leading mem- 
bers of the Cerberus Assembly, each unique and impos- 
ing in its own way. The beating heart of the city, and of 
the empire, lies positioned within the arc of the Candles 
in the terrace of Castle Ungebroch. From within the 
castle halls, King Bertrand Dwendal and his council of 
chosen authorities oversee all matters of state. 


MAGIC MASTERS 

Much of the empire’s prosperity over the centuries 
stems from the Cerberus Assembly, a union of the 
nation’s most powerful mages working directly for the 
Crown. These arcane practitioners and scholars aid 

the king in engaging foreign interests, in developing 
magical technology to better oversee the land and en- 
force his will, and making use of the rare relics that the 
Crown confiscates from unearthed sites of pre-Calamity 
might. This arrangement affords the assembly homes in 
the Candles and across the major cities of the empire, 
as well as access to every Dwendalian political figure. 
Thus, members of the assembly are extremely influen- 
tial and, by the nature of their arrangement, very care- 
fully watched by the king. Most civilians swap rumors of 
demonic pacts and demigod-level magics at the assem- 
bly’s disposal, adding to their aura of mystique among 
the common folk. When an assembly mage walks the 
streets of Rexxentrum or attends the halls of an estab- 
lishment within the city, it is an event that everyone will 
be talking about for days to come. 


RULE WITH A GOLDEN FIST 

The resource-rich economy of Rexxentrum supports a 
powerful guild and merchant class, who work directly 
with the Crown under the watch of Guildmaster Kai 
Arness. Any permanent place of business is required to 
join a corresponding guild, paying an annual fee on top 
of their taxes to the Crown, and to follow the guild’s re- 
quirements for conditions of operations. Some complain 


R1. Castle Ungebroch 


R2. The Candles 


Pearlbow Wilderness R3. Academy Grounds 
R4. King’s Bastion 
R5. Platinum Veranda 
R6. Vigil’s Circle 
R7. Court of Colors 
©} = Watchtower 
== = City Wall 


thatthese conditions are often manipulated on a case- 
by-case basis to remove competition between similar 
interests, but cries of corruption within the guilds fall 
on deaf ears. This has led to a rapid growth of mobile 
businesses on street corners and shops that move be- 
tween districts to avoid inspection by Crownsguard or 
guild members. 


POLITICS AND PERSECUTION 

Historically, public displays of unease under the king’s 
rule were often met with brutal punishment. However, 
the previous king, Everard Dwendal, loosened the laws 
applying to public discourse. This gave rise to a number 
of political figures who gathered the unhappy populace 
behind their philosophies. In response, King Everard 
established the Augen Trust, a network of spies working 
for the king to blackmail or corrupt these politicians. 
With these high-profile dissenters under the thumb 

of the Crown, controlling political discourse became 
easier, and politics within the empire became a tense 
game of cat and mouse. Forthright nobles and frustrated 
guild heads unswayed by propaganda, gold, or threats 
still dissent publicly, testing the boundaries of their in- 
fluence. King Bertrand’s patience with public objections 
to his policies grows ever thinner, and he is enacting 
even more stringent laws against public criticism of 

the Crown. 


A GROWING UNREST 

In the wake of frustrated citizens, neglected concerns, 
and aclear caste system, the common folk of Rexxen- 
trum are disenfranchised. The rallying call of war has 
brought some renewed imperial pride, but whispers 

of discontent have continued, coalescing into a small 
group of rebels within the capital that call themselves 
the Locksmiths. Wary of the history of failed rebellions 
in the empire, they gather information and gradually in- 
spire the common folk to question authority, waiting for 
the right moment to ignite a revolution with a chance of 
success. With the Crown distracted by war and the pop- 
ulace brimming with poverty and discontentment, that 
time might come sooner than anyone thinks. 


GOVERNMENT 

King Bertrand Dwendal rules the capital himself. No 
starosta holds office within Rexxentrum. Prime Arbiter 
Sydnock Truscan oversees all major matters of law that 
do not require the attention of the king, while Guild- 
master Kai Arness works with the various guilds of the 
city to ensure smooth trade both within and beyond 
the walls of Rexxentrum. Beneath Sydnock is the head 
of Rexxentrum’s Crownsguard, Watchmaster Brunda 
Gleshin, who ensures that the laws of the empire are 
enforced in the streets of the capital. 


CRIME 

The capital city harbors a diverse criminal underground 
both within and beneath the streets. Surviving Myriad 
leaders remain hidden in plain sight throughout the city, 
including the beloved Iris Bethelas, who is organizing 
the syndicate’s return to power. Independent crime rings 
plague trade centers and busy districts where there are 
easy gold and gullible cityfolk. The populace is simply 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


too large for the Crownsguard to oversee every corner of 
cobblestone where laws are bent or broken. Now, with 
the collective attention of the law focused on the war in 
the east, thieves and cutpurses are upping their game, 
and crime is on the rise within Rexxentrum. 


GEOGRAPHY 

The city spreads across the tallgrass fields south of the 
Pearlbow Wilderness, its walls forming a distended 
pentagon. Farmland around the north and east sides of 
the city are dotted with farmsteads and small rural com- 
munities that provide food for the capital. The northeast 
side of the wall curves around a trio of immense, forti- 
fied towers surrounded by barracks known as the King’s 
Bastion, where the central force of the Righteous Brand 
military trains and resides. Within the outer walls of 
the city are seven major districts: the Mosaic Ward, 

the Mudtop Ward, the Tangles, the Shimmer Ward, 

the Academy Grounds, the Candles, and Castle Unge- 
broch Terrace. 

Mosaic Ward. A sprawl of impoverished neighbor- 
hoods are hidden behind colorful banners and small 
fences that segregate this ratty residential district from 
the central thoroughfares and avenues. The region, 
which encompasses most of the southern and south- 
western regions of the city along the outer walls, is a 
hotbed for crime and violence. Crownsguard interest in 
policing the region wavers, and opportunists often use 
the lack of military presence to victimize poorer citi- 
zens. This has led to a growing collection of vigilantes 
and self-appointed protectors of the Mosaics. 

Mudtop Ward. The northern end of the city houses its 
own large slum, known as the Mudtop Ward. The cob- 
blestone streets of the city were never quite built up to 
the northern wall, causing this area to be rife with mud 
and muck year round, leaving the denizens cold, ornery, 
and prone to illness. Many of the sick and diseased are 
relegated to the Mudtop to be forgotten. However, some 
healers have come to their aid, as well as some priests 
who wish to remedy the unjust conditions of the poor, 
becoming local heroes for their selfless work. 

The Tangles. This western region of Rexxentrum 
houses the working class folk of the city. It is here that 
most of the city’s general commerce takes place. Doz- 
ens of smaller streets branch off major roads to create 
a labyrinth of twisting neighborhoods and industrial 
districts. The network of major roads converges to form 
three major plazas across the district, where shops, 
inns, and various forms of entertainment can be found. 
The Platinum Veranda plaza lies at the northern end of 
the Tangles, where the more expensive homes and luxu- 
rious entertainment can be found, as well as the central 
temple to Bahamut, called the Dragon Seat. 

Near the southern end of the Tangles is the Vigil’s Cir- 
cle, a marketplace built around a loop of road that sur- 
rounds the Tower of Writ, the temple to Erathis where 
the Prime Arbiter delivers his judgment. All manner of 
commerce takes place here, while the nearby Claykeep 
prison looms as an ominous reminder to any who might 
seek to break the laws of the land. 

The Court of Colors, on the western edge of the Tan- 
gles, is the largest of the three main plazas. The Court 


is a winding knot of streets, each of which is wholly 
dedicated to traders who come from far-off places to sell 
their exotic wares, while artists and performers bring 
an air of lively celebration despite the gray and dreary 
skies of the region. It’s within this lively area that the 
Rexxentrum Archive of the Cobalt Soul can be found. 
Near the southern wall of the Shimmer Ward is the 
Chantry of the Dawn, the ancient temple to the Dawn 
Father on which the city was originally founded, now 
restored and expanded into an awe-inspiring cathedral. 

Shimmer Ward. Within the inner walls of the city, 
the Shimmer Ward is where the noble houses and guild 
leaders of Rexxentrum dwell. Here, beautiful gardens 
and museums celebrate Zemnian culture, and special- 
ist merchants promote their unique wares. The debate 
forum is rarely used aside from holidays, where intel- 
lectuals will challenge each other to arguments about 
philosophy and history. Cottages and tasteful estates sit 
behind tall fences and walls, and a pair of open squares 
host occasional galas when the local elite are in need of 
socialization. 

Academy Grounds. To the northwest of the castle lie 
the Academy Grounds, a well-kept and heavily guarded 
campus where the halls and towers of the Soltryce 
Academy reside. A college of higher learning for all pur- 
suits related to the arcane arts, the Soltryce Academy 
is all but exclusively a school for wealthy scions, though 
a number of rare talents found in the wild are offered 
entry every year. Each subject’s curriculum is tailored 
so that the young mind is indoctrinated to support the 
interests of the empire, and the Cerberus Assembly is al- 
ways looking for prodigies with exemplary talent to take 
under its wing. 

The Candles. East of the castle stands the collec- 
tion of eight tall spires that house the members of the 
Cerberus Assembly. Each tower has its own unique 
appearance. The original Candles were built to the spec- 
ifications of the original leading members of the Cerbe- 
rus Assembly. In the years since, each tower has been 
magically altered to the taste of their successors. This 
creates a jagged and subtly unsettling sight visible from 
any point in the city. 

Castle Ungebroch Terrace. Standing vigilant in 
the center of the inner walls is the Castle Ungebroch 
Terrace, a small district of compact military outposts 
that surround Castle Ungebroch. The dark stone of the 
castle splits into numerous towers, while high-arched 
stained glass windows dress the exterior of each floor of 
the citadel. Within the shadowy halls of the castle, lit by 
flickering torchlight, the king rules with his family and 
councilors at his beck and call. 


REXXENTRUM ADVENTURES 

A noble house in Rexxentrum that isn’t scheming for 
more power is a noble house in decline, or so the gentry 
believe. The city’s officials and nobles have schemes to 
grab more money and power, and more than a few of the 
common folk have their own plots to launch themselves 
into positions of influence. Most of these social climbers 
need the help of adventurers willing to take risks, while 
others often need protection from their fellow schemers. 


Calla Locksmith (Low Level). The exploits of the 
characters might draw the attention of the Locksmiths, 
a resistance group seeking to undermine the totalitar- 
ian rule of the king. A friendly face the characters have 
come to know within the city invites them to meet Lady 
Quana Seledo (chaotic good, female, human noble), a 
well-connected figure who reveals herself to be a key 
figure in the Locksmiths. She asks the characters to 
join the cause, offering allies, rare goods, and well-paid 
work. If they agree, the first mission begins: help the 
Locksmiths infiltrate the office of Exchequer Aethia 
Drooze and steal the current year’s tithe ledgers. 

King Killers (Mid Level). The characters intercept 
a cryptic note which indicates that there will be an at- 
tempt on King Bertrand Dwendal’s life the next time the 
monarch makes a public appearance. The characters 
are too inexperienced to get an audience with the king 
or anyone close to him, so it’s up to the characters to 
thwart the plot. These assassins could be sent by the 
Kryn Dynasty, the Cerberus Assembly, the Myriad, the 
cult of a Betrayer god, or by the Crown itself to garner 
sympathy among the people. If the characters manage to 
stop the assassins, they earn the notice of the king, who 
will likely ask more of them. 


ROCKGUARD GARRISON 


Population: 6,800 (71% humans, 12% halflings, 12% 
dwarves, 5% other races) 

Government: The garrison is commanded by Marshal 
Garad Velious, who oversees regiment captains that 
hold sway in the area. 

Defense: Three regiments of Righteous Brand soldiers 
defend and patrol the garrison and the surrounding 
mountains. 

Commerce: Most supplies within are military rations 
and stationed equipment. Trade with the local soldiers 
can yield goods and services. 

Organizations: Small shrines to empire-approved gods 
have been constructed by the soldiers. Aside from 
the Righteous Brand, the Crown, and their allies in 
Grimgolir, no other organizations have authority over 
the garrison. 


The Rockguard Garrison was constructed in a joint 
effort between the Crown and Grimgolir as a symbol 

of their political union. The sister-fortress to the Ash- 
guard Garrison is the foremost defense post against 
the ever-encroaching forces of the Kryn Dynasty and 
the monstrous hordes of the wastelands to the east. It 
boasts a formidable army and a near-impenetrable pe- 
rimeter that expands into a series of defensible weapon 
posts along the sides of the valley to further dissuade 
any force from attempting an invasion. This fortress has 
held strong for generations without being breached, but 
the loss of the Ashguard Garrison is still fresh in the 
minds of the soldiers stationed here. A cold intensity 
hangs over each passing day as the Dwendalian forces 
plot to reclaim their captured outpost and remain vigi- 
lant against a similar assault. 


ROCKGUARD GARRISON ADVENTURES 
Rockguard Garrison adventures usually relate directly 
to the war. Defending the outpost from attacks, planning 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER Te 
o7 


strikes against the Kryn, and other military missions for 
the Crown are carried out here on a daily basis. 

Steal the Plans (Low Level). Agents of the Kryn hire 
the characters to infiltrate the Rockguard Garrison and 
uncover the Crown’s plans to retake the Ashguard Gar- 
rison. The Kryn want any physical plans the characters 
find to remain in place to ensure the Crown doesn’t 
realize the plot, so all written documents containing key 
information need to be copied. The garrison’s guards, 
scouts, and veterans patrol the place and question char- 
acters who obviously sneak around or don’t belong. 


RUINS OF SHATTENGROD 


This sinkhole is a rocky pit measuring roughly thirty 
feet across and sixty feet deep. Littered with ancient 
bones, the pit was long considered just a macabre cu- 
riosity, referred to by the dwarves of Pride’s Call as the 
Grave Hole. When tales of the strange location reached 
inquiring minds within the empire, an investigation 

was launched. Beneath the pit, explorers discovered the 
sundered ruins of a prominent city from the Age of Ar- 
canum called Shattengrod. Heavy excavation expanded 
the pit into a spiraling hole that delves into the subterra- 
nean city, unveiling broken relics and forgotten secrets— 
as well as some enduring shades and hungry entities 
now awakened. The promise of beneficial discoveries 
pushes both interests of the Crown and the Cerberus 
Assembly to delve into the ruins, but the deaths of mer- 
cenaries are already drawing attention as rumors of the 
dangers below spread and scare off many possible hires. 


SALTWALLOW BOG 


Born from the sunken muck that merges with the north- 

ern treeline of the Velvin Thicket, the Saltwallow Bog 

is amarsh of briny, slightly acidic waters. Myths speak 

of a terrible servant of the Crawling King that was slain 

during the battles of the Calamity, its corrosive corpse 

sinking into the floor of the forest and corrupting the 

thicket around it until this toxic bog was left as a final 

e eS 
DYOLET FRUIT 


A round, blue fruit roughly the size of a plum, a dyolet is 
known for its sweet flavor and the mild surge of energy 
granted to whoever eats it. Dyolets can also be imbued 
with minor healing abilities, a property kept secret by the 
gnomes of the Velvin Thicket until recent years. Herbalists 
and apothecaries can imbue healing within the fruit for a 
fraction of the time and gold cost of brewing a potion. A 
dyolet can be imbued with one of the following properties 
by a character proficient with a healer’s kit: 


e You can saturate the fruit with carefully brewed cura- 
tive draughts to imbue a dyolet with the properties of 
a potion of healing. This process takes 12 hours and 
costs 15 gp. 

e You can saturate the fruit with strengthened restorative 
properties to imbue a dyolet with the properties of a 
potion of greater healing. This process takes 4 days and 
costs 70 gp. 


You can consume a dyolet as an action to gain its healing 
effect. A dyolet lasts up to 20 days after being harvested 
before it begins to rot. A rotting dyolet loses its healing 
properties. 


eT 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


cry of defiance. Strange and twisted creatures have 
adapted to live in this grotesque place, delving into the 
Velvin Thicket to hunt and drag their prey back to their 
lairs in the bog. As dangerous as they are, some of these 
creatures are now highly prized by tanners and alche- 
mists for their leather and harvested parts, and hunters 
venture into the depths of the bog year-round, risking 
life and limb for coin. 


SILBERQUEL RIDGE 


The imposing mountain range known as the Silberquel 
Ridge extends across the middle of Western Wynandir, 
dividing the Marrow Valley from the Pearlbow Wilder- 
ness. A range of jagged mountain tops visible from most 
cities in the empire, the Silberquel Ridge is an import- 
ant landmark, but it is best known for its seemingly 
endless cache of rich metals and deep caverns. The ore 
and gems mined here provided Rexxentrum with most 
of its wealth and funded the rise of the Dwendalian Em- 
pire. The surface veins are the largest source of silver in 
Wildemount, but the deeper paths reveal other precious 
metals, gems, and forgotten remnants of pre-Divergence 
curiosities—and many deadly beasts that have come to 
call those ancient corners home. 


SILBERQUEL RIDGE ADVENTURES 

Traveling across the Silberquel Ridge is its own ad- 
venture, given the number of dangerous creatures that 
inhabit the region’s mountains and tunnels. Caravans, 
miners, and prospectors hire adventurers to guard them 
as they travel and work in the mountains. 

Hell Hound Purge (Mid Level). Marta Denizreitch 
(chaotic neutral, female, human mage) lives in a remote 
tower where she experiments with conjuration magic 
to develop new spells. The Cerberus Assembly funds 
Marta’s research. Years ago, Marta had a problem 
with trolls attacking the tower, so she summoned hell 
hounds to roam the wilds near her tower and keep the 
trolls at bay. She does not want the hell hounds to cause 
problems down the line, so she hires the characters to 
hunt a few to keep the population down. The characters 
discover they aren't the only ones killing hell hounds: 

a hill giant and a small gang of trolls are killing the 
hounds in preparation for an attack on Marta’s tower! 


VELVIN THICKET 


Population: 850 (98% gnomes, 2% other races) 
Government: The people of the Thicket are governed by 
a loose union between the leaders of the Velvins, the 
collection of local nomadic clans who convene only 

when threatened. 

Defense: While few are specifically trained for combat, 
many denizens of the Thicket are well-versed in illu- 
sion magic for self-defense. 

Commerce: Those that have the trust of the Velvins can 
acquire basic supplies, dyolet fruit, and the occasional 
unusual relic. 

Organizations: Scattered altars to the Wild Mother ex- 
ist throughout the Thicket. Each of the seven nomadic 
clans handles its own internal affairs. Representatives 
from Pride’s Call often visit for a time to maintain 
their relationship with the Velvin leaders. 


PF 


VERGESSON SANITORIUM 


Bordering the soggy fields of the Saltwallow Bog is 

the strange forest known as the Velvin Thicket. The 
nomadic gnomish clans that call these dense woods 
home have a loose network of allied families rather than 
a central township, and they defend their shaded sanc- 
tuary with illusions and enchantments. Because of the 
Velvins’ trade agreement with Pride’s Call, the dwarven 
city was able to request that the empire keep the thicket 
from becoming formally assimilated into Dwendalian 
society so long as the Velvins provided a small but con- 
sistent crop of dyolets. The dyolet fruit is a rare delicacy 
receptive to minor enchantments and only grows within 
the Velvin Thicket. The empire’s interest in permitting 
Velvin autonomy has waned over the years, and the 
Cerberus Assembly is keen to take the Thicket under its 
jurisdiction and seize control of the dyolet crop. 


VELVIN THICKET ADVENTURES 

The gnome families that live inthe Velvin Thicket are 
suspicious of outsiders. The Cerberus Assembly’s inter- 
est in the area might be enough to bring the characters 
to this strange place. 

Dyolet Mounds (Mid Level). Herwin Melvot (chaotic 
neutral, male, forest gnome mage) attempted to grow a 
new kind of dyolet with magic. His experiment resulted 
in shambling mounds made of dyolet plants that terror- 
ize the Thicket. The gnomes allow the characters into 
the forest if the adventurers slay the plant monsters. 


VERGESSON SANATORIUM 


During the war between the Dwendalian Empire and 
the Julous Dominion, a vast prison known as the Arche- 
vault was made as a jail for prisoners of war. After the 
war, the Archevault was repurposed by the Cerberus As- 
sembly as the largest imperial sanatorium and hospital. 
Named after Lord Symon Vergesson, the late assembly 
member who founded it, the massive mansion is sur- 
rounded by vast gardens and filled with beautiful art- 
work designed to please the primarily wealthy patients. 

The sanatorium’s patients are treated for physical and 
mental ailments severe enough to require alchemical, 
magical, or experimental therapy. Helmed by Gertrude 
Wagner, the Sanatorium Director, the faculty is mon- 
itored by the Crown. The facility offers treatment to 
those who require assistance and can pay handsomely, 
but beneath the pleasant mansion lies a torturous oubli- 
ette for political prisoners. 


A Dark UTILITY 

While the reputation of the Vergesson Sanatorium is 
sterling, it hides dark secrets. The original purpose of 
the Archevault was never fully discarded, and a number 
of vocal critics of the Crown have disappeared from the 
streets of Rexxentrum. Deep beneath the floors of the 
estate lie hidden chambers and cells that house enemies 
of the king, foreign spies, and traitors to the Crown 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 109 


privately sentenced by Prime Arbiter Sydnock Truscan. 
There, they are subjected to experiments conducted in 
secret under the supervision of Master Trent Ikithon 

of the Cerberus Assembly. A tower on the northern 
outskirts of the grounds acts as Trent’s summer home, 
where he houses and trains the prospective members of 
his Volstruckers, an elite group of spies and assassins 
who use magic to do the assembly’s dirty work. 


VERGESSON SANATORIUM ADVENTURES 

Most who adventure in the Vergesson Sanatorium are 
trying to free a prisoner. Just finding a captive hidden in 
the massive complex is a challenge, but if the characters 
become imprisoned in the Archevault themselves, they 
must survive and form a plan to escape. 

Killing Regin (Mid Level). Regin Kavla (lawful evil, 
female, human spy), a former spy for the Myriad, is 
trapped in the bowels of the Vergesson Sanatorium. 
Worried that she might share important secrets, the 
Myriad hires the characters to get into the prison, cap- 
ture Regin, and delivered her to them, offering a hefty 
sum or some other reward—whatever it takes to get the 
job done. As the characters search for Regin, they un- 
cover the hospital’s dark secrets and must decide what 
to do with this disturbing information. 

Patient Zero (High Level). One of the most trusted 
allies of Prime Arbiter Sydnock Truscan, Doctor Reyn- 
old Brueska, has been privately developing an arcane 
disease to be used in the war against the Kryn Dynasty, 
with the sanatorium’s patients as his test subjects. 
When all contact with the sanatorium ceases, the Prime 
Arbiter hires the characters to investigate the premises 
and uncover the doctor, his work, and the events that 
transpired. The characters discover that a majority of 
the denizens of the Vergesson Sanatorium have been 
mutated and driven mad by the disease. The adventur- 
ers must fight their way through the horror-filled halls 
while trying to avoid contamination, or discover a cure 
before the disease completely corrupts them. 


YRROSA 


Population: 3,220 (54% humans, 28% dwarves, 14% 


elves, 4% other races) 

Government: The Crown’s will is imposed by Starosta 
Zulla Sauer, in tandem with the local noble families. 

Defense: Yrrosa is protected by a battalion of Crowns- 
guard supplemented by mercenaries. 

Commerce: An older and smaller trade post, the town 
has basic equipment and supplies available for trade 
or purchase. Rooms and taverns are humble, but 
available. 

Organizations: A temple to Bahamut looms over 
smaller shrines to the other empire-approved gods. 
The Myriad was once headquartered here; in its ab- 
sence, the local businesses are entirely independent. 


Once a snowy outpost between Icehaven and Rexxen- 
trum, Yrrosa has slowly grown into a sizable township 
where travelers and traders warm themselves as they 
pass through the frigid fields. The town is comprised of 
humble homesteads and numerous inns that promote 
themselves as “the hearth before the hoarfrost.” 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


Recently, adventurers and fortune-seekers have 
flocked to the area to aid in the excavation of the nearby 
Ruins of Shattengrod (described earlier in this chapter). 


SIRING A SYNDICATE 

Eighty years ago, a trapper guild turned smuggling gang 
was ousted from Icehaven and came to Yrrosa to seek 
better fortune. Life was no easier, and the crew of hun- 
gry rogues was forced to become creative. Noticing the 
lack of oversight from the empire, they began to build a 
network of like-minded individuals throughout Western 
Wynandir. Taking the name “the Myriad,” they helmed 
illegal activity from the comfort of this small outpost 
town until fifteen years ago, when their base of oper- 
ations was discovered and raided by imperial forces. 
The remaining Myriad leaders have scattered, but the 
shadow of their operation still looms over Yrrosa like a 
dark cloud. 


GOVERNMENT 

The previous starosta, Stefan Weberrat, was arrested 
fifteen years ago for protecting the Myriad. His succes- 
sor, Zulla Sauer, is the willful and respected daughter of 
Petrov Sauer, a mining baron in Druvenlode. She was 
chosen after she volunteered for the position, but un- 
known to most, she was already involved with the Myr- 
iad long before she became a starosta. She now helps 
inform their hidden network from a position of safety. 


CRIME 

Petty crimes occur, but most stem from disagreements 
or competition over parties using Yrrosa as a base of 
operations while delving into the Ruins of Shattengrod. 
Unbeknownst to all but their allies, the Myriad has been 
slowly carving out new bases, and in time, they might 
grow bold enough to reclaim their old hideout. 


GEOGRAPHY 

Ramshackle wooden domiciles with snow-covered roofs 
line muddy streets throughout the town. The main roads 
were more improvised than planned, and most of the 
older buildings are in varying states of disrepair. Where 
Pride’s Walk Road intersects with Havenpath Road is a 
cluster of taverns, inns, liveries, and stores. 


YRROSA ADVENTURES 

The shadow of the Myriad hanging over Yrrosa makes it 
a fine place for intrigue, and the many travelers moving 
through the town have rumors and jobs to share with 
adventurers. 

Blood Pact (High Level). A human blacksmith named 
Wilhelm Arrisgon never returned from his latest journey 
to collect a wagon of raw materials. Wilhelm’s family 
hires the characters to find the smith, and they trace 
him to Yrrosa. During their investigation, the charac- 
ters discover that several other solitary travelers have 
disappeared while passing through the city. Velima 
Shanglian, a vampire who lives in a hidden lair outside 
Yrrosa, turned the travelers into her vampire spawn. 
The Myriad has a deal with the vampire and sends vic- 
tims her way in exchange for help with various unsavory 
tasks. If the characters destroy the vampire, they make 
an enemy of the Myriad. 


S fe 


Palebankz 


TAERGOSS 


Ruinsof 
IoEN 


Px 
d 
4 


È 


OF 


fe 


Map 3.6: GREVING WILOLANDS 


GREYING WILDLANDS 


Pressed against the northeastern coast of Wynandir is 
a desert of ice and snow, separated from the Dwenda- 
lian Empire by the jagged Dunrock Mountains and the 
Quannah Breach. This landscape of dense, desiccated 
forests, rolling mountains, and icy tundra is known as 
the Greying Wildlands, the southern part of the Biting 
North that encompasses this region as well as the is- 
lands of Eiselcross. The empire has struggled to expand 
into the region, leaving its denizens to focus on their 
own survival in the harsh territory, where wandering 
outlanders and barbarous hunters stalk the unchecked 
wilderness. Tucked beyond the edge of the empire’s 
reach, past the shadowed dangers of the dense, frozen 
foliage, lies the dwarven citadel of Uthodurn, which has 
become the home of many elves who survived the de- 
struction of Molaesmyr. 


BLOOMING GROVE 


Nearly ten miles northwest of Shadycreek Run, deep 
in the Savalirwood, a centuries-old willow grove and 
small temple have held back the curse that darkens 
these woods. The Clay family, heralds to the Wild 
Mother and the Arch Heart, built this holy place as a 
funeral grove of renewal, designed to return the bodies 


BROS 
OAS Uthodurn 


Ay Vee eo x 


a R f ; J 4 & 
ARlotkeAlps 


ZN we f Zz, 


of the fallen to nature while letting their spirits move 
on. Each bloodline that is interred among the swampy 
ponds and vibrant leaves nurtures a wholly unique 
flower, giving the location the macabre nickname of the 
Bone Orchard. 

Time does not stand still, however. The curse of the 
wood has eaten away at the holy boundaries of the 
grove. Dark vines and thorns reclaim layer on layer of 
fences and grave markers, pushing the once-expansive 
grove into a small patch of defiant green at the base of 
the temple. Only one of the keepers remained to watch 
over the decay of their grove, and now this priest, named 
Caduceus, has left in the hopes of discovering a way to 
reclaim the orchard and the ancestry it protects in the 
name of Melora. 


BOROFTKRAH 


Population: 3,060 (70% orcs, 17% half-orcs, 13% 
other races) 

Government: The town is guided by a circle of elder 
warriors known as the Runemarked. 

Defense: A force of hunter-warriors defends the settle- 
ment, but every able-bodied citizen is trained in com- 
bat to defend Boroftkrah. 

Commerce: Basic everyday supplies are available, as 
well as simple crafts and weapons. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


112 


CRYSTALSANDS TUNDRA 


Organizations: A shrine to Kord sits in the center of 
the town, but no organizations, religious or otherwise, 
exist in Boroftkrah. 


After the orc’s creator god Gruumsh was banished in 
the Divergence, many of the war clans of his bloody 
army fled and went into hiding. Splintered from the 
same throng of Odakar orcs that held the Ashkeeper 
Peaks, the leaderless droves migrated northward to the 
Rime Plains. Although they were severed from the di- 
rect influence of the Ruiner, the directionless orcs began 
to succumb to the Ruiner’s “gift” of bloodlust. A schism 
tore the clans asunder, and from the bloodshed emerged 
a new clan of orcish marauders known as the Jez-Araz. 
The remaining champions of the Odakar clan, deter- 
mined to survive, found inspiration in Kord, the Storm 
Lord they had once fought against. They formed an or- 
ganized clan of warrior orcs who seek to overcome the 
Ruiner’s murderous influence and find strength within 
themselves. From this new path, the Boroftkrah orc clan 
and the settlement of Boroftkrah was born, creating a 
strong community that values deeds done in service to 
the clan. The orcs of Boroftkrah wander the surround- 
ing plains in heavy furs and leathers, seeking ways to 
commune with Kord through challenges of survival and 
contests of hunting and tracking skill. While the clan 
is overwhelmingly of orcish descent, on rare occasions 
they welcome outsiders who prove themselves strong in 
the eyes of Kord. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


SURMOUNTING THE CURSE 

Like many of their southern brethren, the orcs of Bo- 
roftkrah continue to eschew the hunger for violence 
that Gruumsh supposedly instilled in the orcish people 
when he created them. They take pride in victory and 
the success of the hunt, making great offerings of pow- 
erful prey to the Storm Lord. They channel their desire 
for war into battling the harsh lands that surround them 
to ensure the survival of their community. While most 
Boroftkrah orcs choose to shed their shackles of mur- 
derous rage, they remain territorial, often fighting their 
ferocious Jez-Araz cousins or coming into conflict with 
hunting parties from Uthodurn. 


GOVERNMENT 

The settlement is guided bya circle of elder warriors 
who have proven themselves the strongest and most 
dedicated to the survival of the clan. If the circle has a 
vacancy, volunteers prove their worthiness in a series of 
contests before the central idol of Kord, ending with a 
rune-casting ceremony that invokes Kord’s will toward 
who will become an elder warrior. Under these elder 
warriors, all others are equal and trained to take up 
arms if the settlement is in danger. 


CRIME 

Crime is not common within Boroftkrah. A strong sense 
of honor often prevents the urge for criminal activity. It 
is rare for anyone within the clan to steal or take from 
others, unless both parties agree to a challenge to see 


who is worthy. Those that do steal are shamed as un- 
worthy and exiled from the clan to wander the Greying 
Wildlands alone. 


GEOGRAPHY 

The settlement of Boroftkrah is a loose collection of 
tents and shelters surrounded by a tall fence of wooden 
pikes. The town is created to be mobile if serious dan- 
ger threatens its current location. Neighborhoods are 
formed in large circles of homesteads called lods. Giant 
boars and powerful worgs of the plains are trained as 
mounts and kept in scattered holding pens. 


BOROFTKRAH ADVENTURES 

Navigating Boroftkrah is its own adventure. To gain the 
trust of the orcs, the characters must prove themselves 
in contests of strength. 

Storm Celebration (Low Level). When lightning 
splits the sky, the Boroftkrah orcs honor Kord with 
competitive games that last until the storm breaks. 
Characters who have earned the orcs’ trust might find 
themselves volunteered as participants or judges during 
such a time. Meanwhile, an orc eye of Gruumsh leads a 
band of orc and orog warriors who have secretly begun 
worshiping the Ruiner. They plan to display their faith 
during the contest by turning the games into a blood- 
bath, hoping to convert other orcs with the promise of 
glorious bloodshed, and murder any who resist. 


CINDERREST SANCTUM 


Hidden along the eastern slopes of Kravaraad is a cav- 
ern of onyx, where a pool of uncooling lava sits at the 
heart of the black stone grotto. Within this spacious 
chamber, black iron adornments and supports bear tales 
etched in runes. Carved reliefs depict dwarven interpre- 
tations of Melora granting stone and ore from below the 
ground to Moradin the All-Hammer, for him to craft into 
great halls and mighty guardians. 

This shrine has been watched over by the Dust family 
for generations, maintained by the offerings delivered 
by the reverent of Uthodurn. Those who make the pil- 
grimage to Cinderrest Sanctum are invited to pray to 
Melora and Moradin, while perhaps gaining access to 
the Underforge, a great forge built over many decades as 
tribute to the partnership between the two deities. With 
their divine blessings, it is said that powerful artifacts 
with great destinies are crafted. 


CRYSTALSANDS TUNDRA 


During the Age of Arcanum, this land was a vibrant 
continuation of the Veluthil Forest. However, stories 
speak of a great battle during the Calamity that violently 
dashed this region into rock and sand. Winter quickly 
reclaimed the new desert, the sands freezing over with 
northern ice and snow. Tall dunes glitter like piles of 
diamonds in the daylight, shifting with high winds and 
the movements of the remorhazes and frost worms that 
burrow and hunt beneath the sands. Nomadic clans of 
northern goblins form hunting parties and ride winter 
wolves, stalking the furred beasts that call these frosted 
dunes home. Other beings stay hidden to avoid the giant 


hawks and giant owls that fly over from the Flotket Alps 
in search of prey. In times of fresh snowfall, travel is ex- 
tremely dangerous, since the soft powder obscures the 
shifting sands and ice-marked tunnels that lead to the 
gnashing jaws of the subterranean frost worms. Some 
travelers have speculated that, depending on the winds, 
great structures of forgotten epochs become partially re- 
vealed as the sands and frost are temporarily scattered, 
only to be swallowed up once more as the dunes shift in 
the next storm. 


WORSHIPERS OF THE WORM 

A tribe of wildfolk who worship Quajath are scattered 
across the northern fields of the Crystalsands, calling 
themselves the Mawcotters. They hunt by digging tun- 
nels and caves in the sands and nearby rock, then lying 
in wait to spring when their quarry falls into the trap. 
These fanatical people make an annual journey across 
the treacherous Frigid Depths to the Eiselcross island 
of Gelier to mine flesh from the frozen body of Quajath. 
This meat is then brought back to the Crystalsands and 
ritualistically devoured by the leaders of these worm- 
cults, and by the young as a rite of adulthood. Fortu- 
nately for them, the flesh travels long enough before con- 
sumption to avoid the full wormkin transformation (see 
“Tomb of the Worm” later in this chapter). The Mawcot- 
ters eagerly seek a way to one day free their patron from 
its icy prison. 


CRYSTALSANDS TUNDRA ADVENTURES 
Traversing these endless fields of frozen dust is a thrill- 
ing and dangerous journey for any adventurer. 

Fair-Weather Friends (Mid Level). While crossing 
the wind-swept snow dunes, the characters encounter 
three young remorhazes that do not attack. They are in- 
stead following Shwells (chaotic neutral, female, gnome 
scout), who wields a recently scavenged pale, blue orb 
that keeps the creatures docile. She will not part with 
the orb and has grown attached to her monstrous com- 
panions, but characters with arcane knowledge will 
notice the orb is drawing more remorhazes to it from all 
across the tundra, and the magicthat subdues the crea- 
tures appears to be rapidly fading. 


FLOTKET ALPS 


Dominating the central region between the Crys- 
talsands Tundra and the Rime Plains, the range of 
mountains known as the Flotket Alps is a majestic, 
snow-covered land of scattered pine trees and rough 
slopes that rise to dizzyingly sharp peaks. Nomadic 
trolls and roving wyverns claim the caves and alcoves 
of the mountainsides, hunting other inhabitants who've 
also adapted to the arctic weather. This alpine expanse 
is often battered by harsh blizzards, pushing some 
denizens underground into the maze of ice caverns 
that wind throughout the range, abandoned by some 
long-forgotten society and turned into the home of sev- 
eral warring frost giant clans. Among the natural chaos 
of the alps, the subterranean city of Uthodurn and its 
people seek to tame the wild crags around them and 
spread beyond the boundaries of this frozen highland. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


114. 


FLOTKET ALPS ADVENTURES 

Icy spires and snowy paths wind though these moun- 
tains, leading travelers who survive the Alps to new 
challenges and rewards. 

A Deserving Dare (High Level). Hidden among the 
shallow chasms of ice is the lair of Yondis the Winter 
Star, an androsphinx with pure white fur. It watches 
over the tomb of a heroic group of champions who sac- 
rificed themselves in the final battles of the Calamity. 
Those who wish to claim the arms and instruments 
of these legendary figures must prove their worth to 
Yondis through numerous quests or challenges—and the 
sphinx has no mercy for those who fail. 


Ivory LAKE 


Fed by the annual snow melt and heavy rains that wash 
across the Flotket Alps, Ivory Lake is the largest source 
of standing fresh water in the region. Many creatures 
throughout the Rime Plains make their way to the lake 
during the summer when the waters are thawed and the 
fish are plentiful. The banks of the lake are dangerous 
for smaller beasts and humanoids alike, as wyverns 
and other predators lie in wait to gorge on unsuspecting 
travelers. 


KRAVARAAD 


Black, burning, and defiant against the frost and cold of 
the north, the volcano of Kravaraad looms in the heart 
of the Flotket Alps. Perpetual streaks of dark smoke 
rise up to blend with heavy steam from the trails of 
molten rock that cool against the surrounding ice. The 
mountain is known for a continuous, gradual flow of 
glowing lava from multiple vents, but massive eruptions 
are extremely rare. The heat of the lava allows a pair of 
adjacent freshwater lakes, known as the Mistpools, to 
provide liquid water year-round. Its dramatic presence 
among the pale, snow-powdered trails of the Flotkets 
makes Kravaraad an important landmark for travel- 
ers in the snowy region. Hardier creatures live in the 
surrounding snowmelt, often competing for territory 
against the fire giants who claim the northern side and 
interior of the volcano. Many such battles echo through 
the mountains like distant thunder, calling other deni- 
zens to come witness the struggle, or to wait and finish 
off the survivors. 


KRAVARAAD ADVENTURES 
The volcano attracts creatures dangerous enough to 
make traveling near Kravaraad an adventure of its own. 
Vault of the Fire Giants (High Level). Kravaraad’s 
fire giants have greedily amassed treasure since the 
time before the Calamity. To reach their subterranean 
vault, the characters must sneak by or carve through the 
latest creatures who have challenged the fire giants (of- 
ten frost giants or other creatures that can endure the 
cold). But making it to the fire giants is only half the bat- 
tle. The fire giants have hewn a vast dungeon under the 
mountain, and characters must navigate its perils while 
maintaining their balance whenever Kravaraad causes 
the entire complex to tremble. The vault itself is guarded 
by an enslaved adult red dragon that longs to be free. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


MyYTHBURROW 


In the farthest reaches of the northeast Greying Wild- 
lands, tucked low near the base of the Flotket Alps, the 
ominous, icicle-wreathed mouth of a deep mountain 
cavern plunges into the heart of the rocky range. The 
locals who call this place Mythburrow tell stories of a 
monstrous, ancient being that claims dominion over 

the surrounding lands. Tales of a bellowing roar that 
shakes the valley have been told for centuries, and some 
even claim to have seen the frightful wingspan of the 
immense white-scaled dragon that calls Mythburrow 
home. While many joke about the siren call of a dragon’s 
hoard, few have the mettle to venture into this cavern in 
search of wealth and glory—and those who did enter the 
cave never returned. 


MYTHBURROW ADVENTURES 

Deep within the Mythburrow, something old and ter- 
rible shifts in seclusion, plotting its next hunt in the 
lands above. 

Gelidon (High Level). All trade and communication 
from Palebank Village (described below) halts suddenly 
and without warning. When the characters are sent to 
investigate, they find the entire area transformed into a 
frozen nightmare, the village leveled and the remaining 
corpses locked within jagged ice. Uthodurnian scouts 
report sightings of the long-dormant ancient white 
dragon Gelidon returning to its lair in Mythburrow. 

The Diarchy of Uthodurn puts out the call to all mon- 
ster hunters and heroes, setting a handsome bounty on 
the head of Gelidon. The characters must now clamber 
down the twisting tunnels of the Mythburrow and de- 
stroy the powerful wyrm before their competition can 
claim the gold and glory. 


PALEBANK VILLAGE 


Population: 690 (61% dwarves, 32% elves, 3% gnomes, 
4% other races) 

Government: The elf ranger Elro Aldataur is the ap- 
pointed leader of the village. He delegates tasks to 
proven friends and trustworthy allies. 

Defense: Elro commands a small force of errant Glass- 
blades. Some civilians are willing to take up arms to 
defend the city in moments of crisis. 

Commerce: Basic supplies can be purchased or traded 
at the small inns or supply shacks. 

Organizations: There are two humble temples to Mora- 
din and Corellon, respectively. Uthodurn governs from 
afar, while the Tribes of Shadycreek send agents to 
seek more information about Eiselcross. 


Along the cold shore of the Frigid Depths, Palebank 
Village marks the first surviving Uthodurn outpost be- 
yond the mountains. The settlement is situated against 
the low cliff boundary of the Crystalsands Tundra, just 
north of the Flotket Alps. The denizens of Palebank 
often take to ice fishing, trapping, or hunting, returning 
in small caravans to Uthodurn to sell their wares and re- 
stock their supplies. Territorial monsters wander close 
to the village, so rotating squads of Glassblades are 
assigned to protect the people. The small docks have 
been recently expanded to accommodate the increased 


interest in heading northwest toward Eiselcross. Pale- 
bank has become a launching point for northern expedi- 
tions, leading to growing trade and a pressing need for 
more inns. 


GOVERNMENT 

The village is guided by Elro Aldataur, a weathered 

elf ranger who helped found Palebank roughly sixty 
years ago. Stoic and humorless, Elro showed a knack 
for leadership when the fledgling outpost was beset 
with danger on a near-constant basis. Elro earned the 
trust and respect of the residents, and they asked him 
to govern Palebank. He begrudgingly accepted, and 
has since overseen the expansion and protection of the 
village. Elro generally has sixty to ninety Glassblades at 
his command. 


CRIME 

The people of Palebank must work together to survive in 
this frigid land, and there is little room in the small com- 
munity to conduct any worthwhile larceny or immoral 
activity. What crimes do occur are born out of necessity 
and punished accordingly by Elro. 


GEOGRAPHY 

Surrounded by four watchtowers and a ten-foot-tall 
palisade of sharpened logs, Palebank is a ramshackle 
village locked in eternal winter. The village is made up 
of over a hundred cabins and shacks. It’s too small to 
have distinct neighborhoods, so most businesses and 
residences were established wherever they could fit at 
the time, creating a meandering layout. Off the northern 
cliff, about fifteen feet down to the sand-and-snow beach, 
the docks hold around a dozen ships, ranging from fish- 
ing vessels to small cargo ships that carry expeditions to 
and from Eiselcross. 


PALEBANK VILLAGE ADVENTURES 

Palebank Village would be a sleepy place without much 
excitement were it not for the presence of eager explor- 
ers and the settlement’s importance as a waystation 
between Uthodurn and the islands of Eiselcross. 

Troll Night (Mid Level). While the characters stay in 
Palebank Village, the only survivor of an unlucky Glass- 
blades patrol staggers into the village. An organized 
band of trolls is coming down from the Flotket Alps 
toward the settlement, which needs every able-bodied 
warrior to keep the trolls at bay. How did these trolls get 
so organized, and what do they seek in the village? 


RIME PLAINS 


These fields of rolling tundra and bursts of boreal forest 
stretch on and on, covering the southeastern Greying 
Wildlands. Wild muskox and snow foxes wander across 
the rocky grassland, as wolves, saber-toothed tigers, 
and other beasts hunt to survive the freezing nights. 
Humans have not yet encroached on this region, and 
the people of Uthodurn abandoned their expansion into 
the plains, so wayfaring orcs and goblinoid bands have 
claimed areas of the region unchallenged. The Rime 
Plains are a mostly open, untamed wilderness where 
survival depends on one’s ability to endure the elements 
and navigate the wilds skillfully. 


ROVING SAVAGERY 

While the Boroftkrah orcs managed to temper their fury 
through their worship of the Storm Lord, a number of 
their kin embraced their violent past and abandoned the 
rest to seek greater conquests. Now known as the Jez- 
Araz, or “Breakers of Spirits,” these violent orcs live in 
scattered, nomadic groups that hunt around the plains 
and the lower Flotket Alps. Praising Gruumsh through 
acts of brutality, the Jez-Araz hunting parties are a fear- 
some sight for any wanderer to behold. 


RUINS OF MOLAESMYR 


Just north of the Boreal Omen River, toward the center 
of the warped Savalirwood forest, looms the ravaged 
elven city of Molaesmyr. Once a beautiful city filled with 
erudite scholars and designed to blend in with the tow- 
ering trees by masterful elven architects, the metropolis 
now lies abandoned. The canopy of trees above the 
ruins is thick enough to block most of the sun, and mas- 
sive, twisting bramble vines choke the streets and roof- 
tops, spreading into the surrounding woods like veins 
from a corrupted heart. Crumbling spires lean against 
trees swollen with disease, halls of learning are smoth- 
ered by toxic fungus and moss, and a perpetual heavy 
fog obscures the dangers that lurk in unseen alcoves. All 
manner of terrible fey creatures now call this city home. 
The rest of the woods are filled with natural forest den- 
izens mutated by errant magics as well as many elves 
who were caught in the horrifying catastrophe and who 
now stalk the shadows as terrible monstrosities, mock- 
eries of their former selves. 

The ruins are considered the source of the corrupt 
magics that still spread throughout the Savalirwood, 
twisting its inhabitants and keeping the elves of Mo- 
laesmyr from their home for over two hundred and fifty 
years. Many factions throughout the Greying Wildlands 
have their eyes on the ancient city, eager to uncover its 
secrets and its treasures. Expeditions from Uthodurn 
into the blighted city delve beyond the outer edges, seek- 
ing the central tower of Caes Mosor and the labyrinth 
beneath, where it is believed that the dark magic was 
unleashed. The Uthodurnian expeditions hope to un- 
cover relics and clues that could be the key to reversing 
this desolation, but these dungeoneers now contend 
with not only the hungry monsters, but also hired mer- 
cenaries and greedy thieves from Shadycreek Run who 
seek to steal these same secrets for profit. The blood 
of both factions has been spilled in the streets of Mo- 
laesmyr, and the dark spirits of the city seem to relish 
the violence. 


RUINS OF MOLAESMYR ADVENTURES 

The ruins of Molaesmyr can tempt the characters into 
their dangers with the promise of forgotten treasures 
and magic. 

Cackles in the Dark (Low Level). Auntie Rottongue, 
Nanny Filthtouch, and Granny Pustreat are a coven of 
green hags living in the labyrinth beneath the ruins 
of Molaesmyr. The hags send their minions to steal 
children from Shadycreek Run, then use them as test 
subjects for new, dark rituals. The minions are sup- 
posed to take children who will not be missed, but when 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


116 


they kidnap a Mardoon child, the characters are hired to 
delve into the ruins and recover the victim while facing 
the hags’ corrupted fey minions. 


SAVALIRWOOD 


This area was once a beautiful thicket known as the 
Veluthil Forest, enchanted with fey magics and guarded 
by elven outposts. Nearly three centuries ago, the forest 
suffered a terrible curse wrought from the disaster that 
felled Molaesmyr. In the centuries since, the fey magics 
have grown twisted and dark, the denizens corrupt and 
feral. Spirits and monsters crawl up from under the 
cold, rotted forest floor, while shadowy whispers bring 
nightmares to those who sleep beneath the sinister 
trees. The forest has been renamed the Savalirwood, for 
the elven word savalir, meaning “guilt.” It has become a 
dangerous obstacle for travel, playing a major role in the 
Dwendalian Empire’s inability to expand northward to 
plunder the ruins of Molaesmyr or conquer Uthodurn. In 
this most recent century, the less-dangerous outskirts of 
the forest have become havens for criminals, leading to 
the establishment of Shadycreek Run. 

Throughout the Savalirwood, a handful of small 
groves and clearings combat the magical miasma that 
infects the rest of the wood. Within many of these rela- 
tively protected locales, wild magic thrives and gentler 
(if slightly mad) fey guard the surrounding glades, often 
enthralling wandering humanoids and capturing them 
to keep the fey company—forever. A community of re- 
served, thick-furred tabaxi called the Nightback Clan 
lives among the dangers of the Savalirwood, occasion- 
ally coming to the aid of others in need, seeking allies in 
their struggle to survive. 


THE NIGHTBACK CLAN 

Many denizens ofthe Veluthil were slain following the 
destruction of Molaesmyr and the spread of the mysteri- 
ous curse that transformed the wood, but one group of 
tabaxi from the southern reaches of the forest survived 
and refused to flee. Knowing that the spirits of their 
ancestors were bound to the trees, they chose to stay 
and adapt, learning to live a nomadic life among the 
perpetual threats of the forest. Devoted to Melora, the 
Nightback Clan patrols the forest for food and locations 
to briefly make home. Unpleasant encounters with folk 
from Shadycreek Run have left some of the Nightback 
Clan eager to terrorize any unlucky thieves found in the 
Savalirwood. The Nightback Clan also blames the elves 
of Molaesmyr for the tragedy that claimed the forest and 
refuses to speak to or work with any representatives 

of Uthodurn. 


SAVALIRWOOD ADVENTURES 
Every journey through the dangerous, weird, and cor- 
rupt Savalirwood is an adventure. 

Nightback Negotiation (Low Level). The Nightback 
Clan captured a merchant caravan traveling through the 
Savalirwood, suspecting that the travelers are thieves. 
The characters are hired by the merchant’s family to 
rescue the caravan. If they can track the tabaxi through 
the woods, they must either convince the Nightback 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


Clan that the travelers are innocent or fight to free the 
captives. Things grow more complicated when the ta- 
baxi present compelling evidence that this merchant 
caravan is more than just a group of simple travelers. 

Treantwatch (Mid Level). While traveling through 
the forest, the characters encounter a treant who insists 
on guiding them safely through the Savalirwood. The 
treant claims to know every nook and cranny in the 
forest, as well as its dangers. On the surface, it seems 
very helpful. However, the curse afflicting the forest has 
driven the treant mad and made it delusional. All the 
dangers it describes are inventions of its twisted mind, 
and it has a knack for leading the characters into one 
perilous situation after another. 

The treant’s refusal to divulge its name is the first clue 
that something is amiss. In truth, the treant no longer 
remembers its name. 

Mapping the Gates (High Level). Erma Schnieb 
(chaotic neutral lightfoot halfling mage) believes that 
the curse infecting the Savalirwood creates portals to 
the Lower Planes. She hires the characters to explore 
the forest with her to find and map these gates. In addi- 
tion to the usual nightmares that stalk the forest paths, 
fiends patrol the gates and attack anyone who tries to 
close the planar doors. 


SHADYCREEK RUN 


Population: 14,770 (56% humans, 15% elves, 14% 
dwarves, 15% other races) 

Government: Four organized crime families and the 
citizen-run Greytrader Union vie for control of the 
city, while the mercenary peacekeepers of the Grudge 
Gang attempt to prevent complete chaos. 

Defense: The Tribes of Shadycreek Run each employ 
personal soldiers and bodyguards, while the Grudge 
Gang defends the city at large. 

Commerce: Most general goods are available, and rare 
imports and stolen commodities are sold and auc- 
tioned in secret. Many taverns, inns, and places of vice 
are open to the public. 

Organizations: Most business is run by one of the 
Tribes or the Union, even if alliances are hidden. The 
city has scattered, humble temples. 


Past the northern outposts of Wynandir, a scattered 

line of shantytowns and hovels chokes the pathway 

into the trees of the wildlands alongside a small creek. 
Originally comprised of a patchwork of makeshift, im- 
poverished societies run by cruel slumlords, Shadycreek 
Run is now known as a hive of criminal activity and 
savage humanity given free reign. The degenerate dregs 
of civilization see this place as a chance to gain untold 
fame and power. Most debates end in a brawl, and most 
brawls end in bloodshed. 

The harsh, unguarded environment breeds a tough 
people, and despite the ravaging beasts that pick off 
easy prey from the outskirts, proud groups of hunters 
and skinners have risen to become prominent traders. 
Some intelligent figures have begun to organize and civ- 
ilize life in the Run, hoping to bring a modicum of order 
and respect to the collection of reprobates, while the 


veterans of the Run fight to keep things unpredictable, 

undermining these attempts with violence. The volatile 
society underscores the age-old adage, “they call it the 

Run for a reason.” 


DANGEROUS VOCATIONS 

Many who choose to live within Shadycreek Run do so 
to avoid the persecution (or prosecution) that awaits 
within the empire, while others have a taste for the bru- 
tal lifestyle afforded by a land of overt moral flexibility. 
Professions here range from artisans and craftsman to 
farmers, mercenaries, and entertainers. However, the 
most profitable entrepreneurs in the region are thieves, 
hunters, and scavengers who brave the deadly Savalir- 
wood and the ruins of Molaesmyr. Powerful beasts yield 
hearty meat and furs, while recovered relics and lost 
magics fetch quite the price in distant markets. The 
struggle over these prizes often grows bloody, as the 
Tribes and the Greytrader Union battle to gain control 
of these trades, while also competing with the people 
of Uthodurn who wish to reclaim their heritage and lost 
belongings. 


ADVERSARIAL RULERSHIP 
Currently, Shadycreek Run is divided between three 
competitive factions: the Greytrader Union, the Tribes, 
and the Grudge Gang. 

The Greytrader Union is a faction of reformed out- 
casts and criminals who want to establish firm trade 


relationships with outside societies and help salvage 
Shadycreek Run by making it a safer, more functional 
community. The members of the union don’t abide 
imperial rule, and they enjoy the freedom of a lawless 
lifestyle, but they also wish to be free of the legacy of 
violence for which Shadycreek Run is known. Made up 
of trappers, hunters, builders, and craftsmen from all 
walks of life, the Greytrader Union wishes to institute 
self-appointed marshals to keep the peace. They aim to 
increase the safety of civilians, turn the Run into a re- 
spectable destination for trade, and eventually diminish 
the influence of the Tribes and the Grudge Gang. 

The Tribes are a collective of rival criminal families 
whoran the Run for nearly a century before they lost 
much of their dominance to violent infighting and in- 
ternal power struggles. Comprised of the Mardoon, 
Uttolot, Trebain, and Jagentoth families, the Tribes 
work to maintain control over most of the business that 
transpires in the city, and conspire against each other in 
secret. While each family center is usually composed of 
relatives by blood or marriage, their employees are also 
considered “within the family,” so long as they remain 
loyal. The Tribes fence stolen goods, provide vice and 
bawdy entertainment, and control the populace through 
confusion, intimidation, and fear. 

The Grudge Gang is a hardened company of merce- 
naries who act as the muscle to enforce local interests 
within the Run. Founded by a band of deserters from 
the Dwendalian army, they've grown into a battalion of 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


warriors loyal to coin and each other. Members of the 
gang will happily work for the Greytrader Union or any 
of the families of the Tribes, so long as their business 
isn’t bloody enough to harm innocents or put the safety 
of the Run at stake. Since the other factions rely on 

the Grudge Gang for protection from the terrors of the 
Savalirwood, its members consider themselves neutral 
instruments in the political chess game. Some mem- 
bers of the gang have assigned themselves to maintain 
order in a land without law, calling themselves Taskers 
and doing their best to keep the innocent ffom being 
crushed by the city’s predators. Their priorities revolve 
around lending their skills to whoever pays the best, 
maintaining livable streets, and keeping the dangers 
of the Savalirwood and the Dwendalian Empire out 

of the city. 


GOVERNMENT 

The city has no central government or laws, so much of 
it is held together by a vague sense of “live and let live,” 
broken by occasional bursts of “take what I want.” If vio- 
lence spirals out of control, the Grudge Gang’s Taskers 
step in and beat everyone involved to a pulp. It’s not un- 
common for careless folk to wind up dead in a snow-cov- 
ered alley, stripped of their goods and left to be eaten by 
starving dogs. Denizens of the Run learn to watch their 
backs and warily wield blades. 


STREETS OF SHADYCREEK RUN 


GEOGRAPHY 

What began as an extended string of shanties and 
shacks built along the southern treeline of the Savalir- 
wood has turned into a three-mile-long, crooked main 
street called Clover Alley, lined with hovels, buildings, 
and mudholes. The neighborhoods on the southern side 
of the Alley, called the South Clover, are the most impov- 
erished and least maintained areas of the city, known 
for extremely desperate folk and even more dangerous 
business. The northern side, called the North Clover, 

is partially built into the Savalirwood itself, and houses 
the wealthy and powerful denizens of the Run, including 
most of the families of the Tribes, who live in various 
mansions and small strongholds. 

The western end of the Clover Alley, known as the 
Wickerskids, is home to the scavengers and farmers 
who do their best to coax the harsh lands of the cold 
north to produce food for the people of Shadycreek Run. 
The central square of Clover Alley is named Clover 
Plaza and marks the heart of commerce, conflict, and 
vice within the city. In the plaza, all factions mingle in 
broad daylight, disguising their hidden agendas with 
a bawdy and loud lifestyle of indulgence and excess. 
The eastern end of Clover Alley, called the Gruff Slum, 
houses a cluster of peasants and cutpurses who live 
among drug dens and pig pens. 


SHADYCREEK RUN ADVENTURES 
Slack laws and the promise of easy money draw many 
opportunists to these dangerous streets. 

A Stolen Heart (Low Level). At the Trench Tavern, 
the characters join a drinking game with some of the 
local Grudge Gang. Win or lose, an orc member of the 
gang, Dratto, reveals their connection with the Mardoon 
family. Dratto mentions that they need some hands to 
steal a Molaesmyr relic currently held by the Trebain 
family. The characters can turn Dratto into the Trebains 
to gain their favor or agree to aid in the theft. 

If the characters agree to help Dratto, a dangerous 
burglary ensues. They must infiltrate a guarded shed 
outside the Wickerskids, only to discover the relic is 
actually a slumbering pixie. This creature wakes in the 
presence of the characters, when a mysterious aspect 
of one character’s nature draws the pixie from out of its 
torpor and binds its affection to the character. 

King’s Spy (Any Level). Nella Durlon (lawful neutral, 
nonbinary, human spy) lives in Shadycreek Run as a 
spy for the empire. They gather information about the 
settlement’s defenses to take back to Oliver Schrieber 
(see “Dwendalian Empire” in chapter 2). The characters 
learn of Nella’s job from a faction that hires them to find 
the spy. Depending on the faction, the characters must 
either escort Nella safely out of the settlement so they 
can report to Oliver, or ask that Nella be killed for giving 
away the settlement’s secrets. Either way, finding Nella 
is no small task. The spy is a master of their craft and 
blends in with the criminals and ruffians of the Run. 


URALISS 


The small town of Uraliss was Uthodurn’s first attempt 
to expand beyond its mountain halls. Uraliss was set- 
tled with the intent of becoming a farming village to aid 
in crop production. As the town began construction, 
arcane wards were developed and placed along a patch 
of snow-covered field at the base of the Flotket Alps. 
The wards were designed to slowly melt the snow and 
hopefully help develop the area into farmable land. How- 
ever, the town was beset by orcs and other threats from 
the Rime Plains, and the town’s hopes were further 
crushed when the land beneath the snow was found 

to be rocky and untillable. The settlement was quickly 
abandoned and is now a crumbling ghost town left to be 
vandalized and repurposed by the Boroftkrah orcs of 
the Rime Plains. 


URALISS ADVENTURES 

Characters might goto Uraliss to retrieve something 
left behind, study its arcane wards, or hunt a beast that 
lurks in the ghost town. 

Haunted Temple of the All-Hammer (Low Level). 
The Boroftkrah orcs avoid Uraliss’s temple of Moradin 
at all costs. The temple is filled with specters of dwarves 
and elves captured by a high priest who went mad and 
locked her congregation in the temple during the final 
orc raid. All her victims starved to death, as did the 
priest herself, who became a wraith. The characters 
could come to this building to find a lost treasure of 
Moradin, or to escape other threats as they pass through 
the ruined town. 


UTHODURN 


Population: 26,240 (56% dwarves, 36% elves, 4% 
gnomes, 4% other races) 

Government: A diarchy between the dwarven and elven 
monarchs rules over the populace, each leader sup- 
ported by a council of nobles who share the responsi- 
bilities of overseeing the city and its functions. 

Defense: Uthodurn maintains a well-trained army of 
Glassblades to keep the peace and stations scouts and 
skirmishers across the Flotket Alps. Nobles also em- 
ploy bodyguards. 

Commerce: Most basic goods and services are avail- 
able. Uthodurn’s isolation means that imports are 
limited and inns for outsiders are scarce. 

Organizations: Numerous temples dot the Volition Disc 
area of the city, and competing guilds do business un- 
der the oversight of the councils. Hidden agents from 
the Tribes of Shadycreek Run have begun to find their 
way into the city. 


Hidden among the icy peaks of the Flotket Alps, the 
northernmost dwarven stronghold of Wildemount 

is ensconced in the base of a steep mountain valley. 
Uthodurn is a bastion of dwarven culture, home toa 
secluded people who've endured the freezing tempera- 
tures and continuous snowfall across the mountains 
and surrounding lands since they founded the strong- 
hold nearly eight hundred years ago. The dwarves of 
Uthodurn are sharp of wit, hairier than their southern 
brethren, and as unyielding as the rock they live in. The 
Queen of Uthodurn broke from stubborn dwarven tradi- 
tions and opened the city’s doors to thousands of elven 
refugees following the destruction of Molaesmyr nearly 
three centuries ago. While there have been moments 

of conflict between the dwarves and elves as ancient 
grudges are briefly revived, the society within these fire- 
warmed stone halls has grown into a unique union of 
both cultures. 


A HARSH ENVIRONMENT 

Beyond the iron doors of the city, the wildlands sur- 
rounding the underground stronghold are brutally cold 
and battered by cutting winds. The people of Uthodurn 
hunt and track in bursts, like sudden flurries of snow, 
stalking the wild white bison and cliffneck goats that 
call the Flotket Alps home. The dwarves and elves of 
Uthodurn have adapted to their environment, becoming 
skilled hunters and trackers as well as hearty travelers 
used to persisting through extreme conditions. As the 
hunter’s saying goes, “squeezing water from a stone 
might be hard, but snaring a rabbit from the Flots is 
harder.” A strong martial force is necessary to combat 
dangers such as frost giant clans and snow-faring gobli- 
noid bands that hunt throughout the slopes and caverns 
of the mountain range, and the masters of Uthodurn 
have trained fierce warriors and spellslingers. 


DUAL SOCIETIES, DUAL SKILLS 

Uthodurn has the unique distinction of being the only 
place in Wildemount where dwarven and elven lifestyles 
and traditions come together within one location. The 
resulting collaborations have created incredible new 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


119 


[20 


THE FIERY VOLCANO KRAVARAAD LOOMS OVER THE SNOW-COVERED FLOTKET Arps, 


HOME OF THE DIARCHY OF UTHODURN. 


crafts and means of circumventing the challenges of 

the region. Dwarven carving techniques blend with 
elven arcane knowledge to elevate architecture and 
excavation capabilities. Historical knowledge of the lo- 
cal vegetation meets refined herbalism to cultivate and 
grow cold-resistant crops. The crafting and smithing 
techniques of each lineage entwine and complement one 
another, making Uthodurnian goods that pass beyond 
the Greying Wildlands valuable indeed. 


Love Knows No BounpDs 

Dwarves and elves have lived together under the same 
roof and banner for centuries within Uthodurn. Over 
those years, they have forged ties of mutual respect, 
and romances and unions between elves and dwarves 
have also become increasingly common as the years 
progress. Though such partnerships were initially con- 
sidered scandalous, they came to be met with tolerance, 
and eventually celebration. While an elf and dwarf may 
indeed produce offspring, the curiously stubborn nature 
of both ancestries produces a child that is either an elf 
or a dwarf, though a child of either race often inherits 
minor physical attributes from the other parent. Such 
children are affectionately referred to as attalwen, or 
“two-hearted.” 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


STRIKE IT RICH 

The Diarchy of Uthodurn rewards those who discover 
magic items in the wastes of Foren, driving Uthodurn’s 
most experienced—and most desperate—explorers to 
Syrinlya. Uthodurn doesn’t have the funds to support 
a full expedition in Foren, so they provide incentives 
for citizens who gather such items. The city provides 
free transportation to and from Syrinlya, in addition to 
rewarding discoveries, because they are desperate for 
items that could provide them with more resources, 
guard them from an invasion from the Dwendalian Em- 
pire or the Kryn Dynasty, or help cure the corruption 
in the Savalirwood. A handful of scholars believe the 
source of the Savalirwood’s corruption might even be 
tied to something within the ruins of Aeor. 


GOVERNMENT 

The stronghold of Uthodurn is ruled bythe dual mon- 
archs, the dwarf Queen Simone Fruunast and the elf 
King Imathan Talviel, who each oversee their own small 
council. Most matters of the city and its provinces are 
handled by these councils, and well-trained soldiers and 
rangers called Glassblades—named for their signature 
weapon design, which resembles jagged glass—act as 
enforcers of order and law. 


CRIME 

Uthodurn society is far from perfect, and a seedy crim- 
inal element exists in the shadows under the moun- 
tain. Guildmasters who seek to surmount their rivals 
are known to resort to theft and bribery, while some 
honorless nobles have occasionally embraced the effec- 
tiveness of blackmail, and even murder, to gain power 
and wealth. Curious spies and thieves from Shadycreek 
Run have also sneaked or lied their way into the hearth- 
lit halls, and a small surge of crime might be imminent. 


GEOGRAPHY 

Above the entrance to Uthodurn stands a series of small 
watchtowers, which surround a cluster of livery stables 
that house thick-coated, hardy horses and cliffneck 
goats. The entire city is built around a vertical pit that 
descends straight down from a half-valley, with numer- 
ous tunnel doorways locked with cap-like iron doors, 
creating a wide, downward spiral of carved stone, ruddy 
iron, polished marble, and cold subterranean waterfalls 
lit by ever-burning pyres. The city’s sections are divided 
and marked by sets of wide pillars that hold aloft steel 
gates that can be dropped to seal off entrances and 
defend the deeper regions of Uthodurn. 

The top level of the spiral, called the Volition Disc, is 
the widest and oldest of the regions. Many citizens live 
along the outer walls of the Volition Disc in a unique 
mishmash of old, angular stone abodes and lofty elven 
homesteads. The district is bisected by a central road 
called the Auger Trail, which is both a thoroughfare 
and a forum, lined by tables, benches, and peddlers’ 
carts. Many construction businesses have small build- 
ing yards here, while the upper, or Topper, mines work 
hard to pull iron from the surrounding rock. The main 
Glassblade barracks are centered around the entrance 
tunnels that descend into the city. 

Below the Volition Disc, in a smaller spiral, lies the 
Deliberation Disc, or Liber Disc as it’s often called. The 
Liber Disc is lined floor-to-ceiling with homes, empori- 
ums, forges, and taverns that fill the air with the scents 
of cooked meats and boiling tubers. Many Uthodurnians 
come here to shop, enjoy the bustling atmosphere, or 
unwind with a hearty ale or piquant wine. Foreign trav- 
elers may be tickled to come across dwarves dancing 
to uncharacteristically whimsical elven music or elves 
enjoying dirty barroom games. 

At the bottom of the city, the Grand Disc contains the 
Luddenbrock Mines that pull precious metals from the 
deeper veins of the mountain, as well as the Grandcast 
Citadel where the dual monarchs rule their people. The 
citadel itself is an impressive palace carved into the 
central stalactite pillars to resemble an inverse tower, 
with marble walls that make it look like a frozen, under- 
ground tornado. 


UTHODURN ADVENTURES 

Travel to and from Uthodurn is its own adventure, given 
the severity of the surrounding environment. The Glass- 
blades might also turn to adventurers to help stem the 
rising tide of crime. 


Awful Wails (Low Level). The characters are hired 
by the Glassblades to investigate a series of murders. 
Ancient elves, old enough to remember the destruction 
of Molaesmyr, are withering and dying in the streets 
at night. Witnesses all report hearing the same thing 
before finding the bodies: a horrible wail. The culprit 
is Myra Quirn, an elf who was turned into a banshee 
when she was left behind as her people fled Molaesmyr, 
and turned into a vengeful spirit by the dark magic of 
the ruins. After many years of searching, Myra found 
her still-living kin in Uthodurn, and she plans to exact 
revenge on every last elf that left her behind. 

Barren Shelves (Mid Level). Uthodurn’s stock of food 
is running out as winter approaches. The monarchs 
sponsor a mammoth-hunting contest, offering a prize 
of 1,000 gp to the team that brings back the largest 
mammoth. If the characters wish to partake, they must 
hunt and kill the largest mammoth possible, then deal 
with a rival crew of adventurers that tries to take their 
kill by force. 

A Dreadful Bore (High Level). The Kryn mount a 
daring incursion into Uthodurn, using purple worms 
to bore into the subterranean city. After breaching the 
outer wall of the Grand Disc, Kryn invaders storm the 
Grandcast Citadel and hold both monarchs hostage af- 
ter they’re pinned down and unable to escape with their 
captives. The Glassblades turn to the adventurers for 
help freeing the monarchs and bringing the Kryn invad- 
ers to justice. 


EISELCROSS 


Far north of the rest of Wildemount is a collection of 
imposing islands of ice, danger, and powerful, forgotten 
relics. Eiselcross and the Greying Wildlands are collec- 
tively known as the Biting North. For centuries, most of 
the world dismissed Eiselcross as an uninhabitable gla- 
cial land of blizzards and yetis. Only fishing vessels ever 
got close to the frozen shores—until one of those ships 
found an Aeorian item. 

The flying city-state of Aeor, a place of inventors, 
magic, and progress, was hurled into Eiselcross by gods 
both good and evil during the Calamity. The Prime and 
Betrayer deities agreed on a momentary armistice to 
achieve this mammoth task, for Aeor’s people crafted 
weapons made to kill the gods and had to be stopped. 
The gods tried to wholly destroy Aeor, but its protec- 
tions against divine entities were carefully tuned and 
unexpectedly strong. It took the most of the pantheon to 
crash the city. 

Aeor was long believed to have been obliterated, 
and the gods’ silence on the matter only furthered this 
conviction, so the books of lore left nothing more to be 
studied or discussed on the once-powerful nation. How- 
ever, recent discoveries of Aeorian artifacts revealed 
the truth of Aeor’s resting place and spurred rumors of 
arcane secrets frozen beneath the ice of Eiselcross. Now 
Dwendalian, Uthodurnian, Xhorhasian, and mercenary 
expeditions search the hazardous terrain for materials 
that could change the tide of the war between the Dwen- 
dalian Empire and the Kryn Dynasty. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


ENCOUNTERS IN EISELCROSS 


Eiselcross is a land of strange magic, bizarre creatures, 


and fascinating people. Each day that the characters 
travel the land, roll a d20. On a result of 15 or higher, 
an encounter chosen or rolled on the Eiselcross En- 
counters table of the appropriate level occurs. Not all 
of these encounters are meant to result in combat, and 
the ideas on the tables can inspire encounters of your 
own creation. 


EISELCROSS ENCOUNTERS: LEVELS 1-4 


d6 
1 


Encounter 

The characters encounter 1d4 wildfolk scouts hunting 
a saber-toothed tiger. The scouts are out of arrows 
and willing to trade equipment and information to 
replenish their ammunition. 

The characters encounter a lost Cerberus Assembly 
mage trying to return to Balenpost. The rest of the 
mage’s team died in the ruins ofAeor, and there is a 
50 percent chance the mage carries a recently recov- 
ered Aeorian item. 

The characters find a griffon with an arrow in its wing 
that prevents it from flying. A character who succeeds 
on a DC 15 Wisdom (Animal Handling) check can 
approach the grifon without being attacked. Such a 
character can remove the arrow, restoring the grif- 
fon’s ability to fly, after which the griffon allows the 
character to ride it as a mount for the next 1d10 days. 
The characters encounter the revenant of a dead ex- 
plorer from Balenpost who was murdered by one of 
its team and is looking for vengeance. 

The characters find a 3-foot-tall, 50-pound egg. If they 
keep the egg in a cold environment for 1d10 weeks, a 
white dragon wyrmling hatches from it. 


A young remorhaz ambushes the characters. 


EISELCROSS ENCOUNTERS: LEVELS 5-10 


d6 
1 


Encounter 

The characters encounter 1d4 + 1 mammoths being 
hunted by 2d6 wildfolk scouts. 

An abominable yeti and 1d4 yetis stalk the characters. 
The characters encounter 2d4 yetis from Allowak’s 
Sanctuary (see “Allowak’s Sanctuary Yeti Statistics” 
later in this chapter). The yetis attempt to scare the 
characters away but do not wish to do harm. 

The characters pass an Aeorian building that crashed 
nearby. The building contains 1d4 + 4 wights. 

An Aeorian absorber (see chapter 7) ambushes the 
characters. 

The characters encounter a large herd of elk. If the 
characters scare the elk, 1d6 elk attack while the rest 
of the herd flees. During the combat, a remorhaz 
bursts out of the snow and attacks indiscriminately. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


N 
N 


EISELCROSS ENCOUNTERS: LEVELS 11—16 


d6 
| 


Encounter 

An adult white dragon confronts the characters, de- 
manding treasure for passage through its territory. 
The dragon accepts 1,000 gp worth of treasure or a 
rare magic item as acceptable tribute. 

The characters encounter an iron golem that keeps 
walking in circles. The golem attacks any creatures 
within 10 feet of it but otherwise continues walking in 
circles. 

The characters find a camp of 2d4 minotaurs and 4d6 
orcs looking for wildfolk to recruit for the Kryn. These 
explorers want to keep their operation covert. If they 
aren't convinced the characters can keep their secret, 
the Xhorhasians attack. 

A roc flies overhead and attempts to scoop up a 
character of your choice as its next meal. 

The characters encounter a coven of three night 
hags searching for Aeorian items. In their humanoid 
guises, these hags pretend to be lost explorers and 
request the characters’ escort. When the characters 
are in a vulnerable spot, the hags reveal their true 
nature and attack. 


The characters are ambushed by 1d8 + 1 frost giants. 


EISELCROSS ENCOUNTERS: LEVELS 17—20 


d8 
1 


Encounter 

The characters find the buried top of an Aeorian tower 
that crashed into the ice. Ice fills the lower levels of 
the tower, and 1d4 + 1 Aeorian nullifiers (see chapter 
7) are frozen in the ice. 

The characters encounter 2d6 gladiator wormkin (see 
“Tomb of the Worm” later in this chapter) attempting 
to force-feed a group of 3d6 wildfolk commoners the 
meat of the Undermaw. 

The characters find a humanoid skull frozen in the 
ice. If they free the skull, it comes alive, revealing its 
true form as a demilich. 

The characters encounter two mages from Balenpost 
planning to steal an Aeorian item from a camp of 3d6 
frost giants and theirtamed frost worm (see chapter 
7) The mages ask for the characters’ help with the 
heist. 

The characters encounter the ghost of an Aeorian 
citizen. If the characters are kind to the ghost, the un- 
dead might be able to share the history of the crashed 
city with the characters. 

The characters encounter 2d6 frost giant zombies 
(see chapter 7). These zombies did not come from 
the Fortress of the Dead Jarl. Their origin is up to you. 
The characters cross over an area of thin ice. A kraken 
obsessed with Aeor floats beneath the ice and orders 
the characters to share any knowledge they have of 
the place or face its wrath. 

An ancient white dragon ambushes the characters. 


p 3 


~ BIESSEL 


= 


ea 


<= 
FROSTBOGEN 


Mar 3.7: Eiseccross 


ISLANDS OF EISELCROSS 


Eiselcross is a collection of eight icy islands, some of 
which have small, snow-covered mountain ranges: 


Beissel. Eiselcross’s third largest island is so far north 
that even prepared explorers have trouble surviving 
the cold. Most don’t dare brave an expedition, and 
those who do turn back once they see the white drag- 
ons that rule Beissel. 

Dampfkan. This island is an active volcano that steams 
into the sky. Dampfkan’s few explorers have seen a 
large structure in the lava, but nobody knows what 
this mysterious monolith is. 

Foren. The largest island of Eiselcross is also its most 
desirable destination for treasure-seekers, since Ae- 
or’s main crash site is on Foren. 

Frostbogen. Given its proximity to Foren, one might 
think that this island is also a popular destination 
for explorers. But ever since a Cerberus Assembly 
delegation of over one hundred people, their ship, and 
all their belongings vanished during an expedition to 
Frostbogen, no one has dared to explore the island. 

Gelier. Eiselcross’s second-largest island holds the 
body of Quajath, the Undermaw, and its wormkin (see 
“Tomb of the Worm’ later in this chapter). 

Kaltsel. The smallest of Eiselcross’s islands floats off 
the southeast coast of Foren and is said to be the 
home of Mynarc Furdahl, an undead warlock of Asmo- 
deus willing to make deals in exchange for souls. 


Schneescel. A permanent magical blizzard rages across 
Schneescel, a small island to the west of Foren, mak- 
ing it nigh impossible to explore. Many believe that a 
fallen Aeorian relic causes this storm. 

Taergoss. Eiselcross’s second smallest island is a favor- 
ite spot for fishing vessels to anchor overnight. The 
crews tend to stay on their boats and never set foot on 
shore, since faint wails can be heard at all times of day 
coming from Taergoss’s center. 


WILDFOLK OF EISELCROSS 


While most of the world did not know about Eiselcross’s 
secrets for centuries, the islands are home to nomadic 
clans of humans and halflings. These people move in 
small groups, following herds of elk and mammoths. 
They have no gods but instead revere the animals and 
natural phenomena such as the wind, snow, and waves. 
The wildfolk avoid Aeor’s ruins and the terrible dangers 
that lurk there. 

Eiselcross’s wildfolk live simple, harsh lives. They 
hunt, gather, and support each other, taking shelter in 
tents made of furs. If they have disputes with one an- 
other, they reconcile or simply go separate ways. Taking 
the life of another Eiselcross native for any reason is 
an even greater transgression than murder normally is 
in the other areas of Wildemount. The penalty for such 
a crime is a facial branding in the shape of a knife and 
permanent exile from any wildfolk clan. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


uo 


AEOR CRASH SITE 


—_ 


E E] For all their peace with each other, the wildfolk of 


Eiselcross are fierce warriors. Their cold environ- 

ment shapes them, and they must defend against 
saber-toothed tigers, yetis, and even more dangerous 
predators such as white dragons. The wildfolk tend to be 
distrustful of outsiders, especially after seeing explorers 
from across the sea going into locations the native peo- 
ple dare not enter and using arcane magic to uncover 
the frozen secrets of their land. 


AEOR CRASH SITE 


While pieces of Aeor were thrown all over Eiselcross 
and the Frigid Depths, the city’s main crash initially 
created a three-mile-diameter crater in the center of 
Foren. In the centuries since, ice covered the crater. 
Ruins poke through the frosty surface, creating tun- 
nels, pits, and chasms. The buried ruins are filled with 
dangerous, wonderful creations and pockets of people 
frozen in time. 


STASIS BUBBLES 

Most of Aeor’s streets, buildings, and people were 
smashed to pieces when the city collided with Foren. 
Amid the ruins are magic fields of translucent blue force 
surrounding moments frozen in time. Many of these 
bubbles hold diverse crowds of humanoids huddled in 
the street, their bodies, clothes, belongings, and the 
ground itself unharmed by the crash. Others contain 
families holding hands as they brace for impact around 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


dining tables, mages waving wands in the air around 
laboratory benches, soldiers with glowing swords raised 
to the sky, siege crews climbing atop weapons meant to 
fire massive projectiles, and more. Each magic field is a 
10-foot-radius sphere, and nothing within appears dam- 
aged or moved by the crash. 

While these preserved scenes are sometimes useful 
for gathering information, the items and people within 
are the real prize. Totally intact Aeorian technology is 
arare find, but having even one of Aeor’s inventors or 
mages to demonstrate, repair, and rebuild their cre- 
ations is areward beyond any of the other treasures 
the ruins hold. However, all attempts to dispel, break, 
or otherwise remove the impenetrable magic barriers 
have failed. The people within appear frozen in time, 
but no evidence suggests this stasiswould change if the 
barriers dropped, or that the change would be for the 
better. Some say the barriers dropping could cause the 
creatures within to age rapidly, turn to dust, or go mad. 
Despite these warnings, explorers search Aeor’s ruins 
for an item or spell that can break these bubbles. 

Breaking the Bubbles. If and how the stasis bubbles 
of Aeor can be broken is up to you, but here are a few 
suggestions for solutions: 


- An encoded ritual hidden in the bowels of Aeor’s 
crash site can break the bubbles. It requires one pow- 
dered unicorn horn and one dried flumph tentacle 
per bubble. 


« The crystal in Allowak’s Sanctuary powers the stasis 
bubbles. If it is destroyed, the stasis bubbles break. 

- In their exalted state, the Arms of the Betrayers (see 
chapter 6) are powerful enough to break the bubbles 
with an attack. 


ARMS AND ARMOR 

Aeorian technology was created to battle the gods and 
their servants. Explorers seek weapons and armor, most 
of which is crafted to pierce divine defenses and guard 
against deific assaults. Weapons as small as daggers 
and as large as cannons were crafted in Aeor. Although 
much was destroyed in the crash, there are still items in 
the rubble (see chapter 6). The pieces are valuable, and 
the blueprints for creating such powerful items would be 
priceless, though none have been found so far. 


DIsEASE LABORATORY 

A large facility in the city developed diseases meant 
to weaken and kill the gods and their servants. Aeor’s 
mages tested the diseases on beasts and prisoners, 
creating horrific monsters, some of which still stalk 
the ruins. 

Frigid Woe. Frigid woe is a special disease developed 
by Aeor’s mages that cannot be cured by conventional 
treatment or magic. The only way a creature infected 
with the disease can be cured is by finding and drinking 
the manufactured antidote, a milky liquid stored in gold 
vials found in Eiselcross’s ruins. This disease was cre- 
ated to slow down the forces of the gods and get around 
the healing power of their clerics and angels. 

The disease is transmitted by breathing in blue 
spores that Aeor’s mages created long ago. When a 
creature comes into contact with these spores, it must 
succeed on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw or be- 
come infected with frigid woe. It takes 1d4 days for the 
symptoms to manifest in an infected creature. These 
symptoms include fatigue, chills, and visible blue veins 
that appear on the creature’s body. The infected crea- 
ture’s speed is reduced by 5 feet as long as it remains 
infected. Every 10 days after symptoms appear, an in- 
fected creature must succeed on a DC 11 Constitution 
saving throw, or its speed is reduced by another 5 feet. If 
acreature’s speed is reduced to 0 as a result of this dis- 
ease, the creature dies and its body turns into a statue 
made of ice. 

A creature can drink the antidote as an action, ending 
all symptoms and effects of the disease instantly. 


AEORIAN HUNTERS 

Aeor’s people didn’t just develop weapons that could 

kill the gods; they created soldiers. Strange experi- 
ments turned captive beasts, prisoners, and volunteers 
into hulking dreadnoughts called Aeorian hunters 
(described in chapter 7). Those that survived the crash 
still stalk the ruins, driven mad by isolation and unsated 
bloodlust. 


STRANGE OBELISK 

A mile west ofthe crater that defines the crash site is a 
rocky hill that thaws any snow or ice that rests atop it. 
The mouth of a cavern can be found on the hill’s north- 
ern side, which leads to a 60-foot-wide, domed chamber. 


In the center of this cave stands a fifteen-foot-tall obelisk 
made of dark, reflective metal that resembles smoothed 
obsidian. The stone quietly hums with an aura of abjura- 
tion from some mysterious enchantment. Travelers that 
complete a long rest within proximity of the stone are 
visited with terrible dreams of strange, alien places and 
visions difficult to understand. 


AEOR CRASH SITE ADVENTURES 

The main reason for characters to explore Aeor’s crash 
site is to uncover Aeorian magic items and other trea- 
sures, but any time spent in the region is sure to bring 
excitement and danger. 

Wild Child (Mid Level). An eight-year-old wildfolk 
child named Essora was playing with others near the 
crash site when a friend dared her to stand on the ice 
over the ruins. Essora fell through the ice and has not 
come out of the city’s remains. None of the wildfolk are 
willing to risk themselves in the ruins to save Essora. 
The child’s grandmother, Leriea, begs the characters to 
bring Essora home. While looking for a way out of the 
ruins, Essora found the enhancement workshop and 
drank a potion that gave her frigid woe. There is a vial of 
antidote deeper in the ruin. 

Weapons of War (High Level). The characters are 
hired by a representative of the Dwendalian Empire, 
the Kryn Dynasty, the Myriad, or some other faction to 
travel to the Aeor Crash Site and search for gold vials 
containing frigid woe, a milky liquid. A previous expedi- 
tion found one such vial, and the characters’ benefactors 
want more of it. The party’s benefactor wants to keep 
the vials from falling into the wrong hands or wants to 
sell them to the highest bidder. To reach a hidden cache 
of vials in the depths of the crash site, the characters 
must content with Aeorian hunters (see chapter 7) and a 
rival search party of high-level adventurers. 


ALLOWAK’S SANCTUARY 


Population: 532 (100% yetis) 

Government: Brightheart, the settlement’s smartest 
and strongest abominable yeti, rules Allowak’s Sanc- 
tuary as a dictator. 

Defense: Every resident of Allowak’s Sanctuary is capa- 
ble of defending the settlement. 

Commerce: Aside from trading for simple goods and 
services, there is no major commerce. 

Organizations: The yetis have no organizational ties. 


When Aeor fell into Foren, the impact threw a mono- 
lithic, purple crystal miles away from the crash site. The 
stone pierced the body of an abominable yeti named 
Allowak, but the crystal’s magic preserved the yeti’s 
corpse and absorbed Allowak’s soul. When other yetis 
touched the crystal, their intellect increased and their 
innate desire to slaughter faded away. A society of the 
monstrosities living in huts and keeping mammoths for 
food sprung up around the crystal. These peaceful yetis 
abhor their more savage kin. 


A SECRET PLACE 

The yetis of Allowak’s Sanctuary keep their home a se- 
cret, for they worry that outsiders might try to steal the 
crystal. Although the crystal’s effects seem permanent, 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


125 


the yetis fear that if it were removed from Allowak’s 
remains, they would lose their newfound intelligence. 

If outsiders get close to the village, the yetis patrolling 
the village’s borders approach and act like the more 
common and savage members of their species. The yetis 
of Allowak’s Sanctuary do not kill unless forced to, but 
they will cause injury to guard their secret. 

In recent years, the yetis have acquired books and 
journals from explorers who died close to their camp. 
The tomes gave the yetis an understanding of the world 
beyond Eiselcross. 


BRIGHTHEART’S INTENTIONS 

The yetis of Allowak’s Sanctuary areled by an abomina- 
ble yeti named Brightheart. She organizes adventuring 
parties of her people to search Foren for more of their 
kin to awaken with the crystal. Brightheart claims this 
recruitment is to increase the size and security of the 
community, but some whisper that she is building an 
army to take over Eiselcross, and possibly even more 
places beyond the Frigid Depths. 


ALLOWAK’S SANCTUARY YETI STATISTICS 
The yetis of Allowak’s Sanctuary are yetis and abomi- 
nable yetis, with these changes: 


¢ Their alignments are neutral. 

- Each has an Intelligence score of 16 (+3) anda 
Charisma score of 10 (+0). 

- They can speak, read, and write Common and Yeti. 


ALLOWAK’S SANCTUARY ADVENTURES 
Thecharacters could stumble across Allowak’s Sanctu- 
ary or fight their way through the perimeter guards to 
uncover the village. 

A Matter of Trust (Mid Level). As the characters 
travel Foren, they find Dawnmind, a female Allowak yeti 
(see “Allowak’s Sanctuary Yeti Statistics”) holding the 
tatters of a net as she lies in the snow, covered in claw 
wounds from others of her kind, with 1 hit point remain- 
ing. Three other yeti corpses, Dawnmind’s companions, 
lie in the bloody snow nearby. Dawnmind begs the char- 
acters to escort her back to Allowak’s Sanctuary along 
with the corpses. Her group failed to capture six wild 
yetis, but those yetis are nearby and stalk the characters 
if they help Dawnmind. 

If the characters travel to Allowak’s Sanctuary with 
Dawnmind, Brightheart welcomes them as heroes and 
thanks them with a place to stay, provided that they 
swear to keep Allowak’s Sanctuary a secret—or the 
abominable yeti could order the characters to prove 
their loyalty by capturing a group of wild yetis or mam- 
moths for her. 


BALENPOST 


Population: 205 (69% humans, 11% halflings, 7% 
gnomes, 7% dragonborn, 6% other races) 

Government: Mages of the Cerberus Assembly, led by 
Wardlow Akron, run Balenpost. 

Defense: A 10-foot-high wooden wall surrounds Balen- 
post. All the inhabitants are mages or adventurers 
capable of defending the outpost. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


Commerce: The residents here are outfitted with all 
they need to survive by the Cerberus Assembly. Visi- 
tors can trade goods or services for lodging, rations, 
and other survival supplies. 

Organizations: The Cerberus Assembly runs every- 
thing in the camp, but a few of King Bertrand Dwen- 
dal’s spies are among the explorers’ ranks. 


A fort of frozen logs stands on the southwestern edge 
of Foren, housing intrepid explorers overseen by the 
Cerberus Assembly. Every waking moment of life in 
Balenpost is dedicated to planning and executing ex- 
peditions to uncover Aeorian items on the island. Lady 
Vess de Rogna (see “Cerberus Assembly” in chapter 2) 
appointed Wardlow Akron (lawful evil, male, human 
mage) to oversee day-to-day operations of the fort. The 
explorers say that Wardlow is harsher than the winds 
when it comes to rationing supplies and driving expedi- 
tions to go farther and faster in the hazardous tundra. 


Icy EXPEDITIONS 
The expeditions that leave Balenpost arerun by mages 
that work for the Cerberus Assembly. These mages and 
their crews are given honors, accolades, and special 
privileges, such as more rations, when they uncover Ae- 
orian items. Teams that return to Balenpost to resupply 
have their wages docked until they return with a find. 
Dwendalians with nothing to lose come to Balenpost 
to earn good pay, but many of the other explorers are 
prisoners quietly approached by the Cerberus Assembly 
and offered freedom in exchange for service. Prisoners 
that don’t contribute to the expeditions are sent back to 
the mainland in chains, so many are willing to cheat, 
steal from, or kill other crews. 


HORSWELL’sS LAB 

Balenpost is not just a place of discovery but also one 

of arcane experimentation. Wardlow Akron placed 
Korberta Horswell (chaotic neutral, female, rock gnome 
mage) in charge of the team that studies and tries to 
duplicate Aeorian items retrieved from the wilds of 
Eiselcross. The reckless mage and her team perform 

all manner of experiments to recreate items brought 
back from the wastes. These tests often go dangerously 
awry. Death and magical destruction are not uncommon 
results, and afew items have warped or twisted subjects 
into horrible monstrosities that are locked away some- 
where secret in the lab. 


DWENDALIAN SPIES 
While the Cerberus Assembly isin charge of exploring 
Eiselcross, the Crown wants to make sure its interests 
are protected. The assembly reports enough discoveries 
to King Bertrand to make it seem like the sovereign is 
informed, but he knows better. King Bertrand planted 
spies among the explorers because he doesn’t want the 
assembly keeping the most powerful Aeorian items se- 
cret, lest they be used to overthrow him. The leader of 
this spy ring is Karta Meck, a neutral human spy who 
also happens to be one of the camp’s most accomplished 
treasure hunters. 

Wardlow suspects that the king planted spies in 
Balenpost and regularly tries to read the minds of 


explorers and look at communications sent out of the 
camp to find the king’s agents. His attempts thus far 
have proven fruitless. 


RESUPPLY 

New supplies, letters, and people come to Balenpost 
from Icehaven by boat every month. These ships then 
take people and missives from Eiselcross back to the 
mainland of Wildemount. The journey through the 
Frigid Depths is perilous and can delay or destroy a 
resupply boat, an event which forces the outpost to re- 
strict rations. 


BALENPOST ADVENTURES 

The main reason for many characters to come to Balen- 
post is to seek out Aeorian items for themselves or the 
Cerberus Assembly. 

Conviction (Low Level). Nathrow Arple (neutral evil, 
male, stout halfling bandit captain), a former enforcer 
for the Myriad, came to Balenpost with his old crew of 
four thugs. The group was captured fifteen years ago 
during the raid on the Myriad’s central facility in Yrrosa. 
Nathrow got his imprisoned crew on the same explora- 
tion team, then they murdered their Cerberus Assembly 
leader and made off into the wilds of Eiselcross, looking 
to steal a fishing vessel. Wardlow Akron offers the char- 
acters 100 gp to hunt down the criminals and throws 
in a gem of brightness if the characters bring back 
Nathrow alive (so the assembly can make an example of 
him). If the characters brave the dangers of Eiselcross 
and catch up to the criminals, Nathrow offers them 
anything within his power to avoid arrest and turns to 
combat if all else fails. 


WHITE DRAGONS SCOUR THE ISLANDS OF 
EISELCROSS FOR FOOD AND TREASURE. 


Cold as Ice (High Level). An entire team of explorers 
was torn apart in the wastes just outside Balenpost. 
The tracks nearby indicate that only humanoids were 
involved in the struggle. Agents of the Dwendalian royal 
family send the characters to investigate, suspecting 
that one of the other teams ambushed the victims. 
Wardlow Akron is loath to cooperate with the charac- 
ters since they are sent by the empire, and because he 
knows the responsibility for the attacks lies partly on 
his shoulders. The person behind the attacks is Mera 
Vacross, a female human transformed into a vampire by 
one of Korberta Horswell’s experiments. The vampire 
escaped the lab and makes her home in a cave just out- 
side Balenpost. If the characters take care of the vam- 
pire, Wardlow tries to bribe or threaten the characters 
to keep quiet about the monster's origins. 

Spy Hunters (Any Level). The Cerberus Assembly 
learns that King Dwendal’s spies have infiltrated Balen- 
post. They hire the characters to find and report the 
spies to Wardlow Akron. The characters might uncover 
Karta Meck’s network of four spies within the camp 
or find a lead-lined box among Karta’s supplies which 
holds a sending stone paired with another held by Oliver 
Schreiber (see “Dwendalian Empire” in chapter 2). If 
discovered, the spies attempt to win over the characters, 
promising an Aeorian item in exchange for helping to 
discover what secrets are hidden in Horswell’s lab. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


127 


FORTRESS OF THE DEAD JARL 


From the outside, the Fortress of the Dead Jarl is an 
enormous fairy-tale castle made entirely of ice. The hor- 
rors inside the place tell a different story. The frost giant 
leader, Jarl Conessa Berg, was obsessed with gathering 
objects from Aeor. Two centuries ago, one of those items 
turned Conessa and every giant within her castle into 
an undead zombie. These beings are trapped inside the 
castle along with a hoard of Aeorian items. 


FORTRESS OF THE DEAD JARL ADVENTURES 
The Aeorian items within the fortress are enough to 
tempt most adventurers, but there are other reasons to 
go to the fortress. 

They're Free (Mid Level). When the characters 
arrive in Balenpost or Syrinlya, a frost giant zombie 
(see chapter 7) attacks the camp. If the characters help 
defeat the giant, the leader of the camp tells the charac- 
ters it is the third attack in as many days and asks them 
to find the source of the zombies. Characters can track 
the zombies back to the fortress. Each day the charac- 
ters follow this path, roll any die. On an even result, the 
characters encounter 1d4 frost giant zombies. When 
they reach the fortress, they find that one of the walls 
is breached and must repair it to stop the zombies from 
leaving the castle. This breach could be natural or could 
be caused by a faction with a score to settle against the 
attacked outpost. 


MUTALOS 


In the northern part of Foren, a strange patch of wil- 
derness exactly 30 miles in diameter is avoided by the 
wildfolk at all costs. They call this region Mutalos. 
Every morning at dawn, the area’s environment sud- 
denly changes. Mutalos shifts from desert to forest, 
from mountainous to swamp, or from any one habitat to 
another without any discernible pattern. The area can 
even be a seemingly normal icy tundra, so unsuspecting 
explorers traveling through Mutalos could suddenly find 
themselves in the middle of the sea when the sun rises. 

The origins of these environmental changes are un- 
known, but scholars believe an Aeorian object fell from 
the city and created the region. All Wildemount’s fac- 
tions are interested in an item of such incredible trans- 
mutation power. 


DENIZENS OF MUTALOS 
When the environment of Mutalos changes, so do its 
inhabitants. At dawn, a mountainous region filled with 
kobolds, goats, and ogres might become a swamp in- 
habited by lizardfolk, rats, and yuan-ti. It is unknown 
where exactly these creatures come from and where 
they go when the regions change. They could be trans- 
ported from other places in Exandria, teleported from 
elsewhere in the multiverse, or created and destroyed by 
this strange magic. It is also unknown if the same crea- 
tures reappear with the same habitats or if the creatures 
are always new to Mutalos. The origin of the region’s 
changes likely holds the answers to these questions. 
Sometimes a creature that appears in Mutalos 
leaves the borders of the region. When this occurs, 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


the creature becomes untethered from the magic that 
brought it to Foren and remains in Eiselcross even after 
Mutalos’s environment changes. Many creatures from 
other habitats don’t last for long in the arctic wastes, but 
a few are smart or strong enough to survive. 


ENVIRONMENT CHANGES 

Each day at dawn, the habitat of Mutalos changes. You 
can choose or roll this new environment on the Mutalos 
Habitats table. If you roll the result of Mutalos’s current 
environment, roll again until you get a new result. 


MUTALOS HABITATS 


d8 Habitat d8 Habitat 

1 Arctic 5 Hill 

a Desert 6 Mountain 
3 Forest 7 — Ocean 

4 Grassland 8 Swamp 


MUTALOS ADVENTURES 

Trying to find the origin of Mutalos’s magic or simply 
traveling through the region is an adventure, but there 
are other reasons to explore the area. 

Lost Staff (High Level). Farrhan Yost (lawful evil, fe- 
male, human archmage) was a part of the initial Cerbe- 
rus Assembly team that explored Eiselcross. Now back 
on the mainland, she tells the characters she lost her 
staff of power in Mutalos when the region was an ocean 
habitat, hoping it tempts them into exploring the region 
to find her old staff. As the characters search, she uses 
the scrying spell to keep tabs on them. Should the char- 
acters discover her staff or any other interesting trea- 
sures, Farrhan teleports to their location with her shield 
guardian and offers a meager payment for the find. If 
the characters refuse, she attacks. Farrhan intends to 
get her staff back no matter what and wants to claim the 
characters’ discoveries as her own. 


RIVER INFERNO 


This odd, mile-wide river of lava flows south-to-north 
across the length of Foren. The River Inferno disap- 
pears at both its ends into the sea, springing up seem- 
ingly from nowhere. Most scholars believe that the river 
was created by the crash of Aeor, though this theory has 
yet to be confirmed. It is clear that the river has ties to 
the Elemental Plane of Fire, for fire elementals, magma 
mephits, and salamanders can be occasionally found 
along its banks. 

The River Inferno’s lava has the destructive power one 
expects, though there is an exception: ice and snow that 
fall into the lava remain intact. Bold explorers traveling 
north sometimes ride the river’s floating icebergs to get 
to their destinations more quickly. The river flows at an 
impressive rate of seven miles per hour. 


RIVER INFERNO ADVENTURES 
The river itself is best avoided, but characters can have 
interesting encounters if they follow it. 

Haughty Efreet (High Level). A pair of efreet recently 
emerged from the River Inferno, and the characters are 
the first intelligent creatures they find. Using tongues 


Toms OF THE Worm 


spells, the efreet demand that the characters tell them 
everything they know about this strange land, then de- 
mand that the characters point them in the direction of 
the nearest settlement. The efreet plan to enslave the 
settlement’s inhabitants and put them to work building 
an obsidian tower on the shore of the River Inferno, 
where the efreet can stay whenever they deign to visit 
this dismally cold corner of the multiverse. 


SYRINLYA 


Population: 182 (72% dwarves, 24% elves, 4% 
other races) 

Government: Professor Gulrim Shalebrow is in charge 
of Syrinlya, appointed to run the outpost by Queen 
Fruunast of Uthodurn. 

Defense: Syrinlya’s inhabitants are explorers capable of 
defending the settlement. 

Commerce: Syrinlya’s explorers are willing to trade for 
meager belongings. Aoerian items can be sold to the 
Buyer (see “The Buyer’s Hut” below). 

Organizations: Elves, dwarves, and a few others from 
Uthodurn are the only residents of Syrinlya. Most 
have no organizational ties. 


Syrinlya is a collection of yurts filled with mercenary 
explorers from Uthodurn looking to get rich. Professor 
Gulrim Shalebrow (see “Diarchy of Uthodurn” in chap- 
ter 2) runs this outpost with few rules: just an unspoken 
agreement that all explorers have each other’s backs 
against the harsh environment, just as they would back 
in their mountain home. 


A LAWLESS, MORAL LAND a 
Syrinlya has few laws, but its explorers look out for 
each other. This is a courtesy they learned at home in 
Uthodurn, where the dwarves and elves are interdepen- ; 
dent. Most folks in Syrinlya share food when their hunts 
are good so that others return the favor when their 
luck runs out. 
Syrinlya doesn’t suffer bullies. The honor system is 
enforced by the toughest explorers, who don’t hesitate to 
take justice into their own hands. One such individual is 
the dwarf Morgo Delwur (neutral good, male werebear), 
a staunch friend and an even more staunch holder of 
grudges. Gulgrim is content to allow the explorers to 
keep order, as it saves him from having to govern and 
allows him to go off on expeditions of his own. 


THE BUYER’S HUT 

The largest yurt in the outpost is occupied by an elf 
called the Buyer (lawful neutral, nonbinary, high 

elf mage). The Buyer was brought to Eiselcross by 
Professor Gulgrim Shalebrow to run the day-to-day 
operations of the camp while the dwarf explores. The 
Buyer keeps to themselves and refuses to share their 
real name, which is Elloway Tenvidas. When the Buyer 
acquires an object, they place the item into a large stone 
chest, which transports the object back to Uthodurn or 
Palebank Village. Some of the explorers think the chest 
could also be used to transport people, but none are 
brave enough to ask the mysterious Buyer or risk experi- 
menting with the chest themselves. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


SYRINLYA ADVENTURES 
The main reason for many characters to come to Syrin- 
lya is to seek out Aoerian items for Uthodurn, but there 
are plenty of other adventures to be had in the outpost. 
The Arcane Tree (Mid Level). While the charac- 
ters are in Syrinlya, Morgo Delwur returns from an 
expedition with a bag of five green seeds from one of 
Eiselcross’s Aeorian ruins. The werebear lost a seed 
in the snow when showing them off, and a 15-foot-tall, 
greentree springs up overnight in the middle of the 
camp. Whenever a creature casts a spell that restores 
hit points or deals radiant damage to another creature 
within 90 feet of the tree, the tree uproots itself from the 
ground and attacks the creature. After killing the spell- 
casting creature and other threats, the tree replants its 
roots. Every 1d10 days the tree remains rooted, a new 
tree of the same type grows up from the ground within 
30 feet. If the trees become a problem, Professor Gul- 
grim Shalebrow asks the characters to deal with them. 
The animated tree uses the treant stat block, with 
these changes: 


e Itis unaligned. 

- It has resistance against necrotic damage and 
radiant damage. 

- It understands Common, Druidic, Elvish, and Sylvan 
but cannot speak. 


TOMB OF THE WORM 


Population: 345 (83% humans, 17% halflings) 

Government: Quajath commands the settlement’s in- 
habitants telepathically, though a cult fanatic named 
Galgonos serves as the Tomb of the Worm’s leader for 
day-to-day operations. 

Defense: All adult inhabitants in the Tomb of the Worm 
are capable combatants. 

Commerce: The Tomb of the Worm has no commerce, 
though Quajath’s meat is offered freely to travelers. 

Organizations: The wildfolk that live here serve only 
Qua jath, but they are friendly toward explorers from 
the Kryn Dynasty. 


Three decades ago, a clan of wildfolk on Gelier found 
the exposed body of Quajath the Undermaw poking 
through the wall of an icy cave (see “Lesser Idols” in 
chapter 1). These accessible sections of the worm peek 
through the cave’s ceiling and walls, and are still at- 
tached to the worm. The wildfolk who discovered this 
place consumed the Undermaw’s exposed meat and 
found that it regrew. They now live in the cave, enjoying 
the easy, renewable source of food, and are now fully un- 
der the sway of the Undermaw. They invite others to join 
them, calling themselves wormkin. 

The people living in the Tomb of the Worm work 
together in harmony. Galgonos (chaotic neutral, male, 
human cult fanatic with the wormkin template de- 
scribed below) is the leader of the settlement, and he 
organizes parties of wormkin that search Gelier and the 
rest of Eiselcross for more wildfolk to join their ranks. 
Outsiders often find the settlement charming because of 
how well the villagers get along, though a character who 
succeeds on a DC 15 Wisdom (Insight) check can tell 
that the wormkin are more dangerous than they appear. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


The villagers offer the Undermaw’s meat to visitors and 
force-feed it to those who refuse but would make worthy 
additions to the Undermaw’s army. 

The wormkin have two goals: grow their numbers and 
free Quajath from the ice. What Quajath plans to have 
its followers do once it leaves the ice is known only to 
the Undermaw. 


WORMKIN TEMPLATE 

Humanoids that consume the Undermaw’s flesh ten or 
fewer days after it has been removed from Quajath must 
make a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or become 
wormkin 1d6 hours later. Wormkin can be identified by 
the black veins that cover their appendages and neck. 
Characters who become wormkin might become NPCs 
at the DM’s discretion. A greater restoration spell or 
similar magic removes all the wormkin features from a 
creature, restoring it to its original state. Wormkin gain 
the following features: 


Alignment. The creature’s alignment becomes cha- 
otic neutral. 

Connected to Quajath. No matter where the creature 
is, Quajath can read the creature’s every thought and 
memory and speak with the creature telepathically. 
Quajath can also access the creature’s senses and 
perceive what the creature perceives. As a bonus ac- 
tion, Quajath can take direct control of the creature, 
choosing the actions, bonus action, reactions, and 
movement the creature takes until Quajath ends this 
control as a bonus action. 

Magic Resistance. The creature has advantage on sav- 
ing throws against spells and other magical effects. 
Regeneration. If the creature has at least 1 hit point, it 

regains 5 hit points at the start of its turn. 


‘TOMB OF THE WORM ADVENTURES 
The characters might find adventure, allies, and adver- 
saries in the Tomb of the Worm. 

Meat Thieves (Low Level). As the characters explore 
Gelier, they cross paths with a group of four wildfolk 
commoners led by Jarinmine (chaotic good, female, 
lightfoot halfling scout). The halfling begs them to take 
a 300-pound package of meat to the sea and dump it 
in the icy water. She warns the characters not to eat 
it and offers them her ivory necklace (worth 100 gp) if 
they agree to the task. If pressed, she says the meat is 
tainted and that it turns people into slaves for Galgonos. 
Jarinmine stole the meat from the wormkin because she 
believes the diet poisons their minds. She needs to get 
back to the Tomb of the Worm before Galgonos realizes 
what she’s done. 

Before the characters reach the sea, six wormkin 
catch up to them. Their leader is Redjaw (chaotic neu- 
tral, female, human cult fanatic), and the others are 
cultists, all with the wormkin template applied. Redjaw 
demands that the characters give back the food that was 
stolen and forces a fight if the characters refuse. If the 
characters return the meat, Redjaw invites them back 
to the Tomb of the Worm. If the characters go to the vil- 
lage, they find that Jarinmine and her friends have been 
captured by the wormkin and are about to be executed 
for their crimes. 


VURMAS 


Population: 193 (51% dark elves, 23% orcs, 14% gnolls, 
12% other races) 

Government: Captain Hallwas Denalor has authority 
over this floating outpost, but Norca Brighttusk leads 
the expeditions. 

Defense: Every inhabitant is an experienced explorer 
capable of defending the outpost. 

Commerce: The outpost has no official economy, but 
people might be willing to trade for goods or services. 

Organizations: The people of Vurmas are not associ- 
ated with any organizations beyond the Kryn Dynasty. 


Vurmas is a floating outpost for the Kryn Dynasty near 
the north shore of Gelier, and the dynasty keeps Vurmas 
secret from other factions. The Kryn established this 
base near Eiselcross’s second-largest island not to find 
Aeorian items but to make allies of Eiselcross’s wildfolk. 


FLOATING OUTPOST 
Vurmas is not a true settlement: it’s actually three sail- 
ing ships tied together and anchored near the north 
shore of Gelier. These boats are the New Radiance, the 
Candlefire, and the Soulsailor. At any given moment, 
one of the ships could be traveling to Xhorhas with a 
hold full of new Luxon-worshiping wildfolk converts or 
on the way back to Eiselcross with more supplies. 

The Kryn’sexplorers stay on the boats when they can, 
bringing supplies to shore when they go out in search 


of allies. These ships are maintained and run by Cap- 
tain Hallwas Denalor (lawful neutral, female, dark elf 
veteran), while Norca Brighttusk (neutral, female, orc 
priest) leads the expedition teams. 


ALLY RECRUITMENT 
The Kryn Dynasty believes that the wildfolk of Eisel- 
cross are a better find and more reliable than most Aeo- 
rian objects, especially since the items tend to interfere 
with the Kryn’s divine magic. With the Cerberus Assem- 
bly and the Uthodurnians busy in Foren, the Kryn stay 
clear of the largest island and search for allies in the 
rest of Eiselcross’s lands. Many wildfolk are easy con- 
verts of the Luxon since they respect divine magic but 
do not worship any deity. 

The Kryn approach each wildfolk clan with cau- 
tion and kindness, healing the sick and injured while 
preaching the faith of the Luxon. They take only willing 
wildfolk away from the clan, knowing many others will 
follow because they miss their friends and family. 

Choosing the waters near Gelier as a base of op- 
erations was no accident. This island is home to the 
wormkin, wildfolk that devour the frozen from of Qua- 
jath (see “Tomb of the Worm” earlier in this chapter). 
These wildfolk have strange minds, but they display 
regenerative abilities because of their diet. Norca Bright- 
tusk regularly preaches to the wormkin, telling them 
that the beast they feed on is a creation of the Luxon. 
The wormkin have agreed to convert and join the Kryn 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


once Quajath is freed from the ice—an effort that is 
already underway. If the Undermaw and its people can 
be turned toward the light of the Luxon, the Kryn Dy- 
nasty will have gained a considerable advantage in its 
war against the Dwendalian Empire. None of the Kryn, 
not even Norca Brighttusk, knows that Quajath has no 
intention of serving anyone and that the wormkin are 
completely under its sway. 


VURMAS ADVENTURES 

The main reason for characters allied with the Kryn 
Dynasty to come to Vurmas is to join Norca Brighttusk’s 
recruitment efforts, but there are plenty of other adven- 
tures to be had in the area. 

Keep Us Secret (Low Level). Kryn spies report that 
the Bold Adventurer, a scouting ship from the Dwenda- 
lian Empire, is planning to visit the island of Gelier, near 
Vurmas. Captain Hallwas Denalor and Norca Bright- 
tusk don’t want the Bold Adventurer’s crew to see Vur- 
mas or reach Gelier, ensuring that the Kryn’s operation 
in Eiselcross and the settlement of the wormkin remain 
secret. The pair offer the characters 500 gp to stop the 
Bold Adventurer’s approach. The Bold Adventurer is 
a keelboat (see the Airborne and Waterborne Vehicles 
table in chapter 5 of the Dungeon Master's Guide) that 
carries six scouts. The captain of the Bold Adventurer, 
Sally Brizzberm, has a sending stone that she uses to 
communicate with the captain of a Dwendalian warship 
called the Bright Queen’s Doom. If her ship is attacked, 
Sally uses the stone to send a warning to the warship, 
which might threaten Vurmas in the future. 

Save Our Ships (Mid Level). While the characters 
are aboard one of Vurmas’s boats, three wildfolk dru- 
ids, each riding on the back of a killer whale, attack the 
boats. The druids are angry that wildfolk are leaving 
Eiselcross in droves to go to Xhorhas. They believe 
that the Kryn are using enchantment magic against 
these wildfolk, tricking them into leaving their friends 
and family. The druids use hit-and-run tactics, dealing 
as much damage as possible before fleeing. Captain 
Hallwas Denalor asks the characters to deal with the at- 
tackers. The druids could be open to negotiation, or they 
might fight with their dying breath for their beliefs. 
| i= 

MOORBOUNDERS 

Beasts of burden are common throughout Xhorhas, and 

often horses and other riding animals are the best or only 

option. For those who require speed and have a little more 
coin to spend, the best option is often a moorbounder 

(see chapter 7). However, moorbounders that haven't un- 

dergone proper training or established bonds of trust with 

their masters tend to attack and even eat their riders. 
Moorbounders can cost anywhere from 300 to 500 gp 


each. They're often cheaper and more abundant in towns 
on the wastes than in cities like Rosohna. 


eee 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


WASTES OF XHORHAS 


Stretching across the lands of Eastern Wynandirisa 
valley that still bears the lingering scars of the final bat- 
tles of the Calamity. Fields of broken earth and muddy 
paths weave around muggy swamps and corrupted for- 
ests, home to creatures twisted by the echoing shadows 
of the Betrayer Gods who once ruled this region. Fierce 
storms rule the sky as hungry predators stalk the open, 
desolate plains. 

All manner of beastfolk, goblinkin, and nomadic out- 
landers claim the marshes and badlands of this region, 
honing their survival skills and warring ways against 
the elements and each other. Meanwhile, the dark elves 
of Rosohna have emerged as the core of civilization in 
Xhorhas, reaching out to the wayward tribes and offer- 
ing them enlightenment if they join the Kryn Dynasty. 

The dark elves of the Kryn Dynasty worship the 
Luxon, a mysterious deity of light, after rejecting the 
evil designs of Lolth long ago. Nevertheless, the Spider 
Queen’s venomous will still seeps into the dynasty, as 
she and her devotees plot revenge. 


ASARIUS, THE CITY OF BEASTS 


Population: 48,025 (41% goblinoids, 32% gnolls, 10% 
darkelves, 17% other races) 

Government: Den Olios governs the city, the laws of 
which are enforced and monitored by captains of the 
Aurora Watch. 

Defense: An impressive army is stationed on the out- 
skirts of the city, comprised of Aurora Watch soldiers 
and trained local warriors, as well as mercenaries. 

Commerce: Basic supplies and equipment are available, 
as well as quality arms and some rare goods. Inns and 
taverns offer austere accommodations. 

Organizations: There are several temples to the Luxon, 
as well as some shrines to other deities. Merchant 
unions are beholden to the will of Den Olios. Mean- 
while, Lolth’s Children of Malice lurk in the shadows. 


Encircling and covering a massive, cracked hillside in 
the center of northern Xhorhas, Asarius has grown into 
a cluttered sprawl of roughshod homesteads, mud huts, 
and military fortifications that are home to a bustling 
blend of the many peoples of the Kryn Dynasty. The city 
is a cultural hub established by the Kryn for the wilder 
folk of the surrounding wastes and nomadic peoples 
who joined the dynasty. The Kryn convinced these 
wastefolk to unite under their banner by promising them 
protection, resources, and, in many cases, enlighten- 
ment (followed by conversion to the faith of the Luxon). 
Although the establishment of Asarius was initially 
fraught, the city quickly grew into a symbol of unity 
for the scattered cultures of northern Xhorhas, who 
eschewed the dangerous, competitive fight for survival 
to instead focus on building a community. In the gener- 
ations since, the city has blossomed into a tangled web 
of quirky neighborhoods, filled with industry and musky 
scents. The muddy plains outside are tilled for hearty 
roots and produce, monstrous livestock are herded 
and kept in large pens and pits, and a growing force of 
Aurora Watch soldiers train and prepare to battle the 
forces of the Dwendalian Empire. 


FORGED IN FRENZY 

The wastes have always bred strong peoples who could 
survive despite the harsh environment, deadly wildlife, 
and scarce resources. Many of the wastefolk fought 
each other over hunting grounds and territory until the 
Kryn rebuffed attempts at violence and instead offered 
to bring together the tribes for the common goal of 
mutually assured survival. Some were intrigued by the 
opportunity, while others did not fully trust the strange 
elves who chose to wield words instead of swords. The 
early establishment of Asarius was marked by conflict, 
and while the community has since flourished, there are 
still many who live beneath the dynasty’s protection but 
mistrust the dark elves’ intentions. 


A MARTIAL PILLAR 

While manysee the establishment of Asarius as pure 
altruism on the part of the Kryn Dynasty, one cannot 
deny the importance of the city’s central location among 
the wastes and strategic proximity to the border of the 
empire. The Bright Queen has transformed the tiny 
township into a gargantuan military hub for the dynasty, 
enlisting many thousands of wastefolk to form the 
backbone of its standing army. Wide swaths of military 
tents cover the western outskirts of the city as countless 
soldiers prepare for the coming conflicts in the west, 
training atop the terrifying war beasts and towering war 
machines brought from Rosohna or built alongside the 
towering walls of Asarius. 


AsarRius, THE City oF Beasts 


ee 


PEARSA 


GOVERNMENT 

The rule of law is tenuously imposed throughout the 
chaotic city, where the squabbles of argumentative ci- 
vilians often lead to physical conflict. The laws of the 
dynasty, which stem from the faith of the Luxon, are 
enforced by a network of trusted Aurora Watch captains 
and soldiers who report to Den Olios within the Aurora 
Hold. Local affairs are the jurisdiction of Lady Zethriss 
Olios, who works with representatives of each major 
neighborhood to manage the city and its people. 


CRIME 

Blood often runs hot in Asarius, and folk here often 
come to blows, simply to deal with the stress and frus- 
tration of life on the plains. The Kryn know this; as 
such, their laws regarding physical assaults and fights 
are far laxer in this city than anywhere else in Kryn 
territory. Even so, disagreements can escalate to a point 
where theft, brutality, and murder sometimes occur with 
worrying regularity. 


GEOGRAPHY 

The majority of this rough, boisterous city is draped 
across a wide, muddy hill that overlooks the surround- 
ing plains. The hill is surrounded by fifteen-foot-tall 
walls of purple vermaloc wood, harvested from the 
eponymous Vermaloc Wildwood. The interior of the 
city is a tangled mass of wayward, mud-slick streets 
and a hodgepodge of homes and structures that 


architecturally mirror the social mixture of dark elf so- 
ciety and the many nomadic lifestyles of the wastefolk. 
The center of the city is marked by the ominous spire 
known as the Aurora Hold, home to Den Olios. 

The southeast region of Asarius is called the Pits, 
named for the multitude of breeding pits for war beasts 
and other beasts of burden. The Pits are responsible 
for the city’s ever-present smell of wet animals and 
dung, and the area is also home to many poorer citizens 
seeking work wherever it can be found. The southwest 
portion of the city is known as the Creets, a rustic tan- 
gle of goblinoid neighborhoods and houses of farming 
folk who till the harsh environment beyond the eastern 
walls. The entire northern side of the city is simply 
known as the Northroads. Within this area, the Scowl 
Square is the center of commerce, and the North Cen- 
ter forms the industrial core of Asarius. An average of 
four thousand Aurora Watch are stationed outside the 
western walls of the city, with additional reinforcements 
during times of looming conflict. 


ASARIUS ADVENTURES 

Characters might come tothe City of Beasts to find a re- 
liable war beast, receive military training, or spy on the 
Kryn military preparations. 

War Beast Escape (Mid Level). While the characters 
stay in Asarius, spies from the Dwendalian Empire 
infiltrate the city and simultaneously release war beasts 
from their pens after enraging them with whips and hot 
irons. As the characters try to stop the rampage, they 
learn that the spies are using the confusion to steal the 
city’s secrets. 

Echo of the Past (Mid Level). A chaotic good, male, 
dranassar survivor named Jibu-Corryn has been living 
as a dark elf in Asarius under the name of Alyxikon, a 
minor government secretary. A cult of hobgoblins and 
bugbears who call themselves the Lords of Strife are 
hunting Jibu after hearing a rumor that one of the last 
of the dranassar are hiding in Asarius. Their leader, a 
hobgoblin captain named Gorthux, possesses the power 
to transform into a bone devil once per day, and plans to 
offer Jibu as a sacrifice to Bane. 

Jibu has heard tales of the characters’ prowess and 
contacts them with a cryptic note. He begs for protection 
while he settles his affairs in Asarius and travels to a 
hermitage in Blightshore. 


BARBED FIELDS 


The valley north of Rosohna is covered by this broken 
and marred landscape of jagged rock, sunken craters, 
and scabrous, hooked spires of glass and rock jutting 
from the ground. It is said that the final battles of the 
Calamity were fought on this valley floor. The earth is 

so scarred here that few question the veracity of this leg- 
end. Treacherously unpredictable earth crumbles into 
sinkholes surrounded by thick, caustic tar pits that swal- 
low careless wanderers, while the storms common to 
the region bring rain-slicked mud traps and flash floods. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


However, powerful relics and armaments have been 
recovered from these ancient battlefields, so the strong 
and the stupid occasionally venture into the dangerous 
fields, often finding themselves hunted by the monsters 
that lurk in this ruined domain. It is rumored that 
toward the center of the barren fields grows a beauti- 
ful, towering tree that grew from the final seed left by 
Melora before she vanished to her realm beyond the 
Divine Gate. Powerful followers of the Wild Mother 
sometimes make a pilgrimage to this tree for guidance 
and communion, but the fields are so fraught with evil 
that few ever return. 


BARBED FIELDS ADVENTURES 

The deeply wounded lands ofthe Barbed Fields are rife 
with planar entities bleeding through where the veils 
between worlds are thin. 

Dark Days (Epic Level). The extremely rare double 
eclipse, when the moons Catha and Ruidis overlap 
before the sun, is approaching, and it will occur over 
Xhorhas. Seers and oracles warn of portents that speak 
of an uncontrollable planar crossover, where multiple 
planes might briefly collide. The Kryn Dynasty hires the 
characters to bolster their ranks in preparation—but no 
one is prepared for the army from the Nine Hells that 
invades the fields when the realms merge. Leading this 
evil army is a pit fiend named Vanatoth. 


BAZZOXAN 


Population: 2,610 (81% dark elves, 8% goblinoids, 11% 
other races) 

Government: Martial law is enforced by Taskhand 
Verin Thelyss and maintained by the local military. 

Defense: The Aurora Watch defends the town and keeps 
the demonic incursions at bay. The few citizens learn 
combat skills out of necessity. 

Commerce: Very basic supplies are available, if scarce, 
due to the dangerous circumstances surrounding the 
town. Most trade involves provisions and goods for 
survival and defense. 

Organizations: There are a number of partially de- 
stroyed temples and a handful of small ones that are 
still intact. 


Bazzoxan was once a dark temple instrumental in the 
machinations of the Betrayer Gods during the Calamity, 
but the remaining ruin was left to gather dust like many 
relics of those terrible times. After Ghor Dranas was 
claimed by the Kryn, settlers roamed north through the 
Barbed Fields to discover this site with hopes of reno- 
vating it as well. A community began to flourish within 
the ruins of Bazzoxan over a few generations, building 
the foundations of a new city around the looming stone 
structures of the abandoned sanctum—until demonic 
forces from within the old temple threw the burgeoning 
society into chaos. Bazzoxan is now perpetually locked 
in a stalemate between the dynasty’s forces and the 
abyssal incursion from within the temple. This unholy 
site is the subject of constant research and of growing 
worry for the dynasty. 


Barseo FieLos 


NEVER LEFT ALONE 

About forty years ago, a group of curious local dun- 
geoneers uncovered a long-dormant gateway to the 
Abyss. Its demonic influence drove them mad, and they 
accidentally reactivated the gateway of Bazzoxan—an 
immense rift between the Abyss and Exandria. This 
enabled demonic forces to pour out into the ruins and 
surrounding city. The incursion was eventually stifled, 
though at agreat loss of life. The civilians that remain 
in Bazzoxan support the warriors who keep the forces 
of the Abyss at bay, as well as the arcanists who work to 
reseal the rift and reclaim the city. 


GOVERNMENT 

The town is under martial law, with Aurora Watch sol- 
diers keeping the peace under the current governance 
of Taskhand Verin Thelyss. The taskhand’s lieutenants 
serve as minor officials and bureaucrats, and even the 
civilians who continue to stay are trained to defend 
themselves and fall into rank if malevolent forces rise 
from beneath their home. 


CRIME 

With the tension of living in constant fear of demonic 
threat, the focus on survival in Bazzoxan leaves little 
room to break the law for personal gain. Evenso, the 
rare grifter sometimes profits from gouging the price 

of provisions or swindling the fearful. Criminals who 
are caught by the Watch are sent south to Rosohna for 
punishment or simply executed, depending on the sever- 
ity of their crimes. 


le 


-3 To Ay E 


GEOGRAPHY 

The towering ruined temple sits against the rocky 
southern base of the Penumbra Range, carved directly 
from the natural stone of the mountains. The ominous 
onyx doors that lead into the heart of the temple remain 
barred and under constant watch. Surrounding the tem- 
ple are over a hundred abodes and structures, as well 
as a partially reconstructed town square. Construction 
equipment lies abandoned in the streets, and vacant 
homes sit untouched since their denizens were slain 

or forced to flee. Makeshift Aurora Watch barracks are 
continuously expanded to make room for the reinforce- 


ments sent to push back the fiends that assail the city 
from beneath. 


BAZZOXAN ADVENTURES 

Adventurers loyal to the Kryn Dynasty are welcome in 
Bazzoxan and will almost certainly be asked to aid with 
keeping Abyssal forces at bay or gathering spell compo- 
nents for the mages trying to seal the rift. 

Heir Aberrant (Mid Level). One of the dungeoneers 
who first discovered the gateway beneath Bazzoxan, a 
lunatic who nonetheless lived out his final days in lux- 
ury, has just passed away. The inheritor of his estate is 
offering a modest reward to any investigators who can 
locate certain relics of abyssal origin rumored to be hid- 
den in the deceased madman’s trapped abode. But what 
are the intentions of the so-called inheritor, and what 
danger do these relics pose to the people of Xhorhas? 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


136 


BROKENVEIL MARSH 


The sheer cliffs and ravines of the Brokenveil Bluffs 
were created when the Dunrock Mountains and the Ash- 
keeper Peaks were sundered in the Calamity. Between 
these precipices, a dense morass of thick, stinking 
marshland claims the valley floor. Gnarled trees and 
tangle vines clutter the shaded canyons, while sucking 
mud pits and buzzing insects make travel a slow and ar- 
duous experience. All kinds of swamp beasts and sink- 
ing muck traps threaten to swallow those who trespass 
in the marsh, and filthy bluff harpies are eager to pluck 
away stragglers. 

The marsh is a comfortable home for horizonback 
tortoises, so the challenge often lies in perceiving which 
dry mound in the Brokenveil is an actual hill and which 
is the shell of a territorial monster. 


A BUFFER OF BATTLE 

The marsh helps discourage the eastern expansion of 
the Dwendalian Empire and deters the Kryn Dynasty 
from pushing farther west. However, nearly two decades 
of skirmishes between these nations have left many sol- 
diers on both sides buried in the marsh, their bodies for- 
ever lost to the dark muck. The Kryn’s recent victory at 
the Ashguard Garrison has given them control over the 
marsh and a foothold in the enemy territory beyond it. 


CHARIS 


Population: 950 (53% dragonborn, 41% halflings, 6% 


other races) 

Government: Two elders preside over this village, one 
representing its dragonborn population and the other 
representing its halfling population. 

Defense: Numerous bands of experienced fighters, dru- 
ids, and hunters patrol the area. Civilians know basic 
combat techniques to defend the village if necessary. 

Commerce: Travelers can find basic supplies, most 
likely at a small inn. Visits from traveling merchants 
are infrequent, so rare goods are special finds. 

Organizations: A mighty treetop temple to Melora 
shades the center of the village. 


A wandering community of halflings survived in the 
fiend-twisted Lotusden Greenwood for generations 
through their cunning and the grace of their faith in 
Melora. When they found themselves ambushed by a 
group of starving ravenites fleeing from the destruction 
of Draconia, the halflings shunned conflict in favor of 
kindness. They offered to feed the ravenites, and a bond 
between peoples was born. 

This burgeoning community of halflings and dragon- 
born was able to carve out a permanent home within a 
safer region of the Lotusden and, with the blessing of 
the Wild Mother, ward off the evils of the forest. They 
gave their woodland village the name Charis, from 
the Draconic word for “hope.” This hidden hamlet of 
hollowed trees, moss-covered grottoes, and mushroom 
fields harbors anature-worshiping commune of vegetar- 
ian farmers, forest guardians, and druids who work to 
live in harmony with the surrounding forest. They hope 
to cleanse the Lotusden of the evils that have pervaded 
its shadows since before the Divergence. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


IGNORANCE Is BLISS 

Despite the chaos and turmoil that rock the lands of 
Wildemount beyond the Lotusden Greenwood, the 
people of Charis are happy in their isolation. Lacking 
any real interest in outside affairs, they focus entirely 

on protecting the surrounding forest and their fellow 
villagers. Outsiders occasionally visit Charis, and while 
the villagers are welcoming to those who offer no sign 
of aggression, they usually find a way to quickly usher 
them along, preferring to be left to their simple lives and 
pursuits. The people of this village would never consider 
leaving their tranquil home, unless so commanded by 
the Wild Mother herself. 


GOVERNMENT 

The community is small enough that most intricacies 

of formal government are unnecessary. Volunteers take 
up responsibilities in shifts, from keeping watch to gath- 
ering food. Leaderships is shared between two elders, 
one for each of the halfling and dragonborn populations, 
and their authority is mostly required for giving spiritual 
guidance and resolving minor disputes. 


CRIME 

The society within the village operates without money, 
gold, or emphasis on precious stones. Everything is pro- 
vided by the community and shared equally, in theory. 
In practice, however, disputes do occasionally arise, and 
ravenites who remember their times in the Dreemoth 
Ravine sometimes feel compelled to secretly hoard 
things once considered valuable. While there are no for- 
mal laws, if enough citizens feel wronged by an action, 
they bring the issue before the elders, who will judge the 
situation and choose a fitting punishment. 


GEOGRAPHY 

Nestled within a sunken meadow surrounded by dense 
trees and hills, this hidden sanctuary is a beautiful 
pocket of protected nature within the haunted shadows 
of the Lotusden. Colorful flowers and fungi line the 
pathways between stacking treehollow homes and hill- 
side domiciles, and vine-wrapped bridges hang between 
treetops. Sunbeams pierce the canopy of the forest, 
bringing vibrant warmth during the day, while moon- 
light calls faint whispers of mischievous fey into the 
village to mingle with its denizens. 


CHARIS ADVENTURES 
Finding Charis is an adventure the characters might un- 
dertake to locate a person with a specific item or piece 
of information that could aid them in another quest. 
Overlord of the Overgrowth (Mid Level). A demon 
has made the forest bordering Charis its lair. Every day, 
the hezrou Garlagrag attempts to summon more and 
more demons into the forest, and the woods are now 
flush with hezrous and dretches. The people of Charis 
seek aid to fight off the demons or to end Garlagrag’s 
plot once and for all. 


| 
HE EMERALD 


Ss 
Vi 

K€ 
ş 


~ 


falonstadt 5) si ie tN auldron #& 
y IES 

A) i 1D) 
; (Asarius 


T Feverguit, SS N 
Lake Ww on) 


Map 3.8: Wastes OF XHORHAS 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


DEEPRIVER MINE AND ICOZRIN 
STEELWORKS 


Established around a plentiful source of iron and copper 


within a dry, subterranean riverbed, the Deepriver Mine 
is one of the dynasty’s most productive mining opera- 
tions. Workers toil away within the mines beneath the 
red canopy of the Vermaloc, or work the smelters that 
litter the courtyard, preparing to send their goods to 
Rosohna or farther into the west of Xhorhas. 

Since the conflict with the Dwendalian Empire has 
escalated in recent decades, Den Icozrin established an 
impressive steelworks alongside the Deepriver Mine to 
expedite the forging of armaments. The Icozrin Steel- 
works has since grown to become a construction yard 
for war machines and siege weaponry to be sent to the 
front lines in the west. 


DREEMOTH RAVINE 


Along the southeastern range of the Ashkeeper Peaks, 
an impressively deep gorge cuts into the mountains for 
nearly eighty miles. Winding and widening, the enor- 
mous ravine reveals a beautiful, rocky valley of sparse 
trees, natural caverns, and incredible waterfalls tum- 
bling from the Ashkeeper runoff. Strong winds blow 
through the gorge, and the numerous natural cliffside 
outcroppings provide shelter for wild griffons, wyverns, 
and other flying beasts. The central bend of the 
Dreemoth Ravine still contains the ruins of Draconia, as 
well as the countless abandoned caves and quarries that 
once held the enslaved ravenites, now freed. 


DREEMOTH RAVINE ADVENTURES 
Characters might come to Dreemoth Ravine to cap- 
ture and train a flying mount, or to explore the ruins 
of Draconia. 

Bones of Frigid Doom (Epic Level). A death knight 
named Pentrakath lurks in a cave in the Dreemoth Ra- 
vine, and he has uncovered the bones of Vorugal, the 
ancient white dragon that destroyed Draconia twenty 
years ago. He gathered a host of profane relics and stole 
the souls of hundreds of dead dragonborn in an attempt 
to stitch together a soul powerful enough to resurrect 
Vorugal as an ancient white dracolich. 


DUMARAN 


The hobgoblin fortress of Dumaran is built into the 


western base of the Penumbra Range, hidden within 
the south end of the web-infested Vermaloc Wildwood. 
Dozens of defensible portholes and arrow slits look 
down over the walkways that wind across the face of the 
impressive fortress, while curling paths lead up into the 
mountains. Within, countless halls, chambers, and tun- 
nels are carved through the rock. 

Following the Calamity, the hobgoblin survivors were 
scattered, fighting the clans of the Iothia Moorland for 
scarce resources. They drew the attention of Lolth, the 
Spider Queen, who seduced and empowered the hob- 
goblins of Dumaran. Although they were not drow, the 
hobgoblins joined the ranks of the Children of Malice, 
giving them dominion over the spiders throughout the 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


Vermaloc and honing them into a ferocious army to top- 
ple the Kryn as punishment for their insolence. 


CHANGED BY HATRED 

Twisted bythe dark gifts of their murderous goddess, 
the hobgoblins of Dumaran have onyx black fur, pale 
yellow eyes, and a hunger for slaughter. Their noctur- 
nal hordes strike out in the dark of night, commanding 
the massive, venomous arachnids of the Vermaloc to 
aid their raiding parties. Their rituals emphasize their 
loathing of the Kryn drow, the same who abandoned 
their Spider Queen, and they work to slowly build paths 
through the Penumbra Range toward Rosohna to even- 
tually corrupt the city from the shadows. 


A JEALOUS MISTRESS 
Like an equally dark mirror of the Lolth-worshiping 
drow in distant regions of Exandria, the warrior 
matrons of the Children of Malice hold power within 
Dumaran, leading their family houses while serving un- 
der Head Matron Vivurk Tonn. Though many drow so- 
cieties are filled with political scheming and infighting 
to win Lolth’s favor, their queen’s seething hatred of the 
dynasty focuses these drow against a common enemy, 
making the forces of Dumaran a ruthlessly efficient en- 
gine of vengeance. 

While crimes occur from time to time, the threat 
of swift and brutal punishment is enough to keep the 
inhabitants of the fortress in line, unless they are abso- 
lutely certain they can get away with a misdeed or prove 
that their actions further Lolth’s goals. 


DUMARAN ADVENTURES 

Those who serve the Spider Queen in Xhorhas often 
pass through Dumaran, and heroes who seek to end 
her poisonous influence might attempt to destroy the 
stronghold. 

Matron of Malice (Mid Level). The Kryn Dynasty 
aims to create upheaval within Dumaran by hiring the 
characters to infiltrate the fortress and assassinate 
Head Matron Vivurk Tonn. To get to her, the characters 
are given potions that can polymorph them into dark 
elves for 24 hours. 

A Looming Visit (High Level). Intercepted messages 
between the Children of Malice speak of a ritual that is 
being prepared in the heart of Dumaran in the coming 
weeks. Victims have been captured for a mass sacrifice, 
and the messages mention a “great arrival.” The Kryn 
Dynasty hires the characters to uncover more informa- 
tion about this ritual, attempt to release any prisoners, 
and, should the opportunity present itself, stop this rit- 
ual or destroy whatever arrives at its completion. 


FEVERGULF LAKE 


Fevergulf Lake is a massive body of brackish water 
known for its warm temperature and sulfurous smell. 
Depending on the season, the waters can become al- 
most scalding in places, causing many of the fish and 
other creatures that live beneath the surface to migrate 
from one end of the lake to the other. The banks of the 
lake collect layers of strange minerals and stones of all 
colors, creating a rainbow of odd pastel hues among the 


pebbles, sands, and muck on the lake shore. The im- 
mensity of the lake gives plenty of room for all manner 
of strange terrors to thrive beneath the waters, making 
it extremely dangerous to cross via boat. 


FEVERGULF LAKE ADVENTURES 

The characters could attempt to cross Fevergulf Lake 
without waking its monsters, or they could hunt the den- 
izens beneath. 

Eyes of the Lake (Any Level). The two islands near 
the center of the Fevergulf, known as the Eyes of the 
Lake, are home to rocky shores and twin forests of 
brown, moss-covered, dead trees. Tall, twisted, and leaf- 
less, these woods are ominous enough from a distance, 
but the clans of the Iothia Moorland still tell fables of a 
strange, isolated cult from long ago that lives there to 
this day, mourning the loss of some long-forgotten god. 


IOTHIA MOORLAND 


The Iothia Moorland fills much of the central valley of 


Xhorhas, a landscape of hilly grasslands and muddy 
fields that stretches from horizon to horizon, framed 

by soggy swamps and massive lakes. The Moorland is 
surprisingly fertile, supporting a robust ecosystem of 
game and beasts that call the valley home. The roving 
Dolorav and Koshtask clans claim the Moorlands as 
their hunting grounds, fighting back the deadly preda- 
tors that stalk the marshes while also fighting intruders 
and each other. 


THE DOLORAV: WAYFARING WARRIORS 
The Doloravclan is a fierce and disciplined warrior 
tribe, as well as one of the largest human societies in 
Eastern Wynandir. The Dolorav are descended from the 
surviving members of the Vukan, who were defeated by 
the Ki’Nau and their patron Uk’otoa in centuries past. 
They’ve now grown into a matriarchal society ruled by 
a champion called the Skyspear, who is chosen through 
feats of strength and mental acuity. Tribal warriors gain 
glory by surviving dangerous trials and rituals, and the 
majority of the Dolorav hunters and fighters are women. 

All who belong to the clan take a blood oath called the 
Marking as a teenager (or on being accepted into the 
clan, if they joined later in life). This vow demands celi- 
bacy until an appointed mate is chosen by the Skyspear. 
The clan is a tight-knit community that understands 
the perilous nature of the land, and is ever vigilant to 
protect its own and rebuff the attempts of the dynasty to 
indoctrinate members into the Luxon’s worship. On rare 
occasions, the Dolorav clan has been known to ally with 
the Koshtask clan against a common foe, and recently 
there have been talks of renewing such a truce to fight 
the Many Hosts of Igrathad. 

At present, the Dolorav clan is recovering from the 
massacre of their previous leadership by one of their 
own only a year ago. 


THE KOSHTASK: WILLFUL BRUTISHNESS 

The Koshtask clan is a powerful union of ornery orc ma- 
rauders and abandoned wastefolk who were left behind 
when they chose not to follow the clans that joined the 
Kryn Dynasty and established Igrathad. As worshipers 


of Gruumsh, the Koshtask value efficiency in the kill 
and take what they want. They prefer fearmongering to 
diplomacy, and most interactions with the Koshtask end 
in violence, unless a greater enemy is present against 
whom they must ally. The current chosen of Gruumsh, 
a fire-scarred orc called Arakki, leads with cunning and 
foresight, seeking convenient alliances to ensure his 
clan’s survival, fight off the Kryn missionaries that seek 
to convert his people, and eventually betray and destroy 
those foolish enough to trust them. 


IOTHIA MOORLAND ADVENTURES 
These muck-laden fields of swamp and grass hide many 
lost secrets that have sunk beneath the mud—and 
deadly denizens intent on keeping those secrets hidden. 
Lost Resting Place (Mid Level). A disorganized clan 
of cyclopes wander the moorland, searching for the 
grave of their founding champion who died hundreds of 
years ago. They might parlay with the characters and 
are willing to trade fine, rare items for aid in seeking 
out their champion’s resting place. When the grave is 
discovered, the cyclopes immediately begin a ceremony 
that raises the bones of their founder from the muck into 
a new existence as a giant. The characters can decide to 
halt the ritual, angering the cyclopes, or learn later that 
the clan is terrorizing the tribes of the moorland. 


JIGOW 


Population: 13,210 (56% goblinkin, 31% orcs, 13% 
other races) 

Government: The assigned taskhand, Durth Mirimm, 
has a strained partnership with the two elder leaders 
of the goblin and orc clans. 

Defense: Taskhand Mirimm’s small platoon of Aurora 
Watch soldiers bolsters the sizable ranks of the lo- 
cal warriors. 

Commerce: Most basic goods and services can be 
found here, though their quality reflects their rough 
and rural origins. Hostels and lodges offer rooms and 
provisions for travelers. 

Organizations: A central temple to the Luxon presides 
over a district called the Jumble (see “Geography” 
later in this section). Each clan maintains their own 
network of artisans and merchants. 


A tenuous alliance of goblin clans and territorial orc 
clans once scavenged along the northern shores of 
Xhorhas, warring and competing for survival. Over the 
past century, the Kryn Dynasty has worked to bring the 
tworoving factions together. The negotiations were long 
and arduous, but the Kryn Dynasty’s introduction of the 
faith of the Luxon ultimately helped the clans to forma 
unified society. 

From these talks, the coastal city of Jigow rose to 
become an important source of seafood within the dy- 
nasty. A booming fishing society that spreads over both 
the banks of the Emerald Gulch Sea and the northern 
Ifolon River, this community of powerful hunters, cun- 
ning fishers, and tireless crafters has become a valuable 
symbol of the dynasty’s growth and influence. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 139 


140 


ALWAYS AT ODDS 

Despite the peace between the peoples of Jigow, their 
long-standing rivalries require other outlets wherein 
they can express their need to conquer and gloat, 

which is why Jigow celebrates competition in any form. 
Whether the rivalry of the day is a contest between 
hunting parties, a cooking competition, or just children 
playing sporting games, the people of Jigow love turning 
amicable rivalries into a loud and colorful spectacle— 
especially when they can make bets or help their chosen 
side cheat to achieve victory. 


A STUBBORN CULTURE 

The beliefs and superstitions of the original Gakthash, 
Uvuroh, and Zetek goblin clans permeate Jigow’s goblin 
society. Similarly, the honorable traditions of the Norgab 
and Shoomat orcs continue to guide their people. While 
some have adopted the beliefs of the Kryn, many resist 
the teachings of the drow, as they feel that the presence 
of drow is suffocating their own culture. The mounting 
tensions between the dynasty and the people of Jigow 
are only further exacerbated by the worry that the dy- 
nasty’s war will spill into Jigow territory. 


GOVERNMENT 

Taskhand Durth Mirimm represents the dynasty’s in- 
terests first and foremost, putting the needs of Jigow’s 
residents a distant second. His controversial judgments 
are often challenged by the most vocal of the clan elders: 
Elder Cubu-Ka, an elderly goblin who enjoys frustrating 
the Kryn representatives, and Elder Ushru, an aging 
orc hunter eager to maintain the cultural heritage of his 
people. To the dynasty, maintaining order resembles a 
handful of adults failing to keep unruly children under 
control. The native people of Jigow, however, see their 
willfulness as a way to establish boundaries against a 
clueless enforcer. 


CRIME 

While members ofthe Aurora Watch do their best to 
keep things under control, a constant hum of small- 
scale thefts can’t be quelled. Between watching their 
own pockets, the occasional violent confrontation from 
a contest gone sour, and illegal attempts to undermine 
a competitor’s business, the Watch is perpetually over- 
worked, which only invites more shenanigans from the 
people of Jigow. 


GEOGRAPHY 

Jigow is more of a collection of coastal villages than a 
singular, central city. The settlement is comprised of a 
chain of settlements clustered among the trees of the 
shoreline. The main docks, known as the Meatwaters, 
lie on the westernmost shore, where the fishing indus- 
try thrives due to the healthy marine ecosystem. The 
central villages, called the Jumble, sit slightly farther 
from the coast, built among the massive mangrove trees 
and nomadic horizonback tortoises that serve as roving 
homesteads. The eastern edges, known as the Wet- 
walks, are filled with huts and shacks built on stilts over 
the low wetland patches where grains are cultivated in 
the paddies amid the reeds. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


JiGow ADVENTURES 

Characters in Jigow might get pulled into local competi- 
tions, or they might be keeping an eye on the populace 
forthe Kryn, who are trying to avoid a revolt. 

Battle of the Braggarts (Low Level). At a tavern, the 
adventurers witness two braggarts engage in a boast- 
off. The two boasters, a battle-scarred old orc named 
Temgor and a young goblin named Gerb, are both pride- 
ful and refuse to back down. It seems like the conflict 
is going to come to blows, and both Temgor and Gerb’s 
friends separately ask the adventurers to defuse the ten- 
sions before the Aurora Watch gets involved. 


LOTUSDEN GREENWOOD 


The dark, verdant forest of the Lotusden Greenwood 
envelops the southern end of Eastern Wynandir in eerie 
mists, murderous trolls, and hungry trees. Incredibly 
lush and filled with life compared to the barren and 
desolate wastes to the north, this unchecked forest is 
home to many creatures and beasts, some of whom have 
grown to a nightmarish size because of the residual 
power of the long-buried druidic fane that empowers 
and protects the Greenwood. 

Giant predators and dire monstrosities stalk the un- 
dergrowth, while vicious, carnivorous plants patiently 
await their next meal. Cold nights bring icy mists to the 
wood, drawing the spirits of those claimed by the Lotus- 
den out into the moonlight to siphon the warmth from 
the living. The Kryn Dynasty considers exploiting the 
mysterious and deadly forest to be an unnecessary risk, 
so the Lotusden Greenwood remains one of the few 
places on this side of the Penumbra Range untouched 
by Kryn interests. 


A BITE AS BAD As ITS BARK 

No one knows the source of the wild curses that plague 
the Lotusden, but there are a number of stories that 
speak of whole portions of the forest suddenly coming 
to life. The trees uproot themselves and march as one, 
going berserk and assaulting any they perceive as out- 
siders—until mysteriously, and without warning, they 
take root again and return to their docile, unmoving 
state. While academics maintain that there is no defini- 
tive proof of this behavior, some explorers have noticed 
the shape of the forest’s edges changing dramatically, 
sometimes overnight. 


LOTUSDEN GREENWOOD ADVENTURES 

The characters might enter the forest to retrieve some- 
one who is lost or to escape Kryn forces in pursuit. Any 
plant in Lotusden Greenwood could be a carnivorous 
monster waiting to attack. 

Mother's Milk (Mid Level). Someone or something 
has been kidnapping the infants and children of Charis. 
A terrible evil lurks at the heart of the matter: an unholy 
coven of hags, led by a night hag of prodigious influ- 
ence and power. The hag preside over a dark corner of 
the Greenwood, where they lair beneath the roots of a 
gargantuan tree. Here, the nightmarish coven and its 
minions manufacture the slow doom of the Greenwood 
itself as they siphon the lifeblood of the Charis children 
into a loathsome artifact known as the Gloom Lathe. 


Many HOSTS OF IGRATHAD 


Population: 6,750 (41% goblinkin, 19% orcs, 15% hu- 


manoids, 25% other races) 

Government: A local leader governs independently 
alongside a Kryn representative in each of the seven 
villages. The village leaders occasionally convene as 
a council. 

Defense: A small force of Aurora Watch soldiers weave 
through the villages, and each village maintains its 
own army of warriors. 

Commerce: Most goods or services can be found within 
the villages, though it might take some searching, and 
strange or rare commodities are occasionally avail- 
able from merchants or scavengers. Inns and taverns 
are scattered throughout the villages. 

Organizations: Small shrines and temples can be found 
in each village, and they each maintain their own mar- 
ketplace and merchant unions. The Children of Malice 
have begun to infiltrate many of the villages. 


South of the Sorrowseep Waters, where the fields are 
more fertile, lies ascattered network of seven villages 
with robust communities of goblinkin, orcs, and giants, 
known as the Many Hosts of Igrathad. The seven vil- 
lages are Kranad, Broonbobah, Aruuth, Oshinik-Ka, 
Wrathfall, Unyeethi, and Dodafir. 

All seven villages were built on a central battleground 
where the factions of this region feuded and warred over 
resources and glory. The Kryn Dynasty reached out to 
the village leaders nearly a century ago and managed 
to broker a peace to halt the bloodshed. This disparate 
community is a uniquely powerful, if quarrelsome, ally 
to the dynasty. 


A WARRIOR CULTURE 

Over the generations of fighting each other as well as 
the roving clans of nomads that wander the Iothia Moor- 
land, the many people of Igrathad have come to prize 
displays of combat prowess and hunting skills. Children 
are trained with arms from an early age, and the Many 
Hosts are respected as the finest warriors in the region, 
making them feared soldiers within the dynasty’s mili- 
tary forces. 


TENTATIVELY UNITED 

While the villages of Igrathad have enjoyed the fruits of 
a somewhat collaborative society under the guidance of 
the dynasty, the centuries of turmoil have not been for- 
gotten. Neighbors argue over territory, and youths chal- 
lenge each other for social dominance. The people take 
pride in the unique history of their own village, and that 
pride can win out over the dynasty’s message of unity. 
Interactions between the villages often grow tense when 
the Kryn aren't around to keep the peace. This isn’t 
helped by the fact that a record number of able-bodied 
villagers from Igrathad have been sent north to fight 

on the front lines of the war. The center of the Kryn’s 
government is far away from Igrathad, and many of the 
Dens are concerned that the tenuous union between the 
Many Hosts is crumbling. 


GOVERNMENT 

Each ofthe seven villages hasits own leader, who is 
usually chosen for their lineage or with a contest of 
strength. Each leader is assigned a representative from 
Rosohna to help enforce the will of the Bright Queen, 
though the leaders often disagree with various facets of 
the dynasty’s decrees, making total unity challenging. 
The various leaders meet in a public space to make most 
major decisions and judgments: they debate and some- 
times duel to resolve the matters before them. While 
this unconventional court is not consistent with the dy- 
nasty’s intended order, few of the Kryn representatives 
find the will to argue. 


CRIME 

Some Aurora Watch soldiers keep the peace and man- 
age the day-to-day quarrels within Igrathad. However, 
the majority of the Hosts’ people are expertly trained 
warriors, so they both handle their own problems and 
make it difficult to enforce any laws on them. The idea of 
attempting to punish or incapacitate a criminal ogre or 
angered giant keeps all but the strongest from taking a 
post in Igrathad. 


GEOGRAPHY 

The seven villages are connected by muddy paths that 
cut through the rocky grassland. Each village has its 
own culture, complete with distinct customs and reli- 
gious practices: 


Kranad began as a bugbear clan of the same name 
and is made up of wooden shanties built around 
stands of trees. 

Broonbobah is a village of goblins, where clusters of 
huts and rickety wood structures climb high to over- 
see the surrounding plains. 

Aruuth is home to the enduring orc people of the 
Aruuth-Uk clan, once the dominant clan of the area. 
The stone village is built around a prominent, deep-set 
vein of iron that provides ore to the villages. 

Oshinik-Ka is a village of the hobgoblin folk, who reside 
in stone bunkers behind barricades that markedly 
push the militant air of life within. 

Wrathfall is the village of humanoid outlanders who 
never joined with the Odarami or the clans of the 
Iothia Moorland. It is little more than a few scattered 
clusters of yurts. 

Unyeethi is home to the gnoll clan of the same name. 

It is the least social of the villages. The gnolls live in 
primitive huts made from bark, furs, and bones. 

Dodafir is the fortress village of hill giants that marks 
the southernmost borough of Igrathad. The fortress is 
made of great logs crudely fitted together, with roofs 
made of bark tiles and thatch. 


IGRATHAD ADVENTURES 

Characters could come to Igrathad seeking help from 
a powerful giant, or to help keep the villages united, or, 
conversely, to try to drive them apart. 

Necromancer’s Army (Mid Level). An exiled Dolorav 
necromancer has allied himself with a clan of blood- 
thirsty minotaurs to manufacture an army of undead, 
whose slow expansion poses a threat to Igrathad. Each 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


of Igrathad’s seven villages appoints a champion to 
march with Dolorav and Koshtask warriors against this 
cruel usurper and his legion of unholy monstrosities. 
The characters must join the fight if they want the vil- 
lages to help them with some other matter. 


PENUMBRA RANGE 


Dividing the marshes and badlands of Xhorhas from 
the ghastly boneyards of the Blightshore, the Penumbra 
Range is an unusually steep series of black rock moun- 
tains that rise against the horizon like a huge jaw of 
pointed teeth. Hiking across the sharp, glassy rock is an 
extremely dangerous feat that would challenge even the 
most experienced travelers. 


ROSOHNA (GHOR DRANAS) 


Population: 113,190 (66% dark elves, 9% goblins, 7% 
duergar, 18% other races) 

Government: The twelve ruling dark elf Dens oversee 
the city, all at the command of Den Kryn and the 
Bright Queen herself. 

Defense: A mighty army of Aurora Watch protects the 
city, while mounted weapons and ballistae stand at the 
ready. Each Den employs personal guards, as well as 
highly trained bodyguards for their nobles. 

Commerce: Most any goods or services can be found 
within the city, with distant imports available on the 
black market. 

Organizations: The majority of temples here are dedi- 
cated to the Luxon, but smaller shrines to the rest of 
the pantheon are scattered throughout in the outer 
districts. The merchant guilds are organized by the 
Dens and closely tied to the faith of the Luxon. Agents 
of the Children of Malice are sown like seeds of chaos 
throughout the city. 


The realm of Xhorhas was home to the strongholds of 
the Betrayer Gods as they walked the realm of mortals, 
but the beating heart of their mercurial alliance was 
the dark city of Ghor Dranas (meaning “gathering of 
shadows” in Draconic). A monument to the union of tyr- 
anny and chaos, the shaded skies framed the dozens of 
crooked towers and war barracks that surrounded the 
central citadel of Virkwzual, or “Dark Bastion” in the 
Infernal language. The final battles of the Calamity were 
waged around Ghor Dranas, and much of the city was 
reduced to ash and dust. Towers crumbled, the ground 
opened to swallow the legions of the Betrayers, and the 
citadel was left sundered and abandoned. It wasn’t until 
the surviving Kryn drow emerged from the Underdark 
that the city rose from its ashes. 

The Kryn slowly cleared the ruins of the corrupt 
creatures that had claimed it for so long. They built new 
structures on the foundations of the ancient city while 
expanding the underground levels beneath, bringing 
new life to the city of Ghor Dranas, which they named 
Rosohna, or “Rebirth,” in their tongue. 

Rosohna is the center of the powerful Kryn society, a 
symbol of dark history reclaimed. Its tall, dusky spires 
and beautiful buildings rise from the broken shards of 
the Calamity. Breaks in the constant cloud cover offer 
glimpses of sunlight, which is seen as a holy gift shining 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


onthe many monuments tothe Luxon. Crystalline halls 
of glass and quartz glow with interior light in the tradi- 
tional Kryn hues of green and purple. 

The streets are lively with city-dwelling wastefolk, the 
Luxon-worshiping drow who live beneath the open sky 
to spite Lolth’s design, and even a few duergar and other 
beings from the Underdark. Local businesses thrive as 
the Xhorhasian community grows, and goblinoid mer- 
chants have found profit and comfort within this dark elf 
civilization. Even so, most people beyond the borders of 
Xhorhas only see Rosohna as an unbroken link in the 
legacy of Ghor Dranas, a city born of malevolent gods 
and their murderous spawn. 


A COLLECTION OF CHARACTERS 

As the Kryn discovered their cycle of reincarnation, 
many began to find beings outside the drow lineage 
undergoing anamnesis, the process in which a creature 
reincarnated by a Luxon beacon begins to recall mem- 
ories from its past lives. Unexpectedly, the spirits of 
heroic Kryn were reborn in various intelligent creatures 
outside the dark elf society. With this knowledge, the 
ruling dens of the Kryn Dynasty began to reevaluate 
their treatment of non-drow, instead seeking to bring 
the light of the Luxon to the wastefolk of Xhorhas. While 
many beings across Xhorhas and beyond still cultivate 
mutual animosity toward the Kryn, there is a growing 
number of goblins, ogres, gnolls, orcs, and many other 
beings who have found a new home and purpose under 
the rule of the dynasty. Thanks to the miracle of anam- 
nesis, Kryn society has become a diverse and thriving 
community that spreads across Xhorhas. 


THE Dusk CITY 

The dark elf and duergar bloodlines are averse to sun- 
light, which presents a challenge to a culture that jour- 
neyed to the surface out of love for their light-bearing 
god. Periods of worship involve occasional prayer and 
meditation in the warmth of daylight, but twelve hours 
of daylight each day can become painful and physically 
detrimental to those beings adapted to subterranean 
life. To mitigate this problem, powerful dunamancers 
have woven arcane shields to temporarily block out the 
sun above Rosohna. Periods of days, sometimes weeks, 
will transpire in a state of perpetual evening, enabling 
the darkness-bound denizens to go about their work. 
Such periods briefly come to an end to usher in periods 
of scheduled, mass worship under the sunlight. 


ABOVE AND BELOW 

Rosohna is built on the remains of Ghor Dranas, and an 
entire, unseen level of the city lurks beneath the surface. 
These caves and tunnels were used as torture dungeons 
by worshipers of Torog, and the Dens of the Kryn have 
spent centuries reclaiming the space for their own 
people. Much of the dungeon remains abandoned, but a 
great many layers have been cleared and transformed 
into underground neighborhoods, hubs for subterranean 
travel across Wildemount, and farming caverns for 
crops of edible fungi. However, the Kryn Dynasty has 
secretly allowed some hidden chambers to fulfill their 
original grim purpose as cells for vile criminals and po- 
litical prisoners. 


seem) | AW! 
)-GlEicid Bastion ~ 


aT 


gd 


@ = Well 

@ = Watchtower [i oe 
Î = City Wall = y ona Soe | 

= Lantern = oe cS = a -o : E mis oe Te ee Meso Room 


144, 


GOVERNMENT 

The ruling class of the dynasty is seated in Rosohna, 
spread across twelve noble Dens—all of whom seek to 
one day rule the dynasty. They play an intricate political 
game by expanding their families of timeless souls and 
covertly undermining the authority of other Dens. 

Each Den traditionally oversees a portion of local 
industry, but the more distinguished Dens also vie for 
control over aspects of spiritual or military leadership. 
Den Masters keep a careful eye out for weakness among 
other Dens, seeking ways to sully the reputations of 
their rivals while displaying their own worthiness to 
the Bright Queen. Such social sabotage is reminiscent 
of the old ways of the drow, but assassinations and acts 
of outright violence are rare. The three ruling Dens— 
Den Kryn, Den Thelyss, and Den Mirimm—are each 
helmed by an Umavi. Of those families, Den Kryn holds 
supreme power, for its head is Bright Queen Leylas 
Kryn herself. 


CRIME 

Conflict and struggle are as common in Rosohna asin 
any other metropolis, and though the unifying faith of 
the Luxon helps maintain the peace between disparate 
and sometimes violent residents, old habits are hard to 
break. Den Mirimm has enacted a tough, sometimes 
brutal approach to law enforcement that helps discour- 
age violent behavior. 

Blackmail is common between political figures, and 
those that indulge in this vice believe that they can ab- 
solve any sins through pious prayer, reasoning that their 
actions are only illegal if they’re caught. 

Those who have been found guilty of major crimes 
against the dynasty are locked away in the Dungeon of 
Penance (see “Geography” below), or taken out beyond 
the reach of the beacons and executed, with no hope 
of rebirth. 


GEOGRAPHY 

Nestled protectively within a deep valley alongside the 
Penumbra Range, the majestic, ominous, and beautiful 
city long known as Ghor Dranasstands as a symbol 

of renewal and change. A vast medley of bright and 
wondrous structures, grandiose towers, and crystalline 
cathedrals soar into the sky, thriving among the broken 
remnants of a ruined metropolis that was once nothing 
but ash and haunted memories. Districts are laid out 

in the husk of the ancient capital like a series of layers, 
each ward growing more refined and enlightened the 
closer one gets to the center of the city. These layers 
are the Ghostlands, the Coronas, the Gallimaufry, the 
Firmaments, the Shadowshire, the Lucid Bastion, and 
the Dungeon of Penance. 

The Ghostlands. Large sections of the foreboding 
obsidian walls that once surrounded the city have fallen, 
but they are in the process of being rebuilt as the war 
with the empire grows more violent. Within these walls, 
the outlying Ghostlands remain empty, haunted by 
ghosts and shadows, the razed structures and barracks 
of the larger, ancient city left to crumble to dust. Two 
functional roads known as the Hallowed Paths allow 
caravans, travelers, and military forces to reach the city. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


Coronas. Most of the city’s poorer citizens are 
scattered throughout this sprawling, foggy district of 
salvaged structures and newer homesteads. Patches of 
magically maintained farmland are tilled and tended by 
nearby denizens, while industrial factories and bellows 
release stacks of black smoke and faintly colored steam. 
Aurora Watch captains coordinate law enforcement 
from three fortresses, while mercenaries, volunteers, 
and desperate folk often strike out into the Ghostlands 
with hopes of exorcising new neighborhoods to shelter 
the continuously growing population of Rosohna. 

Gallimaufry. Deeper into the heart of Rosohna is 
the massive region called the Gallimaufry. The rowdi- 
est and most vibrant ward of the city, the Gallimaufry 
marks the intersection of culture and commerce where 
citizens come to share ideas, peddle wares and ser- 
vices, find employment, or celebrate personal victories 
large and small in the company of other folk from the 
wastes. The area is lit with ever-burning lanterns of 
green light strung across street corners and roadways, 
and the percussive music of the wastefolk mingles with 
the haunting melodies of drow musicians to produce an 
ever-shifting atmosphere that many find at once both 
welcoming and claustrophobic. 

Firmaments. Near the center of Rosohna, travelers 
will find the Firmaments, where the haunted memory of 
Ghor Dranas has been erased with a beautiful district of 
glowing drow gardens, luxurious chapels to the Luxon, 
and the spacious halls of Marble Tomes Conservatory, 
the city’s center of higher learning. Wealthy estates 
house Den members and figures of import to the dy- 
nasty, and the impressive towers of the Nimbus Keep 
loom over the region. The Nimbus Keep is the center of 
the Aurora Watch and the first of two paths to the Dun- 
geon of Penance beneath the city. 

Lucid Bastion. Located at the very center of Rosohna 
is the awe-inspiring and towering citadel of the Lucid 
Bastion. This impressive cathedral is built from the ru- 
ins of Virkwzual and now stands as the symbol of Kryn 
rebirth and their faith in the light of the Luxon. The 
Lucid Bastion’s spires of gray quartz pierce the sky, and 
the soft interior glow that suffuses the interior cham- 
bers never darkens, shining over the city day and night. 
Major religious events are centered around the Bastion, 
for it houses the “heart of consecution,” the first Luxon 
beacon to have been discovered. Within these halls, the 
Bright Queen, her trusted Umavi, and their Dens work 
to govern and protect all citizens of the Kryn Dynasty. 

Shadowshire. Several well-guarded stairways curl 
beneath the Firmaments, descending under the surface 
of Xhorhas into the Shadowshire, a vast subterranean 
district built throughout the reclaimed prisons of Torog. 
Less affluent dark elves live among the stone and glass 
abodes built into the rock and sediment. Caverns amass 
bioluminescent fungi to be harvested for food and med- 
icine, while enchanted lanterns light the various levels 
with a soft and many-colored luminescence. A magical 
underground farmland has been established here, 
where sunless crops are grown to feed the city. The 
second entrance of the Dungeon of Penance is located 
within the Shadowshire. 


Dungeon of Penance. The many levels of the Dun- 
geon of Penance delve under the city. This terrifying 
oubliette bears the marks of the Kryn Dynasty’s renova- 
tions on its upper levels, but become less explored and 
less changed from the days of Ghor Dranas the deeper 
one delves. 

As the largest prison within the dynasty, a microcosm 
of the dynasty itself can be found in the complex bu- 
reaucracy of jailors, supervisors, and elite Aurora Watch 
soldiers who guard the frigid halls of the dungeon. 


ROSOHNA ADVENTURES 

To outsiders, Rosohna is a city of bizarre wonders, but 
to its residents, it is simply home—a place of business, 
crime, worship, and more. All kinds of adventures await 
in this diverse city. 

An Early Dawn (Any Level). While the characters 
are visiting Rosohna, the shadows above the city sud- 
denly disappear, letting in harsh light that hinders the 
drow and duergar residents. Is this phenomenon part 
of an imminent attack, or did the Kryn Dynasty anger 
the Luxon and must figure out a way to regain their 
god’s favor? 

A Bloody Dawn (Mid Level). During a particularly 
clear day, the priests of the Luxon dispel the darkness 
above the city for a moment of prayer. While the deni- 
zens bask in the light, agents of the Children of Malice 
strike, attacking and trying to kidnapinfluential mem- 
bers of the dynasty’s clergy. The characters must stop 
the assault, root out the hidden traitors behind this plan, 
and save any surviving prisoners. 

Ghor Dranas Returns (Epic Level). The Cerberus 
Assembly sends several disguised archmages to reopen 
the sealed rifts in Rosohna, hoping to destroy the dy- 
nasty by filling the city with otherworldly threats. The 
characters might be part of the plot, or they might work 
to stop it. 


RUINS OF DRACONIA 


At the bottom of the deep Dreemoth Ravine lie the 
crumbled ruins of the once-proud nation of Draconia. 
The floating islands of the city-state were the original 
home of dragonborn society within Wildemount, though 
the ruling class installed a strict caste system and 
forced the tailless ravenite dragonborn to labor in the 
ravine below their magically elevated island city. When 
the city was assaulted by the Chroma Conclave two de- 
cades before, the islands were sundered and fell into the 
ravine, killing many of the inhabitants. However, this di- 
saster gave the ravenites a chance to rebel against their 
cruel masters. 

The plundered ruins of the former city are now aban- 
doned heaps of rock and rubble, a dismal memorial to 
the ignominious end of a glorious, cruel civilization. 


NOT FORGOTTEN 

The ravenites did have allies among the ruling houses. 
Many Draconian citizens disagreed with the oppression 
of their brethren and fought for generations to overturn 
the laws that kept them enslaved. Others aided the 
ravenites in their emancipation after the fall of Draco- 
nia; those folk came out on top in the end, for they’re 


considered honored members of the emerging rave- 
nite society. 

Those champions who were lost in the struggle are 
immortalized in statues left among the ruins, the most 
famous of whom is the hero Tiberius Stormwind of Dra- 
conia. Tiberius was one of the legendary heroes of Vox 
Machina, and he gave his life to defend ravenites from 
the ire of Vorugal, the white dragon of the Chroma Con- 
clave. His statue and surrounding shrine are a place of 
pilgrimage for ravenite historians. 


RUINS OF DRACONIA ADVENTURES 
Those brave enough to delve into the ruins of Draconia 
can find treasures and a few ghosts of the destroyed city. 
Former Glory (Low Level). A cabal of disaffected dra- 
conblood dragonborn have been secretly assembling in 
the ruins of their former metropolis. They are guided by 
the whispers of a death knight who promises them the 
power to reassert control over the ravenites. They have 
begun learning necromancy and even making minor 
sacrifices in his name. The death knight, Pentrakath, 
is currently gathering artifacts elsewhere in Wilde- 
mount, but will soon use his cultists and cult fanatics 
to carry out his twisted plans, if no one intervenes (see 
“Dreemoth Ravine Adventures” earlier in this chapter). 


SORROWSEEP WATERS 


The Sorrowseep Waters are one of the twin lakes that 
dominate the central wastes of Xhorhas. These dark 
waters are home to a curious ecosystem of swamp 
beasts, amphibious behemoths, moorbounders, and 
apocryphal creatures said to live within the lake itself. 
Fishers, hunters, and trappers often brave the surround- 
ing knotted boughs and stinking mud of Sorrowseep 
Marsh in search of unique prey, while healers or their 
hirelings also risk the journey to collect the waters of 
the lake, which are believed to have restorative quali- 
ties. The crisp waters of the lake branch out across the 
wastelands of Xhorhas, feeding rivers and sustaining 
life throughout the scarred plains. 


THE TANGLEBED 

The true depth of the Sorrowseep has yet to be discov- 
ered due to the density of vegetation near the bottom, 
called the Tanglebed. Scholars believe that something 
ancient and powerful sleeps at the bottom of the lake, 
and that such a creature could be the source of the 
lake’s unique plant growth, unnaturally clean waters, 
and possible healing properties. 


SORROWSEEP WATERS ADVENTURES 
Characters exploring the Sorrowseep Waters encounter 
all manner of strange creatures and eccentric denizens. 
Something Borrowed (Low Level). One of the char- 
acters is contacted by a close childhood friend or family 
member to announce their sudden betrothal to a pas- 
sionate love interest. This union is taboo, however, for 
the love interest is actually a green hag. The character 
is invited to be a member of the wedding party—but 
something about this marriage seems fishy. 
Entangled (High Level). A gnome inventor claims to 
have created a submersible vessel that can survive the 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


lightless journey through the Tanglebed, past the known 
depths of the Sorrowseep. He hires the characters to 
help him helm the machine. Together, they discover a 
mysterious location beneath the lake, where a marid is 
gathering a cult to purge the nearby rivers of civilization. 


URZIN 


Population: 5,930 (62% goblinoids, 21% gnolls, 10% 


orcs, 7% other races) 

Government: The reigning champion of Urzin, Sun- 
breaker Olomon, guides the townsfolk, who follow 
with zeal and dedication. 

Defense: A legion of Aurora Watch defends the town, 
while the hordes of Urzin hunters scout the marsh. 
The horizonback tortoises that bear the town on their 
backs are more than capable of defending themselves. 

Commerce: Trade in Urzin is fairly basic and geared to- 
ward survival and warfare. Many common goods can 
be bought or traded for, but rarer items are coveted 
and appear infrequently. Inns are very rare. 

Organizations: Some small Luxon temples travel 
on tortoise-back alongside shrines to older 
goblinkin patrons. 


A uniquely mobile settlement with its permanent 
dwellings built on the backs of dozens of horizonback 
tortoises, Urzin is home to swamp hunters, scouts, and 
trappers that know the Brokenveil Marsh like no one 
else. The most recent society to come under the wing 
of the Kryn Dynasty, Urzin acts as a powerful, mobile 
fortress for the Kryn military throughout the Brokenveil 
Marsh. The settlement rarely stays in one location for 
more than a month, and its people are skilled at the art 
of camouflage and ambush. Urzin has become a major 
boon to the dynasty as the conflict with the Dwendalian 
Empire escalates. 


RESPECT FOR STRENGTH 

The swampfolk of Urzin have always prized strength 
and guile: their leader is simply the reigning champion 
of one-on-one combat. The previous champion, Ogre 
Lord Buhfal, ruled the settlement for decades, assault- 
ing the encroaching empire and fighting off the dangers 
of the marsh. Roughly forty years ago, Buhfal was chal- 
lenged by the Kryn paragon Sunbreaker Olomon. In 
what is still retold as legend, a mighty bout between the 
two ended with Buhfal defeated and Olomon elevated to 
rule the settlement. 

With his guidance, Olomon brought the teachings of 
the Luxon, in the name of the Bright Queen, and prom- 
ised that with the hearts of the Urzin people behind him 
and his drow, the terrible soldiers of the empire would 
no longer terrorize the marshfolk. Renewed by this 
promise, Urzin follows the lead of the dynasty with an 
impressive fervor, working like clockwork to achieve any 
goal dictated by Olomon. In his absence, Ogre Lord Buh- 
fal II proudly fills the role of leader and protector. 


A SHIFTY SETTLEMENT 

A large number ofthe denizens of Urzin make their 
homes atop the shells of the horizonbacks, but many 
also carry temporary tents and makeshift abodes that 
allow a home to be made wherever they find themselves. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


Whole packs of tortoises reconfigure daily, and often 

the settlement breaks up and scatters across the marsh 
for periods of time, leaving satellite outposts all over the 
region before reforming elsewhere among the muck. 
Because of this, the Dwendalian military finds the move- 
ments of Urzin hard to track and even harder to predict. 


GOVERNMENT 

While there is a comparatively thin presence of author- 
itarian Aurora Watch soldiers among the ever-shifting 
boundaries of Urzin, Sunbreaker Olomon and his ap- 
pointed council are treated with reverence and their 
orders are followed with impressive zeal. The culture 
of Urzin prizes unity and adherence to the wishes of 
their champion, so Urzin’s governance at times seems 
strangely smooth compared to other locations in the dy- 
nasty. While Olomon is away on other business, the Ur- 
zinians can become restless or slower to follow instruc- 
tion, but this insubordination lasts only until his return. 


CRIME 

Criminal activity within the settlement is rare, given 
the zealous nature of the marshfolk. Dissent within the 
ranks is often punished with exile, so the few that do 
disobey find themselves ostracized and left to survive 
alone among the foggy dangers of the marsh. 


GEOGRAPHY 
The town of Urzin consists of around forty horizonback 
tortoises and many hundreds of mobile tents and huts 
that shift with every relocation. The backs of these tor- 
toises are covered front to back in rickety shacks and 
barracks, sometimes stacked in wild towers, with long 
ropes and vines anchoring them in place. The horizon- 
back shells are reinforced at the edges with jagged pikes 
and sharpened bones to help defend those who live 
atop, while bolt throwers and short-range catapults can 
be found throughout the neighborhoods. Every tortoise 
contains its own microcosm of a village, and denizens 
all take up skills to make the miniature community 
nearly self-sufficient, complete with moss farmers, 
blacksmiths, and physicians. 

Note that any specific indicator of Urzin’s location on 
a map is an approximation of its location, due to the rov- 
ing nature of the community. 


URZIN ADVENTURES 

Just finding the settlement and winning the trust of the 
people of Urzin is an adventure. Characters on the run 
could also try to hide in Urzin, since the settlement does 
the running for them. 

Horizonback Horror (Mid Level). A horizonback 
tortoise (see chapter 7) has broken away from Urzin’s 
fleet and is rampaging through Jigow. The orcs and gob- 
linkin fought to contain it, but every wound they inflict 
on the beast seems to stitch together before their eyes! 
An oni that once led a clan of trolls the orcs defeated 
several months ago is out for revenge and devised an 
alchemical infusion created from troll blood. The oni 
administered the toxin to the tortoise, granting it the Re- 
generation feature of a troll and causing it to go berserk, 
terrifying not only the denizens of Jigow, but also the 
people clinging to their homes atop the frenzied tortoise. 


VERMALOC WILDWOOD 


The Vermaloc Wildwood is an enormous timberland 
of vibrant trees with deep purple and maroon trunks 
and a bright canopy of red-orange leaves. This curious 
and beautiful burst of color stands in stark contrast to 
the often dreary landscape of Xhorhas. Many denizens 
of Xhorhas have camps or small settlements along the 
treeline, as the forest is one of the major sources of 
wood and logging throughout the wastes. Those who 
live here, however, remain alert for the many deadly 
beasts and creatures that call this colorful expanse 
home. Monstrous predators twisted long ago by the 
Betrayer Gods hunt from the trees and brush, while 
the deeper woods are overrun with the webs of the ma- 
licious giant spiders that claim those shaded regions. 
Only the most experienced and well-armed hunters dare 
wander the depths of the Vermaloc. 


VERMALOC WILDWOOD ADVENTURES 

The characters might hunt in the Vermaloc Wildwood 
to prove their mettle or be forced to survive a journey 
through the wood. 

Ettercap’s Web (Low Level). Aramue, a dryad of the 
Vermaloc Wildwood and devout follower of the Wild 
Mother, possesses a unique gift: she can send dreams 
to other worshipers of Melora. Using this power, she 
reaches out to such individuals. Aramue needs help 
ridding her forest of an ettercap that has taken control 


URZIN MOVING THROUGH THE MARSH 


of many of the forest’s giant spiders. The spiders attack 
the forest’s outlying settlements and bring prisoners to 
the ettercap, which it sacrifices to gain Lolth’s favor. The 
dryad is kept awake at night by the ettercap’s scream- 
ing victims. 


VERSTGLADE 


A small valley of crooked, leafless trees is hidden in the 
tallest peaks of the southern Ashkeeper Peaks, though 
few know of its existence. During the Age of Arcanum, 
this dark and menacing wood once was an experimental 
playground for the terrible lich Vecna, where he would 
manipulate and twist all manner of life, arcana, and 
undead to his sick whims. The countless years of mis- 
use left the withered forest corrupt and overrun with 
nightmarish abominations and cursed, undying minions 
who were abandoned to their madness. Mercifully, 
Vecna was banished before he could unleash his cre- 
ations on Wildemount, and his aspirations for godhood 
left his intended plots with Verstglade forgotten. 


VERSTGLADE ADVENTURES 
Verstglade is filled with forgotten experiments that char- 
acters might be asked to retrieve or destroy. 

The Whispered Study (High Level). Cloaked by il- 
lusion and filled with deadly traps, one of the primary 
laboratories of Vecna remains hidden within the Verst- 
glade. It is home to many powerful artifacts and arcane 
secrets, and the promise of such mighty rewards draws 
a bold few to attempt to locate it. Of the few mortal 


148 


minds that even know of Verstglade and what lies hid- 
den within it, only brave adventurers or the minions of 
evil are foolish enough to enter the corrupted woods. 


XARZITH KITRIL 


Population: 9,110 (93% dragonborn, 7% other races) 

Government: A council of six oversees the city, with 
the Wardens of the Ravine keeping order under 
their guidance. 

Defense: An army of Wardens of the Ravine are ever at 
the ready to defend the city. Many self-trained citizens 
can form a militia if need be. 

Commerce: Trade is mostly limited to the city, making 
rare goods hard to find. Most basic equipment, arms, 
and services can be found here, as well as taverns 
and lodging. 

Organizations: Small, rough sanctums of worship can 
be found within the city. Unions of artisans and mer- 
chants work together on a small scale. 


Shortly after the fall of Draconia, when the lords of the 
ruined city-state were deposed and scattered, the re- 
maining ravenite dragonborn took the reins of their new 
freedom and began to develop a new dragonborn society 
in Wildemount. The ravenites have spent nearly two 
decades building a new city of hope for the dragonborn 
survivors within the cliffs of the Dreemoth Ravine. The 
fortified stone city of Xarzith Kitril continues to grow, 
and its borders are constantly being rebuilt to accom- 
modate its exploding centers of residence and industry 
amid the ore-bearing mines and tall smoke pillars from 
ever-burning forges. The leaders of the city, members 

of the newly formed Scars of Scale and Tooth, work to 
bring unity to the fractured, feuding ravenites. 


FREEDOM FROM Two TERRORS 

When the city of Draconia fell, the surviving ravenites 
enjoyed a brief moment of freedom before the terrifying, 
ancient white dragon Vorugal the Frigid Doom claimed 
the ruins and the surrounding ravine as his new lair. 
The ravenites were freshly bound by fear under their 
new overlord, whose presence plunged the ravine into 
an endless winter. It wasn’t until Vorugal was slain by 
the heroes of Vox Machina that the ravenites’ chains 
were truly shattered. As the heavy ice melted away, the 
new city’s construction began, and the city took the 
name Xarzith Kitril, Draconic for “ice born.” 


GROWING PAINS 

Xarzith Kitril represents a new dawn for the dragonborn 
people, and many of the citizens place personal pride in 
what their city stands for and what they believe it will 
eventually become. However, the council of new leader- 
ship, known as the Scars of Scale and Tooth, continues 
to debate over the direction and development of the city, 
unable to agree on a clear vision of the future. Some 
wish to see the city rise in prominence and respect. 
Others wish to keep the city isolated. The populace 
grows restless and frustrated without united leadership. 


GOVERNMENT 


With the support ofthe ravenites behind them, a coun- 
cil of six agreed to form the Scars and govern the city. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


Ruling by committee, however, sometimes leads to dis- 
agreements and slow progress. In particular, Vermosi 
Runek and Druvis Koothalok differ greatly on the per- 
ceived priorities of the city. Vermosi rules with religious 
passion and wants to remain in isolation to spite the 
worldly ways of the previous rulers of Draconia, while 
Druvis seeks the benefits from forging alliances with 
neighboring powers. As this and similar arguments con- 
tinue to escalate, governing the growing city is becom- 
ing challenging. 


CRIME 

Local law enforcement is comprised entirely of a force 
of volunteer soldiers called the Wardens of the Ravine. 
The Wardens truly believe in the future of the city 

and the Scars of Scale and Tooth, and they vigilantly 
maintain the peace and prevent criminal activity. 
Unfortunately, resources are relatively scarce, and 

the recent introduction of trade with the Menagerie 
Coast has brought an influx of coin into the previously 
barter-based society. As such, theft and racketeering are 
on the rise. 


GEOGRAPHY 

Constructed within the thinner, southern end of the 
Dreemoth Ravine, this city of sturdy stone structures 
has expanded into the walls of the ravine on either 

side. Abodes are stacked along the cliffs and entwined 
with winding stairways and gondola platforms that 

glide across the open crevasse, elevated with recovered 
chunks of brumestone that once held the floating islands 
of Draconia aloft. 

The central, base region of the city is referred to as 
the Roots, where the majority of commerce and industry 
meets the political core of the Scars of Scale and Tooth. 
The West Wall region is a tall, nearly vertical neighbor- 
hood of homes built into the rocky western cliff face of 
the ravine above the Dreemoth Quarry. The East Wall 
region looks similar to its western counterpart, though 
at a slightly less extreme grade, and houses three sep- 
arate major mine shafts that are peppered with resi- 
dential caves and abodes. Dozens of cords and chains 
stretch from ravine wall to ravine wall, allowing people 
and goods to move between them on the floating brume- 
stone platforms. 


XARZITH KITRIL ADVENTURES 
All manner of adventures and challenges await within 
this recovering dragonborn society. 

Best Left Alone (Mid Level). One of the prominent 
mining companies within the city has recently uncov- 
ered a mysterious purple stone of unknown origin, 
about fifteen feet in diameter. Dozens of superstitious 
miners have fled this site, so the company hires the 
characters to investigate the stone and uncover its na- 
ture. When any of the stone’s smooth, reflective surface 
takes damages, this buried relic of the Shadowfell 
begins to summon shadowghasts and gloomstalkers 
(see chapter 7) at an increasingly fast rate. The charac- 
ters must discover a way to repair and reseal the stone, 
destroy it, or banish it from Exandria before the city is 
overwhelmed. 


VERMALOC WiLDwooD oe P A 


BLIGHTSHORE 


The blackened seaboard that forms the easternmost 
edge of Wildemount is a savage wasteland struggling to 
recover from the arcane havoc wrought by the Calamity 
so many years ago. The Miskath Strand was once a 
temperate expanse of arboreal pulchritude and coastal 
tranquility, but it has since become a lonely stretch of 
hazardous terrain and maddening isolation. This coast- 
line of cursed earth and the surrounding area have 
come to be known as Blightshore, a fitting moniker for 
the once-proud seaside paradise defiled by the Betrayer 
Gods. Here, among the Miskath Strand’s smoldering 
remains, explorers vie for the opportunities offered up 
by Blightshore’s weird new varieties of flora and fauna— 
not to mention the hidden wealth that lurks within the 
lightless vaults of the Betrayers themselves. Life in 
Blightshore is difficult at best; for many, it represents a 
true test of spirit as they weather the persistent chaos of 
Blightshore’s terrain. 

While the Dwendalian Empire and its constituents 
seek to establish a foothold in the more hospitable 
regions of the Miskath Strand, these efforts are con- 
sistently hampered by Blightshore’s less scrupulous 
denizens. Remote operatives of the Myriad and the Rev- 
elry, intrepid pilgrims from the Kryn Dynasty, outcasts 
from the fallen city of Draconia, and goblinoid nomads 
from the Xhorhasian wastes form the motley civili- 


zation of Blightshore. Moreover, this land is home to 
many undead horrors and wandering hollow ones (see 
chapter 4). 


BIZARRE [TERRAIN OF BLIGHTSHORE 


The strange landscape ofthe Miskath Strand has been 
savagely reshaped by the Calamity, infusing the earth 
with chaotic new elements and especially inhospitable 
terrain. As a result, much of this region of Eastern Wyn- 
andir remains relatively unmapped by modern scholars. 
The terrain and weather features described in the 
sections that follow can be encountered anywhere 
within Blightshore’s defiled expanse. Many of these ar- 
eas present hazardous (and potentially fatal) conditions 
for travelers and explorers. As your players traverse 
the desolate badlands of the Miskath Strand, you can 
present Blightshore’s weird and wondrous terrain as a 
character in its own right. And perhaps there are even 
stranger features of this accursed frontier that wait to be 
discovered, tamed, or avoided at all costs. 


EARTH MOTES 

These chunks of broken land hover and swirl in the air, 
held aloft by unknown arcane forces. A typical earth 
mote is 1d6 x 10 feet indiameter and hovers 2d10 x 

10 feet above the ground. Earth motes are capable of 
supporting the weight of modest structures as well as 
creatures. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


r 


N 


kraal S 
Lak 


Mar 3.10: BLIGHTSHORE 


ELECTRIC WIND 

The galvanic breezes of this supernatural gale are lat- 
ticed with currents of lightning, which stab through the 
air with primordial fury. 


e Ranged attacks through electric wind are made with 
disadvantage. 

« Any creature that starts its turn surrounded by elec- 
tric wind has a 5 percent chance of being struck by 
lightning. A creature struck by lightning must make 
a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 4d6 lightning 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage ona 
successful one. 


EMBER THICKET 

A dense grove of blackened, leafless trees perpetually 
smolders with the dull glow of arcane embers. This 
copse is choked by a cloud of ash and cinders, which 
constantly rain on the cremated forest floor. 


e An ember thicket is a lightly obscured area. 

e Creatures gain one level of exhaustion for every 10 
minutes spent inside an ember thicket without suit- 
able protection from the heat, smoke, and ash. 

¢ Ranged attacks through an ember thicket are made 
with disadvantage. A ranged weapon attack made 
through or within an ember thicket automatically 
misses a target beyond the weapon’s normal range. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


ETHERIC RIFT 

Anetheric rift appears as a light fog or spectral haze. 
The interplanar tracts of this anomaly reach in and out 
of the Border Ethereal. Unseen trenches and invisible 
paths overlap throughout its vaporous expanse. 


- Anetheric rift is a lightly obscured area. 

« Any creature that enters an etheric rift or starts its 
turn there has a 33 percent chance of gaining the 
effect of the etherealness spell until the end of its 
next turn. 


GRAVITY FUNNEL 
This cylindrical area is affected by the unseen pull of 


heightened gravitational force. A typical gravity funnel is 
3d10 x 10 feet tall and 5d10 x 10 feet in diameter. 


- Strength checks made within a gravity funnel have 
disadvantage. 

« A ranged weapon attack made through or within a 
gravity funnel automatically misses a target beyond 
the weapon’s normal range. 

e Creatures and objects that are fully contained within a 

gravity funnel have resistance against force damage. 

The gravity funnel counts as difficult terrain. 


PEVERN) OIE 


PsycHIc MIASMA 

A virtually imperceptible mist of preternatural psycho- 
tropic vapor hovers above the ground. This coruscating 
miasma corrupts the sanity of the living and fortifies the 
grim resolve of the undead. 


- Creatures that are fully immersed in psychic miasma 
havevulnerability to psychic damage. 

e Any creature that enters a cloud of psychic miasma or 
starts its turn there must succeed on a DC 15 Consti- 
tution saving throw or become afflicted with a random 
form of long-term madness (see “Madness” in chapter 
8 of the Dungeon Master's Guide). Creatures that 
can't be poisoned automatically succeed on the saving 
throw. A creature that successfully saves against the 
psychic miasma is immune to its effects for 24 hours. 

« An undead creature that spends at least 1 minute in 
acloud of psychic miasma gains advantage on ability 
checks and saving throws for 24 hours. 


Rust RAIN 


This crimson precipitation is corrosive to ferrous metal 
and caustic to creatures. 


e Rust rain corrodes nonmagical, ferrous metal objects. 
If the object isn’t being worn or carried, the rain de- 
stroys 1 cubic foot of it for every 10 minutes of expo- 
sure. An object must be covered to avoid exposure. 

If the exposed object is nonmagical metal armor, a 
nonmagical metal weapon, or a nonmagical metal 
shield being worn or carried, it takes a permanent 
and cumulative -1 penalty to damage rolls or the AC 
it offers for every 10 minutes of exposure to rust rain. 
A weapon that drops to a—5 penalty, armor reduced 
to an AC of 10, or a shield that drops to a +0 bonus is 
destroyed. 

e Any creature that starts it turn in rust rain and isn’t 
covered by an umbrella, a shield, or some other form 
of rain protection takes 1d4 acid damage. 


Toxic FUNGUS COLONY 


A virulent expanse of malignant fungal growths blan- 
kets the landscape and fills the air above it with spores. 


- Any non-plant creature within 20 feet of a toxic fungus 
colony is poisoned. A creature poisoned by the colony 
for 1 hour has a 20 percent chance of gaining a ran- 
dom form of short-term madness (see “Madness” in 
chapter 8 of the Dungeon Master's Guide). 

e A toxic fungus colony can be bioluminescent. A biolu- 
minescent colony sheds dim light within its area and 
for an additional 20 feet beyond its outer edges. 


UNCANNY PHENOMENA 

The arcane fallout from the Calamity is so widespread 
throughout Blightshore that the very land, sea, and 

air have been subtly altered in strange and mysterious 
ways. As characters explore the post-Calamity Miskath 
Strand, roll on the Uncanny Phenomena table as fre- 
quently as you like to augment the world they encounter. 
If you roll something that doesn’t make sense, roll again, 
choose a more appropriate entry, or use the result as 


inspiration to make up your own phenomenon. The mag- 


ical effects of these phenomena can’t be dispelled. 


UNCANNY PHENOMENA 

d10 Phenomenon 

1 It smells of death here. This area is permanently rid- 
den with the stench of rot and decay. 

2 Incorporeal phantoms move in and out of reality 
here. These apparitions ignore any interaction with 
creatures. 

3 Everything is a single color here. All physical matter in 
this area adopts the pigmentation of one of the seven 
colors of the rainbow or the color black. 

4 Nonmagical fire can’t burn here. 

Sources of light here appear kaleidoscopic. Empty air 
refracts light in this area, creating dazzling displays of 
prismatic colors. 

6 Any character who sleeps here dreams of a different 
life on a different world in a different body. 

7 There is no sound here. This area is permanently un- 
der the effects of the silence spell. 

8 This place is supernaturally unlucky. Attack rolls, 
ability checks, and saving throws cannot be rerolled 
in this area. 

9 Water turns to acid here. Water introduced to this 
area becomes acid in 1d4 days. 

10 This place is haunted by fragments of the Far Realm. 
Whenever the target of a Wisdom saving throw fails 
its save, that creature has a 5 percent chance of 
becoming afflicted by a random form of long-term 
madness (see “Madness” in chapter 8 of the Dungeon 
Master's Guide). 


CAULDRON SEA 


A perpetual storm chokes the stony shores of this dark 
and brackish expanse, where aspects of the Elemental 
Plane of Water and the Abyss collide in constant entro- 
pic turmoil. Aquatic terrors lurk in its murky fathoms, 
which are rumored to hold everything from the ruined 
battlements of a sunken city to the haunted graveyard of 
a forgotten fleet. 

Although the waters of the Cauldron Sea present chal- 
lenges to those who would tame its tides, a handful of 
unmapped (and often unnamed) villages are scattered 
along its savage shores. Some of these settlements offer 
safe havens to weary travelers of the northern Strand, 
prospectors and pirates alike, but most treat outsiders 
with disdain or even outright hostility. 


OBLIVION VORTEX 

Soothsayers claim that Tharizdun, the Chained Obliv- 
ion, created the Cauldron Sea to loosen the veil between 
worlds and warn that one day he will rend the very 
fabric of reality from the depths of its accursed waters. 
There are those who would see this mad prophecy ful- 
filled, but many more would do anything to prevent the 
Betrayer God’s malevolent return. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


CAULDRON SEA ADVENTURES 

The tumultuous waters of the Cauldron Sea breed all 
manner of creatures and crises for intrepid characters 
to overcome. 

Presage in a Bottle (Mid Level). Unlike the restor- 
ative essences of the Sorrowseep Waters, a draught of 
liquid from the Cauldron Sea is said to induce madness 
along with various other arcane effects. A world-class 
alchemist and chirurgeon, the eccentric Brannon Ven 
Brava, seeks to analyze the primordial liquid’s supernat- 
ural essence firsthand and will pay handsomely for an 
escort through the wilds of Blightshore to secure it. 


EBONGLASS MASSIF 


The sharp obsidian peaks of the Ebonglass Massif spell 
doom to those who would attempt to tame them, but 


BLIGHTSHORE CONTRABAND 


The unique environs of the post-Calamity Miskath Strand 
have produced a number of strange new substances that 
can be cultivated for both noble and illicit purposes. The 
regulation of these bizarre drugs proves difficult, however, 
as their exotic qualities often confound those who would 
subvert their questionable usage. As such, supply and 
demand remain steady despite the inevitable hazards of 
production. 

Black Sap. This tarry substance harvested from the dark 
boughs of the death’s head willow is a powerful intoxicant. 
It can be smoked as a concentrate or injected directly 
into the bloodstream. A creature subjected to a dose of 
black sap cannot be charmed or frightened for 1d6 hours. 
For each dose of black sap consumed, a creature must 
succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or become 
poisoned for 2d4 hours—an effect that is cumulative with 
multiple doses. Black sap is valued at 300 gp per dose. 

Blight Ichor. This bitter chartreuse concoction is distilled 
from a fungus native to the Blightshore badlands. The 
sickly green liqueur harbors potent psychedelic properties. 
Provided it is neither a construct nor undead, a creature 
subjected to a dose of blight ichor gains advantage on 
Intelligence and Wisdom checks, as well as vulnerability to 
psychic damage, for 1 hour. For each dose of blight ichor 
consumed, the creature must succeed on a DC 15 Con- 
stitution saving throw or become poisoned for 1d6 hours 
and suffer the effects of a confusion spell for 1 minute. An 
undead creature subjected to a dose of blight ichor gains 
advantage on all Dexterity checks and is immune to the 
frightened condition for 1 hour. Blight ichor is valued at 
200 gp per dose. 

Soothsalts. Soothsalts are derived from a naturally 
occurring crystalline substance discovered throughout 
the wilds of the Miskath Strand. The crimson crystals 
have been mined from cavernous veins like those in the 
mouth of the Miskath Pit and found within smaller geode 
formations near sites ravaged by the Calamity. Soothsalts 
are consumed orally in lozenge-sized doses, and frequent 
users can be identified by the telltale crimson stain around 
their mouths. A creature subjected to a dose of soothsalts 
gains advantage on all Intelligence checks for 1d4 hours. 
For each dose of soothsalts consumed, the creature must 
succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or gain one 
level of exhaustion—an effect which is cumulative with 
multiple doses. Soothsalts are valued at 150 gp per dose. 


ce EN 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


many still try. This jagged range of lustrous volcanic 
rock divides northeastern Blightshore into two large 
peninsulas: Far Hharom to the north, and the Tooth of 
Zehir to the east. Expeditions to the Ebonglass Massif 
from the nations of Western Wynandir and beyond have 
been fraught with peril, and the craggy mountains are 
considered all but impassable by cautious outlanders, 
curious prospectors, and others who would explore 
their mysteries. 

Like many places in the Miskath Strand, the Massif 
is haunted by a dark past. Historians have unearthed 
tales of ancient dwarven strongholds that were utterly 
destroyed by the upheaval during the Calamity. Now, the 
only known denizens of the Ebonglass Massif are the 
birds of prey that scour its peaks for sustenance and a 
maniacal clan of gray-scaled kobolds that employs sim- 
ple technology—hooks, cables, and gliders—to traverse 
the Massif’s treacherous terrain. 


FANG OF THE WORM 

The kobolds ofthe Massif live in a subterranean sprawl 
on the southwestern edge of the Ebonglass foothills. 
Known as the Fangs of the Worm, they are led by a 
kobold queen whose eldritch magic is sustained by the 
clan’s central religious totem—a powerful artifact from 
ancient Eiselcross, which has no doubt played a large 
part in the wayward sect’s rapid evolution and ques- 
tionable sanity. The kobolds of the Fangs of the Worm 
gather around this massive cylinder of metal and light 
to pay fealty to their queen and honor the visions she 
receives from beyond. This columnar artifact is actually 
a cryogenic containment unit that houses and preserves 
a fetid tissue sample from the festering body of Quajath, 
the Undermaw, and what the kobolds of the Ebonglass 
Massif mistake for divine visions are actually the abhor- 
rent murmurs of Quajath, who telepathically guides the 
clan’s erratic actions. 


PHANTOM WARDENS 

The dwarves of the Ebonglass Massif persist as incor- 
poreal caretakers in their hidden subterranean halls, 
where they carve the volcanic glass with psionic pow- 
ers like an artist moves paint on canvas. These forlorn 
specters preside over an empire of impeccable craft and 
staggering natural wealth, but their physical tombs have 
no entrances from the outside world, much to the cha- 
grin of would-be burglars. 


EBONGLASS MASSIF ADVENTURES 

Adventurers who find themselves near the peaks of 
the Ebonglass Massif have strayed very far indeed 
from the political turmoil of Wildemount. The nigh 
impassable mountains hide strange creatures and even 
stranger secrets. 

Lost Xagonstar (Low Level). The adventurers travel 
to Ebonglass Massif by airship to join a well-funded 
archaeological expedition mounted by Duurek Kronst, 

a wealthy dwarf who is determined to find the dwarven 
stronghold of Xagonstar, lost and buried since the Ca- 
lamity. An unnatural storm sweeping across Blightshore 
causes the airship to crash, but the characters survive. 
Once they reach the dig site, they see that great progress 


aae 
re 


CAULDRON SEA 


has already been made. The first great hall of Xagonstar 
has been discovered! Unfortunately, the archaeologists 
are missing and the site has been abandoned. Were the 
diggers captured by the Fang of the Worm or carried off 
by a hungry gloomstalker (as described in chapter 7), or 
did something slip out of Xagonstar to devour them? 


FAR HHAROM 


Beyond the Ebonglass Massif’s hyaline peaks, a lonely 
expanse of moorland stretches northward toward the 
icy waters of the Frigid Depths. Though the landscape 
is drab and featureless, the peninsula known as Far 
Hharom is littered with the barrows of a long-forgotten 
barbarian people, who vanished centuries before the 
Calamity ravaged the Miskath Strand. Here and there, 
gelid bogs home to bizarre flora and fauna dot the land- 
scape. And all around, an obstinate air of doom lingers 
among the peninsula’s perpetual howling winds. 

Far Hharom is a dangerous realm, even by Blights- 
hore’s standards, and many suggest that the impasse 
formed by the Ebonglass Massif is actually a blessing 
in disguise. The only charted settlement in Far Hharom 
is an abandoned village on the rocky island west of the 
peninsula, known as Olc Skerry (described later in this 
chapter). Travelers have been known to camp amid the 
stony ruins—but these interlopers leave as soon as their 
affairs allow, typically preferring the haunted expanse 
of Far Hharom’s open fells over the eerie isolation of Olc 
Skerry’s craggy shores. 


BARROWS OF THE BETRAYERS 

The ancient burial mounds scattered across Far Hha- 
rom are rumored to be haunted by restless undead 

that were animated just as the arcane meddling of the 
Betrayer Gods reached its abominable zenith. Though 
the antiquities buried within Far Hharom’s ancient bar- 
rows promise considerable wealth to those who would 
plunder their lightless depths, few excavators of these 
accursed places actually live to tell the tale. 


DOMAINS OF THE DEEP ONES 

There are rumors ofa frightening clan of amphibious 
humanoids who dwell along the icy northern shores of 
Far Hharom. The stories speak of a hoary clan of pale, 
degenerate folk who pay fealty to dark, arctic demigods 
in the form of warm-blooded sacrifices. Some believe 
the Ebonglass Massif was erected by the Betrayer Gods 
to keep these strange and sinister people at bay, while 
others report to have seen raiding parties of scaly Far 
Hharom monstrosities as far south as the Cauldron Sea. 


Far HHAROM ADVENTURES 
The northern peninsula of Blightshore is a remote and 
unwelcoming place, but characters in search of secret 
histories and treasured lore will find it most inviting. 
Deep Ones of Far Hharom (Low Level). A coastal 
storm causes the characters’ ship to run aground on the 
northern shore of Far Hharom. As they take stock of the 
damage and make plans to head inland, waves of kuo- 
toa converge on the ship and attack them. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


It Kills at Night (Mid Level). While exploring a Far 
Hharom barrow, the characters are surprised to dis- 
cover a group of spooked travelers who have taken 
shelter within. Instead of the subterranean wights and 
poltergeists of legend, these survivors fear an even 
greater threat that stalks the moorland at night—some- 
thing so supernaturally horrible, they must huddle in 
darkness every evening to evade it as they wearily cross 
the accursed landscape. 


GHOR VELES 


The ruined keep at the heart of this crumbling city once 
served as an arcane repository and research facility for 
the Betrayer Gods during their pre-Calamity ascent to 
power. Artifacts and wondrous items from the Age of Ar- 
canum are rumored to linger within its shadow-haunted 
vaults, lying in wait for those brave or foolish enough 
to challenge the citadel’s timeless guardians. Now, its 
decaying battlements stand as a stark monument to the 
Calamity’s unstoppable devastation. 

The name Ghor Veles means “Vault of Shadows,” 
and a vast dungeon indeed lurks below the ruins of the 
city. These catacombs were home to the aberrant and 
undead minions of the dracolich Oracs the Enduring. 
Countless adventuring parties and would-be tomb rob- 
bers have attempted to lay siege to the vaults below Ghor 
Veles, only to perish at the clawed hands and creeping 
doom of the keep’s fearsome inhabitants. But a destiny 
worse than death awaits them: most of these ill-fated 
interlopers become undead minions themselves, bound 
to Oracs in unending servitude. As this army grows, so 
does Oracs’s hold over the Miskath Strand. 


LAND OF REFUGEES AND HERMITS 

Ghor Veles is pockmarked by crumbling houses and 
dilapidated fortresses, and countless people displaced 
from elsewhere in Xhorhas by war or exile have made 
this blighted battlefield their home. A notable resident 
of the ruins surrounding Ghor Veles is a dranassar sur- 
vivor named Liv-Burrath. She uses magic to disguise 
herself as a dark elf to avoid attracting attention, but is 
covertly collecting arcane relics from Ghor Veles with 
the hope that she can one day reunite with other dranas- 
sar and retake their ancient home of Ghor Dranas. She 
pays a fair sum for any artifacts that adventurers gather 
from the ruins. 


GHOR VELES ADVENTURES 

Only the undead horrors beneath Ghor Veles rival the 
cutthroat grave robbers that characters might encounter 
among the crumbling ruins. 

Shadow Essence (Mid Level). The characters are 
hired by Cerberus Assembly sages in New Haxon to 
gather a rare magical ingredient—shadow essence— 
that can be collected from dead gloomstalkers (see 
chapter 7). As gloomstalkers are known to circle above 
Ghor Veles like vultures, the sages ask the characters 
to travel there, slay a gloomstalker, and collect its 
shadow essence in a specially made flask. The sages 
warn the characters not to linger near Ghor Veles, lest 
they fall prey to the terrible creatures lurking in its 
haunted fortress. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


Of Vaults and Vengeance (High Level). One or more 
of the characters are kidnapped by minions of Oracs the 
Enduring (chaotic evil, male, ancient black dracolich) 
and are carried away to the vaults below Ghor Veles for 
indoctrination and necromantic experimentation. With 
the help of a core spawn seer (see chapter 7) from the 
Miskath Pit, the dracolich and his minions are weapon- 
izing their mortal enemies to gruesome effect. As one 
half of the party struggles to survive captivity, the rest of 
the characters must plot their harrowing rescue. 


INCANTER’S REST 


This Calamity-era battlefield is now a massive graveyard 
haunted by the undead spirits of unnameable horrors 
and their cruel, unending vengeance. Named after the 
unknown mage who brought this region’s struggle to its 
devastating conclusion, Incanter’s Rest has few land- 
marks other than the gigantic skeletal remains of three 
monstrous titans, which reverently tower above the 
area’s dusty steppes. Howling winds perpetually sweep 
the Rest with ghostly ardor, while ramshackle monu- 
ments of rusted weapons and armor sporadically mark 
the graves of the fallen. 

Some historians speculate that Incanter’s Rest is ac- 
tually the amalgamated site of multiple conflicts, while 
others claim that it was the most massive battlefield 
Wildemount has ever seen. No matter the cause, the 
grave-strewn fields of Incanter’s Rest are seeded with 
powerful necromantic energies that many unscrupulous 
mages seek to exploit. 


MISKATH PIT 


This geographical anomaly is an arcane sinkhole of un- 
known depth and origin. Its oblong opening measures 
roughly 120 feet in diameter and plunges endlessly into 
the planet’s surface. Few survivors have returned from 
the pit’s staggering subterranean expanse, and those 
who have appear maddened and deranged with fear. 
Whatever precipitated the advent of the pit is ultimately 
inconsequential compared to the sheer devastation it 
causes in the surrounding Blightshore wilds. 

Despite its astounding depth, the Miskath Pit’s twist- 
ing tunnels are far from lightless. A melange of psyche- 
delic sights and sounds are found throughout its bizarre 
subterranean landscapes, where strange, sporadic lights 
can be just as terrifying as the darkness. The cloying 
presence of something ancient and evil is unmistakable 
to anyone who seeks firsthand to understand the pit’s 
harrowing phenomena. This area is an appalling fusion 
of the Underdark and the alien quasi-geometries of the 
Far Realm. 


SPAWN OF THE CORE 

Travelers have recently reported sightings of a new vari- 
ety of horrific aberrations in the vicinity of the Miskath 
Pit. Known as core spawn, these creatures embody the 
chaotic nature of Blightshore itself with every tenebrous 
fiber of their eldritch being. Hordes of lesser core spawn 
are presided over by core spawn seers—corrupted 
magic users whose loathsome agendas are one of 
Blightshore’s greatest (and most troubling) mysteries. 
See chapter 7 for more information about core spawn. 


SALT OF THE ARCANE EARTH 

Despite its unique perils, the Miskath Pit is a darkly 
alluring place that seems to beckon travelers with a 
proclivity for eldritch magic or a taste for trouble. The bi- 
zarre arcane phenomena that plague the Miskath Pit are 
also responsible for an array of enchanted minerals and 
precious elements. Profiteers from Rotthold and beyond 
risk madness, and even death, in an attempt to mine the 
pit’s supernatural resources. 


NEw HAXON 


Population: 1,250 (70% humans, 20% dragonborn, 10% 
other races) 

Government: The Cerberus Assembly works in tandem 
with allied mercenaries to maintain a stratocracy of 
lawful military power. 

Defense: Satyana Vorvexis, an adult copper dragon, 
commands a garrison of over two hundred active duty 
soldiers, and each citizen of New Haxon is enlisted for 
reserve military duty. 

Commerce: Common goods and services are available 
via the city’s vast network of enterprising military mer- 
chants. Meanwhile, the Cerberus Assembly strives 
to subvert New Haxor’s thriving and profitable black 
market for rare arcane antiquities. 

Organizations: Although the Cerberus Assembly’s 
sages hold power here, various mercenary guilds from 
remote corners of Wildemount have also made New 
Haxon their base of operations. The city has become 
an unlikely haven for esoteric cults of the Betrayer 
Gods and other dark entities. 


Whatever disaster befell Old Haxon is a tale lost to time 
and the Calamity. In its place, a fair-weather confed- 
eration of humans and dragonborn have erected this 
lone bastion. The stalwart outpost of New Haxon is 
garrisoned by agents of the Cerberus Assembly, along 
with a contingent of allied mercenaries from nearby 
Draconia. An amalgam of crumbling ruins and modern 
battlements, New Haxon serves as the Dwendalian 
Empire’s only trusted waypoint for “civilized” explora- 
tion throughout Blightshore’s savage badlands. 

The adult copper dragon Satyana Vorvexis com- 
mands New Haxon’s threadbare legion of soldiers with 
a healthy measure of cunning and inventiveness. In 
addition to her military prowess, Satyana’s draconic pre- 
dilections and experience in the field have earned her a 
reputation as one of Wynandir’s foremost curators and 
collectors of arcane relics. Some members of the as- 
sembly (and their imperial patrons) question the chaotic 
dragon’s true intentions, but the people of New Haxon 
would be hard pressed to find a more competent leader 
to navigate the region’s tumultuous history and endur- 
ing threats. 


LosT VAULTS 

Among its other mysteries, Old Haxon is rumored to be 
the site of one of the lost vaults of Vecna, where the lich 
hid countless magic items of awesome power and ill 
intent. Whether or not this arcane storehouse is merely 
the stuff of legend remains to be seen, but its presence 
would certainly explain the Cerberus Assembly’s keen 
interest in Haxon’s wayward history. 


Guor VELES 


NEw HAXON ADVENTURES 

Characters who adventure in New Haxon are likely con- 
scripts, volunteers, or opponents of the local stratocra- 
cy’s oppressive military force. 

Right Side of Wrong (Low Level). As dutiful servants 
of the Cerberus Assembly, the characters are tasked 
with ridding a local safe house of cult activity. But the 
operation doesn’t go according to plan: one of the cult- 
ists is the teenage son of a prominent assembly official, 
and the characters must decide whether they will shine 
a light on his indiscretion or bury it at the potential cost 
of becoming accomplices themselves. 

Plunder the Crypt (Mid Level). A high elf master- 
mind, Drahir Baiegn, hires the characters to masquer- 
ade as Cerberus Assembly agents and plunder a notori- 
ous vault below New Haxon: the Amethyst Crypt. When 
they infiltrate the vault, however, the characters discover 
they've been duped by Baiegn, who sacrifices his dispos- 
able agents to feed an abhorrent arcane construct deep 
within the inescapable tomb. 

Eater of Worlds (High Level). The characters are 
summoned to a meeting with Satyana Vorvexis. One of 
the dragon’s spies managed to infiltrate a cult operat- 
ing within the city and determined that its leaders are 
preparing a ritual to summon Shothotugg, the Eater 
of Worlds (see the “Elder Evils of Exandria” sidebar in 
chapter 7). Shothotugg’s arrival would almost certainly 
place New Haxon in jeopardy. The cult controls a crum- 
bling dungeon complex below the ruins of Old Haxon. 
The cult’s leaders are a pair of vampires aided by a 
small conclave of cloakers, but most of the cult mem- 
bers are nihilistic humanoids and vampire spawn. 


OLC SKERRY 


Legends say the people of Olc Skerry were either 
slaughtered by outlanders or claimed by a virulent con- 
tagion. Learned sages, however, suggest that the inhab- 
itants of this island hamlet abandoned it long ago and 
journeyed into the mainlands of the Far Hharom penin- 
sula. The nature of this exodus remains a mystery, but 
relics found scattered among Olc Skerry’s crumbling 
wooden hovels and tenebrous seaside caves suggest the 
people of the village revered an unnamed pantheon of 
forgotten entities from the Far Realm. Modern explorers 
who return from expeditions to Olc Skerry tell stories 
of pernicious phantoms who poison the mind with 
madness, and blood-hungry wolves that lurk among the 
island’s dark and craggy woodlands. 


OLC SKERRY ADVENTURES 
Olc Skerry is a spooky, abandoned settlement sure to 
raise the hackles of even the most jaded explorer. 

OP Bucket Helm (Low Level). Flocks of black gulls 
haunt the lonely north shores of the island, congregating 
around a seaside cave that attracts ordinary crabs and 
a few giant crabs as well. Just outside the cave mouth, 
someone has planted a grim scarecrow with a rusted 
bucket helm for a head, and anyone who tampers with 
the helm causes the black gulls to form into three hos- 
tile swarms (use the swarm of ravens stat block in ap- 
pendix A of the Monster Manual). The gulls also gather 
into swarms at the command of the cave’s reclusive 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


occupant, Peggy Silva, a sea hag with snails in her hair 
who wears an old fishing net as a shawl. A deranged 
kuo-toa whip named Plookoolp is the only company 
Peggy Silva tolerates. 

Black Sap (Mid Level). Visitors to Olc Skerry can’t 
help but notice an old stone windmill perched atop 
arocky hill just south of town, its four spindly vanes 
stripped to their wooden bones. Behind the crumbling, 
desolate structure grows a large death’s head willow, 
from which characters can extract 20 doses of black 
sap (see the “Blightshore Contraband” sidebar earlier in 
this chapter). The black sap is worth a small fortune in 
the black markets of Rotthold. However, the windmill is 
home to an oni that doesn’t take kindly to the sap’s theft. 


ROTTHOLD 


Population: 8,800 (30% humans, 15% dark elves, 

15% goblins, 15% tieflings, 5% hollow ones, 20% 
other races) 

Government: Rotthold has no official governing body 
but is held together by a consortium of local guild lead- 
ers, merchants, and veteran adventurers who meet in 
secret once a week to discuss current affairs, shared 
interests, and potential threats. 

Defense: The small but precious amount of sanctuary 
Rotthold provides from the Blightshore wastes is up- 
held by a militia of battle-hardened locals and dutifully 
concerned citizens. Other fortune-seekers often join 
this militia simply for the opportunities and informa- 
tion the alliance provides. 

Commerce: Almost anything can be bought or sold in 
Rotthold, where the merchants are just as unscrupu- 
lous as in the surrounding Blightshore wilderness. 
Rotthold is the center of black market trade in Eastern 
Wynandir, and perhaps in all of Wildemount. 

Organizations: In addition to the city’s handful of mer- 
chants and thieves’ guilds, a confederacy of agents 
representing the mercantile interests of the Myriad 
and the Revelry operate in public throughout Rotthold, 
while a covert sect of the Cerberus Assembly carries 
out their own clandestine business. 


Some say this lawless harbor city is as dangerous as 
the arcane wilds of Blightshore that surround it. But 
whether or not visitors enjoy its chaotic disposition, Rot- 
thold is an unmistakable center of travel and commerce 
in eastern Wildemount. The decayed stone dwellings 
and wooden tenements that line Rotthold’s ramshackle 
streets are enveloped by a luminous, rust-colored moss 
that bathes the city’s evenings in a sick crimson glow. 
Many outlanders view this crime-ridden settlement as 
little more than a collection of degenerate safe houses 
and slums, while others see it as a raw jewel—full of po- 
tential—that shines bright among the dusky shadows of 
the poisoned east. 


GOVERNMENT 

Multiple factions operate in and around Rotthold, in- 
cluding covert agents of the Cerberus Assembly and a 
tenuous coalition between members of the Myriad and 
the Revelry. While the Plank King’s remote forces main- 
tain the southern waterways and oversee the export of 
Blightshore’s esoteric resources, Myriad spies monitor 


and manipulate the exchange of goods and services 
inside the city limits, and the fragile alliance between 
these two is the closest thing this unruly corner of the 
Miskath Strand has to a governing body. 


CRIME 

The open trade of illicit goods and servicesis the 
lifeblood of Rotthold’s mossy streets. All manner of 
pleasures are available for those willing enough to pay 
the price, which can be quite steep. Many of Rotthold’s 
denizens owe the Myriad one favor or another, and the 
constant exchange of these debts keeps the city full of 
new faces. Crime is a way of life in Rotthold, where the 
Dwendalian Empire and Kryn Dynasty have no sway 
over its opportunistic, unethical inhabitants. 


GEOGRAPHY 

No walls protect Rotthold from the surrounding 
Blightshore wastes, but eleven watchtowers serve as 

a line of defense. The city is roughly divided into four 
quarters: North Rotthold, East Rotthold, Dockside, and 
Cairn Hill. North Rotthold houses the city’s most impov- 
erished denizens, who encounter the Miskath Strand’s 
impinging monstrous wildlife on a regular basis. Most 
of the city’s trade is conducted in East Rotthold, where a 
bazaar known as the Red Market takes up a majority of 
the quarter. On the south side of the city, Dockside is the 
purview of the Revelry and houses Rotthold’s most afflu- 
ent citizens, who no doubt believe they are safest when 
located as far away from Blightshore’s savage interior as 
possible. On the west end of the city, the quarter known 
as Cairn Hill rests above a mysterious lattice of pre-Ca- 
lamity catacombs. Here in Rotthold’s graveyard, furtive 
agents meet in cemeteries to carry out their agendas. 


ROTTHOLD ADVENTURES 

The moss-lit streets of Rotthold are ripe with adventure 
for characters with a taste for small-city mystery or 
black market mayhem. 

Rough Times in Rotthold (Low Level). A moment 
of respite goes south in one of North Rotthold’s tav- 
erns, where the characters—along with the proprietors 
and other patrons—become targets of an impromptu 
shakedown by an upstart gang with ties to a prominent 
thieves’ guild. Successfully thwarting the thugs could 
very well earn the characters the ire (or the respect) of 
the guild, which operates under the clandestine guid- 
ance of a mysterious cabal of enlightened nothics. 

The Cairn Hill Horror (Mid Level). A serial killer 
cultist stalks the streets of western Rotthold from his 
catacomb lair beneath Cairn Hill, where the viscera of a 
hundred victims have been offered to summon his oth- 
erworldly patron: a glabrezu named Vrath. This demon 
is a cruel, immortal deceiver that promises its acolytes 
unrivaled power in the wake of its awful arrival—and 
only the characters can stop it. 

The Krakenwhacker (High Level). Captain Veluna 
Samarshan of the galley Krakenwhacker has decided 
to retire in Rotthold. Having heard about the adventur- 
ers’ exploits, she offers to sell the Krakenwhacker to 
them for one gold piece, though they’ll need to find their 
own crew. The ship is in excellent condition and has a 
magical figurehead carved in the likeness of Bahamut 


that grants the vessel immunity to fire, lightning, and 
thunder damage. The ship is the envy of several other 
Revelry captains, and the characters might have to 
fend off their advances to keep it. Captain Samarshan 
also warns them about an adult bronze dragon named 
Walarkus. Corrupted by the magic of Blightshore, this 
once-noble dragon has become a coastal menace con- 
sumed by greed. It would like nothing more than to add 
the ship’s magical figurehead to its undersea trove. 

Chapter 5 of the Dungeon Master's Guide has rules 
and statistics for ships, as well as information about hir- 
ing acrew and making ship repairs. 


TOOTH OF ZEHIR 


This eastern arm of Blightshore is a mist-shrouded pen- 
insula, the northernmost swath of which is covered by 
the stone forest of Strathfell (described below). 

The lower region of the Tooth is marked by craggy ba- 
salt beaches covered in black sand, and the ocean is full 
of hazardous, fossilized coral reefs. Exotic fey creatures 
are said to congregate among the Tooth’s darker domin- 
ions, which are rumored to skirt the Shadowfell via the 
Border Ethereal. 


158 


t 
f 
g + Hi 
ADVENTURERS CONTENDIWITH ELECTRIC 4 
> WIND Fi AN EMBER THICKET r rr 
/ oy 


D 
$ 


STRATHFELL 

This petrified woodland is the domain of an ancient 
silver shadow dragon named Karkethzerethzerus, 
the Sable Despoiler (Karketh for short). Before his 
malign reign, this region of the Miskath Strand was a 
verdant haven for a long-lost nation of wood elves and 
centaurs. For reasons unknown, Karkethzerethzerus 
plotted to annihilate the woodland nation, killing it 
off with energies from the Shadowfell. Since doing 
exactly that, the Sable Despoiler has ruled Strathfell 
with equal measures of gleeful arrogance and baleful 
suspicion. The shadow dragon’s lair, like his motives, 
remain hidden. Etheric rifts run throughout Strathfell’s 
gloomy expanse, allowing denizens such as darklings 
and meenlocks to travel to and from the Shadowfell 
with unsettling regularity. Most of these interplanar 
paths are invisible to the naked eye—but minions of 
Karkethzerethzerus know all too well where the veil 
grows thin. 

The future of Strathfell is not without hope, for good- 
aligned centaurs continue to patrol the woods as their 
ancestors did in ages past, battling the evil forces of the 
shadow dragon at every turn. The centaurs could use 
some help, however, as they are few in number. 


CHOSEN OF ZEHIR 

The southern tip of the peninsula abuts the Mordant 
Isle, a smaller land mass separated from the mainland 
by the reef-laden waters of the Venom Strait. On this 
island, an aberrant enclave of winged serpentkin dwell 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


within the ruins of Sariss, the Jade City, where they have 
erected foul monuments to the Cloaked Serpent him- 
self. These abhorrent snake folk plot a terrible doom for 
denizens of the Miskath Strand from their horrid lairs. 
No warm-blooded creature has ever been to Sariss and 
survived—or so the story goes. 


DISTANT LANDS OF 
EXANDRIA 


Wildemount is a vast and war-torn continent where 
many legends of Exandria are forged, but it is just one 
of many remarkable lands across this vibrant world. 
Many other regions have been referenced throughout 
this book, including the majestic realm of Marquet and 
the neighboring continent of Tal’Dorei, while others still 
remain undiscovered. This section outlines known re- 
gions of Exandria beyond the continent of Wildemount. 


TAL DOREI 


The continent of Tal’Dorei lies west of Wildemount, 
nearly connected by a land bridge that stands sundered 
by the Shearing Channel. The independent city-state 

of Whitestone lords over the northeastern reaches of 
Tal’Dorei from deep within the chilled woods of the 
Parchwood Timberland. Farther west, the endless, 
green fields and forests of the Dividing Plains forma 
landscape of farmland, rivers, and untamed wilderness. 


To the north, the Cliffkeep Mountains shelter hidden 
valleys, swift and deadly predators, and the mighty 
dwarven stronghold city of Kraghammer, beneath which 
lie mines and caverns that connect to the Underdark. 

To the south of the Dividing Plains, travelers might find 
themselves traversing the rocky spires of the Storm- 
crest Mountains or attempting to navigate the vast forest 
known as the Verdant Expanse, home to the beautiful 
elven city of Syngorn. Beyond the Verdant Expanse lies 
the southernmost peninsula of Tal’Dorei, a land envel- 
oped by the volatile Rifenmist Jungle. 

Along the eastern shore of Tal’Dorei stands the capi- 
tal city of Emon, a glorious metropolis and the political 
nexus of the continent. Within Emon, the governing oli- 
garchy known as the Council of Tal’Dorei maintains law 
and order across the many territories of the republic, 
partnering with the governing bodies of Kraghammer, 
Syngorn, and Whitestone to help maintain the safety 
and wellbeing of all who call this land their home. 


MARQUET 


Beyond the winds and waves to the far southwest of 
Wildemount, across the Lucidian Ocean and the Ozmit 
Sea, one can find the chain of islands called the Hespet 
Archipelago, and, farther still, the shores of the conti- 
nent of Marquet. The pebble beaches of the Bay of Gifts 
greet weary travelers, where the port city of Shammel 
offers gambling and extravagance to the traders who 
travel from afar. 

Beyond the port lie the rocky Aggrad Mountains, 
which spread for hundreds of miles, filled with deep 
chasms and endless caves housing predators lying in 
wait. The mountains eventually give way to the immense 
Marquesian Desert, whose scorching sands stretch 
from horizon to horizon. The overwhelming heat, 
deadly sandstorms, and ravenous denizens of the dunes 
threaten any caravan that attempts to cross these arid 
lands in search of any oasis of civilization. 

Near the center of this harsh desert, surrounded by 
a sprawling network of small villages, is the grand city 
of Ank’Harel, the center of culture, history, and power 
for Marquet. Ruled by the mysteriously undying J’mon 
Sa Ord, the streets of Ank’Harel are safe and rich with 
music and culture, a sharp contrast to the desolate lands 
that surround this metropolis. The Hands of Ord, the in- 
ternal guard of the city, are guardians of the nearby vil- 
lages and townships, but they can only reach so far. Far- 
ther south, the blistering sands give way to scrubland 
and marshes tangled with the rugged mountains that 
surround the smoking Suuthan Volcano and the danger- 
ous clans that worship it. 

The deserts of Marquet echo a once lush landscape 
that housed a prominent civilization during the Age of 
Arcanum, one that ended in terrible conflict between 
warring nations during the early years of the Calam- 
ity. The battles that raged here reduced the verdant 
lands to sand and ash, burying a multitude of secrets 
that factions across Exandria are willing to go to any 
lengths to claim. 


ISSYLRA 


Far northwest of Wildemount, beyond Tal’Dorei and 
across the freezing waters of the Frigid Depths and the 
Ozmit Sea, lies the oldest continent in known Exan- 
drian history. Issylra is thought to be the land where all 
civilization once emerged and spread in the time of the 
Founding, making it the focal point of historical study 
and the epicenter of many faiths. The territory known 
as Othanzia encompasses a majority of the continent’s 
developed regions, keeping most domains protected and 
governed by the might of the theocracy of Vasselheim. 
Nestled among eastern taiga forests of the Vasper 
Timberland, the city of Vasselheim is the oldest known 
seed of civilization and religion, and the only city to 
withstand every catastrophe that has rocked Exandria 
since the gods brought life to the world. Beyond the 
walls of Vasselheim lie chilly and savage wilds formed 
by the ancient and magically potent nature of the area. 
Small camps, communities, and townships are scat- 
tered across the landscape, and the denizens of Oth- 
anzia are a tough, hardened people who persist in this 
harsh land through duty, faith, or the need to protect 
their communities. Beyond the Othanzian region, there 
are a handful of lesser republics, but the ferocious crea- 
tures that stalk the jagged Utesspire Mountains prevent 
Othanzia from expanding too far beyond its borders. 


SHATTERED TEETH 


Should one wish to brave the perilous waters far south 
of Wildemount, past the dangerous, perpetual fog 
bank called the Fool’s Curtain, they might discover 
themselves adrift among a cluster of forty-three islands 
known as the Shattered Teeth. 

Varying in size from small, mile-wide reef-toppers 
to large islands like Ruukva that hold entire cities, this 
archipelago is largely governed by two contentious soci- 
eties. The Ossended Host is a culture of fishing folk ded- 
icated to isolationism and enlightenment through the 
worship of dreams and nightmares. The Wanderman 
Assembly, a centuries-old trade company from the 
Menagerie Coast that formed after its members were 
stranded across the Shattered Teeth by a hurricane, is a 
capitalistic society that barely conceals its ruthlessness 
under the banner of honor and brotherhood. Tension 
between these societies has led to bloodshed in recent 
years, with each group convinced that the other is bent 
on the destruction of its way of life. 


CHAPTER 3 | WILDEMOUNT GAZETTEER 


ishg: 


gt 


WIZARDS WHO MASTER THE ART OF DUNAMANCY HAVE INFINITE 
WORLDS AND POSSIBILITIES AT THEIR FINGERTIPS. 


HAT MAKES A HERO?” I ASK. IS IT ARMS 
anda will to use them? Is ita certain her- 
itage, a certain disposition? Is it a divine 
right to victory? I know this to be not true. 
I have killed many heroes on the battlefield, and I’ve re- 
spected every one. They have many different faces, and de- 
serve remembrance. What makes a hero is their willingness 
to sacrifice for something they believe in. Anyone can be a 
hero, once they find something worth dying for. 
—Sunbreaker Olomon 


The sprawling lands and endless challenges of Exan- 
dria forge heroes and villains of many different stripes. 
The myriad dangers of this wild continent constantly 
encroach upon innocents in need of protection, even as 
the legends and the magic of the past challenge those 
brave enough to reshape the world—for good or ill. The 
materialin this chapter offers a number of new options 
for player characters to define who they are and what 
they wish to become. 

The character options in this book are useful for play- 
ers and Dungeon Masters alike, allowing adventurers 
and NPCs to take starring and supporting roles in your 
Wildemount D&D campaign. In this chapter, you'll find 
stories and statistics that tie the races of the Player's 
Handbook and the broader world of D&D to the lands 
of Wildemount, as well as new subclasses, new back- 
grounds, and new spells focused on an esoteric study of 
magic known as dunamancy. 

The races, classes, and magic presented in this chap- 
ter might have different origins or defy the expectations 
established in other D&D books. The information in 
this chapter is specific to Wildemount, and in some 
cases, to the wider world of Exandria. If something in 
this book differs from what’s presented in the Player's 
Handbook, this material takes precedence in a Wilde- 
mount campaign. 


“Chapter 4 
CHARACTER OPTIONS 


RACES 


The nations of Wildemount are populated by people of 
many different races. All the races present in the Play- 
er’s Handbook, as well as many of the other races of 
the D&D game, have a home in Wildemount. However, 
some of those races have cultures that differ from those 
of their kin elsewhere in the multiverse. This chapter 
provides cultural information about the common races 
of Wildemount, plus several subraces not found in the 
Player's Handbook. 

This section also includes information on what a typ- 
ical character from each of the major regions of Wilde- 
mount—the Dwendalian Empire, the Menagerie Coast, 
and Xhorhas—might think of the members of each race. 
Although some of these accounts are accurate, others 
represent skewed perceptions or stereotypes. Many 
such perceptions have some basis in truth, but that truth 
has often been distorted by hearsay, prejudice, propa- 
ganda, or cultural misunderstandings. 

In addition to the races of the Player's Handbook, 
Wildemount is home to many other races, including the 
following: 


Aarakocra, bird-like humanoids who roost on isolated 
mountaintops 

Aasimar, beings who gain supernatural power from the 
angelic spark in their souls 

Firbolgs, forest guardians who engage in peaceful 
methods to protect their homes 

Genasi, humanoids imbued with elemental power as a 
result of their birth 

Goblins, outcast scavengers descended from the experi- 
ments of a dark god 

Goliaths, hulking wanderers who dwell atop the high- 
est mountains 

Kenku, accursed corvine humanoids who can speak 
only using mimicry 

Tortles, tortoise-like humanoids with an innate connec- 
tion to the sea 


The dominant races of Wildemount—dwarves, elves, 
halflings, and humans—are presented first in this sec- 
tion, followed by the less common races in alphabet- 
ical order. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


161 


162 


DWARVES 


Dwarves’ long memories give them uncommon insight 
into the world of the past. However, this connection to 
the past can make their societies resistant to change, 
even when change is desperately needed. 


DWARVES IN THE 
DWENDALIAN EMPIRE 


Most folk in the Dwendalian Empire think of dwarves 
as greedy, cave-dwelling hermits with a passion only 
for jewelry, drinking, and fighting. Most dwarves in 
the empire come from the city-state of Grimgolir and 
its settlements under the Dunrock Mountains, whose 
miners, jewelers, and warriors are some of the finest in 
the empire. 

Imperial beer, particularly smooth, sweet Trost 
ale from Trostenwald, is a delicacy among Grimgol 
dwarves. The people who lived beneath the mountains 
never grew wheat or hops, and so never brewed beer. 
Until the dwarves began trading with humans from 
the long-fallen Julous Dominion, dwarven liquor was a 
potent, ugly-smelling spirit called riitga, distilled from 
heavy root vegetables. 


DWARVES ON THE MENAGERIE COAST 


Along the Menagerie Coast, most folk see dwarves as 
foreigners possessed of fiery passions and an eagerness 
for action. Dwarves are uncommon visitors on the coast, 
with most coming from the distant realms of Tal’Dorei 
and Marquet as sailors or travelers, as pirates from 

the notorious Revelry, or as soldiers from the Dwenda- 
lian Empire. 

Ancient legends tell of dwarves living in mountaintop 
citadels in the ominous Cyrios Mountains, performing 
strange rituals that call upon the power of the Storm 
Lord. Along the coast, stories of the strong passion and 
swift judgment of the dwarves are often a product of the 
legends of these religious zealots. But these beliefs have 
been strengthened in modern times by the clear-eyed 
marquis of Port Zoon, Alamads Haddou, who lays down 
laws in plain language and enacts swift justice by the 
letter of those laws. 


DWARVES IN XHORHAS 


Dwarves are few and far between in Xhorhas, and 
those few who remain are known as duergar, or “deep 
dwarves.” Though some duergar have joined with the 
Kryn Dynasty and dwell on the surface, most live in the 
ancient tunnels of the Underdark and harbor a deep- 
seated enmity for the drow. 

Duergar insurgents, striking Kryn settlements or 
seeking hidden paths toward the surface from perhaps 
a dozen small outposts in the Underdark, are trying to 
carve out their own underground dominion. Kryn forces 
have been successful in holding onto their underground 
territories so far, but many generals fear that the war in 
the west is drawing more and more soldiers from their 
fortifications in the Underdark. If duergar aggression 
is left unchecked, territory might inevitably have to be 
ceded to the insurgents. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


ELVES 


When Exandria trembled at the gods’ footfalls, the an- 
cient elves of the north pleaded with the Arch Heart to 
save them from the world’s ending. Corellon did not re- 
spond, for it is said that their divine ears still rang with 
pain after their duel to the death with Gruumsh, the 
Ruiner. Desperate and panicked, the greatest mages of 
the elves performed a ritual powerful enough to encase 
their entire civilization in ice, in hopes of protecting it 
from the wrath of the warring gods while the elves es- 
caped into the Feywild. 

It is said that the ashes of the Calamity still blew upon 
the breeze when, centuries later, the barriers of ice 
melted and the elves of Wildemount emerged from the 
Feywild once more. On their return to the world, they 
found that their ritual had not held fast. The Calamity 
had wiped almost all traces of elven civilization from Ex- 
andria. With only the ruined husks of their mighty cities 
still standing, the elves began to rebuild. 

Even though the human-majority civilizations of the 
Dwendalian Empire and the Clovis Concord view elves 
as reclusive relics of the ancient past, most elves view 
themselves as newcomers to the world, for their return 
to Wildemount is only a generation or two removed from 
the present day. The notable exception are the dark 
elves of Xhorhas, who have lived in Eastern Wynandir 
since time immemorial. Still, it is only in the past few 
centuries that they have abandoned the labyrinthine 
caverns of the Underdark and emerged to live on 
the surface. 


ELVES IN THE DWENDALIAN EMPIRE 


Though the dark elves of Xhorhas are the subject of 
imperial propaganda and widespread prejudice, elves 

of other kinds living within the empire are generally 
treated as friends and allies. Imperial humans love to 
revere elves as ethereal, flawless beings, and to express 
shock when elves reveal the ways that they are all-to 
similar to humans. Elves who maintain their “exotic 
mystique” are most likely to become respected members 
of society, and many hold great social power within cit- 
ies such as Zadash and Rexxentrum. 


ELVES ON THE MENAGERIE COAST 


Elves are commonplace in the Clovis Concord and 
among the pirates of the Revelry, and people living on 
this part of the continent most often laugh at tales of 
elven grace and beauty. “An elf bleeds just like everyone 
else” is acommon saying on the Menagerie Coast, used 
to dismiss the fanciful sense of wonder common in the 
Empire—and the saying has evolved into a dismissal of 
all overwrought tales, even if the idiom doesn’t quite fit. 
Savvy buyers of curios and souvenirs might say, “Your 
wares bleed, just like everyone else’s” to a merchant 
who has exaggerated the quality of their goods. 

Most elves on the Menagerie Coast are descended 
from travelers from the desert continent of Marquet, but 
this area is also home to two rare subraces of elf. The 
seas off the coast are inhabited by secluded civilizations 
of water-breathing sea elves, who trade with under- 
water enclaves of merfolk. All but the most idealistic 


FROM LEFT TO RIGHT: PALLID ELF, LOTUSOEN HALFLING, DRACONBLOOD DRAGONBORN, AND RAVENITE ORAGONBORN 


or mercenary of these ocean dwellers seethe petty 
squabbles of the “boat-riders” of the surface world as 
beneath their notice. At another geographic extreme, the 
moon-worshiping pallid elves of the Cyrios Mountains 
are new to the world, and are generally viewed with cor- 
dial curiosity by the denizens of the Concord’s cities. 


ELVES IN XHORHAS 


The largest elf-majority civilization in Wildemount is the 
Kryn Dynasty of Xhorhas, which is made up primarily 
of dark elves. The drow of Xhorhas are respectful to- 
ward people of all races—including other elves—as they 
believe that their holy cycle of rebirth allows them to be 
reborn into non-drow bodies. The empathy to be gained 
by experiencing life in another body is crucial to their 
religion and their culture. 

Elves who live outside the Luxon’s cycle of rebirth are 
viewed with pity, for they have not yet seen the true path. 
Elves who dwell within the Dwendalian Empire are a 
notable exception, their imperial allegiance earning 
them only the cold bite of a blade. 


ELF SUBRACES 


At the DM’s discretion, players have access to the pallid 
elf and sea elf subraces described below, in addition to 
the elf subraces in the Player’s Handbook. 

Height and Weight. Here’s how to randomly deter- 
mine the height and weight of a pallid elf or sea elf, 
starting with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d10 
Height = 4 feet + 6 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 90 + (1d4 x your size modifier) 


PALLID ELF 

The pallid elves are a mystical and insightful people 
with skin as pale as the surface of Exandria’s largest 
moon. They emerged from the Pallid Grove this century 
and wander the world with childlike curiosity. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score in- 
creases by 1. 

Incisive Sense. You have advantage on Intelligence 
(Investigation) and Wisdom (Insight) checks. 

Blessing of the Moon Weaver. You know the light 
cantrip. When you reach 3rd level, you can cast the 
sleep spell once with this trait and regain the ability to 
do so when you finish a long rest. When you reach 5th 
level, you can cast the invisibility spell (targeting your- 
self only) once with this trait and regain the ability to do 
so when you finish a long rest. Casting these spells with 
this trait doesn’t require material components. Wisdom 
is your spellcasting ability for these spells. 


SEA ELF 

Sea elves are a reclusive and deeply territorial people 

who have as much in common with merfolk as they do 

with other elves. Most sea elves view the people of the 

Clovis Concord—even other elves—with mistrust. 
Ability Score Increase. Y our Constitution score in- 

creases by 1. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


164 


Sea Elf Training. You have proficiency with the spear, 
trident, light crossbow, and net. 

Chrid of the Sea. You have a swimming speed of 30 
feet, and you can breathe air and water. 

Friend of the Sea. Using gestures and sounds, you 
can communicate simple ideas with any beast that has 
an innate swimming speed. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Aquan. 


HALFLINGS 


Nearly every race in Exandria has an origin myth or 
two. The stories vary from realm to realm, but it’s clear 
that Corellon the Arch Heart wove the elves from grass, 
Moradin the All- Hammer carved the dwarves from 
earth, and so on. Halflings across Wildemount have no 
such stories, and no faiths tell of their god creating the 
small folk. Some speculate that Avandra the Change 
Bringer placed halflings in the world, but despite some 
of Ioun’s most devout priests petitioning their god to 
reveal the truth of the halflings’ creation, the Knowing 
Mentor has remained infuriatingly coy on the topic. 
For their part, halflings in the Dwendalian Empire 
and the Menagerie Coast don’t much care where they 
came from. All they know is that they walked out of 
a hole in the ground one day to find a beautiful world 
spread out before them. Some longed to explore to that 
world’s farthest horizons, while others were content to 


gaze upon the beauty of the same sunrise each morning. 


Plenty of halflings have joined the Cobalt Soul over the 
years in desperate search of answers to the world’s big 
questions—where did we come from, and where are we 
going? But most halflings are content to leave the ques- 
tions of past and future well enough alone, simply living 
in the present. 


HALFLINGS IN THE 
DWENDALIAN EMPIRE 


Generations ago, the halflings of the Felder clan estab- 


lished a settlement now known as Felderwin Tillage, 
and discovered in time that they had inadvertently cre- 
ated an agricultural powerhouse. The word “halfling” 
has been synonymous with a simple, rural lifestyle 
ever since. 

The dutiful, orderly people of the Dwendalian Empire 
most often think of halflings as carefree country bump- 
kins. In anation obsessed with its heritage and its leg- 
acy, the stereotypical halfling philosophy of living life in 
the moment is viewed as pathetically unambitious. 


HALFLINGS ON THE 
MENAGERIE COAST 


People in this part of the world have no real assump- 
tions about halflings. Most perceive them on a level 
with humans, having similar ambitions, virtues, and 
vices. The only difference is that halflings are a wee bit 
smaller from prow to stern and a fair bit bigger from 
port to starboard. 

Halflings are common enough in the Clovis Concord 
that just about every vessel, shop, tavern, coffee house, 
and brothel has been designed with halflings and 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


gnomes in mind. Stairs often have shallow steps for 
small legs, stools feature hand-cranks to adjust their 
height up or down, and most restaurants have utensils 
sized for small hands. 


HALFLINGS IN XHORHAS 


Few Xhorhasians have ever seen a halfling except for 
the occasional halfling soldier in Dwendalian armor. Be- 
cause of this, most Kryn citizens view halflings as icons 
of the empire and are quick to distrust them. Only the 
Lotusden halflings, a reclusive and insular clan native to 
the Lotusden Greenwood, call Xhorhas home. 


HALFLING SUBRACES 


At the DM’s discretion, players have access to the lotus- 
den halfling subrace described below, in addition to the 
halfling subraces in the Player’s Handbook. 


LOTUSDEN HALFLING 

Long tied to the natural heart of the Lotusden Green- 
wood, these halflings have adapted to live synergistically 
with the chaotic laws of the wilds. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score in- 
creases by 1. 

Child of the Wood. You know the druidcraft cantrip. 
When you reach 3rd level, you can cast the entangle 
spell once with this trait and regain the ability to do so 
when you finish along rest. When you reach 5th level, 
you can cast the spike growth spell once with this trait 
and regain the ability to do so when you finish a long 
rest. Casting these spells with this trait doesn’t require 
material components. Wisdom is your spellcasting abil- 
ity for these spells. 

Timberwalk. Ability checks made to track you have 
disadvantage, and you can move across difficult terrain 
made of nonmagical plants and undergrowth without 
expending extra movement. 


HUMANS 


The most populous race in Wildemount, humans define 
common culture across the continent. Their unrelenting 
ambition creates societies that aggressively pursue pro- 
ductivity while valuing leisure, and their short life spans 
often lead humans to romanticize the ugly past and fear 
the unknown future. 


HUMANS IN THE 
DWENDALIAN EMPIRE 


In the Dwendalian Empire, humans are everywhere and 
occupy every walk of imperial life. 

Humans recoil from the unknown in ways that 
longer-lived folk do not, and nations dominated by a 
nonhuman majority are a tremendous source of fear and 
suspicion to human-majority nations. Human survival 
instinct stokes the flames of fear, especially when those 
flames are amply fueled by nationalistic propaganda. 
Such is the relationship between the Dwendalian Em- 
pire and the drow-majority Kryn Dynasty of Xhorhas. 

Other societies—including Uthodurn’s pluralistic soci- 
ety of elves and dwarves—are less maligned. However, 


this is because the average citizen of the empire knows 
nothing about those societies, reducing them to objects 
of curiosity for imperial scholars. 


HUMANS ON THE MENAGERIE COAST 


Within the Clovis Concord, humans are seen as adept 
diplomats, nation builders, and loyal soldiers. They 

are the most populous people of the Menagerie Coast, 
but ever since the founding of the Clovis Concord, that 
nation has been one defined by its diversity. Although 
other nations of Wildemount and the world might con- 
sider humans to be the definitive, adaptable jacks-of-all- 
trades, the people of the Concord know that all folk have 
this capacity. 


HUMANS IN XHORHAS 


Humans are rare in Xhorhas, and those found within 
that land typically belong to wandering clans or are 
soldiers of the Dwendalian Empire. Aside from such 
soldiers, humans are not viewed with inherent suspicion 
by most Xhorhasians, but the war between the Kryn 
Dynasty and the Dwendalian Empire has made Xhorhas 
an even more dangerous land for all human travelers. 
Dark elves and monsters that might treat a wandering 
human with caution elsewhere are likely to attack on 
sight in Xhorhas, because they know that an imperial 
human will do the same to them. 


AARAKOCRA 


Many people across Wildemount consider the winged 
aarakocra to be a myth, so infrequently do they descend 
from their lofty aeries to deal with wingless folk. Where 
they are known, the aarakocra rarely engage with the 
land-bound societies of Wildemount, though some 

take great pleasure in traveling on the open ocean with 
Concord sailors and Revelry pirates. Some legends say 
that Melora the Wild Mother created the aarakocra as 
storm herders who drive the clouds across the sky, and 
some aarakocra tribes play a sport called h’aara-shie, or 
“cloud chasing,” that reflects this ancient tale. 


AARAKOCRA IN THE 
DWENDALIAN EMPIRE 


Within the empire, most aarakocra keep to the hidden 
settlement of Vol’antim in the Cyrios Mountains. The 
appearance of an aarakocra is seen as a blessing in 
the settlements of the Truscan Vale and the Marrow 
Valley—often much to the aarakocra’s embarrassment. 
Most rural folk consider the aarakocra to be angels of 
Erathis the Law Bearer, no matter how diligently the 
aarakocra explain otherwise. 


AARAKOCRA ON THE 
MENAGERIE COAST 


The few aarakocra who descend from the Cyrios Moun- 


tains or emerge from the canopy of the Quoraska Jungle 
for longer than a day or two are often swept up in the 
beauty of the sea. Thus enamored, many join a ship’s 
crew and set out to explore the Lucidian Ocean with 
their new allies. The common people of the Menagerie 


AARAKOCRA 


Coast look upon the aarakocra’s bright wings with awe 
and dream about taking to the sky, but are often baf- 
fled by their seemingly nonsensical idioms and figures 
of speech. 


AARAKOCRA IN XHORHAS 


Aarakocra are native to the mountains and jungles of 
western Wildemount, and have precious few settlements 
in the mountains surrounding Xhorhas. The average 
Kryn dark elf would react to the sight of an aarakocra 
with shock, for they have neither stories nor experience 
with such creatures. 


AARAKOCRA NAMES 


As with much of their speech, aarakocra names include 
clicks, trills, and whistles to the point that other peoples 
have a difficult time pronouncing them. Typically, a 
name has two to four syllables with the sounds acting as 
connectors. When interacting with other races, aarako- 
cra may use nicknames gained from people they meet or 
shortened forms of their full names. 


Aarakocra Names: Aera, Aial, Aur, Deekek, Errk, 
Heehk, Ikki, Kleeck, Oorr, Ouss, Quaf, Quierk, Sal- 
leek, Urreek, or Zeed 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


166 


AARAKOCRA TRAITS 


Being able to fly at high speed at 1st level is exception- 


ally effective in certain circumstances and exceedingly 
dangerous in others. Keep this in mind before allowing 
your players to choose this race. 

An aarakocra character has the following traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity score in- 
creases by 2, and your Wisdom score increases by 1. 

Age. Aarakocra reach maturity by age 3. They don’t 
usually live longer than 30 years. 

Alignment. Most aarakocra are good and rarely 
choose sides when it comes to law and chaos. Tribal 
leaders and warriors might be lawful, while explorers 
and adventurers might tend toward chaotic. 

Size. Aarakocra average 5 feet tall and have slender, 
lightweight bodies. Your size is Medium. Here’s how to 
determine your height and weight randomly, starting 
with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d8 
Height = 4 feet + 3 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 70 + (1d4 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feet. 

Flight. You have a flying speed of 50 feet. To use this 
speed, you can’t be wearing medium or heavy armor. 

Talons. Your talons are natural weapons, which you 
can use to make unarmed strikes. If you hit with them, 
you deal slashing damage equal to 1d4 + your Strength 
modifier, instead of the bludgeoning damage normal for 
an unarmed strike. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Aarako- 
cra, Auran, and Common. 


AASIMAR 


The light of the gods still shines upon Exandria, even 
from behind the Divine Gate. Aasimar are the purest 
expression of that divine light as it burns within every 
mortal soul, for the souls of those blessed with an an- 
gelic ancestor blaze brighter than any other. Even rarer 
than the tieflings with whom they share a commonality 
of ancestry, aasimar are mortal, and yet are understood 
to be destined for a grander cosmic purpose than others 
around them. In every culture across the continent of 
Wildemount, the birth of an aasimar is seen as a bless- 
ing and a portent. 

Aasimar who can bear the burden of their destiny 
become champions of noble causes, and encourage 
others to walk always in the light. More often than not, 
however, an aasimar saddled with a vague destiny and 
the grand aspirations of their clan ultimately falls from 
grace, their inner light succumbing to shadow. 


AASIMAR IN THE 
DWENDALIAN EMPIRE 


To a law-abiding family worshiping state-approved gods, 


the birth of an aasimar child is nothing short of a mir- 
acle. Such a child is not only promised a charmed life, 
but elevates the social status of their family. However, 
to a family that secretly worships gods outlawed by the 
empire, the birth of a child touched by an angel of such 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


deities is a mixed blessing. If the event draws the scru- 
tiny of a settlement’s idolmaster and their cronies, it 
might force family members to flee their homes for the 
Greying Wildlands or the Menagerie Coast. 


AASIMAR ON THE MENAGERIE COAST 


In the Clovis Concord, the cosmopolitan melting pot of 
Wildemount, most folk are inured to the sight of unusual 
and remarkable people. Even so, aasimar are a sight to 
behold, and there are many who don’t mind being rude if 
it means spending a few extra seconds staring at a radi- 
ant aasimar as they pass by. 


AASIMAR IN XHORHAS 


Those in the Kryn Dynasty who study dunamancy see 
aasimar as brimming with near-limitless potential. 

As such, aasimar are often sought out from birth to be 
trained as dunamancers and echo knights. The tribes- 
folk who wander Xhorhas see the birth of an aasimar 
as a message from the gods, and their shamans ascribe 
meaning to that birth by the conditions of the world. An 
aasimar born during a raging storm might be a word of 
warning from Kord the Storm Lord, whereas an aasi- 
mar whose mother gave birth in a field of flowers could 
be a vow of protection from Melora the Wild Mother. 


AASIMAR GUIDES 


An aasimar, except for one who has turned evil, has a 
link to an angelic being. That being—usually a deva— 
provides guidance to the aasimar, though this connec- 
tion functions only in dreams. As such, the guidance is 
not a direct command or a simple spoken word. Instead, 
the aasimar receives visions, prophecies, and feelings. 

The angelic being is far from omniscient. Its guidance 
is based on its understanding of the tenets of law and 
good, and it might have insight into combating espe- 
cially powerful evils that it knows about. 

As part of fleshing out an aasimar character, con- 
sider the nature of that character’s angelic guide. The 
Angelic Guide and Angelic Nature tables offer names 
and natures that you can use to flesh out your charac- 
ter’s guide. 


ANGELIC GUIDE 


d6 Name d6 Name 

1 Tadriel 4 Galladia 
2 Myllandra 5 Mykiel 

3 Seraphina 6 Valandras 


ANGELIC NATURE 

d6 Nature 
Bookish and lecturing 
Compassionate and hopeful 
Practical and lighthearted 
Fierce and vengeful 


Stern and judgmental 


nu A U N ~ 


Kind and parental 


AASIMAR NAMES 


Most aasimar are born from human parents. They use 
the same naming conventions as their native culture. 


AASIMAR TRAITS 


An aasimar character has the following racial traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma score in- 
creases by 2. 

Age. Aasimar mature atthe same rate as humans, but 
they can live up to 160 years. 

Alignment. Imbued with celestial power, most aasi- 
mar are good. Outcast aasimar are most often neutral or 
even evil. 

Size. Aasimar have the same range of height and 
weight as humans. Your size is Medium. Here’s how to 
determine your height and weight randomly, starting 
with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d10 
Height = 4 feet + 8 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 110 + (2d4 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Darkvision. Blessed with a radiant soul, your vision 
can easily cut through darkness. You can see in dim 
light within 60 feet of you as if it were bright light, and in 
darkness as if it were dim light. You can’t discern color 
in darkness, only shades of gray. 

Celestial Resistance. You have resistance to necrotic 
damage and radiant damage. 

Healing Hands. As an action, you can touch a crea- 
ture and cause it to regain a number of hit points equal 
to your level. Once you use this trait, you can’t use it 
again until you finish a long rest. 

Light Bearer. You know the light cantrip. Charisma is 
your spellcasting ability for it. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Celestial. 

Subrace. Three subraces for aasimar exist: protector 
aasimar, scourge aasimar, and fallen aasimar. Choose 
one of them for your character. 


PROTECTOR AASIMAR 

Protector aasimar are charged by the powers of good to 
protect the weak, to strike at evil wherever it arises, and 
to stand vigilant against the darkness. From a young 
age, a protector aasimar receives advice and directives 
that urge them to stand against evil. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score in- 
creases by 1. 

Radiant Soul. Starting at 3rd level, you can use your 
action to unleash the divine energy within yourself, 
causing your eyes to glimmer and two luminous, incor- 
poreal wings to sprout from your back. 

Your transformation lasts for 1 minute or until you end 
it as a bonus action. During it, you have a flying speed of 
30 feet, and once on each of your turns, you can deal ex- 
tra radiant damage to one target when you deal damage 
to it with an attack or a spell. The extra radiant damage 
equals your level. 

Once you use this trait, you can’t use it again until you 
finish a long rest. 


SCOURGE AASIMAR 

Scourge aasimar are imbued with a divine energy that 
blazes intensely within them. It feeds a powerful desire 
to destroy evil—a desire that is, at its best, unflinching 
and, at its worst, all-consuming. Many scourge aasimar 
wear masks to block out the world and focus on contain- 
ing this power, unmasking themselves only in battle. 

Ability Score Increase. Y our Constitution score in- 
creases by 1. 

Radiant Consumption. Starting at 3rd level, you can 
use your action to unleash the divine energy within your- 
self, causing a searing light to radiate from you, pouring 
out of your eyes and mouth, and threaten to char you. 

Your transformation lasts for 1 minute or until you 
end it as a bonus action. During it, you shed bright light 
in a 10-foot radius and dim light for an additional 10 
feet, and at the end of each of your turns, you and each 
creature within 10 feet of you take radiant damage equal 
to half your level (rounded up). In addition, once on each 
of your turns, you can deal extra radiant damage to one 
target when you deal damage to it with an attack ora 
spell. The extra radiant damage equals your level. 

Once you use this trait, you can’t use it again until you 
finish a long rest. 


AASIMAR 


168 


FALLEN AASIMAR 

An aasimar who was touched by dark powers as a youth 
or who turns evil in early adulthood can become one 

of the fallen—a group of aasimar whose inner light has 
been replaced by shadow. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score in- 
creases by 1. 

Necrotic Shroud. Starting at 3rd level, you can use 
your action to unleash the divine energy within yourself, 
causing your eyes to turn into pools of darkness and two 
skeletal, ghostly, flightless wings to sprout from your 
back. The instant you transform, other creatures within 
10 feet of you that can see you must each succeed on a 
Charisma saving throw (DC 8 + your proficiency bonus 
+ your Charisma modifier) or become frightened of you 
until the end of your next turn. 

Your transformation lasts for 1 minute or until you 
end it as a bonus action. During it, once on each of your 
turns, you can deal extra necrotic damage to one target 
when you deal damage to it with an attack or a spell. 
The extra necrotic damage equals your level. 

Once you use this trait, you can’t use it again until you 
finish a long rest. 


DRAGONBORN 


Wildemount was the cradle from which all dragonborn 
civilization grew. The city-state of Draconia rose in the 
Dreemoth Ravine along the southern edge of the con- 
tinent, when foreign dragonkin fleeing the gods’ wrath 
during the Calamity forged an alliance with native 
dragonborn already dwelling there. The colonizing drag- 
onborn, who called themselves draconbloods, worked 
with the native dragonborn, called ravenites, to build a 
society that could withstand the wandering monsters 
of Xhorhas. However, Draconia swiftly descended into 
corruption and bigotry, and the draconblood ruling class 
betrayed and enslaved their ravenite kin. 

Twenty years ago, Draconia was destroyed by the 
ire of the mighty Chroma Conclave, and the city-state’s 
ruins were occupied by an ancient white dragon named 
Vorugal. The chaos of the attack upended draconblood 
civilization, and the ravenite slaves rose up and drove 
their former masters from the Dreemoth Ravine. Now 
masters of their own fate, the ravenite dragonborn have 
rebuilt their home within the ravine and have begun to 
spread out across the world. 


DRAGONBORN VARIANTS 


You can allow a player to choose one of the following 
dragonborn variants. 


DRAGONBORN VARIANT: DRACONBLOOD 
Draconbloods possess long tails and a knack for social 
manipulation. They remember the days when they were 
once mighty conquerors. 

A draconblood uses the dragonborn traits in the Play- 
er’s Handbook, with the following traits replacing the 
Ability Score Increase and Damage Resistance traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Intelligence score in- 
creases by 2, and your Charisma score increases by 1. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60 feet 
of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if it 
were dim light. You can’t discern color in darkness, only 
shades of gray. 

Forceful Presence. You can use your understanding 
of creative diplomacy or intimidation to guide a con- 
versation in your favor. When you make a Charisma 
(Intimidation or Persuasion) check, you can do so with 
advantage. Once you use this trait, you can’t do so again 
until you finish a short or long rest. 


DRAGONBORN VARIANT: RAVENITE 
Ravenites have no tails and a hearty physique. They 
remember the days when they were slaves to the 
draconblood, as well as the day when they overthrew 
their masters. 

A ravenite uses the dragonborn traits in the Player's 
Handbook, with the following traits replacing the Ability 
Score Increase and Damage Resistance traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score 
increases by 2, and your Constitution score in- 
creases by 1. 

Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60 feet 
of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if it 
were dim light. You can’t discern color in darkness, only 
shades of gray. 

Vengeful Assault. When you take damage froma 
creature in range of a weapon you are wielding, you can 
use your reaction to make an attack with the weapon 
against that creature. Once you use this trait, you can’t 
do so again until you finish a short or long rest. 


DRAGONBORN IN THE 
DWENDALIAN EMPIRE 


The Dwendalian Empire has seen a massive influx of 
dragonborn since the fall of Draconia. Most of the dra- 
conblood nobles who fled into the empire tried to use 
their grandiloquent names and titles to earn favors and 
prestige. But without the power of a nation-state behind 
them, many of those former slave owners were forced 
into lives of farming or hard labor. Some in the empire 
speak in awed whispers of the “former dragonborn 
princes” who now live as paupers, while others scoff at 
these haughty dragonborn’s delusions of grandeur. 

Many ravenites have journeyed to the Dwendalian 
Empire in the years since the death of Vorugal, but the 
first of those found a colder reception than was given 
their former masters. The empire had no desire to grant 
asylum to revolutionaries, and would have turned the 
ravenites away had the Cerberus Assembly not inter- 
vened. For reasons unknown, the Assembly created the 
shantytown of Talonstadt for displaced ravenites, allow- 
ing them to trade labor for lodging there. 


DRAGONBORN ON THE 
MENAGERIE COAST 


Many ofthe draconbloods fleeing their ruined city-state 
settled among the people of the Clovis Concord. Some 
had beach homes and private villas to flee to, and were 


pr la 


able to establish businesses with the money they had 
stashed away there. Others were not so fortunate, and 
were forced to take menial jobs to make ends meet. 
Many residents of the Clovis Concord feel a twinge of 
sympathy for the draconblood exiles, but most common- 
ers who have any knowledge of the ravenite uprising see 
this life of servitude as just punishment. 

Many of the ravenites who travel to the warm sands 
of the coast are merchants or wealthy generals or pol- 
iticians on vacation. As such, all ravenites on the Me- 
nagerie Coast are assumed to have wealth—even exiles 
or penniless adventurers. Any tailless dragonborn who 
wanders through the cities of the Clovis Concord must 
constantly fend off hucksters, peddlers, and thieves. 


DRAGONBORN IN XHORHAS 


Countless draconbloods fled into the wastes of Xhorhas 


in search of asylum, and some even dared approach the 
intimidating walls of Rosohna. The dark elves of the 
Kryn Dynasty were eager to welcome these formerly 
isolated people into their ranks—though their reasons 
for doing so were less than altruistic. More dragonborn 
living within range of the Luxon’s beacons deepens the 
well of experiences that drow engaged in anamnesis 
can draw from, bringing their people closer to true en- 
lightenment. The dark elves have no interest in the rift 
between the draconbloods and the ravenites, and treat 
both peoples as equals. 


FIRBOLG 


FIRBOLGS 


Firbolgs are a forest-dwelling race native to the Greying 
Wildlands, particularly the mysterious Savalirwood. 
Their bodies are covered with thick fur ranging from 
tones of earthen brown and ruddy red to cool grays 

and blues, and even to wild hues of pink and green. 
Their bodies are bovine or camelid in appearance, with 
floppy, pointed ears and broad, pink noses, but they are 
bipedal and have hands that can manipulate weapons 
and objects. 

Most firbolgs live in extended family units, and it is 
unusualto find one living alone. However, they are in- 
troverted to the point where they seldom engage with 
other firbolgs outside the family unit, and firbolgs rarely 
form their own cities, villages, or even large tribes. 
Despite this, many firbolgs enjoy visiting other nations’ 
settlements for a short time for trade, sightseeing, and 
to visit friends. 


FIRBOLGS IN THE 
DWENDALIAN EMPIRE 


Most imperial citizens have never even heard of firbolgs. 
Stories involving these folk are rare, and typically liken 
them to the giants, depicting firbolgs as hulking hu- 
manoid warriors rather than fur-covered nature lovers. 
People living in the great crossroads city of Zadash 
might be familiar with one firbolg in particular: the jolly, 
eccentric enchanter known as Pumat Sol. This familiar- 
ity means that many warm quickly to new firbolgs, albeit 
after some initial surprise. 


FIRBOLGS ON THE 
MENAGERIE COAST 


Since firbolgs are neither prone to travel nor native 

to the Menagerie Coast, their numbers along Wilde- 
mount’s western shores are vanishingly small. The peo- 
ple of the Clovis Concord share the same folk tales of 
giant-like humanoid firbolgs as the folk of the Dwenda- 
lian Empire, and are likewise surprised by their gentle 
nature when they meet them. 


FIRBOLGS IN XHORHAS 


Firbolgs who travel southeast from the Greying Wild- 
lands and cross the Dunrock Mountains might find 
themselves wandering the wastes of Xhorhas. The ter- 
ritorial monsters that prowl the wastes show no pity to 
unprepared wanderers, and most firbolg families know 
better than to undertake such a dangerous journey. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


169 


With northern Xhorhas firmly under the control of the 
Kryn Dynasty, the dark elves have saved a number of 
firbolg travelers from monsters over the years. Enough 
of those have remained in the wastes for small firbolg 
communities to develop in Rosohna and other major 
Kryn cities. 


FIRBOLG CLASSES 


Most firbolgs are druids, rangers, or fighters. Among 
their kind, these vocations are passed down from one 
generation to the next. The firbolgs’ magical heritage 
also expresses itself in other ways; those who become 
bards preserve the clan’s lore, and firbolg sorcerers 
defend their communities. Firbolg wizards arise when a 
clan becomes friendly with elves. 

Firbolg rogues are typically scouts tasked with spying 
on neighboring folk to determine their intentions. They 
are most common among firbolgs whose homes border 
human settlements. 

Firbolg barbarians are rare except among clans 
that face constant threats from evil humanoids and 
other invaders. 

Firbolg clerics and paladins are usually dedicated to 
nature gods, enforcing their will. 

Firbolg warlocks are rare, but some clans forge alli- 
ances and arcane pacts with powerful fey beings. 

Firbolg monks are almost entirely unheard of, though 
a monastery might take in the young survivors of a dev- 
astated firbolg clan. 


FIRBOLG NAMES 


Firbolg adopt elven names when they must deal with 
outsiders, although the concept of names strikes them 
as strange. They know the animals and plants of the for- 
est without formal names, and instead identify the for- 
est’s children by their deeds, habits, and other actions. 

By the same token, their clan names merely refer to 
their homes. When dealing with other races, firbolgs re- 
fer to their lands by whatever name the surrounding folk 
use, as a matter of tact and hospitality, but among their 
own kind they simply call it “home.” 

Sometimes firbolgs adopt the nicknames or titles out- 
siders give them under the assumption that those who 
need names can call them whatever they wish. 


FIRBOLG TRAITS 


A firbolg character has the following racial traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score increases 
by 2, and your Strength score increases by 1. 

Age. As humanoids related to the fey, firbolg have long 
lifespans. A firbolg reaches adulthood around 30, and 
the oldest of them can live for 500 years. 

Alignment. As people who follow the rhythm of na- 
ture and see themselves as its caretakers, firbolg are 
typically neutral good. Evil firbolg are rare and are usu- 
ally the sworn enemies of the rest of their kind. 

Size. Firbolg stand between 7 and 8 feet tall and 
weigh between 240 and 300 pounds. Your size is Me- 
dium. Here’s how to determine your height and weight 
randomly, starting with rolling a size modifier: 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


Size modifier = 2d12 
Height = 6 feet + 2 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 175 + (2d6 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Firbolg Magic. You can cast detect magic and disguise 
self with this trait, using Wisdom as your spellcasting 
ability for them. Once you cast either spell, you can’t 
cast it again with this trait until you finish a short or 
long rest. When you use this version of disguise self, you 
can seem up to 3 feet shorter than normal, allowing you 
to more easily blend in with humans and elves. 

Hidden Step. As a bonus action, you can magically 
turn invisible until the start of your next turn or until 
you attack, make a damage roll, or force someone to 
make a saving throw. Once you use this trait, you can’t 
use it again until you finish a short or long rest. 

Powerful Build. You count as one size larger when 
determining your carrying capacity and the weight you 
can push, drag, or lift. 

Speech of Beast and Leaf. You have the ability to 
communicate in a limited manner with beasts and 
plants. They can understand the meaning of your words, 
though you have no special ability to understand them in 
return. You have advantage on all Charisma checks you 
make to influence them. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common, 
Elvish, and Giant. 


GENASI 


Genasi are exceedingly rare on Exandria, as befits their 
unique origins. Most live among the elementally attuned 
Ashari tribes of Tal’Dorei or on the Elemental Planes. 
However, there are no major rifts to the Elemental 
Planes in Wildemount, and thus no Ashari to safeguard 
them. The few genasi who dwell on this continent are 
often created as the result of a powerful elemental in- 
fluence at the moment of their birth. A baby born within 
the eye of a hurricane might become an air genasi, 
while a fire genasi might be born in the midst of a raging 
forest fire. 

Some genasi are more attuned to their native element 
than others. A genasi with a powerful connection to el- 
emental fire might have their head covered by crackling 
flames rather than hair. A genasi with a connection to 
elemental water might have blue-tinged skin and appear 
to sweat profusely at all times. 


GENASI IN THE 
DWENDALIAN EMPIRE 


Genasi are so visually distinctive and uncommon that 
they are treated with equal amounts of surprise and 
wonder in all the nations of Wildemount. The authoritar- 
ian regime of the Dwendalian Empire reacts the most 
harshly to the unique power of genasi, and the Cerberus 
Assembly takes the greatest interest in them. Genasi 
are often press-ganged into joining the assembly under 
threat of death or exile, and most accept the offer. Those 
who refuse—and who survive—often take refuge in the 
empire's criminal underworld, with many finding accep- 
tance in the Myriad crime syndicate. 


pS 


FROM LEFT TO RIGHT: EARTH GENASI, WATER GENASI, FIRE GENASI, AND AIR GENASI 


GENASI ON THE MENAGERIE COAST 


Even the cosmopolitan people of the Clovis Concord 
react to the sight of a genasi with wonder. Sailors and 
pirates alike take special interest in genasi, for the 
power to harness the elements is a gift from the gods on 
the open sea. 


GENASI IN XHORHAS 


Powerful storms wrack the flat plains of Xhorhas, and 
many who live beyond the walls of the Kryn Dynasty’s 
cities pray to Kord the Storm Lord to win blessings and 
protection from his wrath. Air, fire, and water genasi are 
often born under Kord’s auspices, and many become 
shamans serving the folk of Xhorhas. Few earth genasi 
roam the wastes, though some are said to dwell within 
the Vermaloc Wildwood. 

The Kryn know little about the genasi and are eager to 
rectify that. Their scouts have orders to bring back any 
genasi they encounter to Rosohna. 


GENASI NAMES 


Genasi use the naming conventions of the people among 
whom they were raised. They might later assume dis- 
tinctive names to capture their heritage, such as Flame, 
Ember, Wave, or Onyx. 


GENASI TRAITS 


A genasi character has the following racial traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution score in- 
creases by 2. 

Age. Genasi mature at about the same rate as humans 
and reach adulthood in their late teens. They live some- 
what longer than humans do, up to 120 years. 

Alignment. Independent and self-reliant, genasi tend 
toward a neutral alignment. 

Size. Genasi are as varied as their mortal parents but 
are generally built like humans. Your size is Medium. 
Here’s how to determine your height and weight ran- 
domly, starting with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d10 
Height = 4 feet + 8 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 110 + (2d4 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Primordial. Primordial is a guttural language, filled 
with harsh syllables and hard consonants. 

Subraces. There are four major subraces of genasi: 
air genasi, earth genasi, fire genasi, and water genasi. 
Choose one of these subraces. 


AIR GENASI 

As an air genasi, you are descended from the djinn. As 
changeable as the weather, your moods shift from calm 
to wild and violent with little warning, but these storms 
rarely last long. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


N 


Air genasi typically have light blue skin, hair, and 
eyes. A faint but constant breeze accompanies them, 
tousling the hair and stirring the clothing. Some air ge- 
nasi speak with breathy voices, marked by a faint echo. 
A few display odd patterns in their flesh. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity score in- 
creases by 1. 

Unending Breath. You can hold your breath indefi- 
nitely while you're not incapacitated. 

Mingle with the Wind. You can cast the levitate spell 
once with this trait, requiring no material components, 
and you regain the ability to cast it this way when you 
finish a long rest. Constitution is your spellcasting abil- 
ity for this spell. 


EARTH GENASI 

As an earth genasi, you are descended from the cruel 
and greedy dao, though you aren’t necessarily evil. You 
have inherited some measure of control over earth, rev- 
eling in superior strength and solid power. You tend to 
avoid rash decisions, pausing long enough to consider 
your options before taking action. 

Elemental earth manifests differently from one indi- 
vidual to the next. Some earth genasi always have bits of 
dust falling from their bodies and mud clinging to their 
clothes, never getting clean no matter how often they 
bathe. Others are as shiny and polished as gemstones, 
with skin tones of deep brown or black, eyes sparkling 
like agates. Earth genasi can also have smooth metallic 
flesh, dull iron skin spotted with rust, a pebbled and 
rough hide, or even a coating of tiny embedded crystals. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score in- 
creases by 1. 

Earth Walk. You can move across difficult terrain 
made of earth and stone without expending ex- 
tra movement. 

Pass without Trace. You can cast the pass without 
trace spell once with this trait, requiring no material 
components, and you regain the ability to cast it this way 
when you finish a long rest. Constitution is your spell- 
casting ability for this spell. 


FIRE GENASI 

As a fire genasi, you have inherited the volatile mood 
and keen mind of the efreet. You tend toward impatience 
and making snap judgments. Rather than hide your dis- 
tinctive appearance, you exult in it. 

Nearly all fire genasi are feverishly hot as if burning 
inside, an impression reinforced by flaming red, coal- 
black, or ash-gray skin tones. The more human-looking 
have fiery red hair that writhes under extreme emotion, 
while more exotic specimens spot actual flames dancing 
on their heads. Fire genasi voices sound like crackling 
flames, and their eyes flare when angered. Some are ac- 
companied by the faint scent of brimstone. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Intelligence score in- 
creases by 1. 

Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60 feet of 
you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if it were 
dim light. Your ties to the Elemental Plane of Fire make 
your darkvision unusual: everything you see in darkness 
is a shade of red. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


Fire Resistance. You have resistance to fire damage. 

Reach to the Blaze. You know the produce flame 
cantrip. When you reach 3rd level, you can cast burning 
hands as a (st-level spell once with this trait, and you 
regain the ability to cast it this way when you finisha 
long rest. Constitution is your spellcasting ability for 
these spells. 


WATER GENASI 

The lapping of waves, the spray of sea foam on the wind, 
the ocean depths—these things call to your heart asa 
descendant of the turbulent marids. You wander freely 
and take pride in your independence, though others 
might consider you selfish. 

Most water genasi look as if they just finished bathing, 
with beads of moisture collecting on their skin and hair. 
They smell of fresh rain and clean water. Blue or green 
skin is common, and most have somewhat overlarge 
eyes, blue-black in color. A water genasi’s hair might 
float freely, swaying and waving as if underwater. Some 
have voices with undertones reminiscent of whale song 
or trickling streams. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score in- 
creases by 1. 

Acid Resistance. You have resistance to acid damage. 

Amphibious. You can breathe air and water. 

Swim. You have a swimming speed of 30 feet. 

Call to the Wave. You know the shape water cantrip 
(see below). When you reach 3rd level, you can cast cre- 
ate or destroy water as a 2nd-level spell once with this 
trait, and youregain the ability to cast it this way when 
you finish a long rest. Constitution is your spellcasting 
ability for these spells. 


SHAPE WATER 
Transmutation cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 30 feet 

Components: S 

Duration: Instantaneous or 1 hour (see below) 


You choose an area of water that you can see within 
range and that fits within a 5-foot cube. You manipulate 
it in one of the following ways: 


- You instantaneously move or otherwise change the 
flow of the water as you direct, up to 5 feet in any di- 
rection. This movement doesn’t have enough force to 
cause damage. 

« You cause the water to form into simple shapes 
and animate at your discretion. This change lasts 
for 1 hour. 

- You change the water’s color or opacity. The water 
must be changed in the same way throughout. This 
change lasts for 1 hour. 

- You freeze the water, provided that there are no crea- 
tures in it. The water unfreezes in 1 hour. 


If you cast this spell multiple times, you can have no 
more than two of its non-instantaneous effects active at 
atime, and you can dismiss such an effect as an action. 


GNOMES 


Gnomes are not native to Wildemount, and are relatively 
uncommon even in an age of swift boats from Marquet 
and flying airships from Tal’Dorei. They hail from the 
distant continent of Issylra and were largely content 

to remain there after the Calamity. In lands inhabited 

by people taller and stronger than them, gnomes often 
resort to living exclusively among other gnomes for 
their own security. This attitude has kept the gnomes of 
Wildemount safe for generations, but it has also instilled 
many gnomish societies with a pernicious strain of 
xenophobia. 


GNOMES IN THE 
DWENDALIAN EMPIRE 


Two major gnome ethnic groups exist within the Dwen- 
dalian Empire, one centered in the mountain-city of 
Hupperdook and the other in the wooded Velvin Thicket. 
The rock gnomes of Hupperdook originally settled the 
Silberquel Ridge, and formed their enclave as a defense 
against bandits and brigands who hunted their kind for 
sport. This settlement predated the rise of the empire, 
and after a long and unprecedented period of imperial 
diplomacy—rather than conquest—the Hupperdook 
gnomes were finally convinced to add their cultural 
knack for invention to the empire’s might. 

The forest gnomes of the Velvin Thicket have resisted 
imperial takeover for decades. As a result, though most 
people in the empire see gnomes as their loyal friends 
and allies, many folk in the empire’s western reaches 
view gnomes as obstinate, backcountry hicks. 


GNOMES ON THE MENAGERIE COAST 


Large numbers of gnomes live within the Clovis Con- 
cord, primarily in the city of Gwardan, where a group of 
gnomes who seceded from Hupperdook settled before 
the Concord’s founding. Just as the elves of Gwardan 
were the metaphorical architects of the original concor- 
dance that founded the nation of city-states, the gnomes 
of Gwardan were the literal architects of the Clovis Con- 
cord’s magnificent cities and halls of governance. A rock 
gnome by the name of Ionia Marbleweaver is revered as 
the grandmother of Concordian art and architecture for 
her innovative use of columns, frescoes, and friezes, all 
of which feature prominently in the great buildings of 
the Menagerie Coast’s cities. 


GNOMES IN XHORHAS 


Most Xhorhasians’ only contact with gnomes is a brief 
glimpse of a deep gnome scurrying about the Underdark 
carrying armfuls of gems. The deep gnomes have little 
interest in surface politics, and even try to stay neutral 
in the underground war between the Kryn Dynasty and 
the duergar rebels. For the most part, the deep gnomes 
and their settlements are small enough to remain unno- 
ticed by larger folk. 


GOBLINKIN 


The civilized people of the world consider goblins to 

be nothing more than monsters—and in many ways, 
they're right. Goblins and their cousins, the hobgoblins 
and bugbears, were first created by Bane, the Strife 
Emperor, as foot soldiers for his unholy army. Eons 
ago, when the flames of the Calamity burned across 
Exandria, the Betrayer Gods gathered in the realm that 
would eventually become Xhorhas. There, they found a 
people known as the dranassar. An ancestor race to the 
goblinoids, the dranassar were tall and beautiful, strong 
of body and mind, and fleet of foot. Their hair was thick 
and black, and their skin gleamed like gold. Most of the 
dranassar willingly served the divine beings that de- 
scended upon their land, but a few fought back against 
the Betrayer Gods’ rule. 

Bane, a cruel tyrant even among the Betrayer Gods, 
smote the rebellious dranassar and twisted them into 
the goblinkin. When the armies of the Betrayer Gods 
wanted for skirmishers, Bane twisted the dranassar 
into goblins. When he was in need of loyal soldiers, he 
made them into hobgoblins. And when brute force was 
required, he sculpted them into bugbears. As the war of 
gods and mortals raged on, Bane corrupted even those 
dranassar who remained loyal to him. 

The Betrayer Gods are long since defeated, but the 
goblinkin survived—leaderless, lost, and fallen into 
chaos. It is said that the voice of Bane still whispers into 
the minds of the goblinkin, goading them to commit 
senseless acts of cruelty against all they see. 

Few goblins can steel their will against Bane’s foul 
whispers, but those who do live peaceful lives free of the 
god’s influence. Likewise, people who are transfigured 
into goblins or reborn as goblins do not hear the voice of 
Bane, and are free from his curse of strife. 


GOBLINKIN IN THE 
DWENDALIAN EMPIRE 


Goblins living in Western Wynandir form small tribal 
groups and do their best to evade the vigilant eye of the 
imperial army. The fearsome soldiers of the Righteous 
Brand, known to the goblins as drohurror or “terror- 
folk,” are the greatest threat to the tribes. But with gob- 
lins treated as little better than vermin throughout the 
empire, any imperial citizen strong enough to wield a 
pitchfork can be a threat in their own right. 

With most goblins in the empire tormented by Bane’s 
homicidal whispers, the people of the empire are just as 
fearful of goblinkin as the goblins are of them. Farmers 
and folk in rural regions such as the southern Marrow 
Valley take special precautions against goblin raids, and 
kill goblins on sight as if they were marauding animals. 
Even goblins who manage to free themselves of Bane’s 
influence are hard-pressed to overcome the fears of the 
empire’s rural folk. By contrast, city dwellers are rarely 
exposed to goblin raiders, and though they might react 
with suspicion and fear when seeing a goblin on the 
street, most are more accepting of the notion that not all 
goblins are evil. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 173 


“I 


GOBLINKIN ON THE 
MENAGERIE COAST 


Goblins are a rare sight on the Menagerie Coast, so 
most folk who live there know of them only through 
folklore and stories told by travelers. With visitors from 
the Dwendalian Empire, the realms of Tal’Dorei, and 
Marquet common on the coast, most of those stories 
are tales of the vicious goblins of the Ravager horde of 
Tal’Dorei or the fearsome Duneburrow goblins of the 
far-off Marquesian deserts, painting a deeply unwhole- 
some picture of goblinkin. 

People living along the northern Menagerie Coast, in 
cities such as Gwardan, have firsthand accounts of the 
goblins and bugbears who have recently settled in the 
Lushgut Forest. Those who worship the Wild Mother in 
Gwardan have long seen the forest as one of her most 
sacred places, and initially reacted with fear to the for- 
est’s “monstrous invaders.” But with the bugbears and 
goblins having freed themselves of Bane’s corrupting 
influence through druidic meditation, they are slowly 
fostering friendship with the people of Gwardan. 


Ae 


GOBLINKIN AND THE CURSE OF STRIFE 


The term “goblinkin” refers to three types of related peo- 
ples: goblins, hobgoblins, and bugbears. All three are 
affected by Bane’s curse of strife, allowing his foul voice 
to prey upon their minds from beyond the Divine Gate. 
Goblinkin who manage to overcome Bane’s curse are freed 
from the compulsion that leads them to evil. Unless the 
goblinkin was freed near birth, however, they have likely 
internalized their bias toward law, chaos, or neutrality, and 
might retain that aspect of their alignment even after the 
curse is broken. 

Itis nearly impossible for a goblinkin to break Bane’s 
curse on their own. Only those who undergo particularly 
traumatic events or are shown exceptional compassion 
typically find the inner strength to do so. Whenever a 
goblinkin returns to consciousness after being reduced to 
0 hit points, they can make a DC 20 Wisdom saving throw, 
with advantage if they were brought back to life. On a 
success, the goblinkin breaks free from the curse of strife. 
A goblinkin targeted by remove curse can also make this 
saving throw, with advantage on the save if the caster is a 
trusted companion. 

Many bugbears are cleansed of the curse from birth by 
a druidic order of bugbears who managed to break free 
from Bane’s influence decades ago. These bugbears never 
develop a chaotic, isolationist nature, and readily band to- 
gether with druids and other defenders of the wilderness. 

Goblins who suffer from the curse of strife are typically 
neutral evil, goaded by Bane to commit acts of wanton 
destruction and malice among the folk of the mortal races 
that opposed him in the Calamity. Hobgoblins afflicted by 
the curse of strife are almost exclusively lawful evil, and 
are urged toward acts of conquest. Their societies are reg- 
imented like military dictatorships, and hobgoblin despots 
are the scourges of whole nations. Bugbears who suffer 
under Bane’s influence are typically chaotic evil, and are 
commanded to isolate themselves from all bonds and ties 
of camaraderie so as to maximize the suffering of those 
they brutalize. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


GOBLINKIN IN XHORHAS 


Goblins, hobgoblins, and bugbears are a common sight 
in Xhorhas, especially around Rosohna—for it was here 
that Bane first created the goblinkin from the noble 
dranassar. The people of the Kryn Dynasty have made 
efforts to forge close ties with the goblinkin who have 
made their home in the region, and have even managed 
to subvert the curse of strife by the power of the Luxon. 
Any creature reborn into a goblinkin body is born 
without the curse, and any natural-born goblin born 
within one hundred miles of a Luxon beacon is likewise 
shielded from Bane’s seed of corruption. 


BUGBEAR RACIAL TRAITS 


A bugbear character has the following racial traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score in- 
creases by 2, and your Dexterity score increases by 1. 

Age. Bugbears reach adulthood at age 16 and live up 
to 80 years. 

Alignment. Bugbears value self-sufficiency and vio- 
lence. They are generally chaotic, organizing in loose 
tribes under charismatic and powerful leaders. 

Size. Bugbears are between 6 and 8 feet tall and 
weigh between 250 and 350 pounds. Your size is Me- 
dium. Here’s how to determine your height and weight 
randomly, starting with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d12 
Height = 6 feet + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 200 + (2d6 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60 feet 
of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if it 
were dim light. You can’t discern color in darkness, only 
shades of gray. 

Long-Limbed. When you make a melee attack on your 
turn, your reach for it is 5 feet greater than normal. 

Powerful Build. You count as one size larger when 
determining your carrying capacity and the weight you 
can push, drag, or lift. 

Sneaky. You are proficient in the Stealth skill. 

Surprise Attack. If you surprise a creature and hit it 
with an attack on your first turn in combat, the attack 
deals an extra 2d6 damage to it. You can use this trait 
only once per combat. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Goblin. 


GOBLIN RACIAL TRAITS 


A goblin character has the following racial traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity score 
increases by 2, and your Constitution score in- 
creases by 1. 

Age. Goblins reach adulthood at age 8 and live up 
to 60 years. 

Alignment. Goblins tend to look out for themselves, 
preferably without drawing unwanted attention from any 
larger and more powerful people. 

Size. Goblins are between 3 and 4 feet tall and weigh 
between 40 and 80 pounds. Your size is Small. Here’s 


how to determine your height and weight randomly, 
starting with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d4 
Height = 3 feet + 5 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 35 + your size modifier 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60 feet 
of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if it 
were dim light. You can’t discern color in darkness, only 
shades of gray. 

Fury of the Small. When you damage a creature with 
an attack or a spell and the creature’s size is larger than 
yours, you can cause the attack or spell to deal extra 
damage to the creature. The extra damage equals your 
level. Once you use this trait, you can’t use it again until 
you finish a short or long rest. 

Nimble Escape. You can take the Disengage or Hide 
action as a bonus action on each of your turns. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Goblin. 


HOBGOBLIN RACIAL TRAITS 


A hobgoblin character has the following racial traits. 
Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution score in- 
creases by 2, and your Intelligence score increases by 1. 
Age. Hobgoblins mature at the same rate as humans 

and have lifespans similar in length to theirs. 
Alignment. Hobgoblins adhere to a strict code of 
honor and a rigid idea of martial discipline. Most are 
lawful, tending toward harsh enforcement of their laws. 
Size. Hobgoblins are between 5 and 6 feet tall and 
weigh between 150 and 200 pounds. Your size is Me- 
dium. Here’s how to determine your height and weight 
randomly, starting with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d10 
Height = 4 feet + 8 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 110 + (2d4 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60 feet 
of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if it 
were dim light. You can’t discern color in darkness, only 
shades of gray. 

Martial Training. You are proficient with two martial 
weapons of your choice and with light armor. 

Saving Face. Hobgoblins are careful not to show 
weakness in front of their allies, for fear of losing status. 
If you miss with an attack roll or fail an ability check or 
a saving throw, you can gain a bonus to the roll equal to 
the number of allies you can see within 30 feet of you 
(maximum bonus of +5). Once you use this trait, you 
can’t use it again until you finish a short or long rest. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Goblin. 


GOLIATHS 


The goliaths of Exandria are a mighty people with stone 
giant blood running in their veins. Most stand well over 

seven feet tall and are blessed with a naturally powerful 
physique. Like their stone giant progenitors, goliaths are 


GOLIATHS 


a rare sight in Wildemount. Most live on isolated peaks 
in the Cyrios Mountains, the Penumbra Range, and 

on the isolated land of Eiselcross. Those few goliaths 
who are exiled from their herds and wander into more 
densely peopled lands are uniformly greeted with fear 
and confusion. 

Goliaths have a compulsion to compete and keep 
score, counting their deeds and tallying their accom- 
plishments to compare to others. Goliaths love to win, 
but they see defeat as a prod to improve their skills. 
Above all else, they are driven to outdo their past efforts. 
Few goliaths reach old age, as most die attempting to 
surpass their past achievements. 

Among goliaths, any adult who can’t or won't con- 
tribute to the herd is expelled. A lone goliath has little 
chance of survival, especially an older or weaker one. 
Goliaths have little pity for adults who can’t take care 
of themselves, though a sick or injured individual is 
treated, as a result of the goliath concept of fair play. 


GOLIATH NAMES 


Every goliath has three names: a birth name assigned 
by the newborn’s mother and father, a nickname as- 
signed by the herd’s chief, and a family or herd name. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


“I 


Goliath Birth Names: Aukan, Eglath, Gauthak, Ilikan, 
Keothi, Kuori, Lo-Kag, Manneo, Maveith, Nalla, Orilo, 
Pethani, Thalai, Thotham, Uthal, Vaunea, Vimak 

Goliath Nicknames: Bearkiller, Fearless, Horncarver, 
Keeneye, Lonehunter, Rootsmasher, Steadyhand, 
Twice-Orphaned, Twistedlimb, Wordpainter 

Goliath Herds: Anakalathai, Elanithino, Gathakanathi, 
Kalagiano, Katho-Olavi, Kolae-Gileana, Ogolakanu, 
Thuliaga, Thunukalathi, Vaimei-Laga 


GOLIATH TRAITS 


A goliath character has the following racial traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score increases 
by 2, and your Constitution score increases by 1. 

Age. Goliaths have lifespans comparable to humans. 
They enter adulthood in their late teens and usually live 
less than a century. 

Alignment. Goliath society, with its clear roles and 
tasks, has a strong lawful bent. The goliath sense of fair- 
ness, balanced with an emphasis on self-sufficiency and 
personal accountability, pushes them toward neutrality. 

Size. Goliaths stand between 7 and 8 feet tall and 
weigh between 280 and 340 pounds. Your size is Me- 
dium. Here’s how to determine your height and weight 
randomly, starting with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d10 
Height = 6 feet + 2 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 200 + (2d6 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Natural Athlete. You have proficiency in the Ath- 
letics skill. 

Stone’s Endurance. You can focus yourself to occa- 
sionally shrug off injury. When you take damage, you 
can use your reaction to roll a d12. Add your Constitu- 
tion modifier to the number rolled, and reduce the dam- 
age by that total. After you use this trait, you can’t use it 
again until you finish a short or long rest. 

Powerful Build. You count as one size larger when 
determining your carrying capacity and the weight you 
can push, drag, or lift. 

Mountain Born. You're acclimated to high altitude, 
including elevations above 20,000 feet. You're also natu- 
rally adapted to cold climates, as described in chapter 5 
of the Dungeon Master's Guide. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Giant. 

A i= 

ROLEPLAYING A KENKU 

If you're playing a kenku, constant attempts to mimic 

voices can come across as confusing or irritating rather 

than entertaining. You can just as easily describe the 

sounds your character makes and what they mean. Be 

clear about your character’s intentions unless you're delib- 

erately aiming for inscrutable or mysterious. 

You might say, “Snapper makes the noise of a ham- 

mer slowly and rhythmically tapping a stone to show 

how bored he is. He plays with his dagger and studies 

the Cobalt Soul agent sitting at the bar.” Creating a vo- 

cabulary of noises for the other players to decode might 


sound like fun, but it can prove distracting and could slow 
down the game. 


G A 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


HALF-ELVES 


Half-elves occupy all lands where humans and elves 
gather. In ancient times, the appearance of half-elves 
was a cause for alarm in elven society, for prejudiced 
elves saw the union between elves and humans as a 
symptom of impurity in their blood and culture. Such 
attitudes have cooled across the continent in recent cen- 
turies, and most elven societies now feature a diverse 
array of people—notably the pluralistic union of dwarves 
and elves in the city-state of Uthodurn and the diverse 
peoples of the Kryn Dynasty. 


HALF-ELVES IN THE 
DWENDALIAN EMPIRE 


The Dwendalian Empire sees half-elves as a sign that 
imperial rule is healthy, and that people are traveling 
across and strengthening the bonds ofits disparate 
provinces. However, this belief is less pervasive in the 
elven enclave of Bysaes Tyl, which was coerced into 
joining the empire decades ago. The elves of Bysaes Tyl 
are dedicated to maintaining a tenuous grasp on their 
lost realm of Molaesmyr, and any elf who bears a non-elf 
child is considered a traitor to their ancient culture. 


HALF-ELVES ON THE 
MENAGERIE COAST 


In some ways, the Clovis Concord can be considered a 
half-elf nation, founded as it was by the native human 
Ki’ Nau people and by elf and human settlers from 
Marquet. Half-elves are also a common sight arriving 
on passenger ships from Tal’Dorei. The elves of Syn- 
gorn, the center of elven culture in Tal’Doreéi, still hold 
a shameful and outdated view of their half-elf children, 
many of whom seek passage or stow away on ships to 
the Menagerie Coast to start new lives. 


HALF-ELVES IN XHORHAS 


Half-elves of all different ancestries dwell within the 
lands of the Kryn, with most having one dark elf parent. 
The idea of elves forming relationships and even having 
children with people of other humanoid races has long 
since been accepted throughout Kryn lands—so much 
so that it seems somewhat unnatural when people 
outside the culture express surprise at half-elves with 
small, minotaur-like horns, or with the tufted ears and 
yellow eyes of a bugbear. 


KENKU 


In ancient times, kenku were black-winged angels—am- 
bassadors who served the Raven Queen as her emissar- 
ies of death. Their voices were once heard across entire 
planes, calling the dead to the Raven Queen’s embrace. 
The kenku likewise served as her loyal warriors in the 
Calamity, and even saved her froma near-fatal encoun- 
ter with the Betrayer God known as Tharizdun. 
Though the kenku saved the Raven Queen from obliv- 
ion, all of her black-winged emissaries were consumed 
by Tharizdun’s infinite void. For long years, the kenku 
were thought to have been annihilated, and it was only 


when Tharizdun was defeated and chained by the god 
Ioun near the Calamity’s end that they were freed. 

When the godssealed themselves behind the Divine 
Gate, the Raven Queen realized what her emissaries 
had sacrificed to save her. Though the kenku survived 
oblivion, they returned as mortals, stripped of all the di- 
vine gifts their god had bestowed on them: their voices, 
their wings, and all memories of their past existence. 
Bearing Tharizdun’s curse of oblivion, the kenku were 
reduced to squat beings that could speak only by mim- 
icking the words of others. 

Kenku exist across Wildemount in small numbers. 
Considered by most to be monsters, they keep to them- 
selves as a result, always longing for something they 
can neither ask for nor explain. Something in a kenku’s 
mind stirs when it looks to the sky and see birds fly- 
ing freely—an ancient longing, and a memory trapped 
within oblivion. 


KENKU NAMES 


Kenku names are drawn from a staggering variety of 
noises and phrases. Kenku names tend to break down 
into three categories that make no distinction between 
male and female names. 

Kenku thugs, warriors, and toughs adopt noises made 
by weapons, such as the clang of a mace against armor 
or the sound made by a breaking bone. Non-kenku refer 
to the kenku by describing this noise. Sample names 
include Smasher, Clanger, Slicer, and Basher. 

Kenku thieves, con artists, and burglars adopt animal 
noises, typically those common in urban settings. In this 
manner, kenku can call out to each other while those 
who overhear them mistake them for common animals. 
Non-kenku use names that refer to the sound made or 
the animal a kenku mimics, such as Rat Scratch, Whis- 
tler, Mouser, and Growler. 

Some kenku are law-abiding and pursue legitimate 
trades. These kenku adopt noises made as part of their 
craft. A sailor duplicates the sound of a fluttering sail, 
while a smith mimics the clanging of a hammer on 
metal. Non-kenku describe these folk by their trade 
sounds, such as Sail Snap, Hammerer, and Cutter. 


KENKU TRAITS 


A kenku character has the following racial traits. 
Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity score in- 
creases by 2, and your Wisdom score increases by 1. 
Age. Kenku have shorter lifespans than humans. They 
reach maturity at about 12 years old and can live to 60. 
Alignment. Kenku are chaotic creatures, rarely mak- 
ing enduring commitments, and they care mostly for 
preserving their own hides. They are generally chaotic 
neutral in outlook. 
Size. Kenku are around 5 feet tall and weigh between 
90 and 120 pounds. Your size is Medium. Here’s how 
to determine your height and weight randomly, starting 
with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d8 
Height = 4 feet + 4 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 50 + (1d6 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Expert Forgery. You can duplicate other creatures’ 
handwriting and craftwork. You have advantage on all 
checks made to produce forgeries or duplicates of exist- 
ing objects. 

Kenku Training. You are proficient in your choice 
of two of the following skills: Acrobatics, Deception, 
Stealth, and Sleight of Hand. 

Mimicry. You can mimic sounds you have heard, 
including voices. A creature that hears the sounds you 
make can tell they are imitations with a successful Wis- 
dom (Insight) check contested by your Charisma (De- 
ception) check. 

Languages. You can read and write Auran and Com- 
mon, but you can speak only by using your Mimicry trait. 


ORCS AND HALF-ORCS 


The first half-orcs in Wildemount were born of a union 
between human warriors and orc traitors in the final 
days of the Calamity. Orcs are one of Exandria’s young- 
est races, and are said to have been born from elves 
seared by the blood of Gruumsh, the Ruiner, when 
Corellon pierced the orc god’s eye on the field of battle. 
For long years, orcs were feared as mindless abomina- 
tions, drawn to slaughter like moths to flame. 

Stories tell of how the blood of the Ruiner flows in the 
veins of all orcs, driving them to commit acts of terrible 
violence and anger. Orcs call this fury hgar’Gruum, or 
the curse of ruin, and use it to refer to everything from 
battle rage to a bad temper. Half-orcs are said to have 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


inherited the blood of the Ruiner, and to carry the same 
bloodlust and fury that orcs do. 

Orcs and half-orcs do feel a certain pull toward vio- 
lence and anger. But the simple truth is that there is no 
curse of ruin. No supernatural power drives orcs to kill. 
Rather, they are simply victims of the same selfish, vio- 
lent impulses that corrupt all mortal beings. 


HALF-ORGCS IN THE 
DWENDALIAN EMPIRE 


The orcish settlement of Bladegarden was incorporated 
into the Dwendalian Empire after the fall of the Julous 
Dominion, nearly three hundred years ago. Orcs are 
now renowned as some of the empire’s most accom- 
plished soldiers, though many folk still fear the ancient 
legends of the curse of ruin. 

Half-orcs are proud of their heritage, though many are 
wary of the wrathful curse that supposedly drives them 
to violence. Those who embrace this gift of fury often 
enlist in the Righteous Brand to focus their rage against 
the enemies of the empire. Other half-orcs reject the 
idea that they are destined for violence, and rely on faith, 
meditation, and friendship to live peaceful lives. 


HALF-ORCS ON THE 
MENAGERIE COAST 


The folk of the Clovis Concord welcome people of all 
kinds to their shores, yet orcs and half-orcs are un- 
common in Concordian cities. Most half-orcs on the 
Menagerie Coast come from the continent of Tal’Dorei 
as visitors, merchants, or mercenaries, and rarely settle. 
Half-orc children in the settlements of the coast are of- 
ten bullied for their unusual teeth. 

Only the Concordian city of Othe has a significant 
half-orc population. Originally established as a spiritual 
site for the Ki’Nau people, the city has long attracted 
orcs and half-orcs who believe that the curse of ruin has 
caused them to lash out at those they love. In Othe, they 
find peace through spiritualism—and a place to belong. 


HALF-ORCS IN XHORHAS 


The orcs of Xhorhas are a predominantly nomadic 
people, living in mixed clans of orcs, humans, and bug- 
bears. They wander the wastes, taming the indigenous 
beasts and trading with Kryn settlements. The relation- 
ship between the orcs and the Kryn is relatively peace- 
ful, though many nomadic orcs are angered when Kryn 
souls are reborn in orc bodies. These orcs nonetheless 
readily accept Kryn into their roving clans, seeing it as 
a point of pride that a city dweller has been drawn toa 
more exciting life in the chaos of the wastes. 

Most half-orcs in Xhorhas have human or drow blood. 
In the culture of the Xhorhasian nomads, the union of 
orcs and goblinkin is strictly taboo, for the clans’ elders 
fear the uncontrolled madness of a soul afflicted by both 
Gruumsh’s curse of ruin and Bane’s curse of strife. 


Orc TRAITS 


Exandrian orcs are not bound to commit acts of evil by 
nature. An orc character has the following racial traits. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score 
increases by 2, and your Constitution score in- 
creases by 1. 

Age. Orcs reach adulthood at age 16, and live up 
to 80 years. 

Alignment. Orcs fear the curse of ruin that is said to 
plague their race, and tend strongly toward either chaos 
(accepting their fate), or toward law (rejecting it). 

Size. Orcs stand easily 8 feet tall and corded with 
powerful muscles, weighing up to 280 pounds. Your size 
is Medium. Here’s how to determine your height and 
weight randomly, starting with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d8 
Height = 5 feet + 4 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 175 + (2d6 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60 feet 
of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if it 
were dim light. You can’t discern color in darkness, only 
shades of gray. 

Aggressive. As a bonus action, you can move up to 
your speed toward an enemy of your choice that you can 
see or hear. You must end this move closer to the enemy 
than you started. 

Powerful Build. You count as one size larger when 
determining your carrying capacity and the weight you 
can push, drag, or lift. 

Primal Intuition. Y ou have proficiency in two skills of 
your choice from the following list: Animal Handling, In- 
sight, Intimidation, Medicine, Perception, and Survival. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Com- 
mon and Orc. 


TABAXI 


The catlike tabaxi are an agile, witty, and playful folk 
who have long lived among the indigenous Ki’Nau peo- 
ple of the Menagerie Coast and in the cold northern 
forests of the Greying Wildlands. Said to have been 
born from the dreams of Melora within the jungles of 
Wildemount’s more temperate regions, they are natural 
hunters with keen senses and predatory instincts. The 
tabaxi of Exandria are also well known for their social 
guile. Many are taken with a love of wordplay and de- 
bate, often engaging travelers in philosophical conversa- 
tions meant to challenge the intellect and to subtly gauge 
the disposition of strangers. 

Tabaxi can be found in small numbers throughout 
Wildemount and are generally well thought of. Some 
make up small clans in the wilderness beyond the 
boundaries of Wildemount’s major societies. Others are 
content to stand out among the other folk of those larger 
nations. Deft at crafts, hunting, and commercial enter- 
prises, many tabaxi find themselves drawn toward an 
entrepreneurial existence, while some fall naturally into 
the more dangerous pursuits of an adventurer’s lifestyle. 

Politics hold a conversational curiosity for some, but 
only afew tabaxi are driven enough to ascend to posi- 
tions of political power, most commonly along the Me- 
nagerie Coast. Even so, most catfolk are happier away 
from the limelight, slyly convincing others to visibly take 
the risks for them. 


FLEETING FANCIES 


Wandering tabaxi are mercurial creatures, trading one 


obsession or passion for the next as the whim strikes. A 
tabaxi’s desire burns bright, but once met it disappears 
to be replaced with a new obsession. Objects remain in- 
triguing only as long as they still hold secrets. 

A tabaxi rogue could happily spend months plotting 
to steal a strange gem from a noble, only to trade it for 
passage on a ship or a week’s lodging after stealing it. 
The tabaxi might even take extensive notes or memorize 
every facet of the gem before passing it on, but the gem 
holds no more allure once its secrets and nature have 
been laid bare. 


TABAXI NAMES 


Each tabaxi has a single name, determined by clan 


and based on a complex formula that involves astrol- 
ogy, prophecy, clan history, and other esoteric factors. 
Tabaxi names can apply to all genders, and most use 
nicknames derived from or inspired by their full names. 
Clan names are usually based on a geographical feature 
located in or near the clan’s territory. 

The following list of sample tabaxi names includes 
nicknames in parentheses. 


Tabaxi Names: Cloud on the Mountaintop (Cloud), Five 
Timber (Timber), Flask of Wine (Flask), Jade Shoe 
(Jade), Left-Handed Hummingbird (Bird), Seven 
Thundercloud (Thunder), Skirt of Snakes (Snake), 
Smoking Mirror (Smoke) 

Tabaxi Clans: Bright Cliffs, Distant Rain, Moun- 
tain Tree, Red Butterfly, Rumbling River, Snor- 
ing Mountain 


TABAXI TRAITS 


A tabaxi character has the following racial traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity score in- 
creases by 2, and your Charisma score increases by 1. 

Age. Tabaxi have lifespans equivalent to humans. 

Alignment. Tabaxi tend toward chaotic alignments, 
as they let impulse and fancy guide their decisions. They 
are rarely evil, with most of them driven by curiosity 
rather than greed and other dark impulses. 

Size. Tabaxi are taller on average than humans and 
relatively slender. Your size is Medium. Here’s how to 
determine your height and weight randomly, starting 
with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d10 
Height = 4 feet + 10 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 90 + (2d4 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60 feet 
of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if it 
were dim light. You can’t discern color in darkness, only 
shades of gray. 

Feline Agility. Your reflexes and agility allow you to 
move with a burst of speed. When you move on your 
turn in combat, you can double your speed until the end 
of the turn. Once you use this trait, you can’t use it again 
until you move 0 feet on one of your turns. 


TABAXI 


Cat’s Claws. Because of your claws, you have a climb- 
ing speed of 20 feet. In addition, your claws are natural 
weapons, which you can use to make unarmed strikes. 
If you hit with them, you deal slashing damage equal to 
1d4 + your Strength modifier, instead of the bludgeoning 
damage normal for an unarmed strike. 

Cat’s Talent. You have proficiency in the Perception 
and Stealth skills. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and one other language of your choice. 


‘TIEFLINGS 


Centuries have passed since the tieflings first faced 
persecution for their fiendish heritage in the Age of 
Arcanum. Although a certain mystique still surrounds 
their kind, most people in Wildemount grew up along- 
side tieflings, and the tides of war have brought tiefling 
soldiers, merchants, and entertainers into even the most 
rural and isolated regions of the continent. For the most 
part, only overzealously devout paladins and folk raised 
on the dark tales of an ancient age might actively wish 
harm on tieflings. 

Exandrian tieflings have a wide array of skin tones, all 
of them vibrant and colorful. The most common hue is 
a deep crimson, but shades of purple, blue, green, and 
even yellow and pink have been seen throughout the 
world. It’s not known what causes these variations, as 
even tiefling parents with the same skin tone can have 
children of wildly different colors. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


179 


180 


TIEFLINGS IN THE 
DWENDALIAN EMPIRE 


Most imperial tieflings live in the cities of the empire 

or in small communes in the countryside. Many are 
encouraged by their parents to join the Crownsguard or 
the Righteous Brand to valiantly serve the empire, and 
a direct connection can be drawn between the tieflings’ 
ancient persecution and their focus on military service. 
Centuries ago, countless tieflings joined the armies 

of the Julous Dominion in hopes of winning glory and 
proving themselves the equals of their oppressors. 
Over time, many found acceptance in the eyes of the 
Julous people and its government, eventually becoming 
hardline loyalists of the Julous Dominion. Their spirits 
were thus crushed when the dominion fell to the mighty 
armies of the invading Dwendalian Empire. 

Three generations have passed since the fall of the 
dominion, and many adult tieflings still remember the 
war stories their grandparents told them as children. 
The empire’s propagandists have been quick to capital- 
ize on this, stoking a hunger for glory that sees the lives 
of eager tieflings fuel the imperial war machine. 


TIEFLING 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


TIEFLINGS ON THE 
MENAGERIE COAST 


Tieflings’ extravagant skin tones and striking horns 

are considered attractive in the culture of the Clovis 
Concord, and many tieflings have capitalized on this re- 
action to become entertainers. Some of the best-known 
tiefling actors, gladiators, and musicians found their 
start on the Menagerie Coast—as have innumerable en- 
tertainers of the bawdier sort, including the prominent 
Nicodranas courtesan known as Ruby of the Sea. Many 
such performers have gone on to perform at the court of 
King Bertrand Dwendal, or to tour the distant lands of 
Tal’Dorei and Marquet. 


TIEFLINGS IN XHORHAS 


Some legends talk of how the first tieflings were born 

in Ghor Dranas. Asmodeus, Lord of the Nine Hells, is 
said to have tempted a number of that city’s original in- 
habitants into tying their bloodlines to his own infernal 
power in exchange for magical knowledge. Though the 
truth of the tale is impossible to confirm, Rosohna main- 
tains a significant tiefling population, and tieflings are a 
common sight in Kryn society. 


TORTLES 


For centuries, the people of Xhorhas and the Dwenda- 
lian Empire believed tortles to be a hoax concocted by 
Concordian hucksters. In truth, tortles are an ancient 
and long-lived people who dwell within the jungles and 
along the beaches of the Menagerie Coast. Most tortles 
who journey far from the coast begin to feel pangs of 
homesickness, which can develop into a depression. 

Tortles are almost unheard of beyond the sunny 
shores of the Menagerie Coast. 


LIFE OF A TORTLE 


A tortle hatches from a thick-shelled egg and spends 
the first few weeks of its life crawling on all fours. Its 
parents, old and near death, spend what little time they 
have left telling stories to their offspring. Within a year, 
the young tortle becomes an orphan, though not before 
it learns to speak and to survive on its own. 

A young tortle and its siblings inherit whatever tools, 
weapons, and gifts their parents left behind. Each young 
tortle is expected to fend for itself. It leaves the place of 
its birth and finds its own corner of the wilderness in 
which to hunt, catch fish, and get by. With each passing 
year, a tortle hones its survival skills. It forms friend- 
ships with its neighbors while also respecting their 
privacy. At some point, a tortle feels an urge to see more 
of the world. It gathers up its gear and travels, returning 
months or years later with stories of its exploits. 

When atortle nears the end of its lifespan, it seeks 
out a mate. Tortles lay their eggs (numbering as few as 
one or as many as a dozen) in a fortified compound. If 
no such compound exists, they build one. The parents 
spend the remainder of their lives guarding it, defending 
their offspring, and sharing their knowledge. When the 
children grow up, they pick up whatever weapons and 
tools their parents left behind and set out on their own. 


TORTLE NAMES 


Tortles prefer non-gender-specific names that are usu- 
ally no more than two syllables. Tortles don’t have sur- 
names or family names. 


Male and Female Names: Baka, Damu, Gar, Gura, Ini, 
Jappa, Kinlek, Krull, Lim, Lop, Nortle, Nulka, Olo, 
Ploqwat, Quee, Queg, Quott, Sunny, Tibor, Ubo, Uhok, 
Wabu, Xelbuk, Xopa, Yog 


TORTLE TRAITS 


A tortle character has the following racial traits. 
Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score in- 
creases by 2, and your Wisdom score increases by 1. 
Age. Young tortles crawl for a few weeks after birth 
before learning to walk on two legs. They reach adult- 
hood by the age of 15 and live an average of 50 years. 
Alignment. Tortles tend to lead orderly, ritualistic 
lives. They develop routines, becoming more set in their 
ways as they age. Most are lawful good. A few can be 
selfish and greedy, tending more toward evil, but it’s un- 
usual for a tortle to shuck off order in favor of chaos. 
Size. Tortle adults stand 5 to 6 feet tall and average 
about 450 pounds. Their shells account for roughly one- 
third of their weight. Your size is Medium. Here’s how 
to determine your height and weight randomly, starting 
with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d8 
Height = 4 feet + 10 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 400 + (2d4 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Claws. Your claws are natural weapons, which you 
can use to make unarmed strikes. If you hit with them, 
you deal slashing damage equal to 1d4 + your Strength 
modifier, instead of the bludgeoning damage normal for 
an unarmed strike. 

Hold Breath. You can hold your breath for up to 1 
hour at a time. Tortles aren’t natural swimmers, but they 
can remain underwater for some time before needing to 
come up for air. 

Natural Armor. Due to your shell and the shape of 
your body, you are ill-suited to wearing armor. Your shell 
provides ample protection, however; it gives you a base 
AC of 17 (your Dexterity modifier doesn’t affect this 
number). You gain no benefit from wearing armor, but if 
you are using a shield, you can apply the shield’s bonus 
as normal. 

Shell Defense. You can withdraw into your shell as 
an action. Until you emerge, you gain a +4 bonus to AC, 
and you have advantage on Strength and Constitution 
saving throws. While in your shell, you are prone, your 
speed is 0 and can’t increase, you have disadvantage on 
Dexterity saving throws, you can’t take reactions, and 
the only action you can take is a bonus action to emerge 
from your shell. 

Survival Instinct. You gain proficiency in the Survival 
skill. Tortles have finely honed survival instincts. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Aquan 
and Common. 


TortTLe 


HOLLOW ONE 


The eastern coast of Xhorhas, known to the Kryn as 
Blightshore, is a land scarred by evil magic. Among the 
creations of that foul place are the Hollow Ones, beings 
whose souls have left for the afterlife, yet whose bodies 
still retain a fragment of their former selves. 

The magic that sustains Hollow Ones is a mystery. 
Most Hollow Ones are reborn after dying in Blightshore, 
suggesting that the spell-scarred nature of the land 
brought them back for an unknown purpose. Yet some 
beings find that, days after they died, they awaken, 
clutching to life, with only a terrible emptiness inside to 
remind them of their death. 

In Blightshore, Hollow Ones are seen as a people like 
any other. They seem strange, but the adventurous and 
hardy folk of Blightshore are used to making allies with 
strange creatures. Elsewhere, Hollow Ones are indistin- 
guishable from living creatures, save for the faint stench 
of necromancy that lingers about them. 

The transition from life to becoming a Hollow One 
affects different people to different degrees. Some let 
their anger and regret consume them. Others use their 
second chance to become a brighter force in the world. 
However, all Hollow Ones are marked by their new exis- 
tence: feelings of unease, dread or sadness cling to them 
like tattered rags of their past life. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


181 


182 


ottow One 


SUPERNATURAL GIFT: HOLLOW ONE 


The Dungeon Master has the option to allow a character 
created in a Wildemount campaign to be a Hollow One. 
Alternatively, a character who perishes in the course of 
a campaign might return as a Hollow One, created by 
the mysterious forces that scar the land. 

As a Hollow One, the void left behind by your departed 
soul is filled with the strange magic of Blightshore. 
Becoming a Hollow One is a supernatural gift (see “Su- 
pernatural Gifts” in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master's 
Guide) that bestows upon you the following traits. 

Ageless. You don't age, and effects that would cause 
you to age don’t work on you. 

Cling to Life. When you make a death saving throw 
and roll 16 or higher, you regain 1 hit point. 

Revenance. You retain your creature type, yet you reg- 
ister as undead to spells and other effects that detect the 
presence of the undead creature type. 

Unsettling Presence. As an action, you can unset- 
tle a creature you can see within 15 feet of you. The 
target has disadvantage on the next saving throw it 
makes within the next minute. Constructs, undead, and 
creatures that can’t be frightened are immune to this 
feature. Once you use this feature, youcan’t use it again 
until you finish a long rest. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


SUBCLASSES 


This section includes three new subclass options: the 
Echo Knight for the fighter and Chronurgy Magic and 
Graviturgy Magic for the wizard. 


DUNAMIS AND DUNAMANCY 


Dunamis is the primal magical energy of potentiality 
and actuality, an anticipatory arcane force that helps 
shape the multiverse and might very well be what holds 
its elements together, like an infinite web of unseen 
tethers. Manifesting as a translucent gray energy that 
shimmers and drifts like an ethereal cloud of mist when 
gathered, dunamis darkens as it vibrates and condenses 
to the moment of action or invocation, manipulating fun- 
damental aspects of reality. Those who study to control 
and tap into this near-invisible power can subtly bend 
the flow of time and space by controlling the forces of 
localized gravity, peering into possible timelines to shift 
fate in their favor, and scattering the potential energy of 
their enemies to rob them of their potency. 

Dunamancy is an ancient, esoteric study of magic al- 
most unknown across Exandria. Facets of dunamancy 
have quietly bled into the more common applications of 
spellcraft like an unrealized glimpse behind the curtain 
of creation. Mages who pursue the study of this strange 
and complex force call themselves dunamancers, and 
their interest in learning to alter the fabric of gravity, 
potential, and time often coincides with a hunger to un- 
derstand the oldest mysteries of the cosmos. 


BEYOND THE KRYN DYNASTY 

Although the Kryn Dynasty is responsible for the care- 
fully guarded development and refining of dunamancy, 
the mysteries of this magical art have long since spread 
beyond the dynasty’s borders. The hidden secrets of 
harnessing dunamis eventually found their way into the 
hands of the Cerberus Assembly and have continued to 
slowly disseminate across all Wildemount as a result. 

If you are considering a character pursuing a path in- 
volving the manipulation of dunamis, you can easily tie 
your story into the Kryn Dynasty and the ready access 
to dunamancy it provides. But you can also consider 
where else in the world dunamancy might have spread, 
and how its secrets have influenced your character’s 
path. You might have stumbled into a cabal of defecting 
Kryn expatriates who teach you their ways, or you might 
have been entrusted with learning such secrets as a 
means of fighting the Kryn with their own power. Work 
with your Dungeon Master and figure out a fun and logi- 
cal way that your character and the mysterious power of 
dunamancy might have crossed paths. 

In campaigns outside Wildemount, there is no fac- 
tional control of dunamancy, so the implementation 
of this arcane discipline is entirely open. Talk to your 
Dungeon Master about how dunamancy might fit into 
their campaign, and how your character’s story could be 
woven into that lore. 


DUNAMIS AS A MARTIAL Focus 

Life is an extended series of choices. Every crossroads 
offers paths to different possibilities. The reality of each 
possible choice begins to coalesce as you approach the 
moment of decision, with multiple timelines humming 
with opportunity. Once a choice is made, one path 
sparks to life and continues while others fade, their en- 
ergy of potentiality diffusing into the multiverse. A rare 
few characters learn to invoke and harness this released 
dunamis in the throes of battle to enhance their martial 
capabilities—and such warriors are uniformly feared. 


FIGHTER 


The fighter takes many forms in Wildemount, from the 
grizzled mercenary who earns their keep by the might 
of their blade, to the dedicated soldier who fights for the 
banner of their homeland, to the hearty treasure hunter 
whose skill with a weapon is their finest asset. 

At 3rd level, a fighter gains the Martial Archetype 
class feature described in the Player’s Handbook. The 
Echo Knight is a new option for that feature. 


ECHO KNIGHT 


A mysterious and feared frontline warrior of the Kryn 
Dynasty, the Echo Knight has mastered the art of using 
dunamis to summon the fading shades of unrealized 
timelines to aid them in battle. Surrounded by echoes 
of their own might, they charge into the fray as a cycling 
swarm of shadows and strikes. 


MANIFEST ECHO 
3rd-level Echo Knight feature 


You can use a bonus action to magically manifest an 
echo of yourself in an unoccupied space you can see 
within 15 feet of you. This echo is a magical, translu- 
cent, gray image of you that lasts until it is destroyed, 
until you dismiss it as a bonus action, until you manifest 
another echo, or until you’re incapacitated. 

Your echo has AC 14 + your proficiency bonus, 1 hit 
point, and immunity to all conditions. If it has to make 
a saving throw, it uses your saving throw bonus for the 
roll. It is the same size as you, and it occupies its space. 
On your turn, you can mentally command the echo to 
move up to 30 feet in any direction (no action required). 
If your echo is ever more than 30 feet from you at the 
end of your turn, it is destroyed. 

You can use the echo in the following ways: 


« Asa bonus action, you can teleport, magically swap- 
ping places with your echo at a cost of 15 feet of your 
movement, regardless of the distance between the 
two of you. 

e When you take the Attack action on your turn, any 
attack you make with that action can originate from 
your space or the echo’s space. You make this choice 
for each attack. 

- When a creature that you can see within 5 feet of your 
echo moves at least 5 feet away from it, you can use 
your reaction to make an opportunity attack against 
that creature as if you were in the echo’s space. 


EcHo KNIGHT 


UNLEASH INCARNATION 
3rd-level Echo Knight feature 


You can heighten your echo’s fury. Whenever you take 
the Attack action, you can make one additional melee 
attack from the echo’s position. 

You can use this feature a number of times equal to 
your Constitution modifier (a minimum of once). You 
regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest. 


ECHO AVATAR 
7th-level Echo Knight feature 


You can temporarily transfer your consciousness to your 
echo. As an action, you can see through your echo’s eyes 
and hear through its ears. During this time, you are 
deafened and blinded. You can sustain this effect for up 
to 10 minutes, and you can end it at any time (requires 
no action). While your echo is being used in this way, 

it can be up to 1,000 feet away from you without being 
destroyed. 


SHADOW MARTYR 
10th-level Echo Knight feature 


You can make your echo throw itself in front of an attack 
directed at another creature that you can see. Before the 
attack roll is made, you can use your reaction to teleport 
the echo to an unoccupied space within 5 feet of the 
targeted creature. The attack roll that triggered the reac- 
tion is instead made against your echo. 

Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until 
you finish a short or long rest. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


RECLAIM POTENTIAL 
15th-level Echo Knight feature 


You’ve learned to absorb the fleeting magic of your echo. 


When an echo of yours is destroyed by taking damage, 
you can gain a number of temporary hit points equal to 
2d6 + your Constitution modifier, provided you don't al- 
ready have temporary hit points. 

You can use this feature a number of times equal to 
your Constitution modifier (a minimum of once). You 
regain all expended uses when you finish a long rest. 


LEGION OF ONE 
18th-level Echo Knight feature 


You can use a bonus action to create two echoes with 
your Manifest Echo feature, and these echoes can co- 
exist. If you try to create a third echo, the previoustwo 
echoes are destroyed. Anything you can do from one 
echo's position can be done from the other’s instead. 

In addition, when you roll initiative and have no uses 
of your Unleash Incarnation feature left, you regain one 
use of that feature. 


CHRONURGY 
WITARD 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


WIZARD 


The brightest minds of Wildemount often find them- 
selves gravitating to the ancient and dangerous study of 
magic. Some train for decades within the halls and tow- 
ers of academies, while others learn their craft in the 
shadows, keeping their discoveries to themselves. 

At 2nd level, a wizard gains the Arcane Tradition class 
feature described in the Player's Handbook. Chronurgy 
Magic and Graviturgy Magic are two new traditions 
available to wizards. 


CHRONURGY MAGIC 


Focusing on the manipulation of time, those who fol- 
low the Chronurgy tradition learn to alter the pace of 
reality to their liking. Using the ramping of anticipatory 
dunamis energy, these mages can bend the flow of time 
as adroitly as a skilled musician plays an instrument, 
lending themselves and their allies an advantage in the 
blink of an eye. 


CHRONAL SHIFT 
2nd-level Chronurgy Magic feature 


You can magically exert limited control over the flow 
of time around a creature. As a reaction, after you or 
a creature you can see within 30 feet of you makes an 
attack roll, an ability check, or a saving throw, you can 
force the creature to reroll. You make this decision after 
you see whether the roll succeeds or fails. The target 
must use the result of the second roll. 

You can use this ability twice, and you regain any 
expended uses when you finish a long rest. 


‘TEMPORAL AWARENESS 
2nd-level Chronurgy Magic feature 


You can add your Intelligence modifier to your initia- 
tive rolls. 


MOMENTARY STASIS 
6th-level Chronurgy Magic feature 


As an action, you can magically force a Large or smaller 
creature you can see within 60 feet of you to makea 
Constitution saving throw against your spell save DC. 
Unless the saving throw is a success, the creature is 
encased in a field of magical energy until the end of your 
next turn or until the creature takes any damage. While 
encased in this way, the creature is incapacitated and 
has a speed of 0. 

You can use this feature a number of times equal to 
your Intelligence modifier (a minimum of once). You re- 
gain all expended uses when you finish a long rest. 


ARCANE ABEYANCE 
10th-level Chronurgy Magic feature 


When you cast a spell using a spell slot of 4th level or 
lower, you can condense the spell’s magic into a mote. 
The spell is frozen in time at the moment of casting and 
held within a gray bead for 1 hour. This bead is a Tiny 


object with AC 15 and 1 hit point, and it is immune to 
poison and psychic damage. When the duration ends, 
or if the bead is destroyed, it vanishes in a flash of light, 
and the spell is lost. 

Acreature holding the bead can use its action to re- 
lease the spell within, whereupon the bead disappears. 
The spell uses your spell attack bonus and save DC, and 
the spell treats the creature who released it as the caster 
for all other purposes. 

Once you create a bead with this feature, you can’t do 
so again until you finish a short or long rest. 


CONVERGENT FUTURE 
14th-level Chronurgy Magic feature 


You can peer through possible futures and magically 
pull one of them into events around you, ensuring a 
particular outcome. When you or a creature you can 
see within 60 feet of you makes an attack roll, an ability 
check, or a saving throw, you can use your reaction to 
ignore the die roll and decide whether the number rolled 
is the minimum needed to succeed or one less than that 
number (your choice). 

When you use this feature, you gain one level of ex- 
haustion. Only by finishing a long rest can you remove a 
level of exhaustion gained in this way. 


GRAVITURGY MAGIC 


Understanding and mastering the forces that draw bod- 
ies of matter together or drive them apart, the students 
of the Graviturgy arcane tradition learn to further bend 
and manipulate the violent energy of gravity to their ben- 
efit, and the terrible detriment of their enemies. 


ADJUST DENSITY 
2nd-level Graviturgy Magic feature 


As an action, you can magically alter the weight of one 
object or creature you can see within 30 feet of you. The 
object or creature must be Large or smaller. The target’s 
weight is halved or doubled for up to 1 minute or until 
your concentration ends (as if you were concentrating 
on a spell). 

While the weight of a creature is halved by this effect, 
the creature’s speed increases by 10 feet, it can jump 
twice as far as normal, and it has disadvantage on 
Strength checks and Strength saving throws. While the 
weight of a creature is doubled by this effect, the crea- 
ture’s speed is reduced by 10 feet, and it has advantage 
on Strength checks and Strength saving throws. 

Upon reaching 10th level in this class, you can target 
an object or a creature that is Huge or smaller. 


GRAVITY WELL 
6th-level Graviturgy Magic feature 


You've learned how to manipulate gravity around a 
living being: whenever you cast a spell on a creature, 
you can move the target 5 feet to an unoccupied space 
of your choice if the target is willing to move, the spell 
hits it with an attack, or it fails a saving throw against 
the spell. 


GRAVITURGY d 
WITARO 2 5 
VIOLENT ATTRACTION 


10th-level Graviturgy Magic feature 


When another creature that you can see within 60 
feet of you hits with a weapon attack, you can use your 
reaction to increase the attack’s velocity, causing the 
attack’s target to take an extra 1d10 damage of the 
weapon’s type. 

Alternatively, if a creature within 60 feet of you takes 
damage from a fall, you can use your reaction to in- 
crease the fall’s damage by 2d10. 

You can use this feature a number of times equal to 
your Intelligence modifier (a minimum of once). You re- 
gain all expended uses when you finish a long rest. 


EVENT HORIZON 
14th-level Graviturgy Magic feature 


As an action, you can magically emit a powerful field of 
gravitational energy that tugs at other creatures for up to 
1 minute or until your concentration ends (as if you were 
concentrating on a spell). For the duration, whenever 
a creature hostile to you starts its turn within 30 feet 
of you, it must make a Strength saving throw against 
your spell save DC. On a failed save, it takes 2d10 force 
damage, and its speed is reduced to 0 until the start of 
its next turn. On a successful save, it takes half as much 
damage, and every foot it moves this turn costs 2 extra 
feet of movement. 

Once you use this feature, you can’t do so again until 
you finish a long rest or until you expend a spell slot of 
3rd level or higher on it. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


186 


DUNAMANCY SPELLS 


This section presents a sampling of spells developed 
through the manipulation of dunamis. These spells are 
available to the wizard subclasses previously mentioned 
in this chapter, as well as other spellcasting classes with 
the Dungeon Master’s consent (see the “Dunamancy for 
Non-Dunamancers’” sidebar). 


DUNAMANCY SPELL LIST 


CANTRIPS 
sapping sting (necromancy) 


LEVEL 5 
temporal shunt* 
(transmutation) 


LEVEL 1 
gift of alacrity* (divination) LEVEL 6 
magnify gravity** gravity fissure** (evocation) 


(transmutation) 


LEVEL 7 
LEVEL 2 tether essence (necromancy) 


fortune’s favor (divination) 
LEVEL 8 


immovable object** 
(transmutation) ; pees 
wristpocket (conjura- reality break* (conjuration) 


tion, ritual) LEVEL 9 


LEVEL 3 ravenous void** (evocation) 


pulse wave (evocation) time ravage* (necromancy) 


LEVEL 4 * chronurgy spell 


SPELL DESCRIPTIONS 


The spells are presented in alphabetical order. 


DARK STAR 
S&th-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 150 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a shard of onyx and a drop of the 
caster’s blood, both of which the spell consumes) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


This spell creates a sphere centered on a point you 
choose within range. The sphere can have a radius of up 
to 40 feet. The area within this sphere is filled with mag- 
ical darkness and crushing gravitational force. 

For the duration, the spell’s area is difficult terrain. A 
creature with darkvision can’t see through the magical 
darkness, and nonmagical light can’t illuminate it. No 
sound can be created within or pass through the area. 
Any creature or object entirely inside the sphere is im- 
mune to thunder damage, and creatures are deafened 
while entirely inside it. Casting a spell that includes a 
verbal component is impossible there. 

Any creature that enters the spell’s area for the first 
time on a turn or starts its turn there must make a Con- 
stitution saving throw. The creature takes 8d10 force 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


PA Se Eee Eee 
DUNAMANCY FOR NON-DUNAMANCERS 
The esoteric powers developed and harnessed through 
the use of dunamis are still very much a rare and care- 
fully guarded feature of the Kryn Dynasty in Wildemount. 
However, such arcana is hard to keep hidden, especially in 
times of war. Spies and defectors have long smuggled out 
the secrets of this obscure magical practice, and even now 
it slowly disseminates beyond Xhorhas. 

Dunamancy spells are readily available to the wizard 
subclasses in this chapter and should not be simply added 
to the full spell lists of other spellcasting classes. However, 
the Dungeon Master can consider allowing other spell- 
casting classes opportunities throughout the campaign to 
learn a handful of dunamancy-themed spells as rewards. 
Perhaps the characters uncover a cache of magical contra- 
band, among which is a couple of spell scrolls, or a traveling 
acolyte takes some downtime with a friendly cleric charac- 
ter and opens their mind to some of the stranger secrets 
of the universe, unlocking a spell or two. There are many 
unique ways to bring these spells into your game without 
requiring any specific dunamis-wielding subclasses to be 
present in the adventuring party. 


= Ch er 


successful one. A creature reduced to 0 hit points by 
this damage is disintegrated. A disintegrated creature 
and everything it is wearing and carrying, except magic 
items, are reduced to a pile of fine gray dust. 


FORTUNE'S FAVOR 
2nd-level divination 


Casting Time: 1 minute 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a white pearl worth at least 100 
gp, which the spell consumes) 

Duration: 1 hour 


You impart latent luck to yourself or one willing creature 
you can see within range. When the chosen creature 
makes an attack roll, an ability check, or a saving throw 
before the spell ends, it can dismiss this spell on itself 
to roll an additional d20 and choose which of the d20s 
to use. Alternatively, when an attack roll is made against 
the chosen creature, it can dismiss this spell on itself to 
roll a d20 and choose which of the d20s to use, the one 
it rolled or the one the attacker rolled. 

If the original d20 roll has advantage or disadvantage, 
the creature rolls the additional d20 after advantage or 
disadvantage has been applied to the original roll. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 3rd level or higher, you can target one addi- 
tional creature for each slot level above 2nd. 


GIFT OF ALACRITY 
Ist-level divination 


Casting Time: 1 minute 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 8 hours 


You touch a willing creature. For the duration, the target 
can add 1d8 to its initiative rolls. 


Dark STAR 


GRAVITY FISSURE 
6th-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Self (100-foot line) 

Components: V, S, M (a fistful of iron filings) 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You manifest a ravine of gravitational energy in a line 
originating from you that is 100 feet long and 5 feet 
wide. Each creature in that line must make a Constitu- 
tion saving throw, taking 8d8 force damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 

Each creature within 10 feet of the line but not in it 
must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or take 
8d8 force damage and be pulled toward the line until 
the creature is in its area. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 7th level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d8 for each slot level above 6th. 


GRAVITY SINKHOLE 
4th-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 120 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a black marble) 
Duration: Instantaneous 


A 20-foot-radius sphere of crushing force forms at a 
point you can see within range and tugs at the crea- 
tures there. Each creature in the sphere must make a 


Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the creature 
takes 5d10 force damage and is pulled in a straight line 
toward the center of the sphere, ending in an unoccu- 
pied space as close to the center as possible (even if that 
space is in the air). On a successful save, the creature 
takes half as much damage and isn’t pulled. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 5th level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d10 for each slot level above 4th. 


IMMOVABLE OBJECT 
2nd-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (gold dust worth at least 25 gp, 
which the spell consumes) 

Duration: 1 hour 


You touch an object that weighs no more than 10 pounds 
and cause it to become magically fixed in place. You and 
the creatures you designate when you cast this spell can 
move the object normally. You can also set a password 
that, when spoken within 5 feet of the object, suppresses 
this spell for 1 minute. 

If the object is fixed in the air, it can hold up to 4,000 
pounds of weight. More weight causes the object to 
fall. Otherwise, a creature can use an action to make a 
Strength check against your spell save DC. On a suc- 
cess, the creature can move the object up to 10 feet. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 
187 


At Higher Levels. If you cast this spell using a spell 
slot of 4th or 5th level, the DC to move the object in- 
creases by 5, it can carry up to 8,000 pounds of weight, 
and the duration increases to 24 hours. If you cast this 
spell using a spell slot of 6th level or higher, the DC 
to move the object increases by 10, it can carry up to 
20,000 pounds of weight, and the effect is permanent 
until dispelled. 


MAGNIFY GRAVITY 
Ist-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 60 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 1 round 


The gravity in a 10-foot-radius sphere centered ona 
point you can see within range increases for a moment. 
Each creature in the sphere on the turn when you cast 
the spell must make a Constitution saving throw. Ona 
failed save, a creature takes 2d8 force damage, and its 
speed is halved until the end of its next turn. On a suc- 
cessful save, a creature takes half as much damage and 
suffers no reduction to its speed. 

Until the start of your next turn, any object that isn’t 
being worn or carried in the sphere requires a success- 
ful Strength check against your spell save DC to pick 
up or move. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d8 for each slot level above 1st. 


Rearity BREAK 


PULSE WAVE 
3rd-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: Self (30-foot cone) 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You create intense pressure, unleash it in a 30-foot 
cone, and decide whether the pressure pulls or pushes 
creatures and objects. Each creature in that cone must 
make a Constitution saving throw. A creature takes 6d6 
force damage on a failed save, or have as much damage 
on a successful one. And every creature that fails the 
save is either pulled 15 feet toward you or pushed 15 
feet away from you, depending on the choice you made 
for the spell. 

In addition, unsecured objects that are completely 
within the cone are likewise pulled or pushed 15 feet. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d6 and the distance pulled or pushed increases by 5 
feet for each slot level above 3rd. 


RAVENOUS VOID 
9th-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 1,000 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a small, nine-pointed star 
made of iron) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You create a 20-foot-radius sphere of destructive grav- 
itational force centered on a point you can see within 
range. For the spell’s duration, the sphere and any space 
within 100 feet of it are difficult terrain, and nonmagical 
objects fully inside the sphere are destroyed if they 
aren't being worn or carried. 

When the sphere appears and at the start of each of 
your turns until the spell ends, unsecured objects within 
100 feet of the sphere are pulled toward the sphere’s 
center, ending in an unoccupied space as close to the 
center as possible. 

Acreature that starts its turn within 100 feet of the 
sphere must succeed on a Strength saving throw or be 
pulled straight toward the sphere’s center, ending in an 
unoccupied space as close to the center as possible. A 
creature that enters the sphere for the first time on a 
turn or starts its turn there takes 5d10 force damage 
and is restrained until it is no longer in the sphere. If 
the sphere is in the air, the restrained creature hovers 
inside the sphere. A creature can use its action to make 
a Strength check against your spell save DC, ending 
this restrained condition on itself or another creature in 
the sphere that it can reach. A creature reduced to 0 hit 
points by this spell is annihilated, along with any non- 
magical items it is wearing or carrying. 


REALITY BREAK 
Sth-level conjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a crystal prism) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You shatter the barriers between realities and timelines, 
thrusting a creature into turmoil and madness. The tar- 
get must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw, or it can’t 
take reactions until the spell ends. The affected target 
must also roll a d10 at the start of each of its turns; the 
number rolled determines what happens to the target, 
as shown on the Reality Break Effects table. 

At the end of each of its turns, the affected target can 
repeat the Wisdom saving throw, ending the spell on 
itself on a success. 


REALITY BREAK EFFECTS 
d10 Effect 


1-2 Vision of the Far Realm. The target takes 6d12 psy- 
chic damage, and it is stunned until the end of the 
turn. 

3-5 Rending Rift. The target must make a Dexterity 
saving throw, taking 8d12 force damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 

6-8 Wormhole. The target is teleported, along with 
everything it is wearing and carrying, up to 30 feet 
to an unoccupied space of your choice that you can 
see. The target also takes 10d12 force damage and is 
knocked prone. 

9-10 Chill of the Dark Void. The target takes 10d12 cold 
damage, and it is blinded until the end of the turn. 


SAPPING STING 
Necromancy cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 30 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You sap the vitality of one creature you can see in range. 
The target must succeed on a Constitution saving throw 
or take 1d4 necrotic damage and fall prone. 

This spell’s damage increases by 1d4 when you reach 
5th level (2d4), 11th level (3d4), and 17th level (4d4). 


TEMPORAL SHUNT 
5th-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 reaction, taken when a creature you 
can see makes an attack roll or starts to cast a spell 

Range: 120 feet 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 round 


You target the triggering creature, which must succeed 
on a Wisdom saving throw or vanish, being thrown to 
another point in time and causing the attack to miss or 
the spell to be wasted. At the start of its next turn, the 
target reappears where it was or in the closest unoccu- 
pied space. The target doesn’t remember you casting the 
spell or being affected by it. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 6th level or higher, you can target one addi- 
tional creature for each slot level above 5th. All targets 
must be within 30 feet of each other. 


TETHER ESSENCE 
7th-level necromancy 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a spool of platinum cord worth at 
least 250 gp, which the spell consumes) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


Two creatures you can see within range must make a 
Constitution saving throw, with disadvantage if they are 
within 30 feet of each other. Either creature can will- 
ingly fail the save. If either save succeeds, the spell has 
no effect. If both saves fail, the creatures are magically 
linked for the duration, regardless of the distance be- 
tween them. When damage is dealt to one of them, the 
same damage is dealt to the other one. If hit points are 
restored to one of them, the same number of hit points 
are restored to the other one. If either of the tethered 
creatures is reduced to 0 hit points, the spell ends on 
both. If the spell ends on one creature, it ends on both. 


TIME RAVAGE 
9th-level necromancy 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 90 feet 

Components: V, S, M (an hourglass filled with 
diamond dust worth at least 5,000 gp, which the 
spell consumes) 

Duration: Instantaneous 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


190 


You target a creature you can see within range, putting 
its physical form through the devastation of rapid aging. 
The target must make a Constitution saving throw, tak- 
ing 10d12 necrotic damage on a failed save, or half as 
much damage on a successful one. If the save fails, the 
target also ages to the point where it has only 30 days 
left before it dies of old age. In this aged state, the target 
has disadvantage on attack rolls, ability checks, and 
saving throws, and its walking speed is halved. Only the 
wish spell or the greater restoration cast with a 9th-level 
spell slot can end these effects and restore the target to 
its previous age. 


WRISTPOCKET 
2nd-level conjuration (ritual) 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Self 

Components: S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


You flick your wrist, causing one object in your hand 
to vanish. The object, which only you can be holding 
and can weigh no more than 5 pounds, is transported 
to an extradimensional space, where it remains for 
the duration. 

Until the spell ends, you can use your action to sum- 
mon the object to your free hand, and you can use your 
action to return the object to the extradimensional 
space. An object still in the pocket plane when the spell 
ends appears in your space, at your feet. 


SOCIAL STATUS RELATIONSHIPS 


HEROIC CHRONICLE 


The heroic chronicle is a system that allows players and 
Dungeon Masters to work together to build a compel- 
ling character story. It even allows characters to gain 
additional proficiencies, magic items, spells, or feats 
before the campaign begins. This section assumes that 
the player is starting from scratch—without having 
chosen a race, class, or background for their character. 
The events that occur as a result of these random rolls 
inform what kind of character the player has. A player 
who already has a character concept in mind can choose 
options from the tables instead of rolling randomly, ig- 
noring anything that doesn’t fit their character concept. 
If you’re a player using these tables, don’t be surprised 
if creating a backstory inspires you to change some as- 
pect of your character concept. Let this tool inspire your 
imagination rather than limit it. 

The “Backstory” section of the chronicle roots a char- 
acter’s history in the land of Wildemount by helping the 
player determine the character's nation, home settle- 
ment, and relationships with family members, allies, 
and rivals. It helps establish major events that happened 
to the character before the campaign began. Options for 
determining acharacter’s favorite food and mysterious 
secrets can help further define a character’s relationship 
to their homeland and the other party members. 

The “Prophecy” section of the chronicle sets out three 
aspirations or goals that the player has for their char- 
acter. Prophecy goals can help players and DMs create 
engaging stories that make the game more interesting. 
Each time a goal is met, it takes on a prophetic tone as 


d20 Background Clovis Concord 
1 Acolyte 1 ally 
2 Acolyte (Luxonborn) -= 
3 Charlatan 1 ally 
4 Criminal 1 rival 
5 Criminal (Myriad operative) 1 rival 
6 Entertainer 1 ally 
7 Folk Hero 1 ally 
8 Grinner 1 ally 
9 Guild Artisan 1 rival 
10 Hermit — 
Mi Noble 1 ally 
12 Outlander — 
13 Sage 1 rival 
14 Sage (Cobalt Scholar) 1 ally 
15 Sailor 1 ally and 1 rival 
16 Sailor (Revelry pirate) 1 ally and 1 rival 
7 Soldier 1 ally 
18 Spy (Augen Trust) — 
19 Urchin 1 ally 
20 Volstrucker Agent — 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


Dwendalian Empire 


Greying Wildlands 


Kryn Dynasty 


1 ally (legal faith) or 1 rival 1 ally 
1 rival (illegal faith) 

1 rival — 1 ally 
1 rival 1 ally 1 rival 
1 rival 1 ally 1 rival 
1 ally 1 rival — 

1 ally 1 rival 1 ally 
1 rival 1 rival 1 ally 
1 rival — — 

1 ally — 1 ally 
1 rival 1 ally 1 ally 
1 ally and 1 rival 1 rival 1 ally and 1 rival 
— 1 ally — 

1 rival — 1 ally 
1 ally and 1 rival 1 ally 1 rival 
= 1 rival 1 ally 
=. 1 ally = 

q ally and 1 rival 1 rival 1 ally and 1 rival 
q ally — 1 rival 
1 rival 1 rival 1 rival 
1 ally = 1 rival 


a character achieves something they were driven or 
destined to do. Completing a prophecy goal grants the 
character a mechanical benefit as a reward. 

Dungeon Masters can also use the heroic chronicle 
process to generate villains with histories and motiva- 
tions grounded in the dangerous lands of Wildemount. 


BACKSTORY 


A character’s story begins with determining the region 
where they were born, the job they had before becoming 
an adventurer, their social status, the settlement where 
they grew up, and their family relationships. As this 
backstory develops, the character will gain allies and 
rivals, as well as learn some of the fateful moments that 
set them on the path of adventure. 


HOMELAND 
The known lands of Wildemount are divided into four 
major geographic regions, each of which is described 
in chapter 3. From west to east, these regions are the 
Menagerie Coast, Western Wynandir (which is further 
divided into the Marrow Valley and the Zemni Fields), 
the Greying Wildlands, and Eastern Wynandir. The 
northernmost reaches of the continent—the forgotten 
lands of Eiselcross—are not included in this section. 
Roll a d100 and consult the Homelands table to deter- 
mine which region you were born in. If you were born in 
one region but grew up in another, roll twice on the table 
to determine your place of birth and the region you even- 
tually settled in. 


HOMELANDS 


d100 Region (Government) 

01-21 Menagerie Coast (choose either the Clovis Concord 
or Revelry pirates) 

22-40 Marrow Valley in Western Wynandir (Dwendalian 
Empire) 

41-72 Zemni Fields in Western Wynandir (Dwendalian 
Empire) 

73-77 Greying Wildlands (choose either the Tribes of 
Shadycreek Run or Uthodurn) 

78-00 Xhorhas in Eastern Wynandir (choose either the 
Kryn Dynasty or Xarzith Kitril) 


BACKGROUND 

In addition to granting you items, gold, and proficien- 
cies, your background gives you a sense of belonging in 
the world. You can roll on the Backgrounds table to ran- 
domly determine your character’s background, or you 
can choose one that fits your character concept. This ta- 
ble includes new backgrounds and adapted backgrounds 
from this book (EGW) as well as the backgrounds from 
the Player’s Handbook (PH). New and adapted back- 
grounds are described later in this chapter. 


BACKGROUNDS 
d20 Background Reference 
1 Acolyte PH 
2 Acolyte (Luxonborn) EGW 
3 Charlatan PH 
4 Criminal PH 
5 Criminal (Myriad operative) EGW 
6 Entertainer PH 
7 Folk Hero PH 
8 Grinner EGW 
9 Guild Artisan PH 
10 Hermit PH 
1 Noble PH 
12 Outlander PH 
13 Sage PH 
14 Sage (Cobalt Scholar) EGW 
15 Sailor PH 
16 Sailor (Revelry pirate) EGW 
7 Soldier PH 
18 Spy (Augen Trust) EGW 
19 Urchin PH 
20 Volstrucker Agent EGW 


SOCIAL STATUS 

Your background determines your place in the world. 
Within the strict hierarchy of the Dwendalian Empire, 

a family with a poor social status is worth less than the 
soil they till, while a family of great renown enjoys all 
the privileges of high society. Most folk toil in the same 
profession from the day they’re old enough to work until 
the day they die, and few families ever rise to glory from 
obscurity. That’s just the way of things. 

You, however, are an adventurer. Though your social 
status is determined by your background and your 
country of origin, you have the power to rebel against 
the hierarchies of your land and change your fate. Your 
background doesn’t change, nor do the proficiencies 
and other benefits you gain because of it. But the social 
status associated with your background might shift over 
the course of your backstory—and over the course of 
your adventures. 

Each nation in Wildemount views people’s back- 
grounds according to its cultural values. Based on your 
character’s background, think about your social status 
within the context of the details of your homeland pre- 
sented below. Then use the Social Status Relationships 
table to determine how many allies and rivals you'll roll 
for later on in this section. 

Menagerie Coast. Both the Clovis Concord and their 
hated nemesis, the Revelry pirates, prize personal free- 
dom over all other things. The Revelry simply takes this 
ideology one bloody step further. People of the Concord 
celebrate folk heroes and entertainers, and all other 
people who might become celebrities, iconoclasts, and 
figures of legend. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


19i 


192 


At the same time, the common working-class sailor 
is asymbol of the Concord’s strength. As with the 
crew of awell-run ship, the small actions of individuals 
can have a huge impact when all are working toward 
common goals. Common sailors despise the Revelry, 
and noteworthy sailors might even have a rival within 
the Revelry. 

Western Wynandir. The Dwendalian Empire prizes 
king and country over personal freedoms—at least as 
far as the freedoms of the poor are concerned. For the 
wealthy noble class, most laws are mere guidelines, 
since bribery and political favors can make almost any 
problem go away. 

In the Dwendalian Empire, rural folk are seen as hon- 
est, hardworking, and pious, while the wealthy ruling 
class are viewed as beneficent patricians—or as miserly 
tyrants. Patriotism is a core virtue, and enlisting in the 
Righteous Brand and adhering to the empire’s strict reli- 
gious laws are the most patriotic acts of all. 

Greying Wildlands. The Greying Wildlands and the 
settlement of Shadycreek Run are lawless. Crime is a 
virtue here, mercy a vice. Only strength rules in the land 
run by the coalition of criminals known as “the Tribes.” 
Anyone who doesn't have the personal strength to de- 
fend themself is treated with contempt, and those who 
represent the iron fist of the empire are utterly despised. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


Travel farther north, however, and one reaches the 
Diarchy of Uthodurn, a stable and ancient city ruled by 
elves and dwarves. Here, order and art are prized over 
chaos and personal enrichment. If your character is 
from Uthodurn rather than Shadycreek Run, replace 
any rival you gain from the Social Status Relationships 
table with an ally, and vice-versa. 

Eastern Wynandir. Accumulating knowledge and 
achieving spiritual enlightenment are the virtues of the 
Kryn Dynasty, whose society is built around the tenets 
of the Luxon. Artists, entertainers, artisans, and all 
people who create are well-valued in Kryn society. Yet 
in this age of war, people whose skills allow them to de- 
stroy are paradoxically prized just as highly. 

To the Kryn, a person’s background is less important 
than the experiences they've accumulated—particularly 
for those who have begun walking the sacred path 
known as consecution. Nonetheless, even the most 
enlightened society can’t help but look down upon its 
lowest citizens and sneer at its haughty elite. Once all 
beings are beloved by the Luxon, perhaps these ills of 
society will be purged once and for all. 


HOME SETTLEMENT 

Once you've determined your nation and considered 
your social status within that realm, roll on the appropri- 
ate table in this section to determine which settlement 
you grew up in. If your character is a traveler—a child of 
soldiers, a nomad, a traveling performer, and so forth— 
you can roll for up to three settlements that you've vis- 
ited often and have some connections in. 

Each home settlement is detailed in chapter 3. If your 
home settlement doesn’t make sense for your social 
status, you can either roll for a different settlement 
or think about ways to make a contradiction work for 
your backstory. For example, if you have the Noble 
background but rolled a village as a home settlement, 
perhaps you were raised there to protect you from your 
family’s enemies. 


MENAGERIE COAST SETTLEMENTS 


d100 Settlement Name Type 
01 Brokenbank Town 
02 Darktow Town 
03-09  Feolinn City 
10-19 Gwardan City 
20-36 Nicodranas City 
37-40 Othe City 
4] Palma Flora Town 
42-84 Port Damali City 
85-93 Port Zoon City 
94-00 Tussoa City 


MARROW VALLEY SETTLEMENTS 


d100 Settlement Name Type 

01-02 Alfield Town 

03-05 Ashguard Garrison Military outpost 
06-07 Berleben Town 

08-12 Bladegarden City 


d100 Settlement Name Type 
13-18 Deastok City 
19-22 Felderwin City 
23-32 Grimgolir City 
33-40 Hupperdook City 
41-44 Kamordah City 
45 Talonstadt Town 
46-50 Trostenwald City 
51-52 Vol’antim Town 
53-00 Zadash City 


ZEMNI FIELDS SETTLEMENTS 


d100 Settlement Name Type 
01 Blumenthal Town 
02-07 Bysaes Tyl City 
08-11 Druvenlode City 
12-13 Icehaven Town 
14-18 Nogvurot City 
19-20 Odessloe City 
21-26 Pride’s Call City 
27—96 Rexxentrum City 


97-98 Rockguard Garrison 
99  Velvin Thicket 
00 Yrrosa Town 


Military outpost 
Nomadic diaspora 


GREYING WILDLANDS SETTLEMENTS 


d100 Settlement Name Type 
01-03 Boroftkrah Town 
04-06 Palebank Village Village 
07-30 Shadycreek Run City 
31-00 Uthodurn City 


EASTERN WYNANDIR SETTLEMENTS 


d100 Settlement Name Type 
01-20 Asarius City 
21 Bazzoxan Town 
22 Charis Village 
23-30 Igrathad Seven villages 
31-36 Jigow City 
OM New Haxon Military outpost 
38-89 Rosohna (Ghor Dranas) City 
90-93 Rotthold City 
94-96 Urzin Town 
97-00 Xarzith Kitril City 
RACE 


You can determine your character’s race by consulting 
the section for your home settlement in chapter 3. Each 
settlement’s description includes a percentile break- 
down of its racial demographics. You can roll a d100 

to determine your character’s race, or simply choose 
whichever race you wish to play. If your roll indicates 
“other races,” you can choose any race that isn’t already 
represented in the settlement’s demographics. 


FAMILY 

The size of your home settlement plays a part in the 
size of your family. Villages in Wildemount are predom- 
inantly rural, and families need children to tend their 
farms and perform household duties. By contrast, land 
and commodities are expensive in the cities, making it 
difficult for many people to afford a large family. 

Families with at least three children often encourage 
one child, typically the eldest, to continue the family 
trade. The other children are encouraged to travel so as 
to learn a new trade, become a scholar, become appren- 
ticed to a master guild artisan, or similar activities. Im- 
perial families who can afford to do so might even send 
one or more children to Rexxentrum, where they can 
learn magic at the Soltryce Academy. 

Roll twice on the appropriate Family Size table—once 
to determine how many living parents you have, and 
once to determine your living siblings. The state of your 
family might change over the course of your backstory, 
just as it might change over the course of the campaign. 


FAMILY SIZE (VILLAGE) 


d100 Number of Parents Number of Siblings 


01-10 3 or more 2d4+2 
11-50 2 2d4 
51-89 1 1d4 
90-00 0 0 


FAMILY SIZE (City) 


d100 Number of Parents Number of Siblings 


01-05 3 or more 2d4 + 2 
06-60 2 2d4 
61-80 il 1d4 
81-00 0 0 


Parents. You might have been blessed with two loving 
parents, or you might have helped your single parent 
take care of the rest of your family. You might have been 
raised by three or more parents, whether because those 
parents engage in a polyamorous relationship, one or 
both parents had multiple spouses, or you were raised 
communally. Or you might have no parents, whether you 
were orphaned early in life or have outlived the parents 
you did have. 

Siblings. Your siblings can include your parents’ 
other children, half-siblings from your parents’ other 
marriages or affairs, cousins who are as close as sib- 
lings, or beloved friends who became siblings by bond 
rather than by blood. 


FAMILY MEMBER TRAITS 


Once you've determined the size of your family, choose 
the gender and age of each family member. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


193 


POWERFUL FAMILY RELATIONSHIPS 

Even before your adventuring career began, you had al- 
lies who supported you and rivals who sought to thwart 
your success. In some cases, your allies might be so 
devoted that they are indispensable companions, while 
your rivals are hateful enough to make them nothing 
short of mortal enemies. 

Your first allies and rivals are your family. Sometimes 
your family members are your closest friends. Some- 
times you hate their guts. Roll a d3. This is the number 
of powerful relationships you have within your family. 

Roll once on the Family Relationships table for each 
powerful relationship you have within your family, to de- 
termine the setup of your friendship or rivalry. 


FAMILY RELATIONSHIPS 
d100 Relationship 


01-10 You thought you killed this family member, whether 
by accident or otherwise. You never expected to see 
them again—but now they’re out for your blood. 
You gain one rival. 

11-20 You insulted this family member so gravely that 
they left your life forever. If they ever return, it will 
be to settle the score. You gain one rival. 

21-30 You have always been better than this family mem- 
ber at a particular activity. They grew jealous and 
abandoned you, so that they could return and best 
you one day. You gain one rival. 

31-40 You uncovered a secret about this family member, 
whether a tiny embarrassment or a life-changing 
scandal. They now seek to unveil your darkest se- 
cret. You gain one rival. 

41-50 You and this family member have a friendly rivalry, 
and are constantly trying to best each other in an 
activity, craft, or other pursuit. You visit occasion- 
ally to test each other’s skills. You gain one rival. 

51-60 This family member owes you a debt, and they 
don’t like it. They'll help you out when you need it, 
but only to clear the slate. You gain one ally. 

61-70 This family member loves you, but you were never 
that close. They'll do anything to help you—as long 
as they won't be at risk of injury or death. You gain 
one ally. 

71-80 This family member caused you to have a horri- 
ble accident when you were a child. They still feel 
incredible guilt, which they would do anything to 
assuage. You gain one ally. 

81-90 This family member left long ago for reasons you 
don’t understand or won’t talk about. Before they 
left, they promised you that they would return in 
your hour of greatest need. You gain one ally. 

91-00 This family member has always loved you with all 
their heart, and would do anything for you. You 
gain one ally. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


ACQUIRED ALLIES AND RIVALS 

If you gained allies or rivals based on your background 
and your homeland, this section allows you to establish 
your relationship with those allies and rivals, as well 

as the broad strokes of their identities. Start by rolling 
once on the Ally Relationships or Rival Relationships ta- 
ble for each of those allies and rivals. Alternatively, you 
and your DM can work together to create ally or rival 
relationships that enhance your character’s story. 

When you've determined the relationships between 
you and your acquired allies and rivals, roll for each one 
on the Ally and Rival Identities table to determine their 
game statistics. This table includes monsters and NPCs 
in this book (EGW) and in the Monster Manual (MM). 

If you roll a particularly powerful ally or rival on this 
table, their involvement in your life causes a fateful mo- 
ment to occur in your backstory, as determined in the 
next section. 


ALLY RELATIONSHIPS 

d100 Relationship 

01-10 This ally is a loyal pet. Rather than rolling on the 
Ally and Rival Identities table, choose one beast of 
CR 1/8 or lower as your pet. 

11-20 This person once lost a bet to you and is still trying 
to scrounge up the cash to pay you back. They've 
decided you'd both be better off if they put you in 
their debt instead. 

21-30 This person was once a beggar to whom you gave 
a large sum of money. They have transformed their 
life thanks to you, and now want to repay your gen- 
erosity. 

31-40 You were this person’s favorite drinking buddy, and 
their home is always open to you and your friends. 

41-50 This person was once your mentor, but you left 
before you could complete your training. You are 
welcome to return and finish what you started, but 
only when you are ready. 

51-60 You bonded with this person over a traumatic event 
such as a battle or an armed robbery. If you ever 
tell them that you are in danger, they will try to aid 
you. 

61-70 You and this person share a terrible secret, and you 
have sworn to never reveal it to anyone. They will 
help you keep this secret if it is ever in danger of 
being revealed. 

71-80 This person fell in love with you. If you recipro- 
cated, they always stand at your side. If you didn't, 
they took it well, and still consider you their closest 
friend. 

81-90 You and this person were affected by powerful 
magic, and now you both share a telepathic con- 
nection that functions while you are within 1 mile 
of each other. 

91-00 This person owes you their life. Even if they can’t 
follow you everywhere you go, they will do anything 
they canto protect you. 


RIVAL RELATIONSHIPS 


d100 Relationship 

01-10 This person believes thatyou murdered their sib- 
ling. Regardless of your guilt or innocence, they are 
out for your blood. 

11-20 You bested this person in combat, but they believe 
you cheated to defeat them. They long to prove that 
they are the superior warrior. 

21-30 You broke a promise to this person, and it caused 
them to suffer greatly. Now they conspire to make 
someone else break a valuable promise to you. 

31-40 You once loved this person, but broke their heart. 
They are now obsessed with making you feel the 
same pain they felt. 

41-50 This person was ordered to arrest you, and dog- 
gedly hunts you wherever you go. 

51-60 This person thinks that you were replaced by a dop- 
pelganger or possessed by a spirit or monster. They 
are now trying to defeat you, so as to find or free 
the original you. 

61-70 You fled from your home under mysterious circum- 
stances. This person is obsessed with finding out 
the truth of what caused you to leave. 

71-80 You and this person tried to harness power beyond 
your control, and it left them disfigured and in 
constant pain. Having since mastered the power 
that nearly destroyed them, they now seek to turn 
it upon you. 

81-90 You helped this person out once when they were 
down on their luck, and now they go to you when- 
ever they need help. 

91-00 This person wants to be your friend, but their help 
has always made your life harder. 


Secret Identities. Some of these allies and rivals 
might keep their true identity secret from your charac- 
ter. The DM can decide to make one or more of the rolls 
on the Ally and Rival Identities table to keep the secret 
intact. Stat blocks appear in either appendix B of the 
Monster Manual (MM) or chapter 7 of this book (EGW). 


ALLY AND RIVAL IDENTITIES 

d100 Stat Block 

01-05 Commoner (MM) 

06-10 Acolyte (MM) 

11-15 Bandit (MM) 

16-20 Bandit captain (MM) 

21-25 Berserker (MM) 

26-30 Cultist (MM) 

31-35 Cult fanatic (MM); gain one fateful moment 

36-40 Druid (MM) 

41-45 Gladiator (MM); gain one fateful moment 

46-50 Guard (MM) 

51-55 Knight (MM) 

56-60 Priest (MM) 

61-65 Scout (MM) 

66-70 Spy (MM) 

71-75 Tribal warrior (MM) 

76-80 Veteran (MM) 

81-84 Mage (MM); gain one fateful moment 

85-88 Noble (MM); gain one fateful moment 

89-92 Assassin (MM); gain one fateful moment 

93-94 Blood hunter (EGW); gain one fateful moment 

95-96 Good or neutral werebear or weretiger (DM’s 
choice; MM); gain one fateful moment 

97-98 Evil wereboar, wererat, or werewolf (DM’s choice; 
MM); gain one fateful moment 

99 Archmage (MM); gain one fateful moment 
00 = Adult gold dragon or adult red dragon (DM’s 

choice; MM); gain one fateful moment 


FATEFUL MOMENTS 

No one decides to go adventuring without a reason. 
Some might set out from home in the name of ven- 
geance, seeking retribution for themselves or their 

kin. Some might be looking for wealth or glory. Others 
might seek only a change from their dreary lives, never 
realizing that they'll soon be caught up in events beyond 
their understanding along the open road. 

Fateful moments are the turning points in your char- 
acter’s life. The weight of these joyous or destructive 
occasions provided some of the talents, skills, and 
equipment you bring into your life as an adventurer. 
Roll once on the Fateful Moments table for each such 
moment you accrued in the previous section, courtesy of 
the allies and rivals that are part of your backstory. 

If a fateful moment grants you a proficiency that you 
already had, choose any proficiency of the same type 
(armor, skill, language, tool, or weapon). If a fateful mo- 
ment doesn’t make sense for your character (for exam- 
ple, if your siblings perished but you don’t have any sib- 
lings), roll a new event or work with your DM to change 
up the details. You can also forego rolling for fateful mo- 
ments entirely, instead working with your DM to create 
moments specifically attuned to your character’s story. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


195 


FATEFUL MOMENTS 


d20 
1 


10 


196 


Event 


Your parents were murdered in front of you. Roll on 
the Ally and Rival Identities table to determine the 
type of creature that killed them. You have profi- 
ciency in the Stealth and Survival skills. 

You met a dark elf dying in the wilderness. Around 
their neck was a silver talisman containing a cameo 
of their child and the name “II’viranya.” It is an am- 
ulet of proof against detection and location. 

A mysterious stranger gave you a gift that saved 
your life while you were lost in the wilderness. Roll 
on the Ally and Rival Identities table to determine 
the identity of the stranger. Then roll on Magic 
Item Table B in the Dungeon Master's Guide to 
determine the item. If you roll a consumable item 
from the table, roll again. 

You were caught in a terrible storm but miracu- 
lously survived. Now your dreams contain visions 
sent by a mysterious god or demigod. You have 
proficiency in the Arcana or Religion skill (your 
choice). 

A famous warrior trained you with what has be- 
come your signature weapon. You have proficiency 
with a martial weapon of your choice, and you own 
one such weapon. It has special features as de- 
tailed in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide. 
You also have the Martial Adept feat from the Play- 
er’s Handbook. 

You were the sole survivor when a horde of ram- 
paging monsters raided your village or your neigh- 
borhood. You have proficiency in the Stealth skill or 
proficiency with martial weapons (your choice). 

A famous mage saw potential in you and tutored 
you in the arcane arts. You have a spellbook and 
the Magic Initiate feat from the Player’s Handbook. 
While on a long journey, you were picked up by a 
traveling circus, spending a year with them before 
returning to your home. You have proficiency in the 
Acrobatics or Performance skill (your choice) and 
proficiency with the disguise kit. 

You were transformed into a bear by mysterious 
magic, and lived for a year as an animal before you 
were saved by a druid. Magic still lingers within 
you, though, and youcan cast speak with animals 
at will. 

You were press-ganged into military service, and 
were left shaken by what you saw on the battlefield. 
You have proficiency with medium armor, shields, 
and martial weapons. You also have a random 
form of indefinite madness, determined by rolling 
on the Indefinite Madness table in chapter 8 of the 
Dungeon Master's Guide. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


d20 
11 


12 


13 


14 


16 


1g) 


20 


Event 


You were kidnapped by bandits while traveling be- 
tween towns. While captured, you met an old thief 
who helped you escape. You have proficiency with 
thieves’ tools and proficiency in the Stealth skill. 
You were visited by a demon lord in a dream. You 
awakened knowing the find familiar spell and are 
now able to cast it as a ritual, but your familiar 
always takes the form of a quasit. You also have a 
random form of indefinite madness, determined by 
rolling on the Indefinite Madness table in chapter 8 
of the Dungeon Master’s Guide. 

While exploring a remote forest, you were attacked 
by evil lycanthropes but escaped before being 
killed. You are cursed with wereboar, wererat, or 
werewolf lycanthropy (DM’s choice). 

While lost in a remote forest or jungle, you were 
saved by a werebear or weretiger (DM’s choice). 
The lycanthrope believed you were destined for 
greatness and granted you the gift of lycanthropy 
with your consent. 

You saved a pseudodragon from being eaten by 

a giant spider in a dark forest. The pseudodragon 
now loyally follows you wherever you go, even if 
you'd rather it stay hidden. It is controlled by the 
DM but obeys your commands if treated well. 

You nearly died from a virulent disease (the DM’s 
choice of cackle fever, sewer plague, or sight rot; 
see chapter 8 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide). Your 
life was saved by an agent of the Cobalt Soul, who 
could not cure the disease, but who gave you a 
periapt of health that suppresses it. 

You were accused of a crime and were exiled or 
imprisoned, regardless of whether or not you were 
guilty. Having spent time among criminals, you 
have proficiency in the Intimidation skill and you 
know thieves’ cant. 

You saved a riderless horse wearing full tack and 
harness from wolves. You own a riding horse and 

a saddle, and you have proficiency in the Animal 
Handling skill. 

While reading through a mysterious tome once 
owned by your parent, you found a treasure map 
that points toward a place in Wildemount of the 
DM’s choice. 

You received a letter revealing that you were the 
secret child of a wealthy noble family living in 
Rexxentrum within the Dwendalian Empire. They 
enclosed 100 gp to ensure your safe passage to the 
imperial capital, and a signet ring bearing your true 
family’s seal. 


FAVORITE FOOD 

Each region of Wildemount favors different cuisine 
based on climate and culture. Depending on where you 
grew up, you probably have a favorite local food. You can 
roll on the appropriate table for your homeland, or select 
or create a favorite option of your own. 

Menagerie Coast. The sea and the freewheeling cul- 
ture of the Menagerie Coast makes its people favor sea- 
food with bold spices, as well as drinks and salads with 
powerful fruity flavors. Indigenous ingredients have 
been married with Marquesian and Tal’Dorei recipes, 
creating a unique and vibrant culinary culture. 

Concordian brewers are known for a potent and sweet 
brandy called silvertooth, distilled from the starchy 
palm lily root, and sweetened with fermented pineapple 
and sugarcane. Pirates favor rum, which is cheaper to 
produce. Tropical fruits and pods not used for brewing 
make luxurious desserts, and are eaten raw, cooked, 
dried, and baked into breads and cakes. 

Western Wynandir. The austere lifestyle of the Dwen- 
dalian Empire and the dour climate of its territories 
makes the people of the empire favor hearty dishes 
made of root vegetables and red meat. Poorer house- 
holds often eat feet, tongue, ears, and tripe, while the 
best cuts are reserved for noble tables. Imperial cuisine 
uses few spices, but still contains plenty of flavor from 
butter and herbs, or from fermentation. 

Heavily fermented and pickled vegetables feature 
prominently in the cuisine of both rich and poor house- 
holds alike. Wealthy imperial families drink imported 
wine, but the empire is best known for its potent spirits, 
distilled from root vegetables and enjoyed by rural folk. 

Greying Wildlands. Fresh game and foraged roots 
and berries are the primary food of the hunters of the 
Greying Wildlands. People who are particularly well 
connected within the Tribes of Shadycreek Run also 
enjoy exotic foods smuggled across the continent by 
the Myriad. 

Local drinks are made from fermented berries, but 
consumption of alcohol in the Wildlands was histori- 
cally limited to ritual purposes. That changed with the 
arrival of the Myriad, and the overconsumption of illicit 
alcohol is now seen as asymbol of status and wealth. 

Eastern Wynandir. Much of the territory of Xhorhas 
is wasteland, and the most edible plants in Eastern 
Wynandir are hearty tubers, roots, and grasses. The 
marshes and bogs of this land are also known for pro- 
ducing vast quantities of rice and cranberries. Most folk 
living here are hunters who band together to take down 
the mammoths and other massive beasts that roam the 
wastelands, one of which can provide enough food to 
feed a tribe for weeks. 

The luxurious cuisine of the Kryn court makes heavy 
use of mushrooms and rare meats found only in the 
dangerous caverns of the Underdark. The aboveground 
regions of Xhorhas are known for their fiery plum spir- 
its, whereas working-class drow traditionally drink an 
earthy, mushroom-based beer. 


FAVORITE FOODS (MENAGERIE COAST) 


d8 
1 


Food 

Paella—a working-class dish made with rice, white 
beans, and seafood 

Plantain cups—a sweet and savory dish of fried 
plantains stuffed with meat and rice 

Gazpacho—a cold soup served on hot days, made 
from pounded vegetables and fruit 

Honeyflame bread—a fried dessert soaked in 
honey and coated in Marquesian spices 

Fusaka fish—seafood cutlets smothered in Mar- 
quesian fusaka spice and fried in oil 

Snakelocks noodles—sea anemone tendrils coated 
in honey batter and delicately fried 

Queen’s water—a soft drink made from syrup, 
honey, guava, and tamarind 

Blacksand coffee—a tiny shot of coffee, brewed 
atop red-hot sand, Marquet-style 


FAVORITE FOODS (WESTERN WYNANDIR) 


d8 
1 


Food 

Dumplings—a steamed potato bread that can be 
served with any meal 

Sauerbraten—a Zemnian peasant dish of pickled 
horse meat served with cabbage 

Brawn, also known as head cheese—a meat jelly 
made from boiled calf’s head 

Schweinshaxe—a Zemnian peasant dish of 
long-marinated roasted pork knuckle 
Dampfnudel—a regal steamed roll served in sweet 
custard or with savory potatoes 

Spanferkel—an expensive dish of suckling pig, 
roasted and served at royal parties 

Trost—a sweet, dark ale brewed in Trostenwald 
Radler—a sweet, expensive drink made from im- 
ported lemonade mixed with beer 


FAVORITE Foops (GREYING WILDLANDS) 


d8 


1 


Food 

Imperial pickled plums, smuggled from the Dwen- 
dalian Empire by Myriad agents 

Charred venison and roasted potatoes, prepared 
with local game and local tubers 

Raw venison still dripping with blood 

Elf-mash—a creamy dish made from overripe 
cloudberries 

Dwarven rootbake—a hearty casserole of roots and 
tubers wrapped in seaweed 

Jam porridge—made from Xhorhasian rice and 
topped with salmonberry jam 

Blazing tea—a beverage blended from fermented 
fireroot and mouth-scalding spices 

Sbiten—a drink made from honey and spices, best 
enjoyed hot on snowy days 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 
197 


198 


FAVORITE FOODS (EASTERN WYNANDIR) 


d8 
1 


Food 


Rzukaal—a dish made from sautéed rice noodles, 
hearty mushrooms, and giant spider legs 
Yuyand|—grilled yuyo (a zucchini-like vegetable 
that grows in Rosohna’s sunless gardens) spiced 
and served with rice 

Mastodon kor’rund|—grilled mastodon served 
with sunless kor’run (a squash-like vegetable that 
grows in Rosohna’s sunless gardens) and rice 
Kinespaji spaaldl—soup made from mushrooms 
or vegetables and the boiled spit of a horizonback 
turtle 

Umarindaly—a dessert akin to rice pudding, 
topped with spiced gooseberry jam 
Keltaly—heavy cream mixed with pulverized black 
currants and frozen into a fluffy, sweet, creamy 
dessert 

Erzfaalyu—a potent spirit made from fermented 
rice 

Yunfaalyu—a fragrant plum liquor served at frigid 
temperatures and garnished with currants 


MYSTERIOUS SECRET 

You saw something you weren't supposed to. A note 
came into your possession by mysterious means. A 
childhood friend spoke to you of a cryptic message. 
Whatever its source, a secret has haunted you your 
entire life. What is it? You can roll on the Mysterious 
Secrets table or work with your DM to create a secret. 


MYSTERIOUS SECRETS 


d20 
1 


Secret 

Years ago, my best friend came to me in the middle 
of the night and gave me a key that glowed with an 
icy blue light. | never saw that friend again. 

| was the only witness to a cold-blooded murder. In 
the aftermath, | saw the killer take a goldcoin with 
a ruby inlaid at its center from the victim's body. 

| once had a dream where an old stranger looked 
me dead in the eye, screamed “Scourger!” at the 
top of their lungs, and then exploded into a column 
of flame. 

While exploring near my home, | found a cliff with 
a bunch of caverns dug out of it, all of them large 
enough for people to hide within. 

| once saw a cat that seemed to be moving with 

a strange sense of purpose. | followed it to the 
dwelling of an important local elder, where it gazed 
through the window for an hour. Then it suddenly 
shook itself and raced away, as though a spell had 
been broken. 

One of my parents left home inthe middle ofa 
storm, in the middle of the night. They had their 
sword and shield. They came back a week later, 
with the shield practically in pieces. They never 
talked about that night. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


d20 


1 


12 


15 


16 


7 


18 


20 


Secret 


| had a friend who was a farmer. Every week, their 
crops doubled in size until they had pumpkins as 
big as houses. Then the next week, the friend was 
gone and their fields were torched. | never heard 
from them again. 

| once saw an enormous figure walking through the 
clouds on a stormy night. At one point, they looked 
at me, and then kept walking. 

| woke up one night to find one of my siblings 
perched on my chest, staring into my eyes. They 
said, “The time is soon,” and then giggled and ran 
off. When | asked them, they had no memory of the 
event. 

| once saw a giant bird soar past overhead. It 
croaked outa cry that sounded like my name, then 
disappeared beyond the clouds. 

| ate a fruit whose seeds spelled out a magic word 
where l’d cast them onto the ground. Years later, 

| saw the same word spelled out within a slice of 
bread. 

A warrior friend of mine died. But every so often, 

| swear | see that friend in their old armor, at the 
corner of my vision. 

An old seer once touched my forehead and gave 
me a vision of a flaming bird chained beneath a 
mountain, squirming and wailing in the darkness. 
Once while on a boat, | heard a voice rumbling 
around me. | looked down below the water, and | 
swear | saw golden eyes looking up at me. 

While | was eating, a whole potato exploded into 
worms, and | suffered a vision of a gigantic worm 
eating the world like a giant apple. 

While picking flowers, | saw a tall figure with red 
skin and horns wandering the meadow. The flowers 
grew taller where they walked, but | fled in fear and 
never saw the figure again. 

| was attacked by wolves in the woods one day, and 
was saved by a stranger with a bandage over their 
eyes. This person shone with silver light and was 
covered with scars—and | think | might have seen 
black wings tucked in at their back. 

While trying to forge a sword, | accidentally burned 
myself with the red-hot blade. A strange vision then 
came to me, of powerful weapons calling out for 
me to wield them. 

| once met someone fleeing through the woods 
who said they had escaped from some evil place. | 
asked what that meant, but the stranger fell dead 
on the spot. When | returned with help to collect 
the body, it was gone. 

| once caught a falling star. It looked up from my 
hands and smiled, then told me to look for it on the 
day when fire erupts from the earth. 


PROPHECY 


A prophecy influences your character’s future. 

Write down three aspirations or goals you have for 
your character, and which you want to achieve over the 
course of the campaign. A prophecy goal should have 
two parts. First is the goal that your character wants to 
attain. Second is a sense of what complication might 
ensue once the goal is met—for good or for ill. 

One of your prophecy goals should be an immediate 
goal, one should be long term, and one should be a 
goal that concludes your character arc at the end of the 
campaign. You don’t have to decide on all three goals 
at the start. You can choose your immediate goal now 
and think about the other two while you get a feel for the 
tone of the campaign. 

These prophecy goals can help your character stay 
motivated, but they’ll also help your Dungeon Master 
create interesting stories that relate directly to your 
character. Your three prophecy goals can help the DM 
shape the campaign by determining what challenges or 
rewards to put in your character’s way. (If you rolled for 
a mysterious secret in the last section, that secret is a 
great thing to link to a goal.) Alternatively, you and your 
DM can work together to create goals that help link your 
character goals to an existing story the DM wants to tell. 

Each time you complete a prophecy goal, your charac- 
ter gains a mechanical benefit as a reward. 

If you're looking for prophecy goals for your character, 
you can roll on the Prophecy Inspirations table for a 
random goal and a consequence of that goal. If this goal 
isn’t a perfect fit for your character, you can fine-tune it 
or roll again to find one that works better. 


PROPHECY INSPIRATIONS 
d20 Prophecy 

] 1 will defeat the creature that killed my parents. Its 
defeat might make me question my purpose in life. 

2 | will uncover the reason that the Cerberus Assem- 
bly took my sibling away. Finding my sibling will set 
political events beyond my control into motion. 

3 | will save my village from the gnoll tribe that has 
raided us for the past year. Their defeat will inspire 
me to perform even greater feats of heroism. 

4 | will unlock the secrets of consecution thatthe 
Krynare hiding. This knowledge will open my mind 
toa terrifying truth. 


d20 


13 


14 


7 


19 


20 


Prophecy 

| will join a blood hunter order. My new comrades- 
in-arms will make me powerful, but | must pay a 
steep price for that power. 

| will steal a king’s ransom from a Revelry pirate. 
That wealth will make me happy, but it will also 
draw unsavory characters to me. 

| will become a hero of the war between the Dwen- 
dalian Empire and the Kryn. | will be haunted by the 
atrocities | witness on the battlefield. 

| will cleanse the Savalirwood ofits corruption 
while welcoming that corruption into my own body. 
| will infiltrate the Myriad, but doing so will compel 
me to commit evil acts. 

| will uncover a relic from Eiselcross and become 
famous, but the relic will exact a terrible cost. 

| will speak to a dragon, live to tell the tale, and pro- 
voke the dragon’s everlasting wrath. 

| will steal a holy relic of the Kryn Dynasty, making 
me a target for anyone who desires its power. 

| will hesitate at an important moment. Another 
person will suffer for it. 

| will stumble by accident into the arms of the 
Golden Grin. Though | will reject their call at first, 
something will draw me back. 

| will befriend a flying beast and ride it through the 
skies. Others will envy me for the bond | have with 
this creature. 

| will kneel before Bright Queen Leylas Kryn with- 
out knowing who she is. This moment of uncer- 
tainty will lead to danger. 

| will stand before Princess Suria Dwendal and 
briefly hold the fate of the empire in my hand. | 
won't realize the gravity of my decision until it is 
too late. 

My actions will lead to the death of a marquis of the 
Clovis Concord. | will know exactly who killed them, 
but no one in power will believe me. 

| will anger one of the Tribes of Shadycreek Run. 

As its members hunt me in retribution, others will 
suffer and | will pay the price. 

| will meet my birth parents. Doing so reveals a se- 
cret about my birth that will change the way | look 
at the world. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 
(99 


FOR THE DUNGEON MASTER 

If you’re the Dungeon Master for your group, think about 
how long you want your campaign to run. Each of the 
players will have three goals set down for their char- 
acter, each of which needs to be achieved by the end of 
the campaign. If you take the number of game sessions 
you anticipate your campaign lasting and divide it by the 
number of prophecy goals laid down by all your players, 
you'll have the average number of sessions it should 
take for one player to complete one goal. 

If the characters are completing their goals too 
quickly, remember that it’s more interesting for the play- 
ers if events that are important to them happen more 
frequently than if they have to slog through a story that 
has nothing to do with them. Use your best judgment 
and find the pacing that works for you. 


PROPHECY REWARDS 

Each time a character completes one of their three 
prophecy goals, they gain a reward of the DM’s deter- 
mination. Any of the following rewards are suitable for 
completing a goal, or the DM might decide on unique 
rewards of the same general level: 


e For the next 1d10 days, the character gains inspiration 
whenever they finish a long rest. 

e For the next 1d10 days, the character has advantage 
on saving throws to avoid being frightened. 

- For the next 1d4 days, the character’s weapon attacks 
deal an extra 1d6 damage of the weapon’s type. 


BACKGROUNDS 


This section presents two new backgrounds—the Grin- 
ner and the Volstrucker Agent—as well as suggestions 
for adapting some of the backgrounds from the Player's 
Handbook to tie them more closely to the factions of 
Wildemount. 

Wildemount is a land of secrets, so your character’s 
background might work best if it’s kept secret from the 
other players—especially if you choose either the Grin- 
ner or Volstrucker Agent background. Work with your 
DM to determine a second false background that can 
help hide your true background, or a cover background 
that can be used if your true background involves a se- 
cret identity. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


GRINNER 


The Golden Grin began in the far-off land of Tal’Dorei, 
trading secret messages through a network of bards 
and minstrels to undermine an iron-fisted king’s au- 
thoritarian rule. Today, Tal’Dorei is a relatively peaceful 
republic, and some Grinners have grown restless while 
waiting for tyranny to raise its ugly head again. A contin- 
gent of such Grinners traveled to the Menagerie Coast 
and set up a network of secret bases in the cities of the 
Clovis Concord, from which they are presently working 
their way into the highest echelons of the Dwenda- 
lian Empire. 

You are a Grinner. Your goals are to spread freedom 
and inspire hope—or, in time, revolution—in the hearts 
of the oppressed. 


Skill Proficiencies: Deception, Performance 

Tool Proficiencies: One type of musical instrument, 
thieves’ tools 

Equipment: A set of fine clothes, a disguise kit, a mu- 
sical instrument of your choice, a gold-plated ring 
depicting a smiling face, and a pouch containing 15 gp 


FAVORITE CODE-SONG 

All members of the Golden Grin have learned a handful 
of folk songs in their travels, and use those songs to 
send secret codes and alert fellow Grinners to danger. 
Choose a favorite song or roll on the Favorite Code- 
Songs table. 


FAVORITE CODE-SONGS 


d6 Favorite Code-Song 

1 Zan’s Comin’ Back. This hopeful Tal’Dorei folk song 
declares the inevitable return of a just ruler. Use it 
to seek out potential allies. 

2 Blow Fire Down the Coast. A rowdy fighting song 
from the Clovis Concord, this ditty talks of blasting 
up pirate ships. Use it to encourage battle. 

3 Hush! Onward Come the Dragons. This Tal’Dorei 
folk song recounts the terror in the days after the 
invasion of the red dragon called the Cinder King. 
Use it to encourage caution in speech and deed. 

4 Let the Sword Grow Rust. An antiwar anthem from 
Marquet, this song has uncertain origins. Use it to 
help quell violent encounters. 

5 Drink Deep, Li'l Hummingbird. A drinking rondo 
from the Menagerie Coast, this song tells the tale 
of a young person who drinks so heavily that they 
awaken to find they've stowed away on a ship. Use 
it to encourage alertness in social situations. 

6 Dirge for the Emerald Fire. This elven song suppos- 
edly has thousands of obscure verses. Use the first 
two verses to spread news of death or defeat. 


FEATURE: BALLAD OF THE GRINNING FOOL 
Like every Grinner, you know how to find a hideout. 
In any city of 10,000 people or more on the Menagerie 
Coast or in the lands of the Dwendalian Empire, you 
can play the “Ballad of the Grinning Fool” in a major 


tavern or inn. A member of the Golden Grin will find you 
and give shelter to you and any companions you vouch 
for. This shelter might be discontinued if it becomes too 
dangerous to hide you, at the DM’s discretion. 

This feature must be used with caution, for not all who 
know the ballad are your friends. Some are traitors, 
counterspies, or agents of tyranny. 


SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 

Grinners are trained in the art of secrecy and innuendo, 
and are skilled at hiding in plain sight by being the 
loudest and brightest person in the room. Their skills 

in subterfuge and combat lend themselves well to an ad- 
venturing lifestyle, and traveling with mercenaries and 
treasure hunters creates a convenient excuse to journey 
through lands bent under tyranny. 


GRINNER PERSONALITY TRAITS 


d8 Personality Trait 

| love the spotlight. Everyone, look at me! 

Give me a drink and I’m your friend. 

Talk to me about yourself. I’m a hell of a listener. 

| hate to start fights, but | love to finish them. 

t can’t sit still. 

lm always humming an old tune from my past. 
When I don’t have a reason to smile, I’m miserable. 


CoN DUN FWY — 


I’m lucky like you wouldn’t believe. 


GRINNER IDEALS 


d6 Ideal 
1! Revolution. Tyrants must fall, no matter the cost. 
(Chaotic) 
2 Compassion. The only way to make a better world 
is to perform small kindnesses. (Good) 
3 Justice. A nation built upon just foundations will 
uphold freedom for all. (Law) 
4 Expression. Music, joy, and laughter are the keys to 
freedom. (Good) 
5 Self-Determination. People should be free to do as 


they please. (Chaotic) 
6 Vigilance. A free people must be carefully taught, 
lest they be misled. (Neutral) 


GRINNER BONDS 


d6 Bond 

1 | lost someone important to an agent of the Dwen- 
dalian Empire. That regime will fall. 

2 The first people to be hurt by this war will be the 
common folk. | need to protect them. 

3 Music helped me through a dark time in my life. 
Now, I'll use music to change the world. 

4 | will be known as the greatest spy who ever lived. 
All life is precious to me. | know I can change the 
world without taking a humanoid life. 

6 The elite in their ivory towers don’t understand 
how we suffer. | intend to show them. 


Dr. DRANZEL, 
THE GRINNER 


GRINNER FLAWS 


d6 
1 


Flaw 

I’ve never lied once in my life. What? No, |’m not 
crossing my fingers! 

| do everything big! Subtlety? | don’t know the 
meaning of subtlety! Oh, that’s a problem? 

Being a spy in wartime is painful. I’ve seen so much 
suffering, | think I’m losing my mind. 

| can’t focus on my mission. | just want to carouse 
and sing and play! 

Yeah, that’s my name. Yeah, I’m a Grinner spy. Who 
cares about staying undercover? 

| can’t afford to trust anyone. Not. Anyone. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


N 


NO 


VOLSTRUCKER AGENT 


The Volstrucker are a clandestine organization of 
arcane assassins and enforcers in the service of the 
Cerberus Assembly. Their operatives bear no official 
title, but are referred to in hushed tones as “scourgers” 
by residents of large Dwendalian cities such as Zadash 
and Rexxentrum. 

You are a Volstrucker agent. Your duty is to silence 
dissidents who would undermine the will of King Dwen- 
dal—and more importantly, the will of the Assembly. 


Skill Proficiencies: Deception, Stealth 

Tool Proficiencies: Poisoner’s kit 

Languages: One of your choice 

Equipment: A set of common clothes, a black cloak with 
a hood, a poisoner’s kit, and a pouch containing 10 gp 


‘TRAGEDY 

Happy people aren't selected to join the Volstrucker. The 
Cerberus Assembly preys upon talented individuals who 
have been broken by tragedy—in some cases, tragedy 
that the Volstrucker has arranged for. A slightly broken 
mind is more easily reshaped and reeducated. Choose 
the tragedy that set you on this path, or roll on the 
Tragedies table. 


TRAGEDIES 
d6 Tragedy 
1 Familicide. Through deceit or manipulation, the 
Volstrucker convinced you to slaughter your own 
family. 
2 Amnesia. You were forced to study magic so potent 


that it strained your mind beyond morta! limits, 
stealing away the memories of your past. 

3 Capture. You were captured and tortured by agents 
of the Kryn Dynasty, and barely escaped. 

4 Starvation. A terrible blight afflicted your rural vil- 
lage, and many of your friends and family members 
starved to death. You survived, but only barely. 

5 Disfigurement. One of your arcane experiments 
went wrong and scarred or dismembered you so 
gravely that others now shun you. Only the Vol- 
strucker showed you kindness after that day. 

6 Vicissitude. You were once the scion of a wealthy 
family who lost their entire fortune in the blink of 
an eye. 


FEATURE: SHADOW NETWORK 

You have access to the Volstrucker shadow network, 
which allows you to communicate with other members 
of the order over long distances. If you write a letter 

in a special arcane ink, address it to a member of the 
Volstrucker, and cast it into a fire, the letter will burn to 
cinders and materialize whole again on the person of 
the agent you addressed it to. 

The ink used to send a letter across the shadow 
network is the same as that used by a wizard to scribe 
spells in a spellbook. Writing a letter in this ink costs 10 
gp per page. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 

Agents of the Volstrucker are groomed to follow orders 
without question and to kill without mercy. The trauma 
that brings one into the order can fester even more 
strongly against the darkness of a Volstrucker agent’s 
assignments. Officially, no one ever leaves the order— 
but those desperate enough do whatever it takes to gain 
some measure of freedom. 


VOLSTRUCKER AGENT PERSONALITY TRAITS 
d6 Personality Trait 


1 | prefer to keep my thoughts to myself. 

2 | indulge vice in excess to quiet my conscience. 

3 I've left emotion behind me. Im now perfectly 
placid. 

4 Some event from the past keeps worming its way 


into my mind, making me restless. 

5 | always keep my word—except when I’m 
commanded to break it. 

6 | laugh off insults and never take them pesonally. 


VOLSTRUCKER AGENT IDEALS 
d6 Ideal 
1 Order. The will of the crown is absolute. (Law) 
2 True Loyalty. The Cerberus Assembly is greater than 
any power, even the crown. (Law) 
3 Death. The penalty for disloyalty is death. (Evil) 
Determination. | cannot fail. Not ever. (Neutral) 


5 Fear. People should not respect power. They should 
fear it. (Evil) 
6 Escape. The Volstrucker are pure evil! | can't atone 


for what I've done for them, but | can escape with 
my life. (Any) 


VOLSTRUCKER AGENT BONDS 


d4 Bond 

1 The job is all that matters. | will see it through. 

2 My orders are important, but my comrades are 
worth more than anything. | would die for them. 

3 Everything I've done, I’ve done to protect someone 
close to me. 

4 If the empire falls, all of civilization falls with it. | 


will hold back chaos and barbarism at any cost. 


VOLSTRUCKER AGENT FLAWS 


d4 Flaw 

i | drink to dull the pain in the back of my head. 

2 | go a bit mad when | see blood. 

3 | can hear the voices of everyone I've killed. | see 


their faces. | can't be free of these ghosts. 

4 Fear is a powerful motivator. | will do whatever it 
takes to prevent those who know what | am from 
seeing me fail, and from those | care about from 
knowing what | am. 


ADAPTING BACKGROUNDS 


All the backgrounds from the Player’s Handbook fit per- 
fectly into Wildemount. Additionally, though, a number 
of existing backgrounds can be adapted to represent 
specific factions in the campaign. 


ACOLYTE (LUXONBORN) 

Every acolyte is a servant of some god. But you serve the 
Luxon, a being that you believe transcends godhood and 
created the cosmos. No mere priest, you are a student 
of potential, for the Luxon is potentiality incarnate. Your 
Shelter of the Faithful feature applies to all who ven- 
erate the Luxon, and to all who practice the art of dun- 
amancy that the Luxon bestowed upon the world. 


CRIMINAL (MyRIAD OPERATIVE) 

Most criminals in Wildemount are petty thieves and 
cutpurses who operate out of desperation. You, however, 
are a criminal of a higher caliber. You are a member of 
the Myriad, the greatest crime syndicate to ever grace 
the face of Exandria. You have a network of criminal 
contacts and allies to help you in your crimes—but you 
also have rivals and superiors that would gladly throw 
you to the wolves to save their own skins. 

The Myriad has bases of operation in every major city 
outside Eastern Wynandir, even if those bases are made 
up of only two or three members. Wherever you find the 
Myriad, you can find temporary shelter from the law— 
for a price. 


SAILOR (REVELRY PIRATE) 

It seems that just about everyone is a sailor on the Me- 
nagerie Coast. Plenty of pirates ply the waters of the 
coast as well, but none are as infamous or as organized 
as the mighty Revelry. If you're a pirate of the Revelry, 
you serve the Plank King and return a cut of all your 
plunder to him on the island of Darktow. 

The Revelry doesn’t take kindly to traitors and desert- 
ers, so if you count yourself a former member of that 
crew, you'll want to watch your back while traveling on 
the Menagerie Coast. Thugs might hassle you and your 
allies until you even the score with the Revelry, either by 
paying up, submitting to imprisonment, or proving that 
you're too dangerous to tangle with. 


SAGE (COBALT SCHOLAR) 

The Cobalt Soul is an organization of monastic schol- 
ars dedicated to preserving knowledge and recorded 
history, not just across Wildemount but all of Exandria. 
Its operations are primarily based out of the cities of 
Zadash and Rexxentrum in the Dwendalian Empire, 
and you likely studied at one of those sites. 

As arank-and-file pupil of the Cobalt Soul, you adven- 
ture to help expand your mind. Alternatively (and with 
the DM’s permission), you might also take on a more 
specific role within the organization. Expositors are 
secret agents who gather information in the field, while 
archivists are the curators who ensure the well-being of 
the Cobalt Soul’s many Archives. Monks of the Cobalt 
Soul are enlightened scholars who lead expeditions into 
ancient and forgotten places, hoping to reclaim their lost 
knowledge and history. 


VOLSTRUCKER AGENT 


Spy (AUGEN TRUST) 

Little is known about the Augen Trust, even within 

the court of the Dwendalian Empire. Only one person 
knows all the members of this elite network of imperial 
spies: its leader, Oliver Schreiber, a noble gnome with 
the ear of King Dwendal. 

If you were favored with membership in the Augen 
Trust, your entire life was laid bare before the secret 
spymaster at one point, and you were found to be a loyal 
servant of the empire with a particular set of skills. Be- 
traying the Trust is high treason against the crown, and 
defectors are hunted down and quickly slain. 

Most defectors from the Augen Trust flee to the Biting 
North, beyond the reach of the empire. The Clovis Con- 
cord would extradite traitors in a heartbeat to maintain 
diplomatic relations with the empire, and fleeing to 
Xhorhas is tantamount to suicide in the present politi- 
cal climate. 

If you are a member of the Trust going on adventures, 
you are either a traitor who has somehow managed to 
keep your true identity secret from the greatest spies in 
the empire—or you are still on active duty. In the latter 
case, you can work with your DM to figure out why you 
are traveling with outside adventurers. 


CHAPTER 4 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


i 
\ y E 
` Yy b pa , 


ADVENTURERS CONFRONT THE MAD INVENTOR STAHLMAST AND HIS 
DEADLY MECHANICAL MASTERPIECE, THE STAHLMASTER./ 


OOKING FOR GOLD, ARE YE? WELL, I HAVE A 
deck that needs a mighty good cleanin’. Gold 
can come easy, if ye look hard enough. Or is it 
glory yere really seekin’? Now that’s another 
drive entirely. That, I believe, I can help ye with. 
—Captain Jessie Wensthorp, 
d pirate captain of the Revelry 


Every epic journey begins somewhere. A long night 

at sea brings fated friends together. The mystery of 

a bloodstained cloak causes talented minds to join 

forces to seek justice. A simple tavern gathering leads 

a number of eager dungeoneers to come together as 

one. Whatever the scenario, that first step that unites a 

would-be band of heroes can be a challenging one. This 

chapter presents four short adventures designed to pro- 

vide those initial events that get a campaign started. 
This chapter of the book is for DMs only. If you're 

planning to run through any of these adventures as a 

player, stop reading now! 


Text that appears in a shaded box like this one is meant 
to be read aloud or paraphrased for the players. You'll 
usually see boxed text when the characters first arrive at 
a specific location, or when something happens in the 


adventure that the characters might want to react to. 


The Monster Manual contains statistics for many of the 
creatures found in these adventures. When a creature's 
name appears in bold type, that’s a visual cue pointing 
you to the creature’s stat block in the Monster Manual. 
If the stat block instead appears in this book, the adven- 
ture’s text tells you so. 

The names of spells and magic items referenced in the 
adventure are in italics. If a spell or magic item appears 
in this book, the text will say so. If it doesn’t, information 
on spells can be found in the Player’s Handbook and in- 
formation on magic items can be found in the Dungeon 
Master's Guide. 


°Chapter 5 
~ ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


UsING THESE ADVENTURES 


Each of these adventures is designed as an introduction 
to one of the four main regions of Wildemount, as well 
as some of the themes that commonly guide events 
within those regions. The adventures are as follows: 


“Tide of Retribution” presents a threat to the village of 
Palma Flora on the beautiful Menagerie Coast. 

“Dangerous Designs” is a tale of political intrigue set in 
the gnomish city of Hupperdook in Western Wynandir. 

“Frozen Sick” takes characters on a perilous journey to 
the far reaches of the Biting North. 

“Unwelcome Spirits” offers a glimpse of the wonders 
and terrors that dominate Eastern Wynandir. 


You are invited to change any aspects of an adventure 
to suit the type of game you and your players would en- 
joy the most. 


GOING OFF THE RAILS 


These adventures are designed for new players and new 
Dungeon Masters. Most make use of helpful NPCs and 
a straightforward plot to help new players easily navi- 
gate the setup of a DUNGEONS & DRAGONS game. How- 
ever, if the players want their characters to “jump the 
rails” of these adventures and do something completely 
beyond what the text has prepared you for, they should 
be allowed to do so. 

Improvisation is your friend! If a character asks a 
question that you don’t have the answer to, think of the 
most exciting thing that could happen without taking 
the spotlight away from the characters and their fun. 
That’s often the right answer. And if you don't feel com- 
fortable improvising an entirely new plot, you can call 
an end to the session (or take a short break) and ask the 
players what they want their characters to do. This gives 
you a chance to learn what your players are really look- 
ing for in the campaign, and gives you some time to plan 
a new adventure (or to ask the Internet for help). 

If your improvisation takes you away from the stories 
presented in any of these adventures, you can always 
plunder elements from the other adventures, replacing 
the NPCs with new ones and putting your own spin on 
them. In other words, it’s okay to repurpose parts of 
these adventures to make entirely new adventures. Your 
players won't know the difference! 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


205 


TIDE OF RETRIBUTION 


Trouble darkens the shores of the Vezdali Peninsula 
when an earthquake hits, sending part of the village of 
Palma Flora down into the sea. “Tide of Retribution” is 
an adventure that takes characters from 1st to 3rd level. 
It introduces them to the Menagerie Coast—a tropical 
region filled with monstrous abominations, mysterious 
curses, and ancient temples. This setting is ideal for 
nautical and jungle-exploring adventures. 

If your players use the heroic chronicle to create their 
characters (see chapter 4), talk to them about creating 
characters who grew up on the Menagerie Coast to give 
them a closer connection to this region. For characters 
not from the Menagerie Coast, the players should think 
about why those characters were drawn from across the 
continent to an idyllic village by the sea. 


STORY OVERVIEW 


The village of Palma Flora is known for its vibrant green 
foliage, its competitive shark-hunting tournaments, and 
a sweet cocktail that shares the village’s name. Lurking 
in the Sharkfeather Abyss, an ocean trench just west of 
the village, is a small clan of some dozen sahuagin that 
has grown weary of the shark hunters of Palma Flora. 
Year after year, the sea devils have attacked the shark 
hunters in an effort to spoil the tournaments, but their 
small numbers have seen them consistently defeated by 
the hunters and the village’s hired mercenaries. How- 
ever, things have recently changed. 

When a young sahuagin named Selachai lost her 
parents in a raid against the shark hunters during last 
year’s tournament, her distraught prayers for vengeance 
touched the fathomless consciousness of Uk’otoa, an 
ancient leviathan trapped beneath the ocean. Selachai 
beseeched her new patron for the power to destroy the 
shark hunters and all who exploit the sea. She received 
that power in the form of a magic scepter tipped with a 
crystalline amber eye. Transformed by the scepter into 
a conduit for Uk’otoa’s might, Selachai now leads the 
Sharkfeather clan on a path of dark retribution, and it’s 
up to the adventurers to stop it. 


ADVENTURE SUMMARY 


In the first part of the adventure, the characters are 
enjoying a day of relaxation or invigorating shark 
hunting on the sunny shores of Palma Flora when a 
ground-quaking tremor rocks the coast. Before their 
eyes, the island-based portion of the village begins to 
sink into the depths. Sahuagin prowl the waters, evis- 
cerating those who try to swim to safety. The characters 
must fight to survive and have a chance to save as many 
villagers as they can before Palma Flora is overrun. 

In the end, the characters must leap aboard a ship 
fleeing the sinking village before they are overwhelmed. 
If they survive this attack and make it to the open water, 
they reach 2nd level. While aboard the ship, the charac- 
ters interact with the crew and their mysterious tabaxi 
captain as they plan their next moves. 

In the last part of the adventure, characters who want 
to save Palma Flora and unravel the mystery of the sink- 
ing village are faced with several options. Captain Three 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


Earrings is keen for them to undertake the quest, and 
many of the nearby islands offer resources for underwa- 
ter adventuring that might help them. 

Returning to the watery ruins of Palma Flora, the 
characters face off against their sahuagin foes. The bat- 
tle is vicious, as many of Palma Flora’s shark hunters 
have been twisted by eldritch power into half-humanoid, 
half-shark abominations. No matter the outcome of the 
final battle, the adventurers are set up to continue their 
nautical adventures along the Menagerie Coast. 


SETUP AND STARTING POINTS 


Before beginning the adventure, work with your players 
as they talk about why their characters are in Palma 
Flora. You can provide players with some details regard- 
ing the village as it’s described in chapter 3. This can 
help the players getinto character and help you establish 
why the party has come to this remote coastal village. 

This is also a good time to figure out if the characters 
already know each other or if this adventure is the first 
time they've met. 


THAT SINKING FEELING 


Once the players are ready to begin, read or paraphrase 
the following to set the scene: 


? ? 
| 
A cool breeze drifts across Flora Isle, mingling the 


sweet scent of flowers with the salty tang of the Lucidian 


Ocean. Well-tanned locals play on the beach, while sun- 
burned visitors sit in wicker chairs and sip cold drinks. A 


half-dozen nearly naked shark hunters preparing to com- 
pete in the annual tournament stand in the shallows on 


the south shore, armed with harpoons and their wits. 


The players now have the chance to describe what their 
characters are doing in the scene you've established. 
Your group can play out these scenes as short vignettes, 
with each player establishing what a normal day is like 
for the characters before the action begins. 

Once the scene is set, proceed to the next section. If 
you or your players don’t feel comfortable roleplaying a 
short two-person scene to set the mood, let the players 
quickly summarize what their characters are doing, 
then get straight into the action. 

All the sections in this part of the adventure are keyed 
to map 5.1, which appears later in this chapter. 


EARTHQUAKE AND SAHUAGIN ATTACK 
Once the characters have introduced themselves, read: 


? , 
| The ground beneath your feet trembles and cracks. 
Waves a dozen feet high crash into the shore, and the 
sound of screaming fills the air as a stampede of beach- 
| goers flees the sands. A chorus of shrieks add to the 
| cacophony as shark hunters run from the water, pursued 
| by humanoid creatures with fish-like heads and slick, 
rubbery skin. 


Ask each player how their character reacts. If any of the 
characters want to fight the sahuagin, tell the players to 
roll initiative. The action of this adventure begins in the 
south part of the village (area P1, described below). 

The characters might not be interested in saving the 
shark hunters, perhaps feeling that people not afraid to 
hunt sharks can fend for themselves. In that case, let 
them ask you questions about what else is happening in 
the village. The players might decide that their charac- 
ters want to focus on saving villagers, raiding houses, 
or performing any other noble or selfish deeds as the 
village falls into chaos. In this event, refer to the map of 
Palma Flora and the following general features to an- 
swer their questions. 


Pl. SOUTH SHORE 

Four sahuagin emerge from the water to pursue two 
shark hunters (use the tribal warrior stat block). If the 
characters don’t interfere, the shark hunters are handily 
skewered and killed by the sahuagin. 

Shark Hunters. The two shark hunters are reckless 
human teenagers—a female half-elf named Elanza and 
a male tiefling named Joao. Elanza fears that the entire 
village will sink into the sea, and she urges the charac- 
ters to accompany her to the ships on the eastern shore 
and escape. Joao is obsessed with glory. If he survives 
this encounter, he heads for the north shore to keep 
fighting unless a character can convince him to flee 
to safety with a successful DC 10 Charisma (Persua- 
sion) check. 


Developments. After this encounter, an aftershock 
rocks the village. Any character who succeeds on a DC 
10 Wisdom (Perception) check confirms that Palma 
Flora is sinking. Every 10 minutes from this point for- 
ward, the size of the island shrinks by 5 feet on all sides 
as it is slowly submerged in the ocean. 

Where to Next? From here, the characters can travel 
to the east, west, or north side of Palma Flora. Any 
character who looks toward the other parts of the village 
in an attempt to understand what’s happening must 
make a DC 10 Wisdom (Perception) check. On a failure, 
the character sees only fleeing people and hears only 
screams. On a success, tell that character the following 
information, based on where they’re looking: 


East Shore. The village docks are here, and several 
ships are already sailing away. One group of sailors is 
battling sahuagin as they try to board the last vessel 
still docked. 

West Shore. The village is sinking most quickly here, 
and several beachside houses are already half sub- 
merged. The villagers and the sahuagin are all headed 
toward the north shore. 

North Shore. Desperate villagers are trying to swim 
to the north part of the village on the mainland. A 
50-foot-wide channel separates the two parts of the 
village after the earthquake splintered the bridge. If 
the characters don’t intervene, the villagers become 
easy pickings for the sahuagin and sharks. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


Q 
J 


P2. WEST SHORE 

Ifthe characters travel to the west shore of the 

island, read: 
A half-dozen cottages spread across this part of Flora 
Isle, and the waves are already lapping at their founda- 
tions. Doors hang open, and windows are smashed. One 
sahuagin raider leaps out of a smashed window, clutch- 


ing a shark-tooth necklace in its slimy hand. 


SS ee 


The sahuagin broke off from its raiding party to doa bit 
of looting. It attacks any characters it sees. 

Looting. All the houses stand empty along this stretch 
of seashore. A character can try to scavenge valuables 
by spending 10 minutes searching a house and making 
a DC 13 Intelligence (Investigation) check. On a suc- 
cess, the character finds an art object worth 25 gp. You 
can roll on the 25 gp Art Objects table in chapter 7 of 
the Dungeon Master’s Guide to determine what kind of 
valuable this is, or you can make one up. 

For every 10 minutes the characters spend looting 
houses, the island sinks and the water on all sides ad- 
vances 5 feet inward. 

Treasure. In addition to anything claimed by looting 
characters, the necklace carried by the sahuagin is cov- 
ered in shark teeth and beaded with tiny shells, and is 
worth 25 gp. 


P3. NORTH SHORE 

Ifthe characters travel tothe north shore of the 
island, read: 

j 

| The fifty-foot-wide channel that separates Flora Isle from 
the rest of Palma Flora is impassable after the earth- 


quake splintered the bridge. By the look of it, the north- 


See 


| ern part of the village is suffering the same aftershocks 
as the island, and people are fleeing in droves. 

| Adozenvillagers stand on the north side of the 

| channel, all of them calling encouragement to the six 


| villagers currently swimming across. But their calls turn 


| to screams as three fast-moving sharks tear through 
| the channel. | 
l i 


Three reef sharks—all telepathically commanded by a 
sahuagin lurking underwater—attack the six common- 
ers swimming through the channel. One commoner is 
35 feet across the channel and can reach the other side 
on their next turn. The other five villagers are only 25 
feet across and are unsure whether to turn back or keep 
swimming. To be prepared if the characters decide to go 
into the water to save the swimmers, be sure to famil- 
iarize yourself with the rules for underwater combat in 
chapter 9 of the Player’s Handbook. 

Sahuagin on Duty. The reef sharks aren't aggressive 
unless threatened, but a sahuagin raider is command- 
ing them to attack. If the sahuagin is killed, the sharks 
swim away and leave the villagers alone. This sahuagin 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


is lurking underwater in the middle of the channel. 
A creature that is underwater and succeeds on a DC 
10 Wisdom (Perception) check sees the sahuagin. To 
creatures above the frothy, blood-clouded water, the 
sahuagin is heavily obscured. 

Saving the Villagers. Any villagers who are saved 
promise the characters that they'll remember their brav- 
ery. If the characters ever visit another settlement in the 
Menagerie Coast (such as Port Damali or Nicodranas) 
in future adventures, one of these NPCs might have 
settled there and can become a local resource for the 
characters. 

Treasure. One of the villagers aided by the characters 
shows their gratitude with the gift of a family-heirloom 
golden bracelet (worth 25 gp). 


P4. East SHORE 
If the adventurers travel to the east shore, read: 


° (3 


One ship remains moored to the waterlogged docks. 
lts crew members are battling sahuagin as well as giant 
crabs with orange shells and vicious pincers as they 
attempt to board the vessel. A young villager wearing a 
bloodstained white robe stands back from the fight and 
screams an incantation, calling a burst of golden flame 
| down on one of the sahuagin. As you arrive, he turns to 
| you, clearly frightened. 


“Are any of you wounded? Those sailors need help, but 


| can’t get close enough to heal them. But if | heal you, 


é b 


will you please help them?” 


The white-robed figure is Aurelio, a teenage acolyte 
with light brown skin and dyed-orange, shoulder-length 
hair. He is willing to cast cure wounds or bless fer the 
characters, but only if they help the sailors fighting off 
sahuagin at the docks. If the characters saved any villag- 
ers elsewhere, those villagers stand at the edge of the 
fray with Aurelio. 

Combat. Four sailors (use the bandit stat block) are 
fighting against two sahuagin and four trained giant 
crabs in the shallow water in front of the docks. Once 
the characters arrive, two of the sailors shout their 
thanks and run up the gangplank to prepare the ship 
for immediate departure. The other two remain to 
help fight. 

Departure. With the two sailors on board, the ship is 
readied to depart in 1d6 rounds. Even if the characters 
aren't able to defeat the enemies here, they can flee to 
the deck of the ship and try to defend against the at- 
tackers until it’s ready to leave. If the sahuagin and the 
crabs are defeated, the sailors are willing to wait for up 
to one hour if the characters have unfinished business in 
Palma Flora. 

Ship. The ship is a two-masted caravel with the name 
Wavechaser emblazoned on its hull. It can hold up to 
twenty people, including its crew of six. 


Æ = Palm Tree 
® = Statue of Kord 


: ok = Sandy Beach 
® =Pillars 
a = Cottage 


IE = Chairs and Tables 


Map 5.1: PALMA FLORA 


OTHER FLORA ISLE LOCATIONS 

The following areas, labeled P5 through P10 on map 
5.1, are specific locations on Flora Isle. When the char- 
acters return to the ruins of Palma Flora in the last part 
of the adventure, all these areas are in ruins or have 
been swept away by the waves. 

P5. Bridge. This bridge once connected Flora Isle to 
the rest of Palma Flora on the mainland. It is destroyed 
when the earthquake rocks the island. 

P6. Cliffs. Unlike the gentle, sloping beaches along 
the rest of the island, the north end of Flora Isle is a 
sheer cliff 10 feet high. 


P7. Farmer’s Cottage. A farmer raises pigs and chick- 


ens in the pen adjacent to this house. 

P8. Docks. Three ships are docked on the east side 
of the island. One is a caravel named Wavechaser (see 
area P4). The others are skiffs named Tradewind and 
Blushing Elf, respectively. Both skiffs flee the docks im- 
mediately after the earthquake. 

P9. Tavern. The three-story Riptide Inn and Tavern 
is the tallest building on Flora Isle. Most visitors to the 
island stay here. The tavern’s ground floor is open to the 
air and looks out at the waves. 

P10. Public Square. In the center of Flora Isle stands 
a wishing pool looked over by a statue of Kord the 


1 square = 10 feet [S] 


na aL sedi 


Storm Lord, patron deity of Palma Flora’s shark hunt- 
ers. Most travelers throw a silver piece in for good luck. 
The pool presently contains 36 sp, but stealing these 
offerings is frowned on by the villagers. Several market 
stalls selling fresh fruit stand just north of the square. 


SEAFARERS 


Having escaped the destruction of Flora Isle, the char- 
acters can take stock of their situation and make some 
new acquaintances. After the characters depart the 
docks on Wavechaser, read: 


° p 
| Flora Isle and the rest of Palma Flora grows ever smaller 
| 
| 
| waters of the Lucidian Ocean. Several refugees from the 


on the horizon as Wavechaser cuts through the choppy 


village are huddled on the deck of the ship, while the 


| 

| 

| crew tends to the vessel. 

é b 


This part of the adventure is an opportunity for the char- 
acters to catch their collective breath, interact with some 
of the NPCs on the vessel, and plan their next moves. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 
209 


210 


Ls 


i 


E 


| 


=a 


j 


seer 


I 


p (3 id AAW 1 square = 5 feet 


Map 5.2: WAVECHASER 


CHARACTER ADVANCEMENT 

At some point during this part of the adventure, ideally 
at the end of your first session of play, each of the char- 
acters advances to 2nd level. Where you place the end 
of your first session is up to you, but two good points to 
conclude a game are when the characters first board 
Wavechaser, and when they speak with Captain Three 
Earrings and decide their next destination (see below). 


WAVECHASER 
Map 5.2 represents Wavechaser and can be used to rep- 
resent other ships as well. 

Wavechaser is a type of vessel known as a caravel, 
which is equipped for navigating coastal waters. The 
ship can carry twenty passengers comfortably. Though 
it’s a sturdy vessel, it’s not built for the open ocean. The 
Revelry-controlled island of Darktow is the farthest this 
ship could feasibly travel. 

Wavechaser is outfitted with two ballistae on its stern 
for ship-to-ship combat. The ship’s store of iron-tipped 
ballista bolts is kept in the hold to keep their wooden 
shafts from rotting. A ballista’s game statistics are de- 
scribed under “Siege Equipment” in chapter 8 of the 
Dungeon Master’s Guide. 


INTERACTING WITH THE CREW 
The crew members of Wavechaser are all easy to spot as 
they attend to their duties around the ship. Read: 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


| A burly, hairy man is playing a card game with some of 
the refugees. A half-orc gazes out at the waves, as she 
smiles at a dolphin leaping through the ship’s wake. A 


young male elf with pale-green skin and watery eyes is 


speaking to a female dwarf with a thick, knotted beard at 


the ship’s helm. A handsome, muscle-bound man is flirt- 


ing with one of the refugees. 


} | 


Most of the crew of Wavechaser are secretly Revelry pi- 
rates, as is the captain of the ship—a female tabaxi with 
snow leopard-like spots named Three Earrings (on ac- 
count of her three earrings). The captain is in her cabin, 
plotting the ship’s next move. 

If you want to roleplay the interactions between the 
characters and the crew, you can fill these NPCs with 
as much personality as you want, making them fully 
fleshed-out characters: 


Boerth (Male Human). This darkly handsome, chaotic 
neutral bandit is heavyset and strong, and has a keen 
mind for games of chance. He hails from Port Damali. 
Boerth doesn’t trust anyone—especially his fellow 
Revelry sailors. 

Dajarkal (Female Half-Orc). This lawful neutral druid 
is soft-spoken and likes animals more than other 
people. She joined Wavechaser’s crew a week ago 


in Nicodranas—as a mercenary spy for the Clovis 
Concord tasked with identifying Revelry pirates. She 
secretly casts animal messenger every evening to 
send reports on Wavechaser’s whereabouts to her 
superiors. 

Dillyu (Male Sea Elf). This green-complexioned, cha- 
otic good bandit joined the crew only a few days be- 
fore. As a result, he has no idea yet that he’s working 
on a pirate vessel. Dillyu spent most of his life in Port 
Zoon after losing his family to a sahuagin raid as a 
child, and he hates the sea devils with a passion. 

Heidi Axebeard (Female Dwarf). This lawful evil 
acolyte is the ship’s pilot and first mate, and she has 
a knack for predicting the weather. She hails from 
Grimgolir in the Dwendalian Empire but has spent 
decades navigating the sea. Heidi has fought sahuagin 
on multiple occasions but has never seen them wield 
magic like whatever caused Flora Isle to sink be- 
neath the sea. 

Kijori (Male Human). This tan-skinned, chaotic neutral 
bandit is the ship’s navigator. Despite his muscled 
physique, he isn’t very strong. A philanderer who hails 
from Port Damali, Kijori is a fool and isn’t suspicious 
of anyone. 

Three Earrings (Female Tabaxi). This pale, spotted, 
neutral evil bandit captain is a low-ranking member 
of the Revelry pirates. She brought her vessel to the 
village of Palma Flora because she was informed that 
a local sahuagin tribe had uncovered an unusual trea- 
sure. Three Earrings rightly assumed that they were 
going to attack the village, and she intended to be 
there to plunder the ruins after the attack. She didn’t 
anticipate Flora Isle sinking. 


Captain’s Invitation. Once the characters are done 
chatting with the crew, have the NPC they’re currently 
speaking to tell them that Captain Three Earrings 
would like to see the characters in her cabin. 


PALMA FLORA REFUGEES 
If the characters want to speak to any of the refugees, 
read or paraphrase the following: 


Island refugees have created makeshift shelters from the 
sun all across the deck of Wavechaser. Those you saved 
during the raid are here, as well as a handful of others 


who managed to reach the ship before it left the dock. 


The NPCs saved by the characters after the earthquake 
are mostly in a state of shock, though their gratitude 
toward the characters continues. They and the other 
refugees have personalities and attitudes that you can 
improvise based on how the characters acted toward 
them when Palma Flora was in crisis. 

If a character wears or displays the shark tooth 
necklace taken from the sahuagin in area P2, one of 
the refugees recognizes it as theirs. (If Joao the shark 
hunter survived the raid, the necklace is his.) If the 
necklace is returned, its owner pledges eternal devotion 
to the character who found it, and that character gains 
inspiration. 


THREE EARRINGS’S PLAN 
When the characters meet with Captain Three Earrings 
in her quarters, read: 
p > 
A tabaxi is hunched over a wide table, puzzling over a 
map pinned to its surface by a half dozen knives and 
daggers. Several golden rings glisten on her paws as she 
traces potential paths through the ocean. She glances up 
at you with her emerald eyes as you openthe door, and 
her feline face spreads into a sharp-toothed smile that is 
equal parts cheerful and unsettling. 

“Ah, welcome,” she purrs. “You are the heroes from 
the pretty village, yes? Welcome aboard Wavechaser. We 
have much to discuss about the sinking isle—and the 


treasure we can find if we return.” 


o é 


Three Earrings is a pirate. More accurately, she is a 
member of the Revelry, a highly organized coalition of 
buccaneers headquartered on the dread isle of Dark- 
tow, many leagues west (see chapter 3). The tabaxi is 
interested in the adventurers she has brought on board, 
wanting to appraise their skill and enrich herself in the 
process. Ultimately, she intends to use them as tools in 
her hunt for sahuagin treasure and invites them to join 
her crew. First, however, she needs a plan. 

The captain of Wavechaser is a cunning tabaxi bandit 
captain with a climbing speed of 20 feet, the Feline 
Agility trait (see below), and darkvision out to a range 
of 60 feet. She can read, write, and speak Common and 
Sahuagin. As an action, she can make a melee weapon 
attack with her claws (+4 to hit), dealing 1d4 slashing 
damage on a hit. 


Feline Agility. When Three Earrings moves on her turn in com- 
bat, she can double her speed until the end ofthe turn. Once 
she uses this trait, she can’t use it again until she moves 0 feet 
on one of her turns. 


Three Earrings has a knack for knowing exactly what 
a person wants and how to offer it to them. Unless a 
character has a passive Charisma (Deception) score of 
15 or higher, she is able to discern that character’s ideal, 
bond, and flaw simply by observing them for 10 minutes. 
To determine this passive score, add 10 to a character’s 
bonus to Charisma (Deception) checks. 

As she talks to the characters, Three Earrings glibly 
answers any questions they put to her (see below) and 
attempts to manipulate them into suggesting that they 
want to save Palma Flora. She only aggressively sug- 
gests a course of action if the characters appear out of 
their depth. Part of her strategy is to make the adventur- 
ers feel as though they are in complete control, even as 
she subtly directs the conversation. 

A character who succeeds on a DC 16 Wisdom (In- 
sight) check catches the tabaxi captain trying to subtly 
goad the characters into action. If confronted, Three 
Earrings slyly smiles and takes note of this clever adven- 
turer. She blithely says that she appreciates initiative, 
and she wants to know what the characters are capable 
of. If she thinks this character would make a successful 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


212 


pirate, she visits them during the night and offers them 
membership in the Revelry—if they can convince the 
rest of the party to help her claim the sahuagin treasure. 
What Three Earrings Knows. The tabaxi captain 
knows exactly what happened in Palma Flora, thanks 
to the Revelry spies that have been observing the village 
and the Sharkfeather Abyss for the past few months. 
She reveals any of the following information: 


e The earthquake dragged Flora Isle into the Shark- 
feather Abyss, a nearby trench that is home to a clan 
of shark-herding humanoids known as sahuagin. 

e The Sharkfeather sahuagin and the people of Palma 
Flora have been at odds for generations, since Palma 
Flora hosts an annual shark-hunting festival. 

- A young female sahuagin named Selachai recently 
took charge of the Sharkfeather clan and wields un- 
usual powers. She carries a magic scepter that has 
been recognized as a rod of retribution, which has be- 
come a conduit for unearthly levels of magical power. 
(The rod is a new magic item detailed in chapter 6.) 

- No one knows exactly how this young sahuagin man- 
aged to cause an earthquake powerful enough to drag 
Flora Isle under the waves, but that isn’t important. 
What is important is finding a way to delve beneath 
those waves and take the scepter from Selachai. Do- 
ing so would stop her from causing any more chaos, 
and the relic would doubtlessly sell for a pretty penny 
on the black market. 

- Three Earrings wants to sell the treasure and split 
it three ways—a third to her and the ship’s upkeep, a 
third to the crew, and a third to the adventurers. She 
offers them a total of 500 gp as their one-third share if 
they help her retrieve the rod. 

- A number of nearby ports or islands are good sites for 
Wavechaser to dock, unload its refugees, and find gear 
that could help a group of brave adventurers take on 
the sahuagin in their underwater lair. 


If the characters tell Three Earrings that they want to 
challenge Selachai, she lays out several of the ports of 
call they could visit before turning about and sailing for 
the Sharkfeather Abyss. If the adventurers would rather 
leave this mess behind them, she scowls and scoffs, but 
eventually acquiesces. The captain agrees to drop the 
party off in Port Damali, where she hopes to find “a few 
sellswords with real courage.” 


PORTS OF CALL 

For characters set on returning to Flora Isle and facing 
down the sahuagin threat, three viable ports are close 
by, any of which would take in the refugees and let the 
characters seek supplies for their mission. Chapter 3 
has more information about all the following locations: 


Bisaft Isle. This tiny island has a small port. A shaman 
living in the hills beyond the port might be able to pro- 
vide the characters with a charm of water breathing 
(see “Charms” in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master’s 
Guide). The charm allows the character to cast the wa- 
ter breathing spell, after which its magic fades. 

Brokenbank. This village is the smallest settlement 
recognized by the Clovis Concord but is nonetheless 
filled with foreign ships. An apothecary here might be 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


able to provide potions that would grant the ability to 
breathe underwater. 

Port Damali. This city is too large for the characters to 
fully explore in this adventure. Three Earrings knows 
a smith with black-market connections, and who can 
help the characters obtain a number of experimental 
diving helmets that would allow them to breathe be- 
neath the waves. 


NEXT MOVES 

As thanks for their bravery, the characters are offered 
the use of a cramped but comfortable spare cabin as 
sleeping quarters. Unless Three Earrings visits one of 
the characters (see “Three Earrings’s Plan” earlier in 
this adventure), the night passes uneventfully. Read: 


Seagulls squawk and chase behind you as Wavechaser 
sails on to your next port of call. Night settles around 


you, the crew guided only by the light of the stars. 


The characters’ decision on where to travel next might 
be the point that marks the end of the first session of 
this adventure. If you ended the first session before 
completing this section, this is still a good place to take 
a short break before continuing into the next part of the 
adventure. Remember that the characters should now 
be 2nd level. 


HUNGER OF THE DEEP 


Once the players are ready to begin this last section of 
the adventure, read or paraphrase the following to set 
the scene: 


“Wake up, travelers!” The voice of Boerth, one of Wave- 
chaser’s crew members, rouses you from slumber. The 
sun is barely above the horizon, but you can just make 
out the docks of a port through the porthole window of 
your cabin. “It’s past dawn and time to get moving.” 


When the adventurers emerge from their cabin, they 
find that the refugees from Palma Flora are packing 

up the few possessions they were able to save. They 
thank the characters again for their rescue before go- 
ing ashore. One of the refugees has business contacts 

in the port, and can arrange to help the other refugees 
find shelter and plan their next moves. He is also able to 
draw on funds as a final reward for the characters’ assis- 
tance—5 gp per refugee brought on board. 

If the characters made friends with any of these NPCs 
and want them to stay, they can encourage them to hang 
around the ship and continue traveling with them. Oth- 
erwise, all the refugees leave the adventure here. You 
can reintroduce these NPCs when the characters return 
to any port in the Clovis Concord, if either you or the 
players want to see them again. 


ADAPTING YOUR PORT OF CALL 

Animportant part of being a Dungeon Master is know- 
ing how to present the players with choices while also 
not forcing yourself to do more work than you have to. 
Allowing players the option of visiting three different 
ports is potentially a huge amount of work, even with the 
help of a book such as this one. To minimize the amount 
of preparation you have to do, a generic settlement with 
several shops and locations is presented here. Short 
descriptions then talk about how to make each possible 
settlement unique. 

Three Earrings is in something of a rush and suggests 
that the characters not spend too much time on shore— 
or she'll leave without them. This makes exploring the 
larger cities of Port Damali and Port Zoon less appeal- 
ing, at least for now. 


PORT GENERAL FEATURES 

All the ports that the characters can visit in this sec- 
tion have the following general features. The specific 
information on the three ports, below, tells you how 
these general features and their NPCs are modified for 
each port. 

Apothecary. The port has a dedicated herbalist (use 
the druid stat block) selling remedies to passing trav- 
elers. The druid has four potions of healing in stock, 
which sell for 50 gp each, and one potion of animal 
friendship that sells for 125 gp. 

General Goods Store. The port has a general goods 
store, which sells items in the “Adventuring Gear” sec- 
tion in chapter 5 of the Player's Handbook worth 50 gp 
or less. The store’s clerk (use the commoner stat block) 
has four of each item in stock. Characters can also sell 
items to the general goods store for half their price in 
the Player's Handbook. 

Scrollery. The port has a shop that sells magic 
scrolls. The scribe here (use the mage stat block) has 
four spell scrolls for sale at a cost of 50 gp each: one 
spell scroll of magic missile, one of shield, one of guiding 
bolt, and one of thunderwave. 

Smithy. The port has a smithy that sells any armor 
and weapons found in chapter 5 of the Player's Hand- 
book worth 200 gp or less. The smithy has two of each 
item in stock. 


BISAFT ISLE 
In addition to the general features noted above, the port 
of Bisaft Isle has the following features. 

Atmosphere. Bisaft Isle is warm and balmy, partic- 
ularly in the early morning. The whole port smells of 
fresh rain. Its people are wary of Three Earrings, but 
are kind to visitors and refugees. 

Scrollery. The scrollery is a mile from the harbor and 
is run by an old female tortle shaman named Grimalda 
(use the mage stat block). She owes Three Earrings a 
favor and grants one party member a charm of water 
breathing (see “Charms” in chapter 7 of the Dungeon 
Master’s Guide). The charm allows the character to cast 
the water breathing spell, after which its magic fades. 


BROKENBANK 
In addition tothe general features noted above, Broken- 
bank has the following features. 


Atmosphere. Brokenbank is a muddy, rain-slick 
village crammed full of travelers. It can feel claustro- 
phobic, and it seems as though a leering Zhelezo guard 
stands on every street corner. 

Apothecary. Brokenbank’s apothecary is a chubby, 
female sea elf druid named Aldageam. Three Earrings 
saved Aldageam’s life when she was young, and al- 
though she doesn't fully trust the tabaxi (who she knows 
is a pirate), she is happy to help her friend. She has ten 
potions of water breathing in stock and sells them to the 
characters at half price for 40 gp each. 

Pawn Shop and General Store. Brokenbank features 
a thriving pawn shop that doubles as its general store. 
Items sold here fetch 75 percent of their value rather 
than 50 percent. 


PORT DAMALI 
In addition to the general features noted above, Port 
Damali has the following features. 

Atmosphere. Port Damali is a beautiful and lively city, 
but its docks are smelly, weather-beaten, and dangerous. 

Smithy. The local smithy has received several exper- 
imental breathing helmets from inventors in Port Zoon. 
Three Earrings gives a letter to the adventurers and 
asks that they deliver it to the smith without opening it. 
(The letter reads: “The Revelry is requisitioning your 
supply of diving helmets. Ask no questions, and your 
next shipment will arrive unharried.”) 

The smith is a middle-aged human veteran named 
Hektor. He blanches when the note is read, but then 
offers up a number of diving helmets equal to the num- 
ber of characters in the party. Each resembles a helm 
of steel and glass resembling a cage wrapped around a 
fishbowl. If asked about payment, the smith stammers 
out, “They're yours! No questions asked. Thank you for 
your patronage.” 

These experimental helmets are breathing bubbles, 
described in chapter 6. 


DEPARTING FOR PALMA FLORA 

Once the characters have concluded their business in 
port, Three Earrings looks sternly at them and asks, 
“Are you prepared? You're about to risk life and limb for 
naught but treasure and a sense of vengeance. The only 
folk who would do such a thing are the greedy, the fool- 
ish, and those with nothing left to lose.” 

A character can make a DC 16 Wisdom (Insight) 
check to read the tabaxi’s inscrutable face. On a success, 
the character discerns that Three Earrings is conflicted 
over something—and that she might even be looking at 
them sympathetically with her catlike eyes. 

Roleplaying Three Earrings. Against her own nature, 
Three Earrings has taken a liking to these adventurers 
(unless they have done something to annoy her) and is 
having second thoughts about using them as disposable 
tools in her attempt to gain the rod of retribution. 

If a character confronts the tabaxi over this in private 
at any time before the final battle (see “Sharkfeather 
Abyss” later in this chapter), Three Earrings asks, 
“What’s the most important thing a captain can feel 
for her crew? Is it trust? Or is it pride?” The character 
can make a DC 13 Charisma (Persuasion) check when 
they answer her. Ona success, Three Earrings nods 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 
213 


214, 


sadly and reconsiders her plan to use the adventurers as 
pawns. This choice comes into play after the final battle 
(see “Concluding the Adventure”). 


ENCOUNTER ON THE OPEN SEA 

Inthe middle of the night, one day after Wavechaser 
leaves port, the ship’s navigator, Kijori, shouts out a 
warning. Another ship has emerged from behind a tall 
rock formation and is moving to intercept! 

This encounter provides a means of breaking up travel 
and for deepening the intrigue surrounding Three Ear- 
rings. If your group wants to finish the rest of this adven- 
ture in a single game session and is pressed for time, 
consider skipping this encounter. 

The intercepting ship, named Moonbeam, is a caravel 
flying the colors of the Clovis Concord, the government 
of the Menagerie Coast. The craft is slightly smaller 
than Wavechaser and is gaining on her rapidly. 

Moonbeam is on the hunt for Three Earrings and is 
captained by Lieutenant Commander Voskiir Larth, 

a princely and flamboyant pale-skinned, male half-elf 
bandit captain. Wavechaser’s druid crew member 
Dajarkal, a spy for the Clovis Concord, has reported the 
ship’s movements by way of her animal messengers, 
and Moonbeam has been sent to intercept the secret 
pirate vessel. 

Combat Begins. It takes Moonbeam 10 minutes to in- 
tercept Wavechaser, giving the characters and the crew 
time to wake up and don their armor (see “Getting Into 
and Out of Armor” in chapter 5 of the Player's Hand- 
book). Combat begins when Voskiir and his boarding 
party of two thugs, two scouts, and four bandits swing 
aboard the vessel. He shouts out, “In the name of the 
laws of the Clovis Concord, surrender your vessel peace- 
fully, or we shall take her!” 

Three Earrings keeps a low profile at the start of the 
fight, skulking in the shadows and hoping that the crew 
and the characters can convince Voskiir he’s grabbed 
up the wrong ship. However, the commander responds 
to the slightest provocation with overzealous force. If 
the characters or crew react with confusion or try to 
talk things out with him, he refuses to listen and attacks 
outright. Use the map of Wavechaser to judge the posi- 
tions of the characters, their allies, and their enemies in 
this combat. 

Complex Combat. Running a combat with several al- 
lied NPCs can be complicated. To simplify this situation, 
have the four bandits on Voskiir’s crew engage Boerth, 
Dajarkal, Dillyu, and Kijori, while Three Earrings fights 
from the shadows and Heidi stays at the helm to steer 
the vessel. This leaves the characters to take on Voskiir 
at the center of the fight. You can resolve these one-on- 
one duels using dice as normal if you wish, or you can 
declare that one side defeats the other depending on 
how the characters conclude their battle with Voskiir. 

Dajarkal and Dillyu are wild cards in the battle, and 
can be used as you see fit. Dajarkal is a mercenary with 
no real alliance to the Clovis Concord, so she might 
hang back at first to see which side gains the upper 
hand. Dillyu might need to have a character convince 
him to fight on their side before he joins the fray. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


Concluding Combat. Combat ends when Voskiir and 
his boarding party are defeated. Moonbeam sails away 
with all haste once the battle is lost, but Wavechaser 
doesn’t follow. If the boarding party is killed, that’s the 
end of that. If the adventurers capture Voskiir, however, 
they have the chance to interrogate him. (You can also 
have Dajarkal or one of Voskiir’s crew know what he 
knows if the captain didn’t survive.) 

Voskiir offers up willingly that Three Earrings isa 
Revelry pirate and that he is an officer of the Zhelezo 
sent to apprehend her. If the characters try to get more 
out of him, you can cut things short by having Three 
Earrings appear and order one of her crew to “Throw 
this wretched do-gooder in the brig.” 

If Three Earrings’s piratical nature isn’t public 
knowledge yet, now is a good time for the characters to 
question her about it. She tries to deflect all criticism 
and claims that she simply wants to claim the rod of 
retribution. The fact that she’s a pirate has no bearing 
on the characters’ situation. “Unless,” she adds with a 
smirk, “word gets out that you attacked an officer of the 
Clovis Concord defending a wanted corsair. Right now, 
the only people who know about this are you, me, and 
the varmints who boarded our ship.” 


AMBUSH AT PALMA FLORA 


The winds favor the characters on their return journey, 
and they arrive at the sunken ruins of Flora Isle at dawn 
on the third day of travel. When the characters arrive at 
Palma Flora and the Sharkfeather Abyss, read: 


Heidi Axebeard shouts out from the helm. “Sharkfeather 
Abyss! We've arrived!” 

The crew moves to the starboard side of the ship to 
look across the waves as the first light of dawn creeps 
over the horizon. Along the distant coast, you can make 
out the mainland section of Palma Flora, which is intact 
but appears deserted, its residents presumably having 
fled in case of another sahuagin attack. The waters 


around the ship are murky and marked by only a few 


| stray scraps of driftwood bobbing lazily on the surface. 


e e 


If any of the characters have a passive Wisdom (Percep- 
tion) score of 15 or higher, also read: 


You spot movement out of the corner of your eye. Some- 
thing is climbing aboard the ship from the port side—a 
small party of sahuagin! Close behind them are two hulk- 
ing, shark-headed humanoids. 


These monsters attack at once. If no one notices the 
eight sahuagin and two sharkbody abominations (see 
the “Sharkbody Abominations” sidebar) as they clam- 
ber aboard Wavechaser, they surprise the characters 
and the crew. As with the previous encounter, you can 
streamline this encounter by having some of the sa- 
huagin engage the crew of Wavechaser one-on-one. 


square = 10 feet 


Map 5.3: Ruinen Parma FLORA 


Combat’s End. The sahuagin leap overboard and flee 
into the sea when the first of the abominations is killed. 
As they flee, Three Earrings emerges from below decks 
and shouts, “Adventurers! Use the supplies we've ac- 
quired and follow them into the trench! We'll deal with 
the last of these monsters!” 

Ifthe characters ignore the order, or if they kill all 
the sahuagin before killing the first abomination, 
Three Earrings instead congratulates the adventurers 
after the battle. She laments that there aren’t enough 
water-breathing tools for her to join them and urges 
them to bring her the rod of retribution from the sa- 
huagin leader. 


DESCENT INTO SHARKFEATHER ABYSS 

An earthquake caused by the writhing of Uk’otoa deep 
beneath the sea has drawn Flora Isle into the trench the 
sahuagin call home. The now-ruined island is lodged 
within a tight corner of the trench one hundred feet be- 
low the surface of the sea. The locations in this section 
are keyed to map 5.3. 

Diving into the depths of the trench is difficult but not 
impossible for heroic adventurers. Ask each character to 
make a DC 13 Strength (Athletics) check. On a success, 
the character dives down to the ruins without strain. 

On a failure, the character makes the dive but gains one 
level of exhaustion (see appendix A, “Conditions,” in the 
Player’s Handbook). 


= Waves 
- = Door 
. =Palm Tree 
= Statue of Kord 


= Sandy Beach 


Chairs and Tables 


SHARKBODY ABOMINATIONS 
The sahuagin shaman Selachai tapped into Uk’otoa’s 
magic to wreak vengeance on the shark hunters of Palma 
Flora. The unfortunate hunters who failed to escape were 
transformed into monstrosities with coarse grayish skin, 
the head ofa shark, and a muscular, humanoid physique. 
These creatures possess all their previous intelligence 
and personality, but they respond to the control of their 
sahuagin masters’ Shark Telepathy. 

A sharkbody abomination uses the hunter shark stat 
block, with these changes: 


+ It is an aberration. 

+ It can breathe air and water, but needs to be submerged 
at least once every 4 hours to avoid suffocating. 

+ It has humanoid limbs and a walking speed of 20 feet. 

e The curse that transformed it into an abomination can 
be undone only by a remove curse spell or similar magic. 


The true horror of the sharkbody abominations is that 
they might be people the characters met and left behind 
in the first part of this adventure. If you want to sting your 
players’ emotions as they fight these monsters, describe 
how the sharkbody abomination resembles a specific NPC 
the characters failed to save. 


= 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


FEATURES OF THE RUINS 


The sunken ruins of Flora Isle have the following gen- 
eral features. 

Light. The trench is within the sunlight zone beneath 
the surface of the water and is brightly lit by day. 

Water. The deep, turbulent water of the trench makes 
movement difficult for creatures not used to it. A crea- 
ture without a swimming speed must spend 2 feet of 
movement for every 1 foot it moves. Additionally, it must 
succeed on a DC 10 Strength (Athletics) check when- 
ever it tries to move or have its speed reduced to 0 until 
the start of its next turn. The sahuagin can move nor- 
mally in the trench. 


SHOWDOWN WITH SELACHAI 
Once the characters arrive at the ruins, read: 


® 
What remains of the sunken island is wedged precari- 
ously in the undersea trench. The skeletal frames of its 
houses still stand, and the gruesome remains of villagers 
are strewn about. 

Five sahuagin flanked by several of the shark-like 
| abominations you fought earlier kneel within the ruins 
bef ore a sahuagin wearing a magnificent headdress. This 


figure is chanting something in an unknown language 


and holds aloft a gleaming scepter tipped with a glowing 


i 
| amber eye. 


l l 


Two sharkbody abominations (see the “Sharkbody 
Abominations” sidebar earlier in this chapter) and five 
sahuagin are gathered around Selachai, the sahuagin 
warlock of Uk’otoa (see chapter 7) who has channeled 
the power to destroy the hated surface dwellers. These 
creatures are all lending Selachai their prayers as she 
invokes Uk’otoa’s power, turning another drowned vil- 
lager into a sharkbody abomination. 

As soon as combat begins, Selachai orders her sa- 
huagin supplicants to protect her. However, none of 


nee ee 2. ™ 


ROLEPLAYING SELACHAI 


Selachai is a young adult sahuagin who commands the 
respect of her clan. She came into a position of leadership 
by defeating the clan’s previous priestess in ritual combat, 
using the powers granted to her by Uk’otoa. Everything she 
has in life, she has had to fight for, but this hasn’t hard- 
ened her heart. Rather, she wishes to create a better life for 
her people. 

Ideal. “Only power can change the land dwellers’ minds. 
We have tried reason. We have tried threats. Now they will 
acquiesce to us by choice or serve us by force.” 

Bond. “The Sharkfeather tribe is all | have. | would do 
anything to protect it—even at the cost of my own life.” 

Flaw. “Secretly, | want to believe the best of people, even 
of land-walkers. Nevertheless, if they betray me, | will en- 
sure they die a painful and horrific death.” 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


them move to attack. Instead, they stand 20 feet back 
from her, still kneeling, intent on giving up their lives 
to protect her. Selachai orders the sharkbody abomina- 
tions to put the characters out of commission. 

Selachai waits until one sharkbody abomination is 
dead before she acts in combat, unless she is attacked 
first. A character who succeeds on a DC 13 Wisdom (In- 
sight) check can infer that she is watching as if to mea- 
sure the characters’ capabilities. Once she enters com- 
bat, Selachai fights to incapacitate the characters, not to 
kill them. If any character is reduced to 0 hit points by 
a melee attack, that character is knocked unconscious 
rather than being killed. An unconscious character is 
stable and doesn’t need to make death saving throws. 


CONCLUDING THE ADVENTURE 


This adventure ends with a final scene, based on 
whether the characters were victorious in their battle 
with Selachai or were defeated. 


DEFEAT 

If the characters were defeated by Selachai and her sa- 
huagin, all is not lost. The warlock is no stranger to kill- 
ing, but she recognizes an opportunity when it appears 
before her. She commands her minions to bind the 
characters, stabilize them, and carry their unconscious 
forms to the surface. 

Any characters who survived the fight awaken a few 
hours later on the shore alongside the ruins of the main- 
land part of Palma Flora, their wrists and ankles bound 
by kelp. Four sahuagin watch over them, while a fifth 
alerts Selachai where she lurks in the water nearby. 
Breaking the kelp bonds requires a successful DC 13 
Strength (Athletics) check. 

When the characters face Selachai, read: 


The sahuagin priestess emerges from the water to face 
you, her mouth spreading into a huge grin that reveals 
her needle-like teeth. In fractured Common, she says, “I 
could use the help of land walkers like you. The surface 
dwellers and boat riders hunt us with their hooks and 
harpoons, but they trust you. Take my hand. We don’t 
need to fight. | can tell you so many tales of the land 

| walkers’ evil.” 


This ending sets up future adventures along the Menag- 
erie Coast. As a DM, you can have fun with the elusive 
morality of Selachai and the sahuagin, and of the Clovis 
Concord. Who are the real villains. Are either of these 
factions truly good or evil? What of Three Earrings and 
the Revelry pirates? All these dangling plot threads offer 
hints of new stories that you can guide your players to- 
ward, or which they can seek out of their own volition. 


VICTORY 

If the characters prevailed in the battle against Selachai, 
the rod of retribution falls from her lifeless hand and 
settles in the sand as any remaining foes flee into 

the murky depths. When the characters return to the 
surface with the rod, Three Earrings and her crew 
throw down rope ladders and bring them aboard. The 
captain of Wavechaser is conflicted. She asks for the rod 
of retribution straight away no matter what. However, 
depending on the characters’ actions, she might have 
formed a bond with them over their brief time together. 

Three Earrings’s Resolve. If any of the characters 
convinced Three Earrings not to think of them as pawns 
earlier in the adventure, she resolves to treat all the 
characters as friends now. She welcomes them back 
onto Wavechaser with a huge smile, then asks the ad- 
venturers to come with her to the pirate haven of Dark- 
tow. “There’s no use in being subtle about it,” she says 
with a shrug. “I need to fence this thing in order to get 
you your gold. No place to do that but in Darktow.” 

If the characters refuse the offer, the tabaxi sadly 
accepts their decision—but she draws her cutlass and 
half-jokingly threatens to gut them if they ever betray 
her in future. 

If the characters go with Three Earrings, she is true 
to her word. She even invites the party to join her as pi- 
rates on Wavechaser—and hints that they could earn the 
command of their own ship if they stick with her. From 
this point, your campaign can continue with the charac- 
ters as pirates along the Menagerie Coast, or they could 
mutiny and try to take Wavechaser for themselves. 

Three Earrings’s Treachery. If Three Earrings 
wasn't convinced to value the adventurers as her 
friends, she demands that they give her the rod. If they 
don’t hand it over, she threatens to take it by force. If 
the characters continue to resist, Three Earrings and 
Wavechaser’s crew all fight them. If the characters are 
defeated, Three Earrings orders the crew to throw any 
survivors in the brig. 

“They know too much now,” she growls bitterly. “The 
Plank King will know what to do with them.” 

If the adventure ends this way, the characters are in 
a rough spot. Their next destination is a prison—and 
possibly an execution—in Darktow. They might have to 
join the Revelry, or try to escape their prison and stow 
away on a pirate ship. Or perhaps Moonbeam will return 
and intercept Wavechaser as it returns to Darktow. The 
choice is yours! 


CHARACTER ADVANCEMENT 


At the end of this adventure, the characters reach 3rd 
level. With this experience under their belts, they can 
set off on any number of possible adventures across the 
Menagerie Coast—or even leave this realm behind and 
travel to another part of Wildemount. 

As the characters level up, you can ask the players 
where they want to adventure next, or ask what excites 
them most about adventuring on the Menagerie Coast. 
Use their responses and suggestions to plan your next 
adventure. 


DANGEROUS DESIGNS 


A war criminal is broken out of prison by well-armed 
kobolds working for a mysterious mastermind who 
threatens the gnomish city of Hupperdook. “Dangerous 
Designs” is an adventure that takes characters from 1st 
to 3rd level, and which introduces them to the Western 
Wynandir region of the continent under the rule of the 
Dwendalian Empire. This region is geared toward ad- 
ventures that involve monster hunting, political intrigue, 
and the war with Xhorhas. 

If your players are using the heroic chronicle to cre- 
ate their characters (see chapter 4), they might wish to 
create characters who grew up in the Zemni Fields or 
Marrow Valley, giving them a closer connection to this 
region and to the Dwendalian Empire. For characters 
not from Western Wynandir, the players should consider 
what has drawn those characters to Hupperdook. Be- 
cause this adventure ties directly to the Kryn Dynasty’s 
conflict with the Dwendalian Empire, you can also ask 
each player to consider their character’s stance on the 
war and how the war might tie into their background. 


STORY OVERVIEW 


The characters are drawn into this adventure in the 
lower regions of the city of Hupperdook, an industrious 
gnomish enclave where long days of hard workin the 
forges and scrapyards end with evenings of extensive 
celebration and debauchery. A brilliant human engineer 
named Huron Stahlmast was assigned to Hupperdook 
by the Dwendalian Empire, where he led the develop- 
ment of weapons for the war against the Kryn Dynasty. 
After years of rising disapproval of his ideas and meth- 
ods, Stahlmast was ousted by the folk of the city due 

to his eccentric experimentation and brutal means of 
testing his weapon designs. Shamed and without funds, 
the inventor allowed his dark hatred to push him to meet 
with agents of the Kryn Dynasty, seeking aid that would 
let him complete his work and enact his revenge. 

With the Kryn resources now funneled to him, Stahl- 
mast has amassed and trained a force of kobold min- 
ions to help him steal resources from Hupperdook and 
establish a secret subterranean base deep within the 
Silberquel Ridge. As construction of his experimental 
weapons nears completion, Stahlmast plans to use 
those weapons against the empire that cast him aside. 

Stahlmast’s plot to take over Hupperdook and hobble 
the military might of the Dwendalian Empire’s gnomish 
war machine begins with a prison break. The target is 
a Kryn operative whose assistance Stahlmast needs. 
From there, the characters are drawn into the grow- 
ing chaos orchestrated by Stahlmast and his minions, 
chasing down leads and eventually confronting the mad 
inventor within his mountain lair. 


ADVENTURE SUMMARY 


In the first part of the adventure, even as the characters 
arrive in Hupperdook, a jailbreak sees a dangerous 
goliath prisoner of war named Sken Zabriss freed by 

a group of cloaked kobolds. Their violent escape route 
crosses the characters’ path before they flee into the 
night. The city’s watchmaster, Bram Gulchswattle, hires 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


the characters to investigate the breakout and to dis- 
cover the whereabouts of Zabriss and her kobold allies. 

Clues lead the adventurers to a waterfall-cloaked cav- 
ern that conceals Sken Zabriss, a force of kobolds, and 
a master artisan missing from the city. When the char- 
acters complete this encounter, they reach 2nd level and 
can return the subdued Sken Zabriss to Hupperdook 
and collect their reward. 

In the final part of the adventure, the characters are 
urged to continue their investigation by entering Stahl- 
mast’s base—or they might pursue Sken to that base if 
they allowed the goliath to escape. Once inside the halls 
of Stahlmast’s mountain compound, the adventurers 
must uncover the depths of the mad inventor’s betrayal 
of the empire. The dangerous incursion culminates with 
an all-out battle against Stahlmast and his prototype 
war machine. 


SETUP AND STARTING POINTS 


Before the adventure begins, talk to your players about 
why their characters might have made the journey to 
Hupperdook. You can provide details regarding the city 
and the surrounding region as outlined in chapter 3. You 
can also ask the players if they want to share any of their 
characters’ goals, which might provide reasons for their 
group to come together. Seeking paying work, purchas- 
ing equipment, and wanting to join the war effort are all 
common reasons for traveling to the gnomish enclave. 

Use this time to also discuss if the characters are 
meeting for the first time or if any of them already know 
each other. 


A BOOM IN THE NIGHT 


The adventure begins with the characters arriving 
(whether singly or together) in Hupperdook. Map 5.4 
shows Lower Hupperdook and marks the locations of 
the Ironlot and Assembly Yard sections of the city. 
Once the players are ready to begin, read or para- 
phrase the following boxed text to set the scene: 


? ? 
A chilled, misty night hangs over the industrious moun- 
tainside city of Hupperdook, the scent of a recent rain 

on the air as you walk the muddied path. The nightly fes- 
tivities have already begun, with the elevated section of 
the city known as the Idleworks Shelf alight with colorful 
lanterns and streamers. The distant sounds of music and 
firecrackers echo from hundreds of feet up the stairs of 
the mountain. You arrive at the quiet, dark fields of the 
Assembly Yard, passing massive forges and partially con- 
structed war machines. All the city’s industry has seem- 
ingly been abandoned for the night, while the workers of 


Hupperdook unwind in the celebrations of the upper city. 


6 ° 


Start by having the players describe their characters 
and determine which of them are traveling together. If 
they arrive as an established party, prompt them to talk 


Ole errs 
oi tiem 


HIS Upper Hipp 


Mar 5.4: Lower NuppeRDOOK 


about their collective goals in coming to Hupperdook. 
If they arrive as smaller groups or solo characters, play 
out their interactions as smaller vignettes covering how 
they cross each other’s paths, prompting introductions 
on the way to a destined meeting. Either way, point 

out that most activity appears to be happening in the 
upper city. 

With the scene set, the characters can progress far- 
ther through the streets. As they do, they come across 
an older fellow named Auby Shudderstone (a neutral 
good, male gnome commoner), cleaning his open-air 
machinist’s workstation. The only gnome still working 
in the area of the Assembly Yard that the characters 
pass through, Auby is a bit ornery and doesn’t want to 
party with his fellow machinists. However, he can offer 
up information about the city if prompted. He’ll recom- 
mend that characters speak with Watchmaster Bram 
Gulchswattle for work, and will even act as a guide if 
treated with respect or offered coin. 

When the characters are headed past the Assembly 
Yard into the Ironlot area of the city, proceed with the 
next section. 


PRISON BREAK! 


Before the characters reach the stairs to the Idleworks 
Shelf, read: 


The peace of the evening is shattered by the deafening 
crack of a massive explosion that rocks the southeast 
part of the city. At the base of the mountain, shards of 
rock spray the street a hundred yards from where you 
stand. Heavy smoke billows from a cavernous hole in 
the mountain wall. As you shake the ringing from your 
ears, six cloaked figures appear in the street, running 
from the source of the explosion—and charging straight 


toward you! 


Ask each player how their character reacts. If any of the 
players wish to try to stop or engage with the running 
figures, tell everyone to roll initiative. The action begins 
near the mountain base of Lower Hupperdook, so see 
the Ironlot streets (area H1) below for more information. 

Depending on their interest or sense of curiosity, the 
players might wish to simply step away from the intrud- 
ers and allow them to escape, perhaps following them 
afterward. If so, they can get a good look at the figures 
before one of them releases a cloud of magical fog be- 
hind them, aiding their escape and making it impossible 
for the characters to pursue them. If the players wish to 
set up a trap or surprise the cloaked figures as they rush 
past, ask them how they choose to prepare in the few 
moments available to them, then begin combat once the 
trap is sprung. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


219 


Enemy Me 
Start Point mee - 


z= 


Map 5.5: IRONLOT STREETS 


H1. IRONLOT STREETS 

The cloaked figures are five kobold underlings and 
Sken Zabriss (see the accompanying stat blocks). They 
begin at the western edge of map 5.5. Having just es- 
caped from prison, Sken has no interest in fighting to 
the death. Instead, she attempts to push past any inter- 
lopers to reach the northeast edge of the map and es- 
cape the city. The kobolds, however, attack anyone they 
perceive as interfering with their escape, shouting “No 
witnesses!” If two of the kobold underlings are killed or 
two of the characters drop to 0 hit points, the remaining 
kobolds and Sken focus on escaping. Sken drops a fog 
cloud spell behind her, and all the NPCs use the Dash 
action to make their exit. 

Auby Shudderstone. lf the characters convinced 
Auby the gnome to guide them through the city, they've 
inadvertently led him into a dangerous fray. Enemies at- 
tempt to strike him if he gets in their way, and the char- 
acters might need to decide between protecting their 
guide and focusing on the attackers. 

Exploding Kobolds. If any kobold underlings are 
reduced to 0 hit points during the fight, the characters 
have only 2 rounds to investigate and loot the corpse 
before the body begins to emit a high-pitched whine. If 
a kobold was reduced to 0 hit points by a critical hit, it 
explodes immediately (see the Messy End trait in the 
kobold underling’s stat block). 

A character with a bladed weapon or thieves’ tools can 
attempt a DC 10 Wisdom (Medicine) check to remove 
the acorn-sized explosive from a dead kobold’s body 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


$ ; Enemy 
: Escape Point 


before it explodes (see the “Alchemical Items” sidebar 
presented later in this chapter). On a success, the char- 
acter removes the explosive and has 1 round to dispose 
of it or disarm it. Throwing the explosive away from 
creatures and structures allows it to detonate safely. A 
character can also use tinker’s tools to try to disarm the 
explosive, which requires an action and a successful DC 
12 Dexterity check. 

A successful DC 14 Intelligence (Investigation) check 
made to search a kobold reveals a deep-crimson mud 
staining its feet, plus a lead key hanging on a cord 
around its neck. 

If the characters manage to subdue or capture any 
kobolds, their loyalty to Stahlmast is hard to break. A 
successful DC 15 Charisma (Intimidation) check begins 
to turn a captured kobold, but before it can reveal any 
information, crossbow bolts shot from the distant shad- 
ows (where more of Stahlmast’s loyal forces are watch- 
ing) silences the would-be confessor. 

Aftermath. When the fight is done, numerous citizens 
and members of the Crownsguard respond to the com- 
motion, followed by the Watchmaster Bram Gulchswat- 
tle (a lawful good, male gnome veteran). Bram wants to 
know who the characters are and what they saw. If the 
characters are hesitant to answer openly, the watchmas- 
ter might take it as a sign of guilt, threatening to arrest 
them unless they speak plainly. 

Bram might recognize the characters as adventurers 
by their actions in trying to stop the escaping criminals 
(if they did so), by their attire and equipment, or if they 


1 square =5 feet 


introduce themselves as such. Either way, he offers to 
hire them. He describes the runaway goliath as Sken 
Zabriss, a prisoner of war, but has no idea who the 
kobolds were. He offers a bounty of 500 gp to anyone 
who will hunt down and bring Sken back, as well as 
investigate who was responsible for breaking her out. 
Bram offers 250 gp up front. If the contract is accepted, 
he presents the characters with a copper-and-gold badge 
that indicates they are working under his authority. 
While the emblem is visible, all the characters have ad- 
vantage on Charisma (Persuasion) checks made to pry 
information from stubborn citizens of Hupperdook. 
Where to Go from Here? The characters can travel 
across Lower Hupperdook to hunt down their quarry. 
If they ask Bram for guidance on where to look first, he 
points them in the direction of the smoking hole in the 
side of the mountain, at the site of Gearhole Prison. 


H2. GEARHOLE PRISON 
Ifthe adventurers head toward Gearhole Prison, read: 


p id 
It’s easy to see the metallic sheen of many tall steel 
plates affixed to the mountainside—the outer walls of 
Gearhole Prison. Moonlight and still-smoldering fires 
frame the billowing smoke that pours from a gaping 
cavity in the rock and metal, marking the violent escape 


route taken by the goliath and her accomplices. 


e 


SKEN ZABRISS 
Medium humanoid (goliath), lawful evil 


Armor Class 16 (breastplate, shield) 
Hit Points 45 (7d8 + 14) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
Mey o 15 42) TRL o 12 (47) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages Common, Draconic, Giant 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Powerful Build. Sken counts as one size larger when deter- 
mining her carrying capacity and the weight she can push, 
drag, or lift. 


Special Equipment. Sken wears a ring of obscuring. With it, she 
can cast the fog cloud spell centered on herself three times per 
day. The cloud lasts for 1 minute (no concentration required). 


ACTIONS _ 
Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 


get. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage, or 8 (1d10 + 3) slashing 
damage when used with two hands. 


REACTIONS 


Stone’s Endurance (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). 
When Sken takes damage, she can use her reaction to reduce 
the damage taken by 8 (1d12 + 2). 
aE OE) 


Members of the Crownsguard are on site. They try to 
keep the characters away from the scene, though char- 
acters can talk their way past these guards by showing 
their delegate emblem or convincing the guards that 
they’ve come to help with a successful DC 12 Charisma 
(Persuasion) check. 

When the characters are led to the scene of the es- 
cape, read: 
? i . p 
| Aten-foot-wide hole edged with twisted steel and jagged 
| rock opens up above a pile of rubble. Beyond the hole is 
|a badly damaged stone prison cell, little more than soot- 
| stained walls and an overturned bed charred on one side. 
A thin skylight above the hole matches others alongside 


it in the steel wall, and was apparently the cell’s window. 


A mangled chamber pot is embedded in the right wall, 
where a elf in a long leather coat is pulling it from the 
stone. She pockets three charred pieces of paper from 
the brass pot before turning and acknowledging your 


presence. 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
) 


The elf asks the characters their business, and intro- 
duces herself as Yinra Emberwind (see her stat block 
later in the adventure), a bounty hunter who heard the 


KOBOLD UNDERLING 
Small humanoid (kobold), lawful evil 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 7 (3d6 — 3) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
Ae) > 163. FC) + Sse 9h. 2c) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 
Languages Common, Draconic 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Messy End. The kobold explodes 3 rounds after it dies, or im- 
mediately if it was killed by a critical hit. The explosion destroys 
the kobold’s body, leaving its equipment behind. Each creature 
within 5 feet of the exploding kobold must make a DC 10 Dex- 
terity saving throw, taking 4 (1d8) bludgeoning damage on a 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


Pack Tactics. The kobold has advantage on an attack roll 
against a creature if at least one of the kobold’s allies is within 5 
feet of the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the kobold has disadvan- 
tage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom (Perception) checks 
that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


Hand Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 30/120 
ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 
EEE I a Ee) 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


228 


commotion from the Idleworks Shelf. She brags about 
having already finished her work here, and wishes the 
characters good luck in finding Sken before she does. 
The characters can attempt to barter for the paper Yinra 
recovered, which she relinquishes for 50 gp in coins or 
other treasure. A character who wants to steal the paper 
from Yinra while she’s engaged in conversation must 
succeed on a DC 18 Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check. 
On a failure, Yinra grabs the would-be thief’s hand and 
laughs at them before leaving. 

If the characters procure the charred paper, they ap- 
pear to be fragments of a damaged note written in clear 
handwriting. (Show the players handout A.) 

Inspecting the Bed. Any character who investigates 
the bed confirms that it is burned only on the side fac- 
ing the hole, as if used as a barrier to protect against 
the blast. With a successful DC 12 Intelligence (Inves- 
tigation) check, they find a jagged, fist-sized shard of 
bronze lodged in the bed. It smells strongly of sulfur and 
burned blasting powder, and doesn’t match any other 
objects in the cell. 

Inspecting the Rubble. A character who investigates 
the rubble confirms that the explosion came from in- 
side the room, with most of the stone and steel having 
been blown out from the inside. A successful DC 12 
Intelligence (Investigation) check notes signs of multi- 
ple simultaneous explosions at various points on the 
inside wall. 

With a successful DC 14 Intelligence (Investigation) 
check, a character makes a discovery within the loose 
rock—a strange, flat automaton the size of a dinner 
plate. It appears to be made from iron, resembles a crab, 
and is damaged beyond the point of functionality. Its 
size means it would have fit through the skylight. 


Hanoour A: Burneo 
LETTER FRAGMENTS 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


More Questions. With a few clues recovered, the 
characters can ask around in hopes of uncovering 
more of the secrets of Sken’s escape. For each specific 
location they travel to in search of answers, roll a d6. 
On aroll of 6, Yinra Emberwind is just leaving as the 
characters arrive, taunting them as she exits. 

Use the following to guide the next steps of the char- 
acters’ investigation: 


e If they ask about the automaton, the characters are 
directed toward Master Maker Cleff Tinkertop. His 
shop in the Idleworks Shelf has been closed since the 
war picked up. The city’s leaders keep him and his 
daughter Rissa working on warfare designs down in 
the Builder’s Plot (area H3). 

- Ifthe characters ask around regarding explosives or 
blasting powder, helpful citizens can point them to- 
ward the city’s only sanctioned creators of such things 
at the Firemark Facility (area H5). 

- Ifthey ask about the deep-crimson mud seen on the 
kobolds’ feet, none of the locals have any sense of 
where it might have come from, but it’s suggested that 
the characters might find more information at the Lay 
of the Land herbalist shop (area H4). 

- If the characters ask if anyone saw where Sken and 
the kobolds escaped to, a number of people saw them 
running toward the north side of the city, but they 
eventually vanished from sight in the shadows. 

- Asking about strange happenings in the city recently, 
a number of builders and designers complain of a 
growing rash of thefts. Tools, raw materials, metal 
ingots, and other manufacturing supplies are consis- 
tently targeted, though always in small amounts. 


H3. THE BUILDER’S PLOT 
If the adventurers head toward the Builder’s Plot, read: 


b 

Stepping past the outer walls of the city brings you 

back into the dusty expanse of the Assembly Yard. Row 
after row of shaded construction bays and towers flank 
partially built catapults, heavy cannons, and other odd, 
experimental weaponry encircled by metal fences. Fol- 
lowing the directions you were given to the Builder’s Plot 


leads you toward high piles of metal sheeting and the 


sounds of incessant hammering. 


e 


During the day, the characters find Cleff Tinkertop and 
his daughter Rissa (chaotic good gnome commoners) 
building a prototype metallic glider. If they arrive in the 
evening, the area is empty except for a few patrolling 
Crownsguard. Asking the guards about Cleff Tinkertop 
sees the characters directed to Sootswallow Lodge (see 
“Other Hupperdook Locations” later in the adventure), 
where he often spends his evenings after work. 

Master Maker Cleff Tinkertop. Cleff is an amiable 
middle-aged gnome, albeit a bit absent-minded and 
easily distracted. Rissa is sharp and keeps her father on 
track as best she can. If they are asked about explosives 
or shown the bronze shrapnel, they direct the charac- 
ters toward the Firemark Facility (area H5), the only 


sanctioned manufacturing den of blasting powder and 
black powder in Hupperdook. 

If the characters show Cleff the damaged automaton, 
he recognizes the design as his own. Thinking at first 
that the device might be one of his older models, he 
inspects it further and scoffs at the realization that it is 
a poor copy. The crafting reminds him of the work of 
an old colleague of his—Huron Stahlmast. Talented but 
impatient, Stahlmast was prone to copying the work of 
others and executing it poorly. He hasn’t been seen in 
Hupperdook for years. 

Treasure. If the characters are particularly interested 
in the functionality of the broken automaton, Cleff offers 
to repair it. Doing so takes a few hours and costs 15 gp 
for materials, whereupon the characters are the owners 
of a vox seeker (see chapter 6). 


H4. Lay OF THE LAND HERBALIST 
If the adventurers find their way to this shop, read: 


> $ 
Navigating the winding streets of the Ironlot, you find 

a wedge-shaped hutch of smoke-stained thatch and 
warped wood. A faded sign bearing the name “Lay ofthe 
Land” dangles above the door. Entering the shaded inte- 


rior, you are greeted by all manner of smells, from pun- 
gent fungi, to dried weeds, to burning incense. A woman 
| turns toward you where she eats at a corner table, her 
smiling mouth half-filled with food, her voluminous black 


hair framing her face. 


é é 


The welcoming herbalist Zendasa (a chaotic good, 
female human druid) treats her customers almost as 
children under her care, and asks frequent and probing 
questions regarding the characters’ daily habits and 
hygiene. Her shop sells the following items from chapter 
5 of the Player’s Handbook: antitoxin, candles, druidic 
focuses, incense, healer’s kits, oil, perfume, potions of 
healing, alchemist’s supplies, and herbalism kits. 

Muddy Feet. If the characters descrihe the stained, 
muddy feet of the kobolds who helped break Sken 
Zabriss out of prison, she tells them that red clay 
shouldn’t be found in Hupperdook. The most likely place 
for it to have come from is farther up the mountain, near 
the long-dormant volcanic caps of the Silberquel Ridge. 


H5. FIREMARK FACILITY 


When the adventurers arrive at the Firemark 
Facility, read: 


kd 

This brown-and-red brick building is larger than you | 
expected, its black-iron roof stretching over a massi» 
compound. The scent of sulfur and blasting powder, 
familiar from the prison cell, is faint on the air here. As 
you draw near, a gnome guard approaches you with a 
suspicious look. 


YINRA EMBERWIND 


Medium humanoid (elf), neutral good 


Armor Class 15 (studded leather) 
Hit Points 16 (3d8 + 3) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
meo 16 (+3) «12 (41) MA BE T0) 


ťa I III M 


Skills Investigation +4, Perception +3, Stealth +5 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages Common, Elvish 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Fey Ancestry. Yinra has advantage on saving throws against be- 
ing charmed, and magic can’t put her to sleep. 


Keen Hearing and Sight. Yinra has advantage on Wisdom (Per- 
ception) checks that rely on hearing or sight. 
ACTIONS 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 150/600 ft., 
one target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage. 


The gnome guard does her best to shoo the adventurers 
away from this restricted site. The characters can sway 
her with a 15 gp bribe, or can attempt to talk their way 
past with a successful DC 14 Charisma (Deception or 
Intimidation) check. Once inside, they can speak with 
the site’s blast gaffer, Sleese. 

Blast Gaffer Sleese Firemark. Sleese Firemark (a 
lawful neutral, male gnome commoner) is a hotheaded 
fellow who seems intent on working himself into an 
early grave. He isn’t happy about having his workflow 
interrupted but entertains questions from the characters 
for afew moments. 

If the adventurers inquire about any missing blasting 
powder, Sleese denies that any such thing could happen, 
checks his ledgers, and confirms that all is accounted 
for. He touts the rather impressive guard force that 
watches over the facility and the importance of the work 
done there with the escalating need to overpower the 
Kryn. He might also lament that the facility’s most tal- 
ented powder artisan has been out ill for a few weeks. 

A Missing Master. If asked about the ill artisan, 
Sleese mentions that a gnome named Nima Cinnarid 
had been one of the Firemark Facility’s most diligent 
suppliers of raw materials and most skilled crafters of 
high-quality blasting powder, at least until she took ill 
three weeks ago. She’s been holed up in her house in 
the northern part of the Ironlot ever since. A few of her 
Firemark compatriots have tried to visit her, but she 
won't let anyone in. Sleese is noticeably fearful over how 
bad this illness might be. 

Treasure. Sleese offers a pouch of blasting powder 
(see the “Alchemical Items” sidebar later in the adven- 
ture) as a gift if the characters agree to check in on Nima 
Cinnarid. He can direct them to her house at area H6. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


224. 


lfsquare\=5)feet 


Map 5.6: Nima Cinnario’s House 


H6. Nima CINNARID’S HOUSE 
This encounter location is shown on map 5.6. If the 
characters seek out Nina Cinnarid at home, read: 


Traveling to the north end of the Ironlot, you approach 
the humble abode that Sleese Firemark directed you to- 
ward. The green-painted wooden walls are streaked with 
dirt washed down by the rain. A sign hanging on the front 


door reads: “Sickness within. Do not disturb.” Curtains at 


the windows all appear to be closed. 


$ $ 


The front and side doors to the house are locked, but 
can be picked with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check 
using thieves’ tools. Knocking once on the front door 
yields no answer, but a second knock summons a cough- 
ing, creaky voice from the other side that falteringly 

tells the characters to stay away for fear of catching the 
sickness. Any character with a passive Wisdom (Insight) 
score of 15 or higher, or who is successful on a DC 15 
Wisdom (Insight) check, recognizes that the voice is ner- 
vous—and is definitely not a female gnome. 

If the characters mention anything about the prison 
break, the voice pauses, then states, “Actually, I think I 
might know something about that.” As the front door is 
unlocked, the voice invites the characters in. 

The interior of Nima Cinnarid’s house is dark except 
for a guttering candle on the back table, shedding dim 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


? ? 


light in a 5-foot radius. Four kobold underlings lie 

in waitin the shadows. Any character with a passive 
Wisdom (Perception) score of 16 or higher, or who suc- 
ceeds on a DC 16 Wisdom (Perception) check, sees the 
kobolds hiding and ready to spring. When any character 
moves more than 10 feet into the house, the kobolds at- 
tack. Anyone who was not aware of the hidden kobolds 
is surprised. 

When the kobolds are defeated, the characters have 
2 rounds to loot or investigate the corpses of any slain 
kobolds. After that time, the kobolds’ bodies explode 
asin area H1. See the “Exploding Kobolds” section in 
that area, the kobold underling stat block (earlier in the 
adventure), and the “Alchemical Items” sidebar for infor- 
mation on removing and keeping the explosive seeds the 
kobolds carry. 

As in area H1, a successful DC 14 Intelligence (In- 
vestigation) check reveals that each of these kobolds 
has a deep-crimson mud staining its feet, plus a lead 
key hanging on a cord around its neck. Neither of these 
things can be discovered if a kobold explodes. 

Development. If the characters manage to subdue 
a kobold, it gives up what it knows with a successful 
DC 15 Charisma (Intimidation) check. The kobold can 
reveal that it works for someone called “the Master,” 
and that Nima Cinnarid has been kidnapped and is 
presently held high up the mountain at a location called 
Silver Falls. If its life is spared, the kobold promises to 
guide the characters to the Silver Falls cavern area. The 
kobold accompanies the party through the “Mountain 
Climb” section below but attempts to escape at any 
opportunity. 

Signs of Trouble. Any search of the house reveals 
signs of a struggle from a few weeks past, including 
broken furniture and an emptied chest with a broken 
lock. A few heavy coats and sets of work boots sized for 
a gnome are all stained with red dirt. A broken workta- 
ble has been dumped into a corner strewn with scraps 
and garbage. Searching through the refuse reveals a 
number of torn parchment notes, one of which provides 
a clue to the location of Silver Falls. (Show the players 
handout B.) 

Treasure. Characters who sift through the wreckage 
find a pouch of blasting powder (see the “Alchemical 
Items” sidebar). 


OTHER HUPPERDOOK LOCATIONS 

The following miscellaneous locations are minor areas 
the characters might visit in Hupperdook during their 
investigations. 

H7. The Prayer Foundry. A majestic temple to Mora- 
din the All-Hammer, this mighty octagonal structure 
resembles a massive anvil atop an iron shrine. Within, 
holy symbols and prayer coins are pressed and forged, 
while blacksmiths and tinkerers come to have their 
plans and creations blessed. 

H8. Omnismelter. Attached through a series of 
angled hallways, this network of foundries forms a 
sprawling compound that smelts, purifies, and prepares 
a majority of the metal materials and ingots distributed 
throughout the Marrow Valley. 


H9. Neverbend Smithy. Long run by the Neverbend 
family of gnomes, this is the place to go for arms and ar- 
mor, as well as general smithing needs. Standard metal 
weapons and armor, as well as metal-based adventuring 
gear, can be purchased here. 

H10. Ironside Barracks. Built across from Gearhole 
Prison, this squat, metal-reinforced barracks is home 
to most of the Crownsguard and Righteous Brand 
soldiers stationed in Hupperdook. Watchmaster Bram 
Gulchswattle can often be found here. 

H11. Sootswallow Lodge. The largest (and one of the 
only) taverns operating below the Idleworks Shelf, the 
Sootswallow Lodge caters to the builders and makers 
of the Ironlot during work hours, then plays home to 
the sketchier elements of Hupperdook by night. A fence 
named Udoth who keeps a room here in the evenings is 
always in the market for adventuring goods, which he 
buys for 75 percent of their value rather than 50 percent. 

H12. The Armavault. A majestic 30-foot-high steel 
door sits flush with the rocky wall of the mountain here. 
Beyond the door, a heavily guarded interior hall expands 
into a long corridor lined with massive alcoves housing 
stored siege weapons. 

H13. Silberhaul Mines. This gated courtyard con- 
tains the many entrances to the deep tunnels and ore 
veins of the Silberhaul Mines. 

H14. Winch Lift. These giant steel platforms lifted by 
impressively large chains carry heavy equipment and 
large groups of people between the Ironlot and the Idle- 
works Shelf. 

H15. Upper Hupperdook. The upper part of the 
city is divided into two main sections—the Idleworks 
Shelf and Silver Falls Grove. The Idleworks Shelf is a 
largely recreational district that houses the city’s eve- 
ning celebrations, and is home to the empire-renowned 
Blushing Tankard tavern. Wrapped around the water- 
fall lake that gives it its name, Silver Falls Grove is the 
residential core of Hupperdook, its streets dense with 
elevated stone-and-metal towers that house families at 
every level. 


a w, 


ALCHEMICAL ITEMS 


This adventure features two new alchemical items, each 
described below. 

Blasting Powder. This volatile alchemical powder comes 
in a small pouch. When ignited by an open flame or a fuse, 
the powder explodes. Each creature within 5 feet of the ex- 
ploding pouch must make a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw, 
taking 3d6 bludgeoning damage on a failed save, or half as 
much damage on a successful one. 

A character can bind multiple pouches of blasting pow- 
der together so they explode at the same time. Each addi- 
tional pouch increases the damage by 1d6 (maximum of 
10d6) and the blast radius by 5 feet (maximum of 20 feet). 

Explosive Seed. This acorn-sized sphere of brass con- 
tains a small amount of blasting powder and a clockwork 
trigger. An explosive seed can be thrown up to 30 feet as 
an action, detonating on impact. Each creature within 5 
feet of the exploding seed must make a DC 10 Dexterity 
saving throw, taking 1d8 bludgeoning damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


Of all the sources we mine from 
within the Silberguel, my yield of 
saltpeter still proves the most pure 

dnd powerfull The Firemarks, 
pry 45 they might, will have to respect 
+ my expertise dnd contributions to the war effort. 

The sheer volume of untapped Sudno in that cavern 

behind the top of the falls is invaluable, and once 


~ 


L have enough marked interest from the Firemark 


* 


if 


Handout B: Nima’s Note 


ASCENDING THE MOUNTAIN 


As the adventurers leave Hupperdook to climb up the 
Silberquel Ridge toward the top of the Silver Falls, read: 


n ° 
You leave the smoky atmosphere of the city for cleaner | 
| mountain air as you begin your hike up the treacherous 
| heights ofthe Silberquel Ridge. The steep climb grows 

| more and more precarious as you go, with pathways 

| becoming thin and hard to traverse among the cliff-side 


| 

| trees and gray rock of the mountainside. You keep the 

| silver line of the tumbling waterfall always in your sights, 
| 
| 


a guide toward your hopeful destination. 


The mountain passis rugged but its paths are easily 
navigable, requiring no ability checks to climb. Ascend- 
ing to the peak of the Silver Falls at an average pace 
normally takes six hours. A successful DC 14 Wisdom 
(Survival) check locates recent kobold tracks leading 

up the mountain, cutting that travel time in half. For 
each hour of travel, roll a d8 and consult the Random 
Mountain Encounters table to see if any denizens of the 
mountain cross paths with the characters. If you roll the 
same encounter twice, reroll. You can alternatively se- 
lect an encounter (or multiple encounters) to liven up the 
characters’ journey. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


waterfall 


9 Fe 


Facility, Ull let them help in harvesting my secret cave, 


= 


226 


RANDOM MOUNTAIN ENCOUNTERS 
d8 Encounter 
1-5 The characters have no encounter. 
6 Two wolves that have been stalking the party attack. 
7 A hungry hippogriff attacks from the air. 
8 Two kobold underlings (see their stat block earlier in 
this adventure) on patrol accost the characters. 


PEAK OF SILVER FALLS 
When the characters finally reach the peak of the Silver 
Falls, read: 


The sound of rushing water grows louder as you finally 
reach the top of the Silver Falls. The impressive flow of 
water cascades down the mountainside toward Hupper- 
dook below. Around the crest of the falls, the rocky earth 
is a deep, rich red. 


o—————— o 


With the information revealed in the note recovered in 
Nima’s house (area H6), the characters have no trouble 
spotting telltale shadows behind the waterfall that hint 
at a hidden cavern. Any investigation of the area reveals 
a 10-foot-wide rock shelf covered in red mud that leads 
behind the falls and into the cavern beyond. 

Fool’s Entrance. Any character with a passive Wis- 
dom (Perception) score of 17 or higher, or who succeeds 
on a DC 17 Wisdom (Perception) check, spots a faint 
column of smoke rising above the waterfall. Characters 
who continue the mountainside climb discover a hidden, 
3-foot-wide iron chimney rising from the rocky ground. 
The chimney is too smooth to be climbed except with 
a rope anchored to the rocks above. It descends 30 
feet before it splits into three chimneys leading to the 
kitchen (area L6), the smithy (area L14), and the clock- 
work forge (area L19). 

Any character who tries to descend the chimney 
without a rope or a climbing speed inevitably falls. Roll 
a d3 to determine which lower chimney the character 
tumbles down. At the end of the fall, the character must 
succeed on a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw or take 1d6 
bludgeoning damage. In addition, the fire at the bottom 
deals damage to creatures that come in contact with it, 
as noted in each area’s description. 


SILVER FALLS CAVERN 
When the adventurers enter the cavern behind the 
waterfall (shown on map 5.7), read: 


? ? 
Beyond the rushing spray of water is a dry cavern. Multi- 
ple lanterns shed light across the rocky interior, revealing 
a floor thickly strewn with dried bat guano, a small tent 
and table, a steel door set into the far wall, and two wide 
workbenches. A female gnome is working at the farthest 
bench, shackled to a chain set into the rock wall. Four 


kobolds sit around the table near the tent, playing a dice 


game with a familiar-looking gray-skinned goliath. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


The bats that long dwelled in this cavern (the source of 
the guano from which Nima Cinnarid extracts saltpeter 
for creating explosives) fled when the kobolds took up 
permanent occupation of the cave. Characters trying to 
sneak through the waterfall and into the cavern must 
succeed on a group DC 16 Dexterity (Stealth) check to 
enter unnoticed, allowing them to attack with surprise. 
If the group check fails, Sken sees the intruders, com- 
plains about her card game being interrupted, and initi- 
ates combat. 

Cavern Fight. Four kobold underlings and Sken 
Zabriss all attack the characters (see their stat blocks 
earlier in this adventure). Sken loudly taunts them for 
how they’re all about to die, and shouts that the fall 
of the Dwendalian Empire at the hands of Xhorhas is 
imminent. If the characters were guided by a captive ko- 
bold from Nima’s house, it rushes to the other kobolds if 
it can, borrows a weapon, and joins the fray. 

The shackled gnome is Nima Cinnarid, a neutral 
good, female gnome commoner. She hides beneath her 
workbench when combat breaks out, but if a kobold or 
Sken moves within 30 feet of the bench, read: 


| From under the bench, the shackled gnome grabs 


| a handful of small brass spheres piled nearby. “You 
wanted these made?” she shouts. “Well, here! You can 


| have them!” 
é 


Nima throws an explosive seed (see the “Alchemical 
Items” sidebar earlier in this adventure) at whichever 
enemies are closest, then throws another seed on each 
of her turns until she runs out of seeds. She has a total 
of four explosive seeds. 

If any of the characters speak to Nima and offer her 
help, Sken rushes over to take the gnome hostage, 
threatening to kill her unless the characters drop their 
weapons. If the characters don’t comply and can’t stop 
Sken in time, the goliath attacks Nima. 

If Sken is reduced to 11 hit points or fewer, she at- 
tempts to use her ring of obscuring and flees to the steel 
door. She spends her action pulling out a lead key she 
carries and opening the door, and it takes another ac- 
tion to close and lock it behind her. If Sken escapes, the 
characters need to pursue her into Stahlmast’s lair to 
complete their contract with Bram Gulchswattle. 

Development. If the battle is won and Nima survives, 
the characters can free her from her shackles and learn 
a number of details regarding what’s going on. The 
gnome can offer up the following information in re- 
sponse to the characters’ questions: 


- Nima has long been a munitions expert, developing 
refined explosives and weapons for the war effort 
against the Kryn Dynasty. 

» The cave is a secret source of potent explosive mate- 
rials, and she has harvested guano from it for years. 
She normally comes here once every four to six 
months to stock up. 

- Nima’s last trip three weeks ago ended with her cap- 
ture by the kobolds and their master, Huron Stahl- 
mast. A former engineer for the Dwendalian Empire, 


To the 


Silberque!- 
Ridge 
Mountains 
Silver Falls Waterfall ~ 
iR J : 3 a l a ae i z ee : 2 J : 
tahlmast’s & k = Be RN 
Shackles e o Shackles 7 
Tinkering i AE W- = 
Table $ “Alchemist 


= 


1squares5feet F 


Map 5.7: Sitver Farts Cavern 


Stahlmast was shamed for his imperfect designs and Ifthe characters want to try to open the door right away, 
immoral experimentation. He left Hupperdook years see the next section of the adventure (“Stahlmast’s 
before and was assumed to have found his fortune Lair”) for more information. 

elsewhere. Instead, he’s been building a lair beyond Treasure. After defeating Sken, the characters can 
the waterfall cavern, sealed off behind the steel door. claim her ring of obscuring (see chapter 6). The work- 
Stahlmast imprisoned Nima in the cavern and has bench Nima was working at holds 1d4 + 1 explosive 
been forcing her to produce explosive devices. One seeds (see the earlier “Alchemical Items” sidebar). 

of those devices was used to help Sken break out 

of Gearhole Prison. She has also been working on CHARACTER ADVANCEMENT 


plans for larger explosive devices whose purpose she At the end of this part of the adventure, the characters 
doesn’t yet know. all reach 2nd level. The setup for the next part of the 


Stahlmast is bent on vengeance against the empire— adventure assumes that the characters return to the city 
and against the city of Hupperdook and its people. before seeing what lies beyond the steel door. If Nima 
survived the fight, she is anxious to flee the cavern and 
begs the characters to escort her back to Hupperdook. 
If the players want to press on immediately—espe- 
cially if both Nima and Sken were killed—that’s fine. 
Just make sure all the characters have leveled up, and 
let them take a long rest in the cave before moving on to 
the next part of the adventure (“Stahlmast’s Lair”). You 
can then rework the events below when the characters 
return to Hupperdook after having bested Stahlmast 
in his lair. 


If Nima was killed, the characters can seek this infor- 
mation from Sken or a captured kobold. If the fight in 
the cavern left no enemies or allies alive, you can move 
these revelations to an NPC in Hupperdook who recog- 
nizes the explosive seeds as Stahlmast’s work. 

Steel Door. If any character investigates the steel 
door, read: 


The eight-foot-tall steel door has layered crossbars 


and supports are embedded deep into the rock of the NEXT Moves 


If Sken was left alive after combat, the characters can 
use the chains that once shackled Nima to bind the 
goliath. Taking her or her corpse back to Watchmaster 
Bram Gulchswattle at Ironside Barracks (area H10 in 


mountain, creating an impassible entrance to whatever 


lies beyond. 


eo 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


228 


the first part of the adventure) completes their contract 
and allows them to collect their reward. The characters 
can then take some time to rest and handle any busi- 
ness they might wish to conduct in Hupperdook. 

You can read or paraphrase the following text to com- 
plete this part of the adventure: 


| 


With a successful mission behind you and your hard- 


thought to the steel door you saw behind the waterfall— 
and the nefarious plots that Stahlmast is hatching to 


earned reward paid out, you have a chance to give more | 
punish the fair people of Hupperdook. | 
i 


With the completion of this first part of the adventure, 
the players are free to decide what’s next for the char- 
acters. They can leave the threat of Huron Stahlmast 
to the authorities as they move on to another adven- 
ture elsewhere, or they can talk to Bram Gulchswattle 
about extending their contract to include a bounty for 
Stahlmast. Gulchswattle is prepared to pay the group 
an additional 1,500 gp for the capture or elimination of 
Stahlmast, along with evidence of his wrongdoing. 

Whatever drives the characters’ decision to go after 
Stahlmast, the next part of the adventure begins at the 
steel door that leads into Stahlmast’s lair. 


STAHLMAST’S LAIR 


Once the players are ready to explore Stahlmast’s lair, 
read or paraphrase the following: 


‘ 
l Gathering your weapons and your grit, you prepare 
| for another hike up the Silberquel Ridge. Your goal is 
to gain access to the lair of this Stahlmast beyond the 
steel door—and to uncover the full scope of his mysteri- 
ous plans. 


You might usethe Random Mountain Encounters table 
(from earlier in this adventure) during the characters’ 
ascent, or you can decide that their familiarity with the 
mountain trails makes it easier to avoid trouble. Either 
way, having made the journey already, it takes only three 
hours to reach the Silver Falls. 


E a 


Att Is Not Lost 


if the characters lose the fight in the Silver Falls cavern or 
in any part of Stahlmast’s lair, it doesn’t necessarily mean 
the adventure is at an end. Whenever Stahlmast’s minions 
get the upper hand, you can have them start knocking 
characters out rather than killing them. Unconscious 
survivors of a fight wake up in a holding cell in area L7 

of Stahlmast’s lair, stripped of their equipment. Any new 
characters replacing fallen characters can join them there 
as previously captured prisoners. 

The characters’ confiscated equipment is in a chest in 
the armory (area L2), and a confident kobold underling 
guards their cells. You can then set up a scenario in which 
the characters find a way to escape and recover their 
equipment. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


STEEL Door 

If the characters recovered an undamaged lead key 

from any of the kobold minions or Sken, they can easily 
unlock the door. Otherwise, it can be opened with a 
successful DC 20 Dexterity check using thieves’ tools. 
Savvy players might also think to try blowing the lock 
open with blasting powder. Doing so requires one pouch 
of blasting powder, tinker’s tools, and a successful DC 
12 Intelligence check, but alerts Stahlmast and his min- 
ions to the characters’ approach. 


ENTERING THE LAIR 

When the characters move beyond the steel door, read: 
e ® 
| The shadowed tunnel stretches onward for fifty feet 

| before the orange glow of lantern light sets an ominous 
glow across its rough stone walls. The smell of burned 
coal, wet earth, and refuse hangs heavy here. From a 
distance comes the intermittent echo of rough, conversa- 
tional kobold barking. The tunnel splits ahead, with one 


branch running south and the other continuing on toa 


| cavern that is the source of the light. 


StahImast’s Minions. Even kobolds as well trained 
as the ones that serve Stahlmast prize self-preservation 
over all else. In each encounter with Stahlmast’s kobold 
minions, if half or more of the kobolds are defeated or 
killed, any remaining kobolds flee the battle. Fleeing 
kobolds retreat deeper into the lair in hopes of warning 
Stahlmast and seeking reinforcements. 

If any kobolds are captured and questioned, they 
reveal what they know of Stahlmast’s operation with a 
successful DC 13 Charisma (Intimidation or Persua- 
sion) check. You can have individual kobolds know only 
bits of the overall plan so that the characters learn all 
the information only over time: 


e The Master is planning to make many tiny metal crabs 
(vox seekers, as described in chapter 6). 

- The gray dwarf is obsessed with his ugly statue. 

e The scary elf visits every few weeks to train the ko- 
bolds, and then vanishes into the Master’s fire room. 


Making a Scene. Though the winding passages of 
the compound help mute the sounds of footsteps, loud 
noises (including combat or shouting) alert the lair’s in- 
habitants of intruders at your determination. 

Voice of StahImast. Each area of the lair is outfitted 
with a metal speaking tube that protrudes from the ceil- 
ing, and which Stahlmast uses to issue orders wherever 
he happens to be. If a character speaks into a tube, their 
words are heard in all areas of the lair. 

If Stahlmast is aware of the characters’ intrusion, 
he occasionally taunts them through these tubes. His 
remarks alternate between threatening and mocking, 
boasting about his plans while goading the characters 
into finding him—and trying to lead them into traps and 
ambushes. As characters approach the clockwork forge 
in area L19, he might start describing the benefits of 
joining him. 


Mar 5.8: STAHLMAST’S LAIR 


Ll. TURRET CAVERN 


This natural cavern is reinforced by support beams 
across its fifty-foot length. A smooth pillar of stone rises 
in the center of the cave to a height of eight feet, nearly 
touching the ten-foot-high ceiling. The tunnel continues 
beyond the cavern, curving abruptly to the west and out 


of sight. 


u h 


Any character with a passive Wisdom (Perception) score 
of 16 or higher, or who succeeds on a DC 16 Wisdom 
(Perception) check, notices that a hand crossbow is 
mounted to the top of the stone pillar. This clockwork 
crossbow remains inert unless Stahlmast is aware of 
the characters, in which case it attacks the nearest crea- 
ture within 30 feet of it each round. The crossbow is +5 
to hit and deals 3 (1d6) piercing damage on a hit. If a 1 
or 2 is rolled for the crossbow’s attack roll, it breaks and 
no longer functions. 

The crossbow turret is Large object with AC 17, 15 hit 
points, and immunity to poison and psychic damage. 


y 


To Silver Falls 


1 square = 5 feet 


L2. ARMORY 


P 
| 
| Three long tables occupy the center of this square cavern, 


a lantern dangling above them. The walls are adorned 
with hooks and loops that hold digging tools and basic 


| weapons in a disorganized fashion. A large chest is set 


| beneath one table, and a door stands closed to the north. 


4 


A kobold underling (see the stat block earlier in this 
adventure) sits at one of the tables as the characters 
approach this area, cleaning a pile of soiled tools and 
weapons with a rag as it curses under its breath in Dra- 
conic. If it receives any warning that intruders are com- 
ing (including hearing the characters fighting or talking 
in area L1), it might make a brief stand against them—or 
it might flee before they arrive, leaving its work behind. 

The north door into area L3 is locked. Roguun the 
duergar blacksmith (area L14) has the key, or the lock 
can be picked with a successful DC 18 Dexterity check 
using thieves’ tools. 

Recovered Goods. If the characters were captured 
and thrown into the prison cells in area L7, their weap- 
ons hang on the walls here and their other equipment is 
in the chest beneath the table. Yinra Emberwind’s equip- 
ment is also stored there (see area L7). 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


S = Secret Door 


Treasure. Characters looting this area can claim four 
daggers, five shortswords, three spears, three cross- 
bows with forty bolts each, and two sets of thieves’ tools. 


L3. VOLATILE MATERIALS STORAGE 


Short steps lead down into this small cavern, whose air 
is heavy with the smell of sulfur. Numerous boxes and 
barrels are filled with blasting powder, black powder, and 


other dangerously explosive materials. 


This cavern is extremely dangerous. Any open flame 
brought into the area (including that of a torch), as well 
as any fire or lightning-based effect used in the area, has 
a 30 percent chance of detonating the materials stored 
here. This detonation deals 4d10 bludgeoning damage 
to each creature within the room and in the armory 
(area L2). It also partially collapses this cavern and 
alerts every creature within the lair to the characters’ 
intrusion. 

Any character with a passive Wisdom (Perception) 
score of 13 or higher, or who succeeds on a DC 13 Wis- 
dom (Perception) check, notices that the materials are 
stored unsafely and assesses that it’s a miracle none of 
it has exploded yet. 

Treasure. The characters can claim up to twenty 
pouches of blasting powder (see the “Alchemical Items” 
sidebar, earlier in this adventure) from this area. 


L4. RECREATION ROOM 


? ° 
Flickering lanterns illuminate this spacious cavern, | 
which features three tables surrounded by chairs. Three | 
kobolds are sitting around the central table, playing cards 
for copper pieces. Mugs and scattered piles of playing | 
cards litter the blade-scarred tabletops. A dozen small 
cloaks hang on the walls from metallic hooks. A passage 
to the south bends out of view, while rickety wooden | 
doors obscure a cavern to the west. Another door onthe. | 


north wall is partially ajar, while a passage to the north- 


east leads toward a dark cavern. 


é b 


The three kobold underlings (see the stat block pre- 
sented earlier in this adventure) playing cards are 
engrossed in their game. If the characters observe the 
game unnoticed, it quickly becomes apparent that the 
kobolds aren't following any consistent rules. The ko- 
bolds attack as soon as intruders are spotted. 

Treasure. Small characters—or Medium characters 
who crouch down—can don the cloaks found here. 
Doing so grants advantage on Charisma (Deception) 
checks to characters trying to pass themselves off as 
kobold minions, as long as they remain 30 feet or more 
away from any ally of Stahlmast. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


L5. STAHLMAST’S WORKROOM 


$ $ 
From the inclined passage leading to this rectangular 

cavern, you see a heavy lantern hanging from the ceil- 
ing, shedding bright light. A long table in the cavern is 
covered in large sheets of parchment, books, inkwells, 
and charcoal, and numerous notes are spiked to the 


stone walls. 


* (3 


Most of the notes here read like mad scrawls mixed 
with engineering designs. Sketches of the layout of 
Hupperdook and the mountaintop are seen, as well as 
what looks like the designs for explosive seeds (see the 
“Alchemical Items” sidebar earlier in this adventure) 
and a diagram of how the seeds can be surgically im- 
planted into creatures. Another note details the process 
by which sharks are to be placed into the waterfall lake 
in Silver Falls Grove. One strange design shows what 
appears to be some kind of clockwork-powered armor. 

Vox Seeker. Clinging to the underside of the table is a 
vox seeker (see chapter 6). There is a 25 percent chance 
that the automaton is wound up when discovered, allow- 
ing it to attack for up to 5 minutes. 

Dastardly Deeds. A character who studies the notes 
and diagrams can determine that Stahlmast plans to 
set powerful explosives across the mountainside in a 
way that will bury most of Hupperdook in a landslide, 
even as it leaves his lair intact. Bringing these designs to 
Watchmaster Bram Gulchswattle earns the characters 
an additional reward (see “Concluding the Adventure” at 
the end of this adventure). 

Secret Door. Any character with a passive Wisdom 
(Perception) score of 17 or higher, or who succeeds on 
a DC 17 Wisdom (Perception) check, notices a thin slab 
of rock that hides a hidden passageway. This passage 
leads into Stahlmast’s bedroom in area L18. 


L6. KITCHEN 


9 $ 
Beyond the rickety wooden doors, a rough-walled cav- 
ern serves as a kitchen. A cutting block to the north 

is stained with old blood, while a low-burning fire to 

the south heats a cauldron hanging by chains. A thick, 
foul-smelling soup simmers within the cauldron. 

Two kobolds are hard at work here, one cutting gamy 
meat at the chopping block, the other stirring the soup in 
the cauldron. 

b è 


The two kobolds enjoy kitchen duty and flee if attacked. 

Fire. A smoky fire heats the cauldron. A creature that 
enters the fire for the first time on a turn or starts its 
turn there takes 3 (1d6) fire damage. 

Chimney. A 3-foot-wide iron chimney rises above the 
cauldron, eventually leading outside the mountain (see 
the earlier “Ascending the Mountain” section for more 
information). 


L7. PRISON CELLS 


$ 
This dank, dreary cavern is sectioned off by walls of iron 
bars that divide the area into two cells. Seated on a small 
chair against the west wall is a kobold. 


The bounty hunter Yinra Emberwind is currently 
locked in the east cell, stripped of her equipment. (See 
her stat block earlier in this adventure, but she is AC 13 
without armor.) A kobold underling (see its stat block 
earlier in the adventure) sits in the chair when the char- 
acters first arrive, watching the prisoner. The kobold 
carries keys that open both cells, or the locks on the 
cells can be picked with a successful DC 18 Dexterity 
check using thieves’ tools. 

If Yinra is freed and no other immediate threats are 
nearby, she tries to immediately escape the lair. The 
characters can persuade her to stay and help them 
with a successful DC 12 Charisma (Persuasion) check. 
Either way, Yinra speaks of her fear that Stahlmast is 
planning a deadly attack against Hupperdook. 


L8. SHARK CHAMBER 


o 
The passageway straightens into a square-walled cavern 
some forty feet long and twenty feet wide. The floor is 
covered in iron, and the rocky ceiling stands ten feet 

high. Beyond the iron floor, the passageway turns back to | 


rough stone and turns to the north. 
è $ 


With a successful DC 12 Intelligence (Investigation) 
check, a character notices that the iron floor is set with a 
groove at its center, bisecting it lengthwise. If more than 
50 pounds of weight is placed on the iron floor, it splits 
open and its two halves swing down, revealing a 10-foot- 
deep pool of water 5 feet below where three hungry reef 
sharks are waiting. The floor resets automatically, snap- 
ping shut after being open for 1 minute. 

Each creature standing on the iron floor when it opens 
must succeed on a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw to grab 
onto the wall and avoid tumbling into the water below. A 
creature can try to avoid falling into the shark-infested 
pool by staying close to the wall; it must succeed on a 
DC 10 Strength (Athletics) check for every 10 feet it 
moves or tumble into the pool. 


L9. TRAINING ROOM 


e 
Within this cavern, seven wooden training dummies 
stand against the walls, all of them nicked and splin- 
tered. Heavy sand is strewn across the rocky floor, while 
blunted weapons and shields lean against the walls 

A dark elf stands in the middle of the room, shaking 


his head and watching with a faint look of disgust as four 


kobolds spar with one another. 


When the characters first arrive here, four kobolds are 
being trained by Ishel—a drow ambassador from the 
Kryn Dynasty. Ishel uses the drow stat block but has 24 
hit points, which raises his challenge rating to 1/2 (100 
XP). He carries keys to the chest in area L10 and to the 
secret door in area L19. 

If Ishel is reduced to 12 hit points or fewer, he at- 
tempts to flee through area L20 and alert Stahlmast 
about the intruders. If he is captured and questioned, 
the drow warns the characters of the steam trap in area 
L12. If pressed hard, he might mention that he belongs 
to Den Hythenos of the Kryn Dynasty, which has an 
agreement with Stahlmast. He can also tell the charac- 
ters about the path to the Underdark in area L20. 


L10. AMBASSADOR’S BEDROOM 
ij if 
The smell of incense is sharp as you enter this clean and | 
| 
well-organized chamber. A comfortable bed is tucked | 
against one wall, while a small table rests under a mirror | 
| 
| 


against the other. A wooden armor rack stands empty in 


the corner. 
é é 


Ishel (see area L9) is quartered in this area. Any charac- 
ter who looks beneath the bed discovers a long, locked 
iron chest there. Ishel carries the key, or the lock can be 
picked with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check using 
thieves’ tools. 

The chest is also trapped, which can be noted with 
a successful DC 14 Intelligence (Investigation) check. 
The trap can be disabled with thieves’ tools and a suc- 
cessful DC 14 Dexterity check. If the trap is not disabled 
and the lock is picked, opening the chest causes a loud 
shrieking noise to blare for 3 rounds, alerting crea- 
tures in areas LO and L11 if they have not already been 
dealt with. Opening the chest with the key doesn’t trig- 
ger the trap. 

Treasure. The chest holds 5 pp, 113 gp, 15 sp, and 10 
cp, as well as a dark steel +1 shortsword. 


L11. KOBOLD BARRACKS 


e 


This spacious cavern is heady with the pungent scent 


| 
| 
of mildew. The stony floor is covered with more than a 
dozen bundles of moldy leather, stained fabric scraps, 


and torn pillows that serve as kobold beds. Three of the 
beds have kobolds sleeping in them. 


| 
® é 


If the characters have made a lot of noise in any nearby 
caverns (including by opening the chest in area L10 or 
fighting in area L9), the three kobolds are pretending 
to sleep and have their weapons hidden. A successful 
DC 12 Wisdom (Insight) check uncovers their ruse. 
Otherwise, any character who approaches within 10 
feet of the sneaky kobolds causes all three to leap up 
and attack. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


N 


N 


L12. STEAM TRAP 


A roughly diamond-shaped cavern opens up beyond a set 
| of double doors. Each of its four walls holds a three-foot- 
by-three-foot iron plate, mounted at the center of the wall 
and featuring a three-inch-diameter hole cut through the 


plate and the rock behind it. Across the cavern, another 


| 
| set of double doors stands closed. 
e 


The holes in the walls extend 1 foot in, then angle 
downward, preventing the mechanisms of the trap from 
being seen. This chamber does nothing as long as the 
characters have not yet caught Stahlmast’s notice. How- 
ever, if he has been alerted to their presence, both sets 
of double doors swing shut and lock tight once all the 
characters (or a majority of the characters if some are 
hanging back) have entered. The locks on both sets of 
doors can be picked with a successful DC 16 Dexterity 
check using thieves’ tools, or the doors can be forced 
open with a successful DC 16 Strength check. 

With the doors locked, Stahlmast taunts the charac- 
ters via the speaking tube in the ceiling before filling 
the chamber with scalding hot steam from the holes in 
the wall plates. Each creature that starts its turn in the 
steam takes 2 (1d4) fire damage. If all four steam holes 
are plugged up with cloth or some similar material, the 
trap stops dealing damage, and instead backs up and 
deals 4d4 fire damage to the Stahlmaster in the clock- 
work forge (area L19). 


L13. BLACKSMITH’S CHAMBER 


Tucked off to the side of the passageway is a modest 
bedroom containing a firm mattress, a bare table, anda 
small, partially sculpted stone statuette. A chair is tucked 


kd 
| 
f 
| 
| against the table, and a pile of broken rocks sits against 
| the wall beneath it. 

} 

® 


| 
| 


The small sculpture on the desk is a mostly finished rep- 
resentation of a dwarf, expertly carved. Any inspection 
of the pile of brokenrocks under the table reveals them 
to be previously failed attempts at the same sculpture. 

Treasure. Even unfinished, the statuette is worth 5 
gp. Characters who search the room thoroughly find a 
small sack of gems hidden under the bed mattress—four 
opals (25 gp each), a flawed ruby (75 gp), and a flawed 
diamond (100 gp). 


L14. SMITHY 


This cramped, uncomfortably hot chamber is outfitted 
for a blacksmith, featuring a glowing forge, an anvil, and 
a water trough. Various tools are set around the anvil, 


while piles of metal ingots stand beside the entrance. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


The blacksmith, Roguun (a lawful evil, male duergar), 
is hard at work when the characters first enter this area. 
He attacks intruders at once but flees to join Stahlmast 
in the clockwork forge (area L19) if he is reduced to 11 
hit points or fewer. Roguun carries the keys to the vola- 
tile materials storage cavern (area L3). 

If a character possesses the small statue from area 
L13 and threatens to smash it, Roguun halts his ag- 
gression and refrains from fleeing while he attempts to 
barter for its safety. A character holding the statuette 
has advantage on Charisma checks made against the 
duergar. If he is captured and questioned, Roguun might 
mention the explosives locked away in area L3, and 
might also mention the secret door that Stahlmast had 
him install in area L5. 

Forge. Any creature that enters the open forge for the 
first time on a turn or that starts its turn there takes 7 
(2d6) fire damage. 

Chimney. A 3-foot-wide iron chimney rises above the 
forge, eventually leading outside the mountain (see the 
earlier “Ascending the Mountain” section for details). 

Treasure. A set of smith’s tools rests by the anvil. 


L15. STORAGE CHAMBER 


Piles of metal ingots, textiles, and other materials fill this 


cavern, mostof it disorganized and all of it clearly com- | 
ing from outside the lair. | 


The goods and raw materials here are worth 250 gp, but 
the hoard weighs over two thousand pounds and has all 
been stolen from Hupperdook, preventing it from being 
resold there. If the characters notify Bram Gulchswattle 
of the stolen goods and their location, the watchmaster 
rewards them with an additional 150 gp. 

Treasure. Characters who search the room thor- 
oughly find a potion of healing. 


L16. INFIRMARY 


A row of rough, bloodstained beds outfit this makeshift 
infirmary. Soiled cloths have been tossed in one corner, 
and a door stands closed to the northwest. A kobold 


sleeps soundly in the bed farthest from the entrance. 


4 


The sleeping kobold underling (see its stat block earlier 
in the adventure) has its chest wrapped with blood- 
stained bandages. If the sore and scared kobold is wo- 
ken up, characters have advantage on Charisma checks 
to question it (see “Stahlmast’s Minions” at the begin- 
ning of this section). In addition to any other information 
you want to reveal, the kobold complains about the pain 
in its chest. (Stahlmast recently implanted an explosive 
seed inside the kobold.) 


L17. SURGERY 


The smell of acrid chemicals and rusting metal are pun- 
gent within this dark cavern. Two small tables against 
the far walls hold all manner of surgical tools and knives, 
as well as a tattered notebook. Beneath an unlit lantern 


hanging from the ceiling, a larger rectangular table is af- 


fixed with restraints and stained with old blood. 


b è 


The notebook on the side table builds on some of the 
notes the characters might have found already in area 
L5. They describe in gory detail the process by which 
Stahlmast performs the experimental surgery that im- 
plants explosive seeds in his minions. 

Treasure. A search of the room reveals a small box 
under one of the tables that holds 1d4 explosive seeds 
(see the “Alchemical Items” sidebar earlier in this 
adventure). 


L18. STAHLMAST’S BEDROOM 


This smooth-walled chamber is lavishly furnished and 
decorated compared to the rest of the lair. Its floor is cov- 
ered in a thick carpet, and it holds a large, luxurious bed, 


an armoire, a vanity mirror, and a small bookshelf. 


The armoire holds five sets of fine clothing, one of 
which has a sending stone in its pocket. The stone can 
be found with a successful DC 12 Wisdom (Perception) 
check, or by anyone putting on the clothing. If the stone 
is activated, a voice responds in a thick accent, asking 
“What is it you need?” A successful DC 12 Intelligence 
check reveals the accent to be Xhorhasian. No matter 
what the response of the character using the stone, they 
must succeed on a DC 18 Charisma (Deception) check 
or the agent with the other sending stone recognizes 
that the stones have been compromised. The other stone 
is then destroyed, severing the connection. 

Secret Door. Any character with a passive Wisdom 
(Perception) score of 17 or higher, or who succeeds on 
a DC 17 Wisdom (Perception) check, notices a thin slab 
of rock that hides a hidden passageway. This passage 
leads into Stahlmast’s workroom (area L5). 

Treasure. A locked chest is hidden beneath the bed, 
and can be opened with thieves’ tools and a successful 
DC 16 Dexterity check. The chest holds 170 gp, 65 sp, 
and two potions of healing. It also contains a letter writ- 
ten in Undercommon, which promises that more sup- 
port and minions will soon be sent through the tunnel. 
The letter thanks Stahlmast for his soon-to-be fruitful 
alliance with Den Hythenos of the Kryn Dynasty. Turn- 
ing the letter over to Watchmaster Bram Gulchswattle 
earns the characters an additional reward (see “Con- 
cluding the Adventure” at the end of this adventure). 


L19. CLOCKWORK FORGE 
Huron Stahlmast (a lawful evil human cultist wearing 
goggles of night) awaits the characters in this elaborate 
workshop. If the drow ambassador from area L9 or 
Roguun from area L14 escaped earlier encounters with 
the characters, he has joined Stahlmast here for the 
final fight. 

When the characters can see into this area, read: 


A mighty anvil of dark metal rests in the center of this | 
cavern between two rocky pillars. To the south stands 
a semicircular pool of stagnant water. Numerous tables 
line the cavern walls, piled with partially constructed me- 
chanical devices and motionless automatons. A massive 
forge stands along the north wall, filling the cavern with 
a bright orange glow. A dangerous-looking clockwork 
construct rests in front of the forge, resembling a skeletal 
iron statue without a head. 

A sweaty, pallid human of middle years is climbing up 


the side ofthe construct. He then slips down inside it, as 


if donning a monstrous suit of armor. 
6 b 


If the characters have managed to get this far without 
Stahlmast being alerted, he shows momentary surprise 
when he sees them, but his bravado quickly takes over. 
Either way, as soon as Stahlmast becomes aware of the 
characters, read: 


The human addresses you with a wily grin as he puts on 
a pair of goggles. “You’ve certainly proven capable and 
determined by getting this far. | appreciate those traits 
immensely, and they should be rewarded. Work with me 
and my team. Help us correct the addled vision of Hup- 
perdook’s future and the future of this wretched empire. 


| Wealth and power await those who prove useful to the 


destined victors of this war. What do you say?” 
| 


é b 


Stahlmast has no qualms about whom he works with, 
as long as those who serve him understand that he’s in 
charge. He might appeal to the characters as free adven- 
turers, hoping to convince him that fighting against the 
Dwendalian Empire is a noble cause, or he might appeal 
to their greed, talking of how much wealth might be 
gained by breaking the empire’s power. 

If the characters abandon their pledge to aid Hupper- 
dook and instead agree to Stahlmast’s offer, they are 
granted a room of their choice within the lair and a 
weekly pay of 25 gp as his elite enforcers. The charac- 
ters reach 3rd level (see “Concluding the Adventure”), 
but their path now leans toward working with the Kryn 
Dynasty and helping Stahlmast with his plots against 
Hupperdook and the Dwendalian Empire. 

Alternatively, the characters might pretend to want 
to serve Stahlmast to get the upper hand on him. That 
kind of twist is perfect for an intrigue adventure, so have 
fun with it! 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


If the characters turn down Stahlmast’s offer or if they 
attack him, read: 
° 6 
The metal plates and spinning gears of the construct | 
churn to life with a grinding noise and a shower of | 
sparks. Stahlmast chuckles. “Though my latest design | 


Thank you for your aid in the testing of my Stahlmaster!” 


isn’t fully completed, this trial run shall prove amusing. | 
> 


The Stahlmaster (see the stat block on the facing page) 
surges toward the characters and attacks in a final con- 
frontation. If the Stahlmaster drops to 0 hit points, Hu- 
ron Stahlmast is ejected from the broken clockwork suit 
and lands prone in an unoccupied space within 5 feet 
of it. On his next turn, he attempts to move to the secret 
door, use his action to unlock it, and flee down the pas- 
sage to the Underdark (area L20). The door locks auto- 
matically behind him, and Stahlmast collapses the tun- 
nel 1 round later to prevent anyone from following him. 

Forge. During the fight, any creature pushed into the 
open forge for the first time on a turn or starts its turn 
there takes 7 (2d6) fire damage. 

Steam Trap Lever. A steel lever topped with a brass 
sphere is mounted on the east wall. If the lever is pulled, 
the doors to area L12 close and the steam trap in that 
area triggers. If the wall holes in area L12 are plugged 
when the lever is pulled, a jet of scalding hot steam 
erupts from the forge in a line that is 15 feet long and 1 
foot wide, and which deals 10 (4d4) fire damage to each 
creature in its area (including the Stahlmaster while it 
remains in its initial position). 

Secret Door. The secret door leading to area L20 can 
be spotted by any character with a passive Wisdom (Per- 
ception) score of 13 or higher, or by one who searches 
the wall and succeeds on a DC 13 Wisdom (Perception) 
check. The door is locked, and Stahlmast and the drow 
ambassador from area L9 carry keys that open it. The 

ROLEPLAYING STAHLMAST 

Stahlmast is a boastful, narcissistic inventor who has 

never been able to accept or admit his faults. This pride, 

coupled with a penchant for hazardous and immoral test- 

ing of his imperfect designs, has consistently hindered his 
success, pushed others away, seen him exiled from Hup- 
perdook, and ruined his once-respected reputation. Driven 
by blind vengeance, Stahlmast has become the self-styled 
leader of his personal army of minions, determined to 
punish all those who cast him aside. 

Ideal. “These stupid people didn’t understand my ge- 
nius, so | will show them. They will regret their ignorance 

as | prove my superiority ... right before | crush them.” 

Bond. “My designs, my work—they are a part of me and 
my legacy. ! will do whatever it takes to see my ideas real- 
ized in front of those who mocked me.” 

Flaw. “| am easily goaded into anger if my plans are ever 
called into question. | must show others precisely why | 

am better than them before | can dispose of them. People 

say that I’m a coward when not fighting from behind my 

constructs—but they're wrong!” 


a 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


locked door can also be opened with a successful DC 15 
Dexterity check using thieves’ tools. 

Chimney. A 3-foot-wide iron chimney rises above the 
forge, eventually leading outside the mountain. See “As- 
cending the Mountain” for more information. 

Treasure. If Stahlmast is killed or subdued, the char- 
acters can claim his goggles of night. Any investigation 
of the Stahlmaster shows that it is beyond repair. How- 
ever, with one hour’s work, the characters can strip 350 
gp of gold and silver clockwork components from it. 


L20. PASSAGE TO THE UNDERDARK 
If the characters get access to this tunnel without Stahl- 
mast collapsing the ceiling to cover his escape, read: 


f A dark, cool tunnel twists down into the mountain, the 
| air growing ever more stagnant. Glowing fungus begins 


to appear on the walls, which glisten with moisture. 
é 


Any character who succeeds on a DC 12 Intelligence 
(History) check understands that this passage is 
descending into the Underdark—and knows how in- 
credibly dangerous that subterranean realm is. You 
might have ideas for other adventures that could lead 
the characters into the depths, but the players should 
understand that a successful expedition would require 
research and resources. For now, the characters are 
better off heading back and finishing their business in 
Stahlmast’s lair and in Hupperdook. 


CONCLUDING THE ADVENTURE 


If Stahlmast was killed or subdued, the characters can 
drag him back to Hupperdook as their prisoner. Turning 
him over to Watchmaster Bram Gulchswattle with proof 
of his wrongdoings completes their assignment, and the 
characters receive the bounty promised them. If Stahl- 
mast got away, the watchmaster pays them 500 gp for 
thwarting the mad inventor’s dark plots. 

If the characters recovered the plans to destroy Hup- 
perdook found in area L5, Bram rewards them an ad- 
ditional 300 gp. If they recovered the letter confirming 
Stahlmast’s relationship with the Kryn Dynasty in area 
L18, Bram gives them an additional 150 gp. 


NEw LODGINGS? 

If the characters made a positive impression on Bram, 
they might try to convince him to allow them to keep 
Stahlmast’s lair for themselves once it’s cleared out. 
Bram agrees to the deal, signing over the location to the 
party’s care. The characters are now able to clear out 
the remainder of the lair and turn it into a new—and per- 
haps somewhat dangerous—home base for their further 
adventures. 


CHARACTER ADVANCEMENT 


At the end of this adventure, the characters reach 3rd 
level. You might have more adventures in mind for West- 
ern Wynandir—especially if the characters are able to 
claim Stahlmast’s lair. But from this point, the course of 
your campaign is up to you. 


FROZEN SICK 


Something is killing people in Palebank Village, and if 
the characters don’t stop it, they might be next. “Frozen 
Sick” is an adventure that takes characters from 1st to 
3rd level and introduces them to the continent’s Biting 
North region—the bleak arctic realms of the Greying 
Wildlands and Eiselcross. 

If your players are using the heroic chronicle to cre- 
ate their characters (see chapter 4), work with them to 
decide how they made their way to Palebank Village. 
Are they citizens of Uthodurn now aiding in the surface 
expansion of their civilization? Have they come north to 
seek freedom from the wars of other lands? Any number 
of options can help tie characters to this frigid region 
and the mysteries it holds. 


STORY OVERVIEW 


Urgon Wenth, a dwarf explorer, recently returned home 
to Palebank Village after exploring the icy wastes of 
Eiselcross for a year. The dwarf brought home several 
items plundered from ruins on Foren, the largest of 
Eiselcross’s islands. Among these treasures were two 
beautiful blue glass vials, which Urgon sold to an elf 
collector named Verla Pelc. The vials were then stolen, 
given to a fence out of Shadycreek Run, and sold again 
to an unsuspecting merchant. 


JENE 


_ Large vehicle 


Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 67 (9d10 + 18) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 10(+0) 14 (+2) A 3 rad 


_ Damage Immunities poison, psychic 


Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 
frightened, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, unconscious 


it (a 


Pilot. The Stahlmaster requires a Medium humanoid to pilot 


it. While inside the Stahlmaster, the pilot uses the vehicle’s 


speed and action options and can’t take reactions or use bonus 
actions, and the pilot has total cover. If the Stahlmaster drops 
to 0 hit points, the pilot is ejected from it and lands prone in an 
unoccupied space within 5 feet of the vehicle. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The Stahlmaster makes two melee attacks, or one 
melee attack and one ranged attack. 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 9 (1d10 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


Shoulder-Mounted Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, 


range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d12) piercing i 
RET 


ELS DI OTe A EEE OE EP A E A 
- a 


In truth, the vials’ beautiful blue color is the result of 
deadly blue spores that cling to the interior of the glass. 
Faint cracks in both the vials have exposed each person 
who handled them to frigid woe, a deadly disease that 
can’t be cured by conventional means. The disease has 
already killed Urgon and Verla, turning them into ice 
statues. Details on frigid woe are found in the “Eisel- 
cross” section of chapter 3. 


ADVENTURE SUMMARY 


While the characters are in Palebank Village, commu- 
nity leader Elro Aldataur asks for their help figuring 
out who or what has killed Urgon Wenth. An explorer 
recently returned from Eiselcross, Urgon was afflicted 
by a strange malady that turned him into an ice statue, 
and which has since shown up in another of the village’s 
residents. The characters investigate the mystery while 
contending with the forces of the Uttolots, one of the 
criminal families that control Shadycreek Run. More in- 
fected locals are discovered, including one more already 
dead, before the characters clear Uttolot thugs out of a 
local cavern complex called Croaker Cave. In the end, 
the vials of frigid woe are reclaimed, but merchant Irven 
Liel and his family are infected and will be the next to 
die without a cure. Moreover, the characters might well 
be infected with the disease themselves. 

Elro asks the characters to travel to Eiselcross to seek 
a cure for frigid woe. The characters take a boat to Sy- 
rinlya, the Uthodurnian outpost on Foren, and retrace 
Urgon Wenth’s path to the ruin of Salsvault. This magic 
laboratory was once a part of Aeor, an ancient flying city- 
state that crashed into Eiselcross during the Calamity. 
Only by braving Salsvault’s defenses and deadly guard- 
ians can the adventurers find the antidote they need. 


SETUP AND STARTING POINTS 


Work with the players to establish why their characters 
are in Palemount Village. You can provide information 
regarding the village and its surrounding lands, all of 
which are described in chapter 3. 

Before the adventure begins is also the time to figure 
out if the characters already know each other or if this 
adventure is the first time they've met. 


MYSTERY IN PALEBANK VILLAGE 


The adventure begins in Palebank Village, with the 
characters drawn immediately into the drama of death 
in an isolated settlement. Once the players are ready to 
begin, read or paraphrase the following to set the scene: 


D o 
Snow gently falls from the sky and wind bites your cheeks | 
as you stand in the graveyard of Palebank Village, a fish- 
ing outpost of Uthodurn that is home to several hundred 
dwarves and elves. The sun is low in the sky, sinking 
behind the fresh grave of Urgon Wenth, an old dwarf 
who caught a curse or disease that turned him into an ice 
statue. The folk of the village have gathered to pay their 
final respects to Urgon’s frozen remains. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


236 


As part of their characters’ backstories, the players can 
decide whether any of them knew Urgon or whether 
they've come to the funeral simply to show respect to the 
folk of the community. Either way, continue by reading 
the following: 


ẹ 9 
A gruff voice speaks softly from behind you. “Thank you 
for attending Urgon’s service.” You turn and meet the 
gaze of Elro Aldataur, a weathered elf, retired ranger, 

and the leader of the village. “I’m sorry to speak of dark 
tidings under such circumstances, but | believe that Pale- 


bank Village might be in danger, and I’m hoping you can 


help us.” 


Whether the characters are known in the village as neo- 
phyte adventurers or simply look the part, Elro (a neu- 
tral good, male wood elf veteran) hopes that they’re the 
sort of people not afraid to step up to help folks in need. 
Use the following points to help guide the conversation 
as he explains his concerns to the characters: 


e Two months ago, Urgon Wenth returned home after 
exploring Eiselcross for a year. He had been back for 
only for a few days when he came down with a strange 
affliction, which made the dwarf move slowly and 
caused blue veins to appear all over his body. 

- The village’s priests of Moradin and Corellon used 

every spell they could muster to attempt to heal Urgon, 

but nothing they tried could stop the bizarre mal- 

ady. Urgon battled the affliction for weeks, until his 

ever-slowing body eventually turned to ice. 

Until yesterday, Elro and the rest of the community 

believed that Urgon’s sad fate was an isolated incident, 

most likely caused by something the dwarf came into 
contact with while exploring Eiselcross. Then Elro 
noticed Tulgi Lutan, a dwarf trapper, showing signs of 
the same illness. 

e Alarmed, Elro tried to talk to Tulgi about it, but she 
pushed him away, asking that he let her die in peace. 


ELRO’s REQUEST 

If the characters are willing, Elro wants them to find out 
what caused Urgon and Tulgi’s affliction. He’s worried 
that it could spread, but Tulgi refuses to talk to him, and 
the Glassblades in the village are better known for their 
combat skills than their ability to glean the truth in a 
complicated situation. Moreover, Tulgi is extremely dis- 
trustful of the authorities. 

Elro thinks a group of adventurers might have better 
luck convincing Tulgi to talk. If the characters agree to 
help find the cause of Urgon and Tulgi’s affliction, Elro 
offers to pay them 100 gp. He suggests that the charac- 
ters start by searching Urgon’s home or talking to Tulgi 
at her cabin. 


UrGon’s CABIN 

Urgon Wenth lived in a one-story, one-room log cabin 

at the edge of town. A good-natured Glassblade rookie 
named Mila Teno (a lawful good, female wood elf scout) 
stands guard outside the front door. If the characters 
explain why they've come, she allows them to enter the 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


house and look around. When the characters enter the 
cabin, read: 


p 9 
This cramped, dark cabin might have been a cozy place 
when its owner was alive. Now an unmade bed stands 
near a cold fireplace, its mantle hung with the head of 
some snarling white beast with gray horns. On the other 
side of the room, a small table strewn with dirty dishes 
and set with a dwarf-sized chair stands before two empty 
shelves whose contents are scattered across the floor: 


kitchen utensils, dried foodstuffs, adventuring gear, and 


| afew books. | 


; t 


Any character who examines the mess in the cabin 
realizes that someone recently trashed the place while 
searching it. A successful DC 12 Intelligence (Inves- 
tigation) check reveals the intruder’s footprints. Tulgi 
Lutan was the culprit, desperate for any clues that might 
help her cure the frigid woe that is killing her. Her 
tracks lead outside and back to her cabin (see “Tulgi’s 
Cabin” below). 

Adventuring Equipment. Urgon’s adventuring equip- 
ment consists of a silvered maul; a suit of splint armor 
sized for a dwarf; bulky, fur-lined clothing sized for a 
dwarf; a grappling hook; and a hooded lantern. 

Mounted Head. A character who succeeds on a DC 
15 Intelligence (Nature) check recognizes that the head 
mounted above the mantle belonged to a yeti, a mon- 
strosity found in Eiselcross. 

Strange Receipt. A character who searches through 
the books on the shelf and succeeds on a DC 10 Intelli- 
gence (Investigation) check finds a folded receipt used 
as a bookmark. The receipt is dated two months previ- 
ous, and indicates that Urgon sold several Aeorian items 
found in Eiselcross to local antique shop Pelc’s Curi- 
osities for 1,000 gp. The items are listed as a dagger, a 
scroll case, a jade statuette, a quiver of twenty arrows, a 
silver ring set with a jasper, and two blue glass vials. 

Characters who are residents of Palebank Village or 
have been there for a while know of Pelc’s Curiosities— 
and also know that the shop was robbed and vandalized 
two months ago. 

Development. After searching the cabin, the charac- 
ters can continue their investigation by going to Tulgi’s 
cabin or by stopping at Pelc’s Curiosities (assuming they 
found the receipt). 


TULGI'S CABIN 
When the characters approach Tulgi’s cabin, read: 


ọ ' 


i 
This snow-covered cabin looks peaceful and quiet from 


the outside. Its windows are shuttered, and a steady 
stream of smoke piping out of the chimney indicates a 
roaring fire within. 


Tulgi Lutan’s home is a one-story, one-room log cabin. 
Because she isn’t keen on letting the characters in, the 
following features might be important: 


e The roof of the cabin is 12 feet high. Climbing up the 
outside walls requires a successful DC 10 Strength 
(Athletics) check. 

e The wooden door to the cabin is locked and has AC 
15, 18 hit points, and immunity to poison and psychic 
damage. The lock can be picked with a successful 
DC 12 Dexterity check using thieves’ tools, or the 
door can be forced open with a successful DC 15 
Strength (Athletics) check. Tulgi carries the key that 
unlocks the door. 

e Each of the cabin’s four walls has one window, which 
is shuttered and latched from the inside. A window 
can be unlatched from outside with a successful DC 
12 Dexterity check using thieves’ tools. 

e The inside of the cabin is brightly lit by fires in a bra- 
zier and a fireplace, though the smoky haze given off 
by both makes the interior lightly obscured. 


If the characters knock on the door, Tulgi Lutan (a 
neutral evil, female mountain dwarf thug with a walking 
speed of 10 feet) calls from the other side, telling them 
to go away. A character who shouts back through the 
door and succeeds on a DC 12 Charisma (Deception, 
Intimidation, or Persuasion) check convinces Tulgi to 
open the door and allow the party inside. Otherwise, she 
ignores anything the characters say. 

If the characters aren't invited inside, they'll have to 
decide what other means they’re willing to use to enter. 
Regardless of how they do so, when the characters enter 
the cabin, read: 


| The heat in this small cabin hits like a hammer blow. A 

| table set with neatly stacked dishes, tools, and utensils 
stands at the center of the room. The smell of a sim- 
mering soup comes from a pot hanging inside a roaring 
fireplace. Another fire burns in an iron brazier at the 
opposite end of the room, filling the cabin with a smoky 
haze. Shivering at the end of a bed near the brazier is a 
dwarf wrapped in blankets. Bulging blue veins streak her | 
| 


face, neck, and hands. 


b ò 


If the characters broke into the cabin, Tulgi attacks as 
soon as she sees them, fighting until reduced to 10 hit 
points, then surrendering. She has two pet wolves, Iro 
and Jira, that hide beneath her bed. If a fight breaks out, 
the wolves join the fray to defend her. 

Fire Hazards. Any creature that comes into con- 
tact with the brazier or the fireplace for the first time 
on its turn, or that starts its turn there, takes 2 (1d4) 
fire damage. 

What Tulgi Knows. Tulgi is gruff and to the point, and 
tries to compensate for her illness with bluster. If the 
characters entered the cabin with her permission or if 
she surrenders to them, she tells them only that she has 
the same affliction that killed Urgon, and that she’s look- 
ing for a cure. 

A character who succeeds on a DC 12 Charisma 
(Intimidation or Persuasion) check convinces Tulgi to 
reveal the following information: 


« Tulgi came to Palebank Village a few years back from 
Shadycreek Run with her sister, Hulil. Both work for 
the Uttolot family. 

- The Uttolots sent the sisters and a few others to the 
village to keep an eye on treasures coming back from 
Eiselcross—with the intent of stealing them. When 
such artifacts come through the small settlement, 
they are often unusual goods that treasure hunters are 
trying to keep away from Uthodurn or the Dwenda- 
lian Empire. 

« When Urgon Wenth returned to Palebank Village with 
treasures from Eiselcross, Tulgi saw her chance. She 
waited for Urgon to sell his finds to Pelc’s Curiosities, 
then stole them all. 

« Tulgi gave most of Urgon’s relics to Hulil, but kept one 
for herself—an ornate dagger. She grudgingly gives 
this weapon to the characters if asked (see “Treasure” 
below). Hulil has the other items in a site north of the 
village known as Croaker Cave. 

e Tulgi was the one who searched Urgon’s cabin, con- 
vinced that the dead dwarf must have had magic or 
other secrets stored away there. 


Treasure. If Tulgi doesn’t offer her dagger to the 
characters, any character with a passive Wisdom (Per- 
ception) score of 11 or higher notices the ornate blade in 
a gilded sheath tucked under her shirt. If the characters 
claim the +1 dagger, a successful DC 15 Intelligence (Ar- 
cana or History) check reveals that the dagger is a relic 
of the fallen flying city of Aeor. 

Development. The characters have no trouble finding 
either Croaker Cave or Pelc’s Curiosities if either of 
those locations is their next destination. If things went 
bad with Tulgi and she died before revealing any infor- 
mation, the characters might find notes or instructions 
from Hulil revealing some of the information above. 


PELC’S CURIOSITIES 

Pelc’s Curiosities is an antique shop run by an intro- 
verted elf named Verla Pelc. Verla keeps to herself, 
opening her shop only when the mood strikes her. She 
trades any and all objects that interest her, shipping 
them across Wildemount. Characters who are residents 
of Palebank Village or have been there for a while know 
of Pelc’s Curiosities—and also know that the shop was 
robbed and vandalized two months ago. If the charac- 
ters are recent arrivals to the village, anyone they ask 
about the shop mentions the robbery. 

Pelc’s Curiosities is a one-story, two-room log cabin. 
The windows are shuttered and locked from inside, leav- 
ing the interior dark. The only entrance is the front door, 
but characters can force open one of the shutters around 
the back with a successful DC 12 Strength (Athletics) 
check, granting access to Verla’s quarters (see that sec- 
tion below). 

When the characters approach the cabin, read: 


The dark cabin before you has a sign over its door which 
reads, “Pelc’s Curiosities,” with the image of a curving 
dragon used to make the letter P. Though the shop ap- 
pears closed, the front door is slightly ajar. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


237 


238 


Any character with a passive Wisdom (Perception) score 
of 11 or higher hears whispered voices and footsteps 
coming from inside the cabin. If the characters succeed 
on a group DC 10 Dexterity (Stealth) check, they can 
surprise the bandits currently in the shop. 

Front Shop Area. The antique shop occupies the 
large front room of the cabin. When the characters can 
see into this area, read: 


Five cloaked elves appear to have ransacked the shop 
and are searching through the broken debris on the 
floor. The furniture, shelves, and front counter have been 


smashed, and the shop’s wares now litter the floor. 


This area is difficult terrain thanks to the debris cover- 
ing it. The five elves are bandits with darkvision out to 
a range of 60 feet, advantage on saving throws against 
being charmed, and immunity to magic that would put 
them to sleep. 

The bandits attack as soon as they notice the charac- 
ters, fighting until only one remains. That survivor then 
surrenders. If a captive bandit is questioned, a charac- 
ter who succeeds on a DC 10 Charisma (Intimidation) 
check can learn the following information: 


« The bandits work for Hulil Lutan, a dwarf priestess 
of Tiamat. Hulil works for the Uttolot family of Sha- 
dycreek Run. 

e Hulil’s sister, Tulgi, robbed Pelc’s Curiosities two 
months ago. 

e Hulil is sick or cursed with some affliction that causes 
her to move slowly and is turning her veins blue. 

e Hulil ordered the bandits to trash Pelc’s Curiosities 
in search of potions, scrolls, or other items that might 
help cure her. Despite their thorough search, the 
bandits found nothing useful. Hulil is hiding out with 
more bandits in Croaker Cave. 


Verla’s Quarters. Verla’s quarters are at the back 
of the cabin. When the characters gain access to this 
area, read: 


What appears to be an ice statue of an elf is bundled 
beneath the blankets of a bed along the east wall of the 
room. A small table loaded with dirty teacups and a ket- 
tle stands next to the bed. 


The figure in the bed is the unfortunate Verla Pelc, who 
was infected with frigid woe by Urgon Wenth’s Aeorian 
relics. Her symptoms appeared a few weeks after the 
shop was robbed, but the reclusive elf never told anyone 
about them. 

Development. Questioning any of the bandits can 
turn up solid leads that can take the characters to 
Croaker Cave, or back to Tulgi’s cabin if there are other 
questions the dwarf has yet to answer. If they were 
unable to question the bandits, you can have one of the 
bandits carrying orders from Hulil that point toward the 
Croaker Cave hideout. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


CROAKER CAVE 


Characters local to Palebank Village or who have spent 
some time there know Croaker Cave. If all the charac- 
ters are new arrivals to the village, any of the villagers 
can tell them about the cave and how to get there. 
Croaker Cave gets its name from its resident giant ice 
frogs. Its entrance is on the shores of the Frigid Depths, 
due north of Palebank Village. As the characters draw 
close to the cave entrance, they see frequent signs of 
tracks where bandits have been coming and going. How- 
ever, there are no signs of patrols or guards. A plume of 
smoke rises from the ground beyond the cave entrance, 
venting through a narrow natural chimney from area 
C6. The chimney is too small to be climbed, however, 
and the main cave entrance is the only entry point. 
Knowing that the residents of Palebank Village avoid 
the cave and its dangerous frogs, Hulil Lutan has made 
the place her base of operations. She and the Uttolot 
bandits she commands have domesticated the giant 
ice frogs that make the cave their home, using them as 
guard animals. 


GIANT ICE FROGS 
With the exception of Old Croaker (see area C5), giant 
ice frogs are giant frogs with immunity to cold damage. 

The blue-skinned frogs attack any creatures in the 
cave complex not escorted by bandits they recognize. 
Each fights until reduced to half its hit points or fewer, 
then flees. A character who succeeds on a DC 15 Wis- 
dom (Animal Handling) check as an action convinces 
one frog to not attack or to stop attacking. If the char- 
acter or any of their allies attacks or harms the frog, it 
resumes combat. 

The frogs spend much of their time resting in pools 
of murky, frigid water in Croaker Cave. A character who 
succeeds on a Wisdom (Perception) check opposed by a 
frog’s Dexterity (Stealth) check notices a frog hiding in 
a pool. If a frog goes undetected, it attacks with surprise 
when acharacter comes within 5 feet of the pool. 


UTTOLOT BANDITS 
The bandits sent out with Hulil bythe Uttolot family are 
all dwarves and elves. Up to ten bandits normally oc- 
cupy Croaker Cave, but only three are currently present 
(in area C2). They use the bandit stat block and have 
darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. In addition, the 
dwarves have resistance to poison damage and have ad- 
vantage on saving throws against poison; the elves have 
advantage on saving throws against being charmed and 
immunity to magic that would put them to sleep 

Uttolot bandits attack any intruders on sight. Each 
fights until reduced to half its hit points or fewer, then 
flees the caves. If the characters capture an Uttolot 
bandit, they can learn the following information with a 
successful DC 10 Charisma (Intimidation) check: 


e Hulil is sick with the same malady that killed 
Urgon Wenth. 

e She plans on setting out for Shadycreek Run soon, 
hoping that trading the items her sister Tulgi stole 
from Pelc’s Curiosities allows her to pay for healing 
that will cure her. 


Mar 5.9: CROAKER Cave 


CROAKER CAVE FEATURES 
The caverns and tunnels of the Croaker Cave complex 
are shown on map 5.9. Unless otherwise noted in an 
area’s description, the following features are common 
throughout all areas of Croaker Cave. 

Ceilings. Cavern ceilings are 10 feet high, with only 8 
feet of clearance beneath stalactites. 

Walls. Climbing the rough walls of a cavern requires 
a successful DC 12 Strength (Athletics) check. 

Light. The caverns contain no light sources, except 
in area C6, as the inhabitants of Croaker Cave rely on 
darkvision to see. 

Frigid Pools. Pools of murky, frigid water within 
the caverns are created by melting snow on the rocky 
ground above dripping down through the ceiling. Each 
pool is 10 feet deep. A creature completely submerged 
in a pool must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving 
throw or gain one level of exhaustion. Creatures with re- 
sistance or immunity to cold damage automatically suc- 
ceed on this saving throw. For each minute the creature 
spends submerged in a pool, it must repeat this saving 
throw, gaining another level of exhaustion on a failure. 


C1. ENTRANCE POOL 

This area of the cave is close enough to the entrance 
that it is dimly lit by day and on clear moonlit nights. 
When the characters can see into this area, read: 


from stalactites down into a murky pool that fills the 


rough tunnel ahead. Every few moments, a loud croaking 


? 
The slow dripping of water sounds out where it falls 
| 


| sounds out from somewhere in the darkness beyond. 


With darkvision or an appropriate light source, the char- 
acters can see a 25-foot-long heavy wooden beam lying 
against the west wall of the cave at the south end the 
pool. The Uttolot bandits use the beam to cross the pool, 
and pull it back to the far side when they are in the cave. 

Two giant ice frogs hide in the murky pool. If combat 
breaks out in this area, the bandits in area C2 quickly 
come to investigate. 


C2. TRAINING POOL 


The slow dripping of water from the ceiling flows to 
a pool in the southwest corner of this cavern. A large 


wooden bucket with a lid sits near the edge of the pool. 


P o he a 


Three Uttolot bandits and two giant ice frogs normally 
occupy this cavern. If the bandits have not yet been 
alerted to disturbances, they are training the frogs. Add 
the following: 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


239 


ing are throwing dead bats into the air. Two giant blue- 


$ 
| A dwarf and two elves bundled in layers of winter cloth- | 
| skinned frogs leap up to snatch the bats in midair, seem- | 
| 
$ 


ingly as part of some sort of training session. | 


Ifthe bandits went to investigate disturbances in adja- 
cent areas, the frogs are hiding in the pool. 

Bucket. The bucket holds six dead bats used as train- 
ing treats. A character who offers a dead bat to a frog 
has advantage on their next Wisdom (Animal Handling) 
check made to control that frog’s behavior. 


C3. BAT CAVERN 
This cavern reeks, and its floor is covered in bat guano. 


A swarm of bats sleeps among the stalactites in this 
cavern. If anything disturbs the bats (including a light 
source or a loud noise in the cavern), the swarm attacks 
the source of the disturbance. The swarm fights until 
reduced to half its hit points or fewer, then flees out of 
the cave complex. If combat breaks out in this area, the 
bandits in area C2 come to investigate. 

Treacherous Floor. The floor of this area is covered 
in slippery bat guano. Whenever a creature standing on 
the floor takes damage, it must succeed on a DC 10 Dex- 
terity (Acrobatics) check or fall prone. 


C4. BANDIT CAMP 


® 
Ten empty bedrolls are arranged in a circle around a cold 
fire pit at the center of this cavern. Chicken bones, empty 
wine and spirits bottles, and other food waste litters 
the floor. 


One of the bedrolls covers the opening of a 10-foot-deep 
pit trap. The trap can be spotted with a DC 10 Wisdom 
(Perception) check. If not spotted, anyone walking 
across the bedroll falls into the pit, taking 3 (1d6) blud- 
geoning damage and landing prone. A creature that falls 
into the pit makes enough noise that the bandits in area 
C2 investigate. 

Treasure. Searching all the bedrolls reveals that one 
contains an unopened bottle of Bald Dwarf Whisky 
(worth 25 gp), an alcohol made by elves in Uthodurn. 


C5. OLD CROAKER’S POOL 


Water dripping down from stalactites in the ceiling fills a 


dark pool that completely covers the floor of this cavern. 


Croaker Cave’s largest denizen—named Old Croaker 
by the Uttolot bandits—has claimed this pool. It hides 
in the water and attacks as other giant ice frogs. Old 
Croaker is a giant toad with immunity to cold damage. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


Old Croaker has been trained to ferry Hulil and visi- 
tors to her cavern (area C6) across the pool. A character 
who succeeds on a DC 15 Wisdom (Animal Handling) 
check to convince Old Croaker to not attack the party 
can also convince the frog to ferry all the characters 
across the pool one at a time. 


C6. HULIĽS CAVERN 
When the characters can see into this area, read: 


ẹọ 

A warm rush of heat comes from a massive fire burning 
in the center of this cavern, its smoke venting up through 
a narrow stone chimney. The flames illuminate a rough 
painting of a five-headed dragon that dominates the 

| north wall. A bedroll is spread out beneath the mural. 

| Near the crackling blaze, a dwarf bundled in a heavy 


| cloak sits on a stone chest beside an elf whose face is 


| covered in dragon tattoos. The dwarf’s face is streaked 
| with pulsing blue veins. 


Hulil Lutan (a neutral evil, female mountain dwarf cult 
fanatic with a walking speed of 15 feet, darkvision out 
to a range of 60 feet, resistance to poison damage, and 
advantage on saving throws against poison) and her 
apprentice, Raegrin Mau (a neutral evil, male wood 

elf cultist with darkvision out to a range of 60 feet, ad- 
vantage on saving throws against being charmed, and 
immunity to magic that would put him to sleep), are 
both in a state of deep meditation, praying to Tiamat for 
a cure for the dwarf’s affliction. Even if combat broke 
out in area C5, they remain unaware of the characters’ 
presence until they are disturbed or attacked. Hulil and 
Raegrin are both greedy servants of Tiamat and the 
Uttolot family. Raegrin follows Hulil’s every order with 
unshaking loyalty. 

Hulil is so desperate for a cure for the ailment that 
is slowly killing her that she doesn’t attack the char- 
acters when she first sees them, as long as she isn’t 
attacked first. Instead, she orders them to stand down 
and demands to know why they came to the cave. A 
quick-thinking character can claim to have come to 
help Hulil (at the direction of her sister, after receiving 
a message from Tiamat, or with another appropriate ra- 
tionale). With a successful Charisma (Deception) check 
opposed by Hulil’s Wisdom (Insight) check, the charac- 
ter convinces the dwarf that all the characters are her 
allies. On a failed check, or if the characters challenge 
her, Hulil and Raegrin attack. 

Campfire. Any creature that enters the area of the fire 
for the first time on its turn, or that starts its turn there, 
takes 3 (1d6) fire damage. 

What Hulil Knows. If the characters convince Hulil 
that they are her allies, or if they capture her or Raegrin 
and succeed on a DC 14 Charisma (Intimidation) check, 
they can learn the following information: 


e Hulil believes she has a disease called frigid woe. 
Though she doesn’t know any more about the disease 
than its symptoms, she’s heard rumors that explorers 
in Eiselcross sometimes succumb to it. 


e Hulil has guessed that her affliction was caused by 
one of the blue vials Tulgi stole from Pelc’s Curiosities, 
originally sold by Urgon Wenth. The vial was cracked, 
revealing that its lovely color was the result of a dark 
blue dust clinging to the interior. 

e She is desperate to get to Shadycreek Run before the 
malady runs its course, hoping that she can trade the 
goods stolen by Tulgifora cure. 


Hulil used one of the vials to trap the chest contain- 
ing the other stolen items (see “Stone Chest” below). 
Needing quick cash for the trip, she sold the other vial to 
Irven Liel, a human merchant staying at the Jolly Dwarf 
inn in Palebank Village while traveling with his family 
to Uthodurn. 

Stone Chest. The stone chest’s outer lid is carved 
with the face of a dragon. A character who examines the 
chest and succeeds on a DC 12 Wisdom (Perception) 
check finds pin-sized openings in the dragon’s mouth 
that contain a blue powder. The powder can be removed 
with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check using thieves’ 
tools. A character who fails this check must succeed on 
a DC 11 Constitution saving throw or contract frigid 
woe (see the “Eiselcross” section of chapter 3). 

A detect magic spell reveals that the chest radiates 
an aura of evocation magic. When a creature touches 
the chest without speaking a prayer to Tiamat, a gust of 
wind escapes the dragon’s mouth. If the blue powder is 
still in the dragon’s mouth, it forms a cloud that fills a 
15-foot cube in front of the chest. Each creature within 
the area must succeed on a DC 11 Constitution saving 
throw or contract frigid woe. 

Treasure. The chest contains the rest of the treasure 
found by Urgon Wenth—a gilded scroll case covered in a 
cosmological map of the multiverse (worth 15 gp), a jade 
statuette of astorm giant (25 gp), a quiver containing six 
+] arrows, and a silver ring set with a jasper stone (50 
gp). It also holds Hulil’s wealth—415 cp, 234 sp, 43 ep, 
and 112 gp—anda receipt indicating that Hulil sold a 
blue glass vial to Irven Liel for 100 gp. 


DEVELOPMENT 

When the characters are done exploring Croaker Cave, 
they should know the blue glass vials found by Urgon 
Wenth are the source of the strange malady that is turn- 
ing people into ice statues, and that Irven Liel has one 
of those vials. If the characters don’t have a chance to 
question Hulil or Raegrin, you can have the chest also 
contain a journal or notes that provide the information 
they need and point them toward the Jolly Dwarf inn. 


JOLLY: DWARF 


The Jolly Dwarf is a cozy, two-story inn run by a retired 
adventurer named Arl Bortock. When the characters 
enter the inn, read: 


The downstairs of this inn features a large taproom. A 
gray-haired dwarf behind the bar greets you cheerfully 
as you enter. Two male humans and two tiefling children 


laugh among themselves as they enjoy a meal together. | 


e 
Arl Bortock (a neutral good, male, mountain dwarf 
veteran) works behind the bar. If the characters ask 
for Irven Liel, the dwarf points them toward the laugh- 
ing family. 

Irven Liel, his husband Fenton Tethwick (both neu- 
tral good, male Dwendalian human commoners), and 
their adopted daughters Honor and Magic (both tiefling 
noncombatants) are friendly and invite the characters to, 
join them. Irven and Fenton are traveling booksellers. If ¢ 
asked about the vial, Irven explains that they met Hulil 
Lutan on the road to Palebank Village. She said she was, 
moving and needed to shed some possessions, so she 
offered him a chance to buy the Aecorian relic at a great 
price. He plans to sell the item for a profit in Uthodurn. 

If the characters tell Irven the truth about the vial, he 
panics, saying that everyone in his family has touched 
the object. Fenton gives the vial to the characters, 
handing it to them wrapped up in a cloth. Any character 
who touches the vial directly must succeed on a DC 11 
Constitution saving throw or contract frigid woe. 


DEVELOPMENT 

Once the characters have the cracked vial, they can 
report back to Elro Aldataur. He pays them 100 gp 
as promised but asks the characters to stay in town. 
He is quite certain he'll have need of their services 
again soon. 

The next morning, Elro comes to the characters with 
somber news. Irven, Fenton, Honor, and Magic are all 
afflicted with frigid woe. Seeing the blue powder in the 
vial has allowed Elro to consult old lore and learn a few 
things about the disease. (If the characters didn’t learn 
the name of the affliction from Hulil, Elro is the source 
of that name as well.) 

Elro knows that frigid woe is said to have only one 
cure—a milky liquid the Aeorians stored in gold vials. 
He hopes that the cure might be found in the same 
place Urgon found the vials of frigid woe in Eiselcross. 
The retired ranger asks the characters to travel to the 
islands of Eiselcross and retrace Urgon’s path, hoping 
they can find the cure. He offers the party 200 gp for the 
task, and reminds them that time is of the essence for 
Irven and his family—not to mention for any characters 
infected with frigid woe. If the characters accept, Elro 
gives them a day to prepare and tells them to find him at 
the village docks when they're ready to set sail. 


CHARACTER ADVANCEMENT 
The characters advance to 2nd level before traveling to 
Eiselcross. 

VIALS OF FRIGID WOE 


As an action, a creature can throw a vial of frigid woe up to 
20 feet, shattering it on impact and releasing its contents 
as a cloud of spores. Each creature within 5 feet of the vial 
when it shatters must succeed on a DC 11 Constitution 
saving throw or contract frigid woe (see the “Eiselcross” 
section of chapter 3). 

If a character has contracted frigid woe, track the num- 
ber of days that have passed so you can inform the player 
when their character’s symptoms appear and when they 
need to make Constitution saving throws. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 
241 


SAILING TO Elsetcross 


TRAVELING TO EISELCROSS 


When the characters are ready to leave for Eisel- 
cross, Elro Aldataur provides them with the following 
information: 


e Elro has arranged passage to Eiselcross for the char- 
acters on the Remorhaz, a sailing ship owned and 
operated by the Glassblades. 

« The characters will be taken to Syrinlya, an Uthodur- 
nian outpost on Foren, Ejiselcross’s largest island. 
Once there, they should talk to a dwarf named Orvo 
Mustave, who has gone on numerous expeditions into 
the wilds of Eiselcross with Urgon Wenth. 

e Once the characters have found the cure, they should 
use whatever they need for themselves, then give the 
rest to an elf in Syrinlya who goes by the name “the 
Buyer.” They can tell the Buyer to teleport the cure to 
Elro in Palebank Village. 


The islands of Eiselcross are covered in ice and 
snow, and are always well below freezing. Characters 
who don't already have cold weather gear will want to 
purchase it, or they will be subject to extreme cold (see 
chapter 5 of the Dungeon Master's Guide). 


NPCs INFECTED WITH FROZEN WOE 

The characters are in a race against time to cure Irven 
and his family (and possibly Hulil and Tulgi Lutan, if the 
characters are feeling merciful toward those two hard- 
ened criminals). Irven and his family have at least sixty 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


days before any of them might die, Hulil has at least 
thirty days, and Tulgi has at least twenty days. You can 
make saving throws for these NPCs against the disease 
every ten days, or you can just decide their final fates. 


VOYAGE OF THE REMORHAZ 

It takes the Remorhaz nine days to get to Syrinlya. This 

trip could be uneventful, or you could populate the ship 

with interesting NPCs and have the characters encoun- 

ter ocean monsters, Revelry pirates, or severe weather. 
When the ship reaches Syrinlya, read: 


The temperature has steadily dropped since you left Pale- 
bank Village, yet it seems to grow colder still as you step 
off the ramp of the Remorhaz onto Foren. Through windy 
snow, you can see fur-lined tents and yurts arranged in 
a large camp. Campfires are whipped by the wind, with 
dwarves and elves huddled close to the flames. 

“Don't worry! It'll cool down here eventually!” a jok- 
ing voice bellows over the snow. A female dwarf with 
a shaggy mane of unkempt hair bows to you. “Morgo 


Delwur at your service. Welcome to Eiselcross!” 
é é 


Morgo Delwur (a neutral good, female mountain dwarf 
werebear) has lived in Syrinlya for years. She can 
show the characters around and answer any questions 


they have about the settlement, providing any of the 
details found in chapter 3. If the characters ask about 
Orvo Mustave or the Buyer, Morgo points out where 
both live. Though Morgo never adventured with Urgon 
Wenth and wasn’t a close friend, she is sad to hear of the 
dwarf’s passing. 

Morgo and the other explorers in Syrinlya know 
about frigid woe and the disease’s terrible effects. If the 
characters have any unanswered questions about the 
disease, the explorers share what they know. 


SYRINLYA 
As Morgo leads the characters through Syrinlya, read: 


Morgo gestures to the groups of dwarves and elves 
huddled and chatting around campfires. “They're plan- 
ning expeditions to find Aeor’s lost treasures,” she says. 
“That’s what this whole place is about. If you ain’t explor- 
ing, you ain’t banking gold.” 

The dwarfstops in front of a large fur-lined yurt. “You 
can stay here. Belonged to a fool rich elf named Bertron 
who came here looking for adventure. He found the 
inside of a saber-toothed tiger instead. Should be some 
food and the like in there. It’s yours now.” 


b o 


BERTRON’S YURT 
The characters are welcome to this yurt during their 
time in Syrinlya. When they first enter, read: 


The sound of wind and the biting cold die down as you 
enter the yurt. A cold fire pit marks the center of the 
hide-covered floor. An open crate containing packaged | 


rations and a few other items stands next to the door. | 


Once the characters are settled, Morgo wishes them 
luck and leaves to prepare for an expedition of her own 
(see the “Can You Help Us?” sidebar). The crate con- 
tains 50 days of rations, a 50-foot silk rope, a blanket, a 
grappling hook, a miner’s pick, and a book titled Adven- 
ture Sexy: Impress Potential Lovers with Great Deeds 
by Scanlan Shorthalt. 


THE BUYER 

Morgo Delwur or any other resident of Syrinlya can 
point out the Buyer’s hut to the characters. It is Syrin- 
lya’s largest yurt. When the characters enter, read: 


? ? 
The pungent scent of incense fills this yurt, whose walls 

are painted with glowing arcane runes. A brass brazier 

burns brightly at the center of the floor, around which | 
are set a few plush chairs, a bed, and a large stone chest. | 
On one of those chairs sits an elf reading a book. A | 


small dragon with green butterfly wings is curled in the | 


elf’s lap. 


Can You HELP Us? 
If the characters feel as though they need help traveling 
the wilds of Foren, they can try to convince other explor- 
ers in Syrinlya to travel with them to recover the cure. 
Although most of Syrinlya’s explorers are willing to help 
others in need, those explorers already have an important 
mission. An expedition led by Professor Gulrim Shalebrow 
(see “The Diarchy of Uthodurn” in chapter 2) went to 
search for the origin of the strange magic in the region of 
Mutalos months ago and has not returned. The explorers 
at the camp are preparing a search and rescue mission to 
bring back Gulrim’s party. If the characters survive their 
quest into Salsvault, this story could serve as a hook for 
another adventure. 

aa SS 


The Buyer (lawful neutral, nonbinary, high elf mage) is a 
mysterious elf who purchases Aeorian relics in Syrinlya 
for the Uthodurnian government. See the “Syrinlya” sec- 
tion of chapter 3 for more information about the Buyer 
and their business. The green faerie dragon is Dew, the 
elf’s familiar. 

The Buyer has been in Syrinlya since the day the out- 
post was founded. They can answer any questions the 
characters might have about the outpost’s history, the 
island of Foren, or frigid woe. If the characters want to 
confirm that the Buyer is able to quickly send the cure 
for frigid woe to Palebank Village, the elf tells them that 
the stone chest in the yurt has the magical capability to 
teleport objects on command. 

In addition to the aid they provide in getting the cure 
back to Palebank Village, the Buyer offers to purchase 
any Aeorian relics the characters want to sell. 

Stone Chest. A detect magic spell reveals that the 
chest radiates an aura of conjuration magic. When an 
item is placed in the chest, the Buyer can teleport it to 
secret locations in Uthodurn or its outpost of Palebank 
Village, with those locations known only to the authori- 
ties of those settlements. 


Orvo MUSTAVE 

Morgo Delwur or any other resident of Syrinlya can 
point out Orvo Mustave’s tent to the characters. When 
the characters approach the tent, read: 


4 
A campfire burns in front of this small tent, whose flaps l 
are open. Inside the tent sits a young dwarf whose | 
face is scarred as though scratched by a large claw. A | 

| shortsword is casually laid across his lap as he warms his 

| outstretched hands. 

b è 


Orvo Mustave (a chaotic good, male mountain dwarf 
scout) is a curious and soft-spoken explorer. He enjoys 
uncovering the secrets of Eiselcross as much as he 
does uncovering the region’s treasures. He is genuinely 
interested in the characters’ lives, and asks them lots of 
questions after inviting them to share his fire. 

Orvo’s Story. Orvo is grief-stricken to hear about the 
demise of his friend Urgon Wenth. If the characters ask 
Orvo about the blue vials that brought disease to Pale- 
bank Village, Orvo shares the following information: 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


rs 


+ Orvo and Urgon found the blue vials in Salsvault, an 
Aeorian ruin partially submerged in water in a region 
of Foren where the glacial ice is thin. Explorers call 
this region Thin Sheets. Orvo believes the ruin is as 
well preserved as it is because the structure was rein- 
forced with magic, as were many of Aeor’s buildings 
that housed hazardous materials or secret projects. 

e Salsvault is two hundred miles northwest of Syrinlya. 
Ice mephits are drawn to the magic of something at 
that location. Orvo and Urgon found the ruin after fol- 
lowing one of the creatures. 

- Salsvault appears to have been an Aeorian lab. Orvo 
and Urgon explored only three of its chambers before 
being chased away by animated suits of armor. 

- The dwarves didn’t know what the vials contained. 

Orvo sold his share of the treasure from Salsvault to 

the Buyer. Urgon decided to hang onto his share until 

he returned home to Palebank Village. 


INTO THE WILDS 


After speaking with Orvo, the characters can make 
whatever preparations they need before heading into the 
wilds of Eiselcross. If they wish to obtain more supplies 
before setting out, there are no shops in Syrinlya, but 
many of the explorers at the camp are willing to trade 
goods and equipment. 


OVERLAND TRAVEL 

The characters must travel two hundred miles over 

ice and snow to reach Salsvault, the ruin where Urgon 
Wenth found the vials of frigid woe. It’s up to the char- 
acters whether they want to move at a fast, medium, or 
slow pace (see “Movement” in chapter 8 of the Player’s 
Handbook). If any character has a walking speed of less 
than 25 feet because of a frigid woe infection, use the 
Reduced Travel Speeds table to determine how far the 
party can travel in a day. 


REDUCED TRAVEL SPEEDS 


Slowest Medium 

Character Speed Slow Pace Pace Fast Pace 
15-20 ft. 12 miles 18 miles 24 miles 
5-10 ft. 6 miles 12 miles 18 miles 


As the characters travel, use the “Encounters in 
Eiselcross” section in chapter 3 to generate random 
encounters. After traveling forty miles, the characters 
enter Thin Sheets. This region is known for its large 
patches of thin ice over deep, frigid water (see the rules 
for frigid water and thin ice in chapter 5 of the Dungeon 
Master's Guide). 


FINDING SALSVAULT 

When the characters have traveled two hundred miles, 
one character who acts as a scout for the group should 
make a DC 15 Wisdom (Survival) check each day. On a 
failure, the character finds no signs of Salsvault. On a 
success, the character finds the trail of an ice mephit, 
which leads to Salsvault after a journey of 1d4 hours. 
If the check succeeds by 5 or more, the character finds 
Salsvault directly. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


SALSVAULT 


Salsvault was once a laboratory in the city of Aeor, 
where mages who specialized in necromancy and trans- 
mutation magic crafted constructs and diseases to be 
weaponized against their enemies. Many of the laborato- 
ry’s creations remain active, still guarding the diseases 
and treasures within. 


APPROACHING SALSVAULT 
As the characters approach Salsvault, read: 


Through wind-whipped snow and biting cold, you notice 
a half-submerged, dark-blue stone building poking up 
through the ice. A gray stone door is carved to look like a 
face with a half-exposed skull. Scribed above the door is 
the word “SALSVAULT.” 


Ziro and Glacies, two ice mephits, hide near the en- 
trance to Salsvault, waiting for someone to open the 
door. A character with a passive Wisdom (Perception) 
score of 13 or higher notices the mephits. If any charac- 
ters interact with the mephits, they attack in response. 
If the characters don’t notice the mephits, the creatures 
follow them inside Salsvault, attracted to the frigid 

woe within. The first time the characters enter an area 
containing vials of frigid woe, the mephits seek out and 
break the vials, reveling in releasing the cold-based 
magical energy within. 

Sealed Entrance. The entrance to Salsvault is frozen 
shut. The characters can force the door open with a 
successful DC 15 Strength check or by dealing 10 blud- 
geoning or fire damage to the ice that seals the door. 
Unsealing the door with bludgeoning damage draws the 
attention of three suits of animated armor in area S3, 
which gather in area S1 and attack the characters as 
soon as they enter. 


SALSVAULT FEATURES 

The locations in Salsvault are detailed on map 5.10. 
Unless otherwise noted in an area’s description, the 
following features are common throughout all areas of 
Salsvault. 

Ceilings. The ceilings in Salsvault’s rooms are 10 feet 
high, with 8-foot-high doorways connecting them. 

Chests. Stone chests two feet on each side are built 
into the floors in several areas. A detect magic spell 
reveals a faint aura of abjuration magic radiating from 
each chest. A chest has AC 17; 27 hit points; resistance 
to bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing damage; and im- 
munity to poison and psychic damage. 

If an area’s description notes a locked chest, the 
chest’s lock can be picked with a successful DC 15 
Dexterity check using thieves’ tools or forced open 
with a successful DC 18 Strength check. Ferol Sal (see 
area S17) carries a master key that locks or unlocks all 
chests in Salsvault. 

Doors and Walls. Salsvault’s heavy doors are made of 
black stone, and its walls are made of blue stone. A de- 
tect magic spell reveals a faint aura of abjuration magic 
radiating from the doors and walls. Each door and each 


Map 5.10: SALSVAULT 


10-foot section of wall has AC 17; 27 hit points; resis- 
tance to bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing damage; 
and immunity to poison and psychic damage. 

If an area’s description notes a locked door, the lock 
can be picked with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check 
using thieves’ tools, or the door can be forced open with 
a successful DC 18 Strength check. Ferol Sal (see area 
S17) carries a master key that locks or unlocks all the 
doors in Salsvault. 

Aeorian Robes. The undead in the complex wear 
archaic-looking robes. With a successful DC 12 Intelli- 
gence (History) check, a character recognizes the robes 
as being of Aeorian style. The characters can also find 
intact robes of the same style in the complex. Constructs 
and zombies in the complex don’t attack a character 
wearing intact robes, unless the character attacks first. 

Eastern Slope. Salsvault is tilted in the ice, with its 
east side lower than its west side. Every area within the 
complex features a gentle slope downward to the east. 

Light. Unless otherwise noted, wall sconces with 
continual flame spells cast on them brightly light the 
interior of Salsvault. 

Temperature. Though Salsvault’s interior is guarded 
from wind and snow, the temperatures within the struc- 
ture are still well below freezing. 

Water. Some areas of Salsvault are partially filled 
with seawater flowing in from beneath the ice of Thin 
Sheets. A creature that starts its turn in the frigid water 


f 
A 1 square =5 feet 
) 


must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw or 
gain one level of exhaustion. Creatures that lair within 
the water in the complex are immune to this effect. 


DENIZENS OF SALSVAULT 
Many of the creatures the characters can encounter in 
Salsvault have similar characteristics and tactics. 

Beasts. Several sea creatures haunt the submerged 
areas of the complex. These beasts attack characters 
who enter the water, fighting until reduced to half their 
hit points or fewer before fleeing. 

Constructs. When Salsvault crashed into Foren, a 
number of its construct guardians survived. Those con- 
structs continue to guard the complex, fighting intruders 
until they flee Salsvault. The constructs won't leave the 
complex willingly and won’t pursue characters who do 
so. The constructs don’t attack the undead of Salsvault, 
understanding on some level that those undead are the 
remains of the people who created them. 

Undead. The humanoids working in Salsvault died 
when it crashed into Foren. Just before impact, Ferol 
Sal, the necromancer in charge of Salsvault, released an 
experimental disease that caused any humanoids who 
died in the complex to return as undead. Most of those 
affected returned as zombies that attack intruders on 
sight and fight to the death. Ferol returned as a wight 
and has continued to work obsessively in his personal 
lab (area S17) ever since. Because of the cold here, all 
the undead are relatively well preserved. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 
245 


24.6 


Sl. ENTRANCE CHAMBER 


The heavy stone walls of this room dampen the cold and 
the howling wind outside. An inscription in what looks 


like Draconic runes is carved into the east wall. 


The inscription is in an archaic version of Draconic 
that was spoken in ancient Aeor. It can be read by any 
character who can read Draconic with a few minutes 
of study, or by anyone with access to a comprehend 
languages spell or similar magic. The message reads: 
“Welcome to Salsvault! Visitors, please wait here for an 
escort, and DO NOT TOUCH ANYTHING WITHOUT 
PERMISSION.” 

If the characters make any noise louder than a whis- 
per in this chamber, the suits of animated armor in area 
S3 come to investigate. 

Locked Door. The door that leads to area S4 is 
locked (see “Salsvault Features,” at the beginning of 
this section). 

Open Door. The door that leads to area S2 is slightly 
ajar. A character who examines the door and succeeds 
on a DC 10 Intelligence (Investigation) check notes that 
it was recently forced open (by Urgon and Orvo when 
they explored Salsvault). 


S2. RANSACKED FRIGID WOE LABORATORY 


Stone tables lie in pieces on the floor at the east end of 
the room. Two open stone chests stand against the west 
wall. A layer of fine sand coats the inside of the chests 


and the floor around them. 


pa ee 


If the characters make any noise louder than a whisper 
in this chamber, the suits of animated armor in area S3 
investigate the noise. 

Any examination of the chests reveals that they are 
built into the floor. A character who examines the sand 
on the ground near the chest and succeeds on a DC 12 
Wisdom (Perception) check notices two sets of dwarf- 
sized boot prints (from Orvo and Urgon) as well as two 
sets of boot prints made by human-sized feet (the ani- 
mated armor from area S3). 


S3. ANIMATED ARMOR LABORATORY 


+ P 
Pieces of rusty plate armor are scattered about this 

chamber amid the rubble of destroyed stone furniture. 

An anvil built into the floor stands in front of a cold 


furnace to the southwest. Across the room from the fur- 


nace, two humanoid feet stick out from a pile of rubble. 


6 b 


Two suits of animated armor normally stand guard in 
this chamber. If the armor didn’t leave to investigate dis- 
turbances in areas S1 or S2, both suits are here when 
the characters arrive, and you can add the following: 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


e 
Two full suits of steel armor stand upright but empty 


in the middle of the chamber, their gleaming surfaces a 


stark contrast to the rusty pieces lying nearby. 


Rescue Mission. One of the blacksmiths who worked 
in this chamber was crushed by a stone table that broke 
into rubble when Salsvault crashed into Foren. Since 
then, the blacksmith has been a zombie restrained be- 
neath the rubble and unable to break free. Any character 
who examines the feet notices them twitching with a 
successful DC 12 Wisdom (Perception) check. 

If the characters want to help the “victim” under the 
rubble, one character can remove enough rubble to free 
the zombie in 10 minutes. Multiple characters working 
together can reduce the time proportionately. As soon as 
it is freed, the zombie attacks. 

Treasure. The zombie wears an apron containing a 
set of damaged mithral smith’s tools (worth 50 gp). 


S4. FRIGID WOE LABORATORY 


Smashed stone tables litter the floor in this chamber. 
Two stone chests built into the floor stand next to each 
other along the far wall. A door to the west is inscribed 
with words in Draconic runes. A large iron lever is flipped 


ae ek 

| into the up position on the wall next to the door. 

| 

a + 


The inscription in archaic Draconic reads: “Disease 
storage. Authorized personnel only.” 

Chests. These stone chests are locked (see “Salsvault 
Features” at the beginning of this section) and magically 
trapped. When a creature makes a failed attempt to pick 
the chest’s lock, or attacks or attempts to force the chest 
open, the chest shoots a beam of cold energy at the 
creature. The beam is +4 to hit and deals 4 (1d8) cold 
damage on a hit. 

A character who searches the exterior of either chest 
and succeeds on a DC 13 Wisdom (Perception) check 
finds an archaic Draconic word for “ice” carved in tiny 
letters near the hinges. With a successful DC 10 In- 
telligence (Arcana) check, a character senses that the 
inscription is connected to a trap. Scratching out the in- 
scription with a tool or a weapon causes the trap to stop 
functioning on that chest. 

Each chest is packed with fine sand, within which are 
nestled two vials of frigid woe (see the “Vials of Frigid 
Woe” sidebar earlier in this adventure). 

Iron Lever. A character who examines the lever no- 
tices spots of faded red paint on it with a successful DC 
13 Wisdom (Perception) check. As an action, a creature 
can pull the lever down, causing flames to shoot down 
from the ceiling in area S5. Even with the door closed, 
a hiss can be heard in this area when the flames are ac- 
tive. A creature can use an action to push the lever back 
up, which shuts off the flames. See area S5 for more 
information on this hazard. 

Locked Doors. The doors from this area to areas S1 
and S5 are locked. The door to area S5 is also trapped. 


Trapped Door. A detect magic spell reveals an aura 
of conjuration magic radiating from the locked door 
to area S5. When a creature makes a failed attempt to 
pick the door’s lock, or attacks or attempts to force the 
door open, that creature is teleported into the middle 
of area S15. 

A character who searches the door and succeeds 
on a DC 13 Intelligence (Investigation) check finds an 
archaic Draconic word for “disappear” carved in tiny 
letters near the foot of the door on both sides. With a 
successful DC 10 Intelligence (Arcana) check, a char- 
acter senses that the inscription is connected to a trap. 
Scratching out either inscription with a tool or a weapon 
causes the trap to stop functioning. 


S5. DISEASE STORAGE 
If the iron lever in area S4 has been raised, read the fol- 
lowing when the door to this room is opened: 


A wave of heat hits you from the wall of roiling flame that 


fills this area, shooting down from the ceiling. 


If the flames are off, read: 


The only things to be seen in this room are eight chests 


built into the floor along the far wall. 


If the flames are active, each creature that enters this 
area or Starts its turn there must make a DC 12 Dexter- 
ity saving throw, taking 4 (1d8) fire damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 

If the flames aren’t active, a character who succeeds 
on a DC 13 Wisdom (Perception) check notes a faint oily 
smell in the room and notices pin-sized holes covering 
the ceiling. 

Chests. Each chest is locked (see “Salsvault Features” 
at the beginning of this section), packed with fine sand, 
and contains three vials of frigid woe (see the “Vials of 
Frigid Woe” sidebar earlier in this adventure). 


S6. NORTH HALL 
Three human zombies in tattered Aeorian robes roam 
this hall aimlessly and attack intruders on sight. 


S7. UNOCCUPIED DORM 


Four unmade beds are built into the east and west walls 


here, each with a footlocker tucked beneath it. 


One of the footlockers holds an intact Aeorian robe (see 
“Salsvault Features” at the beginning of this section). 


S8. RUINED DORM 

Salsvault’s crash into Foren destroyed the magic torches 
in this room, leaving it shrouded in darkness. When the 
characters can see into this area, read: 


Debris from broken stone furniture covers the floor. The 
walls here are cracked, as if they once supported built-in 
shelves that have been reduced to rubble. 


The floor of this chamber is covered in rubble, making it 
difficult terrain. A rug of smothering is hidden beneath 
the rubble. A character with a passive Wisdom (Percep- 
tion) score of 12 or higher notices the rug, but gets no 
hint that it is animated. 

A search of the rubble and a successful DC 14 Wis- 
dom (Perception) check turns up an intact Aeorian 
robe (see “Salsvault Features” at the beginning of 
this section). 


S9. ZOMBIE DORM 
When the characters can see into this area, read: 


Footlockers are tucked beneath four beds attached to the 
north and south walls. In the middle of the room, four 
zombies in tattered robes shuffle around, softly knocking 


into one another without caring. 


The four zombies attack as soon as they see intruders. 
The footlockers are empty. 


S10. FEROL SAL’S CHAMBER 

The door to Ferol Sal’s personal quarters is locked. 
When the characters can see this area, read: 

¢ p 
This room is in immaculate condition, apparently having 
been cleaned up after the destruction seen elsewhere 

in the complex. A crisply made bed stands at the center 
of the west wall, with small tables off to either side. The 
room also contains a stone desk set with a chair, and a 


chest built into the floor. 


6 6 


Though the undead Ferol no longer sleeps here, he and 
the zombies tidied up his personal space after Salsvault 
crashed into Eiselcross. 

Chest. The chest contains Ferol’s treasure (see be- 
low), along with a swarm of undead snakes that attacks 
any creature that opens the chest. The swarm uses 
the stat block for a swarm of poisonous snakes, with 
these changes: 


e The swarm is made of Tiny undead that don’t require 
air, food, drink, or sleep. 

« The swarm has immunity to poison damage and the 
poisoned condition. 


Desk. Any search of the desk turns up a bottle of 
dried ink, several used quills, five sheets of blank parch- 
ment, and a piece of paper with a faded message written 
on it in archaic Draconic. A character who understands 
Draconic can spend a few minutes to piece together 
the meaning of the note, or it can be deciphered with 
a comprehend languages spell or similar magic. The 
note reads: 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


0 


To whomever finds this: 

All my people are dead: my family, my friends, and my 
workers. |, too, am dead. Were it not for my quick think- 
ing and prowess with necromancy, our important work at 
Salsvault would be over. | continue to labor in my undead 
form, trying to find a sickness that can infect the gods 
themselves. If | have perished, | implore you to find my 


| lab, find my notes, and finish my work. The gods must 
| 


pay for Aeor’s destruction. | 


—Ferol Sal | 


Treasure. The chest contains 1,006 sp, 45 ep, and 
201 gp in Aeorian coinage. 


S11. KITCHEN 

Salsvault’s crash into Foren destroyed the magic torches 
in this room, leaving it shrouded in darkness. When the 
characters can see into this area, read: 


9 (J 
| Iron pots, pans, utensils, and frost-covered food covers 
the floor of this kitchen. A steel stove is built into the 


| west wall. 
é ° 


When the characters enter the room, four animated 
kitchen knives fly up from the floor and attack. The 
knives are flying swords, with these changes: 


- Each knife is a Tiny construct with 12 (5d4) hit points 
and a challenge rating of 1/8 (25 XP). 

- Instead of a longsword attack, each knife makes a 
melee attack (+4 to hit) that deals 3 (1d4 + 1) piercing 
damage on a hit. 


Old frozen cheese, bread, meat, and produce cover the 
floor, all well rimed and inedible. 


S12. DINING HALL 

t ? 
| The remains of broken tables and chairs are piled along | 
| the east wall. Two human zombies in tattered robes | 
| 
| 
l 


shuffle aimlessly around each other at the center of 
the chamber. | 


The two zombies occupying the dining hall attack any 
intruders. All the other features of this room have been 
reduced to rubble. 


S13. DROWNED LIBRARY 


(J kd 
| 
| Water ebbs and flows through a large opening along the | 


| east wall of this ruined library. Rotting parchments and 


| waterlogged tomes are spread everywhere, fallen from 


cracked stone shelves. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


The water is deeper than it appears beneath the ruined 
books and parchments, with the floor along the eastern 
side of the room having collapsed to a depth of 15 feet. A 
giant octopus hides here, having claimed this room as 
its lair. A character who succeeds on a Wisdom (Percep- 
tion) check opposed by the octopus’s Dexterity (Stealth) 
check notices the beast. See “Salsvault Features,” ear- 
lier in this section, for the effects of entering the water. 

Treasure. A character with a passive Wisdom (Per- 
ception) score of 12 or higher, or one who succeeds on a 
DC 12 Wisdom (Perception) check, notices a watertight 
scroll case floating in the water. The case holds two 
spell scrolls of detect magic. 


S14. SOUTH HALL 

Three well-preserved human zombies in tattered robes 
roam this hall aimlessly, attacking any intruders that 
catch their attention. 


S15. ANIMATED WEAPON STORAGE 
The door to this room is locked. When the characters 
can see into this area, read: 


Broken blades, cracked hammers, frost-rotted spears, l 
and other ruined weapons are spread out across the 

floor, fallen from the empty iron weapon racks that line 

the walls. | 


The mages of Salsvault stored animated weapons in this 
room, most of which were destroyed in the crash. Five 
flying swords lay among the debris, attacking any char- 
acters who enter. 

The broken weapons on the floor make this area dif- 
ficult terrain. Any creature that falls prone in this room 
takes 2 (1d4) piercing damage. 


S16. GOLEM LABORATORY 
As the characters approach this room, read: 


A large red X is painted across the stone door before you. 


Violent banging and the sound of heavy objects being 


es 


tossed around emanates from the chamber beyond. 


The door is locked. If the characters open it, read: 


As you open the door to this debris-filled room, a human- 
| oid creature made of pieces of stitched-together flesh 
charges toward you. The monster’s body is covered in 
| wounds, and broken pieces of bone stick through its skin 
| atodd angles. 


When Salsvault crashed into Foren, this golem servant 
of the mages was driven mad from the damage it took. 
Ferol locked the golem in this room ages ago. The golem 
uses the flesh golem stat block, with these changes: 


- The golem has 5 hit points remaining, and its Berserk 
trait is activated. 


- The golem has the use of only one arm and can’t use 
its Multiattack. Its challenge rating is 1 (200 XP). 


Debris. The golem has long since smashed all the ob- 
jects in this chamber not destroyed by Salsvault’s crash. 
Any search of the debris turns up only bits of bone, clay, 
iron, stone, and paper. 


S17. FEROL’s LABORATORY 


® p 
Six long stone tables are set with steel and glass labora- 
tory equipment in this chamber, whose walls are lined 

with shelves holding all manner of strange knickknacks 
and tools. An armed humanoid with white skin and red 
eyes moves from table to table, adjusting bubbling mix- 


tures and carefully adding reagents. 


$ b 


The undead Ferol Sal has worked tirelessly in the lab- 
oratory for centuries, obsessed with crafting a disease 
that can kill the gods. Despite having made no progress 
in all that time, he keeps working. Ferol is a wight with 
an Intelligence of 16 (+3). 

Roleplaying Ferol. Ferol knows nothing of Exan- 
dria’s history since Aeor’s crash, and his memory of the 
distant past is almost as hazy. His transformation into 
a wight and the centuries of solitude since have driven 
him quite mad. He cares only about taking revenge on 
the gods—who he incorrectly assumes are still active 
in Exandria. As a resident of Aeor, Ferol doesn’t speak 
Common, though he can communicate in the archaic 
Draconic of Aeor, as well as an archaic form of Elven. 
Characters who speak Draconic or Elven can communi- 
cate with him, albeit slowly. 

When Ferol notices the characters, he demands to 
know what they’re doing in Salsvault. Any character 
who claims they have come to help Ferol with his work 
and succeeds on a Charisma (Deception) check opposed 
by the wight’s Wisdom (Insight) check earns the un- 
dead’s trust. The check is made with advantage if char- 
acters who found and were able to read the note in area 
S10 mention Ferol’s plans to craft a god-killing disease. 

If Ferol trusts the characters, he tells them to stay 
away from the locked golem lab (area S16). If they ask 
about the cure for frigid woe, he tells them they can find 
it locked in a chest in what he calls the curative labora- 
tory (area S18). A character who succeeds on a DC 15 
Charisma (Persuasion) check can convince Ferol to pro- 
vide the key that safely unlocks the chest. 

If the characters don’t earn Ferol’s trust, the wight at- 
tacks, fighting until destroyed. 

Ferol’s Keys. Ferol carries two keys: one that works 
all the doors in Salsvault and another that works all 
the chests built into the floor within the complex (see 
“Salsvault Features”). 

Shelves. The shelves hold spell components, reagents, 
and laboratory supplies that are far past their prime. 
However, a character who spends a few minutes search- 
ing the shelves can collect enough workable tools and 
reagents to put together a set of alchemist’s supplies. 

Tables. Each table holds a working set of alchemist’s 
supplies that Ferol uses to experiment with frigid woe. 


If acreature is forcibly moved into a table, the delicate 
equipment on that table breaks and the creature must 
succeed on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw or con- 
tract frigid woe. 


S18. DROWNED CURATIVE LABORATORY 


@ 9 
A cold wind howls through the collapsed east wall of this 
huge chamber, whose far side is completely submerged 
| under frigid seawater. A dense bed of kelp grows up from 

the submerged floor, obscuring any sight of what lies 
| below. Broken glass and the remains of shattered tables 


| cover the floor in the dry section of the room. 
b b 


Aeorian mages worked in this chamber to ensure that 
they could cure the diseases they created. Four giant 
crabs now lair here, hiding beneath the kelp in the 
5-foot-deep water and attacking any creatures that in- 
trude. A character with a passive Wisdom (Perception) 
score of 14 or higher notices the crabs, which attack 
with surprise if not spotted. See “Salsvault Features,” 
at the beginning of this section, for what happens if 
characters enter the frigid water. Additionally, the kelp 
makes the water difficult terrain for creatures other than 
the giant crabs. 

Chest. A character with a passive Wisdom (Percep- 
tion) score of 11 or higher notices a stone chest built into 
the floor and submerged in the water against the back 
wall. The chest is locked (see “Salsvault Features” at the 
beginning of this section). 

Kelp. The kelp counts as difficult terrain. 

Treasure. The chest is packed with fine sand and 
contains twenty doses of frigid woe antidote (see “Eisel- 
cross” in chapter 3) and an ersatz eye (see chapter 6). 


CONCLUDING THE ADVENTURE 


You can roll for random encounters on the way back to 
Syrinlya (see “Encounters in Eiselcross” in chapter 3), 
or you can allow the characters an uneventful trip as 
reward for a job well done. When the characters arrive 
in Syrinlya, they can arrange for the Buyer to teleport 
the antidote for frigid woe to Palebank Village. After 
doing so, the elf pays out the 200 gp reward on behalf of 
Elro Aldataur. 

If the characters don’t successfully recover the frigid 
woe antidote in time to save Irven and his family, all 
four family members succumb to the disease. If the 
characters are successful, they have the thanks of Elro 
Aldataur, Irven and his family, the people of Palebank 
Village, and the explorers of Syrinlya. 


CHARACTER ADVANCEMENT 


At the end of this adventure, the characters reach 3rd 
level. This might mark the beginning of a campaign in 
the Biting North. In particular, the Buyer suggests that 
the characters could easily find their fortunes exploring 
Eiselcross. Alternatively, their success in this mission 
might inspire the characters to seek out new realms and 
new adventures elsewhere in Wildemount. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


249 


UNWELCOME SPIRITS 


Anelder warlock from the goblinoid swamp village of 
Urzin has been kidnapped by soldiers of the Dwenda- 
lian Empire. Now the machinations of an evil imperial 
inquisitor might unleash an evil that could threaten the 
garrison at Fort Venture and the goblinoids of Urzin 
alike. “Unwelcome Spirits” is a Wildemount adventure 
that takes characters from 1st to 3rd level, and which in- 
troduces them to Wildemount’s desolate and foreboding 
Eastern Wynandir region. 

If your players are using the heroic chronicle to create 
their characters (see chapter 4), you can talk with them 
about creating characters with ties to Urzin or nearby 
Xhorhasian settlements. Alternatively, characters from 
elsewhere might be traveling to Urzin, whether individ- 
ually or as a group. Since this adventure ties directly 
to the Kryn Dynasty’s conflict with the Dwendalian 
Empire, you can also ask each player to consider their 
character’s stance on the war and how the war might tie 
into their background. 


STORY OVERVIEW 


Trouble has come to the roaming village of Urzin, which 


slowly ambles through the wastes of Xhorhas atop the 
massive, mossy shells of horizonback tortoises. The 
village’s elder seer, the goblin warlock Bol’bara, has 
gone missing. Three nights ago, while foraging by night 
for rare alchemical ingredients, Bol’bara was beset by a 
cadre of Dwendalian Empire soldiers near the foothills 
of Brokenveil Bluffs. On the orders of an imperial in- 
quisitor named Parson Pellinost, the goblin warlock was 
forcefully escorted to the local garrison for question- 
ing—and for magical experimentation. 

What neither the imperial forces nor the goblinoids of 
Urzin know is that Bol’bara was performing a series of 
rare communal rites near a site of major arcane signif- 
icance. With those rites interrupted, she is now in the 
throes of possession by her patron, a shadow demon 
known as Trush. If its dark power is set free, Trush 
could wreak havoc across the wastes of Xhorhas, using 
Bol’bara as its worldly vessel. 


ADVENTURE SUMMARY 


In the political absence of the champion chief of Urzin, 


Sunbreaker Olomon, the village’s proud and protective 
acting leader is Ogre Lord Buhfal II. Buhfal seeks to re- 
solve the plight of the missing warlock, Bol’bara, which 
he worries will threaten the frail alliances among the 
village’s restless goblinoids. He and his advisors suspect 
the nearby imperial outpost at Fort Venture has some- 
thing to do with Bol’bara’s fate. However, Buhfal knows 
that goblinoids advancing on Fort Venture will draw re- 
prisals against Urzin, so he seeks an outside group who 
might more easily seek the warlock there and bring her 
back to help safeguard the settlement. 

At Buhfal’s behest, the characters must chart a course 
to the Brokenveil Bluffs with the help of a hobgoblin 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


guide, locate Fort Venture, and extract Bol’bara. Un- 
fortunately, the reckless aims of the imperial inquisitor 
Parson Pellinost and his lackeys work to undermine 
their efforts. Without a timely interruption, the torturous 
interrogation of Bol’bara will lead to her possession by 
Trush, her shadow demon patron—and to a series of 
calamitous arcane events. Trush’s demonic rampage 
will start at Fort Venture before wending its way back 

to Urzin—and it’s up to the adventurers to do some- 
thing about it. 


SETUP AND STARTING POINTS 


Before starting the adventure, work with your players as 
they talk about why their characters have come to Urzin. 
Details regarding this unique settlement and its politics 
can be found in chapter 3. The horizonback tortoises 
that give the village its mobility are detailed in chapter 7. 
Goblinoid or orc characters might be residents of Urzin, 
but characters of other races are probably visitors to this 
remote settlement—and are probably feeling very much 
out of their element. 

This is also a good time to figure out if the characters 
already know each other or if this adventure is the first 
time they've met. If none of the characters are gobli- 
noids, they most likely already make up an adventuring 
party and have traveled to Urzin together. 


MISSION IN URZIN 


Whether the characters are local to the area or have 
traveled to Urzin, the adventure starts with them being 
summoned to an audience with Ogre Lord Buhfal II, 
leader of the village. The characters might have made 

it known that they are mercenary adventurers seeking 
work, or they might simply look the part. Alternatively, if 
they are all strangers to the village, Lord Buhfal might 
approach them simply because he wants there to be no 
connection between the characters and the village if 
their intended mission goes bad. 

The tone of the adventure and the read-aloud text 
assumes that the characters find Urzin a strange and 
exotic location. If the party consists of some or all gobli- 
noids or other natives of Urzin, adjust the flavor and the 
read-aloud text accordingly. 

Once the players are ready to begin, read or para- 
phrase the following to set the scene: 


e $ 
| The rank odors of the Brokenveil Marsh mingle with the 
| musty aroma of a fleet of gargantuan reptiles as you tra- 
| verse the rickety rope bridges above Urzin. This strange 
| goblinoid village moves slowly and endlessly through the 


swampy Xhorhasian wastes, its structures set atop the 


massive shells of horizonback tortoises. Urzin’s mon- 
strous residents pay you little heed until you approach 


the large, ramshackle hall of Ogre Lord Buhfal !I—a tow- 


ering structure of haphazard timber and scrap. 


If the characters enter the hall of Ogre Lord Buhfal II, 
add the following: 


| The din of the swamp and the hushed chatter of Urzin’s 
residents is muted as you step through the folds of a 
heavy leather curtain into the chamber beyond. There, 
the reek of the marsh is quickly replaced by the favorable 
scent of roasted meats and spiced wine. Orc attendants 
gesture you toward a litter of dingy furs before the seat of 


Buhfal II, who allows you to settle in before his baritone 


voice issues a welcome. 
“Eat. Drink. But be wary, for the empire has come to 
Xhorhas, bringing damnation with it!” 


Ogre Lord Buhfal II—a lawful evil, male ogre with an 
Intelligence score of 10—explains the current situation 
to the characters: 


Since his father was slain forty years earlier by the 
Kryn paragon Sunbreaker Olomon, Buhfal II has 
seen a slow swell of discontent among Urzin’s gobli- 
noid population, who labor tirelessly to execute the 
Kryn Dynasty’s clandestine agendas. An increasing 
number of Urzin’s residents look to Buhfal and his ad- 
visors for leadership, despite the dynasty’s overt hold 
on the area. 

¢ Three nights ago, Buhfal’s most trusted counselor, the 
goblin witch Bol’bara, journeyed to the foothills of the 
Brokenveil Bluffs to the west, where she regularly for- 
ages for ritual components. She never returned. 

- Buhfal doesn’t know what happened to her, but he 
knows that Dwendalian Empire patrols had been spot- 
ted in the area in previous weeks. The patrols strike 
out from an outpost known as Fort Venture, which 
watches over the Brokenveil Bluffs. 

- An elder villager who remembers the reign of the 

first Buhfal, Bol’bara is Urzin’s chief loremaster and 

a pivotal ally in both the ongoing battle against the 

empire and the enduring struggle against the cruel 

environs of the Xhorhasian swamps. Little is known of 

Bol’bara’s otherworldly patron, but her warlock pow- 

ers are respected by all. 

Without Bol’bara’s arcane protections and political 

guile, Buhfal fears his people will grow submissive to 

the Kryn Dynasty’s whims, making Urzin a more no- 
table target for imperial reprisals. 


BUHFAL’S BOON 

Buhfal hires the characters to locate the goblin warlock 
and retrieve her. For rescuing Bol’bara from her kidnap- 
pers, the ogre lord agrees to pay 200 gp and to provide 
the characters with “premium weapons.” 

Buhfal suggests that the characters begin by recon- 
noitering the imperial garrison at Fort Venture to the 
west, under the keen supervision of a hobgoblin scout 
named Morgid. 


PREPARING FOR THE JOURNEY 
As they make preparations, the characters discover 
that the “premium weapons” Lord Buhfal promises are 


anything but. Each character receives their choice of 
any simple melee weapon from chapter 5 of the Player’s 
Handbook, but these are crude weapons of goblinoid 
design. With resources scarce in Urzin, goblinoid-made 
weapons are often hastily crafted and cheap. 

Characters looking for better gear can equip them- 
selves (at normal prices) for the journey through Broken- 
veil Marsh by visiting one of Urzin’s merchants. Popular 
stops in the village include the following: 


- Graaf the blacksmith (a lawful neutral, male orc) for 
weapons and armor 

e Quartermaster Krekk (a lawful evil, male goblin) for 
tools and adventuring gear 

e Vreya Trestilya (a chaotic good, agender drow) for 
bows, crossbows, arrows and bolts, as well as simple 
hunters’ traps 


EXPLORING BROKENVEIL MARSH 


The area between Urzin and Fort Venture is encom- 
passed by the boggy morass of the Brokenveil Marsh. 
Unless otherwise noted, all areas of the marsh are diffi- 
cult terrain. The bog water in the marsh averages from 
1 to 5 feet deep, but is too shallow and weed-bound for 
boats or rafts. Tiny creatures must have a swimming 
speed or be carried to traverse this watery terrain. 

Any character not used to this environment who takes 
a short or long rest within the swamp without being 
on raised dry ground must make a DC 11 Constitu- 
tion check. On a failure, the character contracts sewer 
plague (see “Diseases” in chapter 8 of the Dungeon Mas- 
ter’s Guide). 

Key areas of Brokenveil Marsh are noted on map 5.11. 
Each hex on the map measures 1 mile across. Charac- 
ters moving at a normal pace can travel 10 hexes per 
day on foot through the swampy terrain. 


NAVIGATION 

Have the players designate one party member as the 
navigator. The navigator might be an NPC, suchas 
Morgid the hobgoblin or some other guide, and the party 
can switch its navigator day to day. 

At the start of each new travel day, the DM makes a 
DC 15 Wisdom (Survival) check on behalf of the navi- 
gator. This check determines whether or not the party 
becomes lost over the course of the day. Apply a +5 
bonus to the check if the group sets a slow pace for the 
day, or a—5 penalty if the group is moving at a fast pace. 
It’s possible to get lost on a river by following a tributary 
instead of the main branch. 

If the check succeeds, the navigator knows exactly 
where the party is on the players’ map of Brokenveil 
Marsh throughout the day. 

If the check fails, the party becomes lost. Each hex 
on the map is surrounded by six other hexes; whenever 
a lost party moves 1 hex, roll a d6 to randomly deter- 
mine which neighboring hex the party enters, and don’t 
divulge the party’s location to the players. While the 
party is lost, players can’t pinpoint the group’s location 
on their map of Brokenveil Marsh. The next time a nav- 
igator succeeds on a Wisdom (Survival) check made to 
navigate, reveal the party’s actual location to the players. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT are 
25 


DESCRIBING THE JOURNEY 

The following boxed text describes the characters’ first 
foray into Brokenveil Marsh and assumes Morsgid, their 
hobgoblin guide, is leading them: 


| Boggy wetlands covered with waist-high water spread 

| asfaras the eye can see as you venture deeper into the 
mist-laden expanses of the Brokenveil Marsh. Morgid, 
your hobgoblin guide, knows the route you must follow, | 
but that path leads through a hazardous morass and the 
territory of unknown monsters. 

While you take a brief rest on a patch of relatively dry | 
land, Morgid produces a scrap of bleached leather from 
his belt—a map of the marsh. His eyes narrow as if try- | 
ing to pierce the fog ahead as he glances from the marsh | 
| to the map and back again. 


“The marsh loves outlanders like you,” he murmurs. 


“Loves to gobble ’em up, bones and all. But worry you 
not, my friends. Morgid will lead the way. Maybe three 
days of swamp to sift through till we reach Fort Venture. 


And then it’s your time to shine.” The wild-eyed hobgob- 


lin stuffs the map back into his belt and briskly wades 


| into the bog once more, motioning for you to follow. | 
b é 


Morgid (a neutral, male hobgoblin) is an able scout, but 
his allegiance is tenuous. He gladly shares his map with 
the party and is keen to join in on the investigation of any 
landmarks or other points of interest, even as he warns of 
the importance of not dallying in the marsh. However, if 
the hobgoblin loses half or more of his hit points during 

a single combat encounter, he abandons the party unless 
one of the characters succeeds on a DC 15 Charisma 
(Persuasion) check to convince him otherwise. 


RANDOM ENCOUNTERS 

In addition to the fixed locations the characters pass 
through, encounters can occur at any point as the char- 
acters venture through the unwelcoming environs of 
Brokenveil Marsh. While the characters are traveling 
or camping in the swampy wilderness, roll a d12 three 
times per day of game time, checking for encounters 
each morning, afternoon, and evening or night. An 
encounter occurs on aroll of 16 or higher. Roll a d20 
and check the Brokenveil Marsh Encounters table to 
determine what the characters encounter, or choose an 
encounter you like. 


Bl. URZIN’S MARCH 
Asthecharacters push through the Brokenveil Marsh 
to reach the garrison at Fort Venture, the lethargic 
horizonback tortoises that hold the village of Urzin aloft 
move through the swamp at a rate of 1 mile per day. Roll 
a d6 to randomly determine which neighboring hex the 
village enters, and don’t divulge Urzin’s new location to 
the players. 

Whenever the party is at two miles or more away 
from the village, Urzin’s exact location can no longer be 
determined. Characters within two miles of the village 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


SKR’A S’orsk N eae 


can zero in on signs of its movement with a successful 
DC 15 Wisdom (Survival) check. The characters will be 
forced to account for the village’s movement when they 
make their way back after the encounter at Fort Venture, 
with or without a guide. 


B2. WITHERED GROVE 

Approximately four miles from Urzin, the characters 
come across signs of how far into the swamps the 
Dwendalian Empire's patrols have reached. When they 
reach this site, read: 


You spy a shaded thicket of withered mangrove trees 

| draped ina sickly veil of rotted kudzu and creeper vines. 
| A moldering wooden raft topped with a single withered 
post floats near the center of this dark and lonely copse. 
A gaunt form clings lifelessly to the bottom of the post, 
| recognizable as the weathered skeletal remains of a 


Dwendalian soldier. 
é & 


Two swarms of poisonous snakes dwell within the 
knotted root system of the trees, attacking any creatures 
that tread or swim through the area. Any character with 
a passive Wisdom (Perception) score of 14 or higher 
spots the swarms, but all others are surprised. After 

the fight, a character who succeeds on a DC 10 Wisdom 


(Insight) check can deduce that the Dwendalian soldier 


starved to death while waiting out the relentless snakes. 


Treasure. The dead soldier is clad in chain mail and 
rotted clothes. A mildewed pouch containing 15 sp 
dangles from the corpse’s belt, and a tarnished shield 
emblazoned with the Dwendalian crest sits on the raft. 
Any character who succeeds on a DC 12 Wisdom (Per- 
ception) check made to search around the raft locates 
the soldier’s longsword jutting up from the slimy bottom 
of the swamp, along with the scattered skeletal remains 
of at least two more dead travelers. 


B3. SUNKEN BONEYARD 

A boggy field littered with the bones of massive beasts 

has become home to a raiding party of cannibal lizard- 
folk. Read the following when this site comes into view: 


BROKENVEIL MARSH ENCOUNTERS 
di2 Encounter 

ll The characters stumble onto an underwater sink- 
hole of indeterminate size. All plants, earth, and 
structures within the area are slowly receding into a 
watery pit beneath the marsh. Any character with a 
passive Wisdom (Perception) score of 10 or higher 
notices the sinkhole, making it easy to avoid. If 
not spotted, the area of the sinkhole is deep water, 
forcing characters to swim through it with success- 
ful DC 10 Strength (Athletics) checks. 

2 While passing through a copse of blackened man- 
grove trees, the characters are ambushed by 1d4 
vine blights that emerge from the trees’ tangled 
roots. Any character with a passive Wisdom (Per- 
ception) score of 13 or higher spots the blights, but 
all others are surprised. 

3 Any character with a passive Wisdom (Perception) 
score of 13 or higher spots a swarm of ravens flying 
overhead. A character with access to a map of the 
area who succeeds on a DC 10 Wisdom (Insight) 
check intuits that the ravens are flying in the oppo- 
site direction of Fort Venture. 

4 The characters cross paths with 1d4 + 1 bullywugs. 
The bullywugs are hostile but can be pacified with a 
successful DC 18 Charisma (Intimidation) check, or 
a DC 15 Charisma (Persuasion) check if the charac- 
ters are able to communicate with them. 

5 Any character with a passive Wisdom (Perception) 
score of 11 or higher spots a swarm of ravenous 
dragonflies hovering above the nearby marsh. The 
swarm uses the swarm of insects stat block. 

6 A Dwendalian veteran leads a patrol of 1d4 + 2 
guards from Fort Venture through the marsh, 
searching for goblinoids out of Urzin to be inter- 
rogated. If the party includes any goblinoids, the 
Dwendalian forces demand those goblinoids’ im- 
mediate surrender, then attack in response to any 
resistance. 


The fog parts ahead to reveal the skulls and bones of 
giant beasts rising from the marsh like a collection of 
morbid monuments. As you draw nearer, you spy three 
horizonback tortoise skulls beneath the shadow of a 


gargantuan rib cage at the center of this sullen boneyard. 


Six bloodthirsty lizardfolk and a corrupted lizardfolk 
shaman named Skr’a S’orsk have taken up temporary 
residence in the shadows of this titanic heap of primor- 
dial skulls and bones. The lizardfolk regard this place 
as a holy site of profound religious significance. They 
attempt to ambush and attack any interlopers, but are 
particularly brutish against non-lizardfolk humanoids. 


d12 


ii 


12 


Encounter 

The characters discover the bones of a long-dead 
adventurer whose skeletal remains have been 
picked clean by swamp vermin and years of decay. 
If any character searches the bones, roll on the 
Trinkets table in chapter 5 of the Player’s Handbook 
to determine the skeleton’s last worldly possession. 
The characters are ambushed by a giant constrictor 
snake while wading through the murky swamp. 

Any character with a passive Wisdom (Perception) 
score of 16 or higher spots the snake, but all others 
are surprised by it. 

Any character with a passive Wisdom (Perception) 
score of 15 or higher spots a hummock of dry 
earth. The hummock is 1d6 feet above ground, and 
a successful DC 10 Strength (Athletics) check is 
required to climb it. The hummock is 10 feet square 
and firm enough to support six characters and 
their gear. Characters who take a long or short rest 
on this hummock avoid exposure to the swamp’s 
sewer plague (see “Exploring Brokenveil Marsh” 
earlier in this adventure). 

The characters disturb 2d4 stirges as they move 
through an area of the marsh set with overgrown 
ruins and rotting trees. Alternatively, the same 
number of stirges descend on the party's camp 
during a rest. 

Any character with a passive Wisdom (Perception) 
score of 12 or higher sees and hears 1d3 + 1 croco- 
diles moments before they attack. All other charac- 
ters are surprised by the reptiles. 

Any character with a passive Wisdom (Perception) 
score of 12 or higher hears and smells a pack of 2d4 
goblinoid ghouls approaching. There is a 20 per- 
cent chance that the ghoul pack contains a freshly 
undead guard or two from nearby Fort Venture. 
These ghouls are of an aquatic variety known as 
lacedons. In addition to the statistics of a normal 
ghoul, each has a swimming speed of 30 feet. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


N 
(Szi 
oo 


No 


Map 5.11: BROKENVEIL MARSH 


Skr’a S’orsk worships the demon lord Sess’inek and 
has the following spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): produce flame, resistance, thorn whip 

1st level (4 slots): entangle, fog cloud 

2nd level (3 slots): blindness/deafness, spike growth 

3rd level (2 slots): animate dead, conjure animals 
(reptiles only) 


The boneyard provides ample humanoid bones for 
the corrupted shaman’s animate dead spell, and the 
heavy clubs wielded by the lizardfolk are fashioned from 
massive femurs and the like. The lizardfolk are clad in a 
decorative assortment of bone jewelry, and bloody war 
paint. Any character who succeeds on a DC 15 Intelli- 
gence (Religion) check recognizes these affectations as 
tributes to the reptilian demon lord Sess’inek. A char- 
acter who succeeds on a DC 18 Wisdom (Insight) check 
determines that the lizardfolk sect’s proximity to the 
boneyard is fundamentally spiritual in nature. 

Treasure. The lizardfolk have dutifully stacked the 
skulls and bones of their victims in a mound near the 
center of the sunken boneyard. Although most of the 
clothing and equipment of these victims has been cast 
aside or destroyed, any character who searches the bone 
mounds and succeeds on a DC 18 Wisdom (Perception) 
check finds 2d4 gold teeth (worth 1 gp each) among a 
few errant skulls. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


The horizonback tortoise skulls used as dwellings by 
the lizardfolk are sparsely decorated with stone bedding 
and humanoid skull trophies. Any search of the central 
skull turns up the shaman’s trove of valuables: a wand of 
magic detection and a small collection of holy symbols 
representing various gods. A tarnished silver amulet of 
Tharizdun (worth 25 gp) feels cold to the touch. 


B4. CRUMBLING TOWER 

The dilapidated ruins of a pre-Calamity watchtower are 

slowly sinking into the swamp at this location: 

| ? 
A squat, square, three-story tower juts up out of the | 
water ahead. Its crumbling stones sag with age, and half 
of the timeworn building’s first floor has already been 
subsumed by the murky marsh. Shadowy openings mark 
the locations of an arched doorway at ground level and 


several small windows on the upper floors. 


The lowest floor of this 30-foot-wide square edifice is 
half submerged under 5 feet of bog water, creating a 
claustrophobic crawlspace of muck and mire. The ceil- 
ings of the tower are 10 feet high, and all its doors and 
windows have long since rotted off. 

Characters who approach can see a narrow stone 
staircase wrapping around the crumbling tower’s inner 


walls. Spider webs cling to every dry corner of the build- 
ing’s interior, and serve to warn perceptive adventurers 
of the dangers within. 

Spider Sentries. Five giant spiders have taken over 
the top two floors of the crumbling tower, and feast on 
any creatures that traverse or explore its lightless re- 
cesses. The giant spiders won't leave the tower during 
daylight hours unless properly motivated by a threat. 
After dusk, the spiders pursue potential prey up to 100 
feet from the tower before returning. 

Rotten Floors. The wooden floors of the dilapidated 
tower are rotten and dangerous. Whenever a creature 
standing on the floor takes damage, it must succeed 
ona DC 12 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check or fall as a 
section of the floor gives way, taking 3 (1d6) bludgeon- 
ing damage. 

Bodies. The shadowy third floor of the ruins is cov- 
ered with the rotting husks of swamp vermin and birds. 
Any character who succeeds on a DC 13 Wisdom (Per- 
ception) check notices the remains of two dead Kryn 
Dynasty soldiers webbed to the walls. 

Chest. Any character who searches the watery ex- 
panse of the first floor and succeeds on a DC 12 Wis- 
dom (Perception) check finds a locked wooden chest 
half buried between the slimy swamp muck and a rotted 
trap door. Once drawn from the water, the chest’s rusted 
lock can be picked with a successful DC 18 Dexterity 
check using thieves’ tools, or the chest can be forced 
open with a successful DC 20 Strength check. 

Treasure. One of the Kryn cadavers is clad in a suit 
of elven chain, and a normal longsword is knotted 
up in webs nearby. The other body isn’t armed or ar- 
mored, but it wears a silver ring (worth 20 gp) on its left 
ring finger. 

The chest contains a large selection of books and 
scrolls that have been thoroughly destroyed by soiled 
water, plus pipes of haunting carved from the bones of a 
moorbounder. 


B5. BULLYWUG CAVE 

An algae-covered moat surrounds a low hill and a small, 
murky cave, within which dwells a clan of bullywugs 
and their toad steeds. Read the following when the char- 
acters first spot the hill: 


The sunless mouth of a small cave is set into a stony hill 
rising from a scum-covered expanse of the swamp. A col- 
ony of large purple toadstools surrounds the cave on its 
rocky, moss-covered isle, and a slimy path winds through 
the mushrooms before terminating at the cavern’s dark, 


vine-draped entrance. 


The small hill is roughly 80 feet in diameter at its base. 
The stony hollow delved out beneath it is comprised of 
one large cave andthree smaller dens connected bya 
network of short natural tunnels. 

Toxic Toadstools. The overgrown mushroom colony 
surrounding the small hill is noxious. Any character 
who moves through the swamp within 40 feet of the hill 
mustsucceed on a DC 12 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check 


to avoid touching the large purple mushrooms, which 
range from 1 to 10 feet tall. Any character who touches 
the mushrooms must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution 
saving throw or become poisoned until they finish a 
long rest. 

Characters who move only along the slimy path twist- 
ing up toward the mouth of the cave can easily avoid the 
toxic toadstools. 

Exploring the Caverns. Other than a fewrocky out- 
croppings, all the caverns beneath the hill, including the 
entrance, are covered in two feet of standing swamp wa- 
ter, which is difficult terrain. Any character who moves 
through the flooded interior areas of the echoing caves 
has disadvantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks unless 
they can avoid the water. 

The bullywugs launch hunting and raiding parties 
into the marsh on a daily basis, setting out before dawn 
and returning when their appetites have been satiated. 
When the characters arrive here, five bullywugs and 
two giant toads lurk in different sections of the cave. 

If the characters stay in this area and explore the cave, 
there is a 25 percent chance each hour that a hunting 
party of 1d4 +1 bullywugs riding the same number of 
giant toads returns from a foray into the swamp. 

Junk. Any character who searches the bullywug cave 
discovers a small trove of junk “treasures” in the largest 
cavern, consisting of shiny metal scraps and worthless 
polished stones foraged from various corners of the 
swamp. As well, a few items of interest stand out within 
the heap (see below). 

Treasure. Among the worthless goods collected by 
the bullywugs, the characters can find the following: 


« Eleven unbroken glass bottles of assorted shapes, 
sizes, and tints 

« A crude shortsword with artful etchings on its blade 

« A tarnished suit of dwarf-sized plate mail crafted from 
a curious alloy 

« A magnifying glass with a silver frame and handle 

« A copper tankard scribed with an intricate image of 
vines (worth 25 gp) 

¢ Ajar half full of glass marbles plus five tiger-eye gem- 
stone marbles (10 gp each) 


B6. RITUAL STONE 


with a curious standing stone at its center. A jagged, 


® 
Ahead, you spy a mossy knoll rising out of the marsh | 
| 
eight-foot-tall monolith of black rock, the stone is laced | 

| 


with veins of crystal that shimmer with a strange light. 


4 è 


Roughly 3 feet across, this enchanted menhir glows 
with a pale radiance under moonlight, shedding dim 
light in a 5-foot radius. Any character who succeeds on 

a DC 15 Intelligence (Arcana) check or a DC 18 Intelli- 
gence (Religion) check understands that this ritual stone 
is an ancient monument to some dark, primordial god, 
and that it serves modern spellcasters by acting as a 
focus for illicit rituals and dark incantations. (Bol’bara 
was using the stone to commune with her patron when 
she was beset by soldiers of Fort Venture.) 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


Rite of Communion. Any spellcaster who spends a 
short or long rest attuning to the ritual stone can use 
an action to cast the commune spell. Once used, this 
property of the ritual stone can’t be used again until the 
next full moon. Any warlock who uses the ritual stone 
to commune with their otherworldly patron gains in- 
spiration and acts as if under the effect of the guidance 
cantrip for 1d2 + 1 days. 

Ritual Stone Fragments. Any character who suc- 
ceeds on a DC 16 Wisdom (Perception) check made to 
inspect the ritual stone discovers that three naturally 
loosened fragments of the stone can be easily removed 
and replaced. A fragment carries a semblance of the 
stone’s magic, allowing the character who carries it to 
cast the augury spell. Once used, this property of the 
fragment can’t be used again until the next dusk. . 

If a fragment is taken more than 10 feet from the rit- 
ual stone, its magic fades and it ceases to function after 
1d3 + 1 days. A character who attempts to chip away 
a piece of the ritual stone in addition to the three frag- 
ments must succeed on a DC 20 Charisma saving throw 
or take 3 (1d6) psychic damage. 


B7. BROKENVEIL BLUFFS 

If the characters decide to exit the swamp to move 
overland to Fort Venture, they eventually draw near the 
Brokenveil Bluffs. Read the following as the characters 
draw close to land: 


As you near the end of the wetter portion of your journey, 
the mist-veiled western marshland slowly gives way to 

| the rocky foothills of the Brokenveil Bluffs. Sharp crags 

| and steep foothills are visible ahead, as are the openings 


to what must be hundreds of natural caves. 


Life is particularly difficult in this section of the swamp, 
where avian predators and winged monstrosities from 
the bluffs roam unfettered through an open sky. If 
Morgid is still with the party, he warns the characters to 
be on their guard. 

Harpy Assault. When the characters finally leave the 
swamp behind and enter the bluffs, any character who 
succeeds on a DC 13 Intelligence (Nature) check or a 
DC 16 Wisdom (Perception) check notices increasing 
numbers of scattered bones—both animal and human- 
oid. Six harpies lurk among this particular section of 
the foothills. These bluff harpies attempt to beguile 
interlopers with their Luring Song before attacking with 
claws and clubs. 

In the aftermath of the fight, the characters can follow 
the path. of the harpies’ flight back to their nest. This sits 
within a shallow cave approximately 80 feet above the 
moist and peaty ground at the base of the bluffs. 

Treasure. Any character who searches the cave finds 
a collection of valuable items buried beneath a repulsive 
heap of offal, including a potion of healing, a decorative 
rapier with a crystal hilt (worth 50 gp), and an assort- 
ment of loose coins totaling 11 gp. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


B8. THE MOSSBACK STEWARD 
A massive hill appears to rise out of a lonely section 
of the Brokenveil Marsh. The hill is actually an aging 
horizonback tortoise nicknamed the Mossback Steward, 
who has presided over this area for time immemorial. 
This encounter might occur if the characters approach 
Fort Venture from the swamp, or if becoming lost drives 
them south from a course to the Brokenveil Bluffs. Al- 
ternatively, you can have the Mossback Steward move 
from its marked location on the map, with its wandering 
course bringing it into the characters’ path. 
When the characters encounter the Mossback Stew- 
ard, read the following: 


As you forge onward through the marsh, the mist 

clears to reveal a lone hillock crowned with a thicket of 
low-hanging mangrove trees. This bramble-covered knoll 
looks to be a perfect site to take respite from the murky 


waters of the swamp. 


Any character who succeeds on a DC 14 Intelligence 
(Nature) check or a DC 18 Wisdom (Perception) check 
realizes that the hill is, in fact, the partially submerged 
moss-covered shell of a horizonback tortoise. A char- 
acter who succeeds on a DC 18 Intelligence (History) 
check guesses that this must be the Mossback Steward, 
a creature of local mystery and renown. 

Attendant ofthe Broken Veil. Long-term proximity 
to the eldritch phenomena of the marsh has granted the 
Mossback Steward a modest array of magical abilities. 
This unique creature is a horizonback tortoise (see 
chapter 7 for its stat block) with these changes: 


+ The Mossback Steward has an Intelligence of 12 (+1) 
and a Wisdom of 17 (+3). It has the following skills: 
Arcana +5, Insight +7, Nature +5, Perception +7, 
Persuasion +5. 

- Itunderstands Common and Primordial, and has 

telepathy out to a range of 120 feet. 

As an action, it can cast the friends cantrip, the sug- 

gestion spell (save DC 15), or the divination spell. 

After casting suggestion or divination, it can’t cast that 

spell again until it finishes a short or long rest. 


The Mossback Steward is aware of the situation in- 
volving Bol’bara and the Dwendalian garrison at Fort 
Venture. While the great tortoise has a keen understand- 
ing of Bol’bara and her relationship with the people and 
tortoises of Urzin, the true intentions of the Dwendalian 
Empire’s outpost and its leaders remain a mystery. 

One thing is clear, though. Since the garrison at Fort 
Venture was established, the primordial harmony of the 
swamp has been disrupted. The Mossback Steward is 
more than willing to use its powers of divination to as- 
sist characters who display an honest interest in forcing 
the Dwendalian military out of Brokenveil Marsh. 


B9. FORT VENTURE 

Asthe characters draw close to the fort, flashes of 
lightning and the sound of thunder should grow more 
prevalent. 

The Dwendalian stronghold known as Fort Venture 
sits along a dismal stretch of marsh among the craggy 
foothills of the Brokenveil Bluffs. A timber palisade sur- 
rounds the fort’s squat stone keep and muddy grounds, 
where rows of tents are set up alongside a central train- 
ing field. The green timber of its battlements hint at 
the recent construction of this remote military outpost, 
while the bright colors of its quarried stonework and 
foreign banners readily betray its distinctly non-Xhorha- 
sian heritage. 

Read the following when the characters first catch 
sight of the fort: 


? ¢ 


| 
The swamp gives way to a grassy shoreline beneath a 


low promontory, on which sits a modest stone keep sur- 
rounded by a tall wooden palisade. Weather-worn Dwen- 
dalian flags hang forlornly above the massive front gate 
and from decorative pikes rising from the keep. Several 
rows of spiked barricades surround the palisade as a de- 
fense against the predators of Brokenveil Marsh. 

A jagged bolt of lightning suddenly cuts through the 
misty air above the keep, striking the edifice as a mighty 
crack of thunder rumbles off to the horizon. 


Fort Venture is detailed on map 5.12. Any character 
who succeeds on a DC 12 Intelligence (Nature) check 
or a DC 14 Wisdom (Perception) check recognizes that 
the thunderstorm above Fort Venture is fixed around 
the outpost and the nearby promontory, while the 

rest of the marsh remains relatively unaffected by the 
strange weather. 

Once the characters reach Fort Venture, the hob- 
goblin guide Morgid offers to run reconnaissance and 
to distract incoming Dwendalian patrols as the party 
infiltrates the fort. The precise condition of Fort Ven- 
ture and its inhabitants is dependent on how long it 
took the characters to arrive, and how much of Parson 
Pellinost’s ill-fated exorcism of Bol’bara has transpired. 
See “Bol’bara’s Exorcism” later in this chapter for more 
information. 


CHARACTER ADVANCEMENT 

Having successfully navigated the challenges of Broken- 
veil Marsh, the characters reach 2nd level when they 
arrive at Fort Venture. 


INFILTRATING FORT VENTURE 


The Dwendalian Empire’s hold on Eastern Wynandir 

is tenuous at best, and the ramshackle garrison at Fort 
Venture is testament to the empire’s attempt to solidify 
its influence. Despite the outpost’s modest appearance, 
its freshly laid stonework and newly erected battlements 
offer solid protection against the harsh environs and 
deadly creatures of the Brokenveil Marsh. 


$ ‘ 


Commander Struther Felmont and the Dwendalian 
soldiers at the fort have grown callous and cruel under 
the leadership of Imperial Inquisitor Parson Pellinost, 
who conducts deranged experiments on the humanoids 
of the marsh with an unsavory and sadistic application 
of divine magic. The guards of Fort Venture engage in 
defense, training, and patrol work in eight-hour shifts. 
Few of those guards respect Pellinost, but all obey him 
for fear of strict retribution. 


BOL'BARA’S EXORCISM 

The party’s travel time from Urzin to Fort Venture de- 
termines whether the goblin warlock Bol’bara is still 

a prisoner of the empire or has become an unfettered 
vessel of demonic possession and torn the fort apart. 
After three days of torture and experimentation, Parson 
Pellinost triggers Bol’bara’s full demonic possession— 
making her powerful enough to kill the inquisitor and 
escape captivity. 

If the characters spend the minimum three days 
traversing the marsh and enter Fort Venture at once, 
they can either prevent the second phase of Bol’bara’s 
possession or become witness to it. With or without the 
party’s intervention, once Bol’bara enters the second 
phase of her possession, she plots a return to Urzin and 
attempts to destroy anyone and anything in her way. 

Point of No Return. Parson Pellinost’s methods of 
interrogation for “troublemakers” are considered savage 
by normal imperial standards, but the remote location of 
the outpost and the soldiers’ fear of him have worked in 
his favor. Bol’bara is of particular interest to the inquis- 
itor, who has been torturing her to death, then bringing 
her back again using divine healing magic. Bol’bara’s 
full demonic possession is triggered at the end of the 
third day after the characters set out from Urzin, when 
Pellinost utilizes the revivify spell a third time to bring 
Bol’bara back to life. 

A Warlock Possessed. Once Bol’bara enters the next 
phase of her demonic possession, she gainstwo legend- 
ary actions granted by the unique supernatural union 
with her otherworldly patron (see her stat block later in 
this adventure). Most areas of Fort Venture will be af- 
fected by her escape, as indicated by additional descrip- 
tive text in the “Bol’bara’s Possession” section in each 
area of the fort. Use the appropriate text depending on 
whether the characters arrive before Bol’bara has been 
fully corrupted and have a chance to stop the process, or 
whether her spree of destruction is already underway. 

Demon Detente. Even if they are too late to stop 
Bol’bara’s possession, the characters might want to try 
to parley with the demon-possessed warlock. Give the 
players any chance of success that seems appropriate 
to their efforts, but remember that the shadow demon 
behind Bol’bara’s transformation is a creature of chaos. 
It savors the taste of discord, and convincing Trush to 
relinquish its hold over the witch won't be easy. 


V1. PALISADE 

The palisade wall around the fort is easily scouted and 
assessed from a distance, but more difficult to get past. 
When the characters draw close to the fort, read: 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 
257 


The wooden palisade that encloses Fort Venture stands 
over ten feet high and is topped by huge spikes. A gate in 
the middle of the east wall is flanked by two watchtowers 
and appears to be the only way in or out of the complex. 
The parapet of the fort’s stone keep can be seen rising 
up from the center of the grounds. Tall grass and knot- 
ted brambles partially obscure a well-trodden path that 
winds up to the gate from the marsh. Rows of spiked bar- 
ricades encircle the palisade, completing the appearance 
of a well-fortified military outpost. 


é (J 


At any given time, each watchtower (including the two 
towers bordering the gate) is occupied by a Dwenda- 
lian guard equipped with a crossbow and a torch. The 
guards work in eight-hour shifts, with two guards pres- 
ent at each watchtower during shift changes. Characters 
who attempt to sneak into Fort Venture must find a way 
to avoid being spotted by the watchtower guards, whose 
position gives them advantage on all Wisdom (Percep- 
tion) checks to notice activity on the grounds around or 
inside the palisade. 

Strangers approaching the fort are hailed by the 
watchtower guards and ordered to identify themselves. 
At the first sign of trouble (and the guards are inclined to 
view anything out of the ordinary as ‘trouble’), a guard 
sounds an alarm on a horn whose call can be heard 
across the fortress. 

Bear Traps. Scores of bear traps are hidden among 
the tall grass in a 40-foot-wide area surrounding the pal- 
isade. A character with a passive Wisdom (Perception) 
score of 12 or higher is able to spot the traps and avoid 
them. Characters who don’t spot the traps have a 50 per- 
cent chance of stepping on a bear trap and triggering it 
whenever they move through the area. 

A bear trap’s attack is +8 to hit and deals 5 (1d10) 
piercing damage on a hit. This attack can’t be made with 
advantage or disadvantage. A creature hit by the trap 
also has its speed reduced to 0 and can’t move until it 
breaks free of the trap. Breaking free requires a suc- 
cessful DC 15 Strength check by the trapped creature 
or another creature within 5 feet of the trap. A success- 
ful DC 10 Dexterity check using thieves’ tools disables a 
bear trap. 

Spiked Barricades. Though visually formidable, 
these barricades built of crossed rows of spiked poles 
pose a threat only to Large and larger creatures. Any 
area containing a spiked barricade is difficult terrain. 
Any Large or bigger creature that moves through an 
area of spiked barricades must succeed on a DC 14 Dex- 
terity saving throw or take 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 

No Visitors. The garrison of Fort Venture are all 
experienced soldiers and treat all creatures outside 
the fort as potential threats. Characters who approach 
them intent on diplomacy or intimidation are met with 
swift opposition. Using crossbows or spears from their 
watchtower vantage points, the guards attack any char- 
acter who engages in conversation with them for more 
than 1 round. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


Climbing the Walls. The rough-cut logs of the pali- 
sade are relatively easy to climb, notwithstanding the 
risk of being seen. A character must succeed on a DC 12 
Strength (Athletics) check to climb up the wall, followed 
by the same check to descend the other side unless a 
rope is lowered down. At the top of the wall, a charac- 
ter must make a DC 12 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check to 
safely slip up and over the palisade spikes. On a failed 
check, the character takes 3 (1d6) piercing damage. 

East Gate. The gate into Fort Venture is a sturdy door 
of iron-banded oak timbers and can be barricaded from 
within by a 20-foot-long iron crossbar. This crude de- 
fense mechanism can’t be opened from outside the gate. 
The barred door can be physically forced open by crea- 
tures with a combined Strength of 50. 

Bol’bara’s Possession. If Bol’bara has already been 
possessed as a result of the failed exorcism, the watch- 
tower guards are either dead at their posts or missing, 
having fled to the main hall (area V5). The iron-banded 
doors of the gate stand invitingly ajar. 


V2. TENT YARD 

Thirty single-person canvas tents cover this section of 
the outpost grounds in three rows of ten. When the char- 
acters can see this area, read: 


The south side of the Fort Venture grounds is lined with 
three rows of canvas tents, presumably the garrison’s 


barracks. 
b 


When not on duty or training, the guards of Fort Venture 
spend most of their time in this tent yard, where they 
drink, gamble, or attempt to sleep despite the madden- 
ing howls of Pellinost’s furious prisoners in the chapel 
(area V6). Each tent features a floor covered with straw, 
a cotton bedroll, a down pillow, and a small wooden 
footlocker. 

Eight guards are off duty when the characters arrive 
in this area, sleeping (an 80 percent chance) or resting 
but awake in their tents. Sleeping guards use their pas- 
sive Wisdom (Perception) scores to detect intruders or 
to hear the alarm being raised. 

Treasure. The wooden footlockers within the tents 
are unlocked. Each contains the components of an ex- 
plorer’s pack minus the bedroll currently laid out in the 
tent. Each footlocker also has a 15 percent chance of 
containing an object of personal or curious importance. 
Roll on the Trinkets table in chapter 5 of the Player's 
Handbook to determine such items. 

Bol’bara’s Possession. If Bol’bara has already been 
possessed, no guards are present in the infantry tent 
yard. The eight off-duty guards took up arms, joined the 
fray against the possessed warlock, and are either found 
dead in the training yard (area V4) or alive after fleeing 
to the main hall (area V5). 


V3. COMMANDER’S QUARTERS 

This huge canvas tent is completely sealed except for a 
5-foot-wide entrance flap on its eastern wall. When the 
characters can see into the tent, read: 


Map 5.12: Fort VENTURE 


Within the dim confines of this huge canvas tent, a 

tall human clad in splint mail stands before a small, 
lantern-lit table surrounded by three chairs. He takes a 
sip of wine from a copper goblet as he studies a large 
map on the tabletop. A crooked scar dances across the 
left side of his face, and his expression shows a hint of 


regret as he drinks again. 


The map shows the area of Brokenveil Marsh. On the 
west side of the tent, a wooden bed frame topped with 

a dusty mattress is flanked by a bedside table. A locked 
wooden chest lies at the foot of the bed, while a wooden 
weapon rack and armor stand on the north wall. 

Any character who succeeds on a DC 12 Intelligence 
(History) check can identify the Dwendalian insignias 
and medal of rank adorning the armor of Commander 
Struther Felmont (a lawful neutral, male human vet- 
eran). Felmont prefers the isolation of his command tent 
to the grim scene inside Pellinost’s chapel, and retreats 
here whenever the priest conducts his strange exor- 
cisms. He carries a key to the main hall (area V5). 

At the first sight of intruders, Felmont reaches for 
a horn at his side and sounds the alarm, alerting the 
guards outside. The commander is fearful but stubborn, 
and parleys with the characters only if his support 
troops have been routed and he is obviously outnum- 
bered or outclassed. If Felmont sounds the horn, six 


Dwendalian guards arrive from the training yard 
within 2 rounds to fight at his side. If combat persists, 
all the remaining guards at Fort Venture eventually join 
the battle. 

Wooden Chest. The chest at the foot of the bed is 
locked and trapped. Any character who examines the 
chest and succeeds on a DC 15 Intelligence (Investiga- 
tion) check discovers a poisoned needle hidden in the 
chest’s lock. The needle can be removed with a suc- 
cessful DC 15 Dexterity check using thieves’ tools. On 
a failed check, the character attempting to remove the 
needle takes 1 piercing damage and 7 (2d6) poison dam- 
age, and must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving 
throw or be poisoned for 1 hour. 

Treasure. The wooden chest contains 10 silver in- 
gots stamped with the crest of the Dwendalian Empire 
(worth 25 gp each) and a potion of mind reading. Addi- 
tionally, the drawer of the bedside table contains the fol- 
lowing items: an ornate coral-handled dagger (25 gp), a 
magnifying glass, and a dog-eared book of Eastern Wyn- 
andir mythology titled Fabled Mutants of the Miskath 
Strand (worth 10 gp). 

Bol’bara’s Possession. If Bol’bara has already been 
possessed, Struther Felmont isn’t in his tent but can be 
found among the dead guards in the training yard. 


V4. TRAINING YARD 

The bulk of Fort Venture’s garrison are usually found on 
this muddy training yard. Four tall braziers stand at the 
corners of the area. They are lit at sundown and burn 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


259 


260 


through the night, shedding bright light in a 20-foot ra- 
dius and dim light for an additional 20 feet. 
When the characters see this area, read: 


This muddy open space is lined with straw targets and 


practice dummies. Bales of hay stacked six feet high 
fence off the north and south sides of the yard, all filled 
with stray arrows. 


Eight Dwendalian guards are normally present in the 
training yard at all times, with four of them practicing 
ranged attacks with longbows against straw targets to 
the north, while four run longsword skirmishes against 
straw dummies to the south. 

Development. If the watchtower guards or Com- 
mander Felmont sound an alarm, six of the guards here 
investigate the disturbance, while the other two fall back 
to watch the front gate. 

Treasure. The guards of Fort Venture routinely keep 
a bottle of fine brandy (worth 15 gp) hidden within one 
of the bales of hay in the training yard, and stage mock 
tournaments for a chance to quaff the imported spirits 
when the commander isn’t looking. A character who 
succeeds on a DC 12 Intelligence (Investigation) check 
to search the area finds the bottle stuffed into a hay bale, 
next to acharcoal stick and a small parchment notebook 
used to tally scores. 

Bol’bara’s Possession. If Bol’bara has already been 
possessed, the eight guards normally here lay dead, and 
most of the targets, dummies, and bales of hay are burn- 
ing where the braziers have been toppled. 


V5. MAIN HALL 
This small stone-walled keep serves asthe main gath- 
ering hall for the soldiers of Fort Venture. Built on the 
foundations of a pre-Calamity ruin, the main hall is 
the strongest point in the fortress, and guards know 
to muster here for protection against the elements and 
interlopers. 

As the characters approach this area, read: 


The freshly quarried rocks of this squat stone keep lack | 
the Brokenveil Bluffs’ distinct mossy charm, and the | 
structure’s utilitarian style makes it even more forebod- 

ing. No windows are set into the stone walls, and a wide, 


iron-banded double door is the keep’s only entrance. 


The front door can be locked and bolted from inside (see 
below) but is usually unlocked. When the characters can 
see inside the main hall, read: 


Three long tables decorate this sparse room, their oiled 
surfaces spotlessly clean. A closed wooden door is set 
into the far wall. 


The main hall is a place for the guards of Fort Venture 
to join together for meals, revelry, and prayer. However, 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


most of the guards prefer to spend their time in the open 
spaces of the training yard or in their own tents because 
of the unsavory sounds that issue forth from Parson 
Pellinost’s chapel (area V6). 

Chapel Door. Any character who succeeds on a DC 
15 Wisdom (Perception) check in this area can hear 
muffled screaming coming from behind the closed door 
on the west side of the room. 

Two Dwendalian guards normally stand watch out- 
side the chapel door. Any character with a passive Wis- 
dom (Perception) score of 12 or higher notes the looks 
of discomfort and unease both wear. Though the guards 
maintain their watch dutifully, Pellinost’s activities have 
put them on edge, imposing disadvantage on saving 
throws against being frightened. 

One of the guards carries a key to the chapel door, 
which can also be opened with a successful DC 15 Dex- 
terity check using thieves’ tools. 

Main Door. The sturdy, iron-banded oak door leading 
to the main hall features an inset lock. If the door is 
locked, it can be opened with a successful DC 15 Dex- 
terity check using thieves’ tools. Commander Felmont, 
Parson Pellinost, one of the guards in this area, and 
one of the guards at the jail (area V8) carry keys to the 
lock. The door can also be barricaded from within with 
a 20-foot-long iron crossbar. This crude defense mecha- 
nism can’t be opened from outside. The barred door can 
be physically forced open by creatures with a combined 
Strength of 50. 

Bolrbara’s Possession. If Bol’bara has already been 
possessed, the door to the main hall stands wide open 
and the two guards at the chapel door are dead. Any 
character who succeeds on a DC 18 Intelligence (Inves- 
tigation) check or a DC 16 Wisdom (Medicine) check 
can determine that the dead guards slew each other 
with their longswords, providing a hint of the power of 
Bol’bara’s Zone of Calamity legendary action. 

Development. If the guards in Fort Venture suffer 
massive casualties or become targets of a fear spell or 
similar effect, they fall back to the main hall asa final 
defense. If Bol’bara is already possessed, you might 
decide that some of the guards survived her assault and 
have retreated here. 


V6. CHAPEL 
Since Parson Pellinost’s arrival, the chapel built for the 
use of Fort Venture’s soldiers has facilitated his fetish 
for torture and now houses a secret altar to the god of 
blood, death, and life: Vesh, the Bloody Siren (described 
in chapter 1). 

When the characters can see into this area, read: 


| A cramped room is lit by the flickering flames of two 
| small braziers suspended from the ceiling. In the center 


of the room, a Dwendalian inquisitor stands above a 

| bloody stone altar, clutching a crimson-stained mace in 
his prosthetic right hand. On the altar, a goblin struggles 
furiously against the chains that bind her. A Dwendalian 


` guard looks on with glee and disgust. 


| 
6 b 


When the characters arrive, Parson Pellinost and an 
imperial guard are in the process of torturing the 
demon-possessed Bol’bara to the point of death—with 
the sadistic intention of reviving her to repeat the pro- 
cess. Bol’bara has been suffering this horrific treatment 
for days, and the rage in her eyes suggests that she 
would do equally horrific things in return if released 
from this torturous captivity. 

What Pellinost doesn’t know is that the third time he 
attempts to cast revivify on the possessed warlock, her 
tortured mind will break, allowing her to be possessed 
by her shadow demon patron—a fiend known as Trush. 

Bol’bara is a chaotic good (for now at least), female 
goblin (see the accompanying stat block), but she doesn’t 
have legendary actions until she is fully possessed. 

Parson Pellinost uses the priest stat block but has the 
following cleric spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): light, sacred fame, spare the dying 
1st level (4 slots): command, cure wounds, guiding bolt 
2nd level (3 slots): lesser restoration, spiritual weapon 
3rd level (2 slots): dispel magic, revivify 


Pellinost has a prosthetic limb (right hand), as 
described in chapter 6, as well as keys to the main hall, 
the chapel door, and the altar manacles. 

Chapel Door. The door to the chapel is usually locked. 
Parson Pellinost and one of the guards on duty in the 
main hall carry keys to the door, which can also be un- 
locked with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check using 
thieves’ tools. 

Altar of Blood. Bol’bara is shackled by each limb to 
the four corners of the low stone altar. A rope gag muf- 
fles her screaming, and her arms and legs are covered 
in an array of fresh contusions and magically healed 


aia ST -i a 
BOL BARA | 
Small humanoid (goblinoid), chaotic good (chaotic evil when fully 
possessed) 


Armor Class 13 (leather armor), 15 with mage armor 
Hit Points 40 (9d6 + 9) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
11 (+0) 14. (+2) 12(+1) 10(+0) 13 (41) 14 (+2) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages Common, Goblin 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Dark One’s Blessing. When Bol’bara reduces a hostile creature 
to 0 hit points, she gains 6 temporary hit points. 


Nimble Escape. Bol’bara can take the Disengage or Hide action 
as a bonus action on each of her turns. 


Innate Spellcasting. Bol’bara’s innate spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 12, +4 to hit with spell attacks). She 


can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material 
components: 


At will: eldritch blast, false life, mage armor, mage hand 
1/day each: charm person, hex, hold person, invisibility 


lacerations. Rivulets of her dark goblin blood run down 
the side of the stone slab and into a narrow channel 

cut into the floor around the altar. Without the key, the 
manacle locks can be opened with a successful DC 15 
Dexterity check using thieves’ tools. 

Development. If the characters reached Fort Venture 
within three days of setting out from Urzin (see “Bol’ba- 
ra’s Exorcism” earlier in this chapter), they arrive here 
to find Parson Pellinost ready to deliver a death blow 
against Bol’bara. If Bol’bara is slain and revived with 
the use of a revivify spell (the third time Pellinost has 
brought her back to life that way), her otherworldly pa- 
tron manipulates the veil between the Shadowfell and 
the Border Ethereal to possess her. Alternatively, if 1 
minute passes from the time the characters arrive and 
interrupt the torture session, the shadow demon Trush 
completes its own ritual from the Shadowfell and takes 
control of the warlock. 

Treasure. In addition to his prosthetic limb (right 
hand), Pellinost carries a solid ring of polished blood- 
stone on a tarnished silver chain (worth 50 gp)—a holy 
symbol of Vesh, the Bloody Siren. 

Bol’bara’s Possession. If Bol’bara has already 
been possessed, Parson Pellinost and the guard here 
are dead. Any character who succeeds on a DC 18 
Intelligence (Investigation) check can determine that 
the guard attacked Pellinost (under the influence of 
Bol’bara’s Zone of Calamity legendary action) alongside 
another creature using magic. 


V7. ARMORY TENT 

The stronghold’s open-fronted armory tent is set up with 
a blacksmith’s forge to serve the needs of the garrison. 
When the characters can see into this area, read: 


ACTIONS Rae: ey a ee 


Multiattack. Bol’bara makes two melee attacks. 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. 
or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


Eldritch Blast (Cantrip). Ranged Spell Attack: +4 to hit, range 
120 ft., one creature. Hit: 7 (1d10 + 2) force damage. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


When fully possessed by her patron, Bol’bara can take 2 leg- 
endary actions, choosing from the options below. Only one leg- 
endary action option can be used at a time and only at the end 
of another creature’s turn. Bol’bara regains spent legendary 
actions at the start of her turn. 


Incorporeal Dash. Bol’bara moves up to her speed. She can 
move through other creatures and objects as if they were dif- 
ficult terrain. She takes 5 (1d10) force damage if she ends her 
turn inside an object. 

Zone of Calamity (Costs 2 Actions). A 15-foot-radius sphere 
of magical confusion extends from a point Bol’bara can see 
within 60 feet of her and spreads around corners. Each crea- 
ture that starts its turn in that area is treated as if targeted by 
the confusion spell (save DC 12). The sphere lasts as long as 
Bol’bara maintains concentration, up to 1 minute (as if con- 
centrating on a spell). 


SSS SE 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


261 


262 


Smoke rises from the tiny coal forge of this open-fronted 
armory tent, which is equipped with a full complement 
of blacksmith’s resources and tools. Along the rear 

wall, wooden racks hold a battlefield-ready collection 


of swords, crossbows, spears, hammers, chain shirts, 
and shields. 


One Dwendalian veteran serves as the outpost’s 
blacksmith and can be found in the armory tent during 
daylight hours. During evening hours, the smith is ei- 
ther fraternizing with the guards in the training yard 
or drinking and gambling with another guard in the 
tent yard. 

Supplies. The armory holds ten longswords, eight 
crossbows, eight spears, six warhammers, four chain 
shirts, and six shields. Additionally, any character who 
succeeds on a DC 12 Intelligence (Investigation) check 
to search through the tools can assemble a burglar’s 
pack and a dungeoneer’s pack. 


V8. JAIL 


Four iron cages stand in the northeast corner ofthe Fort 


Venture grounds, apparently serving as a makeshift jail. 


Three of the cages are empty, but the fourth houses 

a strange prisoner (see below). A small table and two 
wooden stump stools serve as a guard station between 
the jail and the storehouse (area V9). 

Two Dwendalian guards normally defend this area 
but spend most of their time playing at cards or dice. 
Both guards carry master keys for the cages and for the 
kennels (area V10), and one carries a key to the main 
hall (area V5). Without a key, the cages can be opened 
with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check using thieves’ 
tools, or forced open from the outside with a successful 
DC 20 Strength (Athletics) check. 

Caged Cultist. The solitary prisoner is a neutral evil 
hollow one cultist of Ceratos named Alonne Frith, a 
Far Realm scholar from Rotthold. Frith was captured 
by a Fort Venture patrol during his journey through the 
Brokenveil Marsh seeking eldritch relics. His distinctly 
undead nature was quickly identified as a point of inter- 
est for Parson Pellinost, and Frith has since become a 
reluctant yet reliable subject for Pellinost’s experiments. 

Alonne Frith is toilworn and weary after several days 
of interrogation by Pellinost. He wears a bloodstained 
hunter's coat (see chapter 6) whose magical properties 
have gone unnoticed by Pellinost and his cronies. 

Development. If the alarm is sounded or the dogs 
in area V10 start barking, one of the guards heads to 
the kennel to release the dogs before investigating the 
disturbance, while the other guard holds their position 
at the jail. 

If the characters manage to free Alonne Frith, the 
cultist can be convinced to join the party and take up the 
characters’ mission with a successful DC 18 Charisma 
(Persuasion) check. 


CHAPTER 5 | ADVENTURES IN WILDEMOUNT 


b é 


Treasure. In addition to the playing card set and dice 
they use for entertainment, the two guards each have 
a coin purse containing 26 cp and 17 cp, respectively. 
In addition to the hunter’s coat Alonne Frith wears (see 
chapter 6), one guard also carries Frith’s weapon, a 
black-bladed +/ scimitar, but is unaware of its magical 
properties and doesn’t use the weapon in combat. 

Bol’bara’s Possession. If Bol’bara has already been 
possessed, the two guards are dead and Alonne Frith 
huddles in his cage, the only living witness to Fort Ven- 
ture’s demise. Frith can describe seeing a lone goblin 
spellcaster taking on the garrison, and how her power 
forced many of the soldiers to turn against each other. 
He can still be asked to join the party, but the Charisma 
(Persuasion) check to convince him is made with 
disadvantage. 


V9. STOREHOUSE 
When the characters can see into this area, read: 


This moderately sized tent contains a wide variety of 
foodstuffs stored in barrels and crates of all sizes. The 
air carries the savory aroma of smoked meats, the sweet 


smell of dried fruits, and the hearty fragrance of ale. 


Its location at the lonely edge of the marshlands has 
made Fort Venture an increasingly popular waypoint 
for humanoid envoys and merchant caravans heading 
through the Xhorhasian wastes. This storehouse tent 
contains the fort's full complement of foodstuffs and 
potable drinking water, which are replenished at least 
once a month by caravan. The storehouse tent contains 
enough rations and clean water to accommodate thir- 
ty-five creatures for one month, plus a barrel of ale anda 
ledger of deliveries kept by a Dwendalian quartermaster. 
Bol’bara’s Possession. If Bol’bara has already been 
possessed, the storehouse tent is at risk from the fires 
in area V4 (see that section for details). If the characters 
come here particularly late, they might find the tent and 
its contents charred and ruined. 


V10. KENNELS 


When the characters can see this area, read: 


e 
| The rank odor of wet dog rises from an area of small iron 
cages near the northeast stockade wall. Four lean guard 


dogs are chained within these kennels. 
o 


Underfed and overtrained, the four guard dogs (use the 
mastiff stat block) respond aggressively to anyone not 
in the uniform of the Dwendalian Empire. They start 
barking if they see or scent intruders, causing the near- 
est soldiers to come and investigate. If set free, the dogs 
immediately attack any characters not in uniform or en- 
gaged in combat with any member of the garrison. 

Development. A character who succeeds on a DC 18 
Wisdom (Animal Handling) check is able to calm all the 
dogs and prevent them from barking or attacking. 


If an alarm is sounded elsewhere in the camp, the 
dogs start barking and one of the guards from the jail 
(area V8) runs to the kennel to release them before in- 
vestigating the disturbance. 

Bol’bara’s Possession. If Bol’bara has already been 
possessed, the dogs survive her initial onslaught but are 
fearful in the aftermath. A character who succeeds on 
a DC 14 Wisdom (Animal Handling or Insight) check 
discerns that the dogs are too frightened to attack. If 
the dogs are freed, they either flee or can be encouraged 
to come with the characters at your discretion. If they 
aren't set free, they die of thirst and starvation within 
a few days. 


V11. LATRINES 
Three small wooden outhouses stand in a row beneath 
the southwest palisade wall. When the characters 
first arrive here, there is a 15 percent chance that one 
Dwendalian guard is present in one of the outhouses. If 
combat breaks out here, the inconvenient circumstances 
give the guard disadvantage on its initiative roll. 
Bol’bara’s Possession. If Bol’bara has already been 
possessed, the characters discover a dead guard in one 
outhouse, showing no obvious wounds. A successful DC 
13 Wisdom (Medicine) check confirms that the guard 
died of a heart attack. 


RETURN TO URZIN 


Ifthe characters don’t rescue Bol’bara from captivity 
before Parson Pellinost completes his interrogation and 
triggers her full possession, the goblin warlock is taken 
over by her otherworldly patron. Her alignment be- 
comes chaotic evil, and she gains the legendary actions 
noted in her stat block. After destroying Pellinost and 
the garrison of Fort Venture, Bol’bara heads into the 
Brokenveil Marsh, slaying every creature she meets on 
her way back to destroy the village of Urzin. 

Toprevent the people of Urzin from suffering a terri- 
ble fate, the characters must track Bol’bara across the 
swamp and intercept her for a final confrontation. You 
can use a location the characters didn’t visit on their 
journey to the fort as the site of a climactic battle, or 
reuse an already-visited site as a location for a deadly 
ambush. Alternatively, you could have the characters 
catch the warlock as she reaches Urzin, turning the 
unique village into the site of a deadly battle. 


Ending Bol’bara’s possession while she is alive is 
beyond the characters’ abilities. However, if the warlock 
is reduced to 0 hit points during the party’s confronta- 
tion with her, she falls unconscious rather than dying 
outright. If she is brought back to 1 hit point within 3 
rounds, she is restored to her normal self. This reverts 
her alignment to chaotic good and causes her to lose 
her legendary actions. A character who succeeds on a 
DC 13 Intelligence (Arcana or Religion) check when 
the warlock falls can deduce this fact from observing 
how the unnatural magic infusing her dissipates, or the 
characters might receive this information as a prophetic 
insight from the Mossback Steward (area B8). 


CONCLUDING THE ADVENTURE 


If the characters successfully rescue or defeat Bol’bara, 
they have the gratitude of Buhfal II and the people of Ur- 
zin—and will no doubt attract the questionable attention 
of local Kryn Dynasty operatives. If the characters fail, 
Bol’bara attacks Urzin and becomes an ongoing threat 
in Brokenveil Marsh—a threat for which the characters 
are almost certain to be blamed, by any surviving gobli- 
noids and the Dwendalian Empire alike. 


CHARACTER ADVANCEMENT 


At the end of this adventure, the characters reach 3rd 
level. Further opportunities for adventure might be 
found in Eastern Wynandir, perhaps involving the gob- 
linoids of Urzin or the soldiers of Fort Venture. Or the 
characters might use the success of this adventure—or 
their unwelcome notoriety if the mission failed—as 

an excuse to seek out new opportunities elsewhere in 
Wildemount. 


AN UNDEAD KNIGHT BEQUEATHES ITS ACHERON BLADE TO A WORTHY 
TIEFLING ADVENTURER, BUT EVERY GREAT TREASURE HAS ITS PRICE. 


°Chapter 6 


WILDEMOUNT TREASURES 


HE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN POWER AND 
potential is a curious thing. Everyone seeks to 
gain power, to use it. Yet the more power you 
have, the more you use, the moreotherswill 
try to take it from you. Potential, however, is power un- 
known, unused. Hidden. Secretuntil absolutely necessary. 
I peddle in potential, and Irecommend you do too in these 
times of war. 
—Enchanter Yun 


Since magic was first introduced to mortals in ages 
past, many have sought to channel the gifts of magic 
into implements of power. Master crafters and fine ar- 
tisans have long worked with talented arcanists and di- 
vine acolytes to craft beautiful artifacts of protection, or 
to forge armaments of war. The most skilled archmages 
enchanted and assembled vast collections of mighty 
artifacts throughout the Age of Arcanum, most of which 
were scattered and lost in the conflicts of the Calamity. 

Adventurers, archeologists, and unscrupulous ex- 
plorers delve into dungeons, ruins, and forgotten places 
of lore in hopes of recovering these objects of power, 
even as spellcasters and researchers seek to replicate 
ancient enchantments by their own hands. This chapter 
contains a collection of new magic items and artifacts 
found in Wildemount, but which can be used in any cam- 
paign setting. 


MAGIC ITEMS OF 
WILDEMOUNT 


Whether found in a subterranean tomb while searching 
for lost treasure, chosen as a reward from a wealthy col- 
lector of curiosities, or stumbled across as a discarded 
object of hidden potential, magic items are always highly 
sought after by adventurers in a Wildemount campaign. 
Relics of magic provide a perfect opportunity to bring 
alive the history of ages long gone, and to reward play- 
ers for diligently seeking their way in the world. 

Many of the magic items in this section are relics of 
the flying city-state of Aeor, and can often be found in 
Aeorian ruins in Eiselcross. See chapter 3 for more 
information on Eiselcross and Aeor. 


MAGIC ITEM DESCRIPTIONS 


These magic items are presented in alphabetical order. 
For the rules on magic items, see chapter 7 of the Dun- 
geon Master's Guide. 


ACHERON BLADE 
Weapon (any sword), rare (requires attunement) 


The black blade of this sword is crafted from a myste- 
rious arcane alloy. You gain a +1 bonus to attack and 
damage rolls made with this magic weapon. While the 
sword is on your person, you are immune to effects that 
turn undead. 

Dark Blessing. While holding the sword, you can use 
an action to give yourself 1d4 + 4 temporary hit points. 
This property can’t be used again until the next dusk. 

Disheartening Strike. When you hit a creature with 
an attack using this weapon, you can fill the target with 
unsettling dread: the target has disadvantage on the 
next saving throw it makes before the end of your next 
turn. The creature ignores this effect if it’s immune to 
the frightened condition. Once you use this property, 
you can’t do so again until the next dusk. 


AMULET OF THE DRUNKARD 
Wondrous item, uncommon 


This amulet smells of old, ale-stained wood. While 
wearing it, you can regain 4d4 + 4 hit points when you 
drink a pint of beer, ale, mead, or wine. Once the amu- 
let has restored hit points, it can’t do so again until the 
next dawn. 


ARCANE CANNON 
Wondrous item, very rare 


This Large cannon is imbued with magic. It requires no 
ammunition and doesn’t need to be loaded. It takes one 
action to aim the cannon and one action to fire it. After 
the cannon has fired, it must recharge for 5 minutes be- 
fore it can be fired again. 

The creature firing the cannon chooses the effect from 
the following options: 


Acid Jet. The cannon discharges acid in a line 300 feet 
long and 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must 
make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 22 
(4d10) acid damage on a failed save, or halfas much 


CHAPTER 6 | WILDEMOUNT TREASURES 


266 


damage ona successful one. In addition, a creature 
that fails its saving throw takes 11 (2d10) acid damage 
at the start of each of its turns; a creature can end this 
damage by using its action to wash off the acid with a 
pint or more of water. 

Fire Jet. The cannon discharges fire in a line 300 feet 
long and 5 feet wide. Eachcreature in the area must 
make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 33 
(6d10) fire damage on a failed save, or half as much 
damage on a successful one. The fire ignites any 
flammable objects in the area that aren’t being worn 
or carried. 

Frost Shot. The cannon shoots a ball of frost to a point 
you can see within 1,200 feet of the cannon. The ball 
then expands to form a 30-foot-radius sphere centered 
on that point. Each creature in that area must make a 
DC 15 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, a 
creature takes 22 (4d10) cold damage, and its speed is 
reduced by 10 feet for 1 minute. On a successful save, 
the creature takes half as much damage, and its speed 
isn’t reduced. A creature whose speed is reduced by 
this effect can repeat the save at the end of each of its 
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 

Lightning Shot. The cannon shoots a ball of lightning 
to a point you can see within 1,200 feet of the cannon. 
The lightning then expands to form a 20-foot-radius 
sphere centered on that point. Each creature in that 
area must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, 
taking 33 (6d10) lightning damage on a failed save, or 
half as much damage on a successful one. Creatures 
wearing metal armor have disadvantage on the save. 

Poison Spray. The cannon expels poison gas in a 60- 
foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a 
DC 15 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, 
the creature takes 22 (4d10) poison damage and is 
poisoned for 1 minute. On a successful save, the crea- 
ture takes half as much damage and isn’t poisoned. A 
creature poisoned in this way can repeat the saving 
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect 
on itself on a success. 


BATTERING SHIELD 
Armor (shield), rare (requires attunement) 


While holding this iron tower shield, you gain a +1 bo- 
nus to AC. This bonus is in addition to the shield’s nor- 
mal bonus to AC. 

Additionally, the shield has 3 charges, and it regains 
1d3 expended charges daily at dawn. If you are holding 
the shield and push a creature within your reach at least 
5 feet away, you can expend 1 charge to push that crea- 
ture an additional 10 feet, knock it prone, or both. 


BLOODAXE 
Weapon (greataxe), very rare (requires attunement) 


You gain a +2 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic axe. The axe deals an extra 1d6 necrotic 
damage to creatures that aren’t constructs or undead. If 
you reduce such a creature to 0 hit points with an attack 
using this axe, you gain 10 temporary hit points. 

This axe is forged from a dark, rust-colored metal and 
once belonged to the goliath barbarian Grog Strongjaw 
of Vox Machina. 


CHAPTER 6 | WILDEMOUNT TREASURES 


BREATHING BUBBLE 
Wondrous item, common 


This translucent, bubble-like sphere has a slightly tacky 
outer surface, and you gain the item’s benefits only while 
wearing it over your head like a helmet. 

The bubble contains 1 hour of breathable air. The bub- 
ble regains all its expended air daily at dawn. 


BROOCH OF LIVING ESSENCE 
Wondrous item, uncommon (requires attunement) 


While wearing this nondescript brooch, spells and any- 
thing else that would detect or reveal your creature type 
treat you as humanoid, and those that would reveal your 
alignment treat it as neutral. 


BUTCHER’S BIB 
Wondrous item, rare (requires attunement) 


This black leather apron is perpetually covered by blood, 
even after being washed off. You gain the following ben- 
efits while wearing the apron: 


- Once per turn when you roll damage fora melee at- 
tack with a weapon, you can reroll the weapon’s dam- 
age dice. If you do so, you must use the second total. 

- Your weapon attacks that deal slashing damage score 
a critical hit on a roll of 19 or 20 on the d20. 


COIN OF DELVING 
Wondrous item, common 


This scintillating copper coin sheds dim light in a 5-foot 
radius. If dropped a distance greater than 5 feet, the 
coin issues a melodious ringing sound when it hits a 
surface. Any creature that can hear the chime can deter- 
mine the distance the coin dropped based on the tone. 


CORPSE SLAYER 
Weapon (any), rare (requires attunement) 


You gain a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic weapon. 

When you hit an undead creature with an attack using 
this weapon, the attack deals an extra 1d8 damage of 
the weapon’s type, and the creature has disadvantage on 
saving throws against effects that turn undead until the 
start of your next turn. 


DISPELLING STONE 
Wondrous item, very rare 


This smooth, rainbow-colored, egg-shaped stone can 
be thrown up to 30 feet and explodes in a 10-foot-ra- 
dius sphere of magical energy on impact, destroying 
the stone. Any active spell of 5th level or lower in the 
sphere ends. 


DUSKCRUSHER 
Weapon (warhammer), very rare (requires attunement) 


This item takes the form of a leather-wrapped metal rod 
emblazoned with the symbol of Pelor, the Dawn Father. 
While grasping the rod, you can use a bonus action 

to cause a warhammer head of crackling radiance to 
spring into existence. The warhammer’s radiant head 


AMULET OF 
THE DRUNKARD 


emits bright light in a 15-foot radius and dim light for an 
additional 15 feet. The light is sunlight. You can use an 
action to make the radiant head disappear. 

While the radiant head is active, you gain a +2 bonus 
to attack and damage rolls made with this magic 
weapon, and attacks with the weapon deal radiant dam- 
age instead of bludgeoning damage. An undead creature 
hit by the weapon takes an extra 1d8 radiant damage. 

While you are holding Duskcrusher and its radiant 
head is active, you can use an action to cast the sun- 
beam spell (save DC 15) from the weapon, and this ac- 
tion can’t be used again until the next dawn. 


DUST OF DELICIOUSNESS 
Wondrous item, uncommon 


This reddish brown dust can be sprinkled over any 
edible substance to greatly improve the flavor. The dust 
also dulls the eater’s senses: anyone eating food treated 
with this dust has disadvantage on Wisdom ability 
checks and Wisdom saving throws for 1 hour. There is 
enough dust to flavor six servings. 


ERSATZ EYE 
Wondrous item, common (requires attunement) 


This artificial eye replaces a real one that was lost or 
removed. While the ersatz eye is embedded in your eye 
socket, it can’t be removed by anyone other than you, 
and you can see through the tiny orb as though it were a 
normal eye. 


DuskcRUSHER 


ButcHer’s Bis 


y 


GOGGLES OF OBJECT READING 
Wondrous item, uncommon (requires attunement) 


These leather-framed goggles feature purple crystal 
lenses. While wearing the goggles, you have advantage 
on Intelligence (Arcana) checks made to reveal informa- 
tion about a creature or object you can see. 

In addition, you can cast the identify spell using the 
googles. Once you do so, you can’t do so again until the 
next dawn. 


HUNTER’S COAT 
Armor (leather), very rare (requires attunement) 


You gain a +1 bonus to AC while wearing this armor. 
The coat has 3 charges. When you hit a creature with 
an attack and that creature doesn’t have all its hit points, 
you can expend 1 charge to deal an extra 1d10 necrotic 

damage to the target. The coat regains 1d3 expended 
charges daily at dawn. 


Last STAND ARMOR 
Armor (any), very rare 


You have a +1 bonus to AC while wearing this armor, 
which shimmers softly. 

If you die while wearing the armor, it is destroyed, 
and each celestial, fey, and fiend with 30 feet of you 
must succeed on a DC 15 Charisma saving throw or be 
banished to its home plane of existence, unless it is al- 
ready there. 


CHAPTER 6 | WILDEMOUNT TREASURES 


K 


“I 


268 


LUXON BEACON 
Wondrous item, legendary 


This dodecahedron of faintly glowing crystal is heavier 
than it appears. A set of handles are affixed to its sides, 
and it pulsates and thrums when touched. 

Fragment of Possibility. A creature that touches 
the beacon and concentrates for 1 minute receives a 
Fragment of Possibility, which looks like a Tiny, grayish 
bead of energy that follows the creature around, staying 
within 1 foot of it at all times. The fragment lasts for 8 
hours or until used. Once the beacon grants a Fragment 
of Possibility, it can’t grant another until the next dawn. 
A creature with a Fragment of Possibility from a Luxon 
beacon can’t gain another Fragment of Possibility from 
any source. 

When a creature with a Fragment of Possibility makes 
an attack roll, an ability check, or a saving throw, it can 
expend its fragment to roll an additional d20 and choose 
which of the d20s to use. Alternatively, when an attack 
roll is made against the creature, it can expend its frag- 
ment to roll a d20 and choose which of the d20s to use, 
the one it rolled or the one the attacker rolled. 

If the original d20 roll has advantage or disadvantage, 
the creature rolls its d20 after advantage or disadvan- 
tage has been applied to the original roll. 

Soul Snare. If a follower of the Luxon who has under- 
gone a ritual of consecution dies within 100 miles of a 
Luxon beacon, their soul is ensnared by it. This soul will 
be reincarnated within the body of arandom humanoid 
baby developing within 100 miles of the beacon. 


NEEDLE OF MENDING 
Weapon (dagger), rare (requires attunement) 


This weapon is a magic dagger disguised as a sewing 
needle. When you hold it and use a bonus action to 
speak its command word, it transforms into a dagger or 
back into a needle. 

You gain a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with the dagger. While holding it, you can use an action 
to cast the mending cantrip from it. 


NIGHTFALL PEARL 
Wondrous item, legendary (requires attunement) 


Used to summon night, this 6-inch-diameter, jet-black 
orb is cold to the touch. You can spend 10 minutes to ac- 
tivate it, causing the area within 10 miles of it at the mo- 
ment of activation to become night even if it is daytime. 
This night lasts for 24 hours, until you cancel it as an 
action, or until your attunement to the pearl ends. Once 
used, the pearl can’t be used again for 24 hours. 


ORB OF THE VEIL 
Wondrous item, very rare (requires attunement) 


This onyx sphere bears deep, spiraling grooves and dan- 
gles from an iron chain. While the orb is on your person, 
you gain the following benefits: 


« Your Wisdom score increases by 2, as does your maxi- 
mum for that score. 

e You gain darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. If you 
already have darkvision, the orb increases its range 
by 60 feet. 


CHAPTER 6 | WILDEMOUNT TREASURES 


e You have advantage on Wisdom checks to find hidden 
doors and paths. 


Curse. The orb is cursed, and becoming attuned to it 
extends the curse to you. As long as you remain cursed, 
you are unwilling to part with the orb, keeping it on your 
person at all times. All nonmagical flames within 30 feet 
of you automatically extinguish, and fire damage dealt 
by you is halved. 


POTION OF MAXIMUM POWER 
Potion, rare 


The first time you cast a damage-dealing spell of 4th 
level or lower within 1 minute after drinking the po- 
tion, instead of rolling dice to determine the damage 
dealt, you can instead use the highest number possible 
for each die. 

This glowing purple liquid smells of sugar and plum, 
but it has a muddy taste. 


POTION OF POSSIBILITY 
Potion, very rare 


When you drink this clear potion, you gain two Frag- 
ments of Possibility, each of which looks like a Tiny, 
grayish bead of energy that follows you around, staying 
within 1 foot of you at all times. Each fragment lasts for 
8 hours or until used. 

When you make an attack roll, an ability check, or a 
saving throw, you can expend your fragment to roll an 
additional d20 and choose which of the d20s to use. 
Alternatively, when an attack roll is made against you, 
you can expend your fragment to roll a d20 and choose 
which of the d20s to use, the one you rolled or the one 
the attacker rolled. 

If the original d20 roll has advantage or disadvantage, 
you roll your d20 after advantage or disadvantage has 
been applied to the original roll. 

While you have one or more Fragments of Possibility 
from this potion, you can’t gain another Fragment of 
Possibility from any source. 


PROSTHETIC LIMB 
Wondrous item, common (requires attunement by a 
creature missing some or all of a limb) 


This artificial limb replaces a hand, an arm, a foot, a 
leg, or a similar appendage that was lost or removed. 
While the prosthetic is attached and attuned to you, it 
functions identically to the body part it isreplacing. You 
can detach or reattach it as an action, and it can’t be re- 
moved by anyone else. 

If you have multiple prosthetic limbs, they count as a 
single magic item with regard to the number of magic 
items you can attune to. 


REINCARNATION DUST 
Wondrous item, very rare 


When this small pouch of purple dust is sprinkled on a 
dead humanoid or a piece of a dead humanoid, the dust 
is absorbed by the remains. If willing, the dead creature 
returns to life with a new body as if the reincarnate spell 
had been cast on the remains. 


Luxon Beacon 


RING OF OBSCURING 
Ring, uncommon (requires attunement) 


This band of iron resembles a skull and is cold to the 
touch. It has 3 charges and regains 1d3 expended 
charges daily at dawn. As an action while wearing the 
ring, you can expend 1 of its charges to cast the fog 
cloud spell from it, with the following changes: the cloud 
is centered on you when it first appears, and the spell 
lasts for 1 minute (no concentration required). 


RING OF TEMPORAL SALVATION 
Ring, rare (requires attunement) 


If you die while wearing this gray crystal ring, you van- 
ish and reappear in an unoccupied space within 5 feet of 
the space you left (or the nearest unoccupied space). You 
have a number of hit points equal to 3d6 + your Consti- 
tution modifier. If your hit point maximum is lower than 
the number of hit points you regain, your hit point maxi- 
mum rises to a similar amount. If you have any levels of 
exhaustion, reduce your level of exhaustion by 1. Once 
the ring is used, it turns to dust and is destroyed. 


ROD OF RETRIBUTION 
Rod, uncommon (requires attunement) 


This adamantine rod is tipped with a glowing crystalline 
eye. The rod has 3 charges and regains all its expended 
charges daily at dawn. 

When a creature you can see within 60 feet of you 
damages you while you are holding this rod, you can use 
your reaction to expend 1 of the rod’s charges to force 


RING OF 
OBSCURING 


SpetL BoTTLE 


the creature to make a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw. 
The creature takes 2d10 lightning damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


SPELL BOTTLE 
Wondrous item, legendary (requires attunement) 


This glass bottle can store one spell of up to 5th level 
ata time. When found, roll a d6 and subtract 1; the 
total determines the level of spell in the bottle (the DM 
chooses the spell, and 0 means the bottle is empty). 

A swirling blue vapor fills the bottle while it con- 

tains a spell. 

When the bottle is empty, any creature can cast a spell 
of 1st through 5th level into it by touching it while cast- 
ing. The spell has no effect other than to be stored in 
the bottle. 

While holding the bottle, you can cast the spell stored 
in it. The spell uses the slot level, spell save DC, spell 
attack bonus, and spellcasting ability of the original 
caster, but is otherwise treated as if you cast the spell. 
The bottle becomes empty once the spell is cast. 

If you're holding the empty bottle when you see a 
creature casting a spell within 60 feet of you, you can 
open the bottle as a reaction in an attempt to interrupt 
the spell. If the creature is casting a spell of 3rd level or 
lower, the spell has no effect, and it is stored in the bot- 
tle. If it is casting a spell of 4th level or higher, make an 
Intelligence check. The DC equals 10 + the spell’s level. 
On a success, the spell has no effect, and it is stored in 
the bottle. 


CHAPTER 6 | WILDEMOUNT TREASURES 
269 


STAFF OF DUNAMANCY 
Staff, very rare (requires attunement by a wizard) 


This staff of polished gray wood bears numerous runes 
carved along its length. The staff has 10 charges and 
regains 1d6 + 4 expended charges daily at dawn. If you 
expend the last charge, roll a d20. On a 1, the staff turns 
into dust and is destroyed. 

While holding the staff, you can use an action to ex- 
pend 2 or more of its charges to cast one of the follow- 
ing spells from it, using your spell save DC and spell 
attack bonus: fortune’s favor (2 charges), pulse wave (3 
charges), or gravity sinkhole (4 charges). See chapter 4 
for descriptions of these spells. 

New Possibility. If you are holding the staff and fail 
a saving throw against a spell that targets only you, you 
can turn your failed save into a successful one. This 
property can’t be used again until the next dawn. 


STAFF OF THE IVORY CLAW 
Staff, rare (requires attunement by a spellcaster) 


This gray-and-cerulean staff is topped with a small 
dragon claw carved from ivory. While holding the staff, 
you gain a +1 bonus to spell attack rolls. Whenever you 
score a critical hit with a spell attack, the target takes an 
extra 3d6 radiant damage. 


Vox SEEKER 
Wondrous item, common 


This clockwork device resembles a metal crab the size 
of a dinner plate. Every action used to wind up the 
device allows it to operate for 1 minute, to a maximum 
of 10 minutes. While operational, the item uses the 


Vox SEEKER 


Tiny construct, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 7 (2d4 + 2) 
Speed 20 ft., climb 20 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

2-4) WO). 1260 Tey > WG 1165) 

OOl 

Damage Immunities poison, psychic 

Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 
frightened, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned 

Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), passive 
Perception 10 

Languages — 

Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Rg pera eee 


Voice Lock. The vox seeker must move toward and attack the 
source of the nearest voice within 60 feet of it, to the exclusion 
of all other targets, for as long as it remains operational. 


Spider Climb. The vox seeker can climb difficult surfaces, in- 
cluding upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 
ability check. 


ACTIONS 


Pincer. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 2 (1d4) piercing damage plus 3 lightning damage. 


CHAPTER 6 | WILDEMOUNT TREASURES 


accompanying vox seeker stat block. This automaton 
is under the DM’s control. A vox seeker reduced to 0 hit 
points is destroyed. 


WEAPON OF CERTAIN DEATH 
Weapon (any), rare 


When you damage a creature with an attack using this 
magic weapon, the target can’t regain hit points until the 
start of your next turn. 


VESTIGES OF DIVERGENCE 


When the great wars of the Calamity rolled across 
Exandria, heroes of divinity accepted legendary relics 
from their patrons and gods. At the same time, arch- 
mages wove dangerous arcane power into items of 
immense magical might. When the war ended, most 

of these magic items were buried with their wielders 
beneath ash and dust. Those items that survived were 
passed down as heirlooms and prized tokens of the past. 
Whether they survived destruction or have been claimed 
from the ruins of history, these remnants of a lost era 
have come to be known as the Vestiges of Divergence. 

Each Vestige of Divergence is a magic item that 
evolves with its wielder. If not attuned to a worthy indi- 
vidual over a prolonged period, such items commonly re- 
vert to their dormant state. While in this state, a Vestige 
of Divergence grants an attuned bearer only some of its 
power. Over time, and in response to perseverance and 
personal growth, a Vestige of Divergence might unlock 
facets of its lost capabilities to enter an awakened state. 
Eventually, through extreme personal challenge, evo- 
lution, and achievement, these artifacts can reach their 
ultimate potential in their exalted state. The properties 
and features gained at each new state are cumulative 
with the properties and features granted at a previous 
state, unless otherwise noted. 

This section presents a number of Vestiges of Diver- 
gence that might be found anywhere in Exandria. When 
Vestiges of Divergence are used in a campaign, their 
discovery and acquisition should always be treated with 
a suitable amount of weight and responsibility. 


DANOTH’S VISOR 
Wondrous item, legendary (requires attunement) 


These mithral-frame goggles with clear diamond lenses 
were used by the evoker Danoth Oro to spot invisible 
enemies and scout areas from afar. 

Dormant. While wearing the goggles in their dormant 
state, you can see normally in darkness, both magical 
and nonmagical, to a distance of 60 feet. Additionally, 
you have advantage on Intelligence (Investigation) and 
Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on sight. 

Awakened. When Danoth’s visor reaches an awak- 
ened state, it gains the following properties: 


e You see invisible creatures and objects within 60 feet 
of you as if they were visible, and you can see into the 
Ethereal Plane. Ethereal creatures and objects appear 
ghostly and translucent. 

- Asa bonus action, you can speak a command word 
and use the goggles to see into and through solid 
matter. This vision has a radius of 60 feet and lasts 


for 1 minute. To you, solid objects within that radius 
appear transparent. The vision can penetrate 1 foot of 
stone, 1 inch of common metal, or up to 3 feet of wood 
or dirt. Thicker substances block the vision, as does 
a thin sheet of lead. This property can’t be used again 
until the next dawn. 

« Asa bonus action, you can speak a command word 
to switch the goggles into spyglass mode. While in 
this mode, creatures and objects viewed through the 
goggles are magnified to twice their size. Speaking 
the command word again reverts the goggles to their 
normal operation. 


Exalted. When Danoth’s Visor reaches an exalted 
state, it gains the following properties: 


e Youautomatically detect illusions you can see and 
automatically succeed on saving throws against them. 
In addition, you see a bright aura around any creature 
that isn’t in its true form. 

« Asan action, you can cast the antimagic field spell 
from the visor. This property can’t be used again until 
the next dawn. 


GRIMOIRE INFINITUS 
Wondrous item, legendary (requires attunement by a 
wizard) 


Several of these spellbooks with gilded pages and 
silver-plated covers were created during the Age of Ar- 
canum, but only one has been found since the Calamity 
ended. The book has an infinite number of pages, is 
three inches thick, eight inches wide, twelve inches long, 
and weighs three pounds. 

Dormant. Most of the book is blank, but the following 
spells are recorded in the first pages of the tome: alarm, 
antimagic field, Bigby’s hand, blight, charm person, con- 
fusion, control weather, create undead, detect thoughts, 
enlarge/reduce, fear, foresight, Saseous form, glyph of 
warding, legend lore, Leomund’s tiny hut, mass sugges- 
tion, mislead, misty step, Mordenkainen’s faithful hound, 
prismatic spray, ray of enfeeblement, silent image, tele- 
port, and thunderwave. 

You can use the grimoire as your spellbook, and you 
can scribe new spells into it as normal. When you pre- 
pare wizard spells using the grimoire, the number of 
wizard spells you can prepare increases by 1. 

Awakened. When the Grimoire Infinitus reaches an 
awakened state, it gains the following properties: 


e While you carry the spellbook, you have advantage on 
saving throws against spells and magical effects. 

e When you prepare wizard spells using the grimoire as 
your spellbook, the number of spells you can prepare 
increases by 1 again. 


Exalted. When the Grimoire Infinitus reaches an ex- 
alted state, it gains the following properties: 


- You can now use your Arcane Recovery feature twice 
between long rests, rather than once. 

¢ When you prepare wizard spells using the grimoire as 
your spellbook, the number of spells you can prepare 
increases by 1 again. 


HIDE OF THE FERAL GUARDIAN 
Armor (Studded leather), legendary (requires attunement) 


It is believed that this polished and beautifully detailed 
leather armor was a gift from Melora, bestowed ona 
long-forgotten archdruid and champion of the natural 
world before the terrors of the Calamity. 

Dormant. While wearing the armor in its dormant 
state, you gain the following benefits: 


« The armor grants you a +1 bonus to AC. 

e While you are transformed by an effect that replaces 
any of your game statistics with those of another crea- 
ture, you have a +1 bonus to melee attack and damage 
rolls, and you retain the benefits of this armor. 

- Asan action, you can use the armor to cast polymorph 
on yourself, transforming into a giant owl while 
retaining your Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma 
scores. This property can’t be used again until the 
next dawn. 


Awakened. When the armor reaches an awakened 
state, it gains the following properties: 


- The AC bonus of the armor increases to +2. 

- While you are transformed by an effect that replaces 
any of your game statistics with those of another crea- 
ture, your bonus to melee attack and damage rolls 
increases by 1 (to +2). 

a ee 
ADVANCEMENT OF A VESTIGE OF DIVERGENCE 
Typically, the advancement of a Vestige of Divergence 
echoes its wielder’s own journey of self-discovery, whether 
that involves triumph or failure. However, a Vestige of 
Divergence might evolve on its own during moments of 
duress or desperation for its wielder, granting additional 
aid in times of need. These moments of advancement are 
up to the Dungeon Master to identify and enforce, and 
might manifest in unexpected ways. 

DMs can use the following examples as guidelines for 
shaping the evolution of a Vestige of Divergence: 


+ A character overcomes one of their greatest fears, 
bravely facing an otherwise paralyzing phobia to save a 
fellow party member. 

A character is beaten within an inch of their life by a 
long-hated foe. In the face of defeat, they feel a deep, 
dormant strength grow from within. 

A character loses a close ally in battle, their anguish and 
fury stirring the power within a Vestige of Divergence. 

A character discovers a facet of their destiny that guides 
them toward a dangerous cause. Setting aside their 
fears, they accept their fate and responsibility. 

e A character successfully takes vengeance against a rival 
who has long tormented them. 

A character known for restraint gives in to the amoral, 
violent urges that a Vestige of Divergence was 

forged to hone. 


A Vestige of Divergence typically remains dormant 
until its wielder achieves 9th level. It becomes awakened 
between levels 9 and 15, and achieves an exalted state 
between levels 16 and 20. Ultimately, though, this progres- 
sion is determined by the Dungeon Master. 


CHAPTER 6 | WILDEMOUNT TREASURES 


NJ 


Danotn’s VISOR 


GRIMOIRE INFINITUS 


GUARDIAN WOLF 


Huge monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 66 (7d12 + 21) 


Speed 60 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WS CHA 
22 (+6) 14(42) 16(4+3) 5(-3) 121) 8(-1) 


Skills Perception +5, Stealth +4 
Senses passive Perception 15 
Languages Common, Elvish 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Keen Hearing and Smell. The wolf has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell. 


Pack Tactics. The wolf has advantage on attack rolls against a 
creature if at least one of the wolf’s allies is within 5 feet of the 
creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The wolf makes two attacks: one with its bite and 
one with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (1d10 + 6) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, 
it must succeed on a DC 16 Strength saving throw or be 
knocked prone. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) piercing damage. 
a aE I PO Aaa) 


CHAPTER 6 | WILDEMOUNT TREASURES 


INFILTRATOR’S Key 


WREATH OF THE PRISM 


e When you cast the polymorph spell using this armor, 
you can transform into a cave bear (use the polar bear 
statistics). 


Exalted. When the armor reaches an exalted state, it 
gains the following properties: 


« The AC bonus of the armor increases to +3. 

« While you are transformed by an effect that replaces 
any of your game statistics with those of another crea- 
ture, your bonus to melee attack and damage rolls 
increases by 1 (to +3). 

e When you cast the polymorph spell using this armor, 
you can transform into a guardian wolf (see the ac- 
companying stat block). 


INFILTRATOR’S KEY 
Wondrous item, legendary (requires attunement) 


This mithral skeleton key was forged using the blood of 
twelve master thieves executed for trying to steal magic 
items during the Age of Arcanum. 

Dormant. The infiltrator’s key grants the following 
benefits in its dormant state: 


- The key can be used as thieves’ tools for the purpose 
of opening locks. When using the key, you are consid- 
ered proficient in thieves’ tools and you have advan- 
tage on ability checks made to open locks. 

e While holding the key, your steps are muffled, giving 
you advantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks made to 
move silently. 


Awakened. When the infiltrator’s key reaches an 
awakened state, it gains the following properties: 


e While holding the key, you can use a bonus action to 
transform the key into a magic dagger or back into a 
key. While the key is in the form of a dagger, you gain 
a +] bonus to attack and damage rolls made with it, 
and it returns to your hand immediately after it is used 
to make a ranged attack. 

e While holding the key, you can use an action to cast 
one of the following spells from it: alter self, invisibr]- 
ity, knock, or pass without trace. Once a spell has been 
cast using the key, it can’t be used to cast that spell 
again until the next dawn. 


Exalted. When the infiltrator’s key reaches an exalted 
state, it gains the following properties: 


e Asa bonus action, you can touch the key to a floor, 
wall, or ceiling that is no more than 5 feet thick and 
cause a magical opening to appear in the surface. 
When you create the opening, you choose its length 
and width, up to 10 feet for each dimension. The open- 
ing lasts until the key passes through it to the other 
side, at which point it disappears (if a creature is in 
the opening when the doorway closes, the creature is 
safely shunted to the nearest unoccupied space). The 
key can’t be used to create another opening until the 
next dawn. 

e While holding the key, you can use an action to cast 
one of the following spells from it: dimension door, 
gaseous form, or mislead. Once a spell has been cast 
using the key, it can’t be used to cast that spell again 
until the next dawn. 


STORMGIRDLE 
Wondrous item, legendary (requires attunement) 


A stormirdle is a wide belt made of thick leather 
branded with the symbol of Kord. The girdle’s clasps are 
made from dragon ivory. 

Dormant. While wearing the stormgirdle in its dor- 
mant state, you have resistance to lightning damage and 
thunder damage, and your Strength score becomes 21 if 
it isn’t already 21 or higher. In addition, you can use an 
action to become a Storm Avatar for 1 minute, gaining 
the following benefits for the duration: 


You have immunity to lightning damage and thun- 
der damage. 

When you hit with a weapon attack that normally 
deals bludgeoning damage, it deals thunder damage 
instead. When you hit with a weapon attack that nor- 
mally deals piercing or slashing damage, it deals light- 
ning damage instead. 

« Asa bonus action, you can choose one creature you 
can see within 30 feet of you to be struck by light- 
ning. The target must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving 
throw, taking 3d6 lightning damage on a failed save, 
or half as much damage on a successful one. 


Once you use the girdle’s Storm Avatar property, that 
property can’t be used again until the next dawn. 

Awakened. While wearing the stormgirdle in its 
awakened state, you gain the following benefits: 


« Your Strength score becomes 23 if it isn’t already 23 
or higher. 


- Your Storm Avatar’s lightning strike deals 4d6 light- 
ning damage (instead of 3d6). 

e While transformed into a Storm Avatar, you gain a 
flying speed of 30 feet and can hover. 


Exalted. While wearing the stormgirdle in its exalted 
state, you gain the following benefits: 


- Your Strength score becomes 25 if it isn’t already 25 
or higher. 

+ Your Storm Avatar’s lightning strike deals 5d6 light- 
ning damage (instead of 3d6). 

« You can cast the control weather spell from the girdle. 
This property can’t be used again until the next dawn. 


VERMINSHROUD 
Wondrous item, legendary (requires attunement) 


This patchy cloak was pieced together from the pelts 
of rats found feasting on the dead in Blightshore and is 
dotted with the bloated corpses of magically preserved 
insects along its seams. 

Dormant, While wearing the verminshroud in its dor- 
mant state, you gain the following benefits: 


You have advantage on Wisdom (Perception) checks 
that rely on smell, you are immune to disease, and 
you have darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. If you 
already have darkvision, wearing the cloak increases 
the range of your darkvision by 60 feet. 

As an action, you can use the verminshroud to cast 
polymorph on yourself, transforming into a giant 
rat or rat while retaining your Intelligence, Wisdom, 
and Charisma scores, as well as the properties of 
the cloak. This property can’t be used again until the 
next dawn. 


Awakened. While wearing the verminshroud in its 
awakened state, you gain the following benefits: 


« You have resistance to poison damage. 

« Youcan use an action to cast the insect plague spell 
(save DC 15) from the verminshroud, requiring no ma- 
terial components. This property can’t be used again 
until the next dawn. 

« When you cast the polymorph spell using the vermin- 
shroud, you can transform into a giant wasp. 


Exalted. While wearing the verminshroud in its ex- 
alted state, you gain the following benefits: 


e You gain a climbing speed equal to your 
walking speed. 
Your teeth become razor-sharp natural weapons, 
which you can use to make unarmed strikes. If you 
hit with them, you deal piercing damage equal to 1d6 
+ your Strength modifier, instead of the bludgeoning 
damage normal for an unarmed strike. You can make 
this attack as a bonus action. When you bite a creature 
and deal damage to it, the creature must succeed on a 
DC 17 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned for 1 
minute. The target can repeat the saving throw at the 
end of each of its turns, ending the condition on itself 
on a success. 
e When you cast the polymorph spell using the vermin- 
shroud, you can transform into a giant scorpion. 


CHAPTER 6 | WILDEMOUNT TREASURES 


Q3 


Mace OF THE 
Brack Crown 


LASH OF SHADOWS 


APL 


WREATH OF THE PRISM 
Wondrous item, legendary (requires attunement) 


This loop of golden thorns is inset with dozens of gems 
representing the five colors of Tiamat. 

Dormant. While wearing the wreath in its dormant 
state, you have darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. If 
you already have darkvision, wearing the wreath in- 
creases the range of your darkvision by 60 feet. 

When you hit a beast, dragon, or monstrosity of chal- 
lenge rating 5 or lower with an attack, or when you 
grapple it, you can use the wreath to cast dominate mon- 
ster on the creature (save DC 13). On a successful save, 
the target is immune to the power of the wreath for 24 
hours. On a failure, a shimmering, golden image of the 
wreath appears as a collar around the target’s neck or 
as a crown on its head (your choice) until it is no longer 
charmed by the spell. If you use the wreath to charm a 
second creature, the first spell immediately ends. When 
the spell ends, the target knows it was charmed by you. 

Awakened. Once the wreath of the prism reaches an 
awakened state, it gains the following benefits: 


- You can affect creatures of challenge rating 10 or 
lower with the wreath. 
« The save DC of the wreath’s spell increases to 15. 


Exalted. Once the wreath of the prism reaches an 
exalted state, it gains the following benefits: 


- Youcan affect creatures of challenge rating 15 or 
lower with the wreath. 
« The save DC of the wreath’s spell increases to 17. 


CHAPTER 6 | WILDEMOUNT TREASURES 


GROVELTHRASH 


Ruin’s Wake 


ARMS OF THE BETRAYERS 


The Arms of the Betrayers are sentient weapons forged 
from the souls of fiends by the Betrayer Gods for their 
humanoid champions. (See “Lesser Idols” in chapter 

1 for more details.) These artifacts are more than just 
magic items. They are powerful sentient beings, filled 
with fury and eager to be wielded—and to spill blood. 


BETRAYER ARTIFACT PROPERTIES 


The Arms of the Betrayers advance in power in the 
same manner as the Vestiges of Divergence (see the 
previous section). In its dormant state, each of these 
artifacts has one minor beneficial property and one mi- 
nor detrimental property. When the artifact attains an 
awakened state, it gains an additional minor beneficial 
property and an additional minor detrimental property. 
When the item reaches its exalted state, it gains a major 
beneficial property. See “Artifact Properties” in chapter 
7 of the Dungeon Master's Guide for more information. 


DESTROYING THESE ARTIFACTS 


Destroying any ofthe Arms of the Betrayers isno easy 
task. Most conventional means of destruction fail to 
even scratch one of these ancient artifacts. Each weap- 
on’s method of destruction is determined by the DM and 
should be unique and require at least one adventure to 
accomplish. The DM can choose or roll for a weapon’s 
method of destruction on the Arms of the Betrayers De- 
struction table, or use the table as inspiration. 


When one of the Arms of the Betrayers is destroyed, 
the soul of the fiend within the weapon returns to its 
home plane—and begins to plot the destruction of the 
creatures responsible. 


ARMS OF THE BETRAYERS DESTRUCTION 
d8 Destruction Method 

1 The weapon must be bathed in the ichor of an arch- 
devil or demon lord. 

2 A coven of twelve night hags must perform an 
eight-hour ritual known only to them on the plane 
of Gehenna to destroy the weapon. 

3 The weapon must be brought back to a forgotten 
forge in Xhorhas and melted down by the furnace 
that made it. 

4 The fiery breath of an ancient red dragon is the only 
thing that can destroy the weapon. 

5 The weapon is destroyed if devoured by Uk’otoa. 

6 Thrusting the weapon into a Luxon beacon destroys 
the weapon and the beacon alike. 

7 The weapon can be broken only by a blow from an- 
other of the Arms of the Betrayers. 

8 Burning the remains of the first champion to wield 
the weapon destroys the item. 


ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS 


These artifacts are presented in alphabetical order. For 
the rules on artifacts, see chapter 7 of the Dungeon Mas- 
ter’s Guide. 


BLADE OF BROKEN MIRRORS 
Weapon (dagger), artifact (requires attunement by a 
humanoid) 


A weapon of Tharizdun, this dagger is a piece of jagged 
stone whose blade is scribed with a maze-like pattern 
with no beginning or end. 

Sentience. The Blade of Broken Mirrors is a sentient 
chaotic evil weapon with an Intelligence of 21, a Wis- 
dom of 24, and a Charisma of 24. It has hearing and 
darkvision out to a range of 120 feet. 

The weapon communicates telepathically with its 
wielder and can speak, read, and understand Abyssal 
and Common. 

Personality. An insane glabrezu named Ragazuu lives 
within the Blade of Broken Mirrors. The weapon yearns 
to cause chaos. It learns its wielder’s principles, then 
uses those ideals to encourage reckless action. The dag- 
ger whispers ideas of revolution. 

Dormant. The dagger grants the following benefits in 
its dormant state: 


« You can speak, read, and write Abyssal. 

e You gain a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls 
made with this magic weapon. Immediately after you 
make a ranged attack with this weapon, it returns to 
your hand. 

e Whenever you kill a humanoid with an attack using 
the Blade of Broken Mirrors, the blade remembers the 
creature’s appearance. While holding the dagger, you 
can use an action to change your form to match any 


humanoid the blade remembers. Your statistics, other 
than your size, don’t change. Any equipment you are 
wearing or carrying isn’t transformed. You can revert 
to your true appearance as an action. You revert to 
your true appearance automatically when you die. 

When the Blade of Broken Mirrors attunes to anew 
wielder, the appearances of humanoids it has killed 
are wiped from its memory. 


Awakened. When the dagger reaches an awakened 
state, it gains the following properties: 


- The weapon’s bonus to attack and damage rolls 
increases to +2. 

« While holding the weapon, you can use an action to 
cast one of the following spells from it (save DC 15): 
fabricate, hallucinatory terrain, major image, or phan- 
tasmal killer. Once a spell has been cast using the 
dagger, that spell can’t be cast from the dagger again 
until the next dawn. 


Exalted. When the dagger reaches an exalted state, it 
gains the following properties: 


« The weapon’s bonus to attack and damage rolls 
increases to +3. 

- The saving throw DC for spells cast from the dagger 
increases to 17. 

e While holding the dagger, you can turn invisible as 
an action. Anything you are wearing or carrying is 
invisible with you. You remain invisible until you stop 
holding the dagger, until you attack or cast a spell that 
forces a creature to make a saving throw, or until you 
use a bonus action to become visible again. 


GROVELTHRASH 
Weapon (warhammer), artifact (requires attunement) 


Crafted from a single piece of obsidian, this warhammer 
of Torog hums with magical energy and is carved with 
the images of faces screaming in pain. 

Sentience. Grovelthrash is a sentient neutral evil 
weapon with an Intelligence of 18, a Wisdom of 15, and 
a Charisma of 19. It has hearing and darkvision out toa 
range of 120 feet. 

The weapon communicates telepathically with its 
wielder and can speak, read, and understand Abyssal, 
Common, and Infernal. 

Personality. A covetous ultroloth named Ciria lives 
within Grovelthrash. The weapon values material pos- 
sessions and doling out pain. It compliments its wielder 
whenever they claim treasure and takes pleasure in 
harming others. 

Dormant. The warhammer grants the following bene- 
fits in its dormant state: 


« You can speak, read, and write Abyssal and Infernal. 

- You gain a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic weapon. When you hit with an attack 
using this warhammer, you can deal an extra 2d6 
bludgeoning damage to the target. If you do, you take 
1d6 psychic damage. The warhammer deals double 
damage to objects and structures. 

e While holding this weapon, you have advantage on 
Wisdom (Insight) checks made to discern a lie spoken 
in a language you understand. 


CHAPTER 6 | WILDEMOUNT TREASURES 


on 


276 


Awakened. When the warhammer reaches an awak- 
ened state, it gains the following properties: 


« The weapon’s bonus to attack and damage rolls 
increases to +2. 

e You gain a burrowing speed equal to your walking 
speed. You can use your burrowing speed to move 
through sand, loose earth, mud, or ice, not solid rock. 

- When a creature you can see within 30 feet of you hits 
you with an attack while you are wielding the war- 
hammer, you can use your reaction to deal an amount 
of psychic damage to that creature equal to the dam- 
age you took from the attack. This property can’t be 
used again until the next dawn. 


Exalted. When the warhammer reaches an exalted 
state, it gains the following properties: 


« The weapon’s bonus to attack and damage rolls 
increases to +3. 

e When you have fewer hit points than half your hit 
point maximum, the warhammer deals an extra 2d6 
bludgeoning damage on a hit. 

e You can burrow through solid rock at half your bur- 
rowing speed and leave a 5-foot-diameter tunnel in 
your wake. 

- Asan action, you can use the warhammer to cast 
one of the following spells from it (save DC 17): 
earthquake, meld into stone, or stone shape. Once a 
spell has been cast using the warhammer, that spell 
can’t be cast from the warhammer again until the 
next dawn. 


LASH OF SHADOWS 
Weapon (whip), artifact (requires attunement) 


This snakeskin whip is touched by the power of Zehir 
and ends in five animated serpent heads. 

Sentience. The Lash of Shadows is a sentient chaotic 
evil weapon with an Intelligence of 18, a Wisdom of 16, 
anda Charisma of 20. It has hearing and darkvision out 
to a range of 120 feet. 

The weapon communicates telepathically with its 
wielder and can speak, read, and understand Abyssal, 
Common, and Draconic. 

Personality. A mad marilith named Sizlifeth lives 
within the Lash of Shadows. The weapon has a short 
temper and experiences only extreme emotions. It is 
most happy when dealing harm. 

Dormant. The whip grants the following benefits in its 
dormant state: 


e You can speak, read, and write Abyssal and Draconic. 

« You gain a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic weapon. 

e You can attempt to poison any creature that is hit by 
the whip. The creature must succeed on a DC 13 Con- 
stitution saving throw or suffer the effect of one of the 
following poisons of your choice; once a poison other 
than Serpent Venom has been used, that poison can’t 
be used again until the next dawn: 


CHAPTER 6 | WILDEMOUNT TREASURES 


Dead Eyes. A creature that fails the saving throw 
against this poison is poisoned for 1 hour. While poi- 
soned in this way, the creature is blinded. 

Serpent Venom. A creature that fails the saving 
throw against this poison takes 3d6 poison damage, 
or half as much damage on a successful save. 


Awakened. When the whip reaches an awakened 
state, it gains the following properties: 


« The weapon’s bonus to attack and damage rolls in- 
creases to +2. 

« The saving throw DC for the weapon’s poisons 
increases to 15. 

- The weapon gains a new poison option called Ghoul’s 
Blood. A creature that fails the saving throw against 
this poison is poisoned for 1 minute. While poisoned 
in this way, the creature is paralyzed. The creature 
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Exalted. When the whip reaches an exalted state, it 
gains the following additional properties: 


« The weapon’s bonus to attack and damage rolls in- 
creases to +3. 

« The saving throw DC for the weapon’s poisons 
increases to 17. 

« The weapon gains a new poison option called Cock- 
atrice Tears. A creature that fails the saving throw 
against this poison begins to turn to stone and is 
restrained. It must repeat the saving throw at the end 
of its next turn. On a success, the effect ends. On a 
failure, the creature is petrified for 24 hours. 


MACE OF THE BLACK CROWN 
Weapon (mace), artifact (requires attunement) 


This mace has a haft of black iron and a ruby head 
with a fiendish countenance. Carrying the boon of 
Asmodeus, it is fit for the most powerful servants of the 
Nine Hells. 

Sentience. The Mace of the Black Crown is a sentient 
lawful evil weapon with an Intelligence of 20, a Wisdom 
of 12, and a Charisma of 18. It has hearing and darkvi- 
sion out to a range of 120 feet. 

The weapon communicates telepathically with its 
wielder and can speak, read, and understand Common 
and Infernal. 

Personality. A greedy erinyes named Xartaza lives 
within the Mace ofthe Black Crown. Xartaza wants to 
recruit more souls for Asmodeus, so the weapon pushes 
its wielder toward lawful evil actions by manipulating 
the wielder’s dreams. A former Blood War general, Xar- 
taza hates demons and relishes crafting sound battle 
plans in any conflict. 

Dormant. The mace grants the following benefits in 
its dormant state: 


« You can speak, read, and write Infernal. 


e You gain a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic weapon. 

« While holding the mace, you can use a bonus action to 
speak its Infernal command word, causing flames to 
erupt from the head. These flames shed bright light in 
a 40-foot radius and dim light for an additional 40 feet. 
While the mace is ablaze, it deals an extra 1d6 fire 
damage to anytarget it hits. The flames last until you 
use a bonus action to speak the command word again 
or until you are no longer holding the mace. 

e While holding the mace, you can use an action to sum- 
mon an imp. Any devil you summon with this mace is 
friendly to you and your companions for the duration. 
The imp obeys any verbal commands that you issue to 
it and returns to the Nine Hells 10 minutes after you 
summoned it. This property can’t be used again until 
the next dawn. 


Awakened. When the mace reaches an awakened 
state, it gains the following properties: 


« The weapon’s bonus to attack and damage rolls 
increases to +2, and the extra fire damage dealt by the 
weapon when it is ignited increases to 2d6. 

« The weapon’s Summon Devil feature can also be used 
to summon a bearded devil. 

« You have resistance to poison damage while holding 
this weapon. 


Exalted. When the mace reaches an exalted state, it 
gains the following properties: 


« The weapon’s bonus to attack and damage rolls 
increases to +3, and the extra fire damage dealt by 
the weapon when it is ignited increases to 3d6. Fire 
damage dealt by the mace ignores resistance to 
fire damage. 

- The weapon’s Summon Devil feature can also be used 
to summon a barbed devil. 

« You have resistance to fire damage while you hold 
this weapon. 


RUIN’S WAKE 
Weapon (spear), artifact (requires attunement) 


This spear is made from the ivory bone of an ancient 
gold dragon and carved with an Orc hymn to Gruumsh. 

Sentience. Ruin’s Wake is a sentient chaotic evil 
weapon with an Intelligence of 20, a Wisdom of 16, and 
a Charisma of 22. It has hearing and darkvision out to a 
range of 120 feet. 

The weapon communicates telepathically with its 
wielder and can speak, read, and understand Abyssal, 
Common, and Orc. 

Personality. A slaughter-loving balor named Yarrow- 
ish lives within Ruin’s Wake. The weapon desires only 
to draw blood and pushes its wielder to solve problems 
with violence. 


Dormant. The spear grants the following benefits in 
its dormant state: 


e Youcan speak, read, and write Abyssal and Orc. 

« You gain a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic weapon, and it deals an extra 1d8 
piercing damage to any target it hits. Immediately af- 
ter you make a ranged attack with this weapon, it flies 
back to your hand. 

- Asa reaction when you are hit by a melee attack, you 
can make a melee attack with Ruin’s Wake with ad- 
vantage against the attacker. You can’t use this prop- 
erty again until you finish a short or long rest. 


Awakened. When the spear reaches an awakened 
state, it gains the following properties: 


« The weapon’s bonus to attack and damage rolls 
increases to +2, and the extra piercing damage dealt 
by the weapon increases to 2d8. 

«+ When you hurl the spear and speak a command word, 
it transforms into a bolt of lightning, forming a line 
5 feet wide that extends out from you to a creature 
you can see within 120 feet of you. Each creature in 
the line, excluding you, must make a DC 15 Dexterity 
saving throw, taking 8d6 lightning damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 
Ruin’s Wake then returns to your hand. This property 
can’t be used again until the next dawn. 


Exalted. When the spear reaches an exalted state, it 
gains the following properties: 


+ The weapon’s bonus to attack and damage rolls 
increases to +3. 

e While holding the spear, you can let out a battle cry 
as a bonus action. Each creature you choose within 
30 feet of you gains advantage on attack rolls until the 
start of your next turn. This property can’t be used 
again until the next dawn. 

¢ When you reduce a creature to 0 hit points with an 
attack from the spear, you can regain hit points equal 
to the damage you dealt with the attack. This property 
can't be used again until the next dawn. 


SILKEN SPITE 
Weapon (rapier), artifact (requires attunement) 


The blade of this rapier is made of spider silk. Its onyx 
pommel is tipped with a ruby cut in the shape of a spi- 
der, and the blade carries the blessing of Lolth. 

Sentience. Silken Spite is a sentient chaotic evil 
weapon with an Intelligence of 13, a Wisdom of 15, and 
a Charisma of 15. It has hearing and darkvision out to a 
range of 120 feet. 

The weapon communicates telepathically with its 
wielder and can speak, read, and understand Abyssal, 
Common, Elvish, and Undercommon. 


CHAPTER 6 | WILDEMOUNT TREASURES 


Personality. A murderous yochlol named Sinnafex 
lives within Silken Spite. The weapon speaks in whis- 
pers, pushing its wielder to trust no one and to kill those 
who cause the slightest personal offense. 

Dormant. The rapier grants the following benefits in 
its dormant state: 


You can speak, read, and write Abyssal, Elvish, and 

Undercommon. 

You have darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. If you 

already have darkvision, being attuned to the rapier 

increases the range of your darkvision by 60 feet. 

e You gain a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic weapon. 

« You can use an action to cause poison to coat the 
rapier’s blade. The poison remains for 1 minute or 
until an attack using this weapon hits a creature. That 
creature must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving 
throw or become poisoned for 1 hour. If the saving 
throw fails by 5 or more, the creature is also uncon- 
scious while poisoned in this way. The creature wakes 
up if it takes damage or if another creature uses its 
action to shake the creature awake. 

e While carrying the rapier, you can move up, down, and 

across vertical surfaces and upside down along ceil- 

ings, while leaving your hands free. You have a climb- 
ing speed equal to your walking speed. Additionally, 
you can’t be caught in webs of any sort and can move 
through webs as if they were difficult terrain. 


Awakened. When the rapier reaches an awakened 
state, it gains the following properties: 


- The weapon’s bonus to attack and damage rolls 
increases to +2. 

« The saving throw DC for the weapon’s poison in- 
creases to 15. 

« While holding the rapier, you can use an action to cast 
one of the following spells from it (save DC 15): cloud- 
kill, darkness, levitate, or web. Once a spell has been 
cast using the rapier, that spell can’t be cast from the 
rapier again until the next dawn. 


Exalted. When the rapier reaches an exalted state, it 
gains the following properties: 


- The weapon’s bonus to attack and damage rolls in- 
creases to +3. 

- The saving throw DC for the weapon’s poison and 
spells cast from the weapon increases to 17. 

- Magical darkness doesn’t impede your darkvision. 

« While holding the weapon in dim light or darkness, 
you can use a bonus action to teleport up to 60 feet to 
an unoccupied space you can see that is also in dim 
light or darkness. This property can't be used again 
until the next dawn. 


CHAPTER 6 | WILDEMOUNT TREASURES 


THE BLoopy END 
Weapon (morningstar), artifact (requires attunement) 


Carrying the power of Bane, this adamantine morning- 
star sports foot-long spikes and has a jagged blade on 
its pommel. 

Sentience. The Bloody End is a sentient lawful evil 
weapon with an Intelligence of 22, aWisdom of 18, and 
a Charisma of 24. It has hearing and darkvision out to a 
range of 120 feet. 

The weapon communicates telepathically with its 
wielder and can speak, read, and understand Common 
and Infernal. 

Personality. A tyrannical pit fiend named Izeelzee 
lives within The Bloody End. The weapon boisterously 
pushes its wielder to subjugate others and to never back 
down from a challenge. If the wielder doesn’t demand 
fealty from others, the weapon is happy to demand it on 
their behalf. 

Dormant. The morningstar grants the following bene- 
fits in its dormant state: 


« You can speak, read, and write Infernal. 

e You gain a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic weapon. 

e While holding the morningstar, you can use an action 
to cast one of the following spells from it (save DC 13): 
charm person, dominate person, or fear. Once a spell 
has been cast using the morningstar, that spell can’t 
be cast from it again until the next dawn. 

« While holding the morningstar, you have advantage on 
Charisma (Intimidation) checks. 


Awakened. When the morningstar reaches an awak- 
ened state, it gains the following properties: 


- The weapon’s bonus to attack and damage rolls 
increases to +2. 

- The saving throw DC for spells cast from the morning- 
star increases to 15. 

- When you reduce a creature to 0 hit points with an at- 
tack using The Bloody End, you can cause the follow- 
ing effect: each creature of your choice within 15 feet 
of you must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw 
or be frightened of you until the end of your next turn. 
This property can’t be used again until the next dawn. 

« When a creature hits you with a melee attack, you 
can use your reaction to deal 1d6 psychic damage to 
the attacker. 


Exalted. When the morningstar reaches an exalted 
state, it gains the following properties: 


e The weapon’s bonus to attack and damage rolls 
increases to +3. 

« Add dominate monster to the list of spells that can be 
cast from the morningstar. 

- The saving throw DC for spells cast from the morning- 
star, as well as for creatures to avoid being frightened 
by it, increases to 17. 

« When you use your reaction to deal psychic damage 
to a creature that hits you with a melee attack, the 
amount of psychic damage increases to 2d6. 


WILL OF THE TALON 
Weapon (war pick), artifact (requires attunement) 


Black, blue, green, red, and white gems carved in the 
form of dragon heads cover this ostentatious gold war 
pick, marking it as a weapon channeling the power 

of Tiamat. 

Sentience. Will of the Talon is a sentient lawful evil 
weapon with an Intelligence of 14, a Wisdom of 15, and 
a Charisma of 19. It has hearing and darkvision out to a 
range of 120 feet. 

The weapon communicates telepathically with its 
wielder and can speak, read, and understand Common, 
Draconic, and Infernal. 

Personality. A short-tempered bone devil named 
Ashtyrlon lives within Will ofthe Talon. The weapon 
is greedy and values strong leadership. It demands 
that its wielder take decisive action to keep order in 
high-pressure situations—and to always take a fair 
share of treasure in return. 

Dormant. The war pick grants the following benefits 
in its dormant state: 


e You can speak, read, and write Draconic and Infernal. 

e You gain a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic weapon. 

e Asa bonus action while holding the war pick, you 
can cause the following effect: each creature of your 
choice that is within 30 feet of you and is aware of you 
must succeed on a DC 13 Wisdom saving throw or 
become frightened of you for 1 minute. A creature can 
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, 
ending the effect on itself on a success. If a creature’s 
saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, the 
creature is immune to your Frightful Presence for the 
next 24 hours. This property can’t be used again until 
the next dawn. 

« While holding the war pick, you can use your action 
to exhale destructive energy. Pick a damage type from 
the Will of the Talon Breath Weapons table. Each 
creature in the area of the exhalation must make a DC 
13 saving throw, the type of which is specified in the 
table. A creature takes 3d6 damage on a failed save, 
or half as much damage on a successful one. 

When you use the war pick to unleash a breath 
weapon of a specific damage type, you can’t choose 
that same damage type again until the next dawn. 


WILL OF THE TALON BREATH WEAPONS 


Damage Type Area Saving Throw 
Acid 5 ft. wide, 30 ft. long line Dexterity 
Cold 15 ft. cone Constitution 
Fire 15 ft. cone Dexterity 
Lightning 5 ft. wide, 30 ft. long line Dexterity 
Poison 15 ft. cone Constitution 


Awakened. When the war pick reaches an awakened 
state, it gains the following properties: 


- The weapon’s bonus to attack and damage rolls 
increases to +2. 

- The saving throw DC for the war pick’s Breath 
Weapon property increases to 15, and that property 
deals 4d6 damage on a failed save, or half as much 
damage on a successful one. 

- The saving throw DC for the war pick’s Frightful Pres- 
ence property increases to 15. 

e While carrying the weapon, you have resistance to 
acid, cold, fire, lightning, and poison damage. 


Exalted. When the war pick reaches an exalted state, 
it gains the following properties: 


e The weapon’s bonus to attack and damage rolls 
increases to +3. 

- The saving throw DC for the war pick’s Breath 
Weapon property increases to 17, and that property 
deals 5d6 damage on a failed save, or half as much 
damage on a successful one. 

- The saving throw DC for the war pick’s Frightful Pres- 
ence property increases to 17. 


CHAPTER 6 | WILDEMOUNT TREASURES 


279 


ADVENTURERS CONFRONT A FIENDISH UDAAK THAT HAUNTS THE 
EDGES OF CIVILIZATION IN EASTERN WYNANDIR. 


Chapter 7 


WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY ef 


F THE WEATHER, FOOD, AND COMPANY DON’T 
kill me, I can only hope whatever gods-forsaken 
nightmares live out past the darkness will fin- 
ish the job. 

—Unknown Righteous Brand soldier 


Endless turmoil has scarred Wildemount, from the wars 
of ages long past to the more recent bloody conflicts 
between the many factions that lay claim to this land. 
These struggles have shaped the past and the future— 
even as they have imbued the denizens of Wildemount 
with the tenacity to survive in a world filled with danger. 
This chapter provides stat blocks for various creatures 
of Wildemount. These creatures are presented in alpha- 
betical order. For guidance on how to use a creature’s 
stat block, see the introduction of the Monster Manual. 


STAT BLOCKS BY 
CREATURE TYPE 


Here are lists of the creatures in this bestiary, sorted by 
creature type. 


HUMANOIDS 
Blood hunter 
Sahuagin warlock of Uk'otoa 


ABERRATIONS 
Core spawn crawler 
Core spawn emissary 


Core spawn seer 
MONSTROSITIES 


Core spawn worm 
Aeorian absorber 


BEASTS Aeorian nullifier 
Bristled moorbounder Aeorian reverser 
Moorbounder Frost worm 

Gloomstalker 
CONSTRUCTS 


Horizonback tortoise 


Gegsenabel Sonstiges Merrow shallowpriest 


Swavain basilisk 


Fey 

Sea fury METE 
FIENDS Frost giant zombie 
Nergaliid Husk zombie 
Udaak Shadowghast 


WILDEMOUNT NPCs 


Appendix B of the Monster Manual contains stat blocks 
that can be used to represent most nonplayer characters 
(NPCs) in Wildemount. You can modify these stat blocks 

to give NPCs features similar to the character options in 
chapter 4 of this book. For example, you can create an NPC 
dunamancer by taking the archmage or mage stat block in 
the Monster Manual and replacing some of its spells with 
new spells from chapter 4, or you can take the knight or 
veteran stat block and add a trait similar to the Manifest 
Echo class feature of the Echo Knight in chapter 4. 


———— N S 
ELDER EVILS OF ĒXANDRIA 


Few creatures in the multiverse have any awareness of 
the Elder Evils, and their exact identity remains in dispute 
among the scant few sages who study them. Some are 
said to be gods, primordials, or fiends. Some are alleged 
to be creatures of the Far Realm. But scholars versed in 
the most esoteric mysteries insist that the Elder Evils are 
beings unlike any of those, set apart from any aspect of 
mortal reality, and perhaps trapped in particular planes 
or worlds by wandering stars, imprisoned in the vastness 
of the night sky. The extent to which these beings channel 
power on Exandria varies, as do notions of their relative 
strength and spheres of influence. But they are all forces 
of corruption and evil. Nothing good can come from their 
influence. No bargain made with an Elder Evil ends in any- 
thing other than madness, plague, or death. 

The following are just some of the names given to these 
terrible entities: 


e Azathoth the Boundless 
Bolothamogg Who Watches from Beyond the Stars 
Ceratos of Many Minds 

+ Hadar the Dark Hunger 

+ Haemnathuun the Blood Lord 

+ Hargut of the Gray Pestilence 

+ Ityak-Ortheel the ElfEater 

+ Maram of the Great Spear 

+ Pandorym the Utter Annihilation 

+ Piscaethces the Blood Queen 

+ Rasalhague the Noxious Star 

+ Shothotugg the Eater of Worlds 

+ Tharizdun the Chained Oblivion 

« Y’chak the Violet Flame 
OSES 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


281 


co 


AEORIAN HUNTERS 


Brought to life by mages in the flying city of Aeor during 
the Age of Arcanum, Aeorian hunters were created to 
take on angels, demons, devils, fey, and the gods them- 
selves. When Aeor crashed into Eiselcross, many of 
these magically mutated monstrosities survived, and 
they now stalk Aeor’s ruins and the islands’ icy wastes. 

Created by Experimentation. Acorian hunters were 
created through arcane experimentation on beasts and 
humanoids—both captives and volunteers. These exper- 
iments resulted in monstrosities with brightly colored 
flesh and the power to resist and destroy Aeor’s ene- 
mies. It is theorized that the mages of Aeor must have 
possessed some means of controlling their monstrous 
soldiers, but no such device has yet been found in the 
wastes of Eiselcross. Draconic was the language used 
by these mages to train and bind the Aeorian hunters, 
and the hunters retain an understanding of this lan- 
guage even though they can’t speak it. 

Madness through Immortality. Aeorian hunters do 
not age. As such, the lust for violence their creators 
instilled in their minds has grown ravenous after cen- 
turies without war. Most immediately attack any crea- 
ture they see. 


AEORIAN ABSORBER 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


AEORIAN NULLIFIER 


Never Harm Another Hunter. Though they crave 
violence, Aeorian hunters have never been seen attack- 
ing each other. Most scholars believe that Aeor’s mages 
must have enchanted this behavior into them, given the 
cost in gold and magic required to create each hunter. 
Some adventurers in Eiselcross boast about sneak- 
ing past Aeorian hunters using disguises or illusions 
to mimic a hunter’sform, but these are most likely 
tall tales. 

Ageless Memories. Each Aecorian hunter has perfect 
recall of every experience since the moment of its cre- 
ation. Their limited intellects and desire for violence 
prevent them from effectively communicating, but each 
hunter holds a wealth of knowledge—often including the 
location of rare Aeorian relics—inside its mind. 

Perfect Soldiers. Acorian hunters don’t require 
food or drink. 


AEORIAN REVERSER 


AEORIAN ABSORBER 


Resembling some sort of canine or feline quadruped at 
a distance, the absorber’s monstrous nature becomes 
quickly apparent as it closes in. Named for its ability 

to draw magical energy into its body, the absorber can 
release that energy in devastating blasts through its tail, 
whose eye is constantly on the lookout for prey. 


AEORIAN NULLIFIER 


Nullifiers are the bane of all magic users, with their 
physical forms and innate powers shaped specifically 
to resist and cancel magical effects. Against other foes, 
a nullifier is no less fearsome for the grotesque mouths 
filled with razor-sharp teeth that cover its torso—and 
which set up a cacophony of gnashing that can drive 
other creatures mad. 


AEORIAN ABSORBER 


Large monstrosity, neutral evil 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 171 (18d10 + 72) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
21 (+5) 18 (+4) 18 (+4) 6 (-2) 14 (+2) 8 (-1) 


EEE 
Saving Throws Wis +6, Cha +3 

Skills Perception +6, Stealth +8, Survival +6 

Damage Immunities radiant, necrotic 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16 

Languages understands Draconic but can’t speak 
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) 


EP a a 


Magic Resistance. The absorber has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


Pounce. |f the absorber moves at least 20 feet straight toward 
a creature and then hits its claws attack on the same turn, that 
target must succeed on a DC 17 Strength saving throw or be 
knocked prone. If the target is prone, the absorber can make 
one bite attack against it as a bonus action. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The absorber makes three attacks: one with its 
bite or Mind Bolt and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 10 (1d10 + 5) piercing damage plus 5 (1d10) force damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (1d6 + 5) slashing damage plus 3 (1d6) force damage. 


Mind Bolt. Ranged Spell Attack: +8 to hit, range 120 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 22 (4d10) psychic damage. 


REACTIONS 


Tail Ray. When the absorber takes damage from a spell, the ab- 


sorber takes only half the triggering damage. If the spellcaster 
is within 60 feet of the absorber, the absorber can force the 
caster to make a DC 16 Dexterity saving throw. Unless the save 
succeeds, the caster takes the other half of the damage. 


' = ki 
AEORIAN NULLIFIER ' 


Large monstrosity, neutral evil f 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) pe 
Hit Points 180 (19d10 + 76) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4) 14(42) BEA 7(-2) Ae 18 (+4) 

EE 
Saving Throws Wis +6, Cha +8 
Skills Perception +6, Survival +6 £ 
Damage Immunities radiant, necrotic 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16 
Languages understands Draconic but can’t speak 
Challenge 12 (8,400 XP) 


a_n 


Horrid Gnashing. The nullifier’s mouths gnash incoherently 
while it can see any enemies. Each creature that starts its turn 
within 20 feet of the nullifier and can hear it must make a DC 16 
Wisdom saving throw. Unless the save succeeds, the creature 
rolls a d8 to determine what it does during the current turn: 


1-4: The creature is stunned until the end of the turn. 

5-6: The creature is frightened until the end of the turn and 
uses its movement to get as far as possible from the nullifier. 

7-8: The creature doesn’t move, and it uses its action to make 
one melee attack against a random creature (other than it- 
self) if one is within reach. It otherwise does nothing. 


Innate Spellcasting. The nullifier’s innate spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 16). It can innately cast the following 
spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: counterspell (see “Reactions” below), detect magic, dis- 
pel magic, see invisibility 

1/day: antimagic field 

Magic Resistance. The nullifier has advantage on saving throws 

against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The nullifier makes three attacks: one with its 
bites and two with its claws. 


Bites. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 17 (2d12 + 4) piercing damage plus 11 (2d10) 
force damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage plus 11 (2d10) force damage, 
and the target is grappled (escape DC 16) if it’s a creature. The 
nullifier has two claws, each of which can grapple one creature. 


REACTIONS 


Counterspell. The nullifier attempts to interrupt a creature that 
it can see within 60 feet in the process of casting a spell. If the 
creature is casting a spell of 3rd level or lower, its spell fails 
and has no effect. If it is casting a spell of 4th level or higher, 
the nullifier makes a Charisma check with a DC equal to 10 + 
the spell’s level. On a success, the creature’s spell fails and has 
no effect. 


ca 


ae ‘Sie bes < 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 289 
“05 


Biooo Hunter 


AEORIAN REVERSER 


A reverser is a terrible foe in melee, laying into other 
creatures with teeth and claw. But the chaos it imposes 
is more fearful by far, as its enemies’ healing magic are 
unraveled and turned against them. 


AEORIAN REVERSER 


Large monstrosity, neutral evil 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 133 (14d10 + 56) 
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
GH) 16 (43). EA E TAE) 
o 
Saving Throws Wis +5, Cha +2 
Skills Perception +5, Stealth +6, Survival +5 
Damage Immunities radiant, necrotic 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15 
Languages understands Draconic but can’t speak 
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


O a 


Magic Resistance. The reverser has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The reverser makes three attacks: one with its bite 
and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, range 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 11 (1d12 + 5) piercing damage plus 6 (1d12) force damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (1d6 + 5) slashing damage plus 7 (2d6) force damage. 


REACTIONS 


Reversal. When a creature the reverser can see within 30 feet 

of it regains hit points, the reverser reduces the number of hit 
points regained to 0, and the reverser deals 13 (3d8) force dam- 
age to the creature. 


n 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


BLOOD HUNTER 


To mortals and monsters alike, the blood hunterisa 
legendary figure—a humanoid stalker said to embrace 
monstrous power. Long years ago, a group of mortals 
undertook dark rituals and alchemical experiments to 
gain the power of the deadliest monsters, allowing them 
to better hunt those monsters. 

Blood hunters are steely on the surface, but roiling 
emotion lies beneath that impassive mask. Bestial fury 
and fathomless sorrow drive every stroke of a blood 
hunter’s blade. Humanoids who draw the ire of a blood 
hunter are often in league with monsters—or the victims 
of a terrible misunderstanding. Such misunderstand- 
ings are tough to clear up, for blood hunters are the kind 
of folk to slay first and ask questions later. 


BLOOD HUNTER 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 16 (half plate) 
Hit Points 65 (10d8 + 20) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 12 (+1) 15(+2) 9(-1) 16 (+3) 11 (+0) 


Saving Throws Str +7, Wis +6 

Skills Acrobatics +4, Insight +6, Perception +6 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 16 
Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


CE aaao 


Blood Curse of Binding (1/Day). As a bonus action, the blood 
hunter targets one creature it can see within 30 feet of it. The 
target must succeed on a DC 14 Strength saving throw or have 
its speed reduced to 0 and be unable to take reactions. The tar- 
get can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, 
ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Blood Frenzy. The blood hunter has advantage on melee attack 
rolls against any creature that doesn’t have all its hit points. 


Innate Spellcasting (1/Day). The blood hunter can innately cast 
hex. Its innate spellcasting ability is Intelligence. 


Magic Resistance. The blood hunter has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The blood hunter attacks twice with a weapon. 


Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage plus 3 (1d6) 
fire damage. 


Heavy Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 
100/400 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d10 + 1) piercing damage. 


Core SPAWN 
Emissary 


Core SPAWN CRAWLER 


CORE SPAWN 


The Elder Evils assault the multiverse in strange and 
calamitous ways. Sometimes they breach the Material 
Plane by exploiting the unfathomable energy and dark- 
ness found in the world’s depths. These terrestrial mani- 
festations of loathsome alien agendas are known as core 
spawn, and they are as varied in their physiology as they 
are horrific. 

Their concentration in the desolate lands of 
Blightshore makes the core spawn a challenge to re- 
search, and many who have sought to observe or study 
these nightmarish entities rarely return. Those who 
do return are often shells of their former selves who 
speak of horrifying underground labyrinths of twisting 
caverns and malevolent nests where other denizens of 
the Miskath Strand are dragged below to some infer- 
nal purpose. 

Offspring of Calamity. The aberrant creatures known 
as core spawn are a subterranean breed of heralds, 
servants, foot soldiers, and lieutenants of the Elder Evils, 
awakened in the depths by the cataclysmic actions of the 
Betrayer Gods and their minions. They often appear on 
the surface world in the wake of seismic events, such as 
that which created the bottomless Miskath Pit of Eastern 
Wynandir. Warlocks and cultists sometimes gather to- 
gether to hasten the arrival of core spawn to the Material 
Plane, focusing their arcane power on areas of natural 
seismic instability when the signs and stars are right. 


Core Spawn SEER 


CORE SPAWN CRAWLER 


The smallest and most numerous of the core spawn, 
these eyeless creatures scurry through the subterra- 
nean darkness with the help of their four irregular, 
gangly arms and hooked prehensile tails. Core spawn 
crawlers rarely travel alone, and a group of these agile 
predators is known as a vein of crawlers. Their clatter- 
ing taloned limbs warn of their presence as they scuttle 
through the shadow-haunted depths of the earth. 


CORE SPAWN EMISSARY 


These airborne predators serve as assassins and senti- 
nels for the core spawn. The terrible thrum of its insec- 
toid wings and a chittering of mandibles announces an 
emissary’s arrival. 

The core spawn emissary can expel clouds of crystal- 
line spores from tubes in its head. These spores act like 
a contact poison and can be deadly if inhaled. 


CORE SPAWN SEER 


Core spawn seers are humanoid arcanists corrupted by 
the eldritch power of the Elder Evils through blasphe- 
mous rites or accursed encounters. Ravaged by other- 
worldly radiation and disease, their bodies are covered 
in horrible protrusions of fluorescent crystals, which 
emit a psychedelic glow from beneath the tattered folds 
of their robes. 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


CORE SPAWN CRAWLER 


Small aberration, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 21 (6d6) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 


7 (-2), 14 2h OHO)" 9 ET) ee) 2) 


Skills Perception +5 

Damage Immunities psychic 

Condition Immunities blinded 

Senses blindsight 30 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
tremorsense 60 ft., passive Perception 15 

Languages understands Deep Speech but can’t speak 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


CORE SPAWN EMISSARY 


Medium aberration, neutral evil 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 102 (12d8 + 48) 
Speed 40 ft., fly 60 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
Wise Sey ISG SKE) (4) ST) 


Saving Throws Dex +5, Wis +4, Cha +2 

Skills Perception +4 

Damage Immunities psychic 

Senses blindsight 30 ft., tremorsense 60 ft., 
passive Perception 14 

Languages understands Deep Speech but can’t speak, 
telepathy 120 ft. 

Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


Magic Resistance. The emissary has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


Pack Tactics. The crawler has advantage on an attack roll 
against a creature if at least one of the crawler’s allies is within 
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The crawler makes four attacks: one with its bite, 
two with its claws, and one with its tail. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage, and the target must succeed 
ona DC 11 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened until 
the start of the crawler’s next turn. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) slashing damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 
5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The emissary makes three talons attacks. 


Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 14 (2d10 + 3) slashing damage. 


Alluring Thrum (Recharge 5-6). The emissary emits a dreadful 
yet alluring hum. Each creature within 20 feet of the emissary 
that can hear it and that isn’t an aberration must succeed on a 
DC 14 Constitution saving throw or be charmed for 1 minute. 
A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Crystal Spores (Recharge 6). A 15-foot-radius cloud of toxic 
crystalline spores extends out from the emissary. The spores 
spread around corners. Each creature in the area must succeed 
ona DC 14 Constitution saving throw or become poisoned. 
While poisoned in this way, a creature takes 11 (2d10) poison 
damage at the start of each of its turns. A creature can repeat 
the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the ef- 
fect on itself on a success. 


CORE SPAWN SEER 


Medium aberration, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 153 (18d8 +72) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14 (+2) A BA 226) a EA ‘16 (+3) 


Saving Throws Dex +6, Int +11, Wis +9, Cha +8 

Skills Perception +9 

Damage Immunities psychic 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened 

Senses blindsight 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft., 
passive Perception 19 

Languages Common, Deep Speech, Undercommon, 
telepathy 120 ft. 

Challenge 13 (10,000 XP) 


Earth Glide. The seer can traverse through nonmagical, un- 


worked earth and stone. While doing so, the seer doesn't dis- 


turb the material it moves through. 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


Magic Resistance. The seer has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The seer uses Fission Staff twice, Psychedelic Orb 
twice, or each one once. 


Fission Staff. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 9 (1d6 + 6) bludgeoning damage plus 18 (4d8) radi- 
ant damage, and the target is knocked prone. 


Psychedelic Orb. The seer hurls a glimmering orb at one crea- 
ture it can see within 120 of it. The target must succeed on a 
DC 19 Wisdom saving throw or take 27 (5d10) psychic damage 
and suffer a random condition until the start of the seer’s next 
turn. Roll a d6 for the condition: (1-2) blinded, (3—4) fright- 
ened, or (5-6) stunned. 


REACTIONS 


Fuse Damage. When the seer is hit by an attack, it takes only 
half of the triggering damage. The first time the seer hits with 
a melee attack on its next turn, the target takes an extra 1d6 
radiant damage. 


CORE SPAWN WORM 


This invertebrate horror has quivering, barbed 
tentacles set around its massive, toothy maw. 
The worm’s cracked and stony hide pulses with 
a dull orange glow, as if it might be composed of 
primordial lava perpetually on the verge of hard- 
ening into solid rock. 


CORE SPAWN WORM 


Gargantuan aberration, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 279 (18d20 + 90) 
Speed 60 ft., burrow 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
26B “S'(S3) 20145) GER A A8) 


Saving Throws Con +10, Wis +4 
Skills Perception +4 
Damage Vulnerabilities cold 
Damage Immunities fire, psychic 
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened 
Senses blindsight 30 ft., tremorsense 60 ft., 
passive Perception 14 
Languages understands Deep Speech but can’t speak 
Challenge 15 (13,000 XP) 


Daaa 


Aise 


EEY Na 7 


Illumination. The worm sheds dim light in a 20-foot radius. 


Radiant Mirror. Ifthe worm takes radiant damage, each crea- 
ture within 20 feet of it takes that damage as well. 


Tunneler. The worm can burrow through solid rock at half 
its burrowing speed and leaves a 10-foot-diameter tunnel 
in its wake. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The worm makes two attacks: one with its barbed 
tentacles and one with its bite. 


Barbed Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 10 ft., 
one creature. Hit: 25 (5d6 + 8) piercing damage, and the target 

is grappled (escape DC 18). Until this grapple ends, the tar- 

get is restrained. The tentacles can grapple only one creature = 
at atime. p 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 30 (5d8 + 8) piercing damage. If the target is a Large or 
smaller creature, it must succeed on a DC 18 Dexterity saving 
throw or be swallowed by the worm. A swallowed creature is 
blinded and restrained, has total cover against attacks and 
other effects outside the worm, and takes 21 (6d6) fire damage 
at the start of each of the worm’s turns. 

If the worm takes 30 damage or more ona single turn from 
a creature inside it, the worm must succeed on a DC 21 Con- 
stitution saving throw at the end of that turn or regurgitate all 
swallowed creatures, which fall prone in a space within 10 feet 
of the worm. If the worm dies, a swallowed creature is no lon- 
ger restrained by it and can escape from the corpse by using 20 
feet of movement, exiting prone. 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


cs 
I 


288 


FROST GIANT ZOMBIE 


An unknown Aeorian object of immense power 

and mystery was uncovered and brought to the 
Fortress of the Dead Jarl in Eiselcross to please the 
ruling frost giant, Conessa Berg. The object’s unstable 
nature unleashed a burst of corroding arcane power, 
ravaging the denizens of the stronghold with twisting 
necromantic energies, transforming them into mon- 
strous, rime-infused undead. These hulking brutes now 
wander the ruined landscape surrounding their cursed 
home, hunting and destroying all living things witha 
frightening ferocity. 

The battered, butchered, and frozen remains of 
would-be heroes litter battle sites where these undead 
giants have been encountered. Underestimating these 
towering horrors has been the folly of numerous expe- 
ditions to the northern reaches of Eiselcross, with only 
rumors often finding their way back as proof that these 
frigid monsters even exist. 

Hearts of Ice. Within the giants’ glacial hearts, glow- 
ing and unbeating, elemental energy stokes an unri- 
valed fury that pushes the frost giant zombies beyond 
the meandering speeds of standard zombies, making 
these behemoths far quicker than a studied mind would 
think a rotting giant could be. 

Numbing Aura. Beyond shaping the unsuspecting 
frost giants into undying horrors, the Aeorian artifact 
also infused and amplified the elemental nature of 
the wandering horde, so that the undead giants ex- 
ude a deadly aura of slowing cold, ensnaring their 
prey in icy mist that lessens their chance to escape. 

Undead. A frost giant zombie doesn’t require air, 
food, drink, or sleep. 


Frost GIANT ZOMBIE 


Huge undead, neutral evil 


Armor Class 15 (patchwork armor) 
Hit Points 138 (12d12 + 60) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
23 (66), 6-2). “20 AE A E) 
o 
Saving Throws Wis +2 
Damage Immunities cold, poison 
Condition Immunities poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8 
Languages understands Giant but can’t speak 
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 


e—a 


Numbing Aura. Any creature that starts its turn within 10 feet 
of the zombie must make a DC 17 Constitution saving throw. 
Unless the save succeeds, the creature can’t make more than 
one attack or take a bonus action on that turn. 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


Undead Fortitude. |f damage reduces the zombie to 0 hit 


points, it must make a Constitution saving throw with a DC © 
of 5 + the damage taken, unless the damage is fire, radiant, 
or from a critical hit. On a success, the zombie drops to 1 hit 
point instead. 


ACTIONS r 


Multiattack. The zombie makes two weapon attacks. 


Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 25 (3d12 + 6) slashing damage. 


Hurl Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, range 60/240 ft., 
one target. Hit: 28 (4d10 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 


Freezing Stare. The zombie targets one creature it can see 
within 60 feet of it. The target must succeed on a DC 17 Con- 
stitution saving throw or take 35 (10d6) cold damage and be 
paralyzed until the end of its next turn. 


Frost WORM 


Gargantuan monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 264 (16d20 + 96) 
Speed 40 ft., burrow 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
249) B E 22 Gin WKS) Sea S) 
——E—————————— ———— i ——e 

Saving Throws Con +12, Wis +3 

Damage Vulnerabilities fire 

Damage Immunities cold 

Senses blindsight 30 ft., tremorsense 60 ft., 
passive Perception 7 

Languages — 

Challenge 17 (18,000 XP) 


IRR nuaa 


Freezing Body. A creature that touches the worm or hits it 
with a melee attack while within 5 feet of it takes 10 (3d6) 
cold damage. 


Death Burst. When the worm dies, it explodes in a burst of 
frigid energy. Each creature within 60 feet of it must make a 
DC 20 Dexterity saving throw, taking 28 (8d6) cold damage 
on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 
Creatures inside the worm when it dies automatically fail this 
saving throw. 


Tunneler. The worm can burrow through solid rock at half its bur- 
rowing speed and leaves a 10-foot-diameter tunnel in its wake. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The worm makes two bite attacks, or uses its Trill 
and makes a bite attack. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 22 (3d8 + 9) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) cold damage. 
If the target is a Large or smaller creature, it must succeed on 
a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw or be swallowed by the worm. 
A swallowed creature is blinded and restrained, has total cover 
against attacks and other effects outside the worm, and takes 
10 (3d6) acid damage and 10 (3d6) cold damage at the start of 
each of the worm's turns. 

If the worm takes 30 damage or more ona single turn from 
a creature inside it, the worm must succeed on a DC 20 Con- 
stitution saving throw at the end of that turn or regurgitate all 
swallowed creatures, which fall prone in a space within 10 feet 
of the worm. 


Trill. The frost worm emits a haunting cry. Each creature within 
60 feet of the worm that can hear it must succeed on a DC 20 
Wisdom saving throw or be stunned for 1 minute. A creature 
can repeat the saving throw each time it takes damage and 

at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect onitselfona 
success. Once a creature successfully saves against this effect, 
or if this effect ends for it, that creature is immune to the Trill of 
all frost worms for the next 24 hours. Frost worms are immune 
to this effect. 


ÂE y 
FROST WORM 


Frost worms burrow through the snow, dirt, ice, and 
rock of Wildemount’s Biting North. These enormous 
monstrosities eagerly consume any living creature they 
can wrap their jaws around. 

A frost worm spends most of its time beneath the 
frozen ground, conserving energy while it waits for 
prey to pass overhead. Smart travelers can identify a 
frost worm’s hunting grounds by looking for recently 
iced-over tunnels. When the worm senses vibrations 
above, it bursts forth through dirt, ice, and snow. Those 
who escape its initial assault must still contend with 
the worm’s haunting trill—a hypnotizing call that stops 
creatures in their tracks to make them easy prey. 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


289 


go 


GEARKEEPER CONSTRUCT 


Rolling, deadly whirlwinds of metal plates and curving 
blades, these clockwork automatons were initially de- 
signed by tinkerers and mage engineers to be sentries 
and guardians in the deepest of vaults during the Age 

of Arcanum. While most of these majestic and deadly 
curiosities have fallen to rust and ruin, forgotten along 
with their long-destroyed and buried societies, some 
continue to patrol the tunnels and pathways of forgotten 
tombs and dungeons, following their original operations 
and directives to protect the contents of their domain. 

Resembling a rolling ball of shield-like plates, a gear- 
keeper construct can rapidly travel through corridors to 
seek intruders. Upon discovering an unrecognized crea- 
ture, the shields expand to reveal gaps where numerous 
metallic legs emerge for precision movement. Bladed 
appendages whir around the construct, threatening 
any unlucky delvers who wander too close, while heavy 
spears of steel can be fired from within the construct’s 
core, impaling unwanted guests. If overwhelmed, the 
construct can discharge a spray of heated, jagged metal 
fragments to subdue groups of intruders. 

Reverse engineering from the recovered shells and 
scraps of excavated gearkeeper constructs, a number of 
modern tinkerers have developed updated variations of 
these sentinels. Such designs are only recently seeing 
use in select prisons, or by wealthy collectors seeking to 
keep their collections safe. 

Constructed Nature. A gearkeeper construct doesn’t 
require air, food, drink, or sleep. 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


GEARKEEPER CONSTRUCT 


Large construct, unaligned 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 161 (17d10 + 68) 


Speed 60 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
20 (+5) 16(+3) 18 (+4) 3(-4) (+0) 1(-5) 


Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical attacks 

Damage Immunities fire, poison, psychic 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned 

Senses blindsight 120 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages understands the languages ofits creator but can’t 
speak 

Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) 


Immutable Form. The gearkeeper is immune to any spell or 
effect that would alter its form. 


Rapid Shifting. Opportunity attacks made against the gear- 
keeper have disadvantage. 


Whirling Blades. Any creature that starts its turn within 5 feet 
of the gearkeeper takes 4 (1d8) slashing damage. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The gearkeeper makes two Arm Blade attacks, or 
one Arm Blade attack and one Spear Launcher attack. 


Arm Blade. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 18 (3d8 + 5) slashing damage. 


Spear Launcher. Ranged Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, range 90 ft., 
one target. Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) piercing damage, and the target is 
knocked prone. 


Shrapnel Blast (Recharge 6). The gearkeeper jettisons a spray 
of jagged metal in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in the area 
must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 21 (6d6) 


piercing damage on a failed save, or half as much damage ona 
successful one. 


GLOOMSTALKER 


A gloomstalker is a terrifying, winged predator resem- 
bling a wyvern composed of twisting shadows, with 
glowing eyes and dagger-like teeth. 

Shadows of Doom. Hailing from the cursed lands 
of the Shadowfell, these nightmarish creatures hunt 
the barrens of that desolate plane, freezing prey in 
their tracks with their woeful shrieks before pulling 
them into the skies with their talons to be ripped apart 
and devoured. 

Night Hunters. A gloomstalker’s proclivity for dark- 
ness makes it extremely dangerous at night or in heavily 
shaded places where it can blend in with their shadowed 
surroundings, but more dangerous than the lone hunter 
is a pack of gloomstalkers. Small packs of three to six 
are common. Larger packs of ten or more, called fren- 
zies, are often harbingers of a greater evil yet to come. 


GLOOMSTALKER 


Large monstrosity, neutral evil 


ArmorClass 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 90 (12d10 + 24) 
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

22 (+6) 1e 14(+2) 5 (-3) 17 (+3) 14 (42) 
a 
Saving Throws Str +9, Dex +6 
Skills Athletics +9, Perception +6, Intimidation +5, Stealth +6 
Damage Vulnerabilities radiant 
Senses darkvision 240 ft., passive Perception 16 
Languages understands Common but can’t speak 
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


EEE 


Shadowstep. As a bonus action, the gloomstalker can teleport 
up to 40 feet to an unoccupied space it can see. 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the gloomstalker has 
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom (Percep- 
tion) checks that rely on sight. 


Terror Mounts. Gloomstalkers were employed by 
arcanists and the followers of the Betrayer Gods as 
mounts in the ancient battles of the Calamity. A respect- 
able number of gloomstalkers, now free of their bur- 
den, still hold hidden lairs scattered across the wastes 
of Xhorhas. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The gloomstalker makes two attacks: one with its 
bite and one with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) 
necrotic damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage plus 7 (2d6) 
necrotic damage. 


Snatch. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
Medium or smaller creature. Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing dam- 
age plus 7 (2d6) necrotic damage, and the target is grappled 
(escape DC 17). While grappled in this way, the target is 
restrained. 


Shriek (Recharge 6). The gloomstalker emits a terrible shriek. 
Each enemy within 60 feet of the gloomstalker that can hear it 
must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or be para- 
lyzed until the end of the enemy’s next turn. 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


Nn 


HORIZONBACK TORTOISE 


Desolate badlands and soggy marshes are home to the 
ancient and massive horizonback tortoises of Eastern 
Wynandir. Nearly fifty feet from nose to tail, and with 
a habit of remaining stationary for long periods, a hori- 


zonback tortoise is easy to mistake for a low hill at a dis- 


tance. But when these impressive creatures rise to be- 


gin their march, the sight inspires fear and awe in equal 


parts. An omnivore of incredible size, these scavengers 


HORIZONBACK TORTOISE 


Gargantuan monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor), 22 while in its shell 
Hit Points 227 (13d20 + 91) 


Speed 20 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
2B sa Se A THO) 3) 


Á 
Saving Throws Str +12, Con +10 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages understands Goblin but can’t speak 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


a a 


Amphibious. The tortoise can breathe air and water. 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


prefer to feed on dead vegetation, but make use of what- 
ever edible matter they come across. 

Friend to the Wastefolk. Referred to as “kinespaji” by 
the goblins of the east, these majestic and slow-moving 
beasts have long enjoyed a symbiotic relationship with 
the denizens of Xhorhas. Horizonback tortoises provide 
mobile homesteads and can act as siege weapons in 
times of crisis. 


Massive Frame. The tortoise can carry up to 20,000 pounds of 
weight atop its shell, but moves at half speed if the weight ex- 
ceeds 10,000 pounds. Medium or smaller creatures can move 
underneath the tortoise while it’s not prone. 

Any creature under the tortoise when it falls prone is grap- 
pled (escape DC 18). Until the grapple ends, the creature is 
prone and restrained. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 


Hit: 28 (3d12 + 9) bludgeoning damage. 


Shell Defense (Recharge 4-6). The tortoise withdraws into 

its shell, falls prone, and gains a +5 bonus to AC. While the 
tortoise is in its shell, its speed is O and can’t increase. The 
tortoise can emerge from its shell as an action, whereupon it is 
no longer prone. 


HUSK ZOMBIE 


The wastes of Eastern Wynandir retain many curses 
and corruptions from the time of the Calamity, the worst 
of which pervert the sanctity of death. One such curse 
manifests as a terrible roving fog that draws the corpses 
of the fallen to rise as husk zombies—resilient undead 
of frightening speed and bloodlust. As well, some of the 
more heinous fiends that walk these scarred lands feed 
on the life force of the living, leaving these terrible un- 
dead in their wake. 
Psychotic Frenzy. Unlike typical zombies, which 
are ponderous and lumbering stalkers, a husk zom- 
bie races quickly toward its prey, eager to tear flesh 
from bone. Each kill it makes drives it into a fighting 
frenzy, during which it howls with delight. It doesn’t 
feed on those it kills, but rather leaves the corpses to 
rot. Humanoids killed by a husk zombie become husk 
zombies themselves, rising quickly to join their slayer in 
merry carnage. 
Undead. A husk zombie doesn’t require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 
_ EO 
VARIANT: Husk ZOMBIE BURSTERS 
Some husk zombies become bloated with disease and bile, 
their frenzied state pushing them to rush other living crea- 
tures, explode, and spread their horrid infection. A husk 
zombie burster has the following additional action option: 


Burst. The zombie explodes and is destroyed. Each crea- 
ture within 5 feet of it must make a DC 12 Constitution 
saving throw, taking 14 (4d6) poison damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. A 
humanoid creature killed by this damage rises as a husk 
zombie after 1 minute. 


RR 


a 


HUSK ZOMBIE 


Medium undead, neutral evil 


Armor Class 10 
Hit Points 37 (5d8 + 15) 


Speed 35 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) Oo 16(+3) 3(-4) 6(-2) 5E) 


ell 

Saving Throws Con +5, Wis +0 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8 

Languages understands the languages it knew in life but can’t 
speak 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


aaa!!! 


Curse of the Husk. A humanoid slain by a melee attack from the 
zombie revives as a husk zombie on its next turn. 


Undead Fortitude. If damage reduces the zombie to 0 hit 
points, it must make a Constitution saving throw with a DC 
of 5 + the damage taken, unless the damage is radiant or 
from a critical hit. On a success, the zombie drops to 1 hit 
point instead. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The zombie makes two claw attacks. For each of 
these attacks that reduces a creature to 0 hit points, the zombie 
can make an additional claw attack. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) slashing damage. 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


293 


294 


MERROW SHALLOWPRIEST 


Some of the many merrow that dwell in the watery 
shadows of the Menagerie Coast learn to harness the 
magical aspects of the elements. Often working as 
guides leading merrow hunting parties, some of these 
shallowpriests rise to become powerful leaders, inspir- 
ing their clans to terrorize coastal communities and 
passing ships. 

Rumors speak of underground waterways and lakes 
carved into the rock beneath Wildemount, where shal- 
lowpriests hold court over huge subterranean commu- 
nities of merrow. These evil creatures are thought to 
seek the means of flooding the surface world, allowing 
them to steal away who and what they will to the dark 
waters below. 

While most shallowpriests do not bind themselves 
in the service of a specific deity, some are drawn to the 
worship of entities that reign over regions of the Elemen- 
tal Plane of Water, hoping to find means of expanding 
their dominion into the seas of Exandria. These merrow 
often spearhead the construction of intricate shrines 
and temples along the bottom of the ocean, preparing 
a sacred space for planar doorways to their master’s 
realm to be opened and maintained. 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


atta 


MERROW SHALLOWPRIEST 


Large monstrosity, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 75 (10d10 + 20) 
Speed 10 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
Bea meai EEA ME aL, e) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages Abyssal, Aquan 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Amphibious. The merrow can breathe air and water. 


Spellcasting. The merrow is a 6th-level spellcaster. Its spell- 
casting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 13, +5 to hit with spell 
attacks). The merrow has the following druid spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): druidcraft, minor illusion, shocking grasp 

Ist level (4 slots): cure wounds, fog cloud, thunderwave 

2nd level (3 slots): hold person, mirror image, misty step 

3rd level (3 slots): dispel magic, lightning bolt (see “Actions” 
below), sleet storm 


ACTIONS 


Harpoon. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: + 6 to hit, reach 5 ft. 
or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing dam- 
age. If the target is a Medium or smaller creature, the merrow 
can pull it 10 feet closer. 


Lightning Bolt (3rd-Level Spell; Requires a Spell Slot). The mer- 
row unleashes a stroke of lightning in a line 100 feet long and 5 
feet wide. Each creature in the line must make a DC 13 Dexter- 
ity saving throw, taking 28 (8d6) lightning damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


MOORBOUNDERS 


One of the many predators to stalk the marshlands and 
muddy foothills of Xhorhas, moorbounders are known 
as dangerous killers to those who try to avoid them on 
their travels—and as prized mounts for those willing 

to capture and train them. Though the process of do- 
mesticating a moorbounder is fraught with peril, these 
creatures can become favored hunting companions and 
powerful war mounts. 

Natural Hunters. Moorbounders hunt with elongated 
tusks and retractable claws. With a vague resemblance 
to large hunting cats, their muscular bodies are built 
for combat, granting them incredible prowess at leap- 
ing and a running speed that makes them dominant 
carnivores. 

Bristled Moorbounders. A weird and deadly offshoot 
of the moorbounder has rows of long, bladelike bristles 
covering its sleek body. The creature weaponizes these 
blades, using them to slash nearby creatures to ribbons. 
However, these blades make the bristled moorbounder 
less suitable as a mount. 


MOORBOUNDER 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 30 (4d10 + 8) 


Speed 70 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 2 (-4) 13 (+1) 5 (-3) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Standing Leap. The moorbounder’s long jump is up to 40 
feet and its high jump is up to 20 feet, with or without a run- 
ning start. 


ACTIONS 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 14 (4d4 + 4) slashing damage. 


BRISTLED MOORBOUNDER 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 52 (7d10 + 14) 


Speed 70 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 2 (-4) 13 (+1) 5. (=3) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


rm eee 


Bladed Hide. At the start of each of its turns, the moorbounder 
deals 5 (2d4) piercing damage to any creature grappling it. 


Standing Leap. The moorbounder’s long jump is up to 40 
feet and its high jump is up to 20 feet, with or without a run- 
ning start. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The moorbounder makes two attacks: one with its 
blades and one with its claws. 


Blades. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 14 (4d4 + 4) slashing damage. 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


296 


NERGALIID (DEVIL TOAD) 


Corpulent, scaled, and utterly repulsive, these vicious 
devils stalk the dark edges of society away from prying 
eyes, subsisting on the life force of unsuspecting human- 
oids. Creatures that die to the nergaliid’s feeding leave a 
corrupted undead corpse behind known as a husk zom- 
bie (presented earlier in this chapter). 

The nergaliid favors feeding on the life force of sleep- 
ing humanoids, feasting on the same prey nightly—so 
long as its victim remains unaware. This ensures a last- 
ing source of nourishment, with the victim beset by ter- 
rible nightmares as long as the feeding continues. When 
a nergaliid is discovered, it tries to strike a deal with the 
one who uncovered it. It might offer material wealth in 
exchange for freedom and silence. Only when an accord 
seems unlikely does the nergaliid attack. 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


NERGALIID 
Large fiend (devil), lawful evil 


Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 42 (4d10 + 20) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 12 (41) -20(+5) 2 100). 12 (+1) 


Skills Deception +5, Perception +2, Stealth +5 
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing 


from nonmagical attacks that aren’t silvered 


Damage Immunities fire, poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages Common, Infernal 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


a a 


Shadow Stealth. While in dim light or darkness, the nergaliid 
can take the Hide action as a bonus action. 


Standing Leap. The nergaliid’s long jump is up to 30 feet and 
its high jump is up to 20 feet, with or without a running start. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage, and the target must succeed 
on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or become poisoned for 
1 minute. The poisoned creature can repeat the saving throw 
at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on 

a success. 


Tongue Lash. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 20 ft., one 
target. Hit: 10 (1d12 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


Siphon Life (Recharge 4-6). The nergaliid magically draws the 
life from a humanoid it can see within 40 feet of it. The target 
must make a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw. An incapacitated 
target fails the save automatically. On a failed save, the creature 
takes 10 (3d6) psychic damage, and the nergaliid gains tem- 
porary hit points equal to the damage taken. On a successful 
save, the target takes half as much damage, and the nergaliid 
doesn’t gain temporary hit points. If this damage kills the tar- 
get, its body rises at the end of the nergaliid’s current turn as a 
husk zombie (see earlier in this chapter). 


SAHUAGIN WARLOCK 
OF UK’OTOA 


The slumbering leviathan Uk’otoa preys on the fears 
and ambitions of humanoids that brave the depths of the 
Lucidian Ocean. Countless communities of sahuagin 
inhabit uncharted pockets of water along the Menagerie 
Coast, and the most ambitious among them often hear 
the call of the leviathan in their dreams, urging them 
to take his power and use it to achieve their blood- 
soaked dreams. 

Sahuagin who answer the call of Uk’otoa tend to 
have one ambition in common: vengeance against 
the land dwellers of the Clovis Concord for daring 
to sail oceans that do not belong to them. As these 
devotees receive dark boons from their leviathan 
lord, other sahuagin begin to gather to their side, 
drawn to their displays of power and seeking their 
own pathway to power. Over time, these warlocks 
eventually become empty husks, mere recepta- 
cles for Uk’otoa’s power, and puppets that the 
slumbering leviathan can control as he pleases. 


tt 


VARIANT: ROD OF RETRIBUTION 


Sahuagin warlocks of Uk’otoa who have exceptional po- 
tential in the eyes of the leviathan lord are granted a rod of 
retribution (see chapter 6) in addition to Uk’otoa’s typical 
blessing, the Sword of Fathoms. A sahuagin warlock of 
Uk’otoa holding this rod gains the following reaction: 


Retribution (3/Day). When a creature the warlock can see 
within 60 feet of it damages the warlock, the creature must 
make a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw, taking 11 (2d10) 
lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much damage 
on a successful one. 


SAHUAGIN WARLOCK OF UK’OTOA 


Medium humanoid (sahuagin), neutral evil 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 22 (5d8) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14 (+2) 10(+0) 11 (+0) 8 (-1) 8 (-1) 16 (+3) 
eee 
Skills Arcana +1, Persuasion +5 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 9 
Languages Common, Sahuagin 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


SR eee 


Blood Frenzy. The warlock has advantage on melee attack rolls 
against any creature that doesn’t have all its hit points. 


Innate Spellcasting. The warlock’s innate spellcasting ability 
is Charisma (spell save DC 13, +5 to hit with spell attacks). It 
can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material 
components: 


At will: eldritch blast (see “Actions” below), minor illusion 
1/day each: armor of Agathys, arms of Hadar, counterspell, crown 
of madness, invisibility, hunger of Hadar 


ter, but it needs to be submerged at least once every 4 hours to 
avoid suffocating. 


Shark Telepathy. The warlock can magically command any 
shark within 120 feet of it, using a limited telepathy. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The warlock makes two attacks: one with its bite 
and one with its Sword of Fathoms. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


Sword of Fathoms. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 7 (1d10 + 2) slashing damage, and if the target 
is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving 
throw or begin choking. The choking creature is incapacitated 
until the end of its next turn, when the effect ends on it. 


Eldritch Blast (Cantrip). Ranged Spell Attack: +5 to hit, range 
120 ft., one creature. Hit: 5 (1d10) force damage. 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


Limited Amphibiousness. The warlock can breathe air and wa- 


98 


SEA FURY 


In times of great danger, sea hags form massive covens 
to channel powerful magic against outside threats. But 
when the threat is vanquished, these covens often de- 
stroy themselves from within. One sea hag grows more 
powerful than the others, killing its kin one by one and 
siphoning their magical power as it does so. 

Driven to madness by the power it claims—and by the 
loneliness that is the cost of its killing spree—the hag 
becomes a sea fury, which hoards treasure, spreads 
rumors, and does everything within its power to lure 
sailors and explorers to its lair. By doing so, it hopes 
to break its loneliness for a time—and then to destroy 
its new playthings when they have outlived their 
usefulness. 


A SEA Fury’s LAIR 


A sea fury lurks in the caverns where its coven once 
dwelled, decorating the walls with the bones of its slain 
kin, as well as baubles stolen from sunken wrecks. 

A sea fury encountered in its lair has a challenge rat- 
ing of 14 (11,500 XP). 


LAIR ACTIONS 

On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the sea 
fury can take a lair action to cause one of the follow- 
ing magical effects, but can’t use the same effect two 
rounds in a row: 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


« Caverns, tunnels, and pools of water within 120 feet of 
the sea fury become foggy or murky, to the extent that 
the area becomes heavily obscured. 

- The sea fury conjures a 15-foot cube of water that fills 
an unoccupied space it can see within 30 feet of it, 
then moves the water in a straight line up to 60 feet, 
after which the water disperses. Any creature that 
comes into contact with the rushing wave must suc- 
ceed on a DC 16 Strength saving throw or be knocked 
prone by it and pushed 15 feet along its course. 

- The sea fury calls forth the spirit of a dead sailor or 
sea hag that met its end in the lair. This spirit has the 
statistics of a specter and lasts until the sea fury uses 
another lair action. The specter appears in an unoccu- 
pied space within 30 feet of the sea fury and obeys the 
sea fury’s commands. 


REGIONAL EFFECTS 
The region containing a sea fury’s lair is warped by the 
sea fury’s magic, which creates the following effects: 


e Sea water within 5 miles of the lair becomes coarse 
and choppy, as if whipped by an unseen wind. 

e Sea grass within 1 mile of the lair is imbued with a 
foul mockery of life, grasping ineffectually at any crea- 
ture that passes within 5 feet of it. 

¢ Ordinary crabs and octopi within 1 mile of the lair 
growin size to become giant crabs and giant octopi, 
respectively. These creatures serve the sea fury as 
spies and guards. 


SEA FuRY 


Medium fey, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 105 (14d8 + 42) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 50 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4) 152) 163) 12(41) 12(41) 18 (+4) 
Skills Deception +8, Insight +5, Perception +5, Stealth +6 
Damage Immunities cold, fire, poison; bludgeoning, piercing, 
and slashing from nonmagical attacks that aren’t silvered 
Condition Immunities paralyzed, poisoned 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15 
Languages Aquan, Common, Giant 
Challenge 12 (8,400 XP) 
TENES TEE ISON SO EEEE e e a M M M 


Amphibious. The sea fury can breathe air and water. 


Innate Spellcasting. The sea fury’s innate spellcasting ability 
is Charisma (spell save DC 16, +8 to hit with spell attacks). It 
can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material 
components: 


At will: witch bolt 
1/day each: bestow curse, fear, thunderwave 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). \f the sea fury fails a saving 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


Magic Resistance. The sea fury has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The sea fury makes two attacks with its claws. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) slashing damage. 


Death Glare. The sea fury targets one frightened creature it can 
see within 30 feet of it. The target must succeed on a DC 16 
Wisdom saving throw or drop to 0 hit points. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The sea fury can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The sea 
fury regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


As Water. The sea fury transforms into a wave of foaming 
seawater, along with whatever it is wearing or carrying, and 
moves up to its speed without provoking opportunity at- 
tacks. While in this form, it can’t be grappled or restrained. It 
reverts to its true form at the end of this movement. 

Fearsome Apparition (Costs 2 Actions). The sea fury conjures 
an apparition of one of its dead sisters, which appears in an 
unoccupied space the sea fury can see within 30 feet of it. 
Enemies of the sea fury that can see the apparition must suc- 
ceed on a DC 16 Wisdom saving throw or be frightened of it 
until it vanishes at the end of the sea fury’s next turn. 

Conjure Snakes (Costs 3 Actions). The sea fury disgorges a 
swarm of poisonous snakes, which occupies the same space 
as the sea fury, acts on its own initiative count, and attacks 

_as directed by the sea fury. The sea fury can control up to 
three of these swarms at a time. 


SHADOWGHAST 


A shadowghast is an undead 
assassin. Leaping out from the 
shadows and trailing tendrils of 
darkness, it closes in onits prey 
with nary a sound, then tears into 
a victim with its paralyzing claws 
and furious bite. 


SHADOWGHAST 


Medium undead, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 15 
Hit Points 49 (9d8 + 9) 


Speed 35 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14 (+2) 20 (45) 12 (+1) AE «11 Coe 8 (-1) 


EEE” 
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +8 

Damage Resistances necrotic 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 

Languages — 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 
EE” 


Stench. Any creature that starts its turn within 5 feet of the 
shadowghast must succeed on a DC 12 Constitution saving 
throw or be poisoned until the start of its next turn. On a suc- 
cessful saving throw, the creature is immune to this Stench 
for 24 hours. 


Shadow Stealth. While in dim light or darkness, the shadow- 
ghast can take the Hide action as a bonus action. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The shadowghast makes two attacks: one with its 
bite and one with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 11 (2d8 + 2) slashing damage plus 5 (1d10) 
necrotic damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage. If the target is a creature 
other than an undead, it must succeed on a DC 12 Constitution 
saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. The target can re- 
peat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the 
effect on itself on a success. 

SSS ee 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


SWAVAIN BASILISK 


Pearl divers and seafloor scavengers sometimes tell 
tales of mysterious ocean gardens filled with statues 

of sea creatures and sailors—the underwater grottoes 
of the deadly Swavain basilisk. Though named for the 
Swavain Islands where they are most commonly found, 
these dangerous hunters have been known to wander 
inland waterways, and have even been spotted in subter- 
ranean sewer systems. 

Death’s Slimy Embrace. Physically dissimilar to 
its land-based cousins, the Swavain basilisk is a thin, 
elongated sea serpent that commonly grows to lengths 
of twenty-five feet. Its sinuous body lets it move rap- 
idly through the water and ensnare prey with equal 
ease. Unlike the deadly gaze of its land-based cousin, 
the Swavain basilisk secretes a thick oil that can turn 
other creatures to stone. Petrified prey sinks to the 
ocean floor, where the basilisk feeds at its leisure, the 
devoured bits returning to flesh once consumed. If pro- 
cessed properly under the supervision of an experienced 
alchemist, the basilisk’s oil can be used to reverse the 
petrification effects it causes. 

Shipwreck Steward. Swavain basilisks occasionally 
hunt ashore under cover of night, but are more often 
drawn to hunt and nest near the sites of shipwrecks. 
When salvage parties and treasure hunters seek out 
those wrecks for profit, the Swavain basilisk adds more 
drowned stone to its collection. 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


SWAVAIN BASILISK 


Huge monstrosity, unaligned 


| Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Í Hit Points 85 (10d12 + 20) 

| Speed 15 ft., swim 40 ft. 

| 
1 STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
E E E E E A 


o a M M 


< Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 
Languages — 
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


e 
Amphibious. The basilisk can breathe air and water. 


Petrifying Secretions. A creature must make a DC 13 Consti- 
tution saving throw if it hits the basilisk with a weapon attack 
while within 5 feet of it or if it starts its turn grappled by the 
basilisk. Unless the save succeeds, the creature magically be- 
gins to turn to stone and is restrained, and it must repeat the 
saving throw at the end of its next turn. On a successful save, 
the effect ends. On a failure, the creature is petrified. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The basilisk makes two attacks: one with its bite 
and one with its tail. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 13 (3d6 + 3) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) 
poison damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
Hit: 14 (2d10 + 3) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a Large 
or smaller creature, it is grappled (escape DC 12). 
ca E a 


UDAAK 


Known commonly as the brutes of Xhorhas, 
these enormous creatures resemble an im- 
mense, demonic cross between ox and gorilla. 
Udaaks are solitary wanderers, found most 
commonly along the edges of settled lands in 
the barrens of Eastern Wynandir. Though they 
often scavenge for food, a hungry udaak will 
attack almost any prey, its four sets of red eyes 
and its tangle of teeth and tusks striking fear 
into the heart of any creature. 

Living Siege Engine. Originally brought to 
Exandria from the Abyss, udaaks lost their 
connection to that realm after the Divergence 
and have roamed the world freely ever since. 
In recent years, the warmasters of the Kryn 
Dynasty have developed arcane collars that 
can keep an udaak under control, and they 
have begun using these dread creatures in the 
war against the Dwendalian Empire. 


UDAAK 


Gargantuan fiend, neutral evil 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 165 (10420 + 60) 
Speed 50 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
26 (+8) 14 (+2) 22(+6) 3(-4) 11 (40) 10 (+0) 


Saving Throws Str +13, Con +11 

Damage Vulnerabilities thunder 

Damage Immunities poison; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Condition Immunities frightened, grappled, poisoned, 
restrained 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages — 

Challenge 16 (15,000 XP) 


peaa 


Charge. If the udaak moves at least 20 feet straight toward a 
target and then hits it with a slam attack on the same turn, 
the target takes an extra 27 (6d8) bludgeoning damage. If the 
target is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 21 Strength sav- 
ing throw or be pushed up to 20 feet away from the udaak and 
knocked prone. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The udaak makes three attacks: one with its bite 
and two with its slam. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 21 (2d12 + 8) piercing damage, and the target is grap- 
pled (escape DC 21). Until this grapple ends, the target is 
restrained, and the udaak can’t bite another target. 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 21 (3d8 + 8) bludgeoning damage. 


Swallow. The udaak makes one bite attack against a Large or 
smaller target it is grappling. If the attack hits, the target is 
also swallowed, and the grapple ends. A swallowed creature is 
blinded and restrained, it has total cover against attacks and 
other effects outside the udaak, and it takes 21 (6d6) acid dam- 
age at the start of each of the udaak’s turns. 

If the udaak takes 30 damage or more on a single turn from 
a creature inside it, the udaak must succeed on a DC 21 Con- 
stitution saving throw at the end of that turn or regurgitate all 
swallowed creatures, which fall prone in a space within 10 feet 
of the udaak. If the udaak dies, a swallowed creature is no lon- 
ger restrained by it and can escape from the corpse by using 20 
feet of movement, exiting prone. 


CHAPTER 7 | WILDEMOUNT BESTIARY 


Siege Monster. The udaak deals double damage to objects and 
structures. 


301 


oo 


N 


GLOSSARY 


Aeor was a flying city of mages who sought to destroy 
the gods before they themselves were destroyed 
during the Calamity. Aeor crashed into Eiselcross. 

Age of Arcanum is the previous age before the Calamity 
and the Divergence, a period known for its widespread 
use of magic and dangerous conflicts between pros- 
perous mortal nations and the gods. 

All-Hammer is the alternative title for the god Moradin. 

Arch Heart is the alternative title for the god Corellon. 

Asmodeus is the Betrayer God of domination. 

Assembly refers to the Cerberus Assembly. 

Augen Trust is the spy network of the Dwendalian 
Empire, used to expose those responsible for creating 
unrest and sowing rebellion within the empire. 

Aurora Watch is the trained guard and military arm of 
the Kryn Dynasty. 

Avandra is the god of luck, freedom, and change. 

Bahamut is the god of justice, protection, and honor. 

Bane is the Betrayer God of conquest and tyranny. 

Betrayer Gods are the deities that turned to the dark, 
evil side of creation. 

Biting North is the northern, arctic region of Wilde- 
mount that is comprised of the Greying Wildlands and 
Eiselcross. 

Blightshore is the far-eastern shore of Eastern Wyn- 
andir once known as the Miskath Strand, scarred 
with deep corruption from the experiments of the 
Betrayer Gods. 

Blood Hunters are mistrusted monster hunters that 
live outside society, using blood magic to stalk 
their quarries. 

Bright Queen Leylas Kryn is the head of Den Kryn 
and heralded as the leader of the Kryn Dynasty 
of Xhorhas. 

Calamity is the name given for the collective wars and 
ensuing cataclysms that occurred at the end of the 
Age of Arcanum, which nearly destroyed all life and 
civilization across Exandria. 

Cerberus Assembly is a collection of eight powerful 
mages who work within the Dwendalian Empire un- 
der King Bertrand Dwendal, but often pursue their 
own interests. 

Change Bringer is the alternate title for the 
god Avandra. 

Children of Malice is a faction of followers of Lolth who 
are driven to undermine and ruin the Kryn Dynasty 
for their turning from the Spider Queen. 

Claret Orders is a loose faction of Blood Hunter 
organizations. 

Clovis Concord is the governing body of the Menagerie 
Coast, comprised of a union between the marquises 
who independently rule the major coastal cities. 

Cobalt Soul refers to the Library of the Cobalt Soul. 

Concord (Concordian) refers to the Clovis Concord 
(and members of that particular faction). 

Consecution is the Kryn ritual of binding a soul to a 
Luxon beacon, enabling the soul to be reborn in a new 
body when its previous body dies. 


GLOSSARY 


Corellon is the god of spring, beauty, and the art. 

Crown refers to the rulership of King Bertrand Dwen- 
dal and the Dwendalian Empire. 

Crownsguard are the trained guards who patrol the 
Dwendalian Empire and are often assigned to enforce 
laws in particular locations and cities. 

Dawn Father is the alternative title for the god Pelor. 

Diarchy of Uthodurn is a society of elves and dwarves 
in the Flotket Alps of the Greying Wildlands. 

Divergence is the term used to describe the moment 
that Prime Gods, after banishing the Betrayer Gods 
from Exandria following the Calamity, left Exandria 
and manifested the Divine Gate. 

Divine Gate is the boundary established by the Prime 
Gods between Exandria and the Outer Planes, 
preventing all major divinity from setting foot on 
the world. 

Draconblood are the former ruling class of dragonborn 
in Draconia before its fall, known for their tailed bod- 
ies and guile. 

Draconia was the once majestic dragonborn nation that 
now lays in ruins within the Dreemoth Ravine. 

Dranassar were tall, beautiful humanoids whom Bane 
transformed into goblins, hobgoblins, and bugbears to 
create his armies. 

Dunamancy is the arcane study and mastering of duna- 
mis and dunamis-related magic. 

Dunamis is the mysterious arcane energy of potential, 
probability, and gravity studied and harnessed by 
spellcasters of the Kryn Dynasty. 

Dwendalian Empire refers to the Dwendalian Empire 
that rules over Western Wynandir. 

Dynasty refers to the Kryn Dynasty of Xhorhas. 

Eastern Wynandir is the eastern region of Wildemount, 
which includes Xhorhas and the Miskath Strand 
(Blightshore). 

Eiselcross is the cluster of icy islands that makes up the 
northern region of the Biting North. 

Elder Evils are ancient, esoteric entities of maddening 
malevolence that exist beyond the fringes of Exandria, 
their will subtly corrupting the minds and dreams 
of mortals. 

Empire refers to the Dwendalian Empire. 

Empire Gods refers to the members of the Prime 
Deities pantheon that remain approved for worship 
within the Dwendalian Empire. This includes Erathis, 
Bahamut, Moradin, Pelor, loun, and the Raven Queen. 

Erathis is the god of law, order, and civilization. 

Everlight is the alternative title for the god Raei. 

Exandria is the name of the world that includes the con- 
tinent of Wildemount. It exists on the Material Plane. 

Expositors are highly trained spies and infiltrators 
working for the Cobalt Soul. 

Ghor Dranas was the central city of the Betrayer Gods 
and their armies. Destroyed in the Calamity, it has 
been rebuilt as the city of Rosohna. 

Glassblades are the trained soldiers and rangers that 
serve the Diarchy of Uthodurn. 


Golden Grin is an Exandria-wide secret society that 
works to destroy political corruption, check the abuse 
of power, and inspire everyone to rise. 

Greying Wildlands is the southern region of the 
Biting North. 

Gruumsh is the Betrayer God of savagery and slaughter. 

Ioun is the god of knowledge, philosophy, and lore. 

Julous Dominion was the society that resisted Dwen- 
dalian expansion in the mid-500’s PD before being 
conquered and absorbed into the empire. 

Ki’Nau are the indigenous island people who rees- 
tablished society along the Menagerie Coast after 
the Calamity. 

King generally refers to King Bertrand Dwendal. 

King Bertrand Dwendal is the current ruler of the 
Dwendalian Empire and Western Wynandir. 

Knowing Mentor is the alternative title for the god Ioun. 

Kord is the god of strength, contests, and storms. 

Kryn refers to the Kryn Dynasty faction of Xhorhasian 
citizens and soldiers under its banner. 

Kryn Dynasty is the faction of largely drow and waste- 
folk that rules most of Xhorhas. 

Law Bearer is the alternative title for the god Erathis. 

Lolth is the Betrayer God of deceit and spiders. 

Library of the Cobalt Soul is a network of acolytes 
and scholars that believe in the gathering and open 
sharing of information and lore, many of whom 
worship Ioun. 

Luxon is a pre-pantheon entity of light that is worshiped 
by the Kryn Dynasty. 

Melora is the god of wilderness and nature. 

Marquet is the distant, largely arid continent far to the 
southwest of Wildemount. 

Marquis is generally the title of a city leader within the 
Clovis Concord. 

Marquessian refers to the language of Marquet, archi- 
tecture and crafts from Marquet, or denizens who 
descend from citizens of Marquet. 

Miskath Strand is the far-eastern shore of Eastern 
Wynandir, scarred with deep corruption from the 
experiments of the Betrayer Gods. This region is now 
known as Blightshore. 

Molaesmyr is the ruined and cursed elven city that once 
ruled over the Greying Wildlands from within the 
forest now called the Savalirwood. 

Moon Weaver is the alternative title for the 
god Sehanine. 

Moradin is the god of craft and creation. 

Myriad are a scattered but powerful network of crimi- 
nals and thieves throughout Wildemount. 

PD denotes a year that has occurred “Post-Divergence.” 
For example, the Chroma Conclave’s attack on 
Tal’Dorei occurred in 815 PD. 

Pelor is the god of the sun, summer, and the harvest. 

Platinum Dragon is the alternative title for the 
god Bahamut. 

Prime Deities are the gods who turn to the more 
orderly, good, and balanced view of creation. 


Quajath is a massive worm creature of powerful will 
sealed within the ice of Eiselcross. 

Raei is the god of atonement and compassion. 

Raven Queen is the god of winter, fate, and the transi- 
tion of death. 

Ravenites are the surviving dragonborn previously held 
as a lower, slave-class under the Draconbloods of 
Draconia before its fall, known for their tailless bodies 
and hardy physique. 

Revelry is the faction and banner that most operating 
pirates across the Menagerie Coast are united under. 

Righteous Brand is the military army of the Dwenda- 
lian Empire. 

Scars of Scale and Tooth is a new faction of Ravenites 
and survivors of the destruction of Draconia, centered 
around the city of Xarzith Kitril. 

Sehanine is the god of moonlight, illusions, and 
misdirection. 

Starosta is the title of a settlement leader within the 
Dwendalian Empire. 

Storm Lord is the alternative title for the god Kord. 

Tal’Dorei is a continent southwest of Wildemount, 
across the Lucidian Ocean. 

Taskhands are high-ranking military leaders within 
the Kryn Dynasty, sometimes assigned to preside as 
judges in times of conflict. 

Tharizdun is the Betrayer God of madness and 
destruction. 

Tiamat is the Betrayer God of greed, envy, and wealth. 

Torog is the Betrayer God of imprisonment, torture, and 
enslavement. 

Tribes is a term often referring to the Tribes of 
Shadycreek Run. 

Tribes of Shadycreek Run is a collection of crime fami- 
lies that runs through the Dwendalian Empire and the 
Greying Wildlands. 

Truscan Vale is the far western plain within the Mar- 
row Valley that is largely controlled by the Truscan 
noble family. 

Uk’otoa is a powerful serpent that is sealed within the 
Lucidian Ocean. 

Umavi are consecuted members of the Kryn Dynasty 
who have been reborn and lived enough lifetimes to 
believe they are perfect souls. 

Uthodurnian relates something to the society of the 
Diarchy of Uthodurn. 

Wastefolk are nomads who have adapted to life in the 
wastes of Xhorhas, which they call them home. 

Western Wynandir is the western, central valley of 
Wildemount, which includes the Zemni Fields and the 
Marrow Valley. 

Wild Mother is the alternative title for the god Melora. 

Wildemount is the continent described in this volume 
and the setting for the second campaign of the hit 
series Critical Role. 

Zhelezo are the standing military of the Clovis Concord 
up and down the Menagerie Coast. 


GLOSSARY 


304 


INDEX 


Aarakocra, 165 
Aasimar, 166 
Aeor Crash Site, 124 
Aeorian hunters, 282 
Age of Arcanum, 12 
Alfield, 78 
Allowak’s Sanctuary, 125 
Amber Crossroads, 95 
Arms of the Betrayers, 
30, 274 
Asarius, 132 
Ashguard Garrison, 79 
Ashkeeper Peaks, 80 
Asmodeus, 26 
Avandra, 20 
Backgrounds, 200 
Bahamut, 21 
Balenpost, 126 
Bane, 26 
Barbed Fields, 134 
Barren Shores, 59 
Bazzoxan, 134 
Berleben, 80 
Betrayer Gods, 26 
Bisaft Isle, 60 
Bladegarden, 81 
Blightshore, 149 
Contraband, 152 
Blood hunter, 284 
Blooming Grove, 111 
Blumenthal, 96 
Boroftkrah, 111 
Brokenbank, 60 
Brokenveil Bluffs, 82 
Brokenveil Marsh, 136 
Bwualli, 60 
Bysaes Tyl, 96 
Calamity, the, 13 
Calendar, 8 
Cauldron Sea, 151 
Ceratos, 31 
Cerberus Assembly, 41 
NPCs, 42 
Charis, 136 
Children of Malice, 46 
NPCs, 47 
Chroma Conclave, 20 
Chronurgy Magic, 184 
Cinderrest Sanctum, 113 
Claret Orders, 54 
NPCs, 55 
Clovis Concord, 5, 18, 43 
Laws of the concord, 45 
NPCs, 44 
CopiaLake, 61 
Copia Wildwood, 61 
Core spawn, 285 
Corellon, 22 
Crispvale Thicket, 82 
Crystalsands Tundra, 113 
Cults, 57 
Currency, 9 
Cyrengreen Forest, 82 
Cyrios End Forest, 61 
Cyrios Mountains, 62 
Dark star (spell), 186 


INDEX 


Darktow, 62 
Darktow Isle, 62 
Darrington Brigade, 83 
Deastok, 83 
Deepriver Mine, 138 
Desirat, 31 
Devil toad, 296 
Diarchy of Uthodurn, 48, 
mo 
NPCs, 50 
Diver’s Grave, 64 
Dolithil Mine, 64 
Doralle Woods, 64 
Draconia, 20 
Ruins of Draconia, 145 
Dragonborn, 168 
Dreemoth Ravine, 138 
Druvenlode, 98 
Dumaran, 138 
Dunamancy, 182, 186 
Dunrock Mountains, 99 
Dwarves, 162 
Dwendalian Empire, 5, 
15,35 
Laws of the empire, 38 
NPCs, 36 
Dyolet fruit, 108 
Eastern Wynandir, 18 
Ebonglass Massif, 152 
Echo Knight, 183 
Egelin Quarry, 84 
Eiselcross, 121 
Islands, 123 
Random encounters, 122 
Elder Evils, 281 
Elves, 162 
Pallid elf, 163 
Sea elf, 163 
Erathis, 22 
Erdeloch, 99 
Eve of Crimson Midnight, 
16 
Everplume, 64 
Far Hharom, 153 
Felderwin, 84 
Felderwin Tillage, 85 
Feolinn, 65 
Festerwill Pool, 66 
Fevergulf Lake, 138 
Firbolgs, 169 
Flotket Alps, 113 
Fortress of the Dead Jarl, 
128 
Fortune’s favor (spell), 186 
Founding, the, 11 
Frigid Woe, 125 
Frost giant zombie, 288 
Frost worm, 289 
Gearkeeper construct, 290 
Genasi, 170 
Ghor Dranas, 142 
Ghor Veles, 154 
Gift of alacrity (spell), 186 
Gilded Roadway, 66 
Gloomstalker, 291 
Gnomes, 173 


Goblinkin, 173 
Curse of strife, 174 
Golden Chain, 74 
Golden Grin, 56 
NPCs, 56 
Goliaths, 175 
Gravid Archipelago, 66 
Graviturgy Magic, 184 
Gravity fissure (spell), 187 
Gravity sinkhole (spell), 
187 
Gruumsh, 27 
Greying Wildlands, 18, 111 
Grimgolir, 86 
Grinner, 200 
Gwardan, 66 
Hag Mother, the 32 
Half-elves, 176 
Half-orcs, 177 
Halflings, 164 
Hearthstar Peaks, 67 
Herethis Mines, 87 
Heroic chronicle, 190 
Holidays, 8, 9 
Hollow One, 181 
Horizonback tortoise, 292 
Humans, 164 
Hupperdook, 87 
Husk zombie, 293 
Icehaven, 99 
Icozrin Steelworks, 138 
Immovable object (spell), 
187 
Incanter’s Rest, 154 
Invulnerable Vagrant, 
the, 94 
Iothia Moorland, 139 
Ioun, 23 
Issylra, 159 
Ivory Lake, 114 
Jigow, 139 
Julous Dominion, 14 
Kaltenloch, 100 
Kamordah, 89 
Kenku, 176 
K Nau, the, 17 
Kord, 23 
Kravaraad, 114 
Kryn Dynasty, 6, 19, 38 
Laws of the dynasty, 40 
NPCs, 40 
Languages, 9 
Lebenda Swamp, 90 
Lesser Idols, 30 
Library of the Cobalt Soul, 
52 
NPCs, 53 
Lolth, 27 
Lotusden Greenwood, 140 
Lushgut Forest, 67 
Luxon, the, 32, 33 
Magnify gravity (spell), 188 
Many Hosts of Igrathad, 
141 
Marquet, 159 
Marrow Valley, 78 


Marrow War, 15 
Melora, 23 
Menagerie Coast, 17, 59 
Merrow shallowpriest, 294 
Miskath Pit, 154 
Miskath Strand, 149 
Molaesmyr, 18 
Ruins of Molaesmyr, 115 
Moons, 9 
Moorbounders, 132, 295 
Moradin, 24 
Mount Mentiri, 90 
Mutalos, 128 
Myriad, the, 45 
NPCs, 46 
Mythburrow, 114 
Naviask, 32 
Nergaliid, 296 
New Haxon, 155 
Nicodranas, 67 
Nogvurot, 100 
Odessloe, 101 
Olc Skerry, 156 
Orcs, 177 
Othe, 68 
Othemoor, 70 
Ounterloch, 90 
Palebank Village, 114 
Pallid Grove, 70 
Palma Flora, 70 
Pelor, 24 
Penumbra Range, 142 
Plumgroves, 71 
Port Damali, 71 
Port Zoon, 74 
Pride Silk, 103 
Pride’s Call, 102 
Prime Deities, 20 
Pulse wave (spell), 188 
Quajath, 32 
Quoraska Jungle, 75 
Raei, 24 
Rastum Den, 104 
Raven Queen, the, 24 
Ravenous void (spell), 188 
Reality break (spell), 189 
Revelry, the, 56 
NPCs, 57 
Rexxentrum, 104 
Rime Plains, 115 
River Inferno, 128 
Rockguard Garrison, 107 
Rosohna, 142 
Rotthold, 156 
Ruins of Sepesca, 75 
Ruins of Shattengrod, 108 
Rumblecusp, 76 
Sahuagin warlock of 
Ukotoa, 297 
Saltwallow Bog, 108 
Sapping sting (spell), 189 
Savalirwood, 116 
Scars of Scale and Tooth, 
53 
NPCs, 54 
Sea fury, 298 


Seasons, 8 
Sehanine, 25 
Shadowghast, 299 
Shadycreek Run, 116 
Shattered Teeth, 159 
Silberquel Ridge, 108 
Siltbasin Pass, 76 
Skyships, 72 
Song of Dashilla, 63 
Sorrowseep Waters, 145 
Steamcasting, 66 
Stonecage Cliffs, 76 
Swavain basilisk, 300 
Syrinlya, 129 
Tabaxi, 178 
Tal Dorei, 159 
Talonstadt, 90 
Technology, 9 
Temporal shunt (spell), 189 
Tether essence (spell), 189 
Tharizdun, 28 
Tiamat, 28 
Tieflings, 179 
Time ravage (spell), 189 
Tomb of the Worm, 130 
Tooth of Zehir, 158 
Torog, 28 
Tortles, 180 
Traveler, the, 32 
Tribes of Shadycreek Run, 

6, 50 

NPCs, 51 
Trostenwald, 91 
Tussoa, 76 
Twinward Isles, 77 
Udaak, 301 
Ukotoa, 33 
Uraliss, 119 
Urukayxl, 77 
Urzin, 146 
Ustaloch, 92 
Uthodurn, 119 
Vecna, 29 
Velvin Thicket, 108 
Vergesson Sanitarium, 109 
Vermaloc Wildwood, 147 
Verstglade, 147 
Vesh, 33 
Vezdaweald, 77 
Vide Cay, 78 
Volantim, 92 
Volstrucker Agent, 202 
Vurmas, 131 
Wastes of Xhorhas, 132 
Western Wynandir, 14 
Wormkin template, 130 
Wristpocket (spell), 190 
Wuyun Gate, 93 
Wuyun Gorge, 78 
Xalicas, 33 
Xarzith Kitril, 148 
Xhorhas, 132 
Yrrosa, 110 
Zadash, 93 
Zehir, 29 
Zemni Fields, 95 


n dad na h A) 
s sane dN, Anad WE AA dn PP soll herent, ee ‘ LA ten, 


“sy ws AY 


PR ny) adie S a Er ore 


Palebank 
wVillage 26 


á oe cS 7 
&Einderrest'Sa CEUM 
aN RA KII 
FSE 
otketvAllp: 

= 


Of 


Molaesmyny A 


j 


ie 
on N 
Se ap, 


Vo ee 
_— V lcehaven: 
A BEN DEA ) > - 


a 


THE EMERALD ¢ 


\ 


3 A 
K ame ay = 


| ? wos eget (Gey AA San A o ae 47. SAS ve eee 
; s | Sa ala h Gy — x SAA Ace P - n ay Rae Ai > ae 3 
\ é J ent oe r Q z 7 ae j > — : ¢ i f, iS a > {È A 
l N ; F ? | : : lps if S ws = Lei r a je) aT: nee s ° xX í aes ; 3 i 
R f, A D ? I: ¥ A =) 4 ‘ a 7S AH. = i é : s i k ce = | i i | | 
\ ó ee Ys í f ) AA \ SG x — ` ‘ j SS) | = ath £ | % we Zl S > Ne 
8 P e ‘ ae Genoa | Og = hs ES m o Babee 
. A / ; mir ROMA LS DN ; SA > = 9 Ruinsof ` ; AN A A : KE P gr ak. nana $ Y Na 
S iNs fp r " ) Á re Bie, 4 K AN 4 e? % » 7 A > ( è ; > 7 T - í R $ é < f . i i rS 4 sd =s si ‘ È > a } Ss j jit as os y h P 3 À g 5 ; f | 3 7 3 
acy $ An hi MaA A MAN f 7 L beó á à OS, é > / TY a Bes T ` LA 3 a i ; te . q Uchanda Smp, 7 À = > ; en i y| § oi ; / f i 2 
4 oi aly | | ) 4 i 4 $ 4 as < > = Ni f Z — > <i - —/S e / ( i] ( 110),¢ J 4 & ; ZA F y / 4 { We = uy we ye b af i = a e : uy 
$ 7 a | i / a 7 IA - SZ X ? E 4 — = ae 5G ad Ne a FF. Ss ASNO z ‘ < at: 3 4 eS Ta Eż f s } ` s ~ > = A | E D ae z 
3 : / i} By : > j < 5 ' — rex z x PN > Em i P a Aa e i y vi d shguard \ mY: E D Do ey, =f A ; $ j £3 : es 
r 4 x Be Woy REG T TA ir se . = ET 
À J TA A) ESN J i e y X 7 t p S 7 Z = > E > = > Ki Ý, ia a jad N s bs S A % ‘ HL : i; 3 : lds R n a 


aa 


` Egelin *& 
Quarry, Lt Tig 


a. 


Fa è EE NATIA E ER, ‘ ¢ r4 = j y SS ‘ a p J J NIN J ` 7 O paors 7 ! 3 Ñ 
/ f ee i f i LY N itis d 4 Waters }/ À : 
| \ ait s i p i È i 4 VY > > si , x 4 Z ~ K i A `~ pN o | y af hm Mae PR aT £ $ r 
VM ! = % - es FAA p {4 i, 4 : Aga A f 7. A - Y m \ 7 te A > 
gp > \ yL : ie 


Everplume 
O 


N 


OS 
NS — 

ey 

Xe 


oh 


A 


a, EA "h on. 
-Port Damali. 
ae | oy 


Pa $ 
New Haxon) 
i OV 


Flora 


D) 


Ca 


BISAFT ISLE 


ivers GRAVID 
E ARCHIPELAGO 
a T) 
/ eae 
at }) > 
NOS) Brokenbank 
Caa 


xO) 
BROKENBANK 


THE CONTINENT OF 


WILDEMOUNT: 


Deep Row Reef.,c: 
SAME BS 


i a 4 
tiy We Lt uh 


How Do You 
WANT TO Do THIS? 


A war brews ona continent that has withstood 
more than its fair share of conflict. The Dwendalian 
Empire and the Kryn Dynasty are carving up the 
lands around them, and only the greatest heroes 
would dare stand between them. Somewhere 

in the far corners of this war-torn landscape are 
secrets that could end this conflict and usher in a 
new age of peace—or burn the world to a cinder. 


Create a band of heroes and embark on a journey 
across the continent of Wildemount, the setting 
for Season 2 of the hit series Critical Role. Within 
this book, you'll find new character options, a 
heroic chronicle to help you craft your character’s 
backstory, four different starting adventures, and 
everything a Dungeon Master needs to breathe life 
into a Wildemount-based campaign. 


For use with the fifth edition Player’s Handbook®, 


Dungeon Master’s Guide®: and Monster Manual” 


& E 


ISBN 978-0-7869-6691~2 
5499 5> 
DUNGEONSANDDRAGONS.cCOM 
EAN 
9 780 912 


uj Sug. Retail: US $49.95 CAN $65.95 
Printed in USA C72700000 


786 966 


