RISING PRI 


і А 
5 , 
a 


DUNGEONS @с DRAGONS 


À 
Р H? 

\ 
a 


Explore.the lands of Ebennomimithis campaigmsourcebook 
for the worldis greatest roleplaying game 


CORY TREGO-ERDN 


EBERRON 


RISING FROM THE LAST WAR 


CREDITS 


Lead Designers: Jeremy Crawford, James Wyatt, Keith Baker 
Designers: Ben Petrisor, Bill Benham, Dan Dillon, James Introcaso, 
Adam Lee 


Developers: Jeremy Crawford, Dan Dillon, Mike Mearls, Christopher 
Perkins, Ben Petrisor 

Editors: Christopher Perkins, F. Wesley Schneider, Michele Carter, 
Kim Mohan, Scott Fitzgerald Gray 


Art Director: Kate Irwin 

Graphic Designer: Trish Yochum 
Concept Art Director: Richard Whitters 
Creative Art Director: Shauna Narciso 


Cover Illustrators: Wesley Burt, Vance Kelly 

Interior illustrators: Dave Allsop, John Avon, Mark Behm, Eric 
Belisle, Zoltan Boros, Colin Boyer, Christopher Burdett, Paul 
Scott Canavan, Sidharth Chaturvedi, Chippy, Adam Cook, Eric 
Deschamps, Olga Drebas, Jason A. Engle, Caroline Gariba, 
Tomas Giorello, Brian Hagan, Leesha Hannigan, Suzanne 
Helmigh, Fred Hooper, Lake Hurwitz, Miles Johnston, Andrew 
Jones, Sam Keiser, Julian Kok, Michael Komarck, Ron Lemen, 
Titus Lunter, Howard Lyon, Efflam Mercier, Lee Moyer, Ben 
Oliver, Lucio Parillo, Claudio Pozas, Steve Prescott, Vincent 
Proce, Jenn Ravenna, Wayne Reynolds, Dan Scott, Craig J 
Spearing, Zack Stella, Matt Stewart, Philip Straub, Matias Tapia, 
Mark Tedin, Cory Trego-Erdner, Brian Valenzuela, Brian Valeza, 
Charlie Wen, Shawn Wood, Ben Wootten, Kieran Yanner, 
James Zhang 

Concept Illustrators: Richard Whitters, Shawn Wood 

Interior Cartographers: Dyson Logos, Lee Moyer 

Poster Map Cartographer: Lee Moyer 


ON THE COVER 


The investigations of a warforged wizard, Talenta halfling, and their 
dinosaur companion lead from the ruins of the Last War into the 
depths of the Demon Wastes, in this image by Wesley Burt. 


CE 


620C7287000001 EN 
ISBN: 978-0-7869-6692-9 
First Printing: November 2019 


987654321 


Producers: Dan Tovar, Bill Benham 

Product Engineer: Cynda Callaway 

Imaging Technicians: Sven Bolen, Carmen Cheung, Kevin Yee 
Art Administrator: David Gershman 

Prepress Specialist: Jefferson Dunlap 


Franchise & Global Brand Strategy: Nathan Stewart 

Director of Licensing & Publishing: Liz Schuh 

Licensing Manager: Hilary Ross 

Marketing & Communications: Bart Carroll, Pelham Greene, 
Greg Tito, Anna Vo 

Brand Manager: Shelly Mazzanoble 

Game Designers: Ari Levitch, Kate Welch 

Art Director: Emi Tanji 

Product Marketing Specialist: Chris Lindsay 


The following D&D books provided material and inspiration: 

Baker, Keith. Wayfinder’s Guide to Eberron. 2018. 

Baker, Keith, Bill Slavicsek & James Wyatt. Eberron Campaign 
Setting. 2004. 

Baker, Keith & James Wyatt. Sharn: City of Towers. 2004. 

Noonan, David, Frank Brunner & Rich Burlew. Explorer's Handbook. 
2005. 

Slavicsek, Bill, David Noonan & Christopher Perkins. Five Nations. 
2005. 

Wyatt, James, Keith Baker, Ari Marmell, Robert J. Schwalb & Chris 
Sims. Eberron Campaign Guide. 2009. 

Wyatt, James, Wolfgang Baur & Ari Marmell. The Forge of War. 2007. 


Many thanks to the hundreds of fans who playtested this book! 


ON THE ALTERNATIVE COVER 


Its ring of fire ablaze, an airship soars over the skycrapers of the 
towering city of Sharn, where creatures from all over the war-torn 
world of Eberron gather. Vance Kelly brought this image to life. 


Disclaimer: Published by the brilliant gnomes of House Sivis, this illustrious volume ex- 
poses truths you won't believe about the Last War! You might think that's enough to satisfy 
you, dear reader, but there's more! The book also contains dice-fueled rules for reenacting 
thrilling events in the world of Eberron (dice not included). Also, don't forget to recharge 
this book's magic with a dragonshard about once a week. If you don't, the book will turn 
back into a potato. 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, Eberron, the dragon ampersand, Player's Handbook, Monster Manual, Dungeon Master's Guide, all other Wizards of the Coast 
product names, and their respective logos are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast in the USA and other countries. All characters and their distinctive likenesses are property of Wizards 
of the Coast. This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained herein is 


prohibited without the express written permission of Wizards of the Coast. 


Printed in the USA. ©2019 Wizards of the Coast LLC, PO Box 707, Renton, WA 98057-0707, USA. Manufactured by Hasbro SA, Rue Emile-Boéchat 31, 2800 Delémont, CH. 


Represented By: Hasbro, De Entree 240, 1101 EE Amsterdam, NL. 


CONTENTS 


Welcome to Eberron ................................. 4 
Iblistory Ol DELON ....... 5 
И ЕН КОПӨГҮӘАТЕ................ е... ииз. 6 
ШЫН рАЧуейпйиге............................Ж а... i 
Yon Intrigue mene 8 
PAW a OA CAINVV OT lec о 10 
OP Wve Last Water 12 
Mine Draconicirrophecy ....... 78 15 


потеет 22 
Goblingis:.......... etos 24 
На Е ева... Жозе 26 
Halflings.. „2/7, 


Humans... 


«Kalashtar ............... 279) 
(rcs and На Отс... 31 
Ө ете e 33 
TUS TY A TED а 35 
MWiantopged..... cene 35 
ШЙ А ШЕШ АШЕ5. canar ызасы рык 37 
Marlcof/Betection ................................. 40 
Mark of Finding.... ‚41 
Mark of Handling. 42 
Mark of Healing........ 43 
Mark of Hospitality.. 44 
Mark of Making ........ 45 
Mark of Passage... ле 46 
Мао Seribitgm.......-- em 47 
Mark of/Sentinel.............. cette 48 
Iaith, S NAG OW «es eene retten 49 
MAIS Of SO a 50 
Матко УУатаінр........... cinereo 51 
Aberrant Dragonmarks...... 152 
Background: House Agent. 
Class: Artificer .................. 
Ie e a a a 
ОЕ Е. РЕВИР ЕРРЕТИ 
ВАТЕ e и -®............... 
"ATtilicer InfüsiOris........ eere eene na encene 
(GpeJIDIP atTOns:... ritieni 
"Adventürersd(Gulld.......-.. ша... 
Crime Syndicate........... 
Dragonmarked House 
Espionage Agency........ = 
ее etate mes... 
Immortal BeIng 5... cc erento 
Inquisitive Арепсу.......................-....... 
INSP AT ys ONGC eee eerte 
Ме=рарет aiian aa teens E eC 
HEN 1011S) ORG SL «errem 95 
NW ive SUL y peeiicescevett eee eeeetneet ertet 98 
Ch. 2: Khorvaire Gazetteer................. 103 
Nations of Khorvaire ... 1103 
Aunda eeen «2108 
Втеапа л ee. Lesern лысы: 107 
Суте (The Моогпїапа) 109 
ШАССИ 110 


Tem OW astes me... 3... а... 112 
ТОаа e. E E свесна: 114 
Eldeen'Reaclies 3e eer jul) 
Канто... 117 
LhazaasPrincipalities ....................... 119 
Mior KORSE. А 120 


WY ell etnies Е. 129 
атвори ene mts 130 
Пааа ieas Ж. жел 132 
Dare ma ree гис ыыы: 132 
ArgonnesseN eresi rai 134 
KOET ии арис = 185 
North and South Poles... ..136 
Sarona.. Т 2:197 


Xen'drik .... 


Faiths of Khorvaire... 140 
SOVET eI то 141 
Прат Six eee ан 143 
Church of the Silver Flame .............. 144 
Bood ОМО... т. А Н нз 145 
Cults of the Dragon Below ................ 145 
Бато Ето. ИЕ. Я 146 
Spirits of the Past. ЕТА 
Undying Court ........... ..148 


Druidsiof Кћогуаіте 149 
Ch. 3: Sharn, City of Томегѕ............... 151 
TheShapeolSHasnes roS 151 
Guide tothe City nee Mere 152 
Wardsiof Баги Ос 159 
Central Plated EE teens 165 
Вита... ES 166 
Menihis'Plateam Шы 169 
Northedge............. Abl 
Tavick's Landing. 2172 
Above and Below .... ee bus) 
Dungeons обата oe 177 
Criminal Aeftvities «eroe 178 
Forcesiofithelbaw ee 180 
Ch. 4: Building Eberron 

Айуепїигез........................................... 183 
Adventure Themes .................... 183 


Тһе Агии eere 
Cults of the Dragon Below .. 
Dragonmarked Houses... 


Drasonst- eee 198 
ThejDreamaing атк... 196 
rogaine Инна СЕЕ 198 
(затекеетете Е о. шз... 202 
Goblinoids (Heirs of Dhakaan) ............ 204 
Phe Last Мат О ЖО... 206 
ого Бїадё&....... Жл 211 
The Lords of Dust .. 2105 
The Mournland .............. .218 
Order of the Emerald Claw. 2225 
Planes:on EXISCence ceo 228 
ауе о Linsen ip ere tas 233 


Adventures in Sharn.......................... 239 
Crime in Sharn а 0 c 245 
The Boromar Clanke ее 246 
Da ASKS r с 249 
Ponse Parkana na а 253 
TilfesTyrants:......-.-.t ee 254 
SharniWatchz-- eT T 256 
Adventure: Forgotten Relics ................. 260 
Ch. 5: Тгеавигев...................................... 275 
Dragonshards 
Magic Items.................. " 
Everyday Magic Items ................ werk ES 281 
Ch. 6: Friends and Foes. ....................... 283 
BESNOTY ане асат oa Sree 
Dael inana ло 
Belashyrra 
УТ и 
Ю:поѕайте pee 
Clawfoot..... 
Fastieth ...... 
Dolgaunt.... А 
Dolg MM peas ane аа 
Dusk, Hafo- 
Homunculi 
Expeditious Messenger.................. 293 
lromDefenden®. 7 ПОЕТ 293 
Пеѕрігеак НОЕ eee 294 


Karrnathi Undead Soldier .. 


Lady Illmarrow ..296 
Living Spells. 298 
Living Burning Hands.................... 298 
bivingiGloudkilllc m 299 
Living Lightning Bolt...................... 299 
TTheyLordiofiBladese- 9e 300 


KalamagiüuoEne-. дд 306 
Tsticoral@borietee E 307 
Radiant оі e 308 
Rakshasa акуа 22653 309 
Und Winnie. А 310 
Undying Councilor eee ee 311 
Undying боега 311 


Valenar Animals.. 
Valenar Hawk... 
Valenar Hound. 


Valenar Steed я 
Warforged Colossus ........................... 314 
Warforged тап е 315 

Generic МРЄѕ3........ тыд 316 
ВопеК ере шаа 316 
СһҺайдейп............. ХОЛ 317 
Kalashtar ....... FN 
Magewright ... 318 
Shifter erm ..319 
Tarkanan Assassin. ..320 
Warforged! Soldier тти 320 


N AN ANCIENT RUIN BENEATH THE DEMON WASTES, 
a band of heroes races to claim the Reaper's 
Heart. If the agents of the Emerald Claw reach 
it first, they Il reignite the Last War and un- 
leash an army of undead. 

In the city of Sharn, a team of spies pulls off an impos- 
sible scheme—breaking into the impenetrable vaults of 
House Kundarak. But instead of gold, they find a secret 
that could shatter the fragile peace between the nations. 

Aboard an airship, a wizard debates the interpretation 
ofan ancient prophecy with a blood-red dragon. If the 
sage loses the argument, the dragon will destroy the air- 
ship and everyone on it. But if she wins the debate, the 
dragon will take them to distant Argonnessen, and no 
human has ever seen the land of dragons and returned! 


The world of Eberron has a rich history built on heroic 
deeds, evolving magic, and the wounds of a long, devas- 
tating war. Action, adventure, good, evil, and a thousand 
shades of gray paint the landscape in broad strokes. An- 
cient mysteries await discovery so they can influence the 
world and its people. 

Magic is built into the very fabric of the world. It 
pervades everyday life. It provides comforts and con- 
veniences unknown in either the modern world or any 
world of medieval fantasy. Great cities where castles 
scrape the sky prosper throughout the continent of 
Khorvaire, and a thriving aristocracy of merchant fam- 
ilies controls much of the world’s economy thanks to 
the edge given them by the mysterious and rare drag- 
onmarks. Its people harness magic as a tool—to build 
cities, to sail ships through the skies, and to create both 
wonders and weapons. 

Heroes come in all shapes and sizes, all classes and 
races. They travel the world, battling villains in in- 
stants of over-the-top action. And they unearth fabulous 
treasure, and deal with narrow escapes and ominous 
mysteries that are as likely to shed light on centuries of 
secrets as they are to threaten the world's safety. 

Eberron embraces swashbuckling action and pulp 
adventure while adding a layer of noir intrigue. Stories 
don't always end well, and there isn't a perfect answer to 
every problem. The Last War turned old allies into bitter 
enemies and destroyed an entire nation, leaving behind 
terrible scars. Crime and corruption lurk in the great 
cities of Khorvaire. Hidden dragons shape the course 
of history, and sinister fiends influence the dreams of 
the unwary. Yet mortal greed and ambition might prove 
more dangerous than any dragon or fiend. This dark- 
ness affords opportunities for a group of bold adventur- 
ers to make a difference—for better or for worse. 


WELCOME TO EBERRON 


UsiNG THIS BOOK 


This book is a gateway to using Eberron asa setting for 
your D&D campaign. It guides players and the Dungeon 
Master through the process of creating characters and 
adventures set in this world. 

This introduction presents an overview of the world: 
its history, its calendar, and the themes that drive it. 

Chapter 1 details how to create Eberron characters. 
It offers race options and a new class, the artificer, that 
reflect the flavor of the world. It also presents group pa- 
trons, a new concept that adds a shared purpose to your 
party of adventurers. You can use this material in Eber- 
ron or any other D&D setting. 

Chapter 2 provides an overview of the nations of 
Khorvaire (and beyond) and the religions of Eberron, 
handy details whether you're a player seeking inspira- 
tion for your character's backstory or a DM looking for 
an intriguing place to set an adventure. 

Chapter 3 focuses on Sharn, the City of Towers. 
Sharn is one of the wonders of Khorvaire, and a source 
of endless adventures. This chapter presents a host of 
interesting locations and activities you can explore in 
this towering metropolis. 

Chapter 4 provides ideas for adventures in Sharn 
and beyond. It introduces sinister forces at work in the 
world, along with the impact of the Last War and the 
dreadful Day of Mourning. It also includes a short ad- 
venture you can use to launch your campaign in Sharn. 

Chapter 5 includes magic items and other treasures 
for an Eberron campaign. It also explores the vital role 
of dragonshards. 

Chapter 6 presents new monsters and NPCs drawn 
from the world of Eberron. From mighty archfiends to 
helpful homunculi, these creatures add challenges to 
your adventures in Eberron (or any other D&D world). 


SEVEN THINGS TO KNOW 
What is Eberron? Here are the key things to know: 


1. The Last War Has Ended—Sort Of. The Last War 
plunged the continent of Khorvaire into civil war 
more than a century ago, shattering the Five Nations 
that made up the kingdom of Galifar.Just two years 
ago, the war ended with the signing of the Treaty of 
Thronehold and the establishment of twelve recog- 
nized nations and a tenuous peace. The conflicts, the 
anger, and the pain of the long war remain, however, 
and the new nations seek every advantage as they pre- 
pare for the next war to break out on the continent. 


2. Dragonmarked Dynasties. The great dragonmarked 
families are the barons of industry and commerce 
throughout Khorvaire and beyond. Their influence 
transcends political boundaries, and they remained 
mostly neutral during the Last War. Not technically 
citizens of any nation, the matriarchs and patriarchs 
of each house live in splendor within their enclaves 
and emporiums located throughout Khorvaire. These 
dynastic houses of commerce derive their power from 
dragonmarks—hereditary arcane sigils that manifest 
on certain individuals within the family, granting 
them limited but useful magical abilities associated 
with the trade guilds each family controls. 

3. Lands of Intrigue. The war is over, and the nations 
of Khorvaire now try to build a new age of peace and 
prosperity. Ancient threats linger, however, and the 
world needs heroes to take up the cause. Nations 
compete on many levels—over economic dominance, 
political influence, territory, magical power, and 
more—each looking to maintain or improve its status 
by any means short of all-out war. Dragonmarked 
houses, churches both pure and corrupt, crime lords, 
monster gangs, psionic spies, arcane universities, 
secret societies, sinister masterminds, dragons, and 
a multitude of organizations and factions join the 
struggle for position and power in the aftermath of 
the Last War. 

4. A Continent of Adventure. From the jungles of 
Q'barra to the blasted hills and valleys of the Demon 
Wastes, from the skyscrapers of Sharn to the dino- 
saur-filled Talenta Plains, Eberron is a world of ad- 
venture. Adventures can draw heroes from one exotic 
location to another across the continent of Khorvaire. 
The quest for the Mirror of the Seventh Moon might 
take the heroes from a hidden mountain shrine in 
Darguun to a ruined castle in the Shadow Marches 
and finally to a dungeon deep below the Library of 
Korranberg. Through the use of magical transporta- 
tion, heroes can reach a wide range of environments 
over the course of an adventure, and thus deal with a 
diverse assortment of monsters and other challenges. 

5. AWorld of Magic. The technology of Eberron has 
developed not through the advance of science but by 
the mastery of magic. The widespread use of magic 
pervades life in the cities and towns. Airships and 
rail transport make rapid travel across the continent 
possible. A working class of minor mages, called 
magewrights, uses spells to provide energy and other 
necessities. Advances in magic item creation have led 
to everything from self-propelled farming implements 
to sentient, free-willed beings created in artificers' 
forges. With the aid of rare crystals called dragon- 
shards, dragonmarks can be made more powerful, el- 
ementals can be controlled and harnessed, and magic 
items can be crafted and shaped. 

6. New Races. [n addition to the common player charac- 
ter races found in the Player's Handbook, players can 
choose to play orc or goblinoid characters in Eberron. 
Or they can choose one of four new races: change- 
lings, kalashtar, shifters, and warforged. Changelings 
have minor shapechanging abilities similar to those 
of doppelgangers. Kalashtar are planar entities 


merged with human hosts, giving them telepathic 
abilities. Shifters developed from the mixing of hu- 
mans and lycanthropes, a union that grants them lim- 
ited bestial abilities and feral instincts. The warforged 
are a constructed race created during the Last War, 
seeking to find its place in a post-war world. 

7. D&D with a Twist. Every race, monster, spell, and 
magic item in the Player's Handbook, Dungeon 
Master's Guide, and Monster Manual has a place 
somewhere in Eberron, but it might not be the place 
you expect. Eberron has a unique spot in the D&D 
multiverse, and many familiar elements of the game 
play different roles in the world. In particular, mortal 
creatures are products of culture and circumstances, 
rather than the direct influence of the gods. As a re- 
sult, you can't assume that a gold dragon is good or a 
beholder is evil; only in the case of celestials, fiends, 
and certain other creatures whose identity and world- 
view are shaped by magic (such as the curse of lycan- 
thropy) is alignment a given. 


HISTORY OF EBERRON 


Every child knows the story of the Progenitor Dragons: 
Siberys, Eberron, and Khyber. In the dawn of time, 
these three cosmic beings created thirteen planes of 
existence, each embodying a concept. Their final work 
was the Material Plane, where all ideas would become 
manifest: a realm that could know war and peace, life 
and death, order and chaos. But cruel Khyber sought 
ultimate dominion over this new reality. She struck Sib- 
erys without warning and tore him apart. Eberron wres- 
tled with Khyber and bound the traitor in her coils but 
could not defeat her. So Eberron became a living prison, 
a world that would forever contain Khyber's evil. 

Almost every culture in the world shares this story as 
a myth that explains the world. Shattered Siberys be- 
came the ring of golden dragonshards wrapped around 
the planet, said to be the source of magic. Eberron is 
the world, the source of all natural life. And Khyber is 
the Underdark and the source of aberrations and fiends, 
forever struggling against her bonds and yearning to de- 
stroy the world above. 

Another tale shared across cultures describes one 
more conflict that occurred in the first age of the world. 
Long ago, powerful archfiends known as the Overlords 
and their armies of rakshasa and lesser fiends domi- 
nated Eberron. Forces of light—some versions of the 
story say the nine gods of the Sovereign Host, others 
say an alliance of dragons and celestials—eventually 
defeated the Overlords. But these fiends couldn't be de- 
stroyed; instead, their immortal essences were bound in 
Khyber. Whatever the true details of this tale, this much 
is true: if the Overlords ever break their bonds, the con- 
sequences would be catastrophic. 

Over the course of millennia, numerous civilizations 
rose only to fall. Giants built mighty kingdoms on the 
continent of Xen'drik that were devastated by a war 
with the dragons of Argonnessen. The goblin empire of 
Dhakaan ruled Khorvaire until its reign was shattered 
by an invading army of mind flayers, beholders, and the 
foul creatures that created them. Today these civiliza- 
tions are known only through the remnants left behind. 


WELCO ME TO EBERRON 


THE FIVE NATIONS 


In the modern age, the greatest power was the king- 
dom of Galifar, which covered most of the continent 

of Khorvaire. The Five Nations—Aundair, Breland, 
Karrnath, Thrane, and Cyre—formed the heart of the 
kingdom. Although each has a unique cultural identity, 
they share this unified foundation. Families are spread 
across the Five Nations; the rulers of the Five Nations 
descend from the Wynarns, the royal bloodline of Gal- 
ifar. Despite their differences, an Aundairian has more 
іп common with a Thrane than with а Zil gnome or a 
Lhazaar pirate. 

Acentury ago Galifar collapsed into civil war, and the 
Five Nations became separate countries at odds with 
their neighbors. The Last War came to an end after Cyre 
was destroyed in a cataclysm known as the Mourning. 
The Five Nations remain divided today, sharing Khor- 
vaire with the new nations established by the Treaty of 
Thronehold. The remaining Five Nations remain the 
largest and most powerful countries in Khorvaire. 


THE TREATY OF THRONEHOLD 

The Treaty of Thronehold officially ended the Last War. 
The treaty recognized the following nations as sover- 
eign states: Aundair, Breland, Darguun, the Eldeen 
Reaches, Karrnath, the Lhazaar Principalities, the Mror 
Holds, Q’barra, the Talenta Plains, Thrane, Valenar, and 
Zilargo. These nations abide by a common set of laws 
and maintain diplomatic relations. The Demon Wastes 
and Shadow Marches regions have no unified govern- 
ment. Droaam has declared itself a nation but has yet to 
be recognized by the treaty nations. 


LIFE IN KHORVAIRE 


Although Eberron is a vast world with many continents 
and cultures, your adventures begin in the land of Khor- 
vaire. Here are a few details about everyday life there. 


LANGUAGES 


In Eberron, languages reflect culture and geography; a 
dwarf raised in Breland might not know Dwarvish, but 
a halfling raised in the Mror Holds might. The historical 
development of languages and cultures also explains 
the scripts used to write various languages. For exam- 
ple, the Orc language is written using the Goblin script 
(rather than Dwarvish, as stated in the Player’s Hand- 
book), because the orcs of Khorvaire learned writing 
from the goblins. 

Common is the language of the Five Nations and the 
language of trade in Khorvaire, known by most of its 
people. Goblin was the trade language of the goblin em- 
pire of Dhakaan and survives as the primary language 
in Darguun, Droaam, and the Shadow Marches. Goblin 
displaced the Orc language; the people of the Shadow 
Marches typically speak Goblin, and Orc is an exotic 
language (see the Exotic Languages of Eberron table). 
Members of all races in Xen'drik speak Giant and use it 
as their trade language. Abyssal is the common tongue 
of all fiends. Abyssal is sometimes called "Khyber's 
Speech,” while Celestial is “the tongue of Siberys." 


WELCOME TO EBERRON 


With the DM's approval, you can exchange a language 
granted by your race for a different language from the 
Standard Languages of Eberron table. If your halfling 
wasraised in the Mror Holds, you might replace 
Halfling with Dwarvish to reflect that background. The 
DM may change the languages assigned to a monster 
or NPC. An ogre from Droaam likely speaks Goblin in- 
stead of Giant. 


STANDARD LANGUAGES OF EBERRON 


Language Main Speakers Script 
Common The Five Nations, trade Common 
language of Khorvaire 
Dwarvish Mror Holds Dwarvish 
Elvish Aerenal, Valenar Elvish 
Giant Inhabitants of Xen'drik Giant 
Gnomish Zilargo Dwarvish 
Goblin Darguun, Droaam, Shadow Goblin 
Marches, monsters of Khorvaire 

Halfling Talenta Plains Common 
Riedran People of Sarlona Common 
Exotic LANGUAGES OF EBERRON 

Language Main Speakers Script 
Celestial Celestials Celestial 
Daelkyr Aberrations, denizens of Khyber Daelkyr 
Draconic Dragons, dragonborn Draconic 
Infernal Fiends Infernal 
Orc Isolated orc tribes Goblin 
Primordial Elementals Primordial 
Quori Inspired, kalashtar, quori Quori 
Sylvan Fey creatures Elvish 


NAMES AND SURNAMES 


The naming conventions among the people of Khorvaire 
tend to follow language, rather than being linked to race. 
A Brelish dwarf who doesn’t speak Dwarvish might also 
carry a name with a human origin rather than a tradi- 
tional Dwarvish name. 

Most citizens of Khorvaire have a given name followed 
by a surname. A surname associated with the Common 
language is usually either a family name or related to an 
occupation or region of origin. So Sorn Fellhorn, Kara 
of Windshire, and Tellan Magewright are all names you 
might find among the common folk. 

The noble families of Galifar—along with those 
granted land and titles by one of the sovereigns of the 
Five Nations—add the prefix ir’ to their surname. The 
name Darro ir'Lain tells you that this individual is a 
landed noble. The Wynarns were the royal line of Gal- 
ifar, and the current rulers of Aundair, Breland, and 
Karrnath are all heirs of the Wynarn bloodline. Thus, 
Queen Aurala of Aundair is Aurala ir'Wynarn. 

Another common prefix is d’, used by any heir of a 
dragonmarked house who has manifested a dragon- 
mark. So Merrix d’Cannith is a member of House Can- 
nith who has manifested the Mark of Making. 


CALENDAR 


In the common calendar of Khorvaire, days are 24 
hours long, divided into day and night. Seven days make 
up a week, four weeks a month, and twelve months a 
year. The months correspond to the twelve moons of 
Eberron (see the Eberron Months table), and the prom- 
inent moon carries the name of the month in which its 
orbit brings it closest to the planet. 

The seven days of the week, in order, are Sul, Mol, 
Zol, Wir, Zor, Far, Sar. 

The common calendar of Khorvaire tracks the years 
since the founding of the kingdom of Galifar, using 
the abbreviation YK. The last king of Galifar, Jarot 
ir'Wynarn, died on 12 Therendor 894 YK. The Day of 
Mourning occurred a century later, on 20 Olarune 994 
YK. By default, a new Eberron campaign begins on 1 
Zarantyr 998 YK. 


EBERRON MONTHS 


Month Name 
1 Zarantyr (mid-winter) 
Olarune (late winter) 
Therendor (early spring) 
Eyre (mid-spring) 


Nymm (early summer) 


2 
3 
4 
5 Dravago (late spring) 
6 
7 Lharvion (mid-summer) 
8 


Barrakas (late summer) 


9 Rhaan (early autumn) 

10 Sypheros (mid-autumn) 

11 Aryth (late autumn) 

12 Vult (early winter) 
CURRENCY 


Merchants and nobles use letters of credit to handle 
large transactions, drawing on the reserves of the dwar- 
ven banks of the Mror Holds. But most day-to-day trans- 
actions use coins of precious metal. With the collapse of 
the kingdom of Galifar, each of the Five Nations began 
to mint its own currency, along with the Mror bankers. 
However, while the designs imprinted on these coins 
vary based on the source, each of these factions has 
continued to use the same metals, weights, and denom- 
inations set forth in the days of Galifar, maintaining a 
simple standard for commerce across Khorvaire. 

The copper crown (cp) traditionally depicts the crown 
of Galifar on one face. The crown is the lowest denom- 
ination of coin minted under the rule of Galifar, which 
spawned the saying, "In Galifar, even the beggars 
have crowns." 

The silver sovereign (sp) bears the face of a living or 
recent ruler. An unskilled laborer can expect to earn a 
sovereign for a day's work. 

The gold galifar (gp) bears the image of Galifar I, the 
founder of the old kingdom. 

The platinum dragon (pp) bears the image of one of 
the dragons of legend. With a value of one hundred sov- 
ereigns, these coins are used only by the wealthiest citi- 
zens of Khorvaire, and the average peasant might never 
see such a coin. 


Anumber of other coins remain in circulation, such as 
the double crown of Breland (2 cp) and the silver throne 
of Cyre (5 sp). However, all the major nations of Khor- 
vaire make use of the four basic coins described above. 


PULP ADVENTURE 


Eberron is a world of swashbuckling adventure. 
Whether you're a DM developing an adventure in the 
world or a player preparing to explore it, consider the 
following elements. 


EXOTIC LOCATIONS 


Lightning rails, airships, and other forms of transporta- 
tion facilitate travel to exotic locations. Adventures could 
take you to the colossal ruins left behind by the giants 
of Xen'drik, the warped landscape of the Mournland, or 
the dark demiplanes within the underworld of Khyber. 
Even if you prefer to stay in a town, you could explore 
the mile-high towers of Sharn or the ancient goblin tun- 
nels that lie beneath it. 


REMARKABLE HEROES 


Eberron is a world in need of heroes. Lingering ten- 
sions of war remain. From the fanatics of the Emerald 
Claw and the mad cults of the Dragon Below to the 
flesh-warping daelkyr and ancient archfiends, Eberron 
faces many threats, and few people besides the player 
characters are able to stop them. The gods are distant 
and don't directly intervene. The Silver Flame is a divine 
force of light, but it can act only through mortal cham- 
pions. The few powerful benevolent NPCs have limita- 
tions: the Keeper of the Flame loses her powers if she 
leaves her citadel. The Great Druid, the spiritual leader 
of the Eldeen Reaches, is a tree. Most of the powerful 
people in the world focus on selfish goals. If an angry 
dragon attacks Sharn, there's no one else to deal with 
the problem: the fate of the city is in your hands. 

Consider a dynamic backstory when developing your 
character and choosing your background, whether you 
take a background from the Player's Handbook or the 
house agent background in chapter 1 of this book. If 
you take the soldier background, you might have played 
a role in events of the last few years. What did you do 
during the Last War? What was your greatest triumph 
or defeat? If you're a spy, are you a prized agent or did 
you disavow your organization after they pushed you too 
far? Don't think of your character as a set of numbers: 
even at 1st level, you're remarkable in Eberron. 
P] L^ 

DM Tip: HIGH STAKES 

What's better than a battle on the deck of an airship? A 

battle on the deck of an airship that's about to crash! A 

DM should look for ways to raise the stakes of an Eberron 

scene, so players feel that every decision matters. This 

could be driven by the consequences of failure: your ac- 

tions protect your friends, your house, or your nation. It 

could involve time: the alarm’s been triggered, and you 

only have 6 rounds before security arrives. Such things can 

even be incidental. Did you start a fight in an alley behind 

a bar? Now you notice the drunk ogre sleeping in the shad- 

ows. If she wakes up, this could get ugly. 
————  ———————— 


WELCOME TO EBERRON 


REMARKABLE VILLAINS 


Eberronis rich in villains, from two-bit hoods to con- 
tinental masterminds. It might be a long time before 
you're ready to face the sinister leader behind the 
Order of the Emerald Claw in battle. But part of the 
flavor of pulp adventure includes recurring villains who 
closely match the heroes—rivals who advance in power 
as you do. 


WELCOME TO EBERRON 


To create a compelling villain, the DM and players 
might develop a villain's backstory together. A DM might 
ask a player: When you fought in the Last War, Halas 
Martain served in your unit until he betrayed you. What 
did he do, exactly? Likewise, when a pulp villain appears 
to die, they can devise remarkable escapes from death. 
Perhaps Halas had a ring that cast an illusion of his 
death while stabilizing him or cast feather fall when he 
leapt from that tower in Sharn. A DM could engage the 
players in determining the answer: It’s Halas Martain, 
all rióht. How do you think he survived your last encoun- 
ter? This collaboration can produce a compelling story 
and a sense of investment in the world. 


NOIR INTRIGUE 


Eberron draws inspiration from noir and hard-boiled 
fiction. It’s a world where stories don't always end well, 
and where there isn't a perfect solution for every prob- 
lem. In developing characters or stories in Eberron, con- 
sider the following concepts. 


EVERYONE HAS REGRETS 


Player characters are remarkable people, but they aren’t 
perfect. As you consider a flaw for your character, you 
can add a little hard-boiled flavor by considering the 
past: Did you make a tragic mistake, and if so, is it some- 
thing you can ever undo? Did you hurt or betray some- 
one who now seeks revenge? The Regrets table provides 
a few examples of missteps that might haunt you. 


REGRETS 


ЧЛ0 Regret 

1 While you were serving in the Last War, you were 
forced to abandon an injured comrade. You don't 
know if they survived. 

2 You placed your faith in a lover who betrayed you. You 
don't know if you can ever trust anyone again. 

3 You murdered a rival. Your actions may have been 
justified, but their face still haunts you. 

4 You made a promise to a child or a lover that you 
failed to keep. 

5 You squandered your family's fortune and brought 
shame and ruin to your household. 

6 You made a bargain with an extraplanar entity that 
you now regret. 

7 | You abandoned your family to pursue a life of adven- 
ture. Your village was destroyed in the war and you 
don't know ifthey survived. 

8 You engaged in covert operations for a nation as a spy 
or soldier. While you were serving your country, you 
did unforgivable things. 

9 Someone puttheir trust in you and you betrayed 
them for personal gain. You might regret it now, but 
you can never repair the damage you've done. 

10 You volunteered for mystical experiments. These may 
be responsible for your class abilities, but you might 
experience side effects. 


Way Do You NEED 200 GOLD PIECES? 

A regret helps shape your personality as an element of 
your past that plays an ongoing role in your story. But 
perhaps you have a problem that needs to be resolved 
right now. Another way to define a character’s flaw is to 
roll on the Debts table. 

Why would you want to take on a debt? The obligation 
adds depth to a character and provides a compelling, 
immediate motive for adventuring—you're not just out to 
get rich; you need gold to get that bounty off your head. 
Its also an opportunity to establish an element that can 
be part of a character moving forward. If you're trying 
to reclaim a magic item from a pawnshop, you declare 
that your character once owned that magic item—an 
heirloom, something you created, or a gift from a men- 
tor—you've just temporarily lost it. If you're trying to 
raise money to join a secret society, it suggests that 
membership in this organization may be a part of the 
story later on. 

Establishing a debt requires collaboration and ap- 
proval by both player and DM. Work together to develop 
the details: Who's blackmailing you? Which secret so- 
ciety are you trying to join? What's the story behind the 
magic item you've pawned, and what sort of item is it? 
You can present ideas, but the DM has final approval. 


DEBTS 


410 Debt 

1 | You committed a crime during the Last War, and now 
you're being blackmailed by someone who has proof. 
You can justify your actions, but the law won't care. 

2 You've got a gambling problem. If you can't repay 
Daask (see chapter 3), you're going to be playing tag 
with a cockatrice. 

3 You own an uncommon magic item, but you had to 
sell it to a pawn shop. If you can't reclaim it within the 
month, they'll sell it off. 

4 You were making a delivery on behalf of the Boromar 
Clan (see chapter 3) and you lost the merchandise. 

5 Someone knows the whereabouts of a sibling or loved 
one you thought lost in the Mourning, but that infor- 
mation is going to cost you. 

6 You have a degenerative disease that can't be cured 
by mundane means. If you can't get a lesser restoration 
soon, you're going to start showing symptoms. 

7 Your family lost everything in the Last War. You could 
getthem a stake in a new farm, inn, or stagecoach 
with 200 gp. 

8 You've got a price on your head. Until you settle 
things with House Tharashk, you'd better keep an eye 
out for bounty hunters. 

9 You have an opportunity to join an influential secret 
society. But you've got only one month to raise the 
membership dues. 

10  Rollagain. It's not your debt: it's your lover's problem. 
Can you solve the problem before they have to face 
the consequences? 


PERSONAL MOTIVES 


Not every conflict involves a fight between light and 
darkness. The vast majority of people are driven by sim- 
ple motives: greed, fear, pride, or ambition. One person 
just wants to get some gold in their pocket. Another 
wants to impress a paramour. A leader guiding their na- 
tion into war is motivated both by fear of their neighbors 
and the sincere belief that Khorvaire would be better off 
under their rule. 

Primordial forces strive to change or destroy Eberron. 
But more often, characters encounter misguided patri- 
ots, religious extremists, dragonmarked houses looking 
to wring a few more pieces of gold out of Khorvaire, 
spies who will do anything to protect their nations, and 
petty criminals trying to build empires. Eberron holds a 
place for selfless heroes and truly vile villains, as well as 
everyone in between. 


SHADES OF GRAY 


In Eberron, it's not always easy to separate the heroes 
from the villains. Good people can do terrible things, 
while cruel or heartless people might serve the greater 
good. An inquisitor might torture innocents in a quest 
to root out a cult of the Dragon Below; if she's stopped, 
the cult will survive and flourish. A group of orcs peri- 
odically raids a human settlement because the settlers 
built their village on land sacred to the orcs and are 
disrupting wards that hold evil at bay. The heroes find a 
powerful magic weapon in a tomb, but the artifact is the 
sword of an ancient hobgoblin general, whose descen- 
dants want it back. The ways to resolve these problems 
aren't always simple. 

Certain situations demand straightforward decisions. 
If Emerald Claw cultists are about to detonate a necrotic 
resonator that will kill half of Sharn, they need to be 
stopped. But in a good Eberron story, the simplest solu- 
tion may not be the best one. 


SOMETHING TO LOSE 


In a noir story, things don't necessarily end well. But any 
adventure carries a risk of death or failure, so what ad- 
ditional factors might be at risk for the characters? They 
should have something to lose beyond hit points, vul- 
nerabilities not reflected in game statistics: fear of a tar- 
nished reputation, a threat to a friend or lover, a favorite 
business destroyed or taken over. Character relation- 
ships require players to invest in the story and work best 
when the DM and player collaborate to develop details 
(the group patrons in chapter 1 provide a framework for 
fleshing out such details). 

A DM who introduces an old buddy who served with 
the player characters during the war could describe the 
person and then ask each player to define a connection 
to them. Present each player with a prompt: Player 
one, how did Smitty save your life? Player two, you and 
Smitty were both in a prison camp; how did you escape? 
The answers to these questions provide details to use in 
a campaign, and they give the players a personal invest- 
ment, which makes it more significant when the Emer- 
ald Claw targets Smitty for assassination! 


WELCOME TO EBERRON 


| IO 


A MAGICAL WORLD 


The Five Nations were built on a magical foundation. To 
them, magic is a form of science, which can be studied 
and taught. Nevertheless, few people possess the skill 
required to become a wizard or an artificer, and high- 
level magic remains rare. Resurrection and teleporta- 
tion aren't part of everyday life, but citizens harness 
lesser effects and use them for the common good. 

Artisans called magewrights provide much of this 
magic. Compared to a wizard or an artificer, a mage- 
wright's knowledge of magic is narrow: a locksmith 
might master the arcane lock and knock spells to 
supplement the use of physical tools; a magewright 
healer could cast lesser restoration and cure wounds in 
addition to using healer's kits and the Medicine skill. A 
magewright’s casting is also slow and expensive: they 
typically cast their spells as rituals. They are artisans, 
not adventurers, and the prosperity of the Five Nations 
was built on their foundation. 

Game statistics are given for magewrights in chapter 
6, including how much it costs them to cast a spell of 1st 
level or higher. In chapter 2, prices are given for mage- 
wright services in the city of Sharn, but those prices can 
be used elsewhere in the world as well. 


DRAGONMARKED DYNASTIES 


Powerful dynastic guilds dominate and regulate the 
magical economy. The dragonmarked houses include 
barons of industry whose influence rivals that of mon- 
archs. Their power derives from their dragonmarks: 
magical sigils passed down through their bloodlines. 
For example, House Jorasco dominates the medical 
trade with its Mark of Healing, while only someone with 
House Lyrandar's Mark of Storms can pilot an airship. 

Even independent businesses are typically licensed by 
a house and conform to the standards it sets. Not every 
tavern is run by House Ghallanda, but the Ghallanda 
seal in the corner of an inn sign assures customers that 
the establishment meets health and safety standards. 

Chapter 1 contains more details about dragonmarks 
and the dragonmarked houses, along with rules for cre- 
ating dragonmarked characters. 


COMMUNICATION 


The Courier's Guild of House Orien operates a mail ser- 


vice, carrying messages and packages across Khorvaire 
by horse and the house's lightning rail. Sending a letter 
by mailis inexpensive; sending a package or a message 
by way of a courier is more secure but more expensive. 

If security is particularly important, House Sivis can 
protect written messages using magic, such as the i//u- 
sory script spell, and House Kundarak can secure pack- 
ages with the glyph of warding spell. 

The gnomes of House Sivis also maintain a network 
of speaking stones (described in chapter 5) to facilitate 
instantaneous communication across long distances. 
Short messages pass from one stone to another one 
within a network of message stations. 

The Communication and Security Services table 
shows typical prices. 


WELCOME TO EBERRON 


COMMUNICATION AND SECURITY SERVICES 


Service Cost 

Arcane lock (House Kundarak) 20 gp 
Courier service (House Orien) 1 sp per mile 
Glyph of warding (House Kundarak) 350 gp 
Illusory script (House Sivis) 15 gp 

Mail service (House Orien) 1 cp per mile 


Message station (House Sivis) 2 sp per word 


Translation (House Sivis) 2 cp рег word 


CONVENIENCE 


In the cities of Khorvaire, magic provides a host of 
minor conveniences. Everbright lanterns (described in 
chapter 5) light the streets. A chef heats a pot of stew 
with a whispered incantation, while magic amplifies 
atowncrier's voice. The various effects produced by 
prestidigitation—heating, cooling, cleaning, and minor 
illusion—all enhance daily life in the cities. 


ENTERTAINMENT AND FASHION 


Theaters employ cantrips to amplify sound and focus 
lighting. Grander performances incorporate illusions, 
creating special effects to thrill audiences, and other 
spells allow actors to perform amazing stunts. Dream 
parlors focus on entirely illusory entertainment. 

Those with the inclination to display their wealth wear 
glamerweave, clothing imbued with illusion (presented 
in chapter 5). This can involve moving images, such as a 
cloak lined with glittering stars or a gown with a pattern 
of flames; the wearer might even adjust the intensity of 
these flames with a word. Expensive glamerweave can 
produce more elaborate effects, such as a gown that 
appears to be made of blooming flowers. Glamerweave 
can also create abstract effects that slowly shift colors or 
shimmer with a subtle glow. 


MEDICINE 


The dragonmarked House Jorasco maintains houses of 
healing across Khorvaire. The simplest service is the 
expert application of the Medicine skill. For those with 
desperate need and gold to pay, most Jorasco outposts 
can provide /esser restoration; the best healers can also 
provide greater restoration. In the finest Jorasco en- 
claves, it's even possible to raise the dead. 

The Healing Services table summarizes typical prices 
for the services provided by House Jorasco. 


HEALING SERVICES 
Service Cost 
3 sp per use ofthe Medicine skill 


1 gp per day 
25 gp per level of the spell 


Minor nonmagical care 
Major nonmagical care 
Cure wounds 


Lesser restoration 50 gp 
Remove curse 75 gp 
Greater restoration 150 gp 
Raise dead 750 gp 


‘TRANSPORTATION 


An excellent system of roads connects the central na- 
tions of Khorvaire. Travelers can always make their way 
by horse or coach, which might employ draft animals 
magebred by House Vadalis for speed or endurance. 
House Vadalis also supplies exotic mounts such as hip- 
pogriffs and griffons. Elemental galleons use bound air 
or water elementals to propel them. 

Two main options provide long-distance travel across 
land. Major cities in Khorvaire are linked by the light- 
ning rail of House Orien, which allows you to avoid the 
perils—and tedium—of the roads. The lightning rail 
uses bound elementals to pull a train of carriages over a 
path of magical stones, between which a rail-like stream 
of lightning arcs. 

If speed is an issue, you can book passage on a House 
Lyrandar airship, which uses a bound elemental to hold 
a ship aloft and propel it through the air. This is almost 
the fastest way to travel, but also the most expensive. 
Elemental airships are a recent innovation and are rela- 
tively rare; many cities don’t yet have docking towers. 

For those with no time to spare and plenty of money 
to spend, House Orien also has teleportation circles in 
each ofits enclaves in cities across Khorvaire. At signif- 
icant cost, a member of the house will transport passen- 
gers instantaneously from one enclave to another. 

The Travel Services table summarizes the cost of trav- 
eling by these extraordinary means. 


TRAVEL SERVICES 


Service Cost Speed 
Airship (House Lyrandar) 1 gp per mile 20 mph 
Elemental galleon (House Lyrandar) 5sppermile 10mph 
Lightning rail (House Orien) 5sppermile 30mph 
Magebred coach (House Orien) 3 sp per mile 5 mph 


Teleportation circle (House Orien) 2,500 gp Instant 


WARFARE 


After a century of war, magic plays an ever-increasing 
role on the battlefield. Massive magical siege staffs fill 
the role of artillery. Semi-sentient warforged titans can 
scatter squads of infantry. Arcane sappers may spread 
glyphs of warding to deny a region to an enemy. Wands 
and rods haven't replaced the swords or bows, but elite 
wandslingers, as military spellcasters are often known, 
are becoming ever more common. 

The nations of Khorvaire all employed different forms 
of battle magic during the war. Aundair fielded the 
greatest number of wizards, while Breland produced 
floating fortresses and other engines of war. The nation 
of Karrnath embraced the practice of necromancy and 
animated hordes of undead soldiers. 

In the final decades of the war, House Cannith created 
the warforged: tireless soldiers formed of metal and 
other materials. The Treaty of Thronehold forbade the 
creation of new warforged and granted freedom to those 
that survived the conflict. Warforged now seek places to 
call home across Khorvaire, but these living weapons 
struggle to find their place in a world at peace. 


WELCOME TO EBERRON 


II 


THE LAST WAR 


For hundreds of years, the continent of Khorvaire was 
united under the kingdom of Galifar. This peace came to 
an end with the death of King Jarot in 894 YK, just over 
a century ago. Conflict over the succession spiraled into 
outright war between the Five Nations. 

The Last War was a bitter struggle that forever 
changed the shape of Khorvaire. It was a century 
marked by shifting alliances, with years of stalemate in- 
terspersed with periods of intense battles. This grueling 
conflict left deep scars on the land and the people, but 
there was worse to come. On 20 Olarune 994 YK, the 
nation of Cyre was consumed in a magical cataclysm 
now known as the Mourning. The cause of the Mourn- 
ing remains unknown; many fear it was caused by un- 
bridled use of war magic. Shock and fear brought the 
nations to the negotiating table, and the Last War came 
to an end in 996 YK with the Treaty of Thronehold. 

Although many celebrated the end of the war, others 
remain unsatisfied with its outcome. No one won the 
war. Even though people optimistically refer to it as the 
Last War, most believe that it’s only a matter of time 
until conflict begins anew. The mystery of the Mourn- 
ing is the only thing holding the warmongers at bay. If 
someone uncovers the secret of the Mourning—if it can 
be proven that the Mourning can't happen again, or if 
its power could be harnessed as a weapon—war could 
erupt again. Until then, the nations remain in a cold war 
as each makes preparations and seeks advantages in a 
conflict that could lie ahead. 


WELCOME TO EBERRON 


THE ScARS OF WAR 


As of 1 Zarantyr 998 ҮК, it's been less than four years 
since the Mourning and less than two years since the 
Last War came to an end. The Last War spanned the 
continent and lasted for over a century. Most people 
want to move on. But the scars of decades of war can't 
be erased so quickly. These are just a few of the ongoing 
effects of the Last War. 


DRAGONMARKED POWER 

The dragonmarked houses remained neutral in the war 
and made considerable profit selling their services to all 
sides. War drives innovation; House Cannith developed 
many new weapons during the war, including the war- 
forged. House Lyrandar perfected its airships in the last 
decade of the conflict. Rumors persist of monsters or 
super soldiers developed by House Vadalis or biological 
weapons in the hands of House Jorasco. 

The dragonmarked houses emerged from the war 
stronger than ever, with the divided nations dependent 
on their services. Before the Last War, united Galifar 
imposed many restrictions on the houses. Today, no 
monarch can afford to break ties with any of the dragon- 
marked houses. What will happen if one of the houses 
goes too far in its pursuit of profit? 


NEW NATIONS 

Before the Last War, Galifar laid claim to all Khorvaire. 
Several new states emerged over the course of the war. 
In some cases, this was largely a formality; Galifar 


never had a strong grip on the Lhazaar Principalities or 
the gnome nation of Zilargo, and they held the Demon 


Wastes in name only. Other states were born in violence: 


the elves of Valenar and the goblins of Darguun seized 
their realms by force. But Aundair yearns to reclaim the 
Eldeen Reaches, Breland keeps a wary eye on the mon- 
strous kingdom of Droaam, and many mistrust the Vale- 
nar elves. Within the Five Nations, angerremains over 
how the final lines were drawn; for example, Thrane re- 
tains control of the ancient Aundairian city of Thaliost, 
seized during the war. 


PHYSICAL DAMAGE 

The borders between nations demonstrate the impact of 
generations of conflict. Forests and farmlands scorched 
by fire and magic are still recovering. Ruined cities have 
yet to be reclaimed, along with shattered villages and 
abandoned fortresses. These deserted sites now provide 
shelter for brigands or are haunted by the restless spir- 
its of those who died in anguish. 

This damage reached far beyond the front lines. 
Magic-fueled weapons, aerial cavalry, and guerrilla 
forces all struck deep within enemy territory, and the 
cities of Khorvaire suffered. Wherever you go, you might 
see the scorch marks of fireballs or wreckage from 
siege weapons. Every nation is working to repair these 
wounds, but the damage could linger for generations. 

As you create an Eberron character, consider your 
roots and the impact of the war. Was your hometown 
destroyed in the war? Is your family thriving, or were its 
members scattered or slain during the conflict? 


REFUGEES AND SHORTAGES 


Refugees live in every major city, including tens of thou- 
sands of exiles produced by Cyre's destruction. Cyrans 
are a people without a homeland, seeking shelter and 
sustenance in the lands of their former enemies. Many 
Cyran refugees are former soldiers who were fighting in 
enemy territory when the Mourning struck, or they were 
farmers and merchants who escaped before their nation 
was consumed. Former nobles now have nothing but 
rags, and scholars or artists live in alleyways. 

Cities and towns still suffer from shortages in the 
aftermath of the war. Farmlands, workers, and the 
resources devoted to the war were lost. Nations are 
recovering, and most essential services and goods are 
available in major cities. But there is always the possi- 
bility that something you want—a luxury item or a spell 
component—simply isn't available or can be acquired 
only through the black market. 


THE MOURNING 


The nation of Cyre was once the heart of the kingdom of 
Galifar. The Last War took a heavy toll on Cyre and its 
citizens, as the nation became a primary battleground 
where the Five Nations crossed swords. But no one was 
prepared for the disaster that struck in 994 YK. 
Accounts of the Mourning vary. Some say that a 
blinding light engulfed the battlefield near the Saerun 
Road. Others say that dead-gray mists rose in the capital 
city of Metrol and spread from there. Within the space of 
one day, the nation of Cyre had been engulfed in a wall 


WELCOME TO EBERRON 


14 


of mist, and anything caught within the mists was horrif- 
ically transformed. Over a million Cyrans were killed on 
the day of Mourning. Those who survived were soldiers 
fighting in enemy territory, those living on the borders 
who were able to flee from the advancing mists, and 
those few who were able to escape the interior through 
magical means. On 20 Olarune 994 YK, the nation of 
Cyre ceased to exist. 

The Mourning threw Khorvaire into a state of shock. 
Who could unleash such power? Was this a weapon, 
and if so, when would those responsible issues their de- 
mands? Were the borders of the lingering walls of mist 
stable, or could they expand at any moment? What was 
to be done with the Cyran refugees surging into every 
adjacent nation? Fear of the Mourning ended the war. 
But all those questions remain unanswered. 

Breland opened its borders to refugees, and Prince 
Oargev serves as de facto ruler in the area now called 
New Cyre. Despite its grand name, New Cyre is little 
more than a vast refugee camp. Other refugees scat- 
tered across Khorvaire; some are treated with pity, oth- 
ers with suspicion or anger. And fear of the Mourning 
hangs like a shadow across Khorvaire. Could it happen 
again? Is this how the world ends? 


THE MOURNLAND 

A wall of dead-gray mist surrounds the remnants of 
Cyre. Beyond the mists lies a land twisted by magic, a 
wound that will not heal. The blasted land is strangely 
transformed. In some places, the ground has fused into 
jagged glass. In others, it is cracked and burned. Broken 
bodies of soldiers from various sides litter the land- 
scape—soldiers whose dead bodies refuse to decom- 
pose. The Mournland is a vast open grave. 

In that horrific landscape, vile magical effects linger, 
and monsters mutate into even more foul and horrible 
creatures. Magical effects continue to rain upon the land 
as storms that never dissipate. Stories speak of living 
spells—war magic that has taken physical form, sentient 
fireballs and vile cloudkills that endlessly search for 
new victims. And angry ghosts continue to fight their 
final battles. 

The only thing predictable about the Mournland is 
that nothing is predictable; any sort of monster or horror 
could lurk within its borders. And yet it also holds the 
wealth and treasures of an entire nation, along with the 
secrets of House Cannith and everything else that was 
left behind. It's dangerous. It's mysterious. But it's also 
a dungeon the size of a nation, with opportunities for 
those brave enough to enter the mists. 


THE MOURNING AND YOU 
In making an Eberron character, think about the impact 
the Mourning had on you. If you're from Cyre, did you 
lose all your family and friends? Are there heirlooms 
lost in the mists that you're determined to regain, or 
loved ones you hope to someday see again? Do you feel 
loyalty to your nation and hope to see it restored, or have 
you burned Cyre out of your heart? 

Even if you're not from Cyre, the Mourning may have 
had a profound impact on you. Are you afraid that the 
Mourning could consume all of Khorvaire, or do you 


WELCOME TO EBERRON 


prefer not to dwell on such things? If you're religious, 
did the shocking tragedy of the Mourning cause you to 
question your faith, or did it reinforce it? If you're an 
artificer or a wizard, are you interested in studying its 
effects more closely. Might you even hope to unravel its 
mysteries yourself? Do you see it solely as a tragedy, or 
do you hope that this awesome power could somehow 
be harnessed? 

Perhaps you were caught in the Mourning and sur- 
vived the experience, but its effects remain with you. 
Consider the following aftereffects of your experience: 


* As a barbarian, you could have been a simple peasant 
caught in the Mourning. Everyone else in your com- 
munity was killed, but their spirits were bound to you. 
Your barbarian rage represents you channeling these 
vengeful ghosts. Is there a way to lay these spirits to 
rest? Do they have unfinished business they want you 
to resolve? 

* As a sorcerer, your magical powers could be the result 
of your exposure to the Mourning. Were you physi- 
cally transformed as well, or are your powers the only 
manifestation of the Mourning? Are you comfortable 
using your abilities, or are you afraid that you might 
be increasing the power of the Mourning with each 
spell you cast? 

• Asa warlock, your patron could be interested in the 
Mourning and drive you to learn more about it. Your 
patron could even be part of the Mourning—perhaps 
a collective of spirits killed on the Day of Mourning, 
or a dark and enigmatic power that might have been 
responsible for this tragedy. If you take the latter ap- 
proach, do you feel that by using your warlock magic 
you are serving the Mourning? Or do you believe 
that you siphon power from it and weaken it with 
your actions? 

* Asa member of an unusual race, you could say that 
you are actually a creation of the Mourning. Perhaps 
your dragonborn was an actual dragon transformed 
on the day of Mourning. Or maybe your tiefling is 
touched by the dark power of the Mourning instead of 
by an infernal power. 


WHAT CAUSED THE MOURNING? 

А ОМ running an Eberron campaign can decide the 
cause of the Mourning or leave it as a mystery that will 
never be solved. People in Eberron have many theories 
about the cause of the Mourning. It's up to the DM to de- 
cide if any of them are correct: 


* The Mourning was the result of a century of extensive 
use of war magic. If the nations continue to use this 
magic, the Mourning will expand. 

• The dragonmarked House Cannith made a fortune 
selling magical weapons to all sides during the Last 
War. The Mourning was caused by research gone 
horribly awry. The secrets can be found in a Cannith 
research facility within the Mournland. If this knowl- 
edge could be recovered and refined, it could produce 
aterrifying weapon. 

* The Mourning was triggered by the release of an an- 
cient demon overlord trapped since the dawn of time. 
This mighty fiend is lurking in the Mournland and 
building its power, but soon it will be ready to act. 


DAN SCOTT 


A DM should consider whether the mystery of the 
Mourning can be solved and what the consequences 
would be. Right now, fear of the Mourning holds war at 
bay. If it’s confirmed that the Mourning is no longer a 
threat—or if one nation manages to harness its power— 
war could begin again. 


THE DRACONIC PROPHECY 


There are patterns hidden in the world. Secrets lie in 
the conjunctions of the planes and moons, in strange 
symbols formed by the flowing lava of a volcanic erup- 
tion or the fissures caused by an earthquake. Carved in 
the walls of ancient citadels and on primeval megaliths, 
knot patterns appear to have meaning that only the con- 
templative mind can hope to comprehend. To those who 
can read them, these myriad events and signs form a 
map of possible futures, a map that can be used to shape 
the course of history. 

Scholars call this map the Draconic Prophecy, attrib- 
uting it to the Progenitor Dragons: Eberron, Siberys, 
and Khyber. The Prophecy is vast and complex, its signs 
scattered across the world. Few humans or even elves 
have the time or resources to unravel its secrets. The 
foremost students of the Prophecy are ancient dragons, 
immortal fiends, and others who have devoted thou- 
sands of years to this work. 

What makes the Prophecy especially complex is that 
it doesn’t define a singular path for the future. Rather, 


the Prophecy is a map that shows many possible fu- 
tures, along with the steps that must occur to make that 
future a reality. A fragment of the Prophecy might say, 
“If the Bear King is slain by a sorrowful assassin in the 
Shadow of the Mourning, the Crown will fall from his 
nation.” The “Bear King” could refer to King Boranel of 
Breland, since the bear is Breland’s heraldic beast. The 
“Shadow of the Mourning” could mean that Boranel 
must be slain in the Mournland, or it could mean that 
the assassination must occur on the anniversary of the 
Mourning. This passage doesn’t say that Boranel will 
be assassinated or that the Brelish monarchy will fall; it 
suggests that if Boranel is assassinated under these con- 
ditions, then the monarchy will surely fall. But it could 
also be fulfilled in different ways, if the terms of the 
Prophecy are interpreted differently. Other fragments of 
the Prophecy might cover what happens if Boranel is as- 
sassinated under other circumstances, or what happens 
if he dies of natural causes. 

As an adventurer, you could be hired by a scholar 
trying to piece together a fragment of the Prophecy 
and clash with a secret society along the way. Or you 
could discover that your family plays a pivotal role in 
a fragment of the Prophecy. Will you embrace this or 
fight your potential destiny? Will you dedicate your life 
to interpreting the Prophecy or ignore it as just a bunch 
of mystical nonsense? And might the Prophecy hold the 
answer to the Mourning itself? 


WELCOME TO EBERRON 15 


WITH A HOMUNCULUS ON HER SHOULDER, THE GNOME ARTIFICER VI BRANDISHES 


HER ARCANE FIREARM, AS A HEAVILY ARMOREO WARFORGED STANDS GUARD. 


IE UE B = 


BEN OLIV 


CHARACTER CREATION 


H E SKYSCRAPERS OF SHARN RISE U P BEFORE YOU, 
the spires glimmering with magical lights. Or 
wind rushes through your hair as the airship 
you'reriding races toward adventure in the 
jungles of Q'barra. Or youhunt Emerald Claw 
agents on the lightning rail, creeping through one train 
car after another. Or you chart another adventurous 
course on the war-torn continent of Khorvaire. What- 
ever path your character takes in Eberron, consider how 
the world affects your character. 

Building on the book's introduction, this chapter re- 
veals how you can create a character shaped by Eberron 
and its war-filled history. The chapter offers you the fol- 
lowing choices: 


Race. Choose one of the playable races detailed in this 
chapter, or pick a racefrom the Player's Handbook 
and learn here how Eberron has affected that species' 
development. 

Dragonmark. Decide whether your character bears 
one of the mystical marks associated with the dragon- 
marked houses. 

Background. Choose the house agent background 
if your character has devoted themself to serving a 
dragonmarked house. 

Artificer. Youhave the option of choosing the artificer 
as your character's class, becoming an unmatched 
magical inventor. 

Group Patron. Working with the other players in your 
group, decide which of the great powers in the world 
backs your group. This decision can shape your en- 
tire campaign. 


RACES 


Humanoids of all kinds have made their mark on the 
continent of Khorvaire. Presented in alphabetical order, 
the playable races in this section have especially shaped 
the land's recent history. 

Each of the races described in the Player’s Handbook 
has a place in Eberron. As you make a character from 
one of these races, this section can help you understand 
your character's place in the world. 

This section also presents other playable races that 
have performed important roles in the world's evolution: 


Changelings are clever shapechangers who can dis- 
guise themselves as other people. 

Goblinoids—bugbears, goblins, and hobgoblins—ruled 
Khorvaire long ago, before the madness of the daelkyr 
undermined them. After serving as mercenaries in 
the Last War, they now seek a place in the world's 
new order. 


CHAPTER 1 


f 


Kalashtar are humanoids bound to spirits from the 
plane of dreams, imbued with wisdom and tele- 
pathic talent. 

Orcs, along with their half-orc kin, are a fierce people 
who have fought world-threatening evils for centuries. 

Shifters draw on their distant lycanthropic heritage to 
manifest bestial traits for short periods of time. 

Warforged are artificial lifeforms built to fight in the 
Last War. Created as tools of battle, they now seek a 
place and purpose beyond war. 


CHANGELINGS 


LONG AGO THERE WAS A WOMAN NAMED JES, AND SHE 
had one hundred children. Her rivals conspired against her 
and swore to kill her children. Jes begged the Sovereigns for 
help, but their only answer was the wind and rain. In the 
depths of her despair, a lonely traveler took her hand. “I 
will protect your children if they follow my path. Let them 
wander the world. They may be shunned and feared, but 
they will never be destroyed." Jes agreed, and the traveler 
gave her his cloak. When she draped it over her children, 
their old faces melted away and they could be whoever they 
wanted to be. And so it remains. Though the children are 
shunned by all, the gift of the Traveler protects them still. 
—Chance, changeling priest 


Changelings can shift their forms with a thought. Many 
changelings use this gift as a form of artistic and emo- 
tional expression. It's also an invaluable tool for grifters, 
spies, and others who wish to deceive. This leads many 
people to treat changelings with suspicion. 


A HIDDEN PEOPLE 


Wherever humans live, changelings reside also; the 
question is whether their presence is known. 
Changelings are born to one of three paths. A few 
are raised in stable communities where changelings 
are true to their nature and deal openly with the people 
around them. Some are orphans, raised by other races, 
who find their way in the world withoutever knowing 
another like themselves. Others are part of nomadic 
changeling clans spread across the Five Nations, fam- 
ilies who keep their true nature hidden from the sin- 
gle-skins. Some clans maintain safe havens in major 
cities and communities, but most prefer to wander the 
unpredictable path of the god known as the Traveler. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


CHANGELING ADOPTING 
A PERSON's APPEARANCE 


In creating a changeling adventurer, consider the 
character's relationships with people around them. 
Does the character conceal their true changeling na- 
ture? Do they embrace it? Do they have connections to 
other changelings or are they alone and in search of 
companions? 


MASKS AND PERSONAS 


In their true form, changelings are pale, with colorless 
eyes and silver-white hair. It is rare to see a changeling 
in that form, for a typical changeling changes their shape 
the way others might change clothes. A casual shape— 
one created on the spur of the moment, with no depth or 
history—is called a mask. A mask can be used to express 
a mood or to serve a specific purpose and then might 
never be used again. However, many changelings develop 
identities that have more depth. They build an identity 
over time, crafting a persona with a history and beliefs. 
This focused identity helps a changeling pinpoint a par- 
ticular skill or emotion. A changeling adventurer might 
have personas for many situations, including negotiation, 
investigation, and combat. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


Personas can be shared by multiple changelings; there 
might be three healers in a community, but whoever is on 
duty will adopt the persona of Tek, the kindly old medic. 
Personas can even be passed down through a family, 
allowing a younger changeling to take advantage of con- 
tacts established by the persona's previous users. 


CHANGELING NAMES _ 


A changeling might use a different name for each mask 
and persona and adopt new names as easily as they 
change faces. The true name of a changeling tends to 
be simple and monosyllabic; however, there are often 
accents to a changeling's name that are expressed 
through shapeshifting, something single-skins will 
likely miss. So, two changelings might have the name 
Jin, but one is Jin-with-vivid-blue-eyes and one is Jin- 
with-golden-nails. 

Changelings have a fluid relationship with gender, see- 
ing it as one characteristic to change among many. 


Changeling Names: Aunn, Bin, Cas, Dox, Fie, Hars, Jin, 
Lam, Mas, Nix, Ot, Paik, Ruz, Sim, Toox, Vil, Yug 


CHANGELING TRAITS 
Your changeling character has the following traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma score in- 
creases by 2. In addition, one ability score of your choice 
increases by 1. 

Age. Changelings mature slightly faster than humans 
but share a similar lifespan—typically a century or less. 
While a changeling can transform to conceal their age, 
the effects of aging affect them similarly to humans. 

Alignment. Changelings tend toward pragmatic neu- 
trality, and few changelings embrace evil. 

Size. Your size is Medium. To set your height and 
weight randomly, start with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 244 
Height = 5 feet + 1 inch + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 115 + (2d4 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Shapechanger. As an action, you can change your ap- 
pearance and your voice. You determine the specifics of 
the changes, including your coloration, hair length, and 
sex. Youcan also adjust your height and weight, but not 
so much that your size changes. You can make yourself 
appear as a member of another race, though none of 
your game statistics change. You can't duplicate the ap- 
pearance of a creature you've never seen, and you must 
adopt a form that has the same basic arrangement of 
limbs that you have. Your clothing and equipment aren't 
changed by this trait. 

Youstay in the new form until you use an action to re- 
vert to your true form or until you die. 

Changeling Instincts. You gain proficiency with two 
of the following skills of your choice: Deception, Insight, 
Intimidation, and Persuasion. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and two other languages of your choice. 


OLGA DREBAS 


SAM KEISER 


DRAGONBORN 


WHEN THE JUNGLE'S HIDDEN DARKNESS STIRS, THE 
children of the dragon will scatter into shadow, keeping 
their eternal watch. 
—The Draconic Prophecy, as recorded in the 
Mar'saval Scrolls 


Tens of thousands of years ago, the dragons of Argon- 
nessen established a garrison of dragonborn in what is 
now Q'barra. These warriors were assigned to protect 
the region against the influence of the Lords of Dust. 
Over time they drifted away from their duties, building a 
nation in eastern Khorvaire and clashing with the gobli- 
noids of the Dhakaani Empire. 

This dragonborn nation came crashing down when 
one of the ancient fiendish Overlords stirred, unleashing 
fiends and corrupting many of the dragonborn them- 
selves. Their nation in ruins, the dragonborn retreated 
to the darkness of Q'barra. They have remained there 
ever since, guarding against corruption and fighting the 
evil forces of the Poison Dusk—which is sometimes de- 
scribed as a cult devoted to a dragon, and sometimes as 
an army gathering in the name of a fiendish Overlord. 

To date the dragonborn have largely ignored the hu- 
mans of Q'barra, and the few humans who've encoun- 
tered dragonborn believe they're some exotic type of 
lizardfolk. If you're a dragonborn, what has caused you 
to emerge from Q'barra? Are you on a quest to help your 
people or to oppose the Lords of Dust? Are you driven 
by wanderlust or curiosity? Did you serve as a merce- 
nary in the Last War? How might your travels tie to the 
fate of your people? 


DWARVES 


GOLD IS THE GIFT OF THE MOUNTAINS, BUT IRON COMES 
from blood and bone. 
—Mror Proverb 


The origin of the dwarves is shrouded in mystery. Some 
of their legends tell of a great migration that led the 
ancient dwarves to Khorvaire from “a land of endless 
ice.” Many believe this refers to the arctic lands of the 
Frostfell, while others claim that the first dwarves must 
have come from the frozen plane of Risia. Wherever 
their roots, these migrant dwarves established a mighty 
nation beneath the surface of Khorvaire. 

Most dwarven legends, unconcerned with the ques- 
tion of origin, dwell on the mighty artifacts and priceless 
treasures crafted by ancient deep-dwelling dwarves, 
and of the bloody wars they waged against the goblin 
Empire of Dhakaan. Dwarves today cherish the memory 
of this ancient nation, for all dwarves in Khorvaire are 
descended from exiles driven from the realm below— 
which was later destroyed by the daelkyr. Particularly 
in the Mror Holds, many dwarves cherish the idea of re- 
turning to the subterranean reaches and reestablishing 
their ancient nation, restoring them to a greatness they 
have all but forgotten. 


DWARVES OF THE MROR HOLDS 


The dwarves of the Mror Holds are defined in part 

by their relationship to the ancient Realm Below. Ina 
desperate effort to rediscover and reclaim the holdings 
of their old nation, the dwarves have recovered many 
weapons of war created in the final days of the empire. 
Some of these weapons were forged by the dwarves to 
wield against the daelkyr, but others were made by the 
daelkyr for the use of their minions—strange symbiotic 
items (some of which appear in chapter 5) that use the 
life force of their hosts to power their magical abilities. 

Some clans have banned the use of these symbiotic 
weapons and any exploration of daelkyr magic, notably 
the prominent Clan Mroranon. Others, particularly Clan 
Soldorak, have embraced this magic to use against the 
daelkyr. Defining a relationship to these discoveries 
can be an important element of your character’s back- 
ground; you might be a Mroranon paladin or ranger 
dedicated to expunging any trace of daelkyr magic from 
the Realm Below, or a Soldorak warlock drawing on the 
magic of Xoriat in pursuit of your own power, as well as 
glory for your clan. 

Another important question to consider in playing a 
Mrorian character is why you have left the Holds. The 
Leaving the Mror Holds table offers some suggestions 
that might spark further ideas. 


DWARF WITHA 


TENTACLE WHIP 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION | 


20 


LEAVING THE MROR HOLDS 
d8 Reason for Leaving 

1 A feud with a rival clan has gotten out of hand, and 
it's best that you spend a few decades away from the 
Holds while things cool down. 

2 You come from a large family and there's no room for 
you to shine in your hold, so you hope to make a name 
for yourself in the wider world. 

3  Yourclan has arranged your marriage and your future, 
and you've decided to have a few adventures before 
you settle down. 

4 You're pursuing a vendetta with a personal rival, seek- 
ing to defeat them either in battle or in business. 

5 You're searching for a legendary dwarven artifact, sto- 
len centuries ago by a Karrnish noble. 

6 You want to assemble champions who can help you ex- 
plore the ancient ruins beneath your ancestral home. 

7 You've rejected your clan's attitude toward daelkyr 
magic, earning the enmity of powerful dwarves. 

8 You want to understand how the other peoples of 
Khorvaire—especially the goblins and orcs—have 
fought the daelkyr. 


DWARVES OF THE FIVE NATIONS 


Dwarves are spread across Khorvaire. Dwarf soldiers 
and engineers were part of the armies that united the 
Five Nations, and dwarf masons laid the foundations 
of the greatest cities of Galifar. Traditionally loyal to 
family and clan, dwarves who were born outside the 
Mror Holds tend to transfer their fierce clan loyalty to 
their new homes—and particularly to the edifices of 
stonework that symbolize the permanence and stabil- 
ity of those places. A Brelish dwarf might feel a deep, 
personal connection to the towers of Sharn or the great 
walls of Wroat; some dwarves love the great Cathedral 
of the Silver Flame in Thrane more than devout follow- 
ers of the Silver Flame. Ultimately, the typical dwarf in 
wider Khorvaire is more patriotic than the average hu- 
man of the Five Nations, and many dwarves fought for 
their nations in the Last War, at least for a time. 

When creating a dwarf character from the Five Na- 
tions, consider both your national loyalty and the role 
your family plays in your life. Do you live near family? 
What kind of work do your closest family members pur- 
sue, and is that reflected in the background you choose? 
Are you close to your relatives, or have you had a falling 
out? Did you lose kin in the Last War? 


DWARVES AND DRAGONMARKS 


The Mark of Warding appears on dwarves of House 
Kundarak, which had its origins as one of the clans of 
the Mror Holds. Kundarak dwarves live across Khor- 
vaire while maintaining close ties to the Mror Holds and 
their loyalty to the house over any particular nation. 

In addition to providing all manner of security, House 
Kundarak dominates Khorvaire’s banking industry. As 
a dragonmarked house, it is obliged to remain neutral 
in the politics of all nations, including its homeland. As 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


a result, Clan Kundarak is no longer represented on 

the Iron Council that rules the Mror Holds. However, it 
wields an influence over the other clans that reflects its 
wealth and its status in the world beyond the Holds, and 
the voice of Kundarak members arguing against the use 
of daelkyr magic carries significant weight. 


ELVES 


PUT UP YOUR SWORDS AND TALK OF PEACE, OR HIDE 
behind your walls of stone. When the host of Valenar thun- 
ders forth, neither will save you. 

—Shaeras Vadallia, High King of Valenar 


Tens of thousands of years ago, the elves of the distant 
continent of Xen'drik rose up against the giants who 
ruled over them. This rebellion is the defining event in 
elf history. As the ancient war progressed, the mage- 
breeders of the giants bound magic into the elves who 
remained loyal to them, forming the drow—assassins 
bred to prey on their other kin. Ultimately, the elves fled 
from Xen'drik and settled the island nation of Aerenal, 
where they split into two distinct cultures: the intro- 
spective Aereni and the warlike Tairnadal. Thus, a war 
nearly forty thousand years ago established the pattern 
of how elves live today. 

Neither the Aereni nor the Tairnadal (which include 
the elves of Valenar) have much interest in human ac- 
tivities, but small numbers of elves have immigrated to 
Khorvaire over the centuries and have more or less inte- 
grated with the cultures of the Five Nations. The drow, 
though, are virtually unknown on Khorvaire. 

As a whole, elves are driven by tradition and respect 
for the past. Where humans value innovation, elves 
strive to master and perfect the techniques of their 
ancestors over the course of studies lasting centuries. 
Elf society has changed little over the last буе thousand 
years, while Khorvaire is constantly evolving. Whatever 
the origin of your elf character, consider your relation- 
ship with the past: Do you value the traditions of your 
ancestors? Or do you fear that your people are too 
mired in the past, and need to find a way to adapt and 
move forward? 


HiGH ELVES: THE AERENI 


For thousands of years, the island nation of Aerenal 
has been ruled and protected by the godlike power of 
the Undying Court, a council of undead high elves. The 
greatest heroes of the Aereni join the Undying Court af- 
ter death, joining their heroic ancestors in immortality. 
The Aereni are isolationists who have little interest 
in the world beyond their island. The Five Nations are 
a place of chaos and war, so why would any sensible 
elf venture into that madness? As you make an Aereni 
elf character, decide what has caused you to leave your 
island home and the protection of the Undying Court in 
order to wander the world. Are you in search of a power 
that could earn you your place in the Undying Court? 
Have you been given a quest by one of your own death- 
less ancestors? Or are you an exile, banished from your 
homeland for some crime against your people's rulers? 


EFFIAM MERCIER 


AERENI ELF WITH 
A SYMBOL OF THE 
UNDviNG Court 


Consider your character's personal and family history. 
What is your family known for, and how can you prove 
yourself to be a master of these skills? Do you have an- 
cestors in the Undying Court, and if so, what's your re- 
lationship with them? Do you find it challenging to deal 
with the short-lived races, or are you patient with them? 


Woop ELVES: THE TAIRNADAL 


Tairnadal elves dedicate themselves to the arts of 

war. The greatest heroes of the Tairnadal's many 
wars—against giants, dragons, and the champions of 
Dhakaan-—live on after death, becoming the patron 
ancestors of the Tairnadal. Upon reaching adulthood, a 
Tairnadal elf forms a bond with one of these ancestors 
and strives to follow in the footsteps of this ancestor, liv- 
ing as the patron did. In this way, the champion comes 
to embody their ancestor, allowing the dead to live on. 

The Tairnadal have three distinct lines: the Draleus 
Tairn, the Silaes Tairn, and the Valaes Tairn. All three 
lines roam the northern plains of Aerenal, having left 
the forest long ago, but the Valaes Tairn now reside 
mostly in Valenar, being the Tairnadal most often en- 
countered in Khorvaire. Despite sharing a homeland 
with the Aereni, the Tairnadal have distinct religious 
traditions, revering their patron ancestors rather than 
the Undying Court. 

In creating a Tairnadal character, including a Valenar 
elf, think about your patron ancestor. Most Tairnadal 
pursue the same class as their patron, so if your char- 
acter is a wizard, your ancestor was likely a legendary 


archmage. Was your ancestor a famous blademaster, a 
stealthy hunter, or a war chanter? Were they chivalrous 
or merciless? Bold or clever? Whatever their path, it 

is your duty to follow their example. Is this something 
you proudly embrace, or do you resist it? Do you know 
another elf with the same patron ancestor, and what's 
your relationship to that character? Do you know an elf 
whose patron ancestor was a bitter rival of yours? 

Also consider why you are traveling with a group of 
player characters (who are presumably not also mem- 
bers of your war band) instead of serving with the Tair- 
nadal. Do you experience visions of your patron ances- 
tor driving you on a particular course? Are you pursuing 
an epic quest that mirrors your ancestor's legendary 
deeds? Are you seeking vengeance for the death of a 
friend or ally? Or have you turned away from your peo- 
ple, either by choice or because of the actions of a rival? 


DOUBLE-BLADED SCIMITAR 

The double-bladed scimitar is the signature weapon of 
Valenar elves. A haft of fine wood supports a long, curv- 
ing blade on either end. Forged with techniques honed 
over centuries, these blades are strong, sharp, and 
remarkably light. Each scimitar is a masterpiece, and 
as a result the double-bladed scimitar is an expensive 
weapon (100 gp)—few though ever have the opportunity 
to purchase one. A Valenar blade in the hands of a non- 
elf is generally assumed to have been stolen or looted 
from a fallen foe, and a Valenar elf might feel entitled 

to demand its return or challenge the bearer to prove 
they're worthy to wield it. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


TAIRNADAL ELF IN 
VULKOOR! ARMOR 


22 


A double-bladed scimitar is a martial weapon, weigh- 
ing 6 pounds and dealing 2d4 slashing damage on a hit. 
It has the two-handed property and the following spe- 
cial property: 

If you attack with a double-bladed scimitar as part of 

the Attack action on your turn, you can use a bonus 

action immediately after to make a melee attack with 
it. This attack deals 1d4 slashing damage on a hit, in- 
stead of 2d4. 


FEAT: REVENANT BLADE 
Prerequisite: Elf 


You are descended from a master of the double-bladed 


scimitar, and some of that mastery has passed on to you. 


You gain the following benefits: 


• Increase your Dexterity or Strength score by 1, toa 
maximum of 20. 

• While you are holding a double-bladed scimitar with 
two hands, you gain a +1 bonus to Armor Class. 

* Adouble-bladed scimitar has the finesse property 
when you wield it. 


ELVES OF THE FIVE NATIONS 


Throughout history, elves have occasionally migrated to 


live among the other peoples of Khorvaire. On rare oc- 
casions, entire families have relocated (as House Phiar- 
lan did, almost three thousand years ago), but more 
often wanderers and exiles have come to Khorvaire and 
made their way there. Many of the finest wizards and 
most renowned artisans in the Five Nations are high 
elves. Wood elves are found among the rangers and 
druids of the Eldeen Reaches and stalking the darkest 
alleys of Sharn. 

As an elf born and raised in Khorvaire, your charac- 
ter has grown up among the shorter-lived races. You 
might not be as concerned with history and tradition as 
the Aereni and Tairnadal; you could even live your life 
entirely in the moment, with no care for your family or 
your legacy. Or you could be fascinated by the history 
and traditions of your ancestors and try to relearn the 
ways your family has forgotten. 

Consider also whether you've outlived human friends 
and how that might affect you. Did you know the par- 
ents or grandparents of another member of your party? 
Are you trying to repay a debt or fulfill a promise to 
that long-dead friend, or are you trying to recapture 
some spark of the friendship you felt years ago? Do you 
remember a time before the Last War? Did you fight 
in the war? 


DROW OF XEN'DRIK 


Long ago on the continent of Xen'drik, the first drow 
fought beside the giants against the other elves. Tens 
of thousands of years have passed, and drow and other 
elves remember each other only as figures in their leg- 
ends. The Undying Court and the patron ancestors of 
the Tairnadal remember the drow, but they have little 
occasion to teach their living descendants about these 
shadows of the distant past. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


When the elves fled to Aerenal, the drow remained on 
Xen'drik as subjects of the giants, and they were caught 
in the collapse of giant civilization. Today they linger 
on Xen'drik and have set their own course, free of the 
giants' malevolent influence. 

Three distinct drow cultures formed after the fall of 
the giants. The most numerous are the Vulkoori, hunt- 
ers dedicated to a scorpion god called Vulkoor. They 
hunt giants and other dangers in their lands. Led by 
powerful druids and wizards, the Sulatar cling to tradi- 
tions of elemental shaping that date back to the Age of 
Giants. They live in a handful of obsidian cities across 
Xen'drik, and believe that they are destined to cleanse 
the world in a fiery apocalypse. Finally, the Umbragen 
are descended from drow who fled into the depths of 
the earth when the giant civilization fell. They wield so- 
phisticated magic in their unceasing battles against the 
daelkyr and the other aberrations of the underworld. 

When creating a drow character, think about how 
you came to Khorvaire. Are you a Vulkoori hunter who 
accompanied an expedition home to Khorvaire, now 
seeking your way in this strange new world? Are you an 
Umbragen seeking powers that can help your people in 
their endless war? Or are you a Sulatar pursuing a per- 
sonal path to glory? 

How do you react to meeting members of other elven 
cultures during your journeys? You might quickly rec- 
ognize that most bear little resemblance to the terrors 
described in your people's legends, or you might have an 
almost instinctive reaction of distrust. You might have 
overcome your initial prejudices by the time the cam- 
paign begins, or perhaps you're working to build trust 
with another elf member of your adventuring party. 


ELVES AND DRAGONMARKS 


The Mark of Shadow first appeared among the elves 
of the Phiarlan line, and the house quickly turned the 
mark's powers of shadow and illusion into an economic 
dynasty. The suspicion of their kin drove them from 
Aerenal to Khorvaire, and the house splintered during 
the Last War, giving rise to House Thuranni. The two 
houses of shadow control the business of espionage 
throughout Khorvaire, but they also operate more legiti- 
mate ventures related to art and entertainment. 
Phiarlan blood still runs among some of the Aereni 
elves, and the Mark of Shadow appears once or twice in 
each elven generation. Elves bearing this mark are al- 
ways inducted into the elite force of the Cairdal Blades— 
an espionage agency in the service of Aerenal's Sibling 
Kings (see chapter 2). 


GNOMES 


FIVE WORDS CAN DEFEAT A THOUSAND SWORDS. 
—Zil proverb 


The average gnome has a love of knowledge that bor- 
ders on obsession, a curiosity that admits no limits, and 
a vast collection of potentially useful information on ev- 
ery personal acquaintance. Most gnomes detest physical 
violence and prefer to solve their problems with words— 


SUZANNE HELM 


whether that's a bard's eloquent persuasion, a wizard's 
words of power, or a rogue's careful threat. They give 

an initial impression as friendly busybodies, always 
ready to lend a hand or share a story, while asking ques- 
tions that tend toward the slightly-too-personal. Often, 
though, a cheerful and amiable gnome is methodically 
adding to a mental storehouse of knowledge that might 
one day provide important leverage. 


GNOMES OF ZILARGO 


To say that every Zil gnome is a ruthless schemer would 
be a hurtful exaggeration. Intrigue is the favorite pas- 
time of most Zil, though. Every gnome child of Zilargo 
is taught to manipulate and deceive, and by the time 
they reach adulthood most have been involved in dozens 
of schemes and feuds, some of which persist well into 
adulthood. Even a gnome with a good heart and noble 
goals—of which there are many—often still prefers to 
use trickery and cunning rather than the unreliable 
tools of honesty or brute force. 

Most Zil gnomes belong to the forest gnome subrace. 
Their natural talent for illusion aids them in trickery and 
entertaining, and they often use small animals as mes- 
sengers and guides. 

When you're making a Zil gnome character, consider 
what kinds of schemes you or your family might be 
involved in. The Zil Schemes table offers some sug- 
gestions, but you should feel free to elaborate on these 
schemes, even to absurd extremes. 


Zit SCHEMES 
d10 Scheme 

Т Your family is working on a new form of elemental 
binding, but they need a lot of Khyber dragonshards. 

2 Хои have an anonymous contact who sends you mis- 
sions via the sending spell. When you do as you're 
asked, you receive handsome rewards. 

3 You've inherited a plot of land in Q'barra. If you don't 
visit within a year, you'll lose the claim. 

4  Dueto an unusual twist of Triumvirate law, you share 
the same name with a number of other Zil, and you're 
all legally considered to be the same person. 

5 You've acquired a spellshard (described in chapter 5) 
that contains a vast amount of text in a strange code. 

6 You know the location of a wanted war criminal, and 
you've been trying to decide whether to turn them in or 
trytogetsomething in exchange for your silence. 

7 You've been selling false treasure maps, but now 
you've found one that might be real. 

8 You've acquired a controlling stake in a dragonshard 
mine, which was abandoned long ago. But why? Ko- 
bolds? Aberrations? There's only one way to find out! 

9 Your family is facing financial ruin, and they've taken 
out a life insurance policy on you. It only pays out if 
you die under unusual circumstances, and they're en- 
couraging youto seek out more dangerous adventures. 

10 You're peddling a life-extension scheme where clients 
are petrified by a medusa and then restored later. 


Zit GNOME 


Additionally, consider your relationship to Zilargo: 
why you have left, and what ties do you still have to it? 
Your scheme could provide a good reason for you to 
leave. Or you could be a sage gathering information 
for the Library of Korranberg or an investigator send- 
ing stories of your adventures back to the Korranberg 
Chronicle. Family is important to the Zil, and you could 
be pursuing your family's interests. You could even be 
working for the mysterious Trust, the conspiracy behind 
the Triumvirate's throne that quietly maintains order 
in Zilargo. If you are working for the Trust, you could 
have a specific mission, but you could also be a sleeper 
agent—gathering information and allies until you're acti- 
vated and you are put to your intended use. 

Zil Names. Zil society is divided into major houses, 
each of which is composed of multiple families. Each 
gnome carries the name of a house and of a family in ad- 
dition to a personal name. For example, Alina Lorridan 
Lyrris and Tallian Talius Lyrris are members of differ- 
ent families (Lorridan and Talius) within House Lyrris. 
Gnome names are long and lyrical; a Zil proverb claims 
"the sweetest song is the name of a friend." Personal 
and clan names are usually at least three syllables long, 
and there is a strong tradition of alliteration. 


GNOMES OF THE FIVE NATIONS 


As they have for countless generations, insatiable cu- 
riosity and endless opportunity draw gnomes from 
Zilargo into the wider lands of Khorvaire. Most of these 
dispersed gnomes find new homes and integrate easily 
into local cultures. Gnomes can be found in any walk 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


24 


of life, whether they be as merchants, magewrights, 
scholars, or scoundrels. While the gnomes of the Five 
Nations aren't as inherently devious as their Zil cousins, 
they share the Zil emphasis on the importance of family. 

As a gnome character from the Five Nations, you 
might have a network of connections to the community 
your grew up in, likely built on the exchange of informa- 
tion. Alternatively, you might seek your own path in life, 
avoiding the intrigues your cousins adore. 


GNOMES AND DRAGONMARKS 


The Mark of Scribing appears among the gnomes of 
House Sivis. The gnomes of this house were among 
the first of their kind toleave Zilargo and live in human 
lands. They love bureaucracy and intrigue as much as 
the gnomes of their homeland, but they have carefully 
cultivated a reputation for impartiality and secrecy, 
since their services rely on trust. 

Today, House Sivis provides avenues of communica- 
tion across Khorvaire. Translation, mediation, inter- 
preting, and legal advocacy all fall within House Sivis's 
broad purview, and they maintain the network of mes- 
sage stations that allow cross-continent communication. 


GOBLINOIDS 


HOISTING THE HEAD BY THE FADING PLUMES OF THE 
ruined helmet, still tied under the chin by a cord, Haruuc 
raised it in one hand and his bloody sword in the other. 
"Your lord is dead!" he howled in the human language. 
"The battle is done! By my sword, I claim this place and 
name it Rhukaan Draal, the crown city of Darguun, the 
land of the people!" 

—Don Bassingthwaite, The Doom of Kings 


The goblinoid species—goblins, hobgoblins, and bug- 
bears—were once the dominant civilization in Khor- 
vaire, with the goblinoid Empire of Dhakaan ruling the 
continent for thousands of years. It was crippled by a 
long conflict with the daelkyr and their aberrant armies; 
even though the daelkyr were defeated, the seeds of 
madness took root in the empire and tore it apart. Today 
there are four primary goblinoid cultures in Khorvaire. 


CITY GOBLINS 


Goblins dwell in mostofthe major cities of the Five 
Nations. When humans first came to Khorvaire, they 
enslaved many goblins and built their cities on the foun- 
dations of Dhakaani ruins. Galifar ended the practice of 
slavery, and these goblins are now citizens of the Five 
Nations. Gifted goblins can be found in all walks of life, 
and goblins served in the armies of the Five Nations 
during the Last War. 


THE GHAALDAR 


The Ghaal'dar tribes arose from the remnants of the 
Dhakaani Empire. Hobgoblins are the leaders of the 
Ghaal'dar, enforcing their will on their goblin and bug- 
bear peers. The history of the Ghaal'dar is filled with 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


strife; when they weren't fighting Galifar or Zilargo, the 
tribes usually turned on one another. This came to an 
end with the Last War. House Deneith hired Ghaal'dar 
mercenaries, and this gave focus to the divided tribes. 
A brilliant hobgoblin, Haruuc, united the Ghaal'dar, 

and under his leadership they seized control of what is 
now Darguun (see chapter 2). The aging Lhesh Haruuc 
remains as the ruler of Darguun, and many fear that his 
death could throw the region into chaos. 

As a Ghaal'dar goblinoid, you hold your place through 
cunning and strength. You may have been a former mer- 
cenary now seeking adventure. You could be working 
as an emissary for one of the Ghaal'dar tribes or even 
Lhesh Haruuc himself. Or you could have been driven 
from your tribe by the actions of a rival; perhaps you're 
seeking allies to reclaim your birthright. 


THE MARGUUL 


The Marguul bugbears threw off the yoke of the 
Ghaal'dar long ago, seizing territory in the Seawall 
Mountains in the south of Darguun. They are infamous 
raiders, and while they have brokered a truce with the 
Ghaal'dar, anyone venturing into the Seawall Mountains 
had best travel with a Marguul guide. 

As a Marguul bugbear, you are savage and proud of it. 
The Marguul worship the Mockery and believe in victory 
by any means necessary: there is no such thing as honor 
on the battlefield. It's certainly an unusual choice for a 
player character, but if you've taken a liking to a particu- 
lar group of the small folk, you could be a powerful ally. 


'ТНЕ HEIRS OF DHAKAAN 


Though the Dhakaani Empire defeated the alien 
daelkyr, the war left seeds of corruption strewn through- 
out the empire. As Dhakaan began to fall, a number 

of generals and governors gathered their forces and 
retreated into shelters deep within the earth, deter- 
mined to preserve their civilization until the Empire 
could finally be restored. After thousands of years, their 
descendants have finally emerged, competing among 
themselves to determine which leader deserves the im- 
perial crown. Once this is settled, they will turn to the 
conquest of Darguun and Khorvaire. 

The Dhakaani are far fewer in number than the 
Ghaal'dar; they had to carefully limit their population in 
the underground vaults they've dwelled in for the past 
age. However, they have held onto the martial discipline 
and techniques that allowed their ancestors to dominate 
the continent. Their weaponsmiths are superior even 
to the artificers of House Cannith, and they are experts 
in the working of adamantine and other exotic metals. 
Anyone who presumes to look down upon goblinoids 
should be surprised by the skills of the Dhakaani. 

The Heirs of Dhakaan are an agnostic society and 
don't have clerics, paladins, or druids. Their focus is 
on martial excellence, and their spiritual leaders are 
bards, who tell tales of past glory. Among the Dhakaan, 
goblinoids work together. Hobgoblins are the strategists 
and commanders, typically having the skills of fighters, 
bards, or rangers. Bugbears cultivate a focused battle 
rage and are typically barbarians, Goblins are largely 


artisans and laborers, but exceptional goblins join the 
khesh'dar ("silent folk”), learning the skills of rogues, 
monks, or rangers. The khesh'dar spread agents across 
the Five Nations, and one can never know when a city 
goblin might turn out to be an assassin. 

As an adventurer from a Dhakaani clan, consider why 
are you working with the other player characters? Are 
you a scout gathering information? Are you searching 
for allies to defeat a rival clan, or to support your own 
unlikely bid for the Imperial throne? Are you an exile? 
If so, do you hope to regain your position, or have you 
abandoned your ties to the Dhakaani? 


GOBLINOID NAMES 


Goblinoid names often feature drawn-out vowel sounds 
(represented by doubled letters), as seen in the names of 
both their ancient empire (Dhakaan) and their newborn 
country (Darguun). Goblins, hobgoblins, and bugbears 
use the same names and naming conventions, despite 
their tribal differences. 


Male Names: Aruget, Chetiin, Daavn, Dabrak, Dagii, 
Drevduul, Duulan, Fenic, Gudruun, Haluun, Haruuc, 
Jhazaal, Kallaad, Krakuul, Krootad, Mazaan, Munta, 
Nasaar, Rakari, Reksiit, Tariic, Taruuzh, Thuun, 
Vanii, Vanon, Wuudaraj 

Female Names: Aaspar, Aguus, Belaluur, Denaal, 
Draraar, Duusha, Ekhaas, Eluun, Graal, Gaduul, Ha- 
shak, Jheluum, Kelaal, Mulaan, Nasree, Raleen, Razu, 
Rekseen, Senen, Shedroor, Tajiin, Tuneer, Valii, Wuun 


RACIAL TRAITS 


If you're playing a goblinoid, your racial traits are deter- 
mined by whether you're a bugbear, goblin, or hobgoblin. 


BUGBEAR TRAITS 
Your bugbear character has the following racial traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score in- 
creases by 2, and your Dexterity score increases by 1. 

Age. Bugbears reach adulthood at age 16 and live up 
to 80 years. 

Alignment. Bugbears live on the fringes of society 
even in Darguun, where they value self-sufficiency and 
violence. They are generally chaotic, organizing in loose 
tribes under charismatic and powerful leaders. 

Size. Your size is Medium. To set your height and 
weight randomly, start with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2412 
Height = 6 feet + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 200 + (246 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60 feet 
of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if it 
were dim light. You can't discern color in darkness, only 
shades of gray. 

Long-Limbed. When you make a melee attack on your 
turn, your reach for it is 5 feet greater than normal. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 25 


26 


Powerful Build. You count as one size larger when 
determining your carrying capacity and the weight you 
can push, drag, or lift. 

Sneaky. You are proficient in the Stealth skill. 

Surprise Attack. If you surprise a creature and hit it 
with an attack on your first turn in combat, the attack 
deals an extra 2d6 damage to it. You can use this trait 
only once per combat. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Goblin. 


GOBLIN TRAITS 
Your goblin character has the following racial traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity score 
increases by 2, and your Constitution score in- 
creases by 1. 

Age. Goblins reach adulthood at age 8 and live up 
to 60 years. 

Alignment. In Eberron, goblins are usually neutral. 
They tend to look out for themselves, preferably without 
drawing unwanted attention from any larger, more pow- 
erful people. 

Size. Your size is Small. To set your height and weight 
randomly, start with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d4 
Height = 3 feet + 5 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 35 + your size modifier 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60 feet 
of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if it 
were dim light. You can’t discern color in darkness, only 
shades of gray. 

Fury of the Small. When you damage a creature with 
an attack or a spell and the creature's size is larger than 
yours, you can cause the attack or spell to deal extra 
damage to the creature. The extra damage equals your 
level. Once you use this trait, you can’t use it again until 
you finish a short or long rest. 

Nimble Escape. You can take the Disengage or Hide 
action as a bonus action on each of your turns. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Goblin. 


HOBGOBLIN TRAITS 
Your hobgoblin character has the following racial traits. 
Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution score in- 
creases by 2, and your Intelligence score increases by 1. 
Age. Hobgoblins mature at the same rate ashumans 
and have lifespans similar in length to theirs. 
Alignment. Hobgoblin society in Eberron is shaped by 
the ideal of a strict code of honor and rigid martial disci- 
pline. Most hobgoblins are lawful, tending toward harsh 
enforcement of their laws. 
Size. Your size is Medium. To set your height and 
weight randomly, start with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d10 
Height = 4 feet + 8 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 110 + (2d4 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60 feet 
of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if it 
were dim light. You can’t discern color in darkness, only 
shades of gray. 

Martial Training. You are proficient with two martial 
weapons of your choice and with light armor. 

Saving Face. Hobgoblins are careful not to show 
weakness in front of their allies, for fear of losing status 
among your allies. If you miss with an attack roll or 
fail an ability check or a saving throw, you can gaina 
bonus to the roll equal to the number of allies you can 
see within 30 feet of you(maximum bonus of +5). Once 
you use this trait, you can’t use it again until you finisha 
short or long rest. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Goblin. 


HALF-ELVES 


I’M NOT HALF ANYTHING. YOU HUMANS COME FROM 
Sarlona. Elves are from Aerenal. Me? I'ma true child of 
Khorvaire. 

—Nandon Tam, Khoravar activist 


From the Towering Woods of the Eldeen Reaches to 
the slums of Sharn, half-elves are found across Khor- 
vaire. New half-elves are born in every generation from 
pairings between humans, elves, and other halfelves, 
with children typically clinging to a parent’s culture. 
Over centuries, though, half-elves have developed their 
own communities and traditions, giving them an iden- 
tity strengthened by the rise of House Lyrandar and 
House Medani. Members of these communities gen- 
erally dislike the term “half-elf,” instead calling them- 
selves Khoravar, an Elvish term meaning "children of 
Khorvaire." 

The elves of Aerenal have never allowed a half-elf into 
the Undying Court, and the Valenar elves don't consider 
half-elves capable of channeling a Valenar ancestral 
spirit. Among humans, though, half-elves don’t experi- 
ence any more prejudice or bias than members of other 
races, and some half-elves could easily be mistaken 
for human. 

In making a half-elf character, consider whether you 
were born in a Khoravar community, or if your parents 
were members of different races. Is your half-elf identity 
a source of pride, a simple fact of life, or something that 
has been difficult for you? 


KHORAVAR 


The culture that has developed among Khorvaire’s na- 
tive half-elves places a strong emphasis on hospitality 
toward other Khoravar. They don’t expect each other to 
put themselves in danger for strangers’ sake, but when 
possible, half-elves do what they can to help others with 
information, shelter, and the like. Khoravar communi- 
ties have weekly unity dinners where local news and 
events are shared; these meals are a great chance to 
hear about local events and opportunities. 


Many Khoravar espouse the idea of "the bridge 
between," the notion that the Khoravar are called to 
facilitate communication and cooperation between 
members of different cultures or species. Khoravar who 
follow this philosophy often become bards, diplomats, 
mediators, or translators. Others are fascinated by their 
distant connection to the fey and seek to build bridges 
between the Material Plane and the Feywild of Thela- 
nis. These Khoravar often become Greensinger druids 
or warlocks with Archfey patrons. 

Khoravar speak both Common and Elvish, and among 
themselves they often blend these two together. This 
pidgin makes perfect sense to anyone who speaks both 
languages, butsomeone who speaks only one of them 
will miss some words and subtlety of meaning. 

As you create a Khoravar character, you have a wide 
range of options to describe your backstory. The Khora- 
var Origin table can provide inspiration for it. 


KHORAVAR ORIGIN 
d10 Origin 

1 You're the linchpin of a Khoravar community in a ma- 
jor city, hosting unity meals and maintaining connec- 
tions with every half-elf in the city. 

2 You grew up in a small town dominated by humans. 
You didn't know any other half-elves, and you did your 
bestto fit in. 

3 Хои lived in the Eldeen Reaches as part of a small 
Khoravar community, trying to be a bridge between 
the human farmers in the east and the druids and 
wilder folk in the west. 

4 Your small Khoravar community has only survived in 
the slums of Sharn through the close, family-like sup- 
portyou show each other. 

5 You're part of a community in Thrane whose devotion 
to the Silver Flame has led you to extend your unity 
meals to non-Khoravar. 

6 Your Khoravar community is the crew of a Lhazaar 
ship. 

7 You're part of a tiny Khoravar community in Karrnath 
that's fascinated with death and the practices of your 
Aereni ancestors, transforming your unity meals into 
grim celebrations of death. 

8 You're part of a tiny community of Khoravar living in 
an unexpected place, such as Droaam, Darguun, or 
even the Demon Wastes. Your people strive to find 
common ground with the native population. 

9 You are associated with House Lyrandar or House 
Medani, but you're more interested in the role the 
house plays in supporting Khoravar communities 
than in the work of its guilds. 

10  Youride with the Valenar, hoping one day to prove 
that you are worthy of taking on a patron ancestor. 


HALF-ELVES AND DRAGONMARKS 


Two dragonmarks appear among half-elf families: the 
Mark of Detection is found in House Medani and the 
Mark of Storm in House Lyrandar. Both houses were es- 
tablished families among the Khoravar by the time their 
dragonmarks appeared, and they remain pillars of the 
Khoravar's diverse culture. The Khoravar ideal of build- 
ing bridges supports the work of both houses. 

With the Mark of Storm, House Lyrandar operates 
sailing ships and flying vessels, as well as bringing rain 
to farmlands. House Medani uses the Mark of Detection 
to offer services of personal protection. 


HALFLINGS 


ZOMBIES? MINOTAURS? THEY DON'T SCARE ME A BIT. 


But a howling halfling warrior charging in on a clawfoot 
raptor? Most terrifying thing I've ever seen. 
—Sir Danton ir'Lain, Brelish knight 


The halflings of Eberron originate from eastern Khor- 
vaire, and many nomadic tribes of halflings still travel 
the Talenta Plains. The appearance of dragonmarks 
among the halflings spurred their slow migration across 
Khorvaire, spreading their services of healing and hos- 
pitality along with the migration of the earliest humans 
across the continent. Now they are found in every part of 
Khorvaire, putting their distinctive talents to use. 
Lightfoot halflings are the more widespread halfling 
subrace, especially in the Talenta Plains, but stout hal- 
flings are found within nearly every halfling community. 


TALENTA HALFLINGS 


The halflings who migrated across Khorvaire in the 
company of humans ended up looking very human in 
dress, manners, and customs. Their cousins who re- 
main in the Talenta Plains could hardly appear more dif- 
ferent. In their homeland, halflings are nomads who ride 
domesticated dinosaurs across the wide plains. Those 
few Talenta halflings who journey across Khorvaire are 
visibly out of place, both attracting curious stares and 
expressing plenty of curiosity of their own about the 
strange ways of Khorvaire's cities and towns. 

As you make a Talenta halfling character, give some 
thought to why your character left the open plains. Per- 
haps you served as a mercenary scout in the Last War, 
and you've remained with the comrades you met in the 
conflict. Maybe your tribe was wiped out by a foreign 
enemy, spurring you to travel the wider world in search 
of information and revenge. You might be guided by the 
spirits, who send you whispers and visions that lead you 
on your adventures. You could be an official envoy of 
your tribe seeking allies in the world, or simply sent to 
learn more about the lands beyond the plains. 

Also, consider your relationship to the dinosaurs that 
play a central role in the life of the Talenta halflings. 
You might flavor your spells and class features as dino- 
saur-related: you could have a clawfoot companion, take 
on а fastieth form, name your combat styles and maneu- 
vers after dinosaur attacks, or take inspiration from a 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 27 


glidewing (pteranodon) totem spirit. Or you could simply 
wear a dinosaur mask (as many Talenta halflings do), 
adorn yourself with claws and teeth from past dinosaur 
companions, or adopt dinosaur-like mannerisms. Wher- 
ever you travel, your connection to the dinosaurs of your 
home remains strong. 

Finally, it can be helpful to decide on a couple of be- 
havioral quirks that reflect your culture. The Halfling 
Quirkstable can provide some inspiration. 


HALFLING QUIRKS 
di0 Quirk 

1 You are constantly amazed by things the people of the 
Five Nations take for granted. 

2 You pattern your behavior on a species of dinosaur. 

3 You are extremely curious, and you're always search- 
ing for new experiences. 

4 You love to boast, and you're always telling exagger- 
ated stories of your amazing adventures. 

5 You wear a mask that you believe holds the spirit of 
your former dinosaur mount. You like to talk to it. 

6 You don’t understand the concept of “facts.” To you, 
everything is a story, and truth is in how you tell it. 

7 You are annoyed by buildings and tools designed 
without consideration for small people. 
You seek vengeance for a wrong done to your people. 

9 You never forget an insult or injury. 

10 You ascribe everything to the work of spirits. 


HALFLINGS OF THE FIVE NATIONS 


Quick and charming, many halflings put their natural 
talents to use as bards, barristers, merchants, and pol- 
iticians throughout Khorvaire. Of course, these same 
talents prove equally useful for burglars, grifters, and 
other criminals. 


Of particular note is the halfling-run criminal enter- 
prise of the Boromar Clan, the most powerful crime syn- 
dicate in Breland. The Boromars are based in Sharn, 
but their influence reaches across the nation and even 
to the distant city of Stormreach. If you decide to play a 
halfling rogue, or a character with a criminal or charla- 
tan background, consider (with your DM) whether you 
have a connection to the Boromar Clan. You could be a 
freelance operative who occasionally gets jobs from a 
Boromar underboss. You might have a cousin in the syn- 
dicate, who occasionally pulls you in to criminal affairs. 
Or you could even be the reluctant heir of a Boromar 
leader; perhaps you've gone on the run rather than take 
your appointed place in the criminal empire, but your 
past may yet catch up with you. You could also be the 
point of contact who has made the Boromar Clan your 
party's group patron, as described later in this chapter. 


HALFLINGS AND DRAGONMARKS 


Two dragonmarks appear among the halflings of 
Khorvaire, the Mark of Healing in House Jorasco and 
House Ghallanda's Mark of Hospitality. Both marks are 
ancient, first manifesting among the halflings about the 
same time that the elves of Aerenal received their first 
marks—centuries before the arrival of humans on Khor- 
vaire. Sometimes halflings of House Ghallanda joke that 
their mark prepared them for the arrival of humans by 
allowing them to make their new guests comfortable in 
Khorvaire. There's actually some truth in the humor: the 
services provided by both halfling houses helped enable 
the spread of humanity across the continent. 

With its powers related to food and shelter, the Mark 
of Hospitality was a boon to the early halfling nomads, 
but now it allows House Ghallanda to run the best inns, 
hostels, and taverns in the land. Similarly, the Mark of 
Healing has always been a boon to both nomads and 
settlersfacing dangerous wilds, and House Jorasco still 
employs both magical and mundane healing techniques 
to tend to the well-being of patients across Khorvaire. 


HUMANS 


DWARVES ARE STOIC. ELVES ARE WISE. GNOMES ARE 
cunning. And humans? They can't make up their mind, so 
they try to be all of these things at once. 

—Kessler, bard of Sharn 


The first human settlers came to Khorvaire about 
3,000 years ago, landing in the area now known as the 
Lhazaar Principalities. From there, they began a slow 
but inexorable spread across the continent, disrupting 
the placid elven empire of Aerenal and leaving further 
ruined remnants of fallen Dhakaani goblin kingdoms 
in their wake. During this migration, they founded the 
settlements that would grow into the Five Nations. Even 
today humans make up the majority of the population 
in these countries. Despite their relatively short lifes- 
pans—or perhaps because of them—humans are inno- 
vative, adaptable, and aggressive, always pushing their 
limits and pursuing new ideas. 

Humans prove extremely diverse; a barbarian from 
the Demon Wastes has little in common with a Brelish 
rogue. When creating a human character, consider 
where you're from and how that's reflected in your class 
and background. Chapter 2 presents an overview of 
the nations of Khorvaire and ideas for characters tied 
to those lands. Aundair is a logical place of origin for a 
wizard character, but your wizard could be a down-and- 
out arcanist from the alleys of Sharn or a Lhazaar pirate 
with a knack for the mystic arts. 

If you want to jump-start your ideas for a human char- 
acter's origins, you can roll on the Human Origins table. 


HUMAN ORIGINS 
d10 Origin 

1 An impoverished wizard from Aundair, striving to 
prove you're as intelligent as any other Aundairian 

2 А streetwise rogue from Breland who wants nothing 
more than to escape the bustle of Sharn forever 

3  Adisplaced Cyran fighter who was engaged in war 
outside Cyre at the time of the Mourning and is now 
stranded with no home 

4 A barbarian from the Demon Wastes who repented 
from a life of cruelty and hopes to atone for past evils 

5 A kindly druid from the Eldeen Reaches who wants 
to learn about the flora and fauna of the rest of Khor- 
vaire and beyond 

6  Acleric from Karrnath who aspires to learn the arts of 
necromancy—for the noblest aims, of course 

7  Apiratical bard from the Lhazaar Principalities who 
loves sea shanties but also wants to immortalize the 
deeds of great heroes in song 

8  Arangertrained to hunt the jungles of Q'barra who 
harbors a grudge against dragons 

9  Awarlock from the Shadow Marches, teetering on the 
edge of sanity while contemplating the daelkyr 

10  AThrane paladin ofthe Silver Flame who's looking for 
something to prove the truth underpinning belief 


HUMANS AND DRAGONMARKS 


Five different dragonmarks appear among humans, 
reflecting their dominant status among the races of 
Khorvaire: 


• The Mark of Making is found in House Cannith, 
which has used it to become one of the most powerful 
houses, creating an abundance of both magical and 
technological wonders. 

* The Mark of Passage aids the humans of House Orien 
in operating the lightning rail and trade caravans run- 
ning across the continent. 

* The Mark of Sentinel makes the bodyguards, mer- 
cenaries, and Sentinel Marshals of House Deneith 
widely respected across Khorvaire. 

• The Mark of Handling appears in House Vada- 
lis, which uses it to breed fine mounts and other 
creatures. 

* Humans also number among House Tharashk and 
manifest the Mark of Finding with their half-orc kin. 


KALASHTAR 


I AM KALASHTAR, BORN OF TWO WORLDS. OVER A 

thousand years ago, my ancestor bound her bloodline to 

the spirit Kashtai, and I am a child of that union. Kashtai 

moves within me. Her memories come to me in dreams, 

and at times her voice whispers in the silence of my mind. 

As long as at least one of my sisters isalive, Kashtai will sur- 

vive—and as long as she lives, she will fight il-Lashtavar. 
—Lakashtai, servant of the light 


The kalashtar are a compound people, created from the 
union of humanity and renegade spirits from the plane 
of dreams— spirits called quori. Kalashtar are often 

seen as wise, spiritual people with great compassion 

for others. There is an unmistakable alien quality to the 
kalashtar, though, as they are haunted by the conflicts of 
their otherworldly spirits. 


BOUND TO SPIRITS 


Every kalashtar has a connection to a spirit of light, a 
bond shared by other members of their bloodline. Ka- 
lashtar appear human, but their spiritual connection af- 
fects them in a variety of ways. Kalashtar have symmet- 
rical, slightly angular features, and their eyes often glow 
when they are focused or expressing strong emotions. 
Kalashtar can’t directly communicate with their quori 
spirits. Rather, they might experience this relationship 
as a sense of instinct and inspiration, drawing on the 
memories of the spirit when they dream. This connec- 
tion grants kalashtar minor psionic abilities, as well 
as protection from psychic attacks. All of these quori 
dream-spirits are virtuous, but some are warriors and 
others are more contemplative. Work together with the 
DM to determine the nature of your linked spirit. Typ- 
ically, a kalashtar knows the name and nature of their 
spirit, but some may know nothing of their spirit or the 
source of their psychic gifts, such as an orphan kalashtar 
raised among strangers. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


The bond to the spirit can cause some kalashtar to 
display unusual quirks. Consider rolling or selecting a 
trait from the Kalashtar Quirks table. 


KALASHTAR QUIRKS 

d10 Quirk 

1 You try to understand the motives and feelings of 
your enemies. ; 
You prefer using telepathy over speaking aloud. 
You feel a strong drive to protect the innocent. 
You apply dream logic to mundane situations. 
You discuss things out loud with your quori spirit. 
You suppress your emotions and rely on logic. 


ND л AUN 


You are strongly influenced by the emotions of 

those around you. 

8 You prefer to find nonviolent solutions to problems 
whenever possible. 

9 You are driven by a warrior spirit and will fight for 

any noble cause. 


10 You are obsessed with Dreaming Dark conspiracies. 


KALASHTAR 


HUNTED BY NIGHTMARES 


The virtuous spirits tied to the kalashtar fled from the 
dream-realm of Dal Quor to escape evil spirits that dom- 
inate it. The rebel quori believe that through meditation 
and devotion, they can change the fundamental nature 
of Dal Quor, shifting the balance from darkness to light. 
Most kalashtar communities focus on acts of devotion 
known as the Path of Light. But the dark powers of Dal 
Quor have their own plans for Eberron. Through the 
force known as the Dreaming Dark, these monsters 
manipulate the folk of Khorvaire to eliminate kalashtar 
whenever possible. 

Many kalashtar defend themselves from the Dream- 
ing Dark by focusing on devotion to the Path of Light. 
Others, though, seek out the agents of the Dreaming 
Dark and oppose their plans, or protect the innocent 
however they can. Still other kalashtar grow up isolated, 
knowing nothing about Dal Quor or the Dreaming Dark. 
Such orphans might use their abilities for personal gain 
or otherwise act against the virtuous instincts of their 
quori spirits; this can cause internal conflicts and violent 
mood swings. 


KALASHTAR NAMES 


A kalashtar name adds a personal prefix to the name of 
the quori spirit within the kalashtar. Such names have 
no relation to the kalashtar’s gender. 

Kalashtar orphans are unlikely to know the name of 
their spirit and take names from another source. 


QuoriNames: Ashana, Ashtai, Ishara, Hareth, Khad, 
Kosh, Melk, Nari, Tana, Tari, Tash, Ulad, Vakri, Vash 

Kalashtar Names: Coratash, Dalavash, Dolishara, Ha- 
lakosh, Khoratari, Koratana, Lanhareth, Molavakri, 
Nevitash, Sorashana, Torashtai, Valakhad, Vishara 


KALASHTAR TRAITS 


Your kalashtar character has the following traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score increases 
by 2, and your Charisma score increases by 1. 

Age. Kalashtar mature and age at the same rate 
as humans. 

Alignment. The noble spirit tied to a kalashtar drives 
it toward lawful and good behavior. Most kalashtar 
combine strong self-discipline with compassion for all 
beings, but some kalashtar resist the virtuous influence 
of their spirit. 

Size. Your size is Medium. To set your height and 
weight randomly, start with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d6 
Height = 5 feet + 4 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 110 + (146 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 


ERIC BELISLE 


Dual Mind. You have advantage on all Wisdom sav- 
ing throws. 

Mental Discipline. You have resistance to psy- 
chic damage. 

Mind Link. You can speak telepathically to any 
creature you can see, provided the creature is within a 
number of feet of you equal to 10 times your level. You 
don't need to share a language with the creature for it to 
understand your telepathic utterances, but the creature 
must be able to understand at least one language. 

When you're using this trait to speak telepathically to 
a creature, you can use your action to give that creature 
the ability to speak telepathically with you for 1 hour or 
until you end this effect as an action. To use this ability, 
the creature must be able to see you and must be within 
this trait's range. You can give this ability to only one 
creature at a time; giving it to a creature takes it away 
from another creature who has it. 

Severed from Dreams. Kalashtar sleep, but they 
don't connect to the plane of dreams as other creatures 
do. Instead, their minds draw from the memories of 
their otherworldly spirit while they sleep. As such, you 
are immune to spells and other magical effects that 
require you to dream, like drearn, but not to spells and 
other magical effects that put you to sleep, like s/eep. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common, 
Quori, and one other language of your choice. 


ORCS AND HALF-ORrRCGS 


WE ARE HUNTERS IN A WORLD OF SHEEP. 
—Kalaash’arna, Tharashk inquisitive 


Thousands of years before humans came to Khorvaire, 
the land was dominated by wild orcs and goblinoids of 
the Dhakaani Empire. The goblin empire scattered the 
orc tribes and forced them into harsh and unwanted 
lands: the swamps of the Shadow Marches, the Demon 
Wastes, and the depths of the Ironroot Mountains. But 
in the Shadow Marches, the orcs learned the secrets 
of druidic magic from the dragon Vvaraak, becoming 
the first of the Gatekeepers. With the invasion of the 
alien daelkyr from Xoriat, the Gatekeepers put the 
dragon’s teaching to the test, creating magical seals 
that bound the daelkyr in the depths of Khyber and pro- 
tected Eberron against further incursion from the plane 
of madness. 

Three prominent groups of orcs have survived into the 
present age: 


« The Ghaash’kala are servants of the Silver Flame 
(which they call Kalok Shash, the “binding flame”), 
who devote their lives to battling the fiends of the De- 
mon Wastes. Humans from the Carrion Tribes of the 
wastes sometimes hear the call of Kalok Shash and 
join the Ghaash’kala, leading to a significant popula- 
tion of half-orcs there. 


+ The Jhorash’tar orcs are a perpetual threat in and 
around the Ironroot Mountains, shaped by their 
resentment of the Mror dwarves who drove them un- 
derground. These orcs are isolated from humans, so 
half-orcs here are rare. 

• The Shadow Marches holds the largest numbers of 
orcs and the most significant population of half-orcs. 


ORCS OF THE SHADOW MARCHES 


The orc Gatekeepers played a crucial role in defeating 
the daelkyr and binding their evil in Khyber, and their 
descendants continue to maintain the ancient seals and 
fight aberrations spawned by the daelkyr’s corruption. 
However, many orcs succumbed to that same corruption 
and embraced the madness of the cults of the Dragon 
Below. Orcs who follow both of these paths continue to 
live in the Shadow Marches, and centuries of battles be- 
tween them have diminished both sides. 

Humans settled in the Shadow Marches long ago, and 
the first half-orcs helped to cement the bond between 
these outsiders and the native orcs. Certain Marcher 
clans contain humans, orcs, and half-orcs in roughly 
equal numbers. 

When playing an orc or half-orc character from the 
Shadow Marches, consider what circumstances brought 
you into the wider world. The Leaving the Shadow 
Marches table offers some inspiration. 


LEAVING THE SHADOW MARCHES 


d8 Reason for Leaving 

1 | You're associated with the Gatekeepers, and you're on 
a quest to combat a daelkyr-related threat beyond the 
bounds ofthe Shadow Marches. 

2 House Tharashk recruited you from the Marches to 
serve as a mercenary in the Last War. 

3 You're a simple hunter, but you've decided to seek 
your fortune or a real challenge in the world beyond 
the Marches. 

4 Your village was destroyed by monsters from Droaam, 
so you're looking for a new place in the world. 

5  Asacultist of the Dragon Below, you believe that slay- 
ing powerful foes is the only way to earn your passage 
to the paradise that lies deep within the hollow world. 
You've ventured beyond the Marches in search of 
worthy enemies. 

6 Your clan works with House Tharashk, and you've 
been recruited as a bounty hunter or investigator even 
though you're not a member of the house. 

7 The leader of your clan committed a great wrong 
against another clan, which has now sworn to exter- 
minate every last member of your clan. What better 
time to see the world? 

8 Your work as an investigator has set you upon a trail 
of mysteries that leads far beyond the Marches. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


32 


HALF-ORCS ОЕ KHORVAIRE 


With the rise of the dragonmarked House Tharashk, 
orcs and half-orcs have spread through the Five Nations 
and beyond. In general, the people of the Five Nations 
know little about half-orcs. When people imagine a half- 
orc, they usually think of a Tharashk bounty hunter or 
dogged inquisitive, but a few ignorant sorts might still 
hold the stereotype of a “simpleton from the swamps.” 


HALF-ORCS AND DRAGONMARKS 


The Mark of Finding appears among half-orcs of House 
Tharashk. Strangely, both orcs and humans associated 
with the house cannot develop this mark. As a result, 
dragonmarked half-orcs work extensively with humans, 
orcs, and unmarked half-orcs in pursuit of the house's 
mission of bounty hunting, inquisitive work, and pros- 
pecting. Across Khorvaire, anyone who wants to find 
something or someone turns to House Tharashk. 


Orc TRAITS 


Anorc character has the following racial traits. 
Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score 
increases by 2, and your Constitution score in- 
creases by 1. 
Age. Orcs reach adulthood at age 12 and live up 
to 50 years. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


Alignment. The orcs of Eberron are a passionate peo- 
ple, given to powerful emotion and deep faith. They are 
generally chaotic, but can be any alignment. 

Size. Your size is Medium. To set your height and 
weight randomly, start with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 2d8 
Height = 5 feet + 4 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 175 + (2d6 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60 feet 
of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if it 
were dim light. You can’t discern color in darkness, only 
shades of gray. 

Aggressive. As a bonus action, you can move up to 
your speed toward an enemy of your choice that you can 
see or hear. You must end this move closer to the enemy 
than you started. 

Powerful Build. You count as one size larger when 
determining your carrying capacity and the weight you 
can push, drag, or lift. 

Primal Intuition. You have proficiency in two of 
the following skills of your choice: Animal Handling, 
Insight, Intimidation, Medicine, Nature, Perception, 
and Survival. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Com- 
mon and Orc. 


P 
a 
m 
o 
z 
x 
Шш 
о; 
ш 
2 
z 
3 


SHIFTERS 


GETH'S ANCIENT HERITAGE ROSE UP FROM DEEP WITHIN 
him, spreading out from the core of his being. Some shifters 
manifested terrible claws, others massive fangs, still others 
astounding speed or heightened senses. Geth's gift from 
his lycanthrope ancestors was sheer toughness. Strength 
seeped into his bones and flooded his flesh. His skin hard- 
ened, and his hair became coarse like an animal's tough 
hide. A sense of invincibility spread through him. For the 
moment at least, he felt unstoppable! 

—Don Bassingthwaite, The Binding Stone 


Shifters are sometimes called the weretouched, as 
many believe they are the descendants of humans and 
lycanthropes. Whatever their origins, shifters have 
evolved into a unique race. They are humanoids with a 
bestial aspect; while they can't fully change shape, they 
can temporarily enhance their animalistic features—a 
state they call shifting. Each shifter walks on the knife's 
edge between the wilds and the world around them. 

Do they embrace their primal instincts or the path of 
civilization? 


THE BEAST WITHIN 


Early in childhood, a shifter forms a bond with a beast 
within, a totemic force that shapes their body and mind. 
Some shifters believe that these spirits are indepen- 
dent entities, and they may speak of Bear or Wolf as 
ancestors or guides. Most just see the beast within asa 
formidable expression of their inner nature, something 
that emerges as the shifter’s personality takes shape. 
The beast within is a pool of powerful instincts, and its 
influence is revealed by a shifter’s personality: a feline 
shifter may be cool and distant, driven by predatory 
instincts, while a shifter with a lupine spirit might be 
drawn to find and protect a pack. When a shifter fully 
embraces this beast within they physically transform 
for a short time. 

A shifter's beast within is reflected by the shifter’s sub- 
race. Four subraces are especially common: 


Beasthide often signifies the bear or boar: stoic, stub- 
born, and thick-skinned. 

Longtooth shifters typically have lupine traits and pre- 
fer to run with a pack. 

Swiftstride are often predatory and feline, but a swift- 
stride could also be a cunning rat who darts through 
the shadows. 

Wildhunt shifters are born from any creature that 
tracks its prey. 


While the beast within certainly has a physical impact 
on a shifter, it has a spiritual and psychological effect, as 
well. Two beasthide shifters share the same special abil- 
ity, but if one has the aspect of the boar and the other is 
more like a bear, they'll be quite different in personality. 
With any shifter, identifying the beast within is a crucial 
part of understanding the character. 


SIMILAR AND DIVERSE 


Shifters are similar to humans in height and build but 
are typically more lithe and flexible. Their facial features 
have a bestial cast, often with large eyes, flat noses, and 
pointed ears; most shifters also have prominent canine 
teeth. They grow fur-like hair on nearly every part of 
their bodies. 

The traits of the beast within affect a shifter's ap- 
pearance as well. A swiftstride shifter may have catlike 
eyes and delicate build, while a beasthide shifter might 
be a massive brute built like a bear. While a shifter's 
appearance might remind an onlooker of an animal, 
they remain clearly identifiable as shifters even when 
at their most feral. 


THE JOURNEY YET TO COME 


Shifters have a strong presence in the Eldeen Reaches 
but can be found in rural areas across Khorvaire, 
where they often live among humans. While they 
form powerful bonds to friends and kin, shifters place 
great value on self-reliance and freedom. It's a shifter 
proverb to "always be prepared for the journey yet to 
come,” and most shifters strive to be ready for change 
or opportunity. 

Shifters have a natural inclination toward classes with 
a primal connection. A shifter barbarian draws their 
rage from the beast within. A shifter ranger indulges 
their urge to wander and hunt. A shifter rogue har- 
nesses their own predatory instincts. But shifters can 
pursue any path or faith. 


SHIFTER NAMES 


Shifters have no language of their own and often live 
in blended communities. Their names typically overlap 
with the names of other cultures in their region. Many 
shifters prefer to keep their personal names for their 
friends and use "wandering names" with strangers. 
These are usually tied to a physical or personality trait. 


Shifter Names: Badger, Bear, Cat, Fang, Grace, Grim, 
Moon, Rain, Red, Scar, Stripe, Swift, Talon, Wolf 


SHIFTER TRAITS 


Your shifter character has the following traits. 

Age. Shifters are quick to mature both physically and 
emotionally, reaching young adulthood at age 10. They 
rarely live to be more than 70 years old. 

Alignment. Shifters tend toward neutrality, being 
more focused on survival than concepts of good and 
evil. Alove of personal freedom can drive shifters to- 
ward chaotic alignments. 

Size. Your size is Medium. To set your height and 
weight randomly, start with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 248 
Height = 4 feet + 6 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 90 + (2d4 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 33 


34 


WiLOHUNT 
SHIFTER 


Darkvision. You have superior vision in dark and 
dim conditions. You can see in dim light within 60 feet 
of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if it 
were dim light. You can’t discern color in darkness, only 
shades of gray. 

Shifting. As a bonus action, you can assume a more 
bestial appearance. This transformation lasts for 1 
minute, until you die, or until you revert to your normal 
appearance as a bonus action. When you shift, you gain 
temporary hit points equal to your level + your Constitu- 
tion modifier (minimum of 1 temporary hit point). You 
also gain additional benefits that depend on your shifter 
subrace, described below. 

Once you shift, you can’t do so again until you finish a 
short or long rest. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common. 

Subrace. The beast within shapes each shifter phys- 
ically and mentally. The four major subraces of shifter 
include: beasthide, longtooth, swiftstride, and wildhunt. 
Choose a subrace for your shifter. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


BEASTHIDE 
Stoic and solid, a beasthide shifter draws strength and 
stability from the beast within. Beasthide shifters are 
typically tied to the bear or the boar, but this subrace 
could embody any creature known for its toughness. 
Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution score in- 
creases by 2, and your Strength score increases by 1. 
Natural Athlete. You have proficiency in the Ath- 
letics skill. 
Shifting Feature. Whenever you shift, you gain 1d6 
additional temporary hit points. While shifted, you have 
a +1 bonus to your Armor Class. 


LONGTOOTH 
Longtooth shifters are fierce and aggressive, but they 
form deep bonds with their friends. Many longtooth shift- 
ers have canine traits that become more pronounced as 
they shift, but they might instead draw on tigers, hyenas, 
or other predators. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score in- 
creases by 2, and your Dexterity score increases by 1. 

Fierce. You have proficiency in the Intimidation skill. 

Shifting Feature. While shifted, you can use your 
elongated fangs to make an unarmed strike as a bonus 
action. If you hit with your fangs, you can deal pierc- 
ing damage equal to 1d6 + your Strength modifier, 
instead of the bludgeoning damage normal for an un- 
armed strike. 


SWIFTSTRIDE 
Swiftstride shifters are graceful and quick. Typically 
feline in nature, swiftstride shifters are often aloof and 
difficult to pin down physically or socially. 
Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity score in- 
creases by 2, and your Charisma score increases by 1. 
Graceful. You have proficiency in the Acrobatics skill. 
Shifting Feature. While shifted, your walking speed 
increases by 10 feet. Additionally, you can move up to 10 
feet as a reaction when a creature ends its turn within 
5 feet of you. This reactive movement doesn’t provoke 
opportunity attacks. 


WILDHUNT 

Wildhunt shifters are sharp and insightful. Many are 
constantly alert, ever wary for possible threats. Others 
focus on their intuition, searching within. Wildhunt 
shifters are excellent hunters, and they also tend to be- 
come the spiritual leaders of shifter communities. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score increases 
by 2, and your Dexterity increases by 1. 

Natural Tracker. You have proficiency in the Sur- 
vival skill. 

Shifting Feature. While shifted, you have advantage 
on Wisdom checks, and no creature within 30 feet of 
you can make an attack roll with advantage against you, 
unless you're incapacitated. 


ERIC BELISIE 


'TIEFLINGS 


"THE CHIEFTAIN WHO LEADS THEM," THUEL ASKED, 
"what do we know of him?" 

"His name is Kathrik Mel. He inspires tremendous loyalty 
in the barbarians, an almost religious fervor." 

"He's a demon?" 

"Idon'tthink so. The Ghaash'kala call him a sak'vanar- 
rak—it translates as something like 'fiend-touched.' A Karrn 
scholar coined the word tie fling. I think he's some mixture of 
fiend and mortal, more like a savior than a god." 

Thuel frowned. "Their savior, our damnation.” 

—James Wyatt, Dragon Forge 


Tieflings rarely appear in the cities and towns of Khor- 
vaire, with most dwelling at the fringes of civilization. 
Many tieflings are born to the Carrion Tribes, the 
barbarians who live in the Demon Wastes. Such tief- 
lings are touched by the fiendish forces bound beneath 
the Wastes, and the tribes consider them to be blessed. 
If you're playing such a tiefling, why have you left the 
Wastes? It could be that you were destined for some evil 
purpose—perhaps even serving as an avatar for an im- 
prisoned Overlord—and you are fleeing that destiny. 
Other tieflings are shaped not by fiendish powers, 
but by the influence of the fiend-tainted planes. Such 
tieflings might be born in manifest zones, where a plane 
exerts influence over a region. Planar tieflings are oddi- 
ties, often seen as strange but not necessarily evil. 
Finally, the Venomous Demesne—a city-state hidden 
on the far side of Droaam—is populated by tieflings. 
These tieflings descend from Sarlonan mages who 
bargained with dark powers, with the Demesne’s lords 
being powerful warlocks and wizards. The Venomous 
Demesne has had no significant contact with the Five 
Nations and few know it exists. Your character could be 
an envoy or exile from it, or simply an adventurer driven 
by a desire to see what lies beyond your homeland. 


WARFORGED 


“PIERCE WAS BUILT BY DESIGN, WHILE YOU WERE BUILT 
by accident,” Lakashtai said. “The soul is what matters, not 
the shape of the vessel.” 
“What makes you think he has a soul?” Gerrion said. 
“What makes you think you do?” 
—Keith Baker, The Shattered Land 


The warforged were built to fight in the Last War. While 
the first warforged were mindless automatons, House 
Cannith devoted vast resources to improving these steel 
soldiers. An unexpected breakthrough produced sapient 
soldiers, giving rise to what some have only grudgingly 
accepted as a new species. Warforged are made from 
wood and metal, but they can feel pain and emotion. 
Built as weapons, they must now find a purpose beyond 
war. A warforged can be a steadfast ally, a cold-hearted 
killer, or a visionary in search of meaning. 


LIVING STEEL AND STONE 


Warforged are formed from a blend of organic and inor- 
ganic materials. Root-like cords infused with alchemical 
fluids serve as their muscles, wrapped around a frame- 
work of steel, darkwood, or stone. Armored plates form 
a protective outer shell and reinforce joints. Warforged 
share a common facial design, with a hinged jaw and 
crystal eyes embedded beneath a reinforced brow ridge. 
Beyond these common elements of warforged design, 
the precise materials and build of a warforged vary 
based on the purpose for which it was designed. 

Although they were manufactured, warforged are 
living humanoids. Resting, healing magic, and the Medi- 
cine skill all provide the same benefits to warforged that 
they do to other humanoids. 


WARFORGED PERSONALITY 


The warforged were built to serve and to fight. For most 
of their existence, warforged had a clearly defined func- 
tion and were encouraged to focus purely on that role. 
The Treaty of Thronehold gave them freedom, but many 
still struggle both to find a place in the post-war world 
and to relate to the creatures who created them. 

The typical warforged shows little emotion. Many 
warforged embrace a concrete purpose—such as 
protecting allies, completing a contract, or exploring 
a land—and embrace this task as they once did war. 
However, there are warforged who delight in exploring 
their feelings, their freedom, and their relationships 
with others. Most warforged have no interest in reli- 
gion, but some embrace faith and mysticism, seeking 
higher purpose and deeper meaning. 

The typical warforged has a sexless body shape. 
Some warforged ignore the concept of gender entirely, 
while others adopt a gender identity. 

The more a warforged develops its individuality, the 
more likely it is to modify its body, seeking out an artifi- 
cer to customize the look of its face, limbs, and plating. 


QUIRKS 


Warforged often display an odd personality trait or two, 
given how new they are to the world. The Warforged 
Quirks table contains example quirks. 


WARFORGED QUIRKS 
d8 Quirk 
1 | You analyze—out loud—the potential threat posed 
by every creature you meet. 
You often misread emotional cues. 
You are fiercely protective of your friends. 
You try to apply wartime discipline to every situation. 


л A шш N 


You don’t know how to filter your feelings and are 

prone to dramatic emotional outbursts. 

6 You don't understand clothing beyond its utility and 
assume it denotes a person's function. 

7 | You are obsessed with your appearance and con- 
stantly polish and buff yourself. 

8 War is the only thing that makes sense to you, and 

you're always looking for a fight. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


36 


WARFORGED 


WARFORGED NAMES 


Most warforged were assigned numerical designations 
for use in military service. Many of them adopted nick- 
names, often given to them by their comrades. As inde- 
pendent individuals, some have chosen new names as 
a way to express their path in life. A few take on human 
names, often the name of a fallen friend or mentor. 


Warforged Names: Anchor, Banner, Bastion, Blade, 
Blue, Bow, Cart, Church, Crunch, Crystal, Dagger, 
Dent, Five, Glaive, Hammer, Iron, Lucky, Mace, Oak, 
Onyx, Pants, Pierce, Red, Rod, Rusty, Scout, Seven, 
Shield, Slash, Smith, Spike, Temple, Vault, Wall 


WARFORGED TRAITS 


Your warforged character has the following traits. A few 


of the traits give you a choice; consider how your choice 
reflects the purpose for which your character was built. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution score in- 
creases by 2, and one other ability score of your choice 
increases by 1. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


Аде. A typical warforged is between two and thirty 
years old. The maximum warforged lifespan remains 
a mystery; so far, warforged have shown no signs of 
deterioration due to age. You are immune to magical ag- 
ing effects. 

Alignment. Most warforged take comfort in order and 
discipline, tending toward law and neutrality. But some 
have absorbed the morality, or lack thereof, of the beings 
with which they served. 

Size. Your size is Medium. To set your height and 
weight randomly, start with rolling a size modifier: 


Size modifier = 246 
Height = 5 feet 10 inches + your size modifier in inches 
Weight in pounds = 270 + (4 x your size modifier) 


Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 
Constructed Resilience. You were created to have 
remarkable fortitude, represented by the follow- 
ing benefits: 


* You have advantage on saving throws against being 
poisoned, and you have resistance to poison damage. 
• You don't need to eat, drink, or breathe. 
* Youare immune to disease. 
* You don't need to sleep, and magic can't put 
you to sleep. 


Sentry's Rest. When you take a long rest, you must 
spend at least six hours in an inactive, motionless state, 
rather than sleeping. In this state, you appear inert, but 
it doesn't render you unconscious, and you can see and 
hear as normal. 

Integrated Protection. Your body has built-in defen- 


sive layers, which can be enhanced with armor: 


* You gain a +1 bonus to Armor Class. 

* You can don only armor with which you have profi- 
ciency. To don armor, you must incorporate it into 
your body over the course of 1 hour, during which you 
remain in contact with the armor. To doff armor, you 
must spend 1 hour removing it. You can rest while 
donning or doffing armor in this way. 

• While you live, your armor can't be removed from your 
body against your will. 


Specialized Design. You gain one skill proficiency 
and one tool proficiency of your choice. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and one other language of your choice. 


DRAGONMARKS 


A halfling healer touches a dying man; the mark on her 
forehead blazes with blue fire as his wounds close and 
vanish. A half-orc bounty hunter reaches out with the 
power of his mark to find his prey. A human artificer 
touches a creation forge, and the symbol on her hand 
flares as the eldritch machine rumbles to life. Each of 
these people possesses a dragonmark, a symbol etched 
on the skin in colors more vivid than any tattoo, magical 
power made flesh. 

A dragonmark enhances the user's ability to perform 
certain tasks. For example, the Mark of Making guides 
the hands of the smith, while the Mark of Shadows 
helps its bearer avoid enemies. The power of a dragon- 
mark can also manifest in more dramatic ways. The 
Mark of Storms can scatter enemies with a blast of 
wind, while the Mark of Shadows can weave illusions. 

You can't buy or choose to develop a dragonmark; 
each mark is tied to bloodlines within specific species, 
as summarized in the Dragonmarks and Their Houses 
table. A dragonmark appears on a person around ado- 
lescence, though not every heir manifests the mark. 

Long ago, the families that carry the marks joined 
together to form the dragonmarked houses. Over the 
course of centuries, these houses have used their gifts 
to establish powerful monopolies. For example, only 
House Lyrandar heirs with the Mark of Storms can 
pilot airships. This control over vital services gives the 
houses tremendous power. 

In the past, the dragonmarked houses were held 
in check by the united kingdom of Galifar. But in the 
wake of the Last War, people wonder if any nation has 
the power to enforce its wishes on the houses. 


ALL ABOUT THE HOUSES 


Every dragonmarked house has traditions and secrets. 


Here's a few facts that apply to most of the houses: 


Enclaves. Most dragonmarked houses maintain en- 
claves in major cities. These serve as strongholds and 
hubs for house businesses. A city may also have any 
number of businesses tied to the house, but these are 
simply providing services and don't have any direct 
connection to house leadership. 


DRAGONMARKS AND THEIR HOUSES 


Dragonmark House Race 
Detection Medani Half-elf 
Finding Tharashk Human, half-orc 
Handling Vadalis Human 
Healing Jorasco Halfling 
Hospitality Ghallanda Halfling 
Making Cannith Human 
Passage Orien Human 
Scribing Sivis Gnome 
Sentinel Deneith Human 
Shadow Phiarlan EIf 
Thuranni EIf 
Storm Lyrandar Half-elf 
Warding Kundarak Dwarf 


Healing 


Names and Ranks. Any heir ofthe house who develops 
a dragonmark is allowed to add the d' prefix to the 
house name: for example, Merrix d'Cannith. Despite 
the Korth Edicts' proscription against house mem- 
bers holding noble titles, regional leaders within 
the houses are called barons. Most houses are led 
by a matriarch or patriarch, though some are led by 
a council. 

Emblems. Each dragonmarked house has an emblem, 
a distinctive symbol that features on their heraldry, of- 
ficial seals, crafted goods, and anything else that war- 
rants the house's stamp of authenticity. Each house's 
emblem appears along with the related dragonmark 
on the following pages. 

The Twelve. The Twelve is an organization that facili- 
tates cooperation among the dragonmarked houses. 

Excoriates. Excoriates are dragonmarked heirs who 
have been cut off from their houses. 

Foundlings. Foundlings are people who have a dragon- 
mark yet have no tie to a dragonmarked house. 

Test of Siberys. Dragonmarks manifest around adoles- 
cence. Each house puts its heirs through a trial called 
the Test of Siberys. The specific trials vary by house, 
but they place the heir in circumstances where they 
are likely to manifest the mark, if they have it. About 
half of the members of a bloodline manifest the mark. 

Korth Edicts. The Korth Edicts prevent the houses 
from owning land, holding noble titles, or maintaining 
military forces (with an exception for Deneith). The 
edicts were established when the Five Nations were 
united. Today, many in the houses feel the edicts have 
become obsolete in the wake of the Last War. 


CREATING A 
DRAGONMARKED CHARACTER 


Dragonmarks manifest on certain members of a few 
species, represented in the rules by variant race options: 


* For humans and half-orcs, a dragonmark is a variant 
race that replaces traits associated with those races. 

* For half-elves, a dragonmark is a variant race that lets 
you keep some half-elf traits and replace others with 
the traits associated with your mark. 

* For dwarves, elves, £nomes, and halflings, the 
dragonmark replaces your subrace. 


Guild Specialties 

Bodyguards, investigation, risk management 
Bounty hunting, investigation, prospecting 
Animal training and breeding 


Food, lodging, urban information 
Manufacturing 
Land transportation 
Communication, translation, verification 
Bodyguards, mercenaries 
Entertainment, espionage 
Entertainment, assassination 

. Air and sea transportation 
Banking, storage, prisons 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


37 


> 


So, if you're making an elf character, you can choose to 
take the Mark of Shadow instead of being a wood elf or 
a high elf. 

There is another option related to dragonmarks if 
your group uses feats: the Aberrant Dragonmark feat 
(see page 52) grants potentially dangerous magi- 
cal abilities. Aberrant dragonmarks aren't tied to the 
dragonmark houses and can be taken by a character 
of any race. 


DRAGONMARKS AND BACKGROUNDS 


Dragonmarks are bound to certain bloodlines, and by 
choosing a mark, you are establishing your character's 
blood connection to one of the families in the dragon- 
marked houses. It's up to you to define your relationship 
to the house. Were you brought up in the house? Or are 
you independent from it? This is best represented by 
your background. Consider the following options: 


Agent. You have a close, ongoing relationship with your 
house. The house agent background is a good choice if 
you are actively working for the house. Alternately, you 
could take the noble background to reflect a blood tie 
to the leaders of the house. 

Independent Scion. You were raised or trained by the 
house, but you've kept your independence. This means 
you don't have many special privileges, but you also 
don't have responsibilities. Guild artisan is a good 
choice to reflect basic house training, but you could 
choose entertainer for the Mark of Shadow, sailor for 
the Mark of Storms, soldier for the Mark of Sentinel, 
sage for the Mark of Scribing, and so on. 

Excoriate. When a dragonmarked heir defies their 
house, they might be cut off from their family. In the 
past, your mark would be flayed from your body. Al- 
though this mutilation is no longer practiced, such 
exiles are still called excoriates. If you're an excoriate, 
consider what you did to deserve this punishment. 
Were you a criminal? A charlatan? Or perhaps a sage 
who engaged in forbidden research? 

Foundling. Your ancestors left the house long ago. You 
have no ties to the house and may not have known you 
were connected by blood before you manifested your 
dragonmark. As an outlander or an urchin, you might 
know nothing about the houses. As an acolyte or a 
hermit, you could have put your faith ahead of worldly 
things, choosing not to pursue a connection with the 
houses. Whatever you decide, this is an opportunity to 
talk with your DM about the role you'd like the house 
to play in a campaign. Do you want them to be your en- 
emy? Would you prefer to avoid them completely? Or 
do you want to work your way into a position of power 
in the house, despite being an outsider? 


THE POWERS OF THE MARK 


Each dragonmark grants a set of abilities that reflect the 
inherent powers of the mark. Your dragonmarked race 
gives you a set of traits derived from the magic of your 
mark. If you are a spellcaster, your dragonmark also fu- 
els or channels some of your spells. Each dragonmark's 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


description includes a list of dragonmark spells that flow 
from the magic of the mark. If you play a character with 
the Spellcasting or the Pact Magic class feature, your 
dragonmark spells are added to the spell list for each of 
your spellcasting classes, thereby expanding the spell 
options available to you. 

You might also consider your dragonmark the source 
of any or all of your spells or class features. As a cleric 
with the Mark of Healing, for example, you could say 
your mark is the sole source of the healing and support- 
ive spells you cast, or your magic might come from a 
combination of your mark's power and your faith in the 
gods. As a warlock, your aberrant dragonmark might 
actually be your fiendish patron, the source of all your 
magic. These descriptions add flavor to your character 
but don't change your character's abilities, beyond the 
dragonmark spells added to your spell list. 

Over the centuries, the houses have developed tools 
that enhance and channel the powers of a mark, and 
these items (some appear in chapter 5) give the houses 
much of their economic power. 


DRAGONMARK APPEARANCE 


A dragonmark appears on the skin. There are twelve 
known dragonmarks, each unique in design and power. 
A dragonmark can appear on any part of the body. One 
half-elf could have the Mark of Detection across an eye, 
while another has it in the palm of the hand. Dragon- 
marks appear with vivid shades of blue and purple and 
shimmer or even move slightly. When used, they grow 
warm to the touch and sometimes glow (though this 
doesn't produce useful illumination). A dragonmark 
can't be removed—even if a limb bearing a dragonmark 
is cut away, the mark eventually manifests on another 
part of the bearer's body. All dragonmarks share a sim- 
ilar initial appearance, but a dragonmark can grow in 
size and complexity as a character gains levels and uses 
it to cast more powerful magic. 

While dragonmarks share the same general appear- 
ance, your dragonmark could have a unique quality. Roll 
on the Dragonmark Quirks table for inspiration. 


DRAGON MARK QUIRKS 
d8 Quirk 
1 Your dragonmark is unusually small or faint. 
Your dragonmark is exceptionally large. 
Your dragonmark appears somewhere else on your 
body whenever you finish a long rest. 

4  Yourdragonmark emits dim light in a 5-foot radius 
for 10 minutes whenever you use it. 

5 Your dragonmark tingles and changes color for a mo- 
ment when you're within 10 feet of someone with the 
same mark. 

6 | When you use your dragonmark, it animates and 
adopts the appearance of your dragonmarked house's 
emblem for 1 minute. 

Your dragonmark is an unusual color. 
Your dragonmark changes size whenever you use it. 


LEE MOYER 


Mark oF DETECTION 


& 


Mark or HEALING 


e 


Mark ОЕ PASSAGE 


sir 


Mark OF SHADOW 


Mark OF FINDING 


Mark OF НоѕрітАШТҮ 


Y 


MARK OF ScRIBING 


$ 


MARK OF STORM 


Mark OF HANDLING 


MARK OF MAKING 


MARK OF SENTINEL 


MARK OF WARDING 


THE MARK ӨЕ 


ЮЕ ЕЕ КОМ 


IF YOU WANT A WALL OF MUSCLE TO GET BETWEEN YOU 
and a blade, go to House Deneith. [f you want someone 
to anticipate the threat and make sure you aren't even 
in the room with whoever's holding that blade, that's 
what we do. 

Baron Trelib d'Medani 


The Mark of Detection is an inquisitive's dream. It 
sharpens powers of observation and intuition, allow- 
ing the bearer to draw connections and interpret clues 
others might miss. By actively drawing on its powers, 
the bearer can detect poisons and study the ener- 

gies of magic. 


HousE MEDANI 


Leader: Baron Trelib d'Medani 
Headquarters: Tower of Inquisition (Wroat, Breland) 


Represented by the basilisk's eye, the Warning Guild of 
House Medani brokers the services of bodyguards and 
inquisitives. Medani advisors specialize in risk assess- 
ment and management, protecting clients from both 
physical and social threats. While Medani overlaps with 
theinquisitives of House Tharashk and the bodyguards 
of House Deneith, the Warning Guild specializes in sub- 
tle threats and complex mysteries. Baron Trelib man- 
ages the guild's affairs from the Tower of Inquisition in 
Wroat, where the house also interrogates prisoners for 
King Boranel of Breland. 

The members of House Medani are half-elves with 
deep roots in Breland. Medani has little interest in the 
power struggles that sometimes break out between 
the other dragonmarked houses. Many Medani heirs 
are more interested in helping their communities 
than in raw profit, and Medani heirs often work with 
local law enforcement or help those who can't afford 
their services. 


VARIANT HALF-ELF: 
MARK OF DETECTION 


If your half-elf character has the Mark of Detection, 
the following traits replace the half-elf's Ability 
Score Increase and Skill Versatility traits in the Play- 
er’s Handbook. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score in- 
creases by 2, and one other ability score of your choice 
increases by 1. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


Deductive Intuition. When you make an Intelligence 
(Investigation) or a Wisdom (Insight) check, you can roll 
a d4 and add the number rolled to the ability check. 

Magical Detection. You can cast the detect magic and 
detect poison and disease spells with this trait. Starting 
at 3rd level, you can also cast the see invisibility spell 
with it. Once you cast any of these spells with this trait, 
you can't cast that spell with it again until you finish 
along rest. Intelligence is your spellcasting ability for 
these spells, and you don't require material compo- 
nents for them. 

Spells ofthe Mark. If you have the Spellcasting or 
the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on the Mark of 
Detection Spells table are added to the spell list of your 
spellcasting class. 


MARK OF DETECTION SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 


Ist detect evil and good, detect poison and disease 
2nd detect thoughts, find traps 

3rd clairvoyance, nondetection 

4th arcane eye, divination 


5th legend lore 


CAROLINE GARIBA 


The Mark of Finding sharpens the senses, guiding the 
hunter to prey. Alone among the dragonmarks, the Mark 
of Finding is carried by two races: humans and half- 
orcs. It first appeared in the Shadow Marches, where 
clan hunters used it to find their prey. 


HousE THARASHK 


Leader: The Triumvirate (Maagrim Torrn, Khandar'aas- 
hta, and Daric Velderan) 
Headquarters: Zarash'ak, Shadow Marches 


House Tharashk traditionally licenses inquisitives and 
bounty hunters. Recently the house's Finder's Guild has 
expanded into dragonshard prospecting. As dragon- 
shards are the lifeblood of the magical economy, the 
house's talent has given them new wealth and influence. 
Tharashk is the youngest of the dragonmarked houses 
and hasn't embraced all the customs of the others. The 
distinct clans that united to form the house remain im- 
portant, and heirs of the family usually retain their family 
names rather than adopting “d’Tharashk” as tradition 
dictates. Each of the three major clans—the Aashta, the 
Torrn, and the Velderan—has a representative on the Tri- 
umvirate that governs the house, and the city of Zarash'ak 
in the Shadow Marches. Together, they stand as one un- 
der the emblem of the dragonne (a lion-dragon hybrid). 


VARIANT HALF-ORC OR HUMAN: 
MARK OF FINDING 


If your half-orc or human character has the Mark of 
Finding, the following traits replace the character's 
racial traits in the Player's Handbook, aside from age, 
alignment, size, and speed. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score increases 
by 2, and your Constitution score increases by 1. 

Darkvision. You can see in dim light within 60 feet 
of you as if it were bright light, and in darkness as if it 
were dim light. You can't discern color in darkness, only 
shades of gray. 

Hunter's Intuition. When you make a Wisdom (Percep- 
tion) or Wisdom (Survival) check, you can roll a d4 and 
add the number rolled to the ability check. 

Finder's Magic. You can cast the hunter's mark spell 
with this trait. Starting at 3rd level, you can also cast the 


locate object spell with it. Once you cast either spell with 
this trait, you can't cast that spell with it again until you 
finish a long rest. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for 
these spells. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Goblin. 

Spells ofthe Mark. If you have the Spellcasting or 
the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on the Mark of 
Finding Spells table are added to the spell list of your 
spellcasting class. 


MARK OF FINDING SPELLS 


Spell Level Spells 
Ist faerie fire, longstrider 


2nd locate animals or plants, locate object 
3rd clairvoyance, speak with plants 

4th divination, locate creature 

5th commune with nature 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION "m 


42 


for thetask and to make sure they're of 


THE МАРК GE 


HARDEING 


DON’T GET SENTIMENTAL. A BEAST IS 


a tool. Our role is to find the right tool 


the finest quality. Nature is our king 
dom; never forget that we were born 
torule it. 

—Dalin d'Vadalis 


The Mark of Handling gives its bearer a primal 
connection to beasts and the natural world, grant- 
ing the power to calm and coax. This extends beyond 
purely natural animals; the mark allows its bearer to 
guide a hippogriff as easily as a horse. 


HOUSE VADALIS 
Leader: Dalin d'Vadalis 


Headquarters: Foalswood (near Varna, Eldeen Reaches) 


Represented by the hippogriff, House Vadalis plays an 
important role in daily life, offering meat, mounts, and 
more. Vadalis isn't one of the most powerful houses, but 
its barons are generally content; they're more interested 
in discovering new monstrosities than engaging in poli- 
tics. The current head of the house, Dalin d'Vadalis, dis- 
dains the use of a title and has no aspirations to nobility 
or greatness for himself or his house. 

House Vadalis breeds and trains beasts for a wide 
range of purposes. While the house maintains vast cat- 
tle ranches and trains horses and hounds, the Mark of 
Handling allows Vadalis to work with more exotic crea- 
tures as well. Griffons, hippogriffs, and even bulettes 
can be bred and trained. Even with the Mark of Han- 
dling, this is dangerous work; there's a lot of turnover 
at the bulette ranch. But these exotic creatures aren't 
enough to satisfy the most innovative members of the 
house, leading to the practice of magebreeding. Using 
dragonshard focus items, Vadalis has found ways to 
create magical creatures. Typically, this results in a su- 
perior version of a creature—an animal that is stronger, 
faster, and smarter. But rumors claim that Vadalis has 
crafted monsters of its own. Some rumors even insist 
that Vadalis is trying to magebreed better humans. 


VARIANT HUMAN: 
MARK OF HANDLING 


If your human character has the Mark of Handling, the 
following traits replace the human's Ability Score In- 
crease trait in the Player's Handbook. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score increases 
by 2, and one other ability score of your choice in- 
creases by 1. 

Wild Intuition. When you make a Wisdom (Animal 
Handling) or Intelligence (Nature) check, you can roll a 
d4 and add the number rolled to the ability check. 

Primal Connection. You can cast the animal friend- 
ship and speak with animals spells with this trait, 
requiring no material component. Once you cast either 
spell with this trait, you can't cast that spell with it again 
until you finish a short or long rest. Wisdom is your 
spellcasting ability for these spells. 

The Bigger They Are. Starting at 3rd level, you can 
target a beast or monstrosity when you cast animal 
friendship or speak with animals, provided the creature's 
Intelligence score is 3 or lower. 

Spells of the Mark. If you have the Spellcasting or 
the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on the Mark of 
Handling Spells table are added to the spell list of your 
spellcasting class. 


MARK OF HANDLING SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 


Ist animal friendship, speak with animals 
2nd beast sense, calm emotions 

3rd beacon of hope, conjure animals 

4th aura of life, dominate beast 

5th awaken 


ON LEMEN 


NN. 


Lim De meei er a vea 


WHE MARK GE 


HEALING 


WHAT'S THE PRICE OF A LIFE? WELL, I'VE GOT A RATE 
Sheet right over here. Td be happy to discuss it. 


Bessi d'Jorasco, Fairhaven healer 


A halfling with the Mark of Healing can save a life 
with a touch, restoring vitality and the will to live. 
When dealing with mundane medicine, the mark 
helps its bearer sense the nature of maladies, aiding 
them in finding a cure. When equipped with drag- 
onshard focus items, the mark can even draw the 
dead back from the depths of Dolurrh. 


HOUSE JoRAsco 


Leader: Ulara d'Jorasco 
Headquarters: Vedkyar Enclave (Vedykar, Karrnath) 


The Healer's Guild provides a vital service to Khor- 
vaire, and the Last War ensured there was great need 
for healers. The leader of the guild, Baron Ulara d'Jo- 
rasco, is much beloved in northwestern Khorvaire for 
her instrumental role in combating an epidemic in that 
region a decade ago, and Jorasco medics served in every 
nation's army during the war. 

The guild runs schools that teach medicine, as well as 
houses of healing that provide both mundane and mag- 
ical services. If it could save a life, it’s probably marked 
by the House Jorasco griffon emblem, and it will come 
with a cost. If you have the gold, Jorasco healers can 
remove a disease instantly with /esser restoration. If you 
can't afford such a service, they will treat you with mun- 
dane techniques. House Jorasco is also the source of po- 
tions of healing. While many criticize Jorasco's demands 
for payment, the house maintains that it's not about 
greed; it's about ensuring the prosperity of the house, so 
they can continue to help future generations. 

While the public face of Jorasco is that of the healer, 
there are rumors that the house engaged in disturbing 
experiments during the Last War, working with House 
Vadalis to develop biological weapons and new crea- 
tures. A Jorasco heir has to decide if they want to inves- 
tigate these rumors. 


HALFLING SUBRACE: 
MARK OF HEALING 


If you're a halfling with the Mark of Healing, you have 
this subrace, with the following traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score in- 
creases by 1. 


E. "n 


Medical Intuition. When you make a Wisdom (Med- 
icine) check or an ability check using an herbalism 
kit, you can roll a 44 and add the number rolled to the 
ability check. 

Healing Touch. You can cast the cure wounds spell 
with this trait. Starting at 3rd level, you can also cast 
lesser restoration with it. Once you cast either spell with 
this trait, you can't cast that spell with it again until you 
finish a long rest. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for 
these spells. 

Spells ofthe Mark. If you have the Spellcasting or 
the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on the Mark of 
Healing Spells table are added to the spell list of your 
spellcasting class. 


MARK OF HEALING SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 


Ist cure wounds, healing word 
2nd lesser restoration, prayer of healing 
3rd aura of vitality, mass healing word 


4th aura of purity, aura of life 
5th greater restoration 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 43 


АЕ 


They may not always have gold, but a halfling with the 
Mark of Hospitality is sure to be rich in friends. The 
magic of the mark allows the bearer to keep a place 
clean, and to heat, chill, and season food. But it also 
helps the bearer connect with others. 


HOUSE GHALLANDA 


Leader: Yoren d'Ghallanda 
Headquarters: Gatherhold (Talenta Plains) 


The majority of inns, taverns, and restaurants in the 
Five Nations are either directly owned by House Gha- 
Папаа or licensed by its Hosteler’s Guild. Most people 
give little thought to House Ghallanda; when compared 
to the soldiers of House Deneith and the factories of 
House Cannith, an alliance of innkeepers seems harm- 
less and inconsequential. But Ghallanda's strength lies 
in charm and connections. А Ghallanda innkeeper hears 
many things—if you want to know what's really going 

on in a community, talk to the halfling bartender. The 
leaders of House Ghallanda don't sell information; they 
prefer to build friendship and deal in favors. But should 
a Ghallanda baron ever truly need something, they likely 
have a favor they can call in. 

Ghallanda has a number of "bound businesses"—fran- 
chises run directly by the house. The Gold Dragon Inn is 
such a business, with Gold Dragon Inns being found in 
every major city, each serving a familiar menu and pro- 
viding similar services. But many Ghallanda heirs take 
pride in creating their own unique businesses. There are 
also many independent restaurants, inns, and taverns 
licensed by House Ghallanda. The blink dog emblem is 
an assurance that a locale meets Ghallanda standards of 
health and quality—but not every inn is run by a halfling. 

House Ghallanda's mandate extends beyond providing 
creature comforts to travelers. Every one of the house's 
enclaves—which are more numerous than those of any 
other dragonmarked house—is a sanctuary beyond the 
legal reach of any government or dragonmarked house. 
Baron Yoren and his daughter Chervina have greatly ex- 
panded the house's presence even in remote areas such 
as the edge of the Demon Wastes, guided by their study 
of the Draconic Prophecy. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


HALFLING SUBRACE: 
MARK OF HOSPITALITY 


If you're a halfling with the Mark of Hospitality, you have 
this subrace, with the following traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma score in- 
creases by 1. 

Ever Hospitable. When you make a Charisma (Per- 
suasion) check or an ability check involving brewer's 
supplies or cook's utensils, you can roll a 44 and add the 
number rolled to the ability check. 

Innkeeper's Magic. You know the prestidigitation can- 
trip. You can also cast the purify food and drink and un- 
seen servant spells with this trait. Once you cast either 
spell with this trait, you can't cast that spell with it again 
until you finish long rest. Charisma is your spellcasting 
ability for these spells. . 

Spells ofthe Mark. If you have the Spellcasting or 
the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on the Mark of 
Hospitality Spells table are added to the spell list of your 
spellcasting class. 


MARK OF HOSPITALITY SPELLS 


Spell Level Spells 
151 goodberry, sleep 


2nd aid, calm emotions 

3rd create food and water, Leomund's tiny hut 

4th aura of purity, Mordenkainen's private sanctum 
5th hallow 


JASON A. ENGLE 


MY HOUSE BUILT .THE MODERN WORLD. ORIEN MAY 
drive the lightning rail, but it's Cannith who builds the cars 
and lays the stones it travels on. Cannith makes the ever 
bright lanterns hold the.night at bay. Smith, carpenter, al- 
chemist—the best all carry my seal. 

—Baron Merrix d'Cannith 


The Mark of Making guides its bearer through any act 
of creation. The bearer of the mark can mend broken 
things with a touch, and always has a minor magic item 
they've been working on. An artificer or a wizard will 
get the most out of the mark, but anyone can find a use 
for an enchanted blade. 


HoUsE CANNITH 


Leaders: Cannith East, Zorlan d'Cannith; Cannith 
West, Jorlanna d'Cannith; Cannith South, Mer- 
rix d'Cannith 

Headquarters: Cannith East, Korth Enclave (Karrnath); 
Cannith West, Aundair Enclave (near Fairhaven, Aun- 
dair); Cannith South, Cannith Tower (Sharn, Breland) 


House Cannith dominates all forms of manufacturing, 
both mystical and mundane. Gorgon-marked Cannith 
forgeholds use streamlined forms of production to 
quickly produce common goods. Even independent 
artisans often learn their trade at Cannith academies 
and adhere to Cannith standards. The House of Making 
builds the tools the other houses rely upon, and it has 
always been the unspoken leader of the Twelve. 

The Last War was a time of great opportunity for 
Cannith. Every nation wanted weapons and warforged, 
along with mundane arms and armor. The war raised 
the house up, and then tore it down. House Cannith was 
based in Cyre, and the Mourning destroyed the house 
leadership and key facilities. Now three barons jockey 
to fill the leadership vacuum: the alchemistJorlanna of 
Fairhaven, weaponsmith Zorlan of Korth, and Merrix 
of Sharn, innovator of warforged. It remains to be seen 
whether one of these leaders will unite the house, or if it 
will shatter under the strain. If you're an heir of House 
Cannith, you should decide which of these barons you 
serve or if you have other ideas about the house's future. 


VARIANT HUMAN: MARK OF MAKING 


If your human character has the Mark of Making, the 
following traits replace the human's Ability Score In- 
crease trait in the Player's Handbook. 


Ability Score Increase. Your Intelligence score in- 
creases by 2, and one other ability score of your choice 
increases by 1. 

Artisan’s Intuition. When you make an Arcana check 
or an ability check involving artisan's tools, you can roll 
a d4 and add the number rolled to the ability check. 

Maker's Gift. You gain proficiency with one type of 
artisan's tools of your choice. 

Spellsmith. You know the mending cantrip. You can 
also cast the magic weapon spell with this trait. When 
you do so, the spell lasts for 1 hour and doesn't require 
concentration. Once you cast the spell with this trait, 
you can't do so again until you finish a long rest. Intelli- 
gence is your spellcasting ability for these spells. 

Spells of the Mark. If you have the Spellcasting or 
the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on the Mark of 
Making Spells table are added to the spell list of your 
spellcasting class. 


MARK OF MAKING SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 


Ist identify, Tenser's floating disk 
2nd continual flame, magic weapon 
3rd conjure barrage, elemental weapon 


4th fabricate, stone shape 
5th creation 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 45 


46 


by! 


ЇНЇ MARK OF 


DASSACE 


WE GET THINGS WHERE THEY NEED TO GO. IT DOESN'T 
matter if it's a letter, a person, or a hundred tons of steel. 
Whether we have to cross mountains, rivers, or the Mourn- 
land itself, Orien finds a wa y. 

Bali d'Orien, veteran courier 


The Mark of Passage governs motion, allowing its 
bearer to move with uncanny speed. The bearer of the 
mark can even slip through space in the blink of an eye. 


HOUSE ORIEN 


Leader: Kwanti d’Orien 
Headquarters: Journey's Home (Passage, Aundair) 


The House of Passage manages land transportation. 
The lightning rail is the house’s most dramatic tool, but 
Orien also runs caravans and coaches across the length 
of Khorvaire. Dragonshard focus items ensure that 

the fastest vehicles are those driven by heirs with the 
Mark of Passage, but the house also licenses unmarked 
teamsters. The Courier’s Guild of House Orien delivers 
mail and packages and has a branch that handles more 
covert and dangerous deliveries. 

Orien has dominated transportation for centuries, 
but now the house is facing challenges. The Mournland 
is a dramatic obstacle for ground transportation, and 
Baron Kwanti d'Orien has had tremendous difficulty se- 
curing funds to rebuild the lightning rail line across the 
blasted landscape. Indeed, he spends most of his time 
away from his headquarters in Aundair, trying to raise 
funds for the project while keeping an eye on house 
operations. He travels across western Khorvaire in his 
personal lightning rail coach, the Silver Unicorn—a ref- 
erence to the house's unicorn emblem. 

House Orien's problems don't end with the Mourn- 
land, though. The expanding role of Lyrandar airships 
threatens the house's business. Baron Kwanti would 
like to be able to offer more instantaneous transporta- 
tion, but long-distance teleportation is a service only the 
strongest Orien dragonmarks can provide. So the house 
is working with House Cannith in an effort to unlock 
and enhance this gift of the Mark of Passage. Orien 
heirs might be caught up in these experiments or in the 
rivalry with House Lyrandar. 


VARIANT HUMAN: MARK OF PASSAGE 


If your human character has the Mark of Passage, the 
following traits replace the human's Ability Score In- 
crease trait in the Player's Handbook. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity score in- 
creases by 2, and one other ability score of your choice 
increases by 1. 

Courier's Speed. Your base walking speed increases 
to 35 feet. 

Intuitive Motion. When you make a Dexterity (Acro- 
batics) check or any ability check to operate or maintain 
a land vehicle, you can roll a 44 and add the number 
rolled to the ability check. 

Magical Passage. You can cast the misty step spell 
once with this trait, and you regain the ability to cast it 
when you finish a long rest. Dexterity is your spellcast- 
ing ability for this spell. 

Spells ofthe Mark. If you have the Spellcasting or 
the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on the Mark of 
Passage Spells table are added to the spell list of your 
spellcasting class. 


MARK OF PASSAGE SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 


Ist expeditious retreat, jump 

2nd misty step, pass without trace 

3rd blink, phantom steed 

4th dimension door, freedom of movement 
5th teleportation circle 


The Mark of Scribing deals with communication—both 
the written and spoken word. A gnome who bears the 


mark can feel words as though they are living creatures, 


struggling to make their meaning known. The mark 
provides a range of gifts. It translates languages, but it 
also allows its bearer to communicate with others at 
a distance. 


House Sivis 


Leader: Lysse Lyrriman d'Sivis 
Headquarters: The Labyrinth (Korranberg, Zilargo) 


Bearing the emblem of the cockatrice, the gnomes of 


House Sivis facilitate communication. This is seen most 
literally in speaking stones, magic items allowing a Sivis 


heir to send a short message to another speaking stone. 
House Sivis's message stations employs these items 
as the backbone of their long-distance communication 


network. The house also trains and licenses scribes, no- 


taries, interpreters, cartographers, barristers, heralds, 
bookbinders, and others who work with words. House 
Sivis has an especially close relationship with House 
Kundarak, as Kundarak letters of credit must be nota- 
rized with a Sivis arcane mark. 

House Sivis takes great pains to maintain the trust 
of its clients and holds a position of absolute neutrality 
in all disputes, whether between houses or nations. 
Sivis gnomes are typically friendly, curious, and engag- 
ing, but that kindly exterior might conceal a scheming 
mind. Gnomes have a natural love of intrigue, and the 
different families within the house often engage in sub- 
tle schemes and feuds. Doyenne Lyssa Larriman, the 
leader of the house, takes pains to ensure that these 
intrigues never threaten the house or its reputation. 


GNOME SUBRACE: MARK OF SCRIBING 


If you're a gnome with the Mark of Scribing, you have 
this subrace, with the following traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma score in- 
creases by 1. 

Gifted Scribe. When you make an Intelligence (His- 
tory) check or an ability check using calligrapher’s sup- 
plies, you can roll ad4 and add the number rolled to the 
ability check. 


Scribe’s Insight. You know the message cantrip. You 
can also cast comprehend languages once with this 
trait, and you regain the ability to cast it when you finish 
a short or long rest. Starting at 3rd level, you can cast 
the magic mouth spell with this trait, and you regain the 
ability to cast it when you finish a long rest. Intelligence 
is your spellcasting ability for these spells. 

Spells ofthe Mark. If you have the Spellcasting or 
the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on the Mark of 
Scribing Spells table are added to the spell list of your 
spellcasting class. 


MARK OF SCRIBING SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 


Ist comprehend languages, illusory script 
2nd animal messenger, silence 

3rd sending, tongues 

4th arcane eye, confusion 

5th dream 


CHAPTER ! | CHARACTER CREATION 47 


48 


THE MARK OF 


SENTINEL 


PROTECTION IS MY PURPOSE. I DEFEND THE INNOCENT 
from those who would do them harm. For my siblings, this is 
a job; for me, it's a calling. 


Harric d'Deneith, Sentinel Marshal 


The Mark of Sentinel warns and protects. It heightens 
senses and reflexes, allowing an heir to respond to 
threats with uncanny speed. It can shield its bearer 
from harm. Whether on the battlefield or the ballroom, 
someone who carries the Mark of Sentinel is prepared 
for danger. 


HoUsE DENEITH 


Leader: Breven d'Deneith 
Headquarters: Sentinel Tower (Karrlakton, Karrnath) 


House Deneith was born in Karrnath, and war flows in 
its veins. For centuries, the Blademarks Guild of House 
Deneith has governed the mercenary trade. While war- 
riors with the Mark of Sentinel are among its most elite 
forces, House Deneith brokers the services of a wide 
range of soldiers, including Valenar war bands and the 
goblins of Droaam. Beyond the battlefield, the Defend- 
er's Guild provides exceptional bodyguards for those 
who can afford their services. House Deneith is also 
renowned for its Sentinel Marshals, agents who hold 
the authority to pursue criminals and enforce the law 
across the length of Khorvaire. The Sentinel Marshals 
hold the honor of the house in their hands. Being a Mar- 
shal is a privilege, and it comes with high expectations. 
Despite its might and the desire of some house mem- 
bers to flex their military muscles, House Deneith has 
always maintained absolute neutrality, selling its ser- 
vices to all sides of a conflict. Baron Breven d'Deneith 
shows no inclination of using the massive, chimera- 
marked military forces of his house for his own ends, 
but he'ssurrounded by aggressive advisors who would 
like to see a Deneith ruling all Khorvaire. House De- 
neith is also caught in an escalating rivalry with House 
Tharashk, as it edges into the mercenary trade. 


VARIANT HUMAN: MARK OF SENTINEL 


If your human character has the Mark of Sentinel, the 
following traits replace the human's Ability Score In- 
crease trait in the Player's Handbook. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution score in- 
creases by 2, and your Wisdom score increases by 1. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


Sentinel’s Intuition. When you make a Wisdom (In- 
sight) or Wisdom (Perception) check, you can roll a d4 
and add the number rolled to the ability check. 

Guardian's Shield. You can cast the shield spell once 
with this trait, and you regain the ability to cast it after 
you finish a long rest. Wisdom is your spellcasting abil- 
ity for this spell. 

Vigilant Guardian. When a creature you can see 
within 5 feet of you is hit by an attack roll, you can use 
your reaction to swap places with that creature, and you 
are hit by the attack instead. Once you use this trait, you 
can't do so again until you finish a long rest. 

Spells ofthe Mark. If you have the Spellcasting or 
the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on the Mark of 
Sentinel Spells table are added to the spell list of your 
spellcasting class. 


MARK OF SENTINEL SPELLS 


Spell Level Spells 
151 compelled duel, shield of faith 
2nd warding bond, zone of truth 
3rd counterspell, protection from energy 
4th death ward, guardian of faith 
5th Bigby's hand 


The Mark of Shadow lets an elf weave illusions, crafting 
magic to distract or delight. It also allows its bearer to 
sculpt shadows, making it easy to avoid detection. 


THE HOUSES OF SHADOW 


Leader: House Phiarlan, Elvinor Elorrenthi d’Phiarlan; 

House Thuranni, Elar d’Thuranni 

Headquarters: House Phiarlan, the Demesnes (var- 
ious); House Thuranni, Regalport (Lhazaar Prin- 
cipalities) 


Elves have carried the Mark of Shadow for thousands of 
years. The mark’s bearers left Aerenal after the conflict 
that wiped out the Mark of Death and established House 
Phiarlan in Khorvaire. These elves are expert entertain- 
ers, giving them access to all manner of places and se- 
crets. Known to few, there has always been an elite force 
of spies and assassins within House Phiarlan. Only spe- 
cial clients—nobles, merchant lords, and the like—have 
access to these spies. 

Toward the end of the Last War, a bitter feud broke 
out between the major families of the house. Known 
as the Shadow Schism, it resulted in a split withinin 
Phiarlan—and the foundation of House Thuranni. 
House Phiarlan continues to offer entertainment and 
espionage in the lands west of the Mournland, while 
Thuranni operates in the eastern lands. As a rule, 
Phiarlan elves are the better spies and Thuranni agents 
are superior assassins. Thuranni and Phiarlan main- 
tain a peaceful relationship, but rivalries run deep. 

Baron Elar d’Thuranni is said to be responsible for 
the Shadow Schism. Ruling the house from an enclave 
in Regalport, he is always accompanied by a shadowy 
pair, rumored to be embodiments of shadow itself. The 
displacer beast serves as the young house's emblem. 

The lands of House Phiarlan, known as the De- 
mesnes, are the foremost centers of the arts in the Five 
Nations, each focusing on a specific artistic tradition: 
the written word, movement arts, music, material arts, 
and the arts of illusion, puppetry, oratory, and acting. 
Baron Elvinor Elorrenthi leads the house from the last 
of those, the Demesne of Shadow, which is located in 
Sharn. The hydra serves as House Phiarlan's emblem. 


ELF SUBRACE: MARK OF SHADOW 


If you're an elf with the Mark of Shadow, you have this 
subrace, with the following traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma score in- 
creases by 1. 

Cunning Intuition. When you make a Charisma (Per- 
formance) or Dexterity (Stealth) check, you can roll a d4 
and add the number rolled to the ability check. 

Shape Shadows. You know the minor illusion cantrip. 
Starting at 3rd level, you can cast the invisibility spell 
once with this trait, and you regain the ability to cast it 
when you finish a long rest. Charisma is your spellcast- 
ing ability for these spells. 

Spells ofthe Mark. If you have the Spellcasting or 
the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on the Mark of 
Shadow Spells table are added to the spell list of your 
spellcasting class. 


MARK OF SHADOW SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 


Ist disguise self, silent image 

2nd darkness, pass without trace 

3rd clairvoyance, major image 

4th greater invisibility, hallucinatory terrain 
5th mislead 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


49 


WHE МАРК OF 


STORM 


SOVEREIGNS AND FIRSTBORN, GRANT ME THE FOUR 
blessings promised to our people: dominion over the air, do- 
minion over the water, fortune for my family, and fortune 
for my future. 

—From the Oath of Lyrandar 


Wind and water welcome the half-elves who carry the 
Mark of Storm, and some learn to call on the power of 
the storm itself. 


HOUSE LYRANDAR 


Leader: Esravash d'Lyrandar 
Headquarters: Stormhome (Aundair) 


House Lyrandar has long ruled the seas. Their 
kraken-marked galleons harness air and water elemen- 
tals and are faster than any mundane vessel. Control of 
sea and river trade gave Lyrandar considerable power. 
Now they reach out to the skies. Merely a decade old, 
Lyrandar airships have undermined the lightning rail's 
domination of overland travel. 

House Lyrandar also controls the air in a literal way. 
The Raincallers' Guild can use the Mark of Storms to 
control the weather for its clients. 

For many of the house's members, the house is more 
than a family or business—its private island enclave, 
Stormhome, is the closest thing they have to a home- 
land. Baron Esravash is ambitious and often steers the 
house to act in what he sees as the interests of all half- 
elves. Lyrandar heirs help the Valenar elves run their 
young kingdom, and some believe that Valenar could 
become a true homeland for the Khoravar. 


VARIANT HALF-ELF: MARK OF STORM 


If your half-elf character has the Mark of Storm, the fol- 
lowing traits replace the half-elf's Ability Score Increase 
and Skill Versatility traits in the Player's Handbook. 
Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma score in- 
creases by 2, and your Dexterity score increases by 1. 
Windwright’s Intuition. When you make a Dexterity 
(Acrobatics) check or any ability check involving naviga- 
tor's tools, you can roll a 44 and add the number rolled 
to the ability check. 
Storm's Boon. You have resistance to lightning damage. 
Headwinds. You know the gust cantrip. Starting at 
3rd level, you can cast the gust of wind spell once with 
this trait, and you regain the ability to cast it when you 
finish a long rest. Charisma is your spellcasting ability 
for these spells. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


Spells ofthe Mark. If you have the Spellcasting or 
the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on the Mark of 
Storm Spells table are added to the spell list of your 
spellcasting class. 


MARK OF STORM SPELLS 


Spell Level Spells 
Ist feather fall, fog cloud 
2nd gust of wind, levitate 


3rd sleet storm, wind wall 
4th conjure minor elemental, control water 
5th conjure elemental 

GusT 


Transmutation cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 30 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You seize the air and compel it to create one of the fol- 
lowing effects at a point you can see within range: 


One Medium or smaller creature that you choose 
must succeed on a Strength saving throw or be 
pushed up to 5 feet away from you. 

You create a small blast of air capable of moving one 
object that is neither held nor carried and that weighs 
no more than 5 pounds. This object is pushed up to 10 
feet away from you. It isn't pushed with enough force 
to cause damage. 

* Youcreate a harmless sensory effect using air, such as 
causing leaves to rustle, wind to slam shutters closed, 
or your clothing to billow impressively in a breeze. 


KIERAN YANNER 


HOWARD LYON 


[LIE МАРК Ol 
m hd A } ty ФІ: 


WARDI 


MY FAMILY HAS THE FINEST VAULTS YOU CAN IMAGINE. 


P ga 
> 


They forge the locks that secure royal jewels. And I learned to 
pick those locks when I was barely outofthe crib. 
—Cutter, burglar and Kundarak excoriate 
The Mark of Warding helps its bearers protect things of 
value. Using the mark, a dwarf can weave wards with 
mystic force. It also provides its bearer with an intuitive 
understanding of locks used to protect and seal. 


HOUSE KUNDARAK 


Leader: Morrikan d'Kundarak 
Headquarters: Korunda Gate (Mror Holds) 


If you want to keep something safe—jewels, secrets, 
prisoners—Kundarak is there to help. The Defenders 
Guild of House Kundarak trains locksmiths, secu- 

rity specialists, and more. It maintains the prison of 
Dreadhold, along with a number of smaller prisons. As 
useful as these services are, it's the Banking Guild that 
truly defines the house. Kundarak's lands in the Mror 
Holds include deep veins of precious metals, which 

the dwarves used to establish the banking industry of 
Khorvaire. Anyone who makes a living from coin—from 
bankers to goldsmiths—likely learned their skills at 
House Kundarak. The security of banks bearing the 
Kundarak manticore emblem is legendary. The house 
also provides a special service to those who can afford 
it a system of extradimensional vaults, allowing a client 
to store their goods in one location and retrieve them at 
any other Kundarak enclave. 

House Kundarak has a close alliance with House 
Sivis. Like the House of Scribing, Kundarak has worked 
to earn the trust of its clients and to establish a reputa- 
tion for unshakable integrity. The house has no love of 
renegade dwarves using their marks to turn a profit, and 
such rogues strive to avoid the eye of Kundarak. 

As the dwarves of the Mror Holds have come into 
increasing conflict with the daelkyr, Lord Morrikan 
d'Kundarak has instructed house heirs to establish con- 
nections with the Gatekeeper druids. The druids have 
much in common with the house, being the creators of 
the wards that protect Eberron from the daelkyr. 


DwARF SUBRACE: MARK OF WARDING 


If you're a dwarf with the Mark of Warding, you have 
this subrace, with the following traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Intelligence score in- 
creases by 1. 


KUNDARAK VAULT 


Warder's Intuition. When you make an Intelligence 
(Investigation) check or an ability check using thieves' 
tools, you can roll a 44 and add the number rolled to the 
ability check. 

Wards and Seals. You can cast the alarm and mage 
armor spells with this trait. Starting at 3rd level, you can 
alsocastthe arcane lock spell with it. Once youcast any 
of these spells with this trait, you can't cast that spell 
with it again until you finish a long rest. Intelligence is 
your spellcasting ability for these spells, and you don't 
need material components for them when you cast them 
with this trait. 

Spells ofthe Mark. If you have the Spellcasting or 
the Pact Magic class feature, the spells on the Mark of 
Warding Spells table are added to the spell list of your 
spellcasting class. 


MARK OF WARDING SPELLS 


Spell Level Spells 
Ist alarm, armor of Agathys 
2nd arcane lock, knock 
3rd glyph of warding, magic circle 
4th Leomund's secret chest, 
Mordenkainen's faithful hound 
5th antilife shell 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 51 


52 


ABERRANT DRAGONMARKS 


YOUR SIGIL CREATES, CHILD OF CANNITH. MINE HOLDS 
the power to destroy. 
—Rotting Bal, Tarkanan enforcer 


The twelve dragonmarks are predictable, and their pow- 
ers are generally constructive. But there is another kind 
of dragonmark, which is dangerous to both the bearer 
and the people around them. Aberrant marks often ap- 
pear when people from different dragonmarked families 
produce a child, and for this reason such unions are 
forbidden by the Twelve. But aberrant dragonmarks can 
appear on members of any race, at any age, regardless 
of bloodline. No two aberrant dragonmarks are exactly 
alike—even if they grant the same power, they might 
manifest in different ways. 

It usually takes time for a character to learn to control 
an aberrant mark, and in time, people might be hurt by 
it. This factor has led to the general superstition that 
people with aberrant dragonmarks are dangerous. 

Aberrant marks are feared for another reason, too. 
Long ago, aberrant marks were more common and 
some held great powers. Aberrant leader Halas Tar- 
kanan could devastate cities with powerful earthquakes. 
The Lady of the Plague wielded disease and com- 
manded hordes of vermin. The dragonmarked houses 
united in an inquisition called the War of the Mark. 
Some say this was a persecution of innocents, but most 
feared the aberrants and stood by as the houses hunted 
them down. Following the War of the Mark, aberrant 
dragonmarks were few in number and relatively weak. 
But since the Mourning, aberrant marks have been ap- 
pearing in greater numbers. 


FEAT: ABERRANT DRAGONMARK 
Prerequisite: No other dragonmark 


You have manifested an aberrant dragonmark. Deter- 
mine its appearance and the flaw associated with it. You 
gain the following benefits: 


Increase your Constitution score by 1, to a max- 

imum of 20. 

* Youlearna cantrip of your choice from the sorcerer 
spell list. In addition, choose a 1st-level spell from the 
sorcerer spell list. You learn that spell and can cast it 
through your mark. Once you cast it, you must finish a 
short or long rest before you can cast it again through 
the mark. Constitution is your spellcasting ability for 
these spells. 

• When you cast the 1st-level spell through your mark, 

you can expend one of your Hit Dice and roll it. If you 

roll an even number, you gain a number of temporary 
hit points equal to the number rolled. If you roll an odd 
number, one random creature within 30 feet of you 

(not including you) takes force damage equal to the 

number rolled. If no other creatures are in range, you 

take the damage. 


You also develop a random flaw from the Aberrant 
Dragonmark Flaws table. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


ABERRANT DRAGONMARK FLAWS 
d8 


Flaw 

Your mark is a source of constant physical pain. 

Your mark whispers to you. Its meaning can be unclear. 
When you're stressed, the mark hisses audibly. 

The skin around the mark is burned, scaly, or withered. 
Animals are uneasy around you. 

You have a mood swing any time you use your mark. 
Your looks change slightly whenever you use the mark. 


о м DN A UNa 


You have horrific nightmares after you use your mark. 


OPTION: GREATER ABERRANT POWERS 

Atthe DM's option, a character who has the Aberrant 
Dragonmark feat has a chance of manifesting greater 
power. Upon reaching 10{һ level, such a character has a 
10 percent chance of gaining an epic boon from among 
the options in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master's Guide. 
If the character fails to gain a boon, they have a 10 per- 
cent chance the next time they gain a level. 

If the character gains a boon, the DM chooses it or 
determines it randomly. The character also permanently 
loses one of their Hit Dice, and their hit point maximum 
is reduced by an amount equal to a roll of that die plus 
their Constitution modifier (minimum reduction of 1). 
This reduction can't be reversed by any means. 


them when you interact with a house business. The de- 
gree to which such acquaintances are willing to help you 
depends on your current standing in your house. py 


BACKGROUND 


The house agent background is the perfect background 


option for a character tied to a dragonmarked house. 
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 


House agents are diverse. Consider the house you serve 
and the work you do when choosing characteristics. 


HOUSE AGENT 


You have sworn fealty to a dragonmarked house. If you 
have a dragonmark, you're likely a member of one of the 
house's influential families; otherwise you're an outsider 


PERSONALITY TRAITS 


who hopes to make your fortune through the house. d6 Personality Trait 
Your main task is to serve as the eyes of your house, | I'm always looking to improve efficiency. 
but you could be called on at any time to act as its hand. 2 | love to share trivia about my house's business. 
Such missions can be perilous but lucrative. 3 | never forget an insult against me or my house. 
Skill Proficiencies: Investigation, Persuasion 4 I'm enthusiastic about everything my house does. 
Tool Proficiency: Two proficiencies from the House 5 | represent my house and take pride in my looks. 
Tool Proficiencies table 6 I'm critical of monarchies and limits on the houses. 
Equipment: A set of fine clothes, house signet ring, 
identification papers, and a purse containing 20 gp Te 
House TOOL PROFICIENCIES d6 Ideal 
Your House Proficiencies 1 Common Good. My house serves a vital function, 
Cannith Alchemist's supplies and tinker's tools and its prosperity will help everyone. (Good) — 
Deneith One gaming set and vehicles (land) 2 Tradition. | uphold traditions of my house and bring 
Ghallanda Brewer's supplies and cook's utensils honor to my family. (Lawful) 
Jorasco Alchemist's supplies and herbalism kit 3 Innovation. Abandon old traditions and find better · 
Kundarak Thieves' tools and tinker's tools ways to do things. (Chaotic) > 
Lyrandar Navigator’s tools and vehicles (air and sea) 4 Power. | want to ensure the prosperity of my house 
Medani Disguise kit and thieves’ tools and wield its power myself. (Evil) 
Orien One gaming set and vehicles (land) 5 Discovery. | want to learn all | can, both for my 
Phiarlan Disguise kit and one musical instrument house and for my own curiosity. (Any) 
Sivis Calligrapher’s tools and forgery kit 6 Comfort. | want to ensure that me and mine enjoy 
Tharashk One gaming set and thieves’ tools the best things in life. (Any) 
Thuranni One musical instrument and poisoner's kit 
Vadalis Herbalism kit and vehicles (land) BONDS 
ROLE d6 Bond 
You always gather information for your house, but when 1 My house is my family. | would do anything for it. 
a baron give you a specific mission, what sort of work do 2 | love someone from another house, but the rela- 
you do? The House Agent Role table gives possibilities. tionship is forbidden. 
3 Someone I love was killed by a rival faction within 
House AGENT ROLE . my house, and | will have revenge. 
d8 Role 4 | don’t care about the house as a whole, but | would 
1 Acquisition do anything for my old mentor. 
2 Investigation My house must evolve, and I'll lead the evolution. 
3 Research & Development I'm determined to impress the leaders of my house, 
4 Security and to become a leader myself. 
5 Intimidation 
6 Exploration FLAWS 
7 Negotiation de Flaw 
8 Covert Operations 1 I'm fixated on following official protocols. 
2 I’m obsessed with conspiracy theories and worried i 
FEATURE: HOUSE CONNECTIONS about secret societies and hidden demons. 7 
As an agent of your house, youcan always get food and 3 My house and bloodline make me the best! _ 
lodging for yourself and your friends at a house enclave. 4 МУ secret could get mexexpellád TUB RR DOT. 
When the house assigns you a mission, it will usually р — E pum Р 
provide you with the necessary supplies and transporta- My religious beliefs aren't widespread in my house. 
6 I'm working for a hidden faction in my house that 


tion. Beyond this, you have many old friends, mentors, 
and rivals in your house, and you may encounter one of 


gives me secret assignments. a 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


CLASS: ARTIFICER 


Masters of unlocking magic in everyday objects, ar- 
tificers are supreme inventors. They see magic as a 
complex system waiting to be decoded and controlled. 
Artificers use tools to channel arcane power, crafting 
magical objects. To cast a spell, an artificer could use al- 
chemist's supplies to create a potent elixir, calligrapher's 
supplies to inscribe a sigil of power on an ally's armor, 
or tinker's tools to craft a temporary charm. The magic 
of artificers is tied to their tools and their talents. 


ARCANE SCIENCE 


In the world of Eberron, arcane magic has been har- 
nessed as a form of science and deployed throughout 
society. Artificers reflect this development. Their knowl- 
edge of magical devices, and their ability to infuse mun- 
dane items with magic, allows Eberron's most miracu- 
lous projects to continue. 

During the Last War, artificers were marshaled on a 
massive scale. Many lives were saved because of the in- 
ventions of brave artificers, but countless lives were also 
lost because of the mass destruction unleashed by their 
creations. 


SEEKERS OF NEW LORE 


Nothing excites an artificer quite like uncovering a new 
metal or discovering a source of elemental energy. In 
artificer circles, new inventions and strange discoveries 
create the most excitement. Artificers who wish to make 
their mark must innovate, creating something fresh, 
rather than iterating on familiar designs. 

This drive for novelty pushes artificers to become ad- 
venturers. Eberron's main travel routes and populated 
regions have long since been explored. Thus, artificers 
seek the frontiers of civilization in hopes of making the 
next great discovery in arcane research. 


CREATING AN ARTIFICER 


When creating an artificer, think about your character's 
relationship with the artisan who taught them their 
craft. Does the character have a rival? Talk to your DM 
about the role played by artificers in the campaign and 
the sort of organizations you might have ties to. 


ARTIFICERS IN OTHER WORLDS 

Eberron is the world most associated with artificers, yet 
the class can be found throughout the D&D multiverse. 

In the Forgotten Realms, for example, the island of Lantan 
is home to many artificers, and in the world of Dragon- 
lance, tinker gnomes are often members of this class. The 
strange technologies in the Barrier Peaks of the World of 
Greyhawk have inspired some folk to walk the path of the 
artificer, and in Mystara, various nations employ artificers 
to keep airships and other wondrous devices operational. 
In the City of Sigil, artificers share discoveries from 
throughout the cosmos, and one in particular—the gnome 
inventor Vi—has run a multiverse-spanning business from 
there since leaving the world of her birth, Eberron. In the 
world-city Ravnica, the Izzet League trains numerous агїїй- 
cers, the destructiveness of whom is unparalleled in other 
worlds—except, perhaps, by the tinker gnomes of Krynn. 


omua—————————— „2 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


Quick BUILD 

You can make an artificer quickly by following these 
suggestions. First, put your highest ability score in Intel- 
ligence, followed by Constitution or Dexterity. Second, 
choose the guild artisan background. 


OPTIONAL RULE: MULTICLASSING 

If your group uses the optional rule on multiclassing in 
the Player's Handbook, here's what you need to know if 
you choose artificer as one of your classes. 

Ability Score Minimum. As a multiclass character, 
you must have at least an Intelligence score of 13 to take 
a level in this class, or to take a level in another class if 
you are already an artificer. 

Proficiencies Gained. If artificer isn't your initial 
class, here are the proficiencies you gain when you take 
your first level as an artificer: light armor, medium ar- 
mor, shields, thieves' tools, tinker's tools. 

Spell Slots. Add half your levels (rounded up) in 
the artificerclass to the appropriate levels from other 
classes to determine your available spell slots. 


CLASS FEATURES 


As an artificer, you gain the following class features. 


HiT POINTS 

Hit Dice: 1d8 per artificer level 

Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constitution modifier 

Hit Points at Higher Levels: 148 (or 5) + your Constitu- 
tion modifier per artificer level after 1st 


PROFICIENCIES 

Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields 

Weapons: Simple weapons 

Tools: Thieves' tools, tinker's tools, one type of artisan's 
tools of your choice 


Saving Throws: Constitution, Intelligence 
Skills: Choose two from Arcana, History, Investigation, 
Medicine, Nature, Perception, Sleight of Hand 


EQUIPMENT 
You start with the following equipment, in addition to 
the equipment granted by your background: 


• any two simple weapons of your choice 

• alight crossbow and 20 bolts 

» your choice of studded leather armor or scale mail 
• thieves’ tools and a dungeoneer's pack 


If youforgo this starting equipment, as well as the 
items offered by your background, you start with 5d4 x 
10 gp to buy your equipment. 


OPTIONAL RULE: FIREARM PROFICIENCY 

The secrets of creating and operating gunpowder weap- 
ons have been discovered in various corners of the D&D 
multiverse. If your Dungeon Master uses the rules on 
firearms in chapter 9 of the Dungeon Master's Guide 
and your artificer has been exposed to the operation of 
such weapons, your artificer is proficient with them. 


THE ARTIFICER 


— Spell Slots per Spell Level— 


Proficiency Infusions Infused Сапігірѕ 
Level Bonus Features Known Items Known Ist 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 
Ist +2 Magical Tinkering, Spellcasting — — 2 2 -— — — — 
2nd +2 Infuse Item 4 2 2 2 — — — — 
3rd +2 Artificer Specialist, 4 2 2 3 — — = — 
The Right Tool for the Job 
4th +2 Ability Score Improvement 4 2 2 3 — — — — 
5th +3 Artificer Specialist feature 4 2 2 4 2 — — — 
6th +3 Tool Expertise 6 3 2 4 2 — — — 
7th +3 Flash of Genius 6 3 2 4 B — — — 
8th +3 Ability Score Improvement 6 3 2 4 3 — — — 
9th +4 Artificer Specialist feature 6 3 2 4 3 2 — — 
10th +4 Magic Item Adept 8 4 3 4 3 2 — — 
Tith +4 Spell-Storing Item 8 4 3 4 3 3 — E 
12th +4 Ability Score Improvement 8 4 3 4 3 3 — — 
13th +5 — 8 4 3 4 3 3 1 — 
14th +5 Magic Item Savant 10 5 4 4 3 3 1 — 
15th +5 Artificer Specialist feature 10 5 4 4 B 3 2 — 
16th +5 Ability Score Improvement 10 5 4 4 3 3 2 — 
17th +6 — 10 5 4 4 3 3 3 1 
18th +6 Magic Item Master 12 6 4 4 3 3 3 1 
19th +6 Ability Score Improvement 12 6 4 4 3 3 3 2 
20th +6 Soul of Artifice 12 6 4 4 3 3 3 2 
MAGICAL TINKERING SPELLCASTING 


At 1st level, you learn how to invest a spark of magic 
into mundane objects. To use this ability, you must have 
tinker’s tools or other artisan’s tools in hand. You then 
touch a Tiny nonmagical object as an action and give it 
one of the following magical properties of your choice: 


The object sheds bright light in a 5-foot radius and 

dim light for an additional 5 feet. 

* Whenever tapped by a creature, the object emits a re- 
corded message that can be heard up to 10 feet away. 
You utter the message when you bestow this property 
on the object, and the recording can be no more than 
6 seconds long. 

e The object continuously emits your choice of an odor 
or a nonverbal sound (wind, waves, chirping, or the 
like). The chosen phenomenon is perceivable up to 10 
feet away. 

* A static visual effect appears on one of the object's sur- 

faces. This effect can be a picture, up to 25 words of 

text, lines and shapes, or a mixture of these elements, 
as you like. 


The chosen property lasts indefinitely. As an action, 
you can touch the object and end the property early. 

You can bestow magic on multiple objects, touching 
one object each time you use this feature, though a 
single object can only bear one property at a time. The 
maximum number of objects you can affect with this 
feature at one time is equal to your Intelligence modifier 
(minimum of one object). If you try to exceed your max- 
imum, the oldest property immediately ends, and then 
the new property applies. 


You have studied the workings of magic and how to 
channel it through objects. As a result, you have gained 
the ability to cast spells. To observers, you don't appear 
to be casting spells in a conventional way; you look as if 
you're producing wonders using mundane items or out- 
landish inventions. 


Toors REQUIRED 
You produce your artificer spell effects through your 
tools. You must have a spellcasting focus—specifically 
thieves' tools or some kind of artisan's tool—in hand 
when you cast any spell with this Spellcasting feature. 
You must be proficient with the tool to use it in this way. 
See chapter 5, "Equipment," in the Player's Handbook 
for descriptions of these tools. 

After you gain the Infuse Item feature at 2nd level, you 
can also use any item bearing one of your infusions as a 
spellcasting focus. 


CANTRIPS (0-І ЕУЕІ SPELLS) 
At 1st level, you know two cantrips of your choice from 
the artificer spell list. At higher levels, you learn addi- 
tional artificer cantrips of your choice, as shown in the 
Cantrips Known column of the Artificer table. 

When you gain a level in this class, you can replace 
one of the artificer cantrips you know with another can- 
trip from the artificer spell list. 


PREPARING AND CASTING SPELLS 

The Artificer table shows how many spell slots you have 
to cast your artificer spells. To cast one of your artificer 
spells of 1st level or higher, you must expend a slot of 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


56 


TARAGA ы ылыы „= 
THE MAGIC OF ARTIFICE 
As an artificer, you use tools when you cast your spells. 
When describing your spellcasting, think about how you're 
using a tool to perform the spell effect. If you cast cure 
wounds using alchemist’s supplies, you could be quickly 
producing a salve. If you cast it using tinker’s tools, you 
might have a miniature mechanical spider that binds 
wounds. When you cast poison spray, you could fling foul 
chemicals or use a wand that spits venom. The effect of 
the spell is the same as for a spellcaster of any other class, 
but your method of spellcasting is special. 

The same principle applies when you prepare your 
spells. As an artificer, you don't study a spellbook or pray 
to prepare your spells. Instead, you work with your tools 
and create the specialized items you'll use to produce 
your effects. If you replace cure wounds with heat metal, 
you might be altering the device you use to heal—perhaps 
modifying a tool so that it channels heat instead of heal- 
ing energy. 

Such details don't limit you in any way or provide you 
with any benefit beyond the spell's effects. You don't have 
to justify how you're using tools to cast a spell. But de- 
scribing your spellcasting creatively is a fun way to distin- 
guish yourself from other spellcasters. 

uw p—————————————————————————————— ( NÜ" 


the spell’s level or higher. You regain all expended spell 
slots when you finish a long rest. 

You prepare the list of artificer spells that are avail- 
able for you to cast, choosing from the artificer spell 
list. When you do so, choose a number of artificer spells 
equal to your Intelligence modifier + half your artificer 
level, rounded down (minimum of one spell). The spells 
must be of alevelfor which you have spell slots. 

For example, if you are a 5th-level artificer, you have 
four 1st-level and two 2nd-level spell slots. With an In- 
telligence of 14, your list of prepared spells can include 
four spells of 1st or 2nd level, in any combination. If you 
prepare the 1st-level spell cure wounds, you can cast 
it using a 1st-level or a 2nd-level slot. Casting the spell 
doesn't remove it from your list of prepared spells. 

Youcan change your list of prepared spells when you 
finish a long rest. Preparing a new list of artificer spells 
requires time spent tinkering with your spellcasting fo- 
cuses: atleast 1 minute per spell level for each spell on 
your list. 


SPELLCASTING ABILITY 

Intelligence is your spellcasting ability for your artificer 
spells; your understanding of the theory behind magic 
allows you to wield these spells with superior skill. You 
use your Intelligence whenever an artificer spell refers 
to your spellcasting ability. In addition, you use your 
Intelligence modifier when setting the saving throw DC 
for an artificer spell you cast and when making an at- 
tack roll with one. 


Spell save DC = 8 + your proficiency bonus + your 
Intelligence modifier 


Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus + your 
Intelligence modifier 


RITUAL CASTING 
You can cast an artificer spell as a ritual if that spell has 
the ritual tag and you have the spell prepared. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


ARTIFICER SPELL LIST 
Here’s the list of spells you consult when you learn an 
artificer spell. The list is organized by spell level, not 
character level. If a spell can be cast as a ritual, the rit- 
ual tag appears after the spell’s name. 

These spells are from the Player's Handbook. If a 
spell's name is followed by an asterisk, the spell is in- 
stead from Xanathar's Guide to Everything. 


CANTRIPS (О LEVEL) 
acid splash 
create bonfire* 
dancing lights 
fire bolt 
frostbite* 
guidance 

light 

mage hand 
magic stone* 
mending 
message 
poison spray 
prestidigitation 
ray of frost 
resistance 
shocking grasp 
spare the dying 
thorn whip 
thunderclap* 


1ST LEVEL 

absorb elements* 
alarm (ritual) 
catapult** 

cure wounds 

detect magic (ritual) 
disguise self 
expeditious retreat 
faerie fire 

false life 

feather fall 

grease 

identify (ritual) 
jump 

longstrider 

purify food and drink 
sanctuary 

snare* 


2ND LEVEL 
aid 

alter self 
arcane lock 
blur 

continual flame 
darkvision 
enhance ability 
enlarge/reduce 
heat metal 


invisibility 

lesser restoration 
levitate 

magic mouth (ritual) 
magic weapon 
protection from poison 
pyrotechnics* 

rope trick 

see invisibility 
skywrite* (ritual) 
spider climb 

web 


3RD LEVEL 

blink 

catnap* 

create food and water 
dispel magic 
elemental weapon 
flame arrows* 

Py 

glyph of warding 

haste 

protection from energy 
revivify 

tiny servant* 

water breathing (ritual) 
waterwalk (ritual) 


4TH LEVEL 

arcane eye 

elemental bane* 
fabricate 

freedom of movement 
Leomund's secret chest 


Mordenkainen's faithful hound 


Mordenkainen's 

private sanctum 
Otiluke's resilient sphere 
stone shape 
stoneskin 


STH LEVEL 
animate objects 
Bigby’s hand 
creation 

greater restoration 
skill empowerment* 
transmute rock* 
wall of stone 


INFUSE ITEM 


At 2nd level, you gain the ability to imbue mundane 
items with certain magical infusions. The magic items 
you create with this feature are effectively prototypes of 
permanent items. 


INFUSIONS KNOWN 
When you gain this feature, pick four artificer infusions 
to learn, choosing from the "Artificer Infusions" section 
at the end of the class's description. You learn additional 
infusions of your choice when you reach certain levels in 
this class, as shown in the Infusions Known column of 
the Artificer table. 

Whenever you gain a level in this class, you can re- 
place one of the artificer infusions you learned with 
a new one. 


INFUSING AN ITEM 
Whenever you finish a long rest, you сап touch a non- 
magical object and imbue it with one of your artificer in- 
fusions, turning it into a magic item. An infusion works 
on only certain kinds of objects, as specified in the infu- 
sion's description. If the item requires attunement, you 
can attune yourself to it the instant you infuse the item. 
If you decide to attune to the item later, you must do so 
using the normal process for attunement (see "Attune- 
ment” in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master's Guide). 
Your infusion remains in an item indefinitely, but 
when you die, the infusion vanishes after a number of 
days have passed equal to your Intelligence modifier 
(minimum of 1 day). The infusion also vanishes if you 
give up your knowledge of the infusion for another one. 
Youcan infuse more than one nonmagical object at 
the end of a long rest; the maximum number of objects 
appears in the Infused Items column of the Artificer ta- 
ble. You must touch each of the objects, and each of your 
infusions can be in only one object at a time. Moreover, 
no object can bear more than one of your infusions at a 
time. If you try to exceed your maximum number of in- 
fusions, the oldest infusion immediately ends, and then 
the new infusion applies. 


ARTIFICER SPECIALIST 


At 3rd level, you choose the type of specialist you are: 
Alchemist, Artillerist, or Battle Smith, each of which is 
detailed at the end of the class's description. Your choice 
grants you features at 5th level and again at 9th and 
15th level. 


THE RIGHT TOOL FOR THE JOB 


At 3rd level, you learn how to produce exactly the tool 
you need: with tinker’s tools in hand, you can magically 
create one set of artisan’s tools in an unoccupied space 
within 5 feet of you. This creation requires 1 hour of 
uninterrupted work, which can coincide with a short 
or long rest. Though the product of magic, the tools 

are nonmagical, and they vanish when you use this fea- 
ture again. 


ALCHEMIST 


WITH 
Homunculus 
SERVANT 


ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT 


When you reach 4th, 8th, 12th, 16th, and 19th level, you 
can increase one ability score of your choice by 2, or 
you can increase two ability scores of your choice by 1. 
As normal, you can't increase an ability score above 20 
using this feature. 


Toor EXPERTISE 


Starting at 6th level, your proficiency bonus is doubled 
for any ability check you make that uses your proficiency 
with a tool. 


FLASH OF GENIUS 


Starting at 7th level, you gain the ability to come up with 
solutions under pressure. When you or another creature 
you can see within 30 feet of you makes an ability check 
or a saving throw, you can use your reaction to add your 
Intelligence modifier to the roll. 

You can use this feature a number of times equal to 
your Intelligence modifier (minimum of once). You re- 
gain all expended uses when you finish a long rest. 


MAGIC ITEM ADEPT 


When you reach 10th level, you achieve a profound un- 
derstanding of how to use and make magic items: 


* You can attune to up to four magic items at once. 

* If youcraft a magic item with a rarity of common or 
uncommon, it takes you a quarter of the normal time, 
and it costs you half as much of the usual gold. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


bg 


58 


SPELL-STORING ÍTEM 


At 11th level, you learn how to store a spell in an object. 
Whenever you finish a long rest, you can touch one sim- 
ple or martial weapon or one item that you can use as a 
spellcasting focus, and you store a spell in it, choosing 
a lst- or 2nd-level spell from the artificer spell list that 
requires 1 action to cast (you needn't have it prepared). 
While holding the object, a creature can take an action 
to produce the spell's effect from it, using your spellcast- 
ing ability modifier. If the spell requires concentration, 
the creature must concentrate. The spell stays in the ob- 
ject until it’s been used a number of times equal to twice 
your Intelligence modifier (minimum of twice) or until 
you use this feature again to store a spell in an object. 


MAGIC ITEM SAVANT 
At 14th level, your skill with magic items deepens more: 


* Youcan attune to up to five magic items at once. 
* Youignore all class, race, spell, and level require- 
ments on attuning to or using a magic item. 


MAGIC ITEM MASTER 


Starting at 18th level, you can attune to upto six magic 
items at once. 


SOUL OF ARTIFICE 


At 20th level, you develop a mystical connection to your 
magic items, which you can draw on for protection: 


* You gain a +1 bonus to all saving throws per magic 
item you are currently attuned to. 

* If you're reduced to О hit points but not killed out- 
right, you can use your reaction to end one of your 
artificer infusions, causing you to drop to 1 hit point 
instead of 0. 


ARTIFICER SPECIALISTS 


Artificers pursue many disciplines. Here are specialist 
options you can choose from at 3rd level. 


ALCHEMIST 


An Alchemist is an expert at combining reagents to pro- 
duce mystical effects. Alchemists use their creations to 
give life and to leech it away. Alchemy is the oldest of ar- 
tificer traditions, and its versatility has long been valued 
during times of war and peace. 


TOOL PROFICIENCY 

When you adopt this specialization at 3rd level, you gain 
proficiency with alchemist’s supplies. If you already have 
this proficiency, you gain proficiency with one other type 
of artisan’s tools of your choice. 


ALCHEMIST SPELLS 

Starting at 3rd level, you always have certain spells pre- 
pared after you reach particular levels in this class, as 
shown in the Alchemist Spells table. These spells count 
as artificer spells for you, but they don't count against 
the number of artificer spells you prepare. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


ALCHEMIST SPELLS 
Artificer Level — Spell 


3rd healing word, ray of sickness 

5th flaming sphere, Melf's acid arrow 
9th gaseous form, mass healing word 
13th blight, death ward 

17th cloudkill, raise dead 


EXPERIMENTAL ELIXIR 

Beginning at 3rd level, whenever you finish a long rest, 
you can magically produce an experimental elixir in an 
empty flask you touch. Roll on the Experimental Elixir 
table for the elixir's effect, which is triggered when 
someone drinks the elixir. As an action, a creature 

can drink the elixir or administer it to an incapaci- 
tated creature. 

Creating an experimental elixir requires you to have 
alchemist supplies on your person, and any elixir you 
create with this feature lasts until it is drunk or until the 
end of your next long rest. 

When you reach certain levels in this class, you can 
make more elixirs at the end of a longrest: two at 6th 
level and three at 15th level. Roll for each elixir's effect 
separately. Each elixir requires its own flask. 

Youcan create additional experimental elixirs by ex- 
pending a spell slot of 1st level or higher for each one. 
When you do so, you use your action to create the elixir 
in an empty flask you touch, and you choose the elixir's 
effect from the Experimental Elixir table. 


EXPERIMENTAL ELIXIR 


d6 Effect 

1 Healing. The drinker regains a number of hit points 
equal to 2d4 + your Intelligence modifier. 

2 Swiftness. The drinker's walking speed increases by 10 
feet for 1 hour. 

3  Resilience. The drinker gains a +1 bonus to AC for 10 
minutes. 

4 Boldness. The drinker can roll a 44 and add the num- 
ber rolled to every attack roll and saving throw they 
make for the next minute. 

5 Flight. The drinker gains a flying speed of 10 feet for 10 
minutes. 

6 Transformation. The drinker's body is transformed as if 
by the alter self spell. The drinker determines the trans- 
formation caused by the spell, the effects of which last 
for 10 minutes. 


ALCHEMICAL SAVANT 

At5th level, you develop masterful command of magical 
chemicals, enhancing the healing and damage you cre- 
ate through them. Whenever you cast a spell using your 
alchemist's supplies as the spellcasting focus, you gain 
a bonus to one roll of the spell. That roll must restore hit 
points or be a damage roll that deals acid, fire, necrotic, 
or poison damage, and the bonus equals your Intelli- 
gence modifier (minimum of +1). 


RESTORATIVE REAGENTS 
Starting at 9th level, you can incorporate restorative re- 
agents into some of your works: 


* Whenever a creature drinks an experimental elixir 
you created, the creature gains temporary hit points 
equal to 2d6 + your Intelligence modifier (minimum of 
1 temporary hit point). 

* You can cast lesser restoration without expending a 
spell slot and without preparing the spell, provided 
you use alchemist’s supplies as the spellcasting focus. 
You can do so a number of times equal to your Intelli- 
gence modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all 
expended uses when you finish a long rest. 


CHEMICAL MASTERY 

By 15th level, you have been exposed to so many chem- 
icals that they pose little risk to you, and you can use 
them to quickly end certain ailments: 


* Yougainresistance to acid damage and poison dam- 
age, and you are immune to the poisoned condition. 

* Youcan cast éreater restoration and heal without ex- 
pending a spell slot, without preparing the spell, and 
without material components, provided you use al- 
chemist's supplies as the spellcasting focus. Once you 
cast either spell with this feature, you can't cast that 
spell with it again until you finish a long rest. 


ARTILLERIST 


An Artillerist specializes in using magic to hurl energy, 
projectiles, and explosions on a battlefield. This destruc- 
tive power was valued by all the armies of the Last War. 
Now that the war is over, some members of this spe- 
cialization have sought to build a more peaceful world 
by using their powers to fight the resurgence of strife in 
Khorvaire. The gnome artificer Vi, an unlikely yet key 
member of House Cannith's warforged project, has been 
especially vocal about making things right: "It's about 
time we fixed things instead of blowing them all to hell." 


Toor PROFICIENCY 

When you adopt this specialization at 3rd level, you gain 
proficiency with woodcarver's tools. If you already have 
this proficiency, you gain proficiency with one other type 
of artisan's tools of your choice. 


ARTILLERIST SPELLS 

Starting at 3rd level, you always have certain spells pre- 
pared after you reach particular levels in this class, as 
shown in the Artillerist Spells table. These spells count 
as artificer spells for you, but they don't count against 
the number of artificer spells you prepare. 


ARTILLERIST SPELLS 
Artificer Level Spell 


3rd shield, thunderwave 

5th scorching ray, shatter 
9th fireball, wind wall 

13th ice storm, wall of fire 
17th cone of cold, wall of force 


ELDRITCH CANNON 

At 3rd level, you learn how to create a magical cannon. 
Using woodcarver's tools or smith's tools, you can take 
an action to magically create a Small or Tiny eldritch 
cannon in an unoccupied space on a horizontal surface 
within 5 feet of you. A Small eldritch cannon occupies 
its space, and a Tiny one can be held in one hand. 

Once you create a cannon, you can't do so again until 
you finish a long rest or until you expend a spell slot of 
1st level or higher. You can have only one cannon at a 
time and can't create one while your cannon is present. 

The cannon is a magical object. Regardless of size, 
the cannon has an AC of 18 and a number of hit points 
equal to five times your artificer level. It is immune to 
poison damage, psychic damage, and all conditions. If 
itis forced to make an ability check or a saving throw, 
treat all its ability scores as 10 (+0). If the mending spell 
is cast on it, it regains 2d6 hit points. It disappears if it is 
reduced to 0 hit points or after 1 hour. You can dismiss 
it early as an action. 

When youcreate the cannon, you determine its ap- 
pearance and whether it has legs. You also decide which 
type it is, choosing from the options on the Eldritch Can- 
nons table. On each of your turns, you can take a bonus 
action to cause the cannon to activate if you are within 
60 feet of it. As part of the same bonus action, you can 
direct the cannon to walk or climb up to 15 feet to an 
unoccupied space, provided it has legs. 


ELDRITCH CANNONS 


Cannon Activation 
The cannon exhales fire in an adjacent 15- 
foot cone that you designate. Each creature 


in that area must make a Dexterity saving 


Flamethrower 


throw against your spell save DC, taking 
2d8 fire damage on a failed save or half as 
much damage on a successful one. The fire 
ignites any flammable objects in the area 
that aren't being worn or carried. 

Make a ranged spell attack, originating 
from the cannon, at one creature or object 
within 120 feet of it. On a hit, the target 
takes 2d8 force damage, and if the target 

is a creature, it is pushed up to 5 feet away 


Force Ballista 


from the cannon. 

The cannon emits a burst of positive en- 
ergy that grants itself and each creature of 
your choice within 10 feet of it a number of 


Protector 


temporary hit points equal to 148 + your 
Intelligence modifier (minimum of +1). 


ARCANE FIREARM 

At5th level, you know how to turn a wand, staff, or rod 
into an arcane firearm, à conduit for your destructive 
spells. When you finish a long rest, you can use wood- 
carver's tools to carve special sigils into a wand, staff, 
or rod and thereby turn it into your arcane firearm. The 
sigils disappear from the object if you later carve them 
on a different item. The sigils otherwise last indefinitely. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


89 


f 60 


ВлттіЕ SMITH WITH 
Stee. DEFENDER 


You can use your arcane firearm as a spellcasting 
focus for your artificer spells. When you cast an artificer 
spell through the firearm, roll a d8, and you gain a bo- 
nus to one of the spell's damage rolls equal to the num- 
ber rolled. 


EXPLOSIVE CANNON 
Starting at 9th level, every eldritch cannon you create is 
more destructive: 


• The cannon's damage rolls all increase by 148. 

„ As an action, you can command the cannon to deto- 
nate if you are within 60 feet of it. Doing so destroys 
the cannon and forces each creature within 20 feet of 
it to make a Dexterity saving throw against your spell 
save DC, taking 3d8 force damage on a failed save or 
half as much damage on a successful one. 


FORTIFIED POSITION 
Starting at 15th level, you're a master at forming 
well-defended emplacements using Eldritch Cannon: 


- You and your allies have half cover while within 10 
feet of a cannon you create with Eldritch Cannon, as a 
result of a shimmering field of magical protection that 
the cannon emits. 

* Youcan now have two cannons at the same time. You 
can create two with the same action (but not the same 
spell slot), and you can activate both of them with the 
same bonus action. You determine whether the can- 
nons are identical to each other or different. You can't 
create a third cannon while you have two. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


ARTILLERIST 


BATTLE SMITH 


Armies require protection, and someone has to put 
things back together if defenses fail. A combination 

of protector and medic, a Battle Smith is an expert at 
defending others and repairing both material and per- 
sonnel. To aid in their work, Battle Smiths are usually 
accompanied by a steel defender, a protective compan- 
ion of their own creation. Many soldiers tell stories of 
nearly dying before being saved by a Battle Smith and a 
steel defender. 

Battle Smiths played a key role in House Cannith's 
work on battle constructs and the original warforged, 
and after the Last War, these artificers led efforts to aid 
those who were injured in the war's horrific battles. 


TOOL PROFICIENCY 

When you adopt this specialization at 3rd level, you gain 
proficiency with smith’s tools. If you already have this 
proficiency, you gain proficiency with one other type of 
artisan’s tools of your choice. 


BATTLE SMITH SPELLS 

Starting at 3rd level, you always have certain spells 
prepared after you reach particular levels in this class, 
as shown in the Battle Smith Spells table. These spells 
count as artificer spells for you, but they don’t count 
against the number of artificer spells you prepare. 


BATTLE SMiTH SPELLS 
Artificer Level Spell 


3rd heroism, shield 

5th branding smite, warding bond 

9th aura of vitality, conjure barrage 
13th aura of purity, fire shield 

17th banishing smite, mass cure wounds 


BATTLE READY 
When you reach 3rd level, your combat training and 
your experiments with magic have paid off in two ways: 


* You gain proficiency with martial weapons. 

* When you attack with a magic weapon, you can use 
your Intelligence modifier, instead of Strength or Dex- 
terity modifier, for the attack and damage rolls. 


STEEL DEFENDER 

By 3rd level, your tinkering has borne you a faithful 
companion, a steel defender. It is friendly to you and 
your companions, and it obeys your commands. See 
this creature's game statistics in the steel defender stat 
block. You determine the creature's appearance and 
whether it has two legs or four; your choice has no effect 
on its game statistics. 

In combat, the steel defender shares your initiative 
count, but it takes its turn immediately after yours. It 
can move and use its reaction on its own, but the only 
action it takes on its turn is the Dodge action, unless you 
take a bonus action on your turn to command it to take 
one of the actions in its stat block or the Dash, Disen- 
gage, Help, Hide, or Search action. 

If the mending spell is cast on it, it regains 2d6 hit 
points. If it has died within the last hour, you can use 
your smith's tools as an action to revive it, provided you 
are within 5 feet of it and you expend a spell slot of 1st 
level or higher. The steel defender returns to life after 1 
minute with all its hit points restored. 

At the end of a long rest, you can create a new steel 
defender if you have your smith's tools with you. If you 
already have a steel defender from this feature, the first 
one immediately perishes. 


EXTRA ATTACK 
Starting at 5th level, you can attack twice, rather than 
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. 


ARCANE JOLT 

At 9th level, you learn new ways to channel arcane en- 
ergy to harm or heal. When either you hit a target with a 
magic weapon attack or your steel defender hits a target, 
you can channel magical energy through the strike to 
create one of the following effects: 


• The target takes an extra 2d6 force damage. 

* Choose one creature or object you can see within 30 
feet of the target. Healing energy flows into the chosen 
recipient, restoring 2d6 hit points to it. 


You can use this energy a number of times equal to 
your Intelligence modifier (minimum of once), but you 
can do so no more than once on a turn. You regain all 
expended uses when you finish a long rest. 


STEEL DEFENDER 


Medium construct, neutral 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 

Hit Points equal the steel defender's Constitution modifier + 
your Intelligence modifier + five times your level in this class 

Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14 (+2) 12 (+1) 14 (+2) 4 (-4) 10 (+0) 6(-2) 


Saving Throws Dex +3, Con +4 

Skills Athletics +4, Perception +4 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages understands the languages you speak 


Might of the Master. The following numbers increase by 1 when 
your proficiency bonus increases by 1: the defender's skill and 
saving throw bonuses (above), the bonuses to hit and damage 
of its rend attack, and the number of hit points restored by its 
Repair action (below). 


Vigilant. The defender can't be surprised. 


ACTIONS (REQUIRES YOUR BONUS ACTION) 


Force-Empowered Rend. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 
5 ft., one target you can see. Hit: 1d8 + 2 force damage. 


Repair (3/Day). The magical mechanisms inside the defender 
restore 248 + 2 hit points to itself or to one construct or object 
within 5 feet of it. 


REACTION 


Deflect Attack. The defender imposes disadvantage on the 

attack roll of one creature it can see that is within 5 feet of 

it, provided the attack roll is against a creature other than 

the defender. 
EAE 


IMPROVED DEFENDER 
At 15th level, your Arcane Jolt and steel defender be- 
come more powerful: 


e The extra damage and the healing of your Arcane Jolt 
both increase to 4d6. 

* Your steel defender gains a *2 bonus to Armor Class. 
• Whenever your steel defender uses its Deflect Attack, 
the attacker takes force damage equal to 144 + your 

Intelligence modifier. 


ARTIFICER INFUSIONS 


Artificers have invented numerous magical infusions, 
extraordinary processes that rapidly create magic items. 
To many, artificers seem like wonderworkers, accom- 
plishing in hours what others need weeks to complete. 

The description of each of the following infusions 
details the type of item that can receive it, along with 
whether the resulting magic item requires attunement. 

Some infusions specify a minimum artificer level. 
You can't learn such an infusion until you are at least 
that level. 

Unless an infusion's description says otherwise, you 
can't learn an infusion more than once. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION es 


62 


Boors ОЕ THE WINDING PATH 
Prerequisite: 6th-level artificer 
Item: A pair of boots (requires attunement) 


While wearing these boots, a creature can teleport up 
to 15 feet as a bonus action to an unoccupied space the 
creature can see. The creature must have occupied that 
space at some point during the current turn. 


ENHANCED ARCANE Focus 
Item: A rod, staff, or wand (requires attunement) 


While holding this item, a creature gains a +1 bonus to 
spell attack rolls. In addition, the creature ignores half 
cover when making a spell attack. 

The bonus increases to +2 when you reach 10th level 
in this class. 


ENHANCED DEFENSE 
Item: A suit of armor or a shield 


A creature gains a *1 bonus to Armor Class while wear- 
ing (armor) or wielding (shield) the infused item. 

The bonus increases to +2 when you reach 10th level 
in this class. 


ENHANCED WEAPON 
Item: A simple or martial weapon 


This magic weapon grants a *1 bonus to attack and 
damage rolls made with it. 

The bonus increases to +2 when youreach 10th level 
in this class. 


HOMUNCULUS SERVANT 
Prerequisite: 6th-level artificer 
Item: A gem worth at least 100 gp or a dragonshard 


You learn intricate methods for magically creating a 
special homunculus that serves you. The item you infuse 
serves as the creature's heart, around which the crea- 
ture's body instantly forms. 

You determine the homunculus's appearance. Some 
artificers prefer mechanical-looking birds, whereas 
some like winged vials or miniature, animate cauldrons. 

The homunculus is friendly to you and your compan- 
ions, and it obeys your commands. See this creature's 
game statistics in the Homunculus Servant stat block. 

In combat, the homunculus shares your initiative 
count, but it takes its turn immediately after yours. It 
can move and use its reaction on its own, but the only 
action it takes on its turn is the Dodge action, unless you 
take a bonus action on your turn to command it to take 
the action in its stat block or the Dash, Disengage, Help, 
Hide, or Search action. 

The homunculus regains 2d6 hit points if the mending 
spell is cast on it. If it dies, it vanishes, leaving its heart 
in its space. 


RADIANT WEAPON 
Prerequisite: 6th-level artificer 
Item: A simple or martial weapon (requires attunement) 


This magic weapon grants a *1 bonus to attack and 
damage rolls made with it. While holding it, the wielder 
can take a bonus action to cause it to shed bright light in 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


a 30-foot radius and dim light for an additional 30 feet. 
The wielder can extinguish the light as a bonus action. 

The weapon has 4 charges. As a reaction immediately 
after being hit by an attack, the wielder can expend 1 
charge and cause the attacker to be blinded until the 
end of the attacker’s next turn, unless the attacker suc- 
ceeds on a Constitution saving throw against your spell 
save DC. The weapon regains 1d4 expended charges 
daily at dawn. 


REPEATING SHOT 
Item: A simple or martial weapon with the ammunition 
property (requires attunement) 


This magic weapon grants a +1 bonus to attack and 
damage rolls made with it when it’s used to make a 
ranged attack, and it ignores the loading property if 
it has it. 

If you load no ammunition in the weapon, it produces 
its own, automatically creating one piece of magic am- 
munition when you make a ranged attack with it. The 
ammunition created by the weapon vanishes the instant 
after it hits or misses a target. 

eT Ra) 


HOMUNCULUS SERVANT 


Tiny construct, neutral 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 

Hit Points equal the homunculus’s Constitution modifier + your 
Intelligence modifier + your level in this class 

Speed 20 ft., fly 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
4(-3) 15 (42) 12 (+1) 10(+0) 10(+0) 7 (-2) 
ИИН 

Saving Throws Dex +4 

Skills Perception +4, Stealth +4 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 

Languages understands the languages you speak 
ИННИ 


Evasion. If the homunculus is subjected to an effect that allows 
it to make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, 

it instead takes no damage if it succeeds on the saving throw, 
and only half damage if it fails. It can't use this trait if it's in- 
capacitated. 


Might of the Master. The following numbers increase by 1 when 
your proficiency bonus increases by 1: the homunculus's skill 
and saving throw bonuses (above) and the bonuses to hit and 
damage ofits attack (below). 


ACTIONS (REQUIRES YOUR BONUS ACTION) | 


Force Strike. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30 ft., one 
target you can see. Hit: 144 + 2 force damage. 


REACTIONS 

Channel Magic. The homunculus delivers a spell you cast that 
has a range of touch. The homunculus must be within 120 
feet of you. 


REPLICATE MAGIC ITEM 

Using this infusion, you replicate a particular magic 
item. You can learn this infusion multiple times; each 
time you do so, choose a magic item that you can make 
with it, picking from the Replicable Items tables below. 
A table's title tells you the level you must be in the class 
to choose an item from the table. 

In the tables, an item's entry tells you whether the item 
requires attunement. See the item's description in the 
Dungeon Master's Guide for more information about it, 
including the type of object required for its making. 

If you have Xanathar's Guide to Everything, you can 
choose from among the common magicitems in that 
book when you pick a magic item you can replicate with 
this infusion. 


REPLICABLE ITEMS (2ND-LEVEL ARTIFICER) 


Magic Item Attunement 
Alchemy jug No 
Armblade (detailed in chapter 5) Yes 
Bag of holding No 
Cap of water breathing No 
Goggles of night No 
Prosthetic limb (detailed in chapter 5) Yes 
Rope of climbing No 
Sending stones No 
Wand of magic detection No 
Wand of secrets No 


REPLICABLE ITEMS (6TH-LEVEL ARTIFICER) 


Magic Item Attunement 
Boots of elvenkind No 
Cloak of elvenkind Yes 
Cloak of the manta ray No 
Eyes of charming Yes 
Gloves of thievery No 
Lantern of revealing No 
Pipes of haunting No 
Ring of water walking No 
Wand sheath (detailed in chapter 5) Yes 


REPLICABLE ITEMS (1OTH-LEVEL ARTIFICER) 


Magic Item Attunement 
Boots of striding and springing Yes 
Boots of the winterlands Yes 
Bracers of archery Yes 
Brooch of shielding Yes 
Cloak of protection Yes 
Eyes of the eagle Yes 
Gauntlets of ogre power Yes 
Gloves of missile snaring Yes 
Gloves of swimming and climbing Yes 
Hat of disguise Yes 
Headband of intellect Yes 
Helm of telepathy Yes 


Magic Item Attunement 
Medallion of thoughts Yes 
Periapt of wound closure Yes 
Pipes of the sewers Yes 
Quiver of Ehlonna No 
Ring of jumping Yes 
Ring of mind shielding Yes 
Slippers of spider climbing Yes 
Ventilating lung (detailed in chapter 5) Yes 
Winged boots Yes 


REPLICABLE ITEMS (14TH-LEVEL ARTIFICER) 


Magic Item Attunement 
Amulet of health Yes 
Arcane propulsion arm (detailed in chapter 5) Yes 
Belt of hill giant strength Yes 
Boots of levitation Yes 
Boots of speed Yes 
Bracers of defense Yes 
Cloak of the bat Yes 
Dimensional shackles No 
Gem of seeing Yes 
Horn of blasting No 
Ring of free action Yes 
Ring of protection Yes 
Ring of the ram Yes 


REPULSION SHIELD 
Prerequisite: 6th-level artificer 
Item: A shield (requires attunement) 


A creature gains а +1 bonus to Armor Class while wield- 
ing this shield. 

The shield has 4 charges. While holding it, the wielder 
can use a reaction immediately after being hit by a me- 
lee attack to expend 1 of the shield'scharges and push 
the attacker up to 15 feet away. The shield regains 1d4 
expended charges daily at dawn. 


RESISTANT ARMOR 
Prerequisite: 6th-level artificer 
Item: A suit of armor (requires attunement) 


While wearing this armor, a creature has resistance to 
one of the following damage types, which you choose 
when you infuse the item: acid, cold, fire, force, light- 
ning, necrotic, poison, psychic, radiant, or thunder. 


RETURNING WEAPON 

Item: A simple or martial weapon with the thrown 
property 

This magic weapon grants a +1 bonus to attack 

and damage rolls made with it, and it returns to the 
wielder’s hand immediately after it is used to make a 
ranged attack. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


GROUP PATRONS 


When creating characters for an Eberron campaign, 
consider choosing a patron for your adventuring party. 
This section describes general categories of patrons and 
also examples of each kind of patron from across Khor- 
vaire. Work as a team with your DM to select a group 
patron. As an alternative, your characters could form 
your own organization that might one day stand among 
the great powers of the world. 

Mighty dragonmarked houses, small home-town 
newspapers, national rulers, powerful immortals, and 
various other organizations and individuals hold the 
reins of power in Khorvaire. They bind the fabric of 
society together, and they are responsible for much of 
the change that occurs in the world—often by means 
of agents that include parties of adventurers. An ad- 
venturing group that has a powerful backer as a patron 
has a clear place in the world, access to additional re- 
sources, and a reason to work together in pursuit of a 
common cause. 


How PATRONS WORK 


Each type of patron in this section includes the follow- 
ing information: 


• An example of the general type of patron, including in- 
formation about its organization, headquarters, allies, 
and enemies 

* Suggestions for various roles that characters in your 
party might take on, including classes, backgrounds, 
and skills that are useful for filling that role 

* Possibilities regarding your patron's background 
and your characters' roles in it, including the kinds 
of adventures and missions you might undertake on 
its behalf 

* Benefits your group gets from your patron, which 
might include compensation, equipment, privileges, 
and proficiencies 

* Alist of potential contacts who can serve as your per- 
sonal connection to your patron 


ASSIGNMENTS 


Patrons are more than a resource for your group to 
draw on, they are also a responsibility. Some patrons 
might be eager to support your group, while others 
might prove more demanding. 

Your group's patron might occasionally come to you 
and give you an assignment. This can be an easy way to 
get into an adventure. Of course, it's up to you how you 
respond to your patron's demands, and interesting sto- 
ries can emerge if you decide to refuse an assignment. 

Even a patron that isn't heavy-handed can significantly 
motivate your group. Maybe you'll seek adventures 
based on what pleases your patron and so earn a re- 
ward. A university, for example, might not send you on a 
particular mission, but you might decide to follow leads 
to an ancient artifact hoping the university might reward 
you for bringing it back. You have the freedom to chart 
your own destiny, while still letting the patron shape the 
nature of your group and the adventures you undertake. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


It might help to think of the patrons in this section in 
terms of three broad categories of autonomy: 


With a highly directive patron, you are an employee of 
an organization, and the organization often tells you 
what to do. Crime syndicates, dragonmarked houses, 
espionage agencies, military forces, and newspapers 
are typically highly directive. 

With a highly autonomous patron, you are more like a 
freelancer. Your patron might offer you assignments 
or reward you for achieving certain objectives, but it 
doesn't dictate your activities. Adventurers' guilds, 
heads of state, immortal beings, inquisitive agencies, 
religious orders, and universities are typically highly 
autonomous. 

In a player-directed organization, you don't have a 
patron because your adventuring party is in charge. 
You're the boss; you tell others what to do, and you're 
responsible to no one for your own activities. A crim- 
inal syndicate, inquisitive agency, military force, or 
newspaper can be a player-directed organization. 


BENEFITS AND FAVORS 


Every group patron offers your party a number of bene- 
fits for your service. These benefits range from standard 
business arrangements, like a salary and access to staff 
facilities, to more extraordinary boons, like audiences 
with powerful figures or exceptions from certain laws. 
Specific benefits are presented in more detail in the ben- 
efits section of each group patron. 

Beyond the benefits described in each group patron's 
description, patrons can also grant additional favors. If 
your party is in good standing with your patron—prov- 
ing yourselves reliable agents who fulfill the group's 
goals—your patron might grant requests for additional 
favors. A favor might take a variety of forms appropriate 
to the patron's area of influence or expertise, such as 
small loans, specialized equipment, or access to people 
and places you wouldn't otherwise have. Patrons who 
you regularly find yourself in conflict with aren't likely 
to grant you favors, unless doing so directly furthers 
their goals. 

In any case, the DM shouldn't feel limited to providing 
only the benefits noted in each group patron's descrip- 
tion. Patrons give a party access to solutions and sup- 
port they wouldn't have otherwise, and a patron might 
use their varied resources to guide their agents or pre- 
pare them for greater adventures. 


BEING YOUR Own PATRON 


For certain kinds of organizations, you can either join 

an existing group or found your own. For some players, 
the idea of running a crime syndicate, inquisitive agency, 
mercenary company, or newspaper is much more excit- 
ing than working for someone else. Founding your own 
organization offers a greater degree of autonomy, though 
potentially at the cost of support and reliable work. 

The information in this section applies whether you 
join an organization or found your own. When you're the 
boss, some of the benefits of belonging to an organiza- 
tion become expenses you have to worry about; when 
yourun your own mercenary company, for example, you 


need to stock your own armory rather than drawing on 
an existing organization's stockpile. The organization 
brings in income, but you'll have to spend some of it to 
keep the organization running. 

When you run your own organization, you can use the 
Running a Business downtime activity (see chapter 6 of 
the Dungeon Master's Guide) to reflect your organiza- 
tion's ongoing activities. More than one character can 
take part in this activity at a time. When rolling to de- 
termine the business's performance, add the total days 
spent by all the characters to the roll to determine the 
business's success (still observing the maximum of 30). 
If the business earns a profit, multiply that profit by 4 + 
the number of characters who took part in this down- 
time activity. 


PATRONS IN EBERRON 


Here are the most likely types of patrons for an adven- 
turing group in Eberron. Presented in alphabetical or- 
der, the patrons each include an example. 


PATRONS 
Type of Patron Example 
Adventurers' Guild Clifftop Adventurers' Guild 
Crime Syndicate Boromar Clan 
Dragonmarked House Апу dragonmarked house 
Espionage Agency King's Dark Lanterns 
Head of State Prince Oargev of New Cyre 
Immortal Being Sora Kell 
Inquisitive Agency Finders Guild 
Military Force Redcloak Battalion 
Newspaper The Korranberg Chronicle 
Religious Order Templars of the Silver Flame 
University Morgrave University 


ADVENTURERS' GUILD 


Your group has tiesto a network of professional adven- 
turers. These experts share contacts, resources, and 
leads on all manner of unusual and often dangerous 
work. Joining such a guild makes an ideal choice if you 
want to keep your entanglements with a patron to a min- 
imum, as an adventurers' guild doesn't direct your activ- 
ities or reward you for completing adventures. 

With a few exceptions, adventurers' guilds are local in 
scope, sincetheir primary benefits center on a guildhall. 
They might point you to adventures halfway across the 
world, but the general assumption is that you'll always 
come home to your guildhall, sooner or later. 


CLIFFTOP ADVENTURERS' GUILD 

Sharn's Clifftop neighborhood, located in the upper part 
of the Dura district, has long served as a crossroads 

for adventurers and soldiers of fortune. A dwarf named 
Shekkal Korranor established the Clifftop Adventur- 
ers' Guild 150 years ago, intending it as a place where 
explorers and wanderers could find support and good 
company. Shekkal died in the Last War, but the guild 
remains—a social club for adventurers and a one-stop 
marketplace for anyone seeking capable champions. 


The Clifftop guild has a reputation as a collection of 
helpful and good-hearted adventurers. Members who 
tarnish the guild's reputation can no longer take advan- 
tage of the guild's benefits. 

Guildhall. The Clifftop Adventurers' Guild head- 
quarters is the physical and social center of its district, 
amassive stone edifice built with the riches acquired 
over a lifetime of adventuring. Part quiet library, part 
comfortable inn, part active gymnasium, and part rowdy 
tavern, the guildhall contains practically every facility 
adventurers could need to train, study, and socialize. 
The neighborhood around it caters to adventurers' other 
needs with its variety of shops and services. 

Membership. Most of the members of the Clifftop 
Adventurers' Guild have a modest amount of experience 
as successful adventurers. Nearly everyone can boast of 
a successful delve into the old ruins beneath Sharn or 
an expedition to the Talenta Plains. The guild's leader, a 
dwarf named Sumara "Summer" Korranor, is a descen- 
dant of its founder and a fixture around the guildhall. 

Allies. Relationships with most of the guild's allies are 
based on business and built on upstanding reputations. 
Ultimately, though, the guild is a loose affiliation of 
groups, and organizations that have a good relationship 
with one of those groups might not transfer their good 
will to another. The following groups do brisk business 
with members of the Clifftop Adventurers' Guild: 


Affiliated guilds. Beyond Sharn, the guild has estab- 
lished good relations with adventuring guilds across 
Khorvaire, many of which have reciprocal agree- 
ments: their members can use the Clifftop facilities 
when they are in Sharn, and Clifftop guild members 
can make use of their facilities as well. Lists of these 
other guilds are kept in the Sharn guildhall. 

Clifftop businesses. The guild is a prominent feature in 
its neighborhood, and much of the area is dedicated 
to meeting guild's needs. Some businesses there offer 
small (5 percent) discounts to guild members, and all 
businesses are eager to avoid angering members of 
the guild lest they lose the business of other members. 

HouseSivis. A Speakers' Guild enclave in Clifftop spe- 
cializes in translating texts from Xen'drik. It also pro- 
vides legal services for adventurers in trouble. 

House Tharashk. The Tharashk enclave in Clifftop 
provides the services of guides with extensive experi- 
ence exploring Xend'rik, and it is careful to retain only 
guides who receive positive referrals from guild mem- 
bers. House Tharashk also uses the guild as a means 
to hire adventurers to serve as bodyguards on their 
own prospecting expeditions. 


Enemies. Individual adventuring groups readily 
make lasting enemies, and occasionally that animosity 
extends to the guild as a whole—as is the case with the 
following organizations: 


Deathsgate Explorers' Club. A fierce rivalry simmers 
between the Clifftop guild and Sharn's other local 
adventurers' guild. Sometimes the rivalry can be de- 
scribed as almost friendly, but the Deathsgate guild 
occasionally escalates it with vandalism of the Clifftop 
guildhall or even physical (but usually nonlethal) at- 
tacks on guild members in dark alleys. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 65 


VOICE OF 


BRELAND 


WATCH 
. COMMANDER OR 
CRIME LORD? 


++ жже ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ж i ж э ө ө ө ө ө ө ө э ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө n] ө 


Watch Commander Lian Halamar, in charge of the 

large and prestigious Daggerwatch Garrison in Sharn's 
Dura quarter, has long been suspected of ties to the 
infamous Boromar Clan. Though these suspicions are 
often dismissed as simple prejudice in the assumption 
that any halfling in Sharn must be associated with the 
crime syndicate, the Voice of Breland, in cooperation with 
civic-minded members of the Clifftop Adventurers' 
Guid, have uncovered stunning evidence confirming this 
connection. The Clifftop guild denies claims that these 
accusations embody the latest fracas in the long-running 
tensions between the Daggerwatch Garrison and the 
city's various groups of heroes for hire. 


з карба especie aont уар e AM E tics — —— PRIME 


Sharn Watch. Clifftop is protected of the Daggerwatch 
Garrison and Watch Commander Lian Halamar. Hala- 
mar has по love for adventurers and is happy to catch 
guild members on the wrong side of the law. 


GUILD BENEFITS 
As members of an adventurers' guild, your group gains 
the following benefits: 


Accommodations. Guild members can stay at the guild- 
hall. The room is comparable to one you'd find in a 
comfortable inn, but at a modest price (5 sp per day). 

Dues. These benefits require the annual contribution of 
13 gp paid to the Clifftop Adventurers' Guild. These 
dues fund the guild's services and activities. (Other 
guilds typically charge dues somewhere between 10 
and 15 gp per year.) 

Information. An adventurers' guild headquarters 
makes a good place to learn about topics relevant to 
adventurers' interests. If you need to find someone 
who's knowledgeable about the Mournland, for ex- 
ample, the Clifftop guild's headquarters in Sharn is a 
good place to look. 

Referrals. The guild can recommend hired services 
to its members, drawing on other guild members' 
experiences to provide honest, reliable, and skillful 
hirelings. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


Pte tee print P tt 


Storage. The guild will store items for its members. The 
Clifftop guild has an account with House Kundarak 
banks that allow its members to store valuables in se- 
cure vaults. Some guilds have access to items such as 
a bag of holding or a safe that opens into a similar ex- 
tradimensional space. In the worst case, an item can 
be hidden in a guildhall's basement for a time. 


BUILD YOUR GROUP 

Membership in an adventurers’ guild doesn’t affect the 
composition of your party in any way, though it may 
provide added reasons for why a party features a diverse 
array of characters with varied fields of expertise. 


ADVENTURERS GUILD CONTACTS 

Typically, an adventuring group has no particular con- 
tact within the larger guild. There’s a local leader or 
bookkeeper who collects dues, but otherwise you might 
interact with a variety of different members of the guild 
in different contexts—when looking for a contract, gath- 
ering referrals, staying in the guildhall, and so on. The 
Guild Contact table provides inspiration for contacts you 
might encounter during any given encounter with your 
adventurer’s guild. 


GuiLD CONTACTS 


d10 Contact 

1 The charismatic leader of the guild, who doesn't 
actually do very much except inspire and encourage 
members 

2  Aretired adventurer who works hard to connect 
member groups with employment opportunities that 
match their skills 

3 А petty rival who continually tries to claim jobs, boun- 
ties, and rewards before you can 

4  Abitter enemy who nurtures a grudge over some past 
wrong (real or imagined) and does everything possi- 
ble to undermine you 

5 A naive adventurer who admires you and tries to emu- 
late you in every way 

6 A hardened adventurer who thinks a moral compass 
is akin to a pair of manacles 

7  Aninjured retired adventurer who can't quite let go of 
the adventuring life and experiences it vicariously by 
spending time in the guildhall 

8 A grouchy employee who keeps the guildhall clean 
and cares for its guests while quietly complaining 
about how adventurers should "grow ир,” get a "real 
job,” and contribute to society 

9  Akindly mentor who loves to tell stories of past ex- 
ploits in front of the guildhall fireplace 

10 A sad, older adventurer who tells cautionary tales in 
the vain hope that younger members avoid making 
the same mistakes 


GUILD ADVENTURES 

Among its various services, the Clifftop Adventurers' 
Guild offers a launchpad for all manner of adventures. 
Potential employers bring all manner of work to the 
guildhall, posting messages or seeking out those with 
specific fields of expertise. Guild members also relate 
news about opportunities via word of mouth. Such jobs 
might resemble those assigned by any other patron. 
Without a patron directing your assignments, your 
group is free to pursue its own goals, whether you're 
seeking wealth, struggling against evil, pursuing a per- 
sonal vendetta, or simply reacting to disastrous events 
around you. The Guild Adventures table refers to the de- 
scriptions of other patrons in this section; your DM can 
use the adventure ideas in those descriptions to flesh 
out job opportunities available through your guild. 


GUILD ADVENTURES 


d10 Adventures 

1 Crime. You have to break the law to administer justice 
or thwart a criminal act (see “Crime Syndicate”). 

2  Dragonmarked Affairs. The job involves some dragon- 
marked house concern (see “Dragonmarked House”). 

3 Espionage. Someone requires some spying or sabotage 
(see “Espionage Agency”). 

4 Statecraft. You're involved in national or international 
affairs (see “Head of State”). 


HEADQUARTERS OF THE 


Сиғғтор AovENTURERS' GuiLO 


d10 Adventures 
5 Cryptic Mystery. The job is linked to the concerns of 
immortals (see "Immortal Being"). 
6 Investigation. An assignment involves finding some- 
thing or solving a mystery (see "Inquisitive Agency"). 
7 Military Action. Your party is invited to serve as a mili- 
tary unit (see "Military Force"). 
8 Gathering News. You're called on to act as freelance 
reporters (see "Newspaper"). 
9 Religious Work. The job involves the work of faith (see 
"Religious Order"). 
10 Field Research. The job involves research or relic-hunt- 
ing (see "University"). 


In any of these cases, the potential employer might 
represent an established organization (a crime syndi- 
cate or university, for example) or might be independent 
like your party. In the latter case, there's always the 
possibility that you could end up competing with an or- 
ganization—running up against a crime syndicate while 
pursuing a criminal job, perhaps, or competing with uni- 
versity researchers to plunder a ruin. This competition 
might turn into a rivalry, or it could evolve into employ- 
ment, with the crime syndicate or university recognizing 
your talent and becoming your patron. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 67 


68 


OTHER ADVENTURERS' GUILDS 

Few guilds besides the Clifftop guild are widely known, 
but the following organizations have carved out reputa- 
tions for themselves: 


Deathsgate Explorers’ Club. Named for the lower-class 
district in Sharn where it maintains its guildhall, the 
Deathsgate Explorers’ Club is.a rough-and-tumble 
guild made up largely of Last War veterans. Deaths- 
gaters rarely undertake adventures from altruistic 
motives, demanding prompt payment or other recipro- 
cal arrangements. They have a fierce rivalry with the 
Clifftop Adventurers’ Guild. 

Wayfinder Foundation. Founded by a renowned hunter 
and explorer, Lord Boroman ir’Dayne, the Wayfinder 
Foundation is an exclusive adventurers’ guild that 
welcomes only experienced and renowned members. 
Dayne suffers from a wasting curse that prevents him 
from undertaking further adventures of his own, so he 
has put his considerable fortune to use in sponsoring 
great expeditions. The Wayfinder Foundation has an 
unusually wide reach for an adventurers’ guild, with 
guildhalls found across Khorvaire as well as in the 
city of Stormreach, in Xen'drik. Its headquarters, and 
the residence of its wealthy patron, is in Fairhaven. 


CRIME SYNDICATE 


Your group is a team of crooks that’s part of an orga- 
nized crime syndicate. You’re more talented and have 
a wider range of skills than most thugs and burglars, 
so your crew might be entrusted with more important 
tasks than simply roughing up local merchants or break- 
ing into empty apartments. If you're anything like a typi- 
cal adventuring party, you bring a combination of power- 
ful magic, physical might, and a broad selection of skills 
to your work, making you well suited to missions like 
grand heists, high-profile assassinations, and epic cons. 
Crime syndicates thrived during the Last War. The 
war left many people desperate, driving them into lives 
of crime. The war also demanded huge numbers of 
able-bodied soldiers, which reduced the ranks of law 
enforcement across Khorvaire. As a result, most settle- 
ments have some organized criminal element, ranging 
from small local thieves' guilds to international organi- 
zations with dozens of interconnected branches. 


BOROMAR CLAN 

The Boromar Clan is the most powerful criminal orga- 
nization in the city of Sharn. From its humble start as 

a gang of smugglers and thieves, the Boromars have 
risen to become one of the most influential forces in the 
city. They have a stranglehold on the smuggling trade 
and own the majority of the gambling halls in the city, 
while most of the fences and thieves in Sharn either 
work directly for the them or pay tribute in exchange for 
independence. The Boromars control a vast network of 
extortion, blackmail, and graft that extends throughout 
the city, and their influence reaches far beyond the crim- 
inal underworld. The early Boromar patriarchs invested 
wisely over the centuries, and today the Boromars are 
one of the Sixty, the elite tier of Sharn's aristocracy. 

The Boromar Clan owns warehouses, taverns, and inns 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


throughout the city, and it has a considerable interest 

in the shipping trade. A Boromar heir sits on the city 
council of Sharn, and the current head of the clan is a 
member of the Gold Concord of the Aurum (described in 
chapter 4). 

As much as some members of the Sharn Council and 
the Watch would like to see the Boromars disbanded, 
the syndicate is unlikely to collapse any time soon. 

Membership. The core membership of the Boromar 
Clan—comprising about one in six of its members—is an 
extended family of halflings descended from immigrants 
who came to Sharn from the Talenta Plains. Another 
third of the members are unrelated halflings, and the 
rest belong to other species. The syndicate employs a 
wide variety of bookkeepers and administrators as well 
as burglars, con artists, smugglers, and other criminals. 
When a situation calls for physical violence, the Boro- 
mars usually hire freelancers—members of the Sharn 
Guard or agents of House Tarkanan. The Boromar 
family proper has a team of personal bodyguards called 
the Clawfoots, who are mostly fierce halfling warriors 
recently relocated from the Talenta Plains. They primar- 
ily defend Boromar holdings and headquarters in the 
halfling district of Little Plains. 

Allies. The Boromar Clan has a reputation for omni- 
potence that makes even the forces of law and order in 
Sharn hesitant to cross it. It's far safer to be an ally of 
the syndicate, or at least to stay out of its way, than it 
is to be its enemy—and it's more lucrative to boot. The 
following groups count themselves among the Boromar 
Clan's closest allies: 


House Jorasco. The head of the Boromar Clan, Saidan 
Boromar, is married to an unmarked heir of House 
Jorasco, Mala Boromar d'Jorasco. This marriage has 
created important ties between the Boromars and the 
halfling healers of Sharn. Members of the Boromar 
family can secure healing for free, and other members 
of the syndicate receive a 10 percent discount at Jo- 
rasco houses of healing. 

Sharn Council. Of the seventeen members of Sharn's 
city council, four have close ties to the Boromar 
Clan—including one, Пуга Boromar, who reports di- 
rectly to the head of the syndicate. These four vote as 
a bloc to ensure that the council doesn't take direct ac- 
tion against the Boromars, while enough of the other 
council members fear the syndicate that they tend to 
carry the vote. A member of the Boromar Clan can 
call in a favor to secure an audience with one of these 
councilors, though such does not guarantee aid. 

Sharn Watch. The Boromars have been bribing cap- 
tains of the Sharn Watch for generations. What's 
more, if the Boromar Clan collapsed, the underworld 
would erupt in anarchy as dozens of petty crime lords 
fought for territory and position. As a result, a member 
of the Boromars can call in a favor to get minor crimi- 
nal charges dismissed. 


Enemies. Despite the Boromar Clan's position of 
strength in Sharn, it has many foes, and their unrelent- 
ing assaults have put the syndicate in what might be its 
most precarious position ever. Currently, the following 
groups pose the greatest threats to Boromar interests: 


Daask. The monstrous criminal guild called Daask, a 
pawn of the leaders of Droaam, has started launching 
violent raids against Boromar holdings over the last 
two years. A mobile organization using guerrilla tac- 
tics, Daask has managed to circumvent Boromar se- 
curity and avoid serious reprisals for a range of violent 
thefts and sabotages. Agents of Daask go out of their 
way to harm up-and-coming Boromar agents. 

Sharn Council. Despite four friends on the city council, 
the Boromar Clan has several enemies as well. At 
least three councilors oppose the Boromars because 
of genuine concern for their constituents; two more 
oppose the syndicate because they're part of rival 
organizations (the Aurum and the Tyrants). Because 
of their influence, the council has so far refused to 
devote any resources to combating the rise of Daask, 
hoping the monstrous guild will bring down the Boro- 
mars. Individual members of the Boromar Clan can 
be sure that these councilors will oppose any petition 
they might bring to the council. 


PATRON BENEFITS 
With a crime syndicate as your group's patron, you gain 
the following benefits: 


Assignments. The Boromar Clan doesn't pay you, but it 
might assign you to particular tasks. Sometimes these 
are tasks someone has hired the syndicate to perform 
(such as an assassination), in which case the syndicate 
passes 85 percent of the fee on to your group. Other 
times, your aim is to enrich the syndicate (such as by 
pulling off a heist), in which case you have the priv- 
ilege of keeping 85 percent of what you steal. Other 
syndicates might take more or less than a 15 percent 
share, at the DM's discretion. 

Contraband. You have access to your syndicate's “busi- 
ness" of dealing with contraband, such as poisons or 
narcotics. You don't receive a discount on these goods, 
but you can always find someplace to purchase them. 

Fences. Members or associates of your syndicate are 
skilled at disposing of stolen goods, and you have 
access to this service as well. Fences are useful for 
selling not just illicit goods but also expensive items 
such as works of art and even magic items. In the case 
of magic items, this allows you to delegate the work of 
finding a buyer (a downtime activity described in the 
Dungeon Master's Guide and Xanathar's Guide to Ev- 
erything) to the fence. The drawback is that you don't 
get to choose whether to accept the offer you might 
receive—the fence makes that call for you. 

Immunity. As a member of the Boromar Clan, you are 
protected from other members of the clan. No one in 
your syndicate targets you for their own criminal op- 
erations. (Of course, the same is expected of you.) On 
the other hand, if you haverivals within the clan, they 
might find other ways to interfere with your activities. 

Syndicate-Owned Businesses. The Boromar Clan 
owns several businesses, primarily as fronts for laun- 
dering money. When you buy from one of these busi- 
nesses, you get a 5 percent discount. The DM decides 
what goods and services are available. 


= ПНЕ == 


SHARK INQUISITIVE 


SAVAGERY 
IN STYLE AT 


The annual Tain Gala, as everyone knows, brings the 
wealthiest and most prominent citizens of Sharn together 
in a grand display of opulence and power. But last night, 
it also provided a shocking display of violence, as Saidan 
Boromar—head of the Boromar family, which is allegedly 
tied to all manner of criminal activities throughout the 
city—was confronted by a would-be assassin (whose 
name will not be made public until her next of kin have 
been identified and notified). Boromar and his wife, Mala 
Boromar d'Jorasco, escaped unharmed thanks to the 
timely intervention of their bodyguard, a recent immi- 
grant from the Talenta Plains whose fascinating culture 
and fierce demeanor were both in plain view last night. A 
Boromar spokesperson identified the bodyguard as Halak 
Boromar, head of the Clawfoots—the Boromar family’s 
personal guard, named for the dinosaurs ridden by half- 
lings in the Talenta Plains. 


m Pss Жотолду rer блг ну убу, нуту тр игу бте etn ith tipi ede: 


BUILD YOUR GROUP 

Naturally, a large portion of the Boromar Clan’s mem- 
bers come from a criminal background. There's no rea- 
son characters with other backgrounds can't be part of 
the syndicate, though. The Boromars recruit ex-soldiers 
as muscle, trained sages for research, sailors to crew 
smuggling vessels, and charlatans and urchins for their 
unique talents. Consider some or all of these roles for 
characters in your party: 


Bruiser. Sometimes subtlety means breaking just one 
of a snitch's kneecaps. The Bruiser uses force and the 
threat of force to make sure that the crime syndicate 
gets what it wants. Strength is a natural prerequisite 
for the role, but Charisma can also be useful, espe- 
cially when combined with proficiency in Intimidation 
to reinforce the danger inherent in the Bruiser's pres- 
ence. Plenty of Bruisers have a criminal past, but for- 
mer soldiers are often recruited into this role as well. 
Fighters and rogues make natural Bruisers. 

Burglar. Agile and nimble, the Burglar relies on Dexter- 
ity and proficiency in skills such as Acrobatics, Sleight 
of Hand, and Stealth to get in to a target location, take 
valuables, and get out without being noticed. Some 
Burglars specialize in certain types of theft, such as 
housebreaking or picking pockets. Besides characters 
with the criminal background, young urchins often 
find a place in criminal syndicates by filling this role. 
Rogues are natural Burglars, but anyone else with the 
right combination of skills and abilities can do the job. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


Arsch dto st emt 


(CTR mes 


69 


Mastermind. Somebody has to be the brains of any 
criminal operation—that's where the Mastermind 
comes in. А high Intelligence benefits this character, 
as does proficiency in skills such as Insight and Inves- 
tigation. Masterminds often come from backgrounds 
such as acolyte, noble, or sage, that give them a broad 
range of knowledge to support their schemes. Bards, 
rogues, and wizards are often drawn to this role. 

Safecracker. The "breaking" part of "breaking and en- 
tering" is the Safecracker's job. A typical Safecracker 
might have proficiency with thieves' tools, as well as 
the Dexterity required to use them expertly. Intelli- 
gence can be important for figuring out complicated 
locks and secret doors. Many Safecrackers also boast 
a high Strength for those cases where lockpicks fail. 
Safecrackers often come from criminal backgrounds, 
but characters with experience using other tools and 
devices, including guild artisans and even sailors, also 
fall naturally into this role. Artificer or rogue makes a 
natural class choice for the Safecracker. 

Talker. From con artists to fences, anyone who relies 
on interpersonal skills and a network of contacts falls 
into the role of the Talker. Charisma proves useful for 
this role, along with proficiencies in skills such as De- 
ception, Intimidation, and Persuasion. The charlatan 
background is perfect for Talkers, but criminals, ur- 
chins, and others can fill the role with the right skills. 
Bards are a natural fit for the job as well. 


TYPES OF CRIME 

Your work as syndicate members involves more than 
simple street swindles or pickpocketing. A team with 
your skills comes together for greater purposes—more 
dangerous risks and far more splendid rewards. As a 
group, consider the options on the Syndicate Crimes ta- 
ble and work with your DM to decide what kinds of work 
you do for the Boromar Clan. 


SYNDICATE CRIMES 


d6 Crime 

1 Acquisitions and Retrieval. Your job is to acquire assets 
for the syndicate. You might steal important docu- 
ments or clear out a location for use as a hideout. 

2  Heists. You plan and execute elaborate robberies that 
require the skills of everyone on your team. 

3 Gang Warfare. Your primary job is to ensure that no 
other crime syndicate (such as Daask or House Tar- 
kanan) gains a significant foothold in your territory. 

4 Internal Affairs. Your task is to keep all the corrupt, 
headstrong, and avaricious members of your syndicate 
in line with the goals and rules of the group. 

5  Assassination. Your work involves killing prominent 
people—the sort who have numerous bodyguards and 
elaborate security systems to circumvent. 

6 Topple the Powerful. Your syndicate might be criminal 
and your methods illegal, but your goals are righteous. 
You help people who are powerless to defend them- 
selves against exploitation by the rich and powerful. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


INFAMY 

Even among the notorious Boromar Clan, your group 
has a distinct identity and a reputation. What's the event 
or unique trait that makes your crew stand out? Consult 
the Group Infamy table for suggestions on how your 
group might stand out within the larger syndicate. 


Group INFAMY 


d6 Notorious Element 

1 Tattoos. Each member of your group has a distinct tat- 
too that inspires fear in others. When possible, you use 
the symbol as a calling card to mark your work. 

2 Outfit. Whether it is a leather duster with a group sym- 
bol or a distinctive handkerchief tucked in your pocket, 
your gang has a signature accessory. 

3  Infamy. Your group is linked to an infamous crime, one 
that remains the talk of the town. 

4 Idols. A certain type of person finds criminals alluring, 
and your band has acquired a group of such hang- 
ers-on. They're not criminals themselves, just outsid- 
ers who admire you for your brutality, cunning, or flair. 

5  Legitimate. The Boromar Clan has a legitimate front, 
though everyone knows the truth behind it. You're part 
of that facade of legitimacy, but you have a reputation 
for getting away with (literal) murder. 

6 Legends. You have an air of mystery, and people whis- 
per that you command strange powers. True or not, 
this reputation keeps people out of your way. 


RIVAL OUTFIT 

Some criminals believe you can't do a job without be- 
traying your partners. Perhaps you have your own share 
of adversaries you've angered. The Group Rivals table 
presents a host of groups and individuals who might— 
legitimately or otherwise—hold a grudge against you. 


Group RIVALS 


d6 Rival 

1  TheLaw. Someone in the Sharn Watch has vowed to 
put you in prison or die trying. 

2 Gang War. Some members of a rival syndicate (such as 
Daask, House Tarkanan, or the Tyrants) hate you, prob- 
ably for good reason. 

3 The Press. Your group's adventures make for great 
headlines. Your every move is reported in the broad- 
sheets and your steps are dogged by journalists. 

4  Infighting. Another group within the Boromar Clan is 
jealous of your success or angry about a past wrong. 
They do everything they can to undercut you. 

5 Vigilante. A citizen you wronged has sworn vengeance. 
Around any corner, you might find yourself facing a vig- 
ilante or a posse of angry citizens out for your blood. 

6 The Bosses. The halfling family in control of the syndi- 
cate has its eye on you, taking pains to keep you in line 
and make sure you stay loyal. 


Boromar CLAN NiGHTCLUB 


CRIME SYNDICATE CONTACTS 

Everyone has a well-defined place in the Boromar Clan 
hierarchy. You report to a contact who oversees your 
work, giving you assignments, and collecting the syndi- 
cate's cut. This person might be a criminal mastermind 
who plans all your exploits, or they could leave the plan- 
ning to your group. In any case, the Syndicate Contact 
table can help you define the personality of this contact. 


SYNDICATE CONTACT 


d8 Contact 

1 A surrogate parent who views you as challenging but 
beloved children 

2 Ano-nonsense boss who treats the syndicate's work as 
just another business 

3  Ahardened criminal with no mercy, no patience, and 
no moral compass 

4  Aformer urchin, now fabulously wealthy, who wants to 
see everyone in the syndicate find the same success 

5 The boss at a gambling den or similar house of vice 
who enjoys the business just a little too much 

6 А kind-hearted crook who's grateful to finally be able to 
delegate the dirty work on the streets to you 

7 A miserable cynic who only cares about how much 
money you bring in to the syndicate 

8 А former law enforcement officer who is full of cheerful 
tips for avoiding the law 


OTHER CRIME SYNDICATES 

The city of Sharn is unusual in that it is home to no less 
than four powerful syndicates, which somehow have not 
yet managed to wipe each other out. The Boromar Clan 
is one crime syndicate, while the others include the fol- 
lowing groups: 


Daask. Daask is an aggressive criminal organization 
with cells across Khorvaire. Led by monstrous immi- 
grants from Droaam—gnolls, harpies, medusas, mino- 
taurs, ogres, trolls, and others—the group is ultimately 
under the command of Sora Katra, one of the rulers of 
Droaam. Physical violence is its specialty, but Daask 
also dabbles in illegal drugs. 

House Tarkanan. House Tarkanan is known as a small 
order of highly skilled assassins and thieves in Sharn. 
Less well known is the fact that this guild consists 
primarily of criminals who bear aberrant dragon- 
marks—hence its choice of namesake, as Lord Halas 
Tarkanan united the bearers of these marks during 
the ancient War of the Mark. 

The Tyrants. The Tyrants are a mysterious group of 
shapeshifters who traffic in all manner of information. 
They sell secrets, blackmail powerful people, and 
forge everything from identification papers to coins 
and works of art. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


pn 


ick ep AEN 


сили үл mU RET PUN DRAIN 


VOICE OF 


BRELAND 


BLOOD ADDICTS’ 
DRAGON DRUG 


Imagine it: a long-lasting state of euphoria, a feeling 

of power and energy, a measurable impact on certain 
magical powers, and the risk of addiction and deadly 
overdose with every use. That’s the thrill of the drug 
called dragon’s blood, which currently enjoys skyrock- 
eting popularity in Sharn. Every day the death toll from 
this mysterious substance rises among “blood addicts.” 
And no wonder, as it’s produced in Droaam and sold in 
drams or “veins” by the monstrous thugs of Daask, who 
surely seek nothing less than to destroy the prosperity of 
Sharn but targeting its most precious resource: its sober, 
hardworking people. Remember friends, “Stay on the 
wagon. Say NO to dragon!” 


Running Your Own. Rather than join an existing 
syndicate, you can start your own. You need to establish 
your own headquarters and direct the activities of the 
3d6 criminals who work for you. By claiming a 15 per- 
cent share of their take, you can rely on an income that 
will sustain you at a modest lifestyle, plus an additional 
1d6 gp in profit per week. You can access contraband 
and fences as described earlier in this section, but you 
don't get a discount at syndicate-owned businesses un- 
less you acquire some businesses of your own. You can 
also use the Running a Business downtime activity to 
direct the activities of your syndicate. 


DRAGONMARKED HOUSE 


Your group works for one of the most influential or- 
ganizations in Khorvaire: the dragonmarked houses. 
Whether or not any member of your group carries a 
dragonmark or is even related to one of the houses by 
blood, you act on behalf of a house to advance its inter- 
ests. You might function openly as representatives of the 
house, wearing its badge and exerting its authority, or 
you could be covert or unacknowledged agents. 

The thirteen dragonmarked houses are described in 
detail earlier in this chapter. 


PATRON BENEFITS 
With a dragonmarked house as your group’s patron, you 
gain the following benefits: 


Compensation. Your patron house pays you for the 
work you do on its behalf. On average, the house pays 
each member of your group an amount equal to 10 
gp x the average level of your characters per day you 
spend on the mission. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


House Services. When you require the services pro- 
vided by your patron house, you can secure them at 
a discounted rate (10 percent off the normal charge). 
You might also be able to trade in a favor to get ex- 
traordinary services or a larger discount. 

Independence. Each member of your group is issued 
papers that identifies you as agents of your patron 
house. Because the dragonmarked houses are bound 
to political neutrality by the terms of the ancient Korth 
Edicts, these papers guarantee you the right to travel 
freely across national borders on the business of your 
patron house. (If you assert that you are on the busi- 
ness of the house, even if you aren't, border agents are 
unlikely to challenge you.) 


BUILD YOUR GROUP 

Dragonmarked houses employ adventurers who suit 
their needs. The roles characters play in a group with a 
dragonmarked house patron often have more to do with 
their relationship to the house than with the specific 
roles in the party. Consider some or all of these roles for 
your characters: 


Adventurer. Some characters are associated with your 
patron house because of their connection to its ruling 
family or its businesses. The Adventurer, though, is 
hired by the house for more traditional adventuring 
skills—usually capabilities that the house’s other 
agents lack. The Adventurer might have a wide range 
of abilities, particular to whatever needs the House 
has at the time. Many with peculiar skills or highly 
specific fields of expertise find themselves in the em- 
ploy of dragonmarked houses or house members with 
eccentric interests and deep pockets. 

Guilder. Every dragonmarked house is more than a sin- 
gle family. Each house encompasses at least one guild 
that operates just like a traditional craft or trade guild, 
and hundreds of people associate with these guilds 
while having no other relationship to the houses that 
oversee them. The Guilder is among these, perhaps 
being a skilled physician or cleric in House Jorasco’s 
Healers Guild, for example, or an inquisitive associ- 
ated with House Tharashk’s Finders Guild. The Guil- 
der might have the guild artisan background or some 
other set of skills suited to the specialties of your pa- 
tron house’s guilds. 

Heir. The Heir is a member of your dragonmarked 
house patron, related by blood and carrying the house 
name. This character most likely chooses the race that 
matches the bloodline of the house. The Heir can be 
dragonmarked (with the appropriate marked subrace 
or racial variant) or unmarked. The house agent back- 
ground (described in this chapter) proves particularly 
appropriate for this character. 


HOUSE MISSIONS 

Your group and your DM should decide together which 
house employs you. The nature of the missions you un- 
dertake depends in part on the house or guild you work 
for, but there are general categories of work that every 
house needs agents to perform on its behalf. The House 


Missions table provides suggestions for which house 
might employ you along with multiple possibilities for 
adventures that overlap with their interests. For the 
more general kind of work you might carry out on behalf 
of any dragonmarked house, consult the General House 
Missions table. 


GENERAL HOUSE MISSIONS 


98 Mission 

1 Establish a safe location for a house enclave in a hos- 
tile environment. 

2  Findthe wreckage of a crashed vehicle (airship, light- 
ning rail car, sailing ship, or other) carrying house 
property. 

3 Retrieve assets from a house enclave in the 
Mournland. 

4 Protect a leader of your house from an anticipated 
assassination attempt. 

5 Enforce your house's territory by preventing a rival 
from stealing its business. 

6 X inda trove of dragonshards for your patron house 
to use. 

7 Recruit a renowned sage to join the house's team of 
researchers. 

8 Persuade a hostile tribe to agree to a trade agreement 
with your patron house. 


HOUSE STATUS 

Politics within a dragonmarked house can be vicious. 
Perhaps your the house leadership’s favorite scion. Per- 
haps you've been exiled from your house for misdeeds— 
your own or another’s. In any case, use the Group Sta- 
tus table to determine your party’s standing within the 
organization. 


Group STATUS 


d4 Status 

1 Favored. You have access to the leadership of the 
house, owing to your record of faithful service. 

2 Reliable. You are reliable contributors to the house, 
and can count on it for help in difficult situations. 

3 Oddballs. You don't quite fit in, and tend to draw 
strange assignments or those that other operatives 
pass up. 

4 Outcast. You have made some mistakes in the recent 
past, and your status in the house is tenuous at best. 


DRAGONMARKED HOUSE CONTACTS 

Your primary contact within your patron house is an- 
other house agent—perhaps a dragonmarked heir, an- 
other family member, or a guild leader. Some contacts 
are devoted to the house and its interests, while others 
might use your group to pursue a personal agenda. Con- 
sult the House Contacts table to determine what sort of 


HOUSE MISSIONS 


d12 House Mission 1 

] Cannith Escort a valuable shipment of 
goods 

2  Deneith Act as bodyguards for a prominent 
or wealthy person 

3  Ghallanda Establish useful diplomatic 
contacts 

4 Jorasco Provide healing for a caravan 
or military unit on a dangerous 
mission 

5  Kundarak Safeguard something valuable until 
it is locked in a vault 

6  Lyrandar Hunt down pirates in the Lhazaar 
Sea 

7 Medani Protect a powerful figure from 
kidnapping or assassination 

8 Orien Carry a sensitive message to its 
destination 

9  Phiarlan and  Sneakinto a secret area to serve as 

Thuranni the target of a scrying spell 

10 Sivis Mediate a tense negotiation 

11 Tharashk Track down fugitives 

12 Vadalis Capture wild animals and tame 


them 


arbiter oversees your party. 


Mission 2 
Track down rare materials 


Serve as mercenaries in a lingering 
border conflict 
Acquire rare ingredients or recipes 


Seek out the source of a 
mysterious new illness 


Recover something stolen from 
your house 

Salvage a prototype airship lost in 
the Mournland 

Track down the source of rumors 
pointing to an imminent threat 
Retrieve an important package 
stolen from another courier 

Steal plans for a powerful new 
weapon 

Assure that two parties keep to the 
terms of their agreement 

Locate a supply of dragonshards 


Prevent magebred specimens from 
upsetting a delicate ecosystem 


Mission 3 

Advance the cause of one branch 
of the family at the expense of the 
other two 

Enforce the law across national 
borders as Sentinel Marshals 
Defend a Golden Dragon Inn that 
is under attack 

Find a cure for an exotic curse 
afflicting a wealthy patient 


Find an abandoned vault in the 
Mournland 

Accompany a new airship on its 
first voyage 

Find the villain behind a series of 
apparently unrelated crimes 
Investigate a problem on a 
lightning rail line 

Carry out an assassination 


Break a code used during the Last 
War 

Find the bandits who have been 
preying on house prospectors 
Handle the animals drawing 

a massive caravan across the 
continent 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


73 


74 


| 
И 
| 


THE KORRANBERG 


CHRONICLE 


The Twelve facilitates communication and coopera- 
tion among the dragonmarked houses. As part of the 
agreements that ended the War of the Mark, the houses 
agreed to create an institute for the application of mag- 


FEUD WITHIN 
THE TWELVE? 


Ce э ө ө ө ө ө ж ж «ж ө ж ж ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө өө бу ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө 


Reports emerged this week of bitter disputes within the 
Twelve, the arcane institution that supposedly embodies 
the spirit of cooperation among the houses. According 
to a source that wished to remain anonymous, a special 
meeting of the Committee of Twelve was called last 
week to address accusations that researchers connected 
to House Kundarak had been diverting funds from the 
institute's budget to fund their own private projects, 
then concealing the results of those projects from their 
colleagues. Kundarak's representative, according to our 
source, denied the accusations, saying that the research- 
ers are operating within their allotted budget and keep- 
ing their results secret only temporarily, as a matter of 
house security. 

This matter is far from resolved, as the council meet- 
ing devolved into shouted arguments before disbanding. 
Representatives of House Medani and House Tharashk 
were particularly vocal in denouncing Kundarak, leaving 
this reporter to wonder whether a schism within the 
Council of Twelve might be imminent—and what that 
might mean for peaceful relations among the dragon- 
marked houses themselves. 


—————— RH sims ee "зр VIRUUNUNTTRSNRRONITSCUNDNIE TUN 


House CONTACTS 


d8 Contact 

1 A lesser guild functionary who is cowed by your group 
(especially if it includes a dragonmarked character) 
and apologetic about giving you assignments 

2 Тһе stern and demanding parent of one (or more) of 
the characters in your group 

3 The lovingly indulgent parent of a character in your 
group 

4 The smugly superior dragonmarked sibling of an un- 
marked member ofthe family in your group 

5 Тһе money-minded business manager of a guild within 
your patron house 

6 A retired adventurer within the family who would rather 
join you on your adventures than assign them to you 

7 The proud leader of a regional branch of the dragon- 
marked family 

8 The patriarch or matriarch of the patron house 


THE TWELVE 

Rather than working for one single house, your group 
could work for an organization that serves them all: the 
Twelve. This is a good option if you want to be involved 
in the intrigue among the dragonmarked houses while 
playing characters who come from different houses. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


ic—a foundation that would study dragonmarks, along 
with more traditional forms of magic. Over the centu- 
ries, the Twelve has been responsible for many magical 
advances, including the airships operated by House Ly- 
randar and the message stations of House Sivis 

As an arm of the dragonmarked houses, the Twelve 
attempted to remain neutral during the Last War, but 
many of its wizards and artificers had national loyalties 
that were stronger than their ties to the institute. Now 
that the Twelve has resumed normal operations, it seeks 
to replace its lost members and make sure that each 
house is represented. 

While the Twelve provides a way for your group to 
work for multiple dragonmarked houses, its goals and 
benefits are similar to those of an individual house. Con- 
sider using the following details as a template if there's a 
particular dragonmarked house you wish to serve. 

Patronage. As a patron, the Twelve is functionally 
similar to a dragonmarked house. Rather than advanc- 
ing one house's interests, though, the Twelve seeks to 
advance magical developments that have practical value 
to society as well as potential for profit. All the houses 
contribute to the operating budget of the institute, and in 
theory they all benefit from the results of its research. 

As agents of the Twelve, you might undertake mis- 
sions intended to help one house at a time or all of them 
at once, typically with a focus on magical research or 
problem-solving. Members of your group might have dif- 
ferent status within their houses, but within the Twelve 
you're held as equals. The Twelve pay you (see "Patron 
Benefits"), and as their agents, you receive a 5 percent 
discount on services from all the dragonmarked houses 
(rather than a 10 percent discount from one house). 

Leadership. The Committee of Twelve oversees the 
institute. It currently has fifteen members, though its 
membership is a matter of significant disagreement 
within the council. There are of course only twelve drag- 
onmarks, but the Mark of Shadow is represented by two 
different houses, and House Cannith is currently frag- 
mented into three branches, each of which has claimed 
a seat on the council. 

The Twelve is headquartered in a many-spired keep 
that floats in the air above the city of Korth in Karrnath. 
Most researchers funded by the Twelve operate within 
this structure, but the institute occasionally pays grants 
to researchers whose promising work can't easily (or 
safely) be relocated inside the keep. 

Allies. With a long record of providing benefit to so- 
ciety at large, the Twelve is widely respected. Some of 
their closest allies include the following groups: 


Dragonmarked Houses. Above all, the Twelve has 
the almost universal support of the dragonmarked 
houses, which provide the funding to support its con- 
tinued operation. One of the few things that all the 
houses agree on is that the Twelve should be allowed 
to do its work in peace. Agents of the Twelve can count 
on at least a minimal level of assistance from the 
houses in case of dire need. 


King Kaius. Not every nation shares the same goodwill 
toward the Twelve, but the institutes's location above 
the city of Korth makes its relationship with Karrnath 
particularly important. The kings of Karrnath have 
regularly sought council from the Twelve, and Kaius 
has not abandoned this practice. Agents of Karrnath's 
government are inclined to trust agents of the Twelve 
and side with them in times of trouble. 

Manifest Institute. In the city of Sharn, the Twelve 
sponsors the research of a number of scholars who 
make a study of the manifest zone that links the city to 
the plane of Syrania. Loosely organized as the Man- 
ifest Institute, these researchers include representa- 
tives from House Cannith, House Lyrandar, House 
Orien, and others, as well as those who work directly 
for the Twelve. The institute evaluates ways that the 
manifest zone might improve life in Sharn, seeks a 
deeper understanding of manifest zones in general, 
and plans contingencies in the event that the manifest 
zone ever evaporates. 


Enemies. Most enemies of the Twelve are individuals 
with grudges against the institute, which often stem 
from hurt feelings over being excluded from it. Those 
noted here number among the Twelve's fiercest foes: 


Arcane Congress. Established by King Galifar I ex- 
pressly to serve as a political answer to the Twelve, 
the Arcane Congress competes with the Twelve over 
resources and students. Some would argue that the 
ongoing rivalry encourages both institutions toward 
more and better arcane discoveries, but the animosity 
sometimes escalates to sabotage and researchers tak- 
ing excessive risks. 

Mordain the Fleshweaver. Not many personal grudges 
jeopardize the Twelve, but when a powerful wizard 
feels slighted, the impact can be significant. The elf 
wizard Mordain was banished from the Twelve more 
than two centuries ago because of his disturbing 
experiments related to the magic of the daelkyr. He 
dwells in Droaam now, focused on his research and 
plotting revenge. His reach isn’t long, but agents of the 
Twelve avoid Droaam if at all possible. 


ESPIONAGE AGENCY 
Secret agents, spies, undercover operatives—your group 
is part of an organization engaged in espionage. Most 
such agencies are attached to governments or dragon- 
marked houses, gathering information on the activities 
and plans of rival nations, houses, and businesses. 
Naturally, your affiliation with an espionage agency is 

a secret; you can’t advertise that connection, and if you 
get in trouble with law enforcement forces (especially in 
foreign nations), your home nation will disavow you and 
deny any knowledge of your activities. 

It’s said the Last War was fought as much by spies as 
by armies. Espionage agencies in every nation sought 
secrets to bring military supremacy to their own lands 
and provide dominance over their neighbors. In the 
years since the end of the war, a clandestine struggle 
among these agencies (which the Korranberg Chronicle 
dubbed the Shadow War) has continued unabated, just 
outside of the public eye. 


HEADQUARTERS OF 
THE TWELVE 


KiNG's DARK LANTERNS 

The King's Dark Lanterns is the intelligence division 
of the King's Citadel, an organization sworn to defend 
Breland from its enemies and dispense justice in the 
name of King Boranel. As the secret servants of the 
crown, members of the organization are granted the 
authority to conduct intelligence operations on foreign 
Soil, execute covert missions across the globe, and pre- 
vent national secrets from falling into the hands of rival 
intelligence agencies. The Dark Lanterns also have an 
unwritten license to eliminate any creature that threat- 
ens their nation, its sovereign, or its citizens. 

Headquarters. The King's Citadelis based in Bre- 
land's capital city of Wroat, under the command of 
the king's brother, Lord Kor ir Wynarn. A changeling 
named Captain Vron serves as the leader of the Dark 
Lanterns, with four subordinate knights marshal lead- 
ing branch offices across Breland, in Sharn, Starilaskur, 
and Xandrar. A much smaller branch office keeps an 
eye on Brelish interests in the city of Stormreach, in 
Xen'drik. Small, temporary field offices are sometimes 
established to coordinate missions outside Breland; 
these offices double as safe houses for agents in trouble, 
and they are designed to be wiped clean at a moment's 
notice if discovered by local authorities. 

The Sharn office of the King's Citadel is in Andith 
Tower in the Ambassador Towers district. Though a 
knight marshal commands the office, most of the King's 
Citadel members in Sharn are Dark Lanterns, and thus 
under the authority of a scheming and ruthless gnome 
named Talleon Haliar Tonan. 

Agents. The King's Dark Lanterns includes more 
than 500 agents operating within Breland's borders and 
roughly one-fifth that number stationed abroad. They of- 
ten work in teams, and also work closely with the other 
divisions of the Citadel. Sometimes they recruit local 
talent, often under false pretenses, to help them accom- 
plish their missions in foreign lands. 

Allies. By their nature, espionage agencies must be 
cautious in choosing their allies, and the King's Dark 
Lanterns is no exception. Its most trustworthy allies in- 
clude the following facets of the Brelish government: 


King Boranel. The King's Dark Lanterns, as one would 
expect, serve the king of Breland, and he is their 
greatest advocate and ally. The king views loyalty 
as mutual: as long as an agent's loyalty is irre- 
proachable, Boranel is willing to exercise his 
considerable power on that agent's behalf. 

The King's Citadel. The Citadel has three 
branches besides the Dark Lanterns. The 
King's Swords are elite special combat 
forces. The King's Shields protect 
the king and his closest family 
members and associates. The 
King's Wands provide magical 
support to the other branches 
of the Citadel as well as 
other Brelish forces. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


Some Dark Lanterns might think themselves superior 
to members of the other branches, but even so they 
recognize other Citadel agents as players on the same 
team. When your group needs a little extra help, the 
other branches of the Citadel are there for you. 


Enemies. Rare is the espionage agency that is loved. 
Even within Breland, the populace views the Dark Lan- 
terns with suspicion, and powerful people outside the 
royal family harbor resentment at the influence of the 
Citadel. Many people and institutions outside Breland 
view the Dark Lanterns as a hostile force. As a result, 
the following groups account for just a few enemies of 
the Dark Lanterns: 


Brelish Populists. As much as King Boranel is loved 
in his country, many Brelish voices argue that the era 
of monarchy is at an end, and the throne of Breland 
should be replaced by a government democratically 
elected by the citizenry. When these forces grow rest- 
less enough to plot and riot, the Citadel—and often the 
Dark Lanterns—work to bring them to heel. As a re- 
sult, those who question the authority of the king are 
the most likely Brelish citizens to mistrust the Dark 
Lanterns or view them with open hostility. According 


to rumor some of those people even hold high posi- 
tions in the Brelish government. 

Foreign Nations. Every nation knows the King's Dark 
Lanterns serves as an espionage force and do their 
best to track the movements of Dark Lantern agents 
within their borders. Foreign governments treat Dark 
Lantern agents with care to avoid sparking an inter- 
national incident, but they are quick to arrest Dark 
Lantern agents suspected of wrongdoing. 

New Cyre. One of the world's largest concentrations 
of Cyran refugees settled in eastern Breland under 
the leadership of Oargev ir’Wynarn, the last prince of 
Cyre. Many voices among the Cyrans, possibly includ- 
ing Oargev himself, call for the establishment of an in- 
dependent nation in what is now Brelish territory, but 
Boranel is determined to hold on to every acre of his 
land. The Dark Lanterns actively infiltrate the Cyran 
refugee community, rooting out those who would act 
against the king. 


PATRON BENEFITS 
You gain the following benefits when your group's pa- 
tron is an espionage agency: 


Assignments. Your agency might assign you specific 
tasks at any time, at the DM's discretion. You have 
wide latitude regarding how you carry out a task, and 
your assignments can sometimes be very broad and 
require considerable time to complete. 

Expense Account. You have access to an account main- 
tained at the banks of House Kundarak. You can use 
this account to pay your daily living expenses, as well 
as for purchasing anything you need for completing 
your missions—equipment, transportation, bribes, and 
so on. Your normal spending limit is 100 gp per month 
for each member of your group. If you exceed that, 
your agency asks you to account for the month's ex- 
penses, and they might require you to pay back the ex- 
cess if you can't justify it (at the DM's discretion). You 
can't carry over an unused amount from one month 
to the next, and your access to this account can be cut 
off at any time if you abuse it or fall out of the agency's 
good graces. The agency is aware of every time you ac- 
cess the account and where you are when you do so. 

Identification. Your agency provides you with identifi- 
cation papers establishing your true identity, and you 
also have ready access to false papers and matching 
travel documents showing different identities, when 
you need them for a mission. (Any time you enter a 
foreign nation, it is a good idea for you to do so under 
a false identity.) 

Powerful Friends. An espionage agency, by nature, 
has a long reach and a lot of power to make things 
happen behind the scenes. You can call in a favor 
for a wide range of benefits: A legal case against you 
might be suddenly dropped. A rival might disappear. 
A much-needed magic item might be delivered to you. 
These favors can provide significant short-term ben- 
efit, but they can also come with equally significant 
long-term repercussions—which might lead to entirely 
new missions. 


BUILD YOUR GROUP 

Espionage agents are typically both highly trained and 
tightly specialized. The type of missions you undertake 
can shape your group's composition; you might be a 
team of hunters or investigators, focused on tracking 
people down or gathering information. More likely, 
you're a diverse team with a range of skills that allow 
you undertake a variety of different missions on your pa- 
tron's behalf. Consider some or all of these roles for the 
characters in your party: 


Chameleon. A master of disguise, sleight of hand, and 
deception, the Chameleon can perform the work of 
the Investigator or a Confiscator right under a target's 
nose—or provide cover to agents with different special- 
ties as they do their jobs. A high Charisma, proficiency 
with the disguise kit (or access to spells that cloak or 
disguise one's appearance), and proficiency with skills 
such as Deception, Performance, and Sleight of Hand 
all greatly benefit the Chameleon. Bards and rogues, 
as well as characters with the charlatan, entertainer, 
or urchin background, often excel in this role. 

Confiscator. Sometimes an espionage agency needs 
something stolen—a document that incriminates a 
public figure to a prototype war machine. The Confis- 
cator has the key skills for such jobs. A good Dexterity 
score proves helpful in undertaking such tasks, es- 
pecially if it'S enhanced with proficiency with thieves' 
tools and the Sleight of Hand and Stealth skills. Con- 
fiscators are often rogues, and many have a history of 
stealing for profit rather than national interest. 

Hunter. The Hunter stalks humanoid prey, for purposes 
of assassination, abduction, or gathering information. 
A combination of combat prowess with stealth and 
interaction skills makes for well-prepared Hunters. 
Rangers and rogues prove particularly adept at this 
role, as might anyone with proficiency in the Investiga- 
tion, Perception and Stealth skills. A high Charisma 
and proficiency in Deception, Intimidation, and Per- 
suasion skills can also be useful. Hunters often come 
from backgrounds such as outlander or urchin. 

Investigator. The Investigator is the archetypal spy, a 
master of deductive reasoning and suave interaction. 
Naturally, Investigation can be a crucial skill, which 
many characters in this role combine with magical 
means of scrying to learn about their enemies and 
objectives. Bards and wizards make natural Investiga- 
tors, especially if they can acquire one or more skills 
from among Deception, Perception, Persuasion, and 
Stealth. Investigators come from backgrounds as var- 
ied as charlatans, nobles, sages, and urchins. 

Operator. An Operator leads or organizes a team of 
agents in the field. Like a military officer, the Operator 
issues orders and bears responsibility for the agents 
on the team. High Charisma and Intelligence scores 
help make the Operator a strong leader, especially in 
conjunction with skill proficiencies such as Persua- 
sion and Investigation. The wide array of skills used 
by other agents are also valuable to the Operator, who 
might end up stepping into a different role when the 
need arises. The Operator is often a bard and might 
come from a soldier or noble background (being ac- 
customed to leadership in one form or another). 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


г 


——— HM 


dag 


$ 


78 


ee AE EE EAA AN —— 


BRELAND LEDGER 


LIES ON TRIAL! 
KARRN SPY 
FACES JUSTICE 


In a courthouse surrounded by agents of the King’s Cit- 
adel and thronged by reporters, judge Haliss ir’Cronn 
took her seat for the first session in what some are call- 
ing the “trial of the century.” 

Barath Drinn, a Karrn who has been living in Wroat 
since the end of the Last War, stands accused of stealing 
state secrets, sabotage, and one count of murder— 
though an anonymous source suggests that he is guilty 
of many more killings. 

A spokesperson for the King's Citadel vehemently de- 
nied reports that Drinn is employed by the Citadel. 


— ER 


Saboteur. The Saboteur interferes with the functioning 
of enemy assets. More than a reckless bomber, they 
combine a willingness to destroy with a knack for in- 
filtration. Proficiency with thieves' tools and in skills 
such as Deception, Investigation, and Stealth often 
serve the work of sabotage. The Saboteur benefits 
from an understanding of craft and magic items, mak- 
ing artificers particularly skilled in this role. Guild ar- 
tisans might also disguise tools of destruction as mun- 
dane objects or works of art. Many Saboteurs come 
from backgrounds such as charlatans or soldiers. 


TYPES OF ESPIONAGE 

Espionage activities can be classified in three broad 
categories: counterintelligence, covert action, and in- 
telligence gathering. Your party might focus on one of 
those areas, or perhaps you're the team that handles sit- 
uations that other teams bungle. As a group, work with 
your DM and consult the Espionage Missions table to 
decide what kinds of missions you might undertake. 


ESPIONAGE MISSIONS 


d6 Mission 

1 Information Gathering. If information is out there, you 
can find it and hand it over to your patron. 

2  Counterintelligence. Your work focuses on finding, op- 
posing, and eliminating enemy intelligence agents. 

3  Misinformation. You are experts at creating false sto- 
ries and bogus information to foil enemy spies. 

4  Covert Elimination. When you disappear someone you 
leave behind no evidence. 

5  Disruption. You excel at infiltration and wreaking havoc 
via blackmail, misinformation, and subversion. 

6 Sabotage. You slip into places, lay the seeds for their 
destruction, and escape without detection. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


«+++» ж ө ө ж ө ж ж ө ө ж ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө өө ө өө ө ө 


—€——— en 


dos у= =н a ee —— 


i 


| 


SECRETS 

Most likely, your espionage work will eventually put you 
in possession of secrets others don't want you to know. 
When the time comes, consult the Secrets table to 
determine what clandestine knowledge your group pos- 
sesses, and how it might make life complicated for you. 


SECRETS 


d6 Secret 

1  Blackmail Material. You have evidence of a career-end- 
ing secret concerning an important figure. 

2 Hidden Agenda. You are party to a conspiracy that 
seeks to influence events to better suit your desires. 

3 Careful Balance. You have damning information on 
your patron agency, but it has carefully collected 
equally damaging secrets on all of you. 

4 Conspiracy. A local organization, such as a guild, gov- 
ernment, or dragonmarked house, is engaged in dirty 
deeds, and you have inside information on them. 

5 Deep Cover. You know the secret identity of a seem- 
ingly innocent but powerful person who would rather 
remain anonymous. 

6 Empty Threats. Rumors say you collect damaging se- 
crets on anyone, and people tread carefully around you 
as a result. The truth is that your reputation is over- 
blown, so you have your own secret to keep safe. 


MEMORABLE MISSION 

You engaged in a mission that still overshadows your 
work. Was it the perfect operation, or do you still carry 
scars from a mission gone horribly wrong? Consult the 
Memorable Mission table to determine the details of 
your career-defining exploit. 


MEMORABLE MISSION 
d4 Mission 

1 Betrayal. A former associate turned against you. You 
escaped, and want revenge. 

2  Leftinthe Cold. Things went wrong, and you had to 
make the terrible decision to abandon an ally. They 
might be dead, or they might be looking for revenge. 

3 The Perfect Operation. Your actions made headlines 
across Khorvaire, shaping history for the next decade. 
Nobody knows you were involved, and sometimes you 
wish you could have a little credit for your work. 

4 The Standoff. You met your match during a tense 
operation. Neither side got everything they wanted. 
You hate to admit it, but the team you went up against 
proved your match. Maybe you'll cross paths again. 


ESPIONAGE AGENCY CONTACTS 

Your assignments come from a superior in the agency 
who typically works at a desk rather than in the field— 
compiling intelligence into reports for their superiors 
and coordinating the activities of multiple groups. Use 
the Agency Contacts table to determine the character 
of your superior, which can shape the kinds of missions 
you undertake and the degree of support you receive. 


AGENCY CONTACTS 


d8 Contact 

Т A condescending career desk agent who views you as 
expendable tools 

2  Abitter former field agent, now confined to a field of- 
fice, who envies your work 

3  Akindly bureau chief who views you as a truly special 
team with invaluable skills 

4  Acrotchety middle-manager on the cusp of retirement 
who constantly bemoans the state of today’s agents 
compared to those in the “good old days” 

5 Ahotheaded former soldier who would prefer a return 
to open warfare instead of this so-called "Shadow 
War" 

6 A battle-scarred field agent who would do almost any- 
thing to prevent a return to the horrors of the Last War 

7 A bored but effective manager who refuses to be im- 
pressed by anything you do or shocked by anything 
that happens to you 

8 А mysterious voice on the other end of a speaking stone 


OTHER ESPIONAGE AGENCIES 

Every nation has some form of espionage agency, and 
two of the dragonmarked houses (House Phiarlan and 
House Thuranni) include specialized espionage forces 
as part of their businesses. Besides the King's Dark 
Lanterns, some of Khorvaire's more prominent espio- 
nage agencies include the following groups: 


Argentum. The Argentum is a ministry within the 
Church of the Silver Flame. Originally dedicated to 
the acquisition, study, and redistribution of magic 
items and artifacts, it was repurposed during the Last 
War to serve as Thrane's espionage agency. 

Royal Eyes. Aundair is renowned for its wizards, and 
the Royal Eyes of Aundair excel at spellcraft and div- 
ination—almost every agent of the Royal Eyes has an 
arcane advantage. Agents spy on other nations, pursue 
notorious criminals, and engage in a host of other 
wand-and-dagger missions for the crown. 

Serpentine Table. The Serpentine Table is the espio- 
nage arm of House Phiarlan. Few people outside the 
house even know of its existence, and hardly any of its 
lower-level operatives realize the full implication of 
their service. They simply collect and pass along infor- 
mation, never knowing how it is used. 

The Trust. Zilargo's secret police, the Trust maintains 
order in the service of the Triumvirate. This web of 
spies and ruthless assassins are known for their op- 
erations in Zilargo, but few realize that the Trust is 
also active in nations across Khorvaire. The gnomes 
believe knowledge is the greatest weapon of all, and 
Trust agents endlessly search for secrets that could 
prove useful to their nation. 


HEAD OF STATE 


Your group serves a national ruler. You're not simply 

a member of a military organization or an espionage 
agency (both of which are different patrons described in 
this section); you have the ear of a sovereign and you are 
expected to help them attain their goals at all costs. 


PRINCE OARGEV OF NEW CYRE 

The disaster of the Mourning wiped out much of the 
population of Cyre, but those living near the western 
border had time to cross into the Brelish countryside 
ahead of the strange wall of gray mist that now shrouds 
the Mournland. King Boranel of Breland took pity on the 
refugees and established camps for them, camps which 
have now grown into the town of New Cyre. 

The mayor of New Cyre is Prince Oargev ir' Wynarn, 
the last son of Cyre's ruling family. He was serving as an 
ambassador to Breland at the time of the Mourning, and 
Cyran refugees across Khorvaire now look to him for 
leadership as a sort of king in exile. He hopes to one day 
gather all of Cyre's displaced children to a rebuilt Cyre. 

Prince Oargev is obsessed with the Mourning. He is 
desperate to discover the truth behind the destruction of 
his country. He regularly seeks information from those 
who venture into the Mournland, and he funds expedi- 
tions into the remains of his once-proud nation, hoping 
to discover some clue as to the cause of Cyre's demise. 

Allies. Prince Oargev has a gift for diplomacy (and a 
number of talented ambassadors in his employ), which 
has enabled a widespread campaign of outreach to 
Cyran refugees across Khorvaire. He has a great deal 
of popular sympathy, as well as allies in every nation, 
including the following groups and individuals: 


King Boranel. The ruler of Breland did a great kind- 
ness to the people of Cyre by establishing the refugee 
camps that have grown into New Cyre. Oargev has not 
forgotten that kindness, and he would prefer not to 
jeopardize his friendship with Boranel by seizing land 
from Breland. However, rumors persist that Oargev 
plans to secede, and the King's Dark Lanterns fre- 
quently send agents into New Cyre to keep an eye on 
anti-Brelish sentiment. Oargev wisely views Boranel 
as an ally, but knows Breland could be a threat. 

Q'barra. Aside from New Cyre, the largest population of 
Cyran refugees resides in Q'barra. Oargev has invited 
these displaced Cyrans to join him in New Cyre, but 
most of them have started putting down new roots in 
the jungle land. If Cyre could be reclaimed from the 
Mournland, many of them would probably return; in 
the meantime, they are a friendly force in the east, 
willing to offer shelter and aid to agents of Prince 
Oargev who find themselves among the settlements 
of Q'barra. 

Refugees. Cyrans live across Khorvaire in the wake of 
the Last War. Oargev does significant work in reach- 
ing out to his displaced subjects, and the majority of 
them sympathize with his goals and aid his agents. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


Enemies. Bitter Cyran avengers who punish those 
they believe responsible for the Mourning have cast 
shadows on Prince Oargev's reputation. As a result, the 
following groups consider Prince Oargev their foe: 


The Five Nations. Aundairians, Karrns, and Thranes 
are generally unsympathetic to the plight of displaced 
Cyrans. Many of them bitterly bear the scars of the 
war, their resentments reinforced by the deeds of 
violent Cyran extremists. Even the Brelish, for all 
their practiced indifference, become guarded when 
confronted by Cyrans, who represent a burden foisted 
upon them by their leaders. They tend to treat Cyran 
refugees as second-class citizens and vagabonds. 
Among non-Cyran communities, agents of Prince 
Oargev can't rely on aid from any of Cyre's for- 
mer enemies. 

TheLord of Blades. In the depths of the Mourn- 
land, the closest thing to a sovereign is the Lord of 
Blades—a heavily enhanced warforged who seeks ven- 
geance against those who created his people to serve 
as weapons. He is hostile to adventurers who enter 
the Mournland on missions of plunder, and the idea 
of Prince Oargev reclaiming the Mournland fills him 
with fury. He shows Oargev's agents no mercy. 


PATRON BENEFITS 
With a head of state as your group's patron, you gain the 
following benefits: 


Assignments. Your work is performed at the direction 
of your patron. That means you are usually under 
assignment and not entirely free to choose your own 
course. Depending on the ruler and the task, these as- 
signments can be directive or more hands-off, as you 
pursue long-term goals. 


VOICE OF 


BRELAND 


PAUPER PRINCE 
PLOTS BANDIT 
BARONY 


Prince Oargev, the exiled Cyran royal who governs the 
town of New Cyre by the sufferance of King Boranel, is 
planning a brazen act of secession, hoping to transform 
all of eastern Breland into a new Cyran realm, sources 
say. According to a group of adventurers recently em- 
ployed by Oargev, the prince sent them into the Mourn- 
land to recover weapons of war so they could be wielded 
against the Brelish military during the secession. How 
will King Boranel respond to this treachery? Will the na- 
tions come to the defense of the displaced prince? Will 
Oargev’s scheming result in all of eastern Breland being 
swathed in the same gray mist that consumed Cyre? 


аманат одат pT rere pap ve эш, s РОР) 


ВО CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER GREATION 


Expenses. In addition to your salary, your patron re- 
imburses you for extraordinary expenses incurred 
as part of your work. You are required to account 
for your expenses and might be called on to explain 
any extraordinary expenditures, but routine travel, 
ordinary equipment, and most services don't draw a 
second glance. 

Immunity. As long as you remain in the head of state's 
good graces, you are nearly immune to prosecution 
under the laws of your home country. Committing 
serious crimes—especially if they are unrelated or 
unnecessary for the work you've been assigned—is a 
good way to fall out of your patron's good graces, how- 
ever. When you are carrying out your orders within 
your nation's borders, though, you have a great deal 
of leeway in how you choose to do that, and the law 
isn't an obstacle. (However, note that agents of Prince 
Oargev can't necessarily expect the same clemency in 
Breland outside of New Cyre.) 

Salary. Your employment for a head of state brings you 
an income of 1 gp per day, or enough to maintain a 
modest lifestyle. At the DM's discretion, your salary 
might increase or decrease depending on which par- 
ticular head of state you work for, the nature of your 
work, and the length of your employment. 


BUILD YOUR GROUP 

A head of state like Prince Oargev requires a variety of 
adventurers to do the range of tasks they require. De- 
pending on the kinds of work you do, your party might 
include some or all of these roles: 


Civil Servant. The vast majority of work performed 
on behalf of a head of state has very little to do with 
deadly adventure: it’s about prosecuting and judging 
criminals in the courts of law, hearing the petitions 
and complaints of citizens, collecting taxes, and in- 
terminable amounts of paperwork. Once in a while, 
though, a faithful Civil Servant gets forcefully pulled 
from this work and thrust into life-or-death situations, 
with or without help from more hardened adventur- 
ers. The knowledge and experience of a Civil Servant 
can often be useful, with some developing skills as 
clerics, rogues, wizards, or other classes. Such char- 
acters often come from the sage background and have 
proficiency in skills that reflect their studies, such as 
Arcana, History, Nature, and Religion. 

Diplomat. Negotiating treaties, de-escalating conflicts, 
and issuing ultimatums are tasks that fall within the 
purview of the Diplomat, who typically puts their high 
Charisma to work in the service of the state. These 
characters often come froma noble background and 
bring proficiency in skills such as Intimidation and 
Persuasion to their work. Bards are natural fits in this 
role, as are paladins—as long as they aren't asked to 
do things that violate the tenets of their oaths. 

Marshal. Combat is the specialty of the Marshal, who 
focuses on enforcing the law of the land and bring- 
ing fugitives to justice. Fighters and paladins make 
natural Marshals, many being former soldiers who 
continue fighting the Last War in different venues. 
They often have reasonable Intelligence scores or pro- 
ficiency in Investigation. 


Warden. The Warden’s focus isn't so much on the peo- 
ple of the nation, but on the land encompassed within 
its borders, both cultivated and wild. Sometimes that 
extends to protecting the border from incursions, but 
more often a Warden contend with monstrosities and 
wild beasts that threaten the populace, magical cor- 
ruption that harms the land, and disasters jeopardiz- 
ing the nation as a whole. Wardens are often rangers 
or druids, with proficiency in Nature and Perception. 
They might come from backgrounds as outlanders or 
hermits, making them more comfortable in the wilds 
than in cities or royal courts. 


NATIONAL AFFAIRS 

Sometimes there's a fine line between the missions 
assigned by a head of state and those of an espionage 
agency or a military force, but your team's central fo- 
cus is politics. As a group, consult the Cyran Affairs 
table and work with your DM to decide what kinds of 
adventures you undertake on behalf of Prince Oargev. 
The Heads of State table at the end of the section offers 
additional options for leaders who might make appeal- 
ing patrons. 


CYRAN AFFAIRS 


d6 Mission 
Convince nations to recognize Oargev as a sovereign 
Work diplomatically to secure land for a Cyran nation 
Track down agents and infiltrators from other nations 
who are acting against New Cyre's interests 
Venture into the Mournland to salvage Cyran treasures 
Aid Cyran refugees in Breland and elsewhere 
Make incriminating or embarrassing evidence about 


the prince quietly disappear 


OFFICIAL STATUS 

Heads of state employ a variety of agents. Some are offi- 
cially recognized, but others are expected to operate on 
the borders of legality. Consult the State Status table to 
determine the nature of your group's work 


STATE STATUS 


d6 Status 

1-3 Official. You hold an official position and are recog- 
nized as attached to your patron. You can expect the 
head of state's support, but you must also ensure 
your actions avoid staining your patron's reputation. 

4—5 Shadow. You can expect no official, public recognition 
of your work, but the head of state you work for does 
acknowledge you in private and provide help. 

6 Double. Your allegiance lies with an official or govern- 
ment other than the one you overtly serve. You may 
receive support from the head of state you openly an- 
swer follow, as well as the official you secretly report 
to, but must remain on constant guard against having 
your true loyalties revealed. 


Prince OARGEv IR' WYNARN 


HEAD OF STATE CONTACTS 

Often, your connection to your patron is quite direct— 
the head of state summons you, grants you an audience, 
and gives you an assignment or hears your report. 
Heads of state are busy people, though, and if your 
business isn't pressing, you might be handled by a func- 
tionary of the court. The State Contacts table provides 
several options for what functionaries your group might 
work with when the head of state is indisposed. 


STATE CONTACTS 


d8 Contact 
1 Adisapproving courtier who finds your extrajudicial 
work highly distasteful 
2 A fawning sycophant who figures you are the best path 
to the head of state's good graces 
3  Awide-eyed bureaucrat who dreams of living a life as 
exciting and dangerous as yours 
4 А scheming relative of the head of state who sees you 
as a path toward seizing power 
5 A bored chancellor who is constantly irritated at the 
amount of money you spend 
6 А grumpy ex-adventurer who was “promoted” from 
doing your job to supervising you 
7 Aworried parental figure who is sure that every mis- 
sion will be your last 
8 Тһе ghost of the previous head of state 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


81 


( 82 


OTHER HEADS OF STATE 
The head of almost any nation described in chapter 2 
could be your patron. For some nations and regions, it's 
impossible to speak of a "head of state," but you might 
enjoy the patronage of a powerful clan leader or other 
prominent figure—perhaps working to make that person 
a viable head of state in the long run. 

The Heads of State table offers suggestions for the 
kind of work you might do for other national leaders in 
Khorvaire, if Prince Oargev isn't your patron. 


HEADS OF STATE 


d20 Patron and Missions 
1 As representatives of the Sibling Kings of Aerenal, 
secure trade pacts with the nations of Khorvaire. 

2-3 As agents of Queen Aurala, help her build Aun- 
dair's strength in preparation for the next war, 
without alerting other nations to her ambitions. 

4—5 Assist the Brelish crown in dealing with matters 
beyond the capabilities of local law enforcement. 

6 As emissaries of Darguun's Lhesh Haruuc, work 
to build respect for Darguun as a nation. 

7 As agents ofthe Daughters of Sora Kell, keep 
the powerful Droaamite warlords in line and 
strengthen support for your fledging nation. 

8—9 Patrol the forests of the Eldeen Reaches on guard 
against threats, particularly those coming from 
the Demon Wastes to the west. 

10-11 Crack down on the Order ofthe Emerald Claw's 
activities in Karrnath. 
12 Strengthen the ties between the Lhazaar princes 
while ensuring your prince comes out on top. 
13 On behalf ofa dwarf clan, search for artifacts in 
theunderground realms belowthe Mror Holds. 
14 Clear land for a new settlement in Q'barra, driving 
out the monsters that haunt the jungle location. 
15 Unite several halfling tribes ofthe Talenta Plains 
under the banner of a single leader. 
16-17 Combat forces of corruption within the Church of 
the Silver Flame, both in Thrane and abroad. 
18 Gain glory for Valenar by leading raids and bat- 
tling threats from the Mournland. 
19-20 Оп behalf of one member of Zilargo's Triumvi- 
rate, collect information that could be used as 
leverage against the other two. 


IMMORTAL BEING 


A greater will than a mere mortal organization or nation 


drives your group. It is an ancient power of immortal 
majesty, and its purposes are cosmic and inscrutable. 


SorA KELL, THE QUEEN OF THE NIGHT 

A mysterious figure who appears in lofty myths and 
children’s fables, Sora Kell extends her reach across the 
world and through the myriad planes, claiming mysti- 
cal knowledge by force and cunning. A mighty wizard 
with magic worthy of epic tales, she is a monster whose 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


adamantine claws can flense whole armies before any 
soldier can land a blow on her plated hide. Tales of Sora 
Kell claim she is the first night hag, born from Khyber in 
the first age of the world alongside the ancient raksha- 
sas. Some even claim that her daughters—the hags who 
rule Droaam—are either direct agents of her will or have 
trapped her and pursue their own goals. 

One fact is indisputable: Sora Kell is an immortal be- 
ing who employs mortals to do her bidding. In exchange, 
she trades lore from her boundless stores of magic 
items, racks of scrolls, libraries of ancient spells, maps 
of forgotten ruins, and tomes unveiling the mysteries of 
the multiverse, which she has secreted away in caches 
across the planes. 

Appearances. Unlike some other immortal patrons, 
Sora Kell’s physical form has not been seen on Eberron 
for over a century. Perhaps she has set a task before 
her daughters and watches events unfold. Maybe she is 
trapped upon another plane of existence or is devising 
magic that could shake the foundations of existence. 

In any case, she appears in the dreams of her agents, 
or occasionally uses magical means to communicate, 
sometimes directly, other times through sinister omens. 

Allies. As a creature of legend, Sora Kell can hardly 
be said to have allies, except for a handful of other leg- 
ends like the following groups: 


Daughters of Sora Kell. Sora Kell's three daughters— 
the gifted oracle Sora Teraza, the cunning trickster 
Sora Katra, and the vicious monster Sora Maenya— 
rule the nation of Droaam, either to facilitate their 
own scheming or at their mother's command. Adven- 
turers who enjoy the patronage of Sora Kell can im- 
pose on her daughters for aid if they should ever find 
themselves in or near Droaam. They can also count 
on the aid of Daask, a criminal gang in Sharn, which 
is controlled by Sora Katra. 

Lords of Dust. Ancient fiends number among Sora 
Kell's allies—not the least of which are her daughters' 
three long-forgotten fathers. It isn't for Sora Kell's 
pawns to know which of the powerful villains are 
friendly to Sora Kell, but she occasionally sends ad- 
venturers to lend aid to rakshasas—often lesser fiends 
working to free the ancient overlords. Wise adventur- 
ers carefully weigh the rewards of working with such 
fiends against the costs—to themselves and the world. 


Enemies. Like most immortal beings, Sora Kell has 
many enemies, though the mortal ones barely merit her 
attention. For the most part, only beings like those that 
follow dare oppose Sora Kell: 


The Dreaming Dark. In Sora Kell's estimation, the 
greatest threat to her are the quori of Dal Quor, and 
their minions, the Dreaming Dark. Fortunately for the 
adventurers that serve Sora Kell, few mortals register 
as worthy foes in the alien minds of the quori. 

Lords of Dust. Sora Kell has allies among the Lords 
of Dust, but she also has bitter rivals. Like the quori, 
these fiends rarely pay much attention to Sora Kell's 
mortal minions, but they aren't above harming mortal 
adventurers just to spite her. 


PATRON BENEFITS 

The patronage of an immortal being is a relationship 
built on favors, not on employment or service. Your 
group does favors for your patron, and you can ask fa- 
vors in return. These favors are the benefits you gain for 
having an immortal being as your group's patron, and 
they might include any of the following boons: 


Contacts. Your group is almost certainly not the only 
one sponsored by your patron. Plans that span the 
world and the course of millennia require many 
agents to complete. If necessary, your patron can put 
you in contact with their other agents, who might 
be in a position to help you through status, influ- 
ence, or magic. 

Information. The most precious reward most immor- 
tals can give is a tidbit of their ages-spanning knowl- 
edge. Immortal beings often know secrets hidden 
from most mortals—including glimpses of possible 
futures. They don't usually share secrets freely, but 
they might reward your group for the completion of a 
mission with a hint, a puzzle, or a morsel of informa- 
tion that sets you off in pursuit of more. 

Magic. Immortal beings often have access to vast stores 
of magic, including their own spells and secret caches 
of magic items. They are mindful of the value of this 
magic, and grant spells and items as rewards appro- 
priate to the favor and the power of the adventurers. 


Buirp Young GROUP 

No common thread unites adventurers with an immor- 
tal patron, except perhaps uncommon openness to the 
mysterious and unknown. You haven't been chosen be- 
cause of your capabilities; they might have been chosen 
to fulfill the words of a prophecy, because they were 
born at auspicious times and places, or because they 
happened to be in a particular place at a certain time. 
Individual characters in your group might have different 
relationships with your patron, though; consider some 
or all of these roles for your characters: 


Agent. The Agent doesn't receive direct communica- 
tions from an immortal patron, but puts faith in the 
dreams and inspiration of others, following such 
omens with an eager heart. This character is under no 
illusions of having a special role to play in the immor- 
tal's grand plans, but is ready to make sure those with 
such roles play them. This is often a character with no 
magical ability or sometimes from a scholarly back- 
ground, such as a sage or hermit—perhaps someone 
familiar with lore about the immortal but not directly 
inspired by it. Agents typically have proficiency in 
skills such as Arcana, History, and Religion. 

Innocent. Some characters have no intention of be- 
coming adventurers and desire no connection to the 
machinations of the immortals, but they get caught 
up in schemes and prophecies anyway. The Innocent 
might have been identified as a key part of a prophecy, 
or made what seemed like an innocent bargain with 
a harmless old hermit, or found an artifact with mys- 
terious powers. The folk hero background is ideal for 
the Innocent, combining humble origins with a sense 
of destiny. Any class or proficiencies are suited for 
this role. 


Sora Кеш 


AND A DREAMER 


Visionary. At least one character in the party should 


have a particular connection to your immortal pa- 
tron. The Visionary might hear the patron’s voice in 
dreams, see waking visions that convey the immor- 
tal’s will, or interpret signs in accordance with proph- 
ecy. Different backgrounds might suggest different 
stories for a Visionary: An acolyte might have had a 
revelatory experience that paved the way for the im- 
mortal’s communications. A hermit might have been 
plagued by disturbing dreams from youth. A sage 
might have made a lifetime study of the Draconic 
Prophecy. These characters are often clerics, druids, 
warlocks, or wizards, and typically proficient in skills 
such as Arcana and Religion. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


84 


THE DRACONiIC PROPHECY AS GROUP PATRON 
Though it is not a sentient force that can control or reward 
your party, the Draconic Prophecy can be similar to an Im- 
mortal Being patron. The Prophecy can act as a guide for 
adventurers who seekto fulfill it—or to steer its fulfillment 
in a particular direction. You stand among the heroes of 
the present age; surely you have a role to play in the un- 
folding prophecy. 

In order for the Draconic Prophecy to work as a patron, 
one or more of the characters needs to have access to 
words from the Prophecy. Your group might adventure to 
seek out places where the Prophecy is written: mountain- 
sides and cavern walls, ancient text and crumbling ruins, 
or the patterns of moons, stars, and the Ring of Siberys 
(best interpreted at an observatory). A dragonmarked char- 
acter might gain insight into the Prophecy from the marks 
on their skin. Alternatively, a character might hear words 
from the Prophecy in dreams or visions, or surfacing from 
some deeply buried memory ofa traumatic event. 

Given access to the words of the Prophecy, it's up to 
the characters to decide what they mean. The Prophecy 
is notoriously difficult to interpret, and a given passage 
might be fulfilled in different ways (or, possibly, in multiple 
ways over the course of centuries). For example, take a 
prophetic snippet like the one mentioned in the book's 
introduction: “If the Bear King is slain by a sorrowful as- 
sassin in the Shadow of the Mourning, the Crown will fall 
from his nation." This might mean that if King Boranel of 
Breland is killed in the Mournland, the kingdom of Breland 
will be dissolved, and if dissolving the monarchy is the 
characters' goal, they can try to bring about those circum- 
stances. On the other hand, it could mean that if an awak- 
ened bear in the Eldeen Reaches declares himself king of 
the forest, and if the bear is killed on the anniversary of the 
Mourning, the tallest tree in the domain he claimed (the 
Crown of his nation) will fall. If that is the characters’ goal, 
for whatever reason, they might try to bring those circum- 
stances about. 

The currency of favors that defines most patronage re- 
lationships is tricky when your group's patron is a series 
of vague oracular verses rather than a person. However, 
bringing about the fulfillment of the Prophecy in a certain 
way often has immediate or long-term benefits that are 
equivalent to the favors another patron might grant your 
group. Toppling the Crown in the Bear King's domain 
might give you access to a spell inscribed in the ancient 
tree's rings, for example. 


SERVING AN IMMORTAL 

The tasks you perform for your immortal patron can be 
mysterious, even trivial seeming, but they always have 
implications within the immortal's larger plans. Often 
it's hard to tell what those implications might be—and 
stumbling upon hints of an immortal's broader agenda 
might prove frightening. Your tasks could involve ful- 
filling prophecies in deliberate ways, preventing proph- 
esied events from coming to pass, or even engaging in 
seemingly random actions that further designs invisible 
to mortal eyes. Immortal beings might send you on all 
manner of adventures, such as those shown on the Im- 
mortal Missions table. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


IMMORTAL MISSIONS 
d8 Mission 

1 While in the tower of Mordain the Fleshweaver, spill 
blood on the stairs between the third and fourth floors. 

2 As you pursue a Cult of the Dragon Below into the cav- 
erns of Khyber, retrieve one (and only one) of a specific 
variety of mushroom from a cave where twelve crystals 
glow. 

3 Ensure that the villain you are pursuing dies by falling 
from a great height, not by any other means. 

4 Remove the obstacles that prevent a retired adventurer 
from marrying the nobleman she loves, so that their 
child can grow up to carry out another part of your 
patron's plan. 

5 Plant a magical seed in a remote location to ensure it 
grows into a mighty tree and bears fruit that will give 
power to future heroes. 

6 Defeat a dragon-blooded sorcerer who is doing the 
bidding ofthe Chamber—and wreaking havoc in Dar- 
guun in the process. 

7 Destroy an eldritch machine, created by a rogue 
Cannith artificer, that is drawing on the energy of an 
imprisoned rakshasa—and that will, unknown to the 
inventor, lead to the rakshasa's release. 

8 Protect a kalashtar monk who is being targeted by 
Dreaming Dark assassins as she studies a path that 
might eventually prevent the quori from projecting 
themselves into the Material Plane. 


IMMORTAL CONTACTS 

Immortal beings sometimes use mortal intermediaries 
to contact their agents, but most of them possess magic 
powerful enough to communicate with you directly, even 
over impossible distances. Consult the Immortal Com- 
munication table to determine what mysterious method 
your patron uses to direct your party. 


IMMORTAL COMMUNICATION 
d10 Means of Contact 
1 Aparty member speaks to your patron in dreams. 
2 А ghostly projection of your patron appears before you 
to deliver messages. 
3 Random people are suddenly seized by your patron's 
will and, glassy-eyed, deliver messages to you. 
4 You have a sending stone connected to one in your 
patron's possession. 
5 You are adept at interpreting your patron’s messages 
from the movement of smoke in the air. 
6 A secretive cabal of other mortal agents summons you 
to meetings in various locations. 
7 Certain animals speaks to you in your patron's voice. 
8 Your patron teleports you to their presence, expresses 
their will, then returns you to where you were. 
9 Supernatural messengers deliver your patron's 
messages. 
10 Your patron unexpectedly appears in person. 


THE KORRANBERG 


CHRONICLE 


———M MI €— HÓO— ee RR RR 


ELDEEN FRACAS 


FULFILLS 
PROPHECY 


Ferssscsccó ө ө ө өө ө ө ө ө э ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө эө ө ө ө ө ө ө э ө ө |] ө ө ө ө э ө | в ө э ж 


“In the darkest night of the Dragon Below, storm and 
dragon are reunited, and they break together upon the 
legions of the Blasphemer.” According to Thausil Ken- 
nar, a noted scholar at the Library of Korranberg, these 
words, translated from an ancient prophecy, foretell the 
course of recent events in the Eldeen Reaches, where an 
upstart warlord led a barbarian army from the Demon 
Wastes on a mission of plunder. 

For all your news needs, be they ageless riddles or 
breaking modern developments, keep reading the 
Korranberg Chronicle! 


OTHER IMMORTAL BEINGS 

Various immortal beings exert their will upon the peo- 
ple and nations of Eberron. Many are villainous forces 
that adventurers might find themselves resisting, such 
as the fiends of the Lords of Dust or the Quori and the 
Dreaming Dark. Even those without evil motives are 
often inscrutable—the agendas of immortal beings span- 
ning millennia. What role you might play in an immor- 
tal's schemes and what sorts of deeds you'll be called on 
to perform varies from patron to patron. Consider the 
following options when determining what immortal pa- 
tron your party might serve: 


Flamewind. A gynosphinx with oracular powers came 
back to Morgrave University with a Xen'drik expedi- 
tion two years ago, and took up residence there. In 
addition to her first-hand knowledge of Xen'drik, she 
is one of the few nondragons to have made extensive 
study of the Draconic Prophecy. She sometimes 
sends adventurers on missions by uttering a cryptic 
prophecy. "It is time for the Globe of Seven Lights to 
be brought out of Xen'drik," she might say. She never 
explains her proclamations, and never provides infor- 
mation on mundane affairs. 

Faerie Court. Somewhere deep in the western forest of 
the Eldeen Reaches lies the Twilight Demesne, where 
powerful archfey hold court over an ongoing revelry. 
It often appears as if nothing more than mischief and 
caprice governs the actions of the archfey, but they 
have ancient interests in the mortal world—as well as 
extensive rivalries among themselves. 

Undying Court. The honored, undead ancestors of Ae- 
renal rule the elven nation and shape their people's 
destiny. These undead—known as deathless—despise 
evil undead, nurture an ancient grudge against drag- 
ons, and pursue the fulfillment of ancient prophecies. 


INQUISITIVE AGENCY 


Your party works for an agency offering investigative 
services, or you might run your own firm as a group. 
Inquisitives put their keen minds and dogged determi- 
nation to use unraveling mysteries. Inquisitive agencies 
run the gamut from private investigators to networks of 
detectives supported by dragonmarked houses. 


FINDERS GUILD 

Across Khorvaire, the inquisitives of House Tharashk 
have a reputation for discretion and cunning. Members 
of that house operate the Finders Guild, a loose collec- 
tion of independent inquisitive agencies. Dragonmarked 
heirs of House Tharashk own and operate some of these 
agencies, but each employs unmarked inquisitives as 
well, leaving the heirs free to take on the most difficult 
cases. A connection with the Finders Guild is viewed 

as a mark of high quality, a guarantee that a particular 
agency numbers among the best in the business. 

In the city of Sharn alone, four inquisitives with the 
Mark of Finding lead agencies in different parts of the 
city: Kurt Karr'Aashta's Investigations in the neigh- 
borhood of Deathsgate, Information Acquisition in 
Underlook, Thuranne Velderan's Investigative Services 
in Warden Towers, and Globe Information Agency in 
Dragon Towers. Your party might be associated with 
any of these groups, or you might operate your own affil- 
iated agency. In any case, your connection to the Finders 
Guild means you have a sterling reputation to uphold. 

Allies. While the Finders' Guild's greatest strength 
is its internal connections, it lacks many strong allies 
beyond House Tharashk's holdings. That said, the fol- 
lowing groups have had numerous interactions with the 
guild and generally view inquisitives in a positive light: 


Droaam. Since the rise of the Daughters of Sora Kell in 
Droaam, members of House Tharashk have served as 
intermediaries between the realm of monsters and the 
east, bartering the services of monstrous mercenaries 
across Khorvaire. The house takes great pride in hav- 
ing forced mainstream Khorvaire to recognize that 
orcs and half-orcs are worthy of the same courtesies 
and opportunities as races long established in society, 
and house members are now using their status to do 
the same for various other races from Droaam. As a 
result, members of the Finders' Guild can expect at 
least a modicum of respect while traveling in Droaam 

Gatekeepers. House Tharashk and the druidic sect of 
the Gatekeepers share common origins in the Shadow 
Marches, and the druids remain friendly with the 
house and its Finders' Guild. In the Marches, the guild 
often helps the druids locate stray aberrations and 
open portals between planes of existence. For their 
part, the Gatekeepers offer the support of their magic 
to aid guild members in whatever ways they can. 


Enemies. The work of inquisitives naturally creates 
enemies, mostly on a local scale: con artists, gangs, and 
others who have had their unsavory deeds uncovered. 
Such groups are inclined to hold grudges against the 
guild as a whole. The guild's enemies on a larger scale 
are few, but include the following groups. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


86 


er tts hurt s ats tn 


| AUNDAIBIAN SCROLL 


GENIUS 
INQUISITIVE 
SERVES COLD 

JUSTICE 


eros! |] өе ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө | ө ө ө э ө ө ө n 


In yet another embarrassing blow to the Fairhaven 
Watch, renowned inquisitive "Feather" Fallester has 
apparently solved yet another case she randomly pulled 
from the watch's files of unsolved mysteries. The 
case—the theft of a bejeweled statuette on display in the 
University of Wynarn Museum of Antiquities—baffled 
watch officers seven years ago, but in a matter of five 
days, Fallester managed to pin the crime on a changeling 
thief called Spaut, who has confessed. 


NR i i tte Элет чөе ae aei qni iOS PF ih e aR MeN tt 


Daask. The Finders Guild has a difficult relationship 
with the criminal organization called Daask. On the 
one hand, Daask is a violent criminal gang whose 
members are often targeted by Finders Guild inquisi- 
tives. On the other hand, Daask is a gang of monsters, 
many of whom actually left Droaam under the aus- 
pices of House Tharashk. Finders Guild inquisitives 
who pry too deeply into Daask business often feel 
pressure to back away coming from higher in House 
Tharashk. Those who ignore that pressure tend to end 
up the targets of Daask assassins. 

House Deneith. For centuries, House Deneith cornered 
the market on mercenary forces in Khorvaire. It was 
an unpleasant surprise for them when House Tha- 
rashk entered the mercenary market in the later days 
of the war, bringing monsters from Droaam to bolster 
Five Nations armies. House Deneith still resents 
House Tharashk for this, and the animosity between 
the houses only increases when Finders’ Guild inquis- 
itives stick their noses into Sentinel Marshal business. 


PATRON BENEFITS 
With an inquisitive agency as your group’s patron, you 
gain the following benefits: 


Compensation. You can collect fees from your clients 
when you undertake investigations on their behalf. 
You can set those fees, and clients will often pay 
higher fees as your reputation and prestige increase. 
A fee of 5 sp to 10 sp per inquisitive per day, plus ex- 
penses incurred as part of the investigation, is a rea- 
sonable starting rate. 

Contacts. Through the Finders’ Guild, each associated 
inquisitive agency can benefit from the knowledge 
and experience of not only other inquisitives, but also 
bounty hunters, explorers, dragonshard prospectors, 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


and others who make use of House Tharashk’s tal- 
ent for finding. Thus, an affiliated agency might find 
helpful allies not only in cities throughout the Five 
Nations, but even in remote corners of the wilderness 
where trackers and prospectors ply their trade. At the 
DM's discretion, your contacts might direct you to new 
cases, offer you leads in the case you're working on, 
put you in touch with their own network of contacts, 
or show up suddenly to pull you out of the fire. You 
can call in a favor from your agency to draw on the 
resources of any of your contacts. At the start of the 
campaign, roll twice on the Contacts table to choose 
two contacts. You will certainly acquire new contacts 
in the course of your adventures, who might or might 
not fit the descriptions of contacts on this table. 


CONTACTS 
912 Contact 

1 A friendly law-enforcement officer sends clients your 
way and gives you inside information about the work- 
ings of the watch. 

2  Asatisfied former client with a minor position in local 
government can pull strings for you. 

3 A lieutenant in a crime gang knows the underworld 
and will help you so long as you don’t interfere in that 
gang's affairs. 

4  Abitter, more experienced inquisitive spends a lot of 
time telling you who you could have talked to ten years 
ago—if that person hadn't died—but still knows a lot 
about the city's inner workings. 

5 The owner of a tavern or other business that attracts 
clientele from the seedy parts of society has an ear to 
the ground and often feeds you leads to more work. 

6 A wealthy former client can get you into high-society 
parties and put you in touch with other rich people. 

7 А nosy journalist always wants to write stories about 
your cases, but also helps lead you to new work and 
key contacts. 

8 A local priest appreciates the work you do and provides 
you with minor magical assistance. 

9  Atough-as-nails street urchin will carry messages for 
you, lead you anywhere in the city, and squeeze into 
tight spaces for a meager reward. 

10 Abrooding warforged can connect you to an extensive 
network of former soldiers. 

11 Akalashtar seer might be a fraud, but also occasionally 
provides you with valuable leads. 

12 A curious changeling always seems to show up when 
you least expect it. 


BUILD YOUR GROUP 

A wide variety of talents can be useful in the work of an 
inquisitive, leading the Finders' Guild to employ special- 
ists with diverse skill sets. Many inquisitives come from 
backgrounds such as criminal, sage, soldier, or urchin, 
regardless of the role they play in a group. Consider 
some or all of these roles for characters in your party: 


Client. When a routine investigation goes sideways, 
sometimes innocents get unwillingly caught in the ac- 
tion. The common artisan who hired the party to find 
her missing partner might find herself and her hired 
inquisitives on the run when things take a deadly turn. 
Such a Client is often a nonplayer character whose 
connection with the party is dissolved at the end of an 
adventure, but sometimes a Client develops a taste for 
excitement and becomes a fixture in the campaign. A 
perfectly ordinary background such as guild artisan or 
folk hero often work well with this character, who oth- 
erwise needs no specific proficiencies or capabilities. 

Consultant. Sometimes skilled individuals end up 
working alongside inquisitives for a time. Such Con- 
sultants might work for a newspaper, study an esoteric 
field, or write crime fiction for a living. This character 
is usually similar to an Investigator, but typically has 
an unusual background or expert knowledge. The 
relationship between a Consultant and the rest of the 
party can be a source of drama—or comedy. 

Interrogator. The Interrogator specializes in interaction 
with suspects, witnesses, or others who need per- 
suasion to reveal what they know. A high Charisma 
combined with proficiency in both Persuasion and In- 
timidation prove helpful in this role. Bards, paladins, 
and sorcerershave both the requisite talents and the 
ability to supplement their interrogations with magic. 

Investigator. Investigators piece evidence into a co- 
herent whole that explains a mystery. This character 
combines a high Intelligence score with proficiency 
in skills such as Investigation, Perception, and some- 
times Medicine. The Investigator might also use divi- 
nation and other forms of magic to supplement those 
skills, making wizards a natural fit for this role. 

Tough. An inquisitive's work is inherently dangerous, so 
it's often important for their group to include someone 
who can physically intervene when situations devolve 
into combat. The Tough's role might include fighting 
criminal thugs, kicking in doors, and even roughing 
up suspects, all of which suggests a high Strength 
score and combat ability. The Intimidation skill can 
also helpfully supplement the Tough's work. 


'ТҮРЕ$ OF INQUISITIVE WORK 

Much of the work done by inquisitives is relatively mun- 
dane: collecting evidence of marital infidelity, investigat- 
ing insurance fraud, or finding runaways. Sometimes 
these relatively innocent investigations can lead into the 
shadowy underbelly of society and become more dan- 
gerous, but most adventurers prefer the more dangerous 
kinds of inquisitive work. Your group might specialize 
in one particular kind of work, or it might take whatever 
cases come its way. Roll or pick from the Investigative 
Expertise table to determine your agency's specialty. 


INVESTIGATIVE EXPERTISE 
d6 Investigation 
1 Find People. You seek people who are lost, in hiding, on 
the run, or victims of foul play. 
2 Find Items. Whether it's a stolen painting or a family 
heirloom, you excel at finding lost items. 


d6 Investigation 

3 Justice for All. The powerful often escape justice due 
totheir wealth and influence. Their victims sometimes 
turn to you, hoping you'll help set things right. 

4 Help Law Enforcement. The city watch must obey the 
rules to bring criminals to justice. When the rules need 
to be bent or broken, they turn to you for help. 

5 Uncover Secrets. You put your inquisitive skills to use 
inquiring into others' mysterious backgrounds. 

6 Private Security. You provide services for a specific 
organization. Perhaps you travel on airships to provide 
security or work in a casino to catch cheaters. 


SIGNATURE CASE 

Inquisitives occupy a significant place in the popular 
imagination, both in their real-life exploits (as reported 
in the newspapers) and in many fictionalized accounts. 
As romanticized heroes of many tales, they shed the 
light of truth into the shadows to uncover secret mis- 
deeds. Equally romanticized as self-serving muckrak- 
ers, they often use questionable methods to bring to 
light secrets that might have better remained hidden, 
causing untold harm in the process. 


Whether true or false, stories like these tend to cling 
to inquisitive agencies and color their reputations. What 
big story is associated with your agency (and possibly 
your party)? Are the stories accurate, or do they reflect 
only one side of a complicated situation? Roll on the Sig- 
nature Case table or choose a case that cemented your 
reputation. 


SIGNATURE CASE 


d6 Case 

1 Case of the Century. You uncovered key evidence in a 
sensational case. You made headlines, but some par- 
ties involved carry grudges against you. 

2 The Set Up. You uncovered evidence of a high-profile 
figure's misdeeds. At trial, that evidence was deemed 
false, but by then the accused's career was ruined. 

3 Scandal. Your work uncovered a deeply embarrassing 
scandal that ended a powerful politician's career. 

4  Underdog Champion. You brought justice to a sym- 
pathetic victim, proving yourself a champion ofthose 
overlooked by society. 

5 Genius. You resolved a case that baffled others, and 
now youare celebrated foryour brilliance. 

6  Bungler. You bungled a case, badly. The guilty party 
walked free, and everyone blames you. 


CLIENTELE 

Inquisitives tend to acquire a reputation for working 
with a certain type of person. Some are known for 
discretion, attracting wealthy clients who trust them to 
keep a secret. Others are known to have a soft spot for 
a sad story, drawing the type of client who has plenty of 
troubles butlittle money. Roll on or choose an option 
from the Clientele table to determine who tends to show 
up at your office with a case. 


CLIENTELE 


d6 Clientele 

1 Wealthy Socialites. Your discretion and low-key ap- 
proach to cases make you the perfect team to handle 
cases best keep out of the public eye. 

2 Underdogs. Whether deserved or not, you have a repu- 
tation for doing the right thing even if it comes without 
a reasonable fee. Anyone pitted against the rich and 
powerful knows to come to you for justice. 

3 Magnet for Trouble. Maybe you trust people too easily 
or it's just bad luck, but every client who walks into your 
office has some double deal, hidden agenda, or scam 
they're running. 

4 Desperate. You have a reputation for taking on clients 
who can't afford your services. Every hard-luck case 
ends up at your door, whether you want them or not. 

5  Warforged. In a world where the rights of warforged are 
not always certain, you take up their cause. 

6 Criminals. When a criminal has been wronged but 
doesn't want to be brought to justice they come to you, 
trusting (rightly or wrongly) that you won't turn them in. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


OTHER INQUISITIVE AGENCIES 
Beyond the Finders' Guild, the following inquisitive or- 
ganizations solve mysteries across Khorvaire: 


King's Citadel. Part spy, part inquisitive, and part 
soldier, the agents of the King's Citadel serve crown 
and country as the ultimate agency for dispensing the 
king's justice in Breland. Local watches and constabu- 
laries can call on its agents when a crime or situation 
poses a threat that spreads beyond their jurisdiction. 

Sentinel Marshals. The Sentinel Marshals are a mul- 
tinational force administered by House Deneith and 
authorized to enforce the law across Khorvaire. As 
the only force that can cross borders in pursuit of fugi- 
tives, they are well trained to track renegades. 

Sharn Watch. Like most local police forces of any size, 
the Sharn Watch includes inquisitives devoted to solv- 
ing crimes and tracking down the perpetrators. 

Warning Guild. Affiliated with but largely independent 
from House Medani, the Warning Guild provides cer- 
tification and contractemployment for bodyguards, 
inquisitives, and sentries across Khorvaire. The guild 
emphasizes the use of logic, perception, and deduction 
to assemble fragments of evidence into a recognizable 
whole. Its inquisitives are often called upon to solve 
mysteries that baffle local law enforcement. 


Running Your Own. Rather than join an existing in- 
quisitive agency, you can start your own. You need to es- 
tablish your own office. You can collect the same fees as 
if you worked for another agency, and you have access 
to the same range of contacts. You can also use the Run- 
ning a Business downtime activity to direct the activities 
of your agency, as described at the start of this section. 


MILITARY FORCE 


Your group serves as a team of soldiers in a larger mil- 
itary force, one dedicated to combat missions or other 
dangerous tasks. You could be a team of mercenaries, 

a special forces unit, or an ordinary squad of infantry. 
Perhaps you protect a nation's people from monsters, 

or even continue to fight the Last War in the shadows. 
There is plenty of work for military forces at the edges of 
civilization, such as protecting the Eldeen Reaches from 
the dangers of the Demon Marches or skirmishing with 
Droaam at the borders of Breland. 


REDCLOAK BATTALION 
The soldiers of the Redcloak Battalion number among 
the deadliest warriors in Breland. When a situation calls 
for extreme military force, law enforcers turn to the 
Redcloak Battalion. This elite unit fought at the forefront 
of the Last War, and Brelish bards still sing of the ex- 
ploits of Khandan the Hammer and Meira the Huntress. 
At the end of the war, the battalion was split up and its 
units assigned to cities and strongholds across Breland. 

As an elite group of special forces, the Redcloaks don't 
include inexperienced adventurers in their ranks. Con- 
sidering that, there are two ways to use the Redcloak 
Battalion as a group patron. 

First, the Redcloaks do sometimes take inexperienced 
adventurers under their wings. Existing Redcloaks 
proved themselves on the battlefields of the Last War; 


if the group is to continue, the Redcloaks of the future 
have to learn the soldier's trade in different battles. To 
such ends, senior members of the battalion send your 
party on missions across Khorvaire to provide you with 
combat experience as well as to further Redcloak goals. 

Alternatively, your DM might decide to start the cam- 
paign with your characters at a higher level and already 
established as members of the Redcloaks (see "Starting 
at Higher Level" in chapter 1 of the Dungeon Master's 
Guide). In this case, you might also begin with magic 
items and other gear reflecting your status in the orga- 
nization. The standard-issue uniform for the Redcloaks 
is a hooded crimson c/oak of protection bearing two 
badges: the seal of the Brelish crown on the left shoul- 
der and a snarling displacer beast surrounded by the 
words, "First in battle, last to fall"—the Redcloak insig- 
nia and motto—on the right. 

Allies. As part of Breland's military forces, the Red- 
cloaks can count on the support of the crown, the King's 
Citadel, and the larger Brelish army, largely summa- 
rized as the following parties: 


King Boranel. The king of Breland is a cautious advo- 
cate of the Redcloaks. He values their contributions 
but fears their power, which is why he divided the bat- 
talion after the end of the war. Still, he rewards loyalty 
among the Redcloaks by showing loyalty to them in 
return. Again and again, he has proven himself willing 
to exercise his power on behalf of a loyal Redcloak. 

Other Redcloaks. The first place any Redcloak turns 
for help is another Redcloak. No one else is as reliable 
and competent, while being unerringly faithful to the 
Brelish king and the battalion. Every Redcloak read- 
ily provides aid to other members, with no questions 
asked and no favor expected in return. 


Enemies. As veterans of the Last War, many 
Redcloaks carry strong grudges against other na- 
tions. They tend to believe that the Treaty of Throne- 
hold is merely an intermission in the ongoing conflict, 
and soon enough King Boranel will take his proper 
place on the throne of a reunited Galifar. Many of 
these grudges are personal based on an individ- 
ual soldier's experience in the war, but some of 
them run both ways. Among the Redcloaks, ten- 
sions still run hot regarding their former rivals, 
particularly those from the following nations: 


Darguun. The hobgoblins of Darguun fought 
alongside Brelish forces at the Battle of Cairn 
Hill, but the cordial relations between the two 
nations frayed immediately after. The Redcloaks 
skirmished with hobgoblins who were leading Thrane 
civilians in chains back to Darguun. Few Darguuls 
remember the skirmish itself, but the ^wicked red- 
cloaked Brelish" have an established place in the gob- 
linoids' collective memory—and many Redcloaks do 
remember the event bitterly. 

Thrane. In the waning years of the Last War, the Red- 
cloaks played a major role in the devastating Battle 
of Cairn Hill between Brelish and Thrane forces. 
Thanks to heavy losses on both sides, veterans 
of that battle tend to nurse bitter grudges against 
their enemies. 


PATRON BENEFITS 
With a military force as your group's patron, you gain 
the following benefits: 


Accommodations. You can always find a place to stay 
and meals on a base or fort connected to your military 
force. Your accommodations are appropriate to your 
rank and station, but never luxurious. 

Armory. You can purchase nonmagical weapons and 
armor at a 20 percent discount at a facility associated 
with your military force. This might also be a location 
where you can buy magic items, at the DM's discre- 
tion, but you receive no discount. 

Chain of Command. You are part of a rigid chain of 
command. In addition to providing you with orders, 
this structure reduces your responsibility for your 
own actions. If you land in trouble in your own nation, 
you answer to your officers, not local law enforcement. 

Orders. You undertake your missions at the direction 
of a commanding officer. Your absolute obedience is 
expected. These missions are often explicit, leading 
you into the path of adventure. In some cases, though, 
you might be trusted with more open-ended tasks that 
afford you more leeway in interpreting orders. 

Salary. Each member of your group is paid a regular 
salary. The amount varies depending on your orga- 
nization and your position within it, but at minimum 
you enjoy a modest lifestyle. You might receive a small 
salary (as little as 1 sp per day) but also receive food 
and housing on a military base. Or youcould receive 1 
gp per day but rely on that money for room and board. 
With higher rank comes commensurately higher pay. 
As an officer, you can maintain a comfortable lifestyle. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


90 


€—M—M TUQUE" RUSSIE 5 Mns Ea RNE a ИДИ 


NEWTHRONE 


LEDGER 


THIRTEEN DEAD 
IN BLACKSCALE 
SLAUGHTER! 


+++» »»»» ж» ж» э э э ө ө ө ж э ө э ө ө э ж ө э ө э э ө ө э ө э ө ө э ө э э э ө ө э ө ө ө ө э ж 


Venturing unusually far from their accustomed territory 
in the eastern jungles, a band of enormous lizardfolk— 
described by local experts as members of the Blackscale 
Tribe—broke through the fortifications at Adderport 
and killed thirteen residents before retreating back into 
the jungles. Khalar d'Tharashk has announced a plan to 
track the perpetrators and exact retribution under the 
sponsorship of King Sebastes. 


BUILD YOUR GROUP 

A military unit, like most adventuring parties, incorpo- 
rates a range of useful skills while covering each mem- 
ber’s weaknesses with another’s strengths. Thus, char- 
acters of any class can find a home in such a unit, and a 
diversity of different skills and backgrounds benefits the 
group as a whole. Consider some or all of these roles for 
characters in your party: 


Commander. Every band of infantry has its leader, 
even if that person isn't a officer. The Commander 
earns that position through some combination of 
high Charisma and Intelligence—the ability to inspire 
and the capacity to plan. Proficiency in skills such as 
Persuasion and History can be helpful as well. The 
Commander might be a career soldier (with that back- 
ground) or someone from a noble background placed 
in command by virtue of birth. A Commander might 
be a fighter, bard, cleric, paladin, or even wizard—as 
magic proves valuable in military engagements. 

Medic. Keeping soldiers alive is essential to military 
success, and that's the Medic's job. In an elite unit of 
adventurers, the Medic is often a cleric or has another 
class with healing ability, but these characters are 
also often proficient in the Medicine skill or use of a 
herbalism kit. A Medic can be a soldier who demon- 
strated aptitude in healing and got moved into this 
position, or a character from a different background 
(such as acolyte, sage, or even hermit) who decided to 
put medical expertise to military use. 

Scout. Trained in navigating the wilderness and laying 
ambushes for enemy soldiers, the Scout melds the 
combat skill of a fighter with the skills of a ranger or 
rogue. High Dexterity and Wisdom scores, combined 
with proficiency in the Nature, Perception, Stealth, 
and Survival skills, support this character's core ca- 
pabilities. Scouts are often recruited from people who 
are more familiar with the wilds than with city streets, 
including folk heroes, hermits, and outlanders. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


Soldier. Soldiers make up the core of most military 
groups, whether they're general infantry, magical ar- 
tillery, or elite special forces. These characters come 
from all classes and backgrounds—for some, their 
background before joining the military is more import- 
ant than their current role. No particular set of talents 
is common to all soldiers, but military units often 
strive to avoid duplication of skills. 

Warforged. Literally made for war, most warforged 
characters have spent the years since the end of the 
Last War trying to find a new way of life. For some 
warforged, the answer is to continue fighting the war 
one way or another, often as part of an organized mili- 
tary unit. This experience, as a people created to fulfill 
arole and now seemingly locked into a destructive 
destiny, is just a part of life for many warforged. 


MILITARY MISSIONS 

The work involved in serving as a military unit is 
wide-ranging. Your missions potentially run the risk of 
shattering the fragile peace established by the Treaty 
of Thronehold and plunging all of Khorvaire back into 
war. Alternatively, you might consider running your 
campaign during the Last War, so your group's missions 
influence the war effort and don't risk violating the 
treaty. As a group, consider the options on the Military 
Missions table and work with your DM to decide how 
the work you do fits into the larger picture of war and 
peace in Khorvaire. 


MILITARY MISSIONS 


d6 Missions 

1 Strike Force. You are trained to make quick, strategic, 
devastating attacks against enemy assets. 

2 Special Forces. You're trained in covert operations, simi- 
lartothe work of spies but with more focus on combat. 

3 Defensive Operations. Your focus is on protecting your 
allies from attackers, monsters, or deadlier enemies. 

4 Reconnaissance. Your missions involve keeping track of 
enemy troops and surveying potential battlefields. 

5  Peacekeeping. Your paradoxical task is to maintain the 
fragile peace of the Treaty of Thronehold by maintaining 
a military presence in turbulent areas. 

6  Warforged Affairs. You are responsible for hunting down 
berserk warforged, working in the gray spaces between 
national order and a people seeking their destiny. 


DEFINING MISSION 

You were there at a crucial moment that turned the tide 
of the Last War. Choose or roll an option on the Defin- 
ing Mission table to determine what that moment was. 


DEFINING MISSION 


d6 M Mission 
1 Heroic Stand. You knew if you took one step back from 
the line, all would be lost. When relief arrived days 
later, you had not budged. 
2 Telling Blow. The enemy general never knew what hit 
them. You still carry their personal flag as a trophy. 


d6 Mission 

3 Dawn Raid. You traveled hundreds of miles around en- 
emy lines to reach your target. In a single day, months 
of enemy preparation went up in flames. 

4  Breakthe Line. During a key battle, you were part of a 
heroic push to break the enemy line. 

5 Liberator. You were at the forefront of a daring assault 
to liberate a captured citadel or town. 

6 Sharp Eye. The enemy's secret attack would've been 
devastating. Luckily, you spotted it in time. 


NEMESIS 

During the Last War, you had a run-in with a particu- 
larly dangerous foe, one who still haunts your night- 
mares. One day you'll have your revenge. Consult the 
Nemesis table to determine the identity of your foe. 


NEMESIS 


d6 Nemesis 

1 | Necromancer. You lost a lot of friends in battle, but 
what made it worse was watching that cackling wizard 
raise them as zombies and turn them against you. 

2 Camp Commandant. As prisoners of war, you were 
captured and subjected to brutal conditions in a pris- 
oner camp. The commandant delighted in your pain. 

3  Inept Commander. Your friends would still be alive if 
one incompetent officer with political power and influ- 
ential allies hadn't sent you on a disastrous mission. 

4 Colossus. You were among those who survived an 
encounter with a warforged colossus. Cyre or House 
Cannith— whoever was responsible for such a night- 
mare— deserves whatever evil fate comes their way. 

5 Mercenaries. A band of traitorous mercenaries who 
switched sides, turning the battle against you. 

6 Champion. One mighty hero fought on the enemy side, 
wielding powerful magic and cruel strategies against 
the rank-and-file soldiers on your side. 


MILITARY CONTACTS 
Your group’s primary contact within your hierarchy is 
generally your superior officer—the person who gives 


you orders and is responsible for your success or failure. 


The Commanding Officer table offers suggestions for 
the personality and goals of that officer. 


COMMANDING OFFICER 


d8 Officer 
1 An angry officer who yells every order, reprimands you 
for even the smallest mistake, and fully expects you to 
fail at every mission you undertake 
2  Abattle-scarred officer who experienced terrible hor- 
rors during the Last War and is barely capable of giving 
you orders through a haze of intoxication 


d8 Officer 

3  Agrim officer who expects the Last War to reignite at 
any moment and intends to be ready 

4  Acheerful officer with a dark sense of humor who mer- 
rily sends you into grave danger 

5  Akindly officer who is hesitant to send you into danger 
and constantly reminds you to be careful 

6  Abitter officer who carries deep grudges against your 
nation's enemies in the Last War and leaps at any 
chance to deal them any blow 

7 An optimistic officer who believes that a new era of 
peace is just over the horizon, as soon as these few 
last military tasks are complete 

8 A devout officer who believes that your success or fail- 
ure lies entirely in divine hands and you're ultimately 
just along for the ride 


OTHER MILITARY FORCES 

Every nation in Khorvaire hasits military forces. In 
addition to the Redcloak Battalion, the following groups 
number among the forces most likely to make use of a 
team of adventurers: 


Blademarks Guild. House Deneith manages mercenary 
activities across Khorvaire through its Blademarks 
Guild, with house members serving as officers, train- 
ers, and strategists. The rank-and-file soldiers of the 
guild are largely human mercenaries but also includes 
significant numbers of hobgoblins from Darguun, 
elves from Valenar, and Cyran soldiers who no longer 
have a nation to fight for. 

Maruk Ghaash'kala. Among the orc tribes of the 
Demon Wastes, the Maruk tribe inhabits the deadly 
Labyrinth that lies between the wastes and the Eldeen 
Reaches. In its sacred dedication to containing the 
threat of the Lords of Dust, it draws significant num- 
bers of orc barbarians from the Shadow Marches, hu- 
man scouts from the Eldeen Reaches, and even youths 
from the Carrion Tribes that live deeper in the wastes. 

Q'barra. The frontier nation of Q'barra has significant 
need for military forces to protect its communities 
from the lizardfolk, warbands from Valenar, Lhazaar 
marauders, and other dangers of the jungle. 

Valenar. The elves of Valenar have no interest in peace, 
but they participated in the talks that led to the Treaty 
of Thronehold to gauge the measure of their enemies 
and gain acceptance in the human courts. Today, 
Valenar forces continue to raid the Talenta Plains and 
Q'barra on a regular basis, in stark defiance of the 
Treaty of Thronehold. A Valenar warband is unlikely 
to contain members of races other than elves and per- 
haps half-elves, but such a band could make an inter- 
esting military party. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


9I 


92 


Running Your Own. Rather than join an existing 
force, you might choose to form your own mercenary 
outfit. You can assemble a unit of 3d10 soldiers housed 
in a headquarters with an armory, barracks, and pri- 
vate quarters for you and any other officers. Your group 
earns 3d20 gp per month, plus enough money to main- 
tain your headquarters. You might be able to acquire 
weapons and armor through an arms dealer at a 20 
percent discount, at the DM's discretion. You give the or- 
ders to those beneath you and take orders from no one, 
but that means that you are ultimately responsible for 
the activities of everyone in your outfit. 

Youcan use the Running a Business downtime ac- 
tivity to direct the activities of your unit and potentially 
increase your earnings, as described at the start of 
this section. 


NEWSPAPER 


Your group comprises a team of ace reporters working 
for a chronicle—one of the many newspapers that pro- 
vide news and entertainment for readers across Khor- 
vaire. You might be under contract to provide the paper 
with tales of your exploits as you search out adventure. 
Or you might be investigative reporters dedicated to 
shining the light of truth into the darkness of criminal, 
political, and religious corruption. You might have an 
unflinching commitment to the truth, or be more inter- 
ested in selling papers—or you might be in conflict with 
the chronicles management over priorities. 

The simplest chronicles appear as scrolls nailed to 
public message boards containing the pertinent news 
of the week. More ambitious chronicles—including the 
Aundairian Scroll, the Breland Ledger, and the Sharn 
Inquisitive—are presented as folded broadsheets nested 
together to form simple books. 


KORRANBERG CHRONICLE 

By far Khorvaire's best known and most widely read 
newspaper is the Korranberg Chronicle. Thanks to its 
unflinching and mostly unbiased coverage of the Last 
War, combined with a distribution deal with House 
Orien, the Korranberg Chronicle enjoys a loyal and avid 
readership throughout central Khorvaire. The Chronicle 
is released three times a week (on Mol, Wir, and Far), 
and each edition features some mixture of news from 
around Khorvaire, stories of adventurers and exciting 
expeditions, business solicitations, royal proclamations, 
and almanac information. 

Offices. The Chronicle's main offices are located in 
Korranberg. The paper also maintains field offices in the 
Five Nations, the Mror Holds, and Zilargo. Each field 
office shares space with a House Sivis message station, 
giving reporters at the office the ready ability to commu- 
nicate with the home office (at discounted rates). 

Employees. The Chronicle sends reporters across 
Khorvaire. Most of them live in Korranberg or near 
one of the field offices, but correspondents might be 
stationed in more remote regions for long periods of 
time, and the paper frequently publishes stories written 
by freelancers from across the world. Your adventuring 
party most likely falls into that last category, at least at 
the start of your career. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


A large staff of editors—mostly but not exclusively 
comprised of Zil gnomes—works out of the newspaper's 
various offices. They are organized into an extensive 
hierarchy from senior to junior editors. The top tier of 
senior editors is responsible for broad categories of sto- 
ries, such as crime or international affairs. Lower tiers 
take on increasingly specific subsets of that category, 
down to the junior editor responsible for the crime beat 
in Sharn's Lower Dura district. 

Even the most senior editors, though, are responsible 
to the top tier of the Chronicle's management, including 
its publisher and its secretive board of owners. 

Allies. The Korranberg Chronicle is widely known 
and respected as a source of balanced news coverage. 
As such, it has friends in many places, including some 
in positions of power. Some of the Chronicle's closest 
allies come from the following groups: 


House Orien. House Orien distributes the Chronicle 
along its mail and lightning rail runs across Khor- 
vaire, helping the newspaper reach a huge audience. 
Employees of the Chronicle can travel on lightning rail 
coaches at a discounted rate of 8 sp/day (instead of the 
usual 1 gp/day). 

House Sivis. The newspaper also cooperates closely 
with House Sivis to facilitate communication between 
the main office and the field offices, as well as be- 
tween reporters and their editors. The house bills the 
Chronicle directly for communications using speaking 
stones or sending spells directed to the newspaper's 
main office. 

Zilargo. The gnome nation of Zilargois generally 
friendly to the newspaper. The senior editors, pub- 
lisher, and owners of the Chronicle are influential peo- 
ple in the city of Korranberg and Zilargo as a whole. 
In extreme circumstances Zilargo officials might be 
persuaded to advocate for the newspaper's employees. 


Enemies. The Korranberg Chronicle is dedicated to 
learning and reporting the truth, and such an attitude 
is always certain to arouse the ire of those who would 
rather keep their secrets hidden. The following rep- 
resents just a fraction of the enemies the newspaper has 
made over the years: 


The Boromar Clan. The dominant crime syndicate 
in Sharn is still stinging from an exposé published 
ten years ago that resulted in the arrest of many of 
the clan's leaders and gave other gangs a foothold in 
the city. Members of the Boromar Clan go to great 
lengths—even murder—to sabotage Chronicle report- 
ers who pry into their secrets. 

Karrnath. King Kaius nurses a grudge against the 
newspaper stemming from its coverage of the peace 
process at the end of the war, blaming them for sev- 
eral setbacks along the way to the eventual signing 
of the Treaty of Thronehold. Chronicle reporters op- 
erating in Karrnath often face harassment and find 
bureaucracy impeding their every effort. 

House Thuranni. The snoops and spies of the Chroni- 
cle have pried one time too many into House Thuran- 
ni's private affairs. No member or agent of the house 
will cooperate with Chronicle reporters under any 
circumstances. 


PATRON BENEFITS 
With a newspaper as your group's patron, you gain the 
following benefits: 


Compensation. Assuming that you regularly provide 
the newspaper with stories it can print, each member 
of your group earns 1 gp per day, or enough to sustain 
a modest lifestyle. 

Expenses. In addition to your salary, your group can be 
reimbursed for expenses related to your work. The 
newspaper covers the cost of travel when it's required 
for your stories, food when you perform an interview 
over a meal, communication costs using courier ser- 
vices or message stations, and similar work-related 
expenses. If your expenses are excessive, your patron 
might refuse to repay them. 

Equipment. Your group can request access to equip- 
ment owned by the newspaper, such as a printing 
press. With permission, you can use this equipment 
for your private purposes, within reason. 

Press Access. Each member of your group is issued 
identification papers from the nation where the news- 
paper is based. These papers establish your identity 
and identify you as a member of the press, which 
commands a certain amount of respect. You can often 
secure an audience with those you want to talk to. Of 
course, this isn't a guarantee of safety—if you discover 
a damaging truth, some people will do whatever it 
takes to make sure it never sees print. 


BUILD YOUR GROUP 


Newspapers employ a wide range of adventurers to 
bringnews back to the home office. Consider some or all 
of these roles for the characters in your party: 


Civilian. Some groups include members whose skills 
are great for reporting but less useful on adventures. 
This could be the designated writer, a political car- 
toonist, or a chronicler who records the party's adven- 
tures. This might be a challenging role for a player 
character to fill, but an NPC could provide services to 
the party, making them worth keeping around. 

Face. Typically gifted with a high Charisma score and 
skilled in a combination of Persuasion, Intimidation, 
and Insight, the Face takes the lead in conducting 
interviews or talking the group's way past obstacles. A 
character with access to enchantment magic (such as 
a bard or sorcerer) can supplement natural Charisma 
with magical persuasion. A character with the char- 
latan background, proficiency in Deception, or profi- 
ciency with a Disguise kit might also fill this role. 

Muscle. Sometimes sources need a bit of physical ca- 
joling to share their stories. The Muscle has a knack 
for getting people to talk. Alternatively, when those in 
power lock away the truth, the Muscle physically wres- 
tles it free. Any character who's proficient with armor 
and martial weapons (such as a fighter) makes a fine 
choice for this role. Characters in this role are often 
former soldiers or more-or-less reformed criminals. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 93 


94 


E 


: 


VOICE OF 


BRELAND 


KORRANBERG 
CHRONICLE 


ССЭ err! n n n nnn 


Who really pulls the strings behind the ostensibly un- 
biased news coverage of the Korranberg Chronicle? The 
Chronicle's publisher, a wily Zil gnome named Cassia Lor- 
ridan Claddik, is the most public face of its leadership, 
and her connection to Korranberg's ruling Council of 
Nine is well known. But she is not the ultimate author- 
ity determining what gets printed and what does not. 
No, that honor goes to the shadowy board of the Chroni- 
cle's owners. 

Voice reporters have uncovered the names and posi- 
tions of several members of this board, and the results 
are nothing less than shocking. The Trust—the shadowy 
secret police who maintain order in Zilargo—is well 
represented on this board, raising questions about the 
extent to which the Chronicle is a propaganda engine for 
Zilargo. Worse still, several of the wealthiest and most 
influential members of the board are associated with the 
Aurum, a shadowy cabal whose primary interest seems 
to be increasing its members' wealth and influence. 
Whose interest, then, does the Chronicle serve? 

All the more reason, loyal readers, to rely on the Voice 
of Breland for unbiased news you can use. 


Networker. The Networker knows exactly who can get 
the party what they need. This character makes exten- 
sive use of contacts and friends to facilitate the party's 
work. A character with the criminal background likely 
has underworld contacts, while an urchin could be 
familiar with the ins and outs of the city. Interper- 
sonal connections are typically more important than 
any particular skills or abilities for this character, al- 
though many Networkers have high Charisma scores. 

Snoop. A Snoop pries into secrets and pieces together 
the clues behind a sensational story. High Intelligence 
and proficiency in Investigation often aids the core 
work of the Snoop, and knowledge of Arcana, History, 
or Religion can be helpful for background research. 
Divination magic can also prove useful (perhaps in the 
hands of a wizard or a cleric), while a character with 
the sage background might have a knack for research. 


TvPES ОЕ REPORTING 

Decide as a group, in consultation with your DM, what 
kind of reporting you do for the newspaper. It's possible 
that different members of your group have different spe- 
cialties, or that only some members actually write sto- 
ries while the rest aid the reporters. Choose an option 
or roll on the Journalistic Focus table to determine what 
sort of reporting you specialize in. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


JOURNALISTIC Focus 


d10 Reporting 

1 Investigation. Your job is to uncover the secrets that 
governments, dragonmarked houses, and other pow- 
erful people don't want the public to know. 

2  Muckraking. You look for scandalous and titillating se- 
crets that famous people would rather hide. 

3 Local News. You care about the local community and 
report on local events and government. 

4 International Affairs. You report on the activities of na- 
tional governments and their relationships. 

5 Crime. You work with police and inquisitives—or do 
some inquisitive work yourselves—to report on crim- 
inal activity. 

6 Cultural Reporting. You write about arts, fashion, and 
similar events and trends. 

7 Science and Magic. Your job is to investigate scientific 
and magical advances and explain them in jargon-free 
language anyone can understand. 

8 Personal Interest. You seek out stories of personal tri- 
umph over adversity, such as how people are rebuild- 
ing and working together in the wake ofthe Last War. 

9 Travel. You travel extensively and write about the best 
way for others to enjoy such journeys. 

10 Adventure Logs. Your job is to entertain the public 
with exciting stories about your life as an adventurer. 


FAMOUS STORY 

Is there one story that hangs over your group's head, 
for good or ill? Maybe it sets a high bar you might never 
reach again, or ensures you'll never write a story of a 
different kind. Consult the Famous Story table to deter- 
mine what reporting has most colored your career. 


FAMOUS STORY 
d6 Famous Story 

1 Fear Monger. You spiced up a story by stretching a 
few facts, instigating a wave of misinformation that 
plagues public discourse to this day. 

2 Hit Piece. You have revealed secrets that many famous 
people wanted kept under wraps. Youtry to keep a low 
profile when dealing with the rich and powerful. 

3  Unheeded Warning. You've been tracking a significant 
story and have published damning articles. Unfortu- 
nately, those who keep the truth hidden workto make 
even your most ironclad proof look shaky. 

4 Scandal. You reported on a massive scandal that com- 
pletely upended the local political scene. 

5 Buried Headline. You almost broke a story, but then 
received a threat or bribe so significant that you put it 
on ice. 

6 Double Cross. You thought you had the scoop of a life- 
time, but you were fed false information and published 
a story that was pure fiction. 


REPORTING REPERCUSSIONS 

Your reporting changes lives—you like to think for the 
better. Sometimes, though, your work has drawn some 
fairly pointed criticism and earned you an enemy. Refer- 
ence the Story Aftermath table to determine the reper- 
cussions of one of your most impactful stories. 


STORY AFTERMATH 


d6 Aftermath 

1 Business. Your reporting put a serious dent in a busi- 
ness, and that organization refuses to deal with you. 

2 Dragonmarked House. One of the dragonmarked 
houses has sworn revenge against you. You avoid show- 
ing your face in their facilities. 

3 Criminal. You exposed a criminal conspiracy. Most in- 
volved were arrested, but a few crooks remain free. 

4 Politician. You ended a politician's career, and they've 
sworn to return the favor. 

5 Rival Newspaper. You got the scoop of a lifetime by 
stealing it from another newspaper. Now that paper 
tries to undermine you at every turn. 

6 Innocent Victim. You rashly published the name of a 
person you incorrectly thought was connected to a 
scandal, ruining their life. 


NEWSPAPER CONTACTS 

Usually, your primary contact—the person who gives 
you assignments for the newspaper—is an editor of 
some kind, who takes the stories you write and makes 
them suitable for the printed page. Depending on the 
editor, you might not even recognize the stories when 
they're printed, and your editor's personality and goals 
can have a tremendous impact on your work for the 
paper. Consult the Newspaper Contact table to learn 
about the editor or other newspaper figure you're re- 
sponsible to. 


NEWSPAPER CONTACT 


d8 Primary Contact 

1 Atough-as-nails senior editor who holds you to high 
standards but rewards you well when you reach them 

2 Awealthy newspaper owner who demands the paper 
use your work even though the editor doesn't want to 

3  Anambitious junior editor who hopes that your work 
will help them rise through the ranks 

4  Asenior reporter obsessed with their own supposedly 
groundbreaking work, making you run down the day- 
to-day stories they don't consider "real journalism." 

5 An editor who is more interested in keeping powerful 
friends happy than in reporting the truth 

6 An editor who thinks the way to make reporters do 
their best work is by making them compete with each 
other, setting your group up against a team of rivals 

7 An editor who suffered horrors during the Last War 
and is desperate for signs of hope 

8 A cynical editor who seeks the corruption and down 
side in every story 


e — 


THE KORRANBERG 


CHRONICLE M: 


SPECIAL SUL EDITION 


—— M — —— эө eric 


WAR IS OVER! | 


Treaty of Thronehold signed. Galifar is no more. { 


иес усу metn ra a eee EE y 


OTHER NEWSPAPERS 

Besides the well-respected Korranberg Chronicle, other 
newspapers in Khorvaire can be grouped into a few dif- 
ferent categories: 


Local Rags. Small papers such as the Vathirond Jour- 
nal, the Vedykar Sentinel, and the Write of Passage 
are limited in circulation to their own home city, and 
their coverage is similarly limited in perspective. 

Mainstream Media. The Breland Ledger, the Sharn 
Inguisitive, the Aundairian Scroll, and papers like 
them present generally balanced coverage of world 
events. They are usually a little slanted in favor of their 
home nations. 

Propaganda. Some newspapers, such as the Voice of 
Breland and similar papers in other nations, print 
fiercely partisan news that seems designed to fan the 
flames of resentment that linger after the Last War. 


Running Your Own. Rather than work for an existing 
outlet, you can run your own newspaper. You own a 
small office and a printing press, and keep 2d4 employ- 
ees to manage daily tasks and keep the paper going to 
press. You gain the benefit of press access as described 
earlier. Additionally, you can use the Running a Busi- 
ness downtime activity to direct the activities of your pa- 
per in hopes of increasing your earnings, as described 
at the start of this section. 


RELIGIOUS ORDER 


Your group acts in the service of one of Khorvaire's 
most prominent or obscure religious institutions. Per- 
haps you're a team of devotees pursuing a cause for your 
faith, or maybe you're a bunch of cynics taking advan- 
tage of a wealthy congregation. You could be on a mis- 
sion to retrieve sacred relics lost in ancient ruins, holy 
objects from war-ravaged temples, or treasures to fill the 
church's coffers. Your faith might drive you to hunt evil 
monsters or stave off interplanar invasions, to protect 
and defend the powerless from oppression and exploita- 
tion, or to spread the teachings of your religion in a land 
that's hostile to it. Or you could serve a corrupt hierar- nm 
chy by making its enemies quietly disappear—though e 
even the most cynical mercenaries might become true 
believers when confronted with the miraculous. 

The patronage of a religious order isn't simply a 
matter of each member of your group belonging to the 
same faith. An actual organization—with its own re- 
sources, goals, and leaders—sponsors and directs your 
adventures. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


96 


TEMPLARS OF THE SILVER FLAME 

The Church ofthe Silver Flame includes three orders 
of clergy: ministers who tend congregations, friars who 
spread the faith, and templars who fight evil in the flesh. 
Your group has been ordained as templars and sent into 
war against the forces of evil. 

As templars of the Silver Flame, you have distinctive 
silver tabards to wear over your other clothing or armor. 
You also have the privilege of using a knightly honorific 
before your name (typically "sir" or “lady”), and you are 
immediately recognized as a knight, an agent of the 
church, and effectively a lesser member of Thrane's 
aristocracy. This status guarantees the good will of 
members of the church and citizens of Thrane, but 
carries less weight and might even provoke animosity 
outside Thrane. 

Hierarchy. The order of the Templars of the Silver 
Flame is represented on the Council of Cardinals that 
serves as the governing body of Thrane and the church. 
Seven commanders govern the knights of the order un- 
der the Grand Master's leadership: one for each of the 
Five Nations of old, one for foreign lands, and one for 
the seas. Their assistants carry the title of marshal, but 
no real division of rank exists beneath them. 

Knights templar are free to wander the world in pur- 
suit of the order's aims. When leaving the jurisdiction 
of one commander and entering that of another, it is a 
knight's responsibility to promptly report to the com- 
mander of the new area, in case that commander has 
a pressing need for a knight to perform a mission. The 
commanders try to keep each other informed about 
where knights are operating and what they are doing, 
but this system works better in some places—and be- 
tween some commanders—than others. 

Allies. The other two orders of the Church of the 
Silver Flame's clergy—ministers and friars—staunchly 
support the knights templar. Even when there is rivalry 
among the leaders of these orders and other officials 
of the church, the rank and file members support each 
other regardless of order. You can count on these clergy 
to help you secure spellcasting services, and to offer you 
other material aid within reason. 

Enemies. Since the order of knights templar is sworn 
to exterminate supernatural evil, such creatures are 
always hostile when they recognize a knight templar. 
The following groups and creatures viciously oppose the 
templars of the Silver Flame: 


Fiends and Undead. Unnatural beings loathe templars, 
as they represent everything these foul creatures 
despise—light, life, hope, and good. These menaces 
sometimes go to great lengths to trap and destroy tem- 
plars, and fiends take particular pleasure in corrupt- 
ing the faithful to evil. 

Lycanthropes. All types and alignments of lycan- 
thropes have a particular hatred for the Church of the 
Silver Flame, thanks to the crusade that nearly exter- 
minated their kind over a century ago. Shifters are 
uncomfortable with the templars for the same reason. 

The Order of the Emerald Claw. Tied as it is to the 
Blood of Vol and the worship of the undead, the Order 
of the Emerald Claw opposes the Church of the Silver 
Flame and its agents in the world. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


PATRON BENEFITS 
With a religious order as your group's patron, you gain 
the following benefits: 


Divine Service. In times of need, your group can appeal 
to the priests of your faith for magical aid. A cleric or 
druid of your faith who is of sufficiently high level will 
cast any spell of up to 5th level on your group's behalf, 
without charge. The priest even provides any costly 
material components needed for the spell, so long as 
you can demonstrate your need and are in good stand- 
ing with the church. 

Equipment. Each member of your party has a holy 
symbol or druidic focus, even if it isn't needed for 
spellcasting. Each of you also has a book containing 
prayers, rites, and scriptures of your faith. 

Proficiencies. Each member of your party gains pro- 
ficiency in the Religion skill, if the character doesn't 
already have it. 


BUILD YOUR GROUP 

Religious orders attract people from all walks of life. 
It can be fun to play against type—to make a devout 
character with the criminal or charlatan background, 
for example. Regardless of your origins, consider the 
following roles for the characters in your party: 


Fixer. The Fixer might work for a religious order for 
entirely non-religious reasons. This character does 
the order’s dirty work and clears away its problems. 
It’s entirely possible for an entire party to be made 
up of Fixers, but rogues and fighters are especially 
well suited to this kind of work. Characters with the 
criminal background excel at putting their skills and 
contacts to use on the church’s behalf. 

Prophet. The Prophet is a visionary with a more-or- 
less direct connection to the divine. This character 
might be the driving force behind the group’s quests, 
steering them according to divine will. Proficiency in 
skills such as Insight and Religion can help reflect this 
character’s divine connection. The Prophet is often a 
cleric or druid, but could also be an NPC with no real 
adventuring skills, who needs the group’s protection. 

Scholar. The Scholar brings academic knowledge to 
bear in the religious order’s work, often in the form 
of proficiency in History and Religion. This character 
might be an expert on ancient ruins or know all the 
weaknesses of the demons they are hunting. Charac- 
ters with access to divination magic (including clerics 
with the Knowledge domains as well as wizards) 
might excel at this role. Many Scholars come from the 
sage background. Unlike the Prophet and Zealot, the 
Scholarisn’t necessarily devout, just knowledgeable. 

Teacher. Those in this role spread the teachings of the 
faith. This isn’t usually an effort to win converts— 
though it can be, especially in the case of the Church 
of the Silver Flame—but rather the task of encour- 
aging people to live according to the highest ideals 
of faith. Proficiency in skills such as Persuasion (or 
sometimes Intimidation) and Religion can be useful 
for this character. Many clerics fill this role, but devout 
bards can also be effective Teachers. Some Teachers 
bring skills from the entertainer background into the 
service of their faith. 


Zealot. Dedicated to smiting the foes of the faith, the 
Zealot focuses on combat above all. Clerics, druids, 
and paladins make iconic Zealots, but any character 
can play this role; there are barbarians whose fury is 
fueled by their devotion, and rangers sworn to track 
down the enemies of the faith. The soldier and folk 
hero backgrounds are well suited to such champions 
of the faith. 


SERVING THE ORDER 

What is the nature of your work for the religious order? 
As a group, consult the Religious Service table and work 
with your DM to decide what role you play—which likely 
shapes the kind of adventures you undertake. 


RELIGIOUS SERVICE 


d6 Service 
Smite Evil. You battle evil in your order's name. 

2 Fight for Freedom. You protect the downtrodden from 
the forces of oppression. 

3 Retrieval. Your group seeks sacred relics and holy arti- 
facts on behalf of your church. 

4 Root Out Corruption. You are charged with finding cor- 
ruption within the hierarchy of your own faith. 

5  Exhortation. You work with the faithful at a grassroots 
level to get them to uphold their high ideals. 

6 Dirty Work. As the radical zealots of your order, you sin 
so the other members ofthe order don't have to. 


HIERARCHY 

Some religious orders are viewed with suspicion by the 
priestly hierarchies of their faiths; others are viewed 

as champions who act as the gods' hands in the world. 
Within a religious order, some members are highly 
respected while others are seen as dangerous for one 
reason or another. What is your relationship to the hier- 
archy you're a part of? 15 your entire order held in par- 
ticularly high or low esteem? Or does your adventuring 
party stand out from the larger order for some reason? 
Is your behavior in line with the expectations of your 
religion, or is it unorthodox in some way? Reference the 
Order Reputation table to determine how you're viewed 
by your larger religious institution. 


ORDER REPUTATION 


d6 Reputation 

1 Faithful Few. You are seen as righteous crusaders, up- 
holding the highest ideals of yourfaith and doing the 
gods' work in the world. Your deeds and methods are 
rarely, if ever, questioned. 

2  Respectable. Your behavior and beliefs are in line with 
the hierarchy's expectations. As long as you stay in 
line, no one gives you trouble. 

3  Troublemakers. You attract unwanted attention to your 
order or hierarchy from outside, so you are under a 
great deal of pressure to keep a low profile. 

4 Rebels. You flout the dictates of your hierarchy—even 
if it's for just reasons. Your superiors constantly try to 
rein you in. 


d6 Reputation 

5 Reformers. You bring a much-needed breath of fresh 
air into the ranks of your faith. If only more people of 
faith would act as you do! 

6  Anathema. For right or wrong, your behavior and be- 
liefs are viewed as unacceptable, and the hierarchy of 
your faith actively opposes your work. 


RELIGIOUS ORDER CONTACTS 

Your primary contact within the religious order is usu- 
ally some kind of priest—not necessarily a cleric or 
druid, but someone who holds a priestly office and a po- 
sition of some authority in the hierarchy of the organiza- 
tion. This person might direct you and your adventures 
according to their interpretation of divine will, or they 
might trust the gods to lead you to do what needs to be 
done. Of course, some priests (as well as lay functionar- 
ies) are more interested in their own agendas than any 
supposed divine will. Consult the Order Contact table to 
determine your liaison within the religious order. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


THE VOICE OF 


THRANE 


SILVER FLAME'S 


CRISIS OF FAITH! 


The Templars of the Silver Flame are supposed to repre- 
sent the Church and the nation in pursuit of the highest 
ideals of the faith, as they crusade against the forces of 
evil across Khorvaire. But are they fulfilling that high 
calling? Or are they just as mired in politics as the Brelish 
bureaucracy? 

High Cardinal Baerdren ir'Davik, who also holds the 
rank of grand master of the templars, appears to be an 
exemplary templar, utterly dedicated to the mission of 
the order. Yet it is widely known that he chafes at the 
political and bureaucratic responsibilities that his posi- 
tion on the Council of Cardinals demands of him. This 
reporter has learned that Sir Baerdren would readily 
surrender his position, were it not for his distrust of his 
seneschal, Ofejjaia of Korth. 

Lady Ofejjaia, it seems, has other issues on her per- 
sonal agenda besides advancing the cause of the knights 
templar, and one wonders if those issues are tied to her 
Karrnathi origin. Though her wisdom and sound judg- 
ment are not in dispute, it seems that Sir Baerdren fears 
that she would drive the order into obsolescence or even 
banishment if she were in charge. 

Does Lady Ofejjaia hold her lofty position because of 
her loyalty, her piety, and her qualifications? Or is she 
there simply so that Sir Baerdren can keep his eye on 
her and ensure that she doesn't sabotage the templars 
from within? 


ORDER CONTACT 

d8 Contact 

1 A cloistered priest with little worldly experience who 
doesn't really understand what you do but seems to 
approve of it anyway 

2  Acynical priest who thinks nothing you do makes any 
difference in the grand scheme ofthings 

3  Azealous priest who is constantly urging you to do 
more and do it better 

4  Anambitious priest who views you as a ticket to ad- 
vancement in the hierarchy 

5  Aretired adventurer who would rather do your work 
than direct you in it 

6 A pious priest who sees the hands of the divine in ev- 
ery event, even the actions of unbelievers 

7 A devout lay person who envies the magic and power 
your group wields 

8 A practical functionary who tries to keep your work iso- 
lated from the knowledge and influence of the priests 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


OTHER RELIGIOUS ORDERS 

In addition to the Templars of the Silver Flame, several 
other groups might sponsor your party, such as the fol- 
lowing organizations: 


The Deathguard. This elite order of elven priests 
and warriors from Aerenal is sworn to destroy all 
evil undead. 

The Devout of the Celestial Crown. One of many litur- 
gical councils that serve a mostly administrative role 
for the priests of the Sovereign Host, the Devout man- 
age a large portion of the city of Sharn. 

The Gatekeepers. This ancient druid sect seeks to de- 
fend nature against aberrations, fiends, and undead. 


UNIVERSITY | 


An institution of higher education sponsors your group. 
You might be researchers, bodyguards for scholars, or 
glorified treasure hunters searching for ancient arti- 
facts. The university might regularly employ you or you 
might have a contact at the university who pays you any 
time you bring back something useful from your adven- 
tures. You could be a team of academics, or you could be 
employed to provide some (physical and magical) mus- 
cle that the university otherwise lacks. 


MORGRAVE UNIVERSITY 

Atthe heart of Sharn's Morgrave University is a sharp 
dichotomy: On the one hand, it is known as a nexus for 
scholars wishing to study Xen'drik, thanks in large part 
to Sharn's proximity to the secret continent. Its col- 
lections of artifacts and scholarly works about ancient 
Xen'drik and the Dhakaan Empire are unparalleled. 

In many ways, it lives up to the shining vision of its 
founder, Lord Lareth ir'Morgrave, to be “а beacon of 
knowledge shining from the tallest towers of the city." 

On the other hand, the university's reputation is 
tainted by allegations of smuggling, treasure hunting, 
and profiteering. Many priceless relics recovered from 
Xen'drik or Dhakaani ruins have disappeared from the 
university vaults and found their way to the black market 
or into the hands of the Aurum. It's an open secret that 
some scholars, professors, and even students at the 
university have ties to smugglers and thieves. All these 
allegations, too, have ties to the university's founding: 
Lord Morgrave himself is said to have made his fortune 
selling Dhakaani artifacts on the black market, and 
some have claimed that the true purpose of the uni- 
versity was to help him build his fortune through such 
questionable means. 

Allies. The academic world is relatively small, and 
people at any one university tend to have connections 
at others. You might parlay such relationships into as- 
sistance from academies and institutions, such as the 
following organizations: 


Flamewind. The sphinx Flamewind (described in the 
"Immortal Being" section) isn't officially affiliated 
with the university, but she lives there and spends 
much of her time in its libraries and museums. As a 
scholar of the Draconic Prophecy, Flamewind often 
poses strange questions and sends adventurers on 
obscure missions. 


Library of Korranberg. The Library of Korranberg 
boasts the greatest collection of learning in Khorvaire. 
Its prestige means that people associated with it often 
look down on their colleagues at Morgrave University, 
but they still celebrate the two institutions' common 
purpose of pursuing knowledge. If Morgrave's own li- 
braries are insufficient for the task at hand, your group 
can probably find help in Korranberg. 

The Twelve. For many scholars of magical studies, the 
idea of pursuing their research under the auspices of 
the Twelve is a cherished dream. Some faculty mem- 
bers at Morgrave have had the opportunity to do just 
that, and many others have nurtured connections to 
the Twelve in an attempt to secure that honor. Those 
connections can give your group access to powerful 
magic and the other resources of the Twelve. 

Wayfinder Foundation. Morgrave maintains extensive 
connections with the Wayfinder Foundation—an exclu- 
sive guild for adventurers, which funds expeditions to 
distant locales. Should your group needs a grant or re- 
sources from the Wayfinders, a letter of recommenda- 
tion from someone at Morgrave carries some weight. 


Enemies. Morgrave University has few true enemies 
but many rivals. Despite the friendly ties among aca- 
demic institutions, Morgrave occupies the low end of 
the prestige scale among academic bodies, so its faculty 
tends to look for opportunities to steal glory from its aca- 
demic peers. Beyond rivalries with allied organizations, 
Morgrave openly competes with the following group: 


University of Wynarn. Foremost among Morgrave's 
rivals is Aundair's University of Wynarn, whose ad- 
ministrators have been known to refer to Morgrave as 
an "institute of learning, relic hunting, and grave rob- 
bing." The University of Wynarn is ancient—the first 
university established in the Five Nations—and more 
prestigious than Morgrave. It sponsors many of the 
same kind of expeditions and can boast many great 
discoveries, yet, somehow, Morgrave is more famous, 
and that stings many among the university's staff. 


PATRON BENEFITS 
With a university as your group's patron, you gain the 
following benefits: 


Compensation. The university pays for the work you 
do on its behalf. The nature of your employment in- 
fluences how you are paid. On average, the university 
pays each member of your group 1 gp per day, or 
enough to sustain a modest lifestyle. Or you might be 
paid a bounty for each ancient artifact you bring back 
from your adventures and give to the university. 

Documentation. Each member of your group has 
identification papers that include your affiliation with 
the university, which carries some clout in academic 
circles. The university also secures documentation, 
letters of introduction, and traveling papers for you if 
your work requires them. Finally, if your adventures 
take you to Xen'drik, the university secures the neces- 
sary letters of marque issued by the king of Breland, 
which grant you permission to explore the ruins there. 

Research. Research might be part of your group's job, 
but your patron has abundant resources to facilitate 


it. You can call in a favor to delegate the work of re- 
searching lore (a downtime activity described in the 
Player's Handbook or Xanathar's Guide to Everything) 
to a colleague, contact, or research assistant. You're 
responsible for covering all expenses occurred as part 
of this research, and the DM determines the success, 
failure, or other possible results. 

Resources. Most universities have extensive libraries 
and museums, which you have access to. You can call 
in a favor to gain access to resources that are gener- 
ally not on exhibit—dangerous relics or possibly magic 
items, spellbooks, and the like. Additionally, the fac- 
ulty of your university might make it possible for you 
to consult with experts in various fields—so long as 
you can coax them away from their work. 

Training. Because you're associated with the university, 
you receive a discount on any education you wish to 
pursue. When you undergo training as a downtime 
activity (as described in the Player's Handbook or 
Xanathar's Guide to Everything), you pay only one-half 
the normal cost, assuming that what you are studying 
is something the university teaches. Training in lan- 
guages, musical instruments, and other tools might 
also be available, at the DM's discretion. In addition, 
you can gain proficiency in the Arcana, History, Na- 
ture, or Religion skills by this method, as if you were 
learning a language. A character can only learn one of 
these skills in this way. 


BUILD YOUR GROUP 

A group sponsored by a university might look very much 
like any other adventuring party, with a range of diverse 
skills and capabilities. The only significant distinction 
lies between characters who are scholars and those who 
are more traditional adventurers. Consider some or all 
of these roles for characters in your party: 


Field Researcher. The academic in your group might 
also be a character with plenty of training and expe- 
rience in the dangerous life of an adventurer. Some- 
times called tomb raiders or grave robbers, such 
characters know that groundbreaking work requires 
firsthand experience with the creatures, cultures, 
forces, and histories being investigated, and the best 
way to get that is in the field. This role is similar to the 
Scholar, but the Field Researcher is armed with com- 
bat-oriented spells that supplement the knowledge-fo- 
cused capabilities of the Scholar, preparing them to 
face those who guard the world’s greatest secrets. 

Financier. Whether they’re hunting for grants or seek- 
ing donations from wealthy philanthropists, the Finan- 
cier seeks the funds to pay for academic expeditions. 
Such characters might know their ways around ball- 
rooms, boardrooms, and seedy taverns, willing to do 
whats necessary to get what they need. Those in this 
role often exude Charisma and might be adept with 
the Deception, Intimidation, and Persuasion skills. 
Bards and rogues make natural academic Financiers, 
as do those with the charlatan and noble backgrounds. 

Research Assistant. Whether their seeking to graduate, 
get published, or make their academic mark, the Re- 
search Assistant's fate is likely tied up in the success 
of another scholar or a specific project. Alternatively, 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


99 


the Research Assistant might just be along for the 
ride, helping a professor merely to pass a course. Re- 
gardless, such characters might come from any class 
or background and could have skills gathered from 
experiences far outside the academic sphere. While 
there are certainly legitimate Research Assistants 
who honestly pursue their studies, this role might suit 
characters without academic interests. 

Scholar. Likely possessing a high Intelligence score 
and a focus on learning and research, the Scholar in 
your party might represent the academic emphasis of 
the university. This character is often a noncombatant, 
a professor or student the rest of the party protects. 
Alternatively, they might live a dual life, shedding 
their academic persona as soon as they're off campus 
grounds. The Scholar might also be a nonplayer char- 
acter, or the role could be filled by a player character 
whose spells and training don't include combat. A 
wizard whose spellbook is filled with utility-focused 
spells makes a fine Scholar, as might some clerics and 
monks. In any case, the sage background is an obvi- 
ous choice for the Scholar, with acolyte and hermit 
also providing fine alternatives. Proficiency in skills 
such as Arcana, History, Investigation, Nature, and 
Religion often proves useful for this character. 


SCHOLARLY MISSIONS 

Decide as a group, in consultation with your DM, what 
kind of work your group does for the university. Consult 
the Scholarly Missions table to determine what sort of 
adventures you undertake. 


SCHOLARLY MISSIONS 
d6 Mission 

1 Adventurous Archeology. Your focus is on finding an- 
cient artifacts and bringing back what you can. 

2 Arcane Research. Your team focuses on acquiring 
magical knowledge that can only be found outside 
the university walls. 

3 Investigative Ecology. None can say how many amaz- 
ing creatures make their homes in the world's wildest 
reaches, but you're dedicated to finding out. 

4 Historical Research. Your team's work involves learn- 
ing more about Eberron's long history. 

5 Radical Engineering. The birth of a new race wasn't 
the peak of magical and mechanical engineering, it 
was just the beginning of new scientific fields you 
now explore. 

6 X Exploration. Khorvaire is a vast continent, and areas 
beyond the heartland of the Five Nations are poorly 
charted. Your focus is on understanding the wilder 
places of the world, as well as distant cultures. 


SCHOLARLY STANDING 

Academics live and die by their reputation. Some stand 
as embodiments of their fields of expertise, others 
might be considered con artists who stigmatize whole 
academic fields. Roll on or choose an option from the 
Scholarly Standing table to determine what other peo- 
ple think about your research. 


MoRGRAVE 
UNIVERSITY 


ScHOLARLY STANDING 


d6 Standing 

1 Revolutionary. Your work has upended scholarly соп- 
sensus and reshaped the way other academics think 
about your field. Each new discovery you make is re- 
ceived with acclaim. 

2 Respected. Your work is considered noteworthy, 
though not revolutionary. Scholars in your field follow 
your writing and efforts with interest. 

3 Anonymous. Try as you might, you can't earn positive 
or negative attention. Even worse, after you've pub- 
lished your findings, more prominent scholars have 
made similar statements to much acclaim. 

4  Misguided. Your theories challenge scholarly consen- 
sus and are discounted. A prominent scholar argues 
against your conclusions, and their voice carries the 
day ... for now. 

5 X Fringe. You work on the edges of your field, advocat- 
ing bizarre theories that challenge scholarly consen- 
sus and seem patently outrageous, even scandalous. 

6 Fraud. For right or wrong, many in the academic com- 
munity believe you have invented at least some of 
your "findings" to earn attention. 


UNIVERSITY CONTACTS 

With a university as your patron, you are part of a 
sprawling bureaucracy—maybe deep in the tangles of it 
or, more likely, lingering at the edges. Wherever you sit 
in the network of colleges, administrators, and faculty, 
a single person serves as your primary point of contact, 
someone who has a significant impact on the nature of 
your relationship with the university. Reference the Uni- 
versity Contact table to help determine who manages 
the relationship between you and the university. 


UNIVERSITY CONTACT 


d8 Contact 

1  Anoverworked department head who doesn't quite 
know what to make of you but gives you work to keep 
you busy 

2  Acareer bureaucrat who insists you file paperwork in 
multiple offices in orderto get anything done 

3  Ajunior professor who might be more interested in 
selling plundered artifacts than in actual research 

4  Adepartment secretary who thinks you're a great deal 
more interesting than any ofthe regular faculty 

5  Anerudite dean who believes you have tremendous 
potential and urges you on to greater endeavors 

6  Anenergetic librarian or museum curator who ad- 
dresses every question, assignment, or acquisition 
with disproportionate enthusiasm 

7 Atired senior professor whose only joy in academia is 
seeing what you bring back from your adventures 

8 Ап eager researcher who wants to come with you on 
every adventure because second-hand reports are al- 
ways incomplete and unsatisfying 


zx ПНЕ @ 


SHARK INQUISITIVE 


PROFITS TRUMP 
PROMISES AT 
BLACK MARKET 
UNIVERSITY 


ey a) 


In response to last week’s exclusive report detailing a 
scheme to remove precious antiquities from storage at 
Morgrave University and sell them on the black market, 
Master Larrian ir’Morgrave has issued a statement full of 
the usual platitudes and empty promises we have grown 
accustomed to hearing from the Office of the University 
Master. In it, ir'Morgrave vows to put an end to the crim- 
inal activities occurring within the university and bolster 
the school's academic reputation. As regular readers of 
this paper know, he makes such promises frequently, but 
we have yet to see him take any substantive action to 
back up his promises. 


"" А " — memet 


OTHER UNIVERSITIES 

Numerous universities exist across Khorvaire. Mor- 
grave University is the one most often connected to ad- 
venturous exploits, but the following institutes number 
among Khorvaire's other prominent academic bodies: 


Arcanix. Housed in elegant towers that float above 
southern Aundair, Arcanix is a place of arcane learn- 
ing, where the next generation of spellcasters studies 
the intricacies of magic. The mentors at Arcanix com- 
prise the Arcane Congress, a council of spellcasters 
who explore the limits of the arcane arts under a man- 
date instituted by King Galifar I. 

Rekkenmark. The Military Academy of Rekkenmark 
has trained Galifar officers for hundreds of years and 
continues to excel as the premier combat training 
facility in all of Khorvaire. Nobles from every nation 
used to send their children to Rekkenmark for at least 
part of their education, but the Last War put an end to 
that practice. Now that the war is over, the academy 
hopes to welcome students from other nations once 
again, but so far only a handful of students from out- 
side Galifar have come to Rekkenmark. 

Library of Korranberg. Zilargo's Library of Korran- 
berg is the greatest repository of general knowledge 
in Khorvaire. More than just a library, it hosts eight 
attached colleges dedicated to different fields of study, 
drawing gentry from across Khorvaire who come to 
study there. In addition to serving as a resource for 
scholars and explorers, the library often funds expedi- 
tions to study ancient cultures or unexplored lands. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER CREATION 


{ 
{ 
i 
{ 
i 


IOI 


Tan. 


A LYRANOAR AIRSHIP VENTURES TOWARD THE OEAD-GRAY MIST OF THE MouRNLAND 


UST ONE CENTURY AGO, THE KINGDOM OF 
Galifar spanned most of Khorvaire. Of course, 
we never tamed the lands beyond the Graywall 
Mountains or the jungles of the east. Nevertheless, 
it was impressive, this kingdom of humanity’s. 

Now I look at the map of Khorvaire with a touch of de- 
spair. Galifar lies shattered, the Five Nations irreparably 
divided. So many new realms claim sovereignty—kingdoms 
of elves and goblins, and what of this nation of monsters 
called Droaam? Can it last, or will another war fracture us 
further? Should I dwell on such things when the Mourning 
might simply consume us all? Gods, how I fear the future. 
—Lyrian Das, Morgrave historian 


Most player characters begin their adventures on the 
continent of Khorvaire, as shown on the poster map 
included with this book and on map 2.1 (page 104). Al- 
though humans make up the majority of the population 
in the nations of Khorvaire, the continent is home to a 
wide range of peoples and cultures. Once largely unified 
under the Kingdom of Galifar, today Khorvaire is split 
into many nations—some old, others newly born from 
the crucible of war. This chapter provides an overview of 
Khorvaire, a glimpse of the world that lies beyond it, and 
the predominant faiths of Eberron. 


NATIONS OF 
KHORVAIRE 


The following sections focus on what you need to know 
to create characters and NPCs from Khorvaire. For 
general information about the Kingdom of Galifar, the 
Five Nations that arose from the kingdom's ashes, and 
the Treaty of Thronehold that helps keeps the peace 
between the nations of Khorvaire, see the introduction 
of this book. 

An excellent system of roads connects the central na- 
tions of Khorvaire, and travelers can always make their 
way by horse or coach. Major cities are linked by the 
lightning rail of House Orien, which allows one to avoid 
the perils—and tedium—of the roads. If speed is an is- 
sue, one can book passage on a House Lyrandar airship. 
This is the fastest way to travel, but also the most ex- 
pensive. This book's introduction has more information 
about these and other travel options. 


CHAPTER 


KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


AUNDAIR 


Capital: Fairhaven 
Hallmarks: Cheese, education, fashion, grains, 
wine, wizardry 


Fertile farmlands surround the grand cities of Aundair. 
The floating towers of Arcanix are the finest institute 
for mystical study in Khorvaire, and magic is deeply 
ingrained in Aundairian culture. The nation produces 
more magewrights and wandslingers than any other in 
Khorvaire. 

From the nobles lounging in the towers of Fairhaven 
to the common folk working the vast vineyards of Blue- 
vine, Aundairians value wit and wisdom. Aundairians 
prefer finesse to brute force and appreciate cunning 
wordplay and fine fashions. The Sovereign Host is the 
dominant faith of Aundair, with a particular devotion to 
Aureon. However, the Silver Flame also maintains a de- 
voted following—some might say overzealous. 

Although Aundair is a small nation, its arcane supe- 
riority allowed it retain its dominion during the Last 
War. The people of Aundair know that knowledge is 
power, and they take pride in their nation’s magical ad- 
vancements. To ensure her nation’s prosperity and dom- 
inance, Queen Aurala ir'Wynarn instituted the Arcane 
Initiative, an aggressive series of programs intended to 
forward the development of mystical infrastructure and 
battle magic. 


INTERESTING THINGS 
ABOUT AUNDAIR 


* Arcanix is the most prestigious academy of magic in 
Khorvaire. Most of its sages specialize in ritual magic 
and abstract theory, and don't have the full powers 
of wizards. 

* Magic permeates many aspects of Aundairian life— 
more so than other nations. A cleansing stone (see 
chapter 5) graces every village, and you might encoun- 
ter animated farming equipment in the fields. The 
Knights Arcane are an elite unit of eldritch knights, 
and the spies of the Royal Eyes of Aundair specialize 
in divination magic. 

* Some Aundairian nobles are bound by arcane pacts 
handed down through generations. Only remarkable 
heirs—such as player characters—develop into war- 
locks. Most such lines have an Archfey patron. 


AUNDAIRIAN CHARACTERS 


Regardless of your Intelligence score, as an Aundairian 
you're sure you're the smartest person in the room. Con- 
sider the following characteristics for your Aundairian: 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


103 


THE CONTINENT OF 


| KHORVAIRE 


is о i it - 050 „1 
miles 


1000 


REACHES: 


THE; Ж: 
PSIOWERINGZ (аа 
P4 WOOD о 


ДОМ 


"ir DUSK WOOL 


Hall i 
g Hal Е Далы 
7 
farun ,Rellekor. 
оет oou x 2 
д н i aie i 2 БШП) a 
K ve, sy” Fore 


HARROW 
CROWNS: 


7" IWHITEHORN. 
ZI WATCHING: WOOD, 
аф 


Woop: 


i3 / 55 


T'RAGONWOOD 


E BALINOR'S 
SORROW, 


DAGGER 
Woop, 


LEE MOYER 


(THE SHIMMERWOOD) FOREST, § 


\GREENTAR y 


ufida- ~ { Я у B c d Ф ARTIP 
RO) 1 А Ing МАА 
эф?” s х "Д А y 


P 


L.4 
e e. 


2 


Si 


p 


I, КП s 
‚= Таегийапйдоге5 ЫЕ 
‚ 9 Е 


AL 


ZAAR 
PALITIES 


HADOWMOUNT 
Fo ee 


m 
Dollen on 
the River. 


мо; 


Met 


2t 
n Nm 


Годсплт У 


т 
] a 
j B Griffondaw тег Elladorn 
BLADE DESERT 
QIBARRAN, 


r EC JUNGLE 


iN 


JRAGONWATCH 
1515 


B 
QWhitehearth 


Sele 


: KIRAAN "j 


s 


THAT 
LEDAR 


106 


Arcane Talent. If you're not going to play a magic-using 
class, consider creating a high elf or a human with the 
Magic Initiate feat. Whether you favor damage-dealing 
cantrips or more utilitarian ones, every Aundairian 
should know a little magic. 

Magic Beats Mundane. Why use your hand when you 
could use mage hand? Why strain your muscles tug- 
ging on a bowstring when you could use a wand? 

Show Some Style. Don't settle for common clothes and 
a squalid meal when you could wear glamerweave 
(see chapter 5) and drink the finest wine. If you're a 
fighter, focus on finesse instead of crude strength. And 
never miss an opportunity for a clever quip. 


CITIES AND SITES 


Aundair intersperses pastoral farmlands between 
densely populated cities. 


ARCANIX 
This farming village on Lake Galifar provides food for 
the nearby floating towers of wizardry that serve as 
home to Aundair's Arcane Congress—a cutting-edge 
research facility and the finest school of magic in Khor- 
vaire. The members of the congress oversee the magical 
research conducted in these towers, advise Aundair's 
queen on all things magical, and confer with colleagues 
visiting from other nations. 

Apprentices come from all over Khorvaire to train at 
Arcanix. If you're a wizard, sage, or artificer, you might 
have learned your craft here. 


FAIRHAVEN 

The capital of Aundair is one of the most beautiful 
cities in Eberron. Stunning displays of magical light 
and other arcane wonders enhance the exquisite archi- 
tecture. This is the seat of the University of Wynarn, a 
prestigious institution that draws students from across 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


ARCANIX 


Khorvaire. As a noble, entertainer, or sage, you might 
have your roots in the City of Lights. 


PASSAGE 

Located on the shores of Lake Galifar, the city of 
Passage is the heart of the dragonmarked House Orien. 
Resources include production and maintenance facili- 
ties for the lightning rail and the Orien caravans. If you 
have the Mark of Passage, odds are good you've spent 
time here. 


STORMHOME 
This island city is the seat of House Lyrandar, and 
Queen Aurala allows the house a free rein in govern- 
ing the isle. It is the finest resort and vacation spot in 
Khorvaire. Spies, charlatans, sailors, and house agents 
all have a place in Stormhome. Even though the island 
escaped the devastation wrought during the Last War, it 
remains a hotbed for clandestine activities. 

Lyrandar wizards use magic to continuously alter 
Stormhome's weather, turning the otherwise bleak and 
storm-blasted location into a temperate island getaway. 


AFTERMATH OF THE LAST WAR 


Aundair and Thrane were bitter rivals during the Last 
War. Thrane seized the ancient city of Thaliost during 
the war and holds it to this day. Most of the people of 
Aundair remain furious about the occupation of Thali- 
ost, but the city has become a haven for Aundairians 
who revere the Silver Flame. 

The Eldeen Reaches seceded from Aundair halfway 
through the Last War. The western farmers rebelled 
over high taxes and neglect, allying with the druids of 
the Towering Wood. Aundair was forced to accept the 
sovereignty of the Reaches under the terms of the Treaty 
of Thronehold, but many Aundairians view it as a rene- 
gade nation. 


Extensive use of magic has repaired most of the dam- 
age to the cities of Aundair, but the countryside remains 
scarred by the war, especially along the border with 
Thrane. The Crying Fields are a region of farmlands 
permanently scarred by magic and haunted by restless 
spirits. Aundairians claim their nation is stronger than 
ever, but some worry about the long-term impact of the 
loss of the Eldeen farmlands and the Crying Fields. 

Now, Aundairians debate over differing views of their 
nation's future. Some believe the first focus should be 
reuniting Aundair and the Eldeen Reaches, whether 
through diplomacy or force. Others consider Thaliost 
to be the pressing issue. And still others support Queen 
Aurala's claim to the throne of Galifar. When creating 
an Aundairian, consider whether you have ties to any of 
the affected regions and if this influences your opinion 
of Thranes or druids. 


THE KORRANBERG 


CHRONICLE 


WIZARD WAR 
BREWING AT 
ARCANIX? 


Cee meee weer ө ө ж ө э ө а э ө э ө ө ө ө э ө ө ө ө ө ө э ө ө э э ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө э ө э ж 


Before the war, the Arcane Congress served all Galifar. 
The most promising students from across Khorvaire 
came to study at Arcanix, and students from Khorvaire, 
Cyre, and Aundair worked together to win honor in the 
Trials of the Ninefold Path. Known to students simply 
as the Nine, this contest pits students of the eight tra- 
ditions against one another in a series of arcane chal- 
lenges, along with a ninth bracket for those who have 
yet to select a tradition. Teamwork, independence, mem- 
orization, innovation—the Nine challenges competitors 
on many levels, and the finest wizards of Galifar were 
invariably champions of the Nine. 

Thanks to the Treaty of Thronehold, students of all na- 
tions once again study side by side in the towers of Arca- 
nix. But no treaty or ritual can easily dispel the tensions 
of a century of war. Over the last year we've reported on 
a number of hate crimes in the towers fueled by national- 
ist passions. Optimistic teachers hope that the Nine will 
showcase the diversity that has evolved over the course 
of the past century—highlighting Karrnathi advances in 
necromancy and evocation, Cyran illusions, and more. 
But privately, professors fear that the competitive aspect 
of the Nine will inflame nationalist tension. Some even 
believe that the lives of foreign students could be endan- 
gered should they defeat Aundairian champions. 

Only time will tell if the Nine can bring us together as 
it once did, or if it will drive us further apart. 


BRELAND 


Capital: Wroat 
Hallmarks: Espionage, industry, metalwork, organized 
crime, subterfuge 


In the wake of the Last War, Breland is one of the most 
powerful nations in Khorvaire. Possessing a large popu- 
lation and abundant resources, Breland leads the conti- 
nent in industry. 

The Brelish are known for their pragmatism and in- 
dependence. They lack the discipline of Karrns and the 
faith of the Thranes, but they excel at finding innovative 
solutions to problems. The Brelish also have a talent 
for intrigue and subterfuge. The King's Dark Lanterns 
is one of the finest intelligence agencies in Khorvaire, 
rivaled only by House Phiarlan and the Trust of Zilargo. 
The dark side of these aptitudes is a strong streak of 
cynicism, which allows crime and corruption to flourish 
in Brelish cities and temples. The Sovereign Host is the 
dominant religion of Breland, but in general the Brelish 
aren't as devout as citizens of other nations. 

King Boranel ir'Wynarn rules Breland in conjunction 
with an elected parliament. Boranel is a popular leader 
celebrated for his exploits during the Last War, but his 
children have yet to prove themselves, and a growing 
movement advocates for abandoning royal rule when 
Boranel passes. 


INTERESTING THINGS 
ABOUT BRELAND 


e Sharn is the largest city in Khorvaire. Almost a nation 
in its own right, the City of Towers is a hub for com- 
merce and intrigue. Chapter 3 provides more informa- 
tion on Sharn. 

• The Boromar Clan is the oldest and most powerful 

criminal organization in Breland. The Boromar 

halfling leadership maintains ties to the Talenta 

Plains. Other notable criminal organizations include 

the monsters of Daask and House Tarkanan, an 

alliance of assassins and thieves with aberrant drag- 
onmarks (see chapter 4 for more about these crime 
syndicates). 

Breland's major cities are highly cosmopolitan. Due 

to its proximity to Droaam, Breland's cities include 

more monsters—ogres, orcs, goblins, and even sa- 
huagin, harpies, and gargoyles—than elsewhere in the 

Five Nations. 


BRELISH CHARACTERS 


As you develop a Brelish character or NPC, consider the 
following qualities: 


Slightly Shady. Many Brelish have a loose relationship 
with the law. Even if you're a hero, you might have 
questionable connections or friends in low places. 
Backgrounds such as criminal, spy, or charlatan can 
reflect this tendency, regardless of your class. You 
could also be a folk hero who challenges the laws to 
protect the innocent, or an entertainer who plays in 
every dive in Sharn. 

Innovative and Independent. Find your own path in the 
world; don't simply follow established traditions. As 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


107 


a cleric, you might challenge your church and follow 
your own divine revelations. As a wizard, you could 
search for new techniques or attempt to unravel for- 
gotten secrets. 

Practical. Whether it's about fashion, food, or conver- 
sation, the Brelish tend to be pragmatic. Why spend 
a fortune on a fancy meal when a simple one will do? 
You use whatever tool gets the job done, and you don't 
see a need for unnecessary flair. 


CITIES AND SITES. 


Beyond the magnificence of Sharn, Breland hosts a vast 
spectrum of other wonders. 


ARGONTH 
The floating fortress of Breland, Argonth is one of the 
marvels of the Last War. The product of House Cannith 
ingenuity and Brelish industrial might, Argonth is the 
largest engine of war ever built. This moving city is 
home to thousands of soldiers. Currently Argonth pa- 
trols the edge of the Mournland, but if tensions rise with 
Droaam or Darguun, the fortress can be deployed to 
reinforce a threatened border. 

Asa Brelish soldier or spy, you might have served 
aboard Argonth for a time before some incident led you 
to become an adventurer. 


BLACK PIT 
A massive chasm in the Blackcap Mountains, the Black 
Pit is over a mile across and descends beyond the lim- 
its of sight. It’s said to be an entrance to the abyss of 
Khyber, and foul creatures live among the caves that 
honeycomb its walls. A nearby village—also called Black 
Pit—provides a haven for deserters and other criminals 
as well as a thriving black market. 

If you have shady friends, you've likely heard of Black 
Pit's reputation as a place to quietly "disappear." Sim- 


ilarly, if you have ties to the King's Dark Lanterns, you 
know where to find some of Breland's worst criminals. 


NEW CYRE 

What began as a refugee camp has evolved into a strug- 
gling town hosting thousands of Cyran refugees. Prince 
Oargev holds court in New Cyre, considering himself a 
king in exile. Though resources are scarce, New Cyre 
remains a symbol of hope for many refugees. It's also a 
last stop for those determined to explore the Mournland. 


SHARN 

The City of Towers is described in chapter 3. Law and 
chaos dance on a knife's edge here, one never truly gain- 
ing advantage over the other. 


VATHIROND 

Throughout the Last War, this town was beset by armies 
from Thrane, Cyre, and Karrnath. Vathirond's residents 
still hold grudges against these close foreign neighbors. 
However, their attention of late has been focused on the 
Mournland. Nameless horrors have begun to slip into 
Breland from the east at an alarming rate, and Brelish 
soldiers and adventurers stationed in Vathirond are usu- 
ally the first to contend with these threats. 


WROAT 

Built on both sides of the Howling River at a point 
where the river widens, the ancestral seat of the rulers 
of Breland seduces visitors with its tree-lined avenues, 
elegant drawbridges, cleanliness, and laid-back atmo- 
sphere. Perched on a rocky island in the middle of the 
river, surrounded by military docks and barracks, is 
Brokenblade Castle, the king's stern fortress. 

In contrast to its welcoming countenance, Wroat casts 
dark shadows, and much goes on quietly behind closed 
doors. The absence of beggars and riffraff in the streets 
might also raise suspicion that Wroat is putting on ap- 


ARGONTH 


inp 


——— 


HE г 


SHARK INQUISITIVE 


WINTER PALACE 
UNDER SIEGE 


Although untouched by a century of war, the Winter 
Palace suffered an attack from an unexpected quarter: the 
people of Breland. The so-called Swords of Liberty have 
taken credit for a daring raid that left the east wing of the 
palace in flames. No members of the Brelish royal family 
were in attendance during the attack. 

The Swords of Liberty call for the violent overthrow 
of the Wynarn monarchy, demanding that all power be 
invested in the Brelish parliament. Their manifesto draws 
on the speeches of Lord Ruken ir'Clarn, but Lord Ruken 
has condemned their action. “No victory is possible when 
Brelish fight Brelish," he said in Wroat. "But I hope King 
Boranel can see that the time for change is upon us and 
help us navigate a peaceful transition of power before any 
more innocents are hurt." 


— Р se estrone ia dat — —( 


pearances. The King's Dark Lanterns are ever vigilant 
here, and newcomers who aim to misbehave tend to dis- 
appear quickly and without so much as a whisper. 


AFTERMATH OF THE LAST WAR 


For Breland, the Last War was an ever-shifting tangle 
of enemies and alliances. Breland fought Aundair, Cyre, 
Karrnath, and Thrane at various points of the war, as 
well as clashing with Darguun and Droaam. These con- 
flicts caused many Brelish to embrace a cynical view of 
the world, a sense that no one can be fully trusted and 
that people need to look out for themselves. As a Brelish 
character, you could have an axe to grind against any 

of the other nations. This is balanced against a strong 
belief in humanoid rights and dignity, convictions that 
motivated the Brelish to shelter more Cyran refugees 
than any other nation. 

The major cities of Breland host significant popula- 
tions of refugees, both Cyrans and Brelish from villages 
lost in the war. This has increased the overall level of 
poverty and desperation and contributed to an increase 
in crime. The southern cities—including Wroat and 
Sharn— suffered relatively little damage in the war, but 
northern Breland was hard hit. The city of Vathirond 
is still repairing the damage from Thrane attacks, and 
many northern villages are either recovering or have 
simply been abandoned. 

Despite these struggles, the Brelish maintain a pos- 
itive view of their future. The heart of Breland is as 
strong as it ever was, and the citizens believe that had 
the war continued, Breland would have triumphed. 


CvRE (THE MOURNLAND) 


Capital: Metrol (destroyed) 

Previous Hallmarks: Art, artifice, jewelry, music, ora- 
tory, philosophy 

Current Hallmarks: Destruction, ruins 


Destroyed at the end of the Last War, Cyre now exists 
only in the hearts of the refugees scattered across 
Khorvaire. 

Before the war, Cyre was the seat of the kings and 
queens of Galifar. The wealth of the kingdom flowed 
through Cyre, and it was a nexus for commerce and 
culture. By tradition, Cyre's Princess Mishann had the 
rightful claim to the throne of Galifar. Cyrans take pride 
that they alone were in the right in the Last War, but 
they unquestionably lost more to the war than any other 
nation. As a Cyran, you stand on the moral high ground, 
but that may offer little comfort. 

Cyrans like to say that their culture represented the 
best that Galifar had to offer, which is to say a little bit of 
everything. Cyrans value diversity and versatility, both 
in talents and thought. Cyre couldn't match Karrnath in 
martial discipline or Aundair in the arcane arts, but the 
flexibility of its forces reflected the nation's ideals. 

Although the Sovereign Host was the dominant faith 
of Cyre, the Silver Flame had a significant following. 
Many survivors question their faith in the wake of the 
Mourning, but some believe that their anguish at the 
loss of their homeland is a divine trial, prompting them 
to cling to their faith more than ever. 

Queen Dannel ir Wynarn was in Metrol on the Day 
of Mourning and is presumed dead. Her son, Prince 
Oargev ir'Wynarn, holds court in New Cyre, a massive 
refugee camp set up in Breland. Some refugees support 
Oargev and the dream of a restored Cyre, while others 
prefer to focus on the future instead of trying to reclaim 
the past. As a Cyran, you should decide whether you 
hold tight to your national identity, or instead consider 
yourself to be an expatriate without a nation. 


INTERESTING THINGS ABOUT CYRE 
(THE MOURNLAND) 


* Cyre was the ancestral seat of the dragonmarked 
House Cannith, the house of Making. The house main- 
tained arcane workshops across Cyre. Who knows 
what treasures wait in Cannith vaults for those who 
brave the dangers of the Mournland? 

• While not as flamboyant as Aundairians, Cyran 
fashions involved bright colors and glamerweave 
(see chapter 5). Some Cyrans have made a point of 
continuing this custom. Others wear clothing cut in 
the Cyran style, but entirely in black; this has become 
known as Mourning wear. 

* Stories say communities of warforged live in the 
Mournland, including the insurgent called the Lord 
of Blades. 


CYRAN CHARACTERS. 


When creating a character from Cyre, consider the fol- 
lowing questions: 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 109 


IIO 


What Have You Lost? Did you lose wealth or sta- 
tus? Did you have family or loved ones killed in the 
Mourning? Did you lose something you could one day 
recoverfrom the Mournland—arcane research, an 
heirloom artifact, or a precious family relic? Consider 
the impact the disaster has on your background. As a 
Cyran noble or soldier, your estates have been lost and 
your army scattered, but you still have the respect of 
your comrades or peers. 

What Do You Hold Onto? Do you have a trinket that 
embodies Cyre for you? Is your wand or weapon an 
heirloom of your family? As an entertainer or guild ar- 
tisan, do you preserve a particular Cyran tradition? 

What Drives You? Are you determined to solve the mys- 
tery of the Mourning? Do you want to help other ref- 
ugees, or are you concerned only with your personal 
survival? Is there something you want to recover from 
the Mournland, or would you prefer to never set foot in 
Cyre again? Do you hold a grudge against the nations 
that fought against Cyre in the war, or are you solely 
concerned with the future? 


CITIES AND SITES 


Cyre was devastated by the Mourning. Its ruins have 
become grim reminders of the folly of war. Unknown 
threats both magical and monstrous haunt the Mourn- 
land. For more about the Mournland as it stands now, 
see chapter 4. 


ESTON 

Once the seat of House Cannith, this was a place of 
wonders—a city where “magic comes to life.” Marvels 
of the city included the Clockwork Menagerie, showcas- 
ing the golems and homunculi made by generations of 
artificers; production facilities that housed three cre- 
ation forges (see chapter 5), and the miraculous Steel 
Gardens, an early breakthrough that paved the way for 
the living warforged. If you're an artificer or have ties to 
House Cannith, you might have roots in Eston. 


METROL 

Once the capital of Galifar, Metrol was known as the 
Rising City, for many of its buildings stood atop soar- 
ing columns of rock that dared to scrape the heavens. 
The Cathedral of the Sovereign Host was the center 
for followers of that faith. The Vault served as the mint 
and treasury of Galifar, containing cultural treasures 
deemed too valuable to be displayed; salvagers dream 
of finding this “golden palace.” Floating gardens orbited 
the towering Royal Vermishard. Now lost, the beauty of 
Metrol lives only in Cyran memory. 


SEASIDE 

A coastal town in southern Cyre, Seaside was a pop- 
ular vacation spot even during the war. While not as 
celebrated a destination as Stormhome in Aundair, 
the memory of Seaside has become an iconic image of 
peace and tranquility for the people of Cyre. 


AFTERMATH OF THE LAST WAR 


No nation won the Last War, but Cyre unquestionably 
lost it. Other nations are recovering from the conflict, 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


but Cyre is gone. The lands not destroyed in the Mourn- 
ing were lost decades earlier to Darguun and Valenar. 
Cyrans who survived the war must now carve out a new 
destiny in the lands of their enemies or in foreign na- 
tions beyond what was once the Kingdom of Galifar. 

In creating a Cyran character, first determine how you 
survived the Mourning. Were you outside Cyre when it 
occurred, or did you somehow escape the destruction? 
Where did you take shelter? Breland has taken in refu- 
gees and created refugee camps. Thrane also accepted 
refugees but has worked to disperse and integrate them 
into the general population. Are you grateful or bitter? 
Do you have family or friends in refugee camps, or are 
you a lone survivor? Other Cyrans sought opportunities 
on the frontiers, settling in the jungles of Q'barra or 
seeking a new life in the distant land of Xen'drik. 

Many Cyran survivors are soldiers, veterans stationed 
on the front lines when the Mourning occurred. If mul- 
tiple members of your party are Cyrans, you might have 
served together during the Last War. Because Cyrans 
are so widely dispersed, you can encounter former com- 
rades or friends anywhere in Khorvaire. 

Since Cyrans lost their lands, the distinctions be- 
tween peasant and aristocrat have become moot. Even 
with a criminal background, you might have been a 
viscount in Cyre; your background reflects your cur- 
rent standing and the resources you can call upon in 
the present. 


DARGUUN 


Capital: Rhukaan Draal 
Hallmarks: Dungeons, goblinoid mercenaries, ruins 


Goblins and their kin have always been part of Khor- 
vaire. Their ancient empire spread across the lands now 
held by other nations, and goblin foundations still stand 
underneath many human cities. This empire collapsed 
into savagery, and when humans arrived from Sarlona, 
they drove the goblins from their ancestral lands. Thus, 
goblins have long been a disenfranchised people, liv- 
ing in the shadows of newer nations or in wild lands 
shunned by humans. 

The land now called Darguun was once part of Cyre. 
The hobgoblin clans known as the Ghaal'dar were based 
in the Seawall Mountains, but during the war, the de- 
mand for mercenaries drew an ever-increasing number 
of goblins out of the mountains to fight for Cyre and Bre- 
land. Late in the war, a brilliant hobgoblin named Lhesh 
Haruuc Sharaat'kor recognized that the goblins had be- 
come the dominant military power in the region. Uniting 
the Ghaal'dar under his banner, Haruuc seized the terri- 
tory he was supposed to protect. The Five Nations were 
unprepared, and Breland quickly negotiated an alliance 
with Haruuc to secure the border. Cyre fought the gob- 
lins until the Day of Mourning, but the majority of dele- 
gates involved in forging the Treaty of Thronehold chose 
to recognize the new nation of Darguun to ensure peace. 

Darguun is a young and volatile nation, ruled by Lhesh 
Haruuc Sharaat'kor. Haruuc remains a brilliant strat- 
egist and tactician, but many wonder whether he can 
maintain the web of alliances that hold the Ghaal'dar to- 
gether, and whether he and his people will be content to 


abide by the terms of the treaty. Other goblins still hid- 

den in the mountains—the enigmatic Heirs of Dhakaan 
(see chapter 4)—could pose a threat both to the goblins 
and the rest of Khorvaire. 

Traditionally, the Ghaal'dar worshiped a form of the 
Dark Six. House Deneith introduced the Sovereign 
Host to the region, and some goblins have embraced 
this faith, especially the gods Dol Dorn, Dol Arrah, 
and Balinor. 


INTERESTING THINGS 
ABOUT DARGUUN 


* House Deneith has a strong presence in Darguun. No 
one will employ goblin armies in the wake of Haruuc's 
betrayal, but security forces value smaller units of gob- 
linoid mercenaries for their ferocity and skills. 

• Darguun is a frontier nation. Although recognized by 
the Treaty of Thronehold, it doesn't abide by the com- 
mon laws of the treaty nations. Law enforcement is 
unpredictable, and acts considered criminal in other 
nations are part oflife in Darguun. 

• A number of bugbear-dominated clans known as 

the Marguul inhabit southern Darguun. Some of the 

Marguul refuse to acknowledge the authority of the 

Ghaal'dar hobgoblins; these clans are especially dan- 

gerous and violent. 

Lhesh Haruuc united the Ghaal'dar clans and seized 

control of Darguun nearly three decades ago. If you 

are a non-goblin from this land, you may have been 
born in captivity. Were you forced into bondage, or 

did you adopt Darguul customs and earn a place in 

their society? 


DHAKAANI RUINS IN THE 


SEAWALL MOUNTAINS 


DARGUUL CHARACTERS 


Darguun is a logical point of origin for goblin, hobgoblin, 
or bugbear characters. When creating a Ghaal'dar char- 
acter from Darguun, consider the following: 


Constant Struggle. Among the Ghaal'dar, you must 
constantly prove your strength and skill to gain and 
hold the respect of your kin. Ghaal'dar rarely kill in a 
casual battle; you might fight to prove a point but kill 
only when you must. 

Loyal to Your Clan. Challenge your peers as you like 
in times of peace, but when blades unsheathe for 
war, you stand by your clan—or those allies you have 
bonded with—until death. This loyalty doesn't extend 
to warriors of other Ghaal'dar clans. 

Muut and Atcha. Your ancestors once forged an empire 
even greater than Galifar. Perhaps you believe that 
your people can reclaim this lost glory. The Dhakaani 
were renowned for their martial skill and their disci- 
pline. Muut roughly translates to "duty"—your duty to 
your empire, your clan, and your commander. Muut 
is expected; if you have no muut, you have no place in 
battle. Atcha corresponds to "honor," especially your 
personal honor gained by virtuous deeds that tran- 
scend the expectations of muut. 


CITIES AND SITES 


Thirty years ago, this region was part of Cyre. The gob- 
lins converted towns and villages and raised new set- 
tlements, but many ruins and abandoned farms remain. 
The region is also peppered with dungeons dating back 
to the ancient goblin empire; these can be found in the 
vast Torlaac Moor or beneath the Khraal rainforest. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER m 


II2 


THE GATHERING STONE 

This fortress enclave of House Deneith serves as a 
staging area for goblin mercenaries who wish to work 
for the house. It provides a stable and secure haven for 
travelers passing through the region, provided you're on 
good terms with House Deneith. 


GORGONHORN 

This fortified village lies close to the Mournland. Once it 
maintained the front line against Cyre. Now, the hobgob- 
lins stationed here protect their people from the horrors 
that crawl out of the warped realm. If you're a goblin 
soldier, you might have served in Gorgonhorn. It's also a 
base for the scavengers and salvagers who venture into 
the Mournland. 


LYRENTON 

Once a thriving Cyran town, Lyrenton is aruin on 

the very edge of the Mournland. It’s shunned by the 
Ghaal'dar, who believe it to be cursed. At night, a terri- 
ble wailing that echoes among the ruins can be heard 
for miles across the plains. 


RHUKAAN DRAAL 

The largest city in Darguun serves as the seat of Lhesh 
Haruuc Sharaat'kor. As the hub for trade, travel, and 
diplomacy, it also a provides a haven for fugitives and 
smugglers. Lhesh Haruuc dwells in a fortress known as 
Khaar Mbar'ost, the Red House. 


WYVERNSKULL 

If you're a Ghaal'dar sailor or guild artisan, this small 
city—Darguun's primary seaport—could be your home. 
The goblinoids who live here are a sociable, rowdy lot 
who are also, by and large, friendly toward strangers. 


AFTERMATH OF THE LAST WAR 


Darguun was born in the Last War, and the scars of its 
birth are still raw. Most of the Cyran population fled the 
goblin uprising, and those who remained were killed 

or enslaved. As a result, many burnt-out farms and 
abandoned villages have stood empty for decades. The 
broken paths of the lightning rail make travel into the in- 
terior difficult, and only the largest cities offer the basic 
services common elsewhere in the treaty nations. 

Any significant settlement is likely the domain of a 
single Ghaal'dar clan. While these clans give their fealty 
to Lhesh Haruuc, every clan lord holds absolute power 
in their town. Some clans are friendly to outsiders and 
welcome commerce. Others despise non-goblins. Lhesh 
Haruuc has abolished slavery in Rhukaan Draal, but 
some of clan lords continue this practice. 

Overall, Darguun is a nation that is still finding its 
identity—a kingdom that seeks to be more than a seized 
territory. The goblins carry the legacy of a mighty em- 
pire and stand in the shadow of the nations around 
them. Haruuc wants to draw out the best in his people, 
to harness their strengths and achieve their potential. 
The rest of Khorvaire waits to see if the Ghaal'dar have 
the will to remain a nation, and if Darguun can survive 
when Haruuc passes away. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


DEMON WASTES 


Capital: None 
Hallmarks: Fiends, pestilence 


Rivers oflava cut across plains of black sand and vol- 
canic glass. The only vegetation consists of blood-red 
moss and a thick layer of shimmering slime. A jagged 
rock formation might be a piece of an ancient wall, if you 
stretch your imagination. 

Tens of thousands of years ago, fiends ruled Khor- 
vaire. The Demon Wastes held the seat of power for 
some of the mightiest archfiends, home to cities of 
rakshasas and demons. Most of these foul entities per- 
ished or fled long ago, but a few still linger in this place 
even as new ones crawl up from the depths of Khyber. 
A handful of primordial ruins sustained by dark magic 
dot the bleak landscape—ruins that may still be home to 
fiends and their treasures. 

The Stone Cage, Shadowcrags, and Icehorn Moun- 
tains separate the Demon Wastesfrom the Eldeen 
Reaches. A series of canyons known as the Labyrinth 
further separate the Demon Wastes from the rest of 
Khorvaire. Due to ancient warding magic, any creature 
that wishes to leave must do so through the Labyrinth. 
These passes are guarded by the Ghaash'kala, tribes of 
orcs sworn to contain the evils of the Wastes. Beyond 
the Labyrinth, the mortal inhabitants of the Demon 
Wastes include a brutal people known as the Carrion 
Tribes. Each tribe is devoted to an archfiend, and they 
engage in endless battles against the Ghaash'kala and 
the other Carrion Tribes. 

If you're creating a character from the Demon Wastes, 
you're likely associated with either the Ghaash'kala or 
one of the Carrion Tribes. 


INTERESTING THINGS ABOUT THE 
DEMON WASTES 


* A variety of fiends inhabit the Wastes, including devils, 
rakshasas, and demons. These creatures are spawned 
by Khyber, not the Outer Planes. 

• The Demon Wastes are riddled with portals to abyssal 
demiplanes, unearthly realms populated by fiends and 
other horrors. These inner realms include vast and 
twisted forests, living oceans, realms of rusted iron, 
and stranger places. 


GHAASH'KALA CHARACTERS 


The Ghaash'kala are primarily orcs, but their numbers 
include a few half-orcs and members of other races. 
They devote their lives to guarding the Labyrinth and 
containing the evils of the Wastes. When creating a 
Ghaash'kala character, consider the following: 


The Binding Flame. The Ghaash'kala worship Kalok 
Shash, the "Binding Flame." Fundamentally the same 
religion as the Silver Flame, Kalok Shash is a harsh 
faith that requires all able-bodied folk to fight in the 
endless war against the forces of darkness. 

Sacred Champions. As a Ghaash'kala, you are a cham- 
pion of the Binding Flame. A paladin sworn to the 
Oath of Vengeance, a barbarian on the Path of the 


Zealot (found in Xanathar's Guide to Everything), and 
a cleric of the Light or War domain all represent a log- 
ical path for a Ghaash'kala character. Outlander and 
hermit are appropriate backgrounds, reflecting your 
harsh upbringing or religious devotion. / D N 


CARRION TRIBES e, 


The Carrion Tribes descend from explorers and refu- 
gees twisted by the evil in this realm. Explorers usually 
encounter these savage folk as enemies, but occasion- 
ally a hero emerges from the shadows. When creating 
a character from the Carrion Tribes, consider the 
following: 


Sworn to an Overlord. Your tribe is devoted to an arch- 
fiend. This can serve as the roots of a warlock's pact 
or the inspiration for a barbarian's rage. Are you still 
loyal to your dark lord, or did you break free from its 
influence? Either way, work with the DM to develop 
the details of your overlord. 

Child of a Savage Land. You were born into a lawless 
realm where violence was the only constant. How 
have you adapted to life on the other side of the Laby- 
rinth? Are you superstitious, refusing to adapt to this 
new world, or are you doing your best to learn the 
ways of this strange realm? 4 

Why Did You Leave? You began your life as a servant b 
of darkness. Have you embraced the light? Are you Ў 
fighting the servants of your former master? Ог are 
you a pawn in a conflict between overlords? You might 
serve an evil force, but the cultists you fight serve even 
darker powers. 


CITIES AND SITES 


Settlements are few and far between in the Demon 
Wastes. The Carrion Tribes are semi-nomadic, assem- 
bling camps in the crumbling ruins of long-forgotten 
cities built by demons in the first days of the world. 


ASHTAKALA 

Legends say that a single city of fiends remains intact. 
Stories describe Ashtakala as a city of basalt and brass, 
filled with rakshasas and demons. If it exists, it is 
shielded by powerful wards. Who knows what ancient 
artifacts and treasures it might contain? 


BLOOD CRESCENT 

House Tharashk established this tiny port at the end 

of the Last War. The house hopes to gain access to the 
dragonshard deposits buried in the Wastes. To date, it 
has survived the Carrion Tribes and the malefic horrors 
of the Wastes, but few believe it will last. 


DESOLATE 

Known at various times as Greenholt, Newholt, or 
Kymar's Folly, this outpost has served as an Aundair- 
ian settlement, a Thrane hermitage, and an outpost 

of House Lyrandar. It's fallen three times, and no one 
knows exactly how. Each time, its inhabitants have 
vanished in a single night, leaving all their possessions 
behind. Today it's known as Desolate, and it awaits the 
next band of settlers willing to stake their claim. 


114 


DROAAM 


Capital: The Great Crag 
Hallmarks: Byeshk ore, monstrous mercenaries 


Droaam is a nation of monsters ruled by the Daughters 
of Sora Kell. Each of these three hags is a legend in her 
own right, the subjects of tales used to frighten children. 
Eleven years ago, they seized the lands west of the Gray- 
wall Mountains and founded the nation of Droaam. 

Although Breland laid claim to these barren lands, 
Galifar had never tamed this wild region. Gnolls, orcs, 
and goblins commonly sought haven here, as well as 
ogres, trolls, harpies, minotaurs, medusas, tieflings, 
changelings, lycanthropes, and other races unwelcome 
in civilized lands. In the past, these creatures fought one 
another more often than they raided human settlements. 
Under the leadership of the Daughters of Sora Kell, they 
have new purpose. The Daughters use an army of ogres 
and war trolls to maintain order. 

To date, the other nations of Khorvaire have refused 
to recognize Droaam, and the region was not acknowl- 
edged in the Treaty of Thronehold. Most people believe 
that the monstrous nation can't last—that even the 
Daughters can't hold the disparate alliance together— 
but Droaam is currently thriving and stronger than ever. 

Droaam works closely with House Tharashk, selling 
the services of monstrous soldiers and laborers and 
byeshk ore, a form of metal with magical properties. 
Beyond that, it's a still-expanding frontier nation. The 
cities of Graywall and Great Crag grow larger and more 
organized every day, and the rest of Khorvaire is uneasy 
with the potential power of a fully realized Droaam. 

The monsters that inhabit Droaam retain their racial 
subcultures. Most worship the Dark Six, but other reli- 
gious traditions flourish as well. 


INTERESTING THINGS 
ABOUT DROAAM 


• Droaam uses the supernatural abilities of its citizens 
as tools, just as other nations of Khorvaire use magic. 
The Daughters of Sora Kell keep their people fed with 
troll sausage and use harpy’s song to quell brawls. 
When dealing with monsters in Droaam, consider the 
practical applications of their abilities. 

* When the Church of the Silver Flame purged lycan- 
thropy from the Five Nations, a number of lycan- 
thropes escaped into the region that later become 
Droaam. The Dark Pack alliance of lycanthropes, 
worgs, and other supernatural predators hunts south- 
ern Droaam. 


DROAAMITE CHARACTERS 


Minotaurs, orcs, gnolls, tieflings, changelings, and other 
monstrous species all have a place in Droaam. Consider 
these questions when making a Droaamite character: 


What Makes You Different? The people of Droaam 
aren't just humans with horns or green skin. Think 
about the unique aspects of your people and what 
makes you different from humanity, both physically 
and culturally. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


What Are Your Ambitions? Citizens of Droaam are 
proud of their nation. You know that the rest of Khor- 
vaire considers you a monster. Do you intend to prove 
that you and your kind are capable of deeds humanity 
can't imagine? Or are you driven solely by your per- 
sonal desires, or the goals of your family or warlord? 

How Does Your Background Shape You? The diverse 
creatures of Droaam could include a kobold city-savvy 
rogue urchin, an orc outlander barbarian with little 
knowledge of the outside world, or a tiefling warlock 
sage versed in Arcana and History. 


CITIES AND SITES 


In the past, particular creatures dominated the commu- 
nities of Droaam. The harpy flights lived in mountain 
peaks, while the medusas remained isolated in the cita- 
del of Cazhaak Draal. Under the rule of the Daughters of 
Sora Kell, the Droaamites are creating cities where all 
manner of creatures live and work together. 


GRAYWALL 

Known as the Gateway to Droaam, this city sits on the 
border to Breland. Though dominated by monsters 
and ruled by a mind flayer, Graywall is both a center 
for trade and a haven for deserters and fugitives. The 
dragonmarked houses maintain outposts in Graywall, 
and House Tharashk governs the Calabas, the foreign 
quarter inhabited by humans and other people from 
elsewhere in Khorvaire. 


THE GREAT CRAG 

Built atop ancient goblin ruins, the Crag is the seat of 
the Daughters of Sora Kell. Few outsiders have seen 
this thriving city of monsters. Of the dragonmarked 
houses, only House Tharashk has a presence in the city. 


THE VENOMOUS DEMESNE 

This hidden city is ruled by families of tiefling warlocks 
who wield powerful magic and craft dark wonders. If 
you're playing a tiefling or a warlock, you could have ties 
to the Venomous Demesne. 


AFTERMATH OF THE LAST WAR 


Droaam is barely a decade old. The treaty nations refuse 
to acknowledge its sovereignty; according to the terms 
of the Treaty of Thronehold, it’s a rebellious territory 
of Breland. As a renegade nation, it is a haven for war 
criminals and deserters, as well as brigands and mages 
pursuing forbidden paths of magic. The monsters of 
Droaam have no particular love for these bandits and 
fugitives, and outlanders have to watch their step. 
Tensions remain high on the border with Breland, re- 
sulting in constant skirmishes and raids. Deeper within 
the nation, the Daughters of Sora Kell build their power. 
Graywall and the Great Crag are constantly expanding, 
with goblins and ogres laboring through the night. War- 
lords drill their troops, forcing all manner of monsters 
to work together. A predatory aspect permeates life in 
Droaam but also a sense of excitement, the belief that 
the Daughters will lead Droaam to greatness. For centu- 
ries the people of Droaam have hidden in the shadows; 
now they stand in the light, and they are proud. 


717 


THE KORRANBERG 


CHRONICLE 


DESCENT INTO 
DROAAM: MY 
TRAIL TO TERROR 


«+++» жж ж ж ө ө ө ж ө ө э ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө э ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө | n ө | n 


We're all going to die. That thought echoed through my 
mind as the wagon carried us toward the Great Crag. 
The diplomats around me intended to speak with the 
Daughters of Sora Kell. All I could think about was the 
stories my grandmother used to tell me. Sora Maenya can 
crush a giant with her bare hands. She can eat the whole creature 
and still be hungry. If you're bad, she'll come in the night and 
carry you away. She'll make a lantern of your skull and torment 
you until the end of time. And she's the least frightening 
member of the Daughters of Sora Kell! 

When I could set aside my sheer terror, I was learning 
a great deal about this strange nation. The Daughters in- 
vested power in warlords, each of whom rules a territory 
in their name. It's sort of like Karrnath, except each of 
the warlords of Droaam is a horrifying monster. We were 
traveling through the territory of the Prince of Bones, 
an ancient troll said to be too evil to die. We'd already 
passed through the domain of Queen Sheska the me- 
dusa, where even the trees are turning to stone. Harpies. 
Gargoyles. There's even a king of the kobolds. Our car- 
avan was being protected by gnolls. Not protected from 
gnolls, protected by gnolls. I thought things couldn't get 
any stranger. I couldn't have been more wrong. ... 


ELDEEN REACHES 


Capital: Greenheart 
Hallmarks: Agriculture, animal husbandry, 
druidic magic 


A stretch of fertile farmlands borders a vast, untamed 
forest. Farmers tend the fields, while tribes of shifters 
and circles of druids and rangers roam through the 
woods. These are the Eldeen Reaches. 

Druids and shifters dwelled in the Towering Wood 
for thousands of years, but the eastern farmlands of the 
Reaches were part of Aundair until the Last War. The 
lords of Aundair focused their resources on the war ef- 
fort, ignoring banditry and other problems faced by the 
farmers of the east. The Wardens of the Wood—largest 
of the druid sects—came to the aid of these farmers. 
Fifty years ago, the people of eastern Aundair seceded 
and formed the Eldeen Reaches. The Treaty of Throne- 
hold recognized the Reaches as a nation, but its citizens 
fear Aundair will try to reclaim the region. 

Druidic magic is central to life in the Eldeen Reaches. 
Its people seek to live in harmony with the natural 
world, and each community has a druidic advisor 
who helps with planning and planting. The Towering 
Wood is also home to tribes of shifters, who maintain 


a nomadic existence. The Wardens of the Wood uphold 
order and settle disputes, and the Great Druid Oal- 
ian—an awakened greatpine—is the spiritual leader of 
the Reaches. 


INTERESTING THINGS ABOUT THE 


* The Towering Wood is vast and untamed. The 
Wardens of the Wood seek to protect travelers, but 
swathes of forest remain entirely untouched by human 
or shifter. Such areas could hold giant beasts never 
seen in the outside world, or relics from a previous 
age—artifacts or ruins created by demons or the terri- 
fying daelkyr. 

* The fey have a strong presence in the Towering Wood. 
Even outside the fey stronghold of the Twilight De- 
mesne, manifest zones tied to Thelanis (see chapter 4) 
allow passage between worlds. The Eldeen Reaches 
are a logical origin for a character with ties to the fey. 

* Druidic magic is a vital tool in the Eldeen Reaches. 
Residents use animal messengers to carry commu- 
nications between villages, and beasts perform vital 
services. Goodberry wine takes the place of House 
Vadalis healing. Communities include awakened ani- 
mals and plants as members. 


ELDEEN CHARACTERS 


When creating an Eldeen character or NPC, consider 
the following: 


Farm or Forest? Did you grow up on one of the farms of 
the eastern Reaches, or did you spend your childhood 
in the Towering Wood? Are you comfortable in build- 
ings, or do you prefer the open air? As a child of the 
forest, you might take the outlander background, or 
perhaps you became a folk hero by defending farmers 
from bandits and beasts. 

Natural Magic. Druidic traditions play an important 
role in Eldeen society. If you're a druid or ranger, are 
you a stoic Warden of the Wood or a grim Child of 
Winter? Even if you're not a spellcaster, the Magic Ini- 
tiate feat can provide you with a few spells to reflect a 
basic initiation into the druidic mysteries. 

A Land with No Lords. The Reachers are fiercely inde- 
pendent. They broke with Aundair, and they bow to 
no monarch. The folk of the Reaches value talent over 
titles. The Eldeen people respect the guidance of the 
druids, but they all work together to solve their prob- 
lems; no one gives orders to a Reacher. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


I15 


CITIES AND SITES 
Most people of the Eldeen Reaches live in villages and 
on farms. Some folk in the Towering Wood make their 


homes in the vast trees, while others are wanderers. 


THE GLOAMING 

This region of the Towering Wood has strong ties to the 
sinister Plane of Mabar (see chapter 4). It's charged with 
negative energy, and undead and other malevolent crea- 
tures lurk in its shadows. 


GREENHEART 

The grove of the Archdruid Oalian, the awakened great- 
pine, is a place of great primal power. The Wardens 

of the Wood are based around Greenheart, but all the 
druid circles of the Eldeen Reaches send emissaries 

to Greenheart when they have important matters 

to discuss. 


THE TWILIGHT DEMESNE 

Located within the Towering Wood, the Twilight De- 
mesne has close ties to the Faerie Court of Thelanis 
(see chapter 4). Fey abound in this forest, and those who 


wander within may stumble upon the City of Rose and 
Thorn, the domain of a powerful archfey called the King 
of Summer. If you're playing a character with ties to the 
fey, the Twilight Demesne could be your home. 


VARNA 

The largest city in the Reaches serves as the gateway 
for commerce with the world beyond. Reacher mer- 
chants come from far and wide to sell their goods in the 
markets of Varna. All the dragonmarked houses have 
outposts in Varna, but as the ancestral seat of House 
Vadalis it houses their largest enclave. 


AFTERMATH OF THE LAST WAR 


The farmers of the eastern Eldeen seceded from Aun- 
dair during the Last War, and tensions between the two 
nations remain high. Most Reachers believe it's only a 
matter of time until Aundair tries to reclaim the region, 
and every village has a militia ready to serve. 

The people of the Reaches value hospitality and re- 
gard all people as equals, but the fear of Aundairian 
aggression can cause Reachers to treat foreigners with 
suspicion or hostility. 


PLANAR OBSERVATORY IN 


THE ELOEEN REACHES 


KARRNATH 


Capital: Korth 
Hallmarks: Ale, dairy, glass, livestock, lumber, martial 
discipline, paper, textiles, undead 


In a nation of storms and long winters, the grim and 
stoic Karrns are accustomed to enduring hardship with- 
out complaint. 

First and foremost, Karrnath is knownfor its military 
tradition. Strength, strategy, and discipline are the core 
values of Karrnath. Karrnath's soldiers might be the 
finest in Khorvaire, but they lack the magical support 
of Aundair or Thrane, which evened the odds during 
the Last War. Nonetheless, Karrns are proud of their 
martial history, and most are convinced that they would 
have eventually won the Last War. 

Karrnath suffered a series of severe food shortages 
and plagues early in the Last War. As a result, the king 
embraced the Blood of Vol as the national religion. The 
priests of this faith bolstered Karrnath's forces with un- 
dead. The current king, Kaius ir'Wynarn III, broke ties 
with the Blood of Vol and has stopped creating new un- 
dead, but Karrnath still has a significant number of skel- 
etons and zombies in service. Many Karrns still believe 
in the Blood of Vol and approve of the use of undead, but 
just as many feel that this practice disgraces Karrnath's 
proud military history and that the necromancers might 
have been responsible for the famines and plagues. 


INTERESTING THINGS 
ABOUT KARRNATH 


» Rekkenmark Academy is the premier military insti- 
tute in Khorvaire; prior to the Last War, all of Galifar's 
officers trained at Rekkenmark. 

• The Sovereign Host has regained its place as the 
dominant religion of Karrnath, but the Blood of Vol 
retains a strong following. Communities that practice 
the faith still use skeletons and zombies as guards 
or laborers. 

* Thelaws of Karrnath are harsher than those in other 
treaty nations, approaching a state of martial law. 


KARRNATHI CHARACTERS 


Karrns are somber folk and disapprove бй ёхкгауадапсе 
or excessive shows of emotion. As you develop a Кагг- 
nathi character or NPC, consider the following: 


Military Service. Karrns have a strong tradition of 
military service, making soldier or sailor appropriate 
backgrounds for any character. Criminals and char- 
latans have a difficult time evading the harsh laws of 
Karrnath. The Martial Adept feat can give a character 
a strong sense of military experience. 

Martial Tradition. Karrnathi tradition emphasizes 
teamwork, focus, and force, and melee warriors 
prefer heavy armor and weapons. Fighters favor the 
Champion and Battle Master martial archetypes, and 
Karrnathi wizards choose the School of Evocation or 
Necromancy as their arcane tradition. 

The Dead. Undead soldiers have served in Karrnath's 
armies for decades. How do you feel about the 


——Àni 


THE KORRANBERG 


CHRONICLE 


IN THE THRALL 
OFTHE — — 
VAMPIRE KING 


++++» озо жж o] ө |] ө э ө ө |) ө |] ө э э ө ө э э ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө | ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө | n 


Kaius ir'Wynarn III emerged from the shadows like a 
villain in one of Kessler's plays. His guardians kept him 
hidden during his youth while his aunt Moranna served 
as the regent of Karrnath. So it was a surprise to many 
when he burst forth to claim his crown and his power, 
all the more so because of his uncanny resemblance 

to Kaius I, the ruler who plunged Karrnath into the 

Last War and instituted the brutal system of laws that 
bears his name. | 

Given the circumstances of Kaius III's ascension, it’s 
hardly surprising that the new king would face chal- 
lenges from the proud warlords of Karrnath. Some ques- 
tioned his lineage and his ability to command. But the 
most unusual challenge came from the warlord Drago 
Thul: was Kaius III actually alive? Kaius I had elevated 
the Blood of Vol in Karrnath and instituted the use of 
undead as weapons of war. Drago Thul asserted that 
Kaius III was actually Kaius I, a vampiric monster "seek- — | 
ing to drain the lifeblood of Karrnath itself." This was a $ 
serious accusation; the undead have no rights under the 
Code of Galifar and cannot inherit titles or lands. Thul's 
challenge spread like wildfire, only to be crushed when 
Kaius III met the warlords under the midday sun and cut 
his palm to show his freely flowing blood. 

This should have been the end of it, but the tale of the 
Vampire King has proven surprisingly resilient. Some say 
that the king developed special enchantments to avoid 
the effects of sunlight; others say that he has relies on 
changeling impersonators to take his place in the day- 
light. As for Drago Thul, he refused to stand down when 
Kaius III pushed for peace and the Treaty of Thronehold. 

He fled to the city of Stormreach in Xen'drik with a 
small band of followers, and he continues to rally sup- 
port against "the monster that sits on our throne." 


rece ans cct oca apri sanc Psion tate E AE йй 


undead? Are you a follower of the Blood of Vol who 
considers the undead to be a practical tool? Do you 
have a relative or friend currently serving? Or do you 
despise the Blood of Vol and the use of necromancy? 


CITIES AND SITES 


Sturdy walls surround Ker nathi communities, and 
even the smallest village maintains a capable militia. 


ATUR 

Known as the City of Night, Atur is the stronghold of the 
Blood of Vol in Karrnath. During the war, this was the 
center for the production of undead, and massive cata- 
combs below the city hold legions of Karrnath's undead 
soldiers in case they are needed again. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


FORT BONES 

Fortresses such as this one dot the hilltops of Karrnath, 
watching for signs of enemy encroachment even since 
the Last War has ended. Fort Bones’ garrison consists 
primarily of Karrnathi undead soldiers. No lights glow 
here, as these undead rely on darkvision to see. 


KARRLAKTON 

The turbulent Cyre River separates this city from the 
deathly Mournland. Karrlakton is the birthplace of kings 
(both Karrn the Conqueror and Galifar I were born 
here) and is the center of power for House Deneith. The 
house’s headquarters, Sentinel Tower, dominates the 
city’s skyline. A stern edifice of angular stone, Sentinel 
Tower radiates martial authority and is one of the most 
heavily defended fortresses in Khorvaire. Surrounding 
the tower are training grounds, barracks, and smithies 
to accommodate all of House Deneith’s needs. Sentinel 
Tower serves as the headquarters of the famed Sentinel 
Marshals, though most of them are abroad. 


Ковтн 

The capital of Karrnath is а city-fortress on the edge of 
the Nightwood and the seat of King Kaius III. Its walls 
and towers bristle with the weapons of war, and military 
marches through the city help bolster the spirits of the 
Karrns as well as intimidate foreign diplomats. The 
forges of Korth produce some of the finest armor and 
weapons in Khorvaire. 


Fort Bones 


THE NIGHTWOOD 

This massive forest has close ties to the Plane of 
Mabar. Monsters sometimes slip out of the Nightwood 
to threaten the surrounding regions. Criminals and 
fugitives who flee into the Nightwood find the dangers 
within deadlier than any Karrnathi executioner. 


AFTERMATH OF THE LAST WAR 


Karrnath has always been a martial nation, and its 
people remain vigilant. Early in the war, King Kaius 

I instituted the Code of Kaius, a strict set of laws and 
limits. Karrnath weathered a number of famines during 
the war, and this privation led to an ongoing program of 
rationing to ensure that the nation is prepared for what- 
ever lies ahead. The war is over, but the Code of Kaius 
and the rationing remains in place; the people of Karr- 
nath willingly endure ongoing hardship to ensure that 
their future is secure. The populace frowns on excess of 
any sort, accepts limits on luxury items, and approves of 
swift and harsh punishments for crime. 

King Kaius III was one of the architects of the Treaty 
of Thronehold and remains committed to peace. How- 
ever, many of the nation's warlords believe that Karr- 
nath would have won the Last War and that Kaius de- 
nied the Karrnathi people their rightful destiny. Should 
these warlords gain sufficient support, they could push 
for a military coup. 

A second destabilizing factor is the tension between 
the followers of the Blood of Vol and the Karrnathi tra- 
ditionalists. The Seekers assert that the Blood of Vol 
saved Karrnath and point to the power of its undead 
troops. The traditionalists claim that the dark magic 
of the Seekers caused famines and plagues, crippling 
Karrnath and forcing it to rely on the undead. The Blood 
of Vol could back an uprising in Karrnath, or those who 
wish to drive out the Seekers could trigger a civil war. 


LHAZAAR PRINCIPALITIES 


Capital: Regalport 
Hallmarks: Fish, mercenaries, merchants, 
pirates, ships 


This loose confederacy of pirate lords, merchant 
princes, and sea barons holds the northeastern coast- 
line of Khorvaire and the many mist-shrouded islands 
scattered across it. Recognized as a single allied nation 
under the Treaty of Thronehold, the principalities are 
more of а loose alliance. Each island domain has its 
own values, goals, and feuds with other domains. 

The Lhazaar are the finest sailors in Khorvaire. During 
the Last War, they served all nations as privateers and 
engaged in piracy on the side. When the war ended, they 
returned to the merchant trade, but pirates still hunt on 
the open seas. 

The Lhazaar value their independence. Here, anyone 
can rise to captain a ship or even seize a principality. 
Leadership is earned, not given. Nevertheless, High 
Prince Ryger ir Wynarn of Regalport seeks to forge the 
principalities into a unified force. He has the finest fleet, 
and his efforts ensured that the principalities gained rec- 
ognition at Thronehold, after which he awarded himself 
the title of High Prince. So far, the other princes have 
rejected his proposals for a stronger union. 

Some principalities are devoted to the Blood of Vol 
and a few favor the Sovereign Host. Beyond these, the 
Lhazaar show little enthusiasm for religion, though 
many curse the Devourer when a storm comes. 


INTERESTING THINGS ABOUT THE 
LHAZAAR PRINCIPALITIES 


* Rulership of the principalities is so fluid that it's possi- 
ble for someone to start the day as a sailor and end it 
as a prince. А campaign could easily be based around 
a party of adventurers gaining a principality. 

* The Wind Whisperer principality includes a number 
of half-elves with the Mark of Storm—foundlings with 
no tie to House Lyrandar. The Wind Whisperers want 
to obtain airships by any means necessary. 

* The Lhazaar Principalities have the largest change- 
ling population in Khorvaire. Many of them con- 
gregate in the Gray Tide, a domain founded by 
changelings. 


LHAZAAR CHARACTERS 


As you develop a Lhazaar character or NPC, consider 
the following: 


Seafarers and Swashbucklers. Most Lhazaar spend 
more time at sea than they do on land. Sailor is an 
appropriate background for any Lhazaar, but you can 
ask your DM if you can switch a tool proficiency for ve- 
hicles (water) proficiency. Lhazaar are flamboyant peo- 
ple with little concern for the law, so charlatan, enter- 
tainer, and folk hero are all appropriate backgrounds. 

Local Customs. Each principality has its own martial 
traditions, fashions, and slang. Think about how your 
choices reflect your principality and work with your 
DM to develop one that fits your character. 


Big Dreams. Whatever their circumstances, the people 
of the principalities always look to the future. What do 
you want? To find a forgotten treasure hoard? To com- 
mand your own ship? To take your place as a prince? 
Think big and chase your dreams. 


CITIES AND SITES 


Among the myriad ports and pirate redoubts of the 
Lhazaar Principalities are ancient ruins from forgotten 
civilizations that predate even the Dhakaani Empire, as 
well as tombs built by wealthy pirates and sea lords to 
house their treasures and earthly remains. 

Presented below are a handful of the most widely 
known—f hard to find—places in the principalities. 


DREADHOLD 

This island prison is said to be inescapable. Maintained 
by House Kundarak, Dreadhold houses a host of infa- 
mous criminals and political prisoners. Its vaults also 
hold some of the greatest treasures of House Kundarak. 


PORT VERGE 

Port Verge is the royal port of the Direshark Princi- 
pality. Prince Kolberkon yearns to expand Verge and 
overshadow Regalport, and he is always looking for 
capable adventurers and allies. The Blood of Vol has a 
strong presence in Port Verge, and Kolberkon recently 
allowed House Lyrandar to establish an enclave there. 
But Kolberkon’s thirst for glory may lead him to fool- 
ish bargains. 


REGALPORT 

The seat of the High Prince Ryger and the Seadragon 
Principality, Regalport is the grandest city in the princi- 
palities. The patriarch of House Thuranni resides in Re- 
galport, and House Ghallanda has a significant outpost 
here. The Pirate Exchange is the largest market east of 
the Ironroot Mountains. 


TREBAZ SINARA 

It’s said that the legendary pirate queen Lhazaar made 
her home on Trebaz Sinara, and that this island holds 
the treasures and tombs of generations of sea lords. 
However, the island hasn’t been seen in over five hun- 
dred years. Many Lhazaar sailors have devoted their 
lives to finding the legendary lost isle. 


AFTERMATH OF THE LAST WAR 


During the Last War, the Lhazaar served as privateers 
and pirates. Outsiders wonder if the principalities can 
adapt to peace, or if their thirst for gold and adventure 
will lead their subjects to ruin. 

Most of the princes are content with their domains, 
but ambitious rulers such as Prince Ryger of Regalport 
and Prince Kolberkon of Port Verge could shatter the 
status quo. Kolberkon seeks to expand his personal 
power, while Ryger wants to forge a stronger unified 
nation. Both pursue dangerous alliances in their cam- 
paigns. In addition to agreements with the dragon- 
marked houses, rumors abound of bargains with drag- 
ons, fiends, and the distant Empire of Riedra. Will the 
dreams of these princes lead to a new war? 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER YE 14 
PIX 


Mror HOLDS 


Capital: Krona Peak 
Hallmarks: Banking, dwarves, metalwork, mining (pre- 
cious and non-precious metals) 


When humanity first came to Khorvaire, they found 

the dwarven clans of the Mror Holds locked in endless 
feuds. This division kept the clans from uniting against 
the new arrivals, and the dwarves were forced to swear 
fealty to Karrnath and Galifar. Over the centuries, they 
turned their energies to harnessing the astonishing 
natural resources of their mountain home. The dwarves 
were then reborn as merchant lords. 

In the early days of the Last War, Mror miners made 
an astonishing discovery: the ruins of an ancient dwar- 
ven empire, vast halls deep within the Ironroot Moun- 
tains. Explorers uncovered mines still brimming with 
jewels and precious ores and vaults filled with riches 
and powerful artifacts. The Mror restored these ancient 
fortresses and worked to reclaim the secrets of their 
ancestors. Seeing the untapped potential of the Realm 
Below and the broken Kingdom of Galifar, the clan lords 
joined together to form the Iron Council and to declare 
the independence and sovereignty of the Mror Holds. 

One question remained: What had become of the an- 
cient dwarves? The answer soon became apparent. As 
the Mror delved deeper into the Realm Below, they woke 
an ancient evil: Dyrrn the Corruptor, a daelkyr lord of 
madness. Hordes of aberrations and derro rose from the 
depths to challenge the explorers. For decades, the Mror 
lords have been fighting a battle in the depths, strug- 
gling to drive the darkness from their ancestral halls. 
Many dwarves revileanything to do with the daelkyr. 
Others believe that the daelkyr can grant the Mror 
dwarves the power to overcome any enemy. Some clans 
have taken up symbionts and living weapons recovered 
from the depths, and cabals of warlocks draw on the 
power of the Plane of Xoriat (see chapter 4). 

The Mror Holds consist of a loose confederation. 
Twelve noble clans each govern a hold and have a 
representative on the Iron Council, which resolves dis- 
putes and issues affecting the entire nation. Each hold 
includes a number of lesser clans, who owe fealty to the 
noble line. Those who occupy land above have the right 
to claim the halls that lie below if they can. 

The Sovereign Host is the dominant faith of the Mror 
Holds. Kol Korran is the most beloved of the Sover- 
eigns, but the dwarves also revere Boldrei, Dol Dorn, 
Olladra, and Onatar. 


INTERESTING THINGS ABOUT THE 
MnoR HOLDS 


• The Mror Holds contain deep reserves of gold, silver, 
and other rare and precious metals, along with iron 
and other ores. The Mror dwarves are skilled miners 
and artisans. 

• Aclan of orcs called the Jhorash'tar live among the 
Ironroot Mountains. The Jhorash'tar have been slowly 
crowded into the least hospitable regions of the moun- 
tains. Afew dwarven clans seek to incorporate the 
Jhorash'tar into Mror society, but others wish to drive 
them out once and for all. 


* The dwarves have recovered artifacts and arcane se- 
crets from the Realm Below. Dwarf artificers are still 
working to master the techniques of their ancestors, 
while warlocks strive to harness the powers of the 
daelkyr. Mror communities are shaped by the artifacts 
they possess or by their interactions with the daelkyr. 
A Mror lord might serve guests from a bottomless 
cauldron of wine, while another studies strangers 
using a crown of eyes, claiming that this living artifact 
reveals all evil intent. 


MROR CHARACTERS 


As you develop a Mror character or NPC, consider the 
following: 


Clan Focus. The dwarf clan is the heart of Mror culture. 
Is your clan known for mercantile power or martial 
skill? Are you a noble—even if you're a few steps re- 
moved from true power? Or are you a guild artisan or 
soldier? Most Mror have embraced modern martial 
techniques, but a few minor clans still cling to barbar- 
ian traditions of the past. What caused you to leave 
your hold? Are you serving your clan and honing your 
skills, or have you been exiled from your homeland? 

The Realm Below. How has the Realm Below affected 
your family and your character? Do you oppose the 
foul forces that infest your ancestral halls, or do you 
see them as a source of power? You might be a pal- 
adin sworn to oppose the horrors that dwell in the 
deep, or you could be a warlock who's forged a pact 
with a Great Old One patron, one of the dark powers 
in the depths. 

Pride in Possessions. From the wealthiest clan lord 
to the humblest miner, the Mror take great pride in 
their possessions. Quality is more important than 
appearance, and you are interested in the history of 
the items you carry. If you find a magic weapon, you 
want to know the battles it has seen and the warriors 
who have wielded it before you. This is especially true 
of the relics recovered from the Realm Below. Who 
forged the blade you carry? Do you bear a trinket from 
a forgotten age? 


CITIES AND SITES 


THE VOICE OF 


KARRNATH 


The Mror Holds spread across the Ironroot Mountains. 
Most Mror communities are at least partially subterra- 
nean, extending down into the mountains. The Realm 
Below is deep beneath the surface, and not every town 
has a passage to it. 


KRONA PEAK 

Located in the dwarven realm of Mroranonhold, Krona 
Peak serves as the seat of the Iron Council and thus is 
the Mror Holds’ equivalent of a capital. This center of 
commerce provides a major connection to the western 
nations. Kol Korran's Throne, Khorvaire's largest tem- 
ple to the Sovereign Lord of World and Wealth, domi- 
nates the cityscape. 


MROR HOLDS: 
BIRTHPLACE OF 
ABOMINATION! 


+++ в вуз в ж ө ө ө э ө ө э ө ө ө ө ө ]i ө ө ө ө э ө э ө э ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө t|] n 


It's been exactly seventy years since the Iron Council 
declared the Mror Holds' independence from Karrnath. 
King Kaius II was newly seated on the steel throne and 
lacked the resolve to bring the dwarf lords to heel. Now 
we see the harvest we have sown, and it is horrifying. 
Without the firm hand of Karrnath to keep them on 
arighteous path, the Mror dwarves have embraced 

foul powers. 

Witness Lord Malus Soldorak, seen in Korth this week 
for trade negotiations. His breastplate was forged from 
chitin and muscle, and it seemed to pulse with its own 
heartbeat. A guard present at the event said that Soldor- 
ak's axe moaned when the blade came close to him, as if 
the weapon hungered for human blood. 

This is what springs from our mercy and forbearance. 
Who knows what horrors the dwarves are crafting—or 
breeding—in their mountain halls? We cannot stand 
by and let this vileness continue. For the good of our 
nation, we call on all true Karrns to demand that Regent 
Moranna unleash our full might on the Mror Holds and 
cleanse this horror! 


SOLANGAP 

The holdfast of Clan Soldorak, Solangap boasts vast 
gold mines and the largest mint and treasury in Khor- 
vaire. Clan Soldorak has recovered many daelkyr 

tools and weapons from the Realm Below. Solan lords 
proudly wear symbionts and make no effort to hide their 
warlock pacts. 


NOLDRUNHOLD 

Four hundred years ago, the dwarves of Clan Noldrun 
vanished. All expeditions that delved into Noldrunhold 
ended in disaster, and the region was declared to be 
cursed and shunned. At the time, the dwarves believed 
that the Jhorash'tar orcs were responsible, but now it 
seems more likely that the Noldrun opened a path to the 
Realm Below. What malevolent powers have claimed 
the halls of Noldrunhold? 


THE REALM BELOW 

No one knows the extent or depth of the ancient dwar- 
ven empire deep beneath the Ironroot Mountains. Great 
wealth and arcane secrets remain hidden in these halls, 
along with endless hordes of aberrations. As a Mror ad- 
venturer, you could help your family reclaim lands from 
the Realm Below, or you could lead your allies into the 
deep in search of wealth and glory. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


ct mem 


Н 


I2I 


AFTERMATH OF THE LAST WAR 


The Mror Holds declared independence during the Last 
War. Many nations depend on the resource of the Holds, 
and the Treaty of Thronehold affirmed its sovereignty. 

To the casual observer, the Mror dwarves' star ap- 
pears to be rising. Their mines seem to offer limitless 
resources. Mror artificers make amazing strides as 
they study the relics of their ancestors. The dwarves are 
proud of their ancient past and optimistic about the fu- 
ture. Most Mror are generous and courageous, eager to 
show off their wealth and accomplishments. 

Those who dig deeper realize that this prosperity is 
built on an unstable foundation. The Last War may be 
over, but the war against the daelkyr has barely begun. 
The clan lords hold their reclaimed halls in the Realm 
Below, but no one knows the full extent of the power of 
the daelkyr. A renewed assault could come at any time, 
whether it's a force of monsters boiling up from below or 
a creeping madness that infects the weak-willed. 

The dwarves are also divided by their attitude toward 
the aberrations. Some of the clans—notably Soldorak— 
embrace symbionts and other daelkyr gifts; some even 
experiment with flesh-warping techniques and create 
their own monsters. Others—notably Clan Mroranon— 
avoid contact with the aberrations. Such dwarves trea- 
sure the relics of their ancestors but despise those who 
use symbionts or form pacts with the darkness. 

Long ago, the dwarves engaged in vicious feuds that 
kept them from uniting as a nation. This new divide 
could reignite those rivalries, leading to a civil war on 
the surface even as evil gains strength in the depths. 


(Q'BARRA 


Capital: Newthrone 
Hallmarks: Eberron dragonshards, rare herbs 


Q'barra is a young nation on the edge of Khorvaire, an 
untamed frontier filled with danger and opportunity. 
During the golden age of Galifar, few humans bothered 
to cross the Endworld Mountains to explore the vast 
jungle beyond. When the Last War broke out, a fleet of 
settlers came to Q'barra in search of a new home far 
from the war. As this settlement expanded, the settlers 
discovered massive deposits of Eberron dragonshards 
(see chapter 5). Over the past decade, a wave of pros- 
pectors, wandslingers, refugees, and fortune-seekers 
have descended on Q'barra, along with brigands, de- 
serters from the war, and all manner of criminals and 
opportunists. 

To their surprise, Q'barra was already home to a num- 
ber of ancient civilizations humans know nothing about: 
the lizardfolk of the Cold Sun Federation, the dragon- 
born of Ka'rhashan, and the confederacy of the Poison 
Dusk lizardfolk. Most settlers refer to them collectively 
as "scales." King Sebastes ir'Kesslan of Newthrone has 
established a treaty with the Cold Sun Federation, but 
communication has been difficult and prospectors rarely 
abide by the terms of the treaty. 


INTERESTING THINGS 
ABOUT Q'BARRA 


* Q'barra is one of the richest sources of Eberron drag- 
onshards in Khorvaire, drawing waves of settlers and 


prospectors to this young and growing nation on the 
edge of civilization. 

* Certain ruins in Q'barra appear connected to the Age 
of Demons. The settlers know little of the history of 
this region, but the Poison Dusk lizardfolk have ties to 
fiendish powers. 

* House Tharashk has a strong presence in Q'barra. 
Tharashk is the primary buyer of Eberron drag- 
onshards and also runs large-scale mining opera- 
tions here. 


Q'BARRAN CHARACTERS 


Q'barra tempts explorers from the west with the pros- 
pects of wealth and new lands to conquer—mostly hu- 
mans but including members of all races found in Khor- 
vaire. Settlers, dragonborn, and lizardfolk characters 
who originate here should consider the following: 


Settlers. Q'barra is an excellent place to explore the 
traditional archetypes of the classic Western. As a 
paladin, you could be a lone sheriff seeking to protect 
your newly formed mining village. Your cleric could be 
the town preacher. As a sorcerer or bard with a crim- 
inal background, you could be a dashing wandslinger 
looking for trouble and gold. 

Renegades and Regrets. Q’barra promises a land of 
opportunity and a place whereyou can leave your 
past behind. Are you a deserter? Were you convicted 
of a crime you didn't commit? Are you fleeing from a 
broken heart? Q'barra has also drawn Cyran refugees 
and newly freed warforged, both seeking a home in 
the wild east. 

Lizardfolk. The lizardfolk's primitive culture blends 
druidic traditions with the beliefs of the Silver Flame. 
You might have been sent to study the softskins—to 
learn about them and potentially serve as an envoy for 
your people. Alternatively, you could be following a 
spiritual vision. 

Dragonborn. The dragonborn live amid the remnants 
of ancient glory. They have a proud martial tradition, 
and a number of dragonborn venture west in search of 
worthy challenges. If you follow this path, you might 
have served as a mercenary in the Last War. 


CITIES AND SITES 


Q'barrais split into three main regions. New Galifar is 
the original colony; it has a feudal structure and holds 

to the laws of the Treaty of Thronehold. To the north, 
Hope is a collection of small mining towns. In Hope, the 
law goes only as far as the people willing to enforce it. 
Beyond these human regions lie the unexplored lands of 
the scales. 


HAKA'TORVHAK 

Explorers tell stories of a city hidden deep in the jungles 
of Q'barra—a wondrous citadel of obsidian and brass. 
According to these tales, the city is filled with treasure 
and guarded by a dragon fused with an ancient demon. 


NEWTHRONE 
The capital of New Galifar and the seat of King 
Sebastes, Newthrone is the largest city and port in 


Q'barra. Myriad people from all over Khorvaire mingle 
here in crowded streets. Soldiers pay little heed to the 
rampant crime in these streets,viewing it instead as 
part of life in the port city. 


WYRMWATCH 

A thriving prospecting town in Hope, Wyrmwatch was 
established by Cyran refugees. Although far smaller 
than New Cyre in Breland, its people are proud of what 
they have built. The independent community is led by 
Elder Nevillom, a veteran and evangelist of the Silver 
Flame. Nevillom's courage and passionate sermons help 
sustain the people of Wyrmwatch in difficult times. 


AFTERMATH OF THE LAST WAR 


The influx of Cyran refugees promises to reshape 
Q'barra. Most of the settlers are peaceful people search- 
ing for a homes and opportunities, but some among 
them chose Q'barra over refugee camps because they 
refused to accept charity from former enemies. These 
"Mourners" rob and kill settlers from the nations that 
fought against Cyre. Hope also has its share of brigands 
and criminals, bandits who prey on House Tharashk 
convoys and settlers alike. 

The relationship between the settlers and the natives 
is another source of tension. Although King Sebastes 
forged a treaty with the Cold Sun Federation, the pros- 
pectors of Hope regularly violate this treaty. The Poison 
Dusk lizardfolk are hostile to both the settlers and the 
Cold Sun Federation. Conflicts between settlers and 
scales have escalated over the last four years, and many 
fear that worse is yet to come. 


SHADOW MARCHES 


Capital: Zarash'ak (unofficial) 
Hallmarks: Eberron dragonshards, herbs 


When most people think of the Shadow Marches, they 
imagine a fetid backwater where illiterate humans 
mingle with orcs and other foul creatures, practicing 
strange rites by the light of the moons. While flawed, 
this vision isn't entirely inaccurate. The Shadow 
Marches are a desolate land of swamps and moors. The 
homeland of the orcs, the Marches were scarred in the 
ancient conflict with the daelkyr. The fiends left twisted 
creatures and aberrations in the swamps, and sowed 
seeds of madness that linger to this day. There are in- 
deed moonlit rituals in the Marches: some to honor the 
daelkyr, others to maintain the wards that keep them 
trapped in Khyber. 

Humans came to the Marches long ago, refugees 
fleeing a war in the distant land of Sarlona. Over time 
the two cultures merged, forming the Marches as they 
exist today. 

The Marches had little contact with the Kingdom of 
Galifar or the east until a few hundred years ago, when 
a House Sivis expedition made two discoveries: the re- 
gion contained valuable dragonshards, and a number of 
clans had manifested the Dragonmark of Finding. This 
led to the foundation of House Tharashk, as these clans 
joined together to master the economic potential of their 
mark and leverage their mineral wealth. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 123 


The Shadow Marches aren't a nation. No one voice 
speaks for the clans and tribes, and most of the tribes 
have no interest in dealing with outsiders. House Tha- 
rashk is the largest faction in the region, and their city of 
Zarash'ak is the center for commerce. 

House Tharashk is the main point of contact between 
the Shadow Marches and the outside world. Tharashk 
aside, the region remains a collection of tribes and cult- 
ists following their ancient traditions in the shadows of 
the swamps. 


INTERESTING THINGS ABOUT THE 
SHADOW MARCHES 


* The untamed Shadow Marches are filled with mys- 
teries. Relics of the daelkyr rest undisturbed in the 
depths of the swamps, along with foul monsters and 
druidic shrines. 

* The Marches are the birthplace of the druidic tradi- 
tion of the Gatekeepers. Long ago, this sect defeated 
the vile daelkyr; today, its last champions continue to 
protect Eberron from aberrations and other extrapla- 
nar threats. 

* Even in defeat, the daelkyr sowed seeds of madness in 
the Marches. Followers of the Cults of the Dragon Be- 
low remain scattered across the region. Some of these 
cults work with mind flayers and other aberrations. 
Others have no evil intent but are driven by dangerous 
delusions. 


MARCHER CHARACTERS 


As you develop a Marcher character or NPC, consider 
the following: 


The Mark of Finding. An alliance of Marcher clans 
formed House Tharashk, but not all those who car- 
ried the mark chose to join this house. As a half-orc 
with the Mark of Finding, you could be a child of the 
Marches with a strong tie to the house, or you could 
be a scion of a small tribe of hunters, proud of your in- 
dependence and suspicious of the houses. Your ties to 
the Marches might be distant because you were born 
to afamily that left years ago. Do you want to redis- 
cover your ancestral roots? 

Madness and Mysticism. Most Marchers have a mysti- 
cal view of the world, beliefs shaped by the traditions 
of the Gatekeepers and the madness of the daelkyr. 
Marchers typically feel that the people of the treaty 
nations are blinded by their civilized ways. You have 
heard the truth in the voices of croaking frogs and 
seen it in the shadows shifting on the water. Whether 
you're loyal to the Gatekeepers, the Sovereign Host, or 
the Dragon Below, superstitions inform your path. 

Clan or Tribe? The people of the Shadow Marches are 
split into two distinct cultures. The clans blend the tra- 
ditions of human and orc, building towns and working 
with steel. If you were raised in one of the clans, the 
ways of civilization aren't that strange to you; you've 
seen the city of Zarash'ak and worked with House 
Tharashk. By contrast, the Marcher tribes main- 
tain traditions that predate humanity. As nomadic 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


hunter-gatherers, they don't work metals; they make 
their tools from stone, hide, wood, and bone. If your 
character is from one of the Marcher tribes, you might 
be the first of your people to leave the swamps. Why 
have you left your people, and how are you adapting to 
this new world? 


CITIES AND SITES 


The clans ofthe Shadow Marches primarily live in small 
towns and villages, their huts raised above the swamps 
on stilts. The Shadow Marches contain many manifest 
zones tied to Xoriat and Kythri (see chapter 4 for de- 
scriptions of both), the planes of madness and chaos. 
Time moves strangely in places in the deep swamps, 
which twists mundane beasts and plants into strange 
shapes. Daelkyr ruins linger in these areas, remnants of 
the ancient war against the goblins and orcs that once 
dominated Khorvaire. 


DRAGONSHARD FIELDS 

The Shadow Marches hold deposits of Eberron dragon- 
shards, the source of House Tharashk's wealth. These 
fields aren't as rich as those in Q'barra, but there's gold 
to be made by those willing to hunt for shards in the 
dangerous swamps. 


VVARAAK'S CAVE 

The green dragon Vvaraakis said to have taught the 
secrets of druidic magic to the first Gatekeepers thou- 
sands of years ago. Though Vvaraak is long dead, ru- 
mors say that her hidden lair holds secrets tied to the 
Draconic Prophecy and the mysteries of druidic magic. 


ZARASH AK 

Because overland travel through Droaam or the Eldeen 
Reaches can be extremely dangerous, most people who 
need to do business in the Marches travel by ship to the 
port city of Zarash’ak. Built on stilts and known for its 
cuisine and music, Zarash’ak offers the rare exports of 
the land without the difficulty of navigating the swamps. 
House Tharashk oversees the City of Stilts, but Marcher 
clans and tribes come here to sell crafts and other goods 
or to celebrate religious rituals. 


AFTERMATH OF THE LAST WAR 


The Shadow Marches aren't a nation, and the region 
wasn't recognized by the Treaty of Thronehold. Most 
Marchers have little interest in the outside world. 
Marcher tribes don't know the names or number of the 
nations beyond the swamps, let alone that they were 

at war. However, as House Tharashk gains power and 
influence in the world beyond the swamps, it has in- 
creased its presence in its homeland. The house has 
expanded Zarash'ak dramatically over the last decade 
and is working on transforming other towns into cities. 
This has caused tension with a number of tribes. And 
House Tharashk's mining operations and its urban 
expansion always run the risk of disrupting Gatekeeper 
seals and unleashing ancient evils bound beneath 

the Marches. 


ERIC DESCHAMPS 


TALENTA PLAINS 


Capital: Gatherhold 
Hallmarks: Dinosaurs, halflings, livestock 


The halflings of the Talenta Plains have no cities and no 
industrialized magic, but they do have dinosaurs. The 
halflings domesticated the dinosaurs of the plains and 
use these creatures as mounts, livestock, and beasts 

of burden. A sacred bond exists between a hunter and 
mount, and few people are prepared to face a raging hal- 
fling barbarian riding a furious clawfoot raptor. 

Talenta religion reveres spirits, both departed ances- 
tors and natural spirits. Each tribe has a lath—a chief- 
tain who guides the tribe—and shamans who consult 
the spirits and choose the paths of migration. 

In the past, the tribes stood alone, but during the Last 
War, many halflings came together under Lathon Hal- 
pum to defend their land. Halpum won recognition for 
the Plains as one of the Thronehold nations, though it's 
still unclear what this means beyond increasing passage 
between the Plains and the outside world. 


INTERESTING THINGS ABOUT THE 
TALENTA PLAINS — 


* House Ghallanda and House Jorasco both originated 
in the Talenta Plains. The dragonmarked bloodlines 
appear throughout the tribes, though you can play a 
dragonmarked halfling from the Plains who doesn't 
work for the houses. 


* The Talentan reverence for spirits derives from the 
fact that a variety of spirits haunt the Plains. The re- 
gion contains an unusual number of manifest zones 
tied to Dolurrh and Thelanis (see chapter 4 for de- 
scriptions of both). Ghosts are more likely to linger 
in such places, and minor fey are scattered across 
the Plains. 

Stories tell of ancient ruins that date back to the first 
age of the world and of a vast graveyard holding the 
bones of dragons. 


TALENTAN CHARACTERS 


See chapter 1 for quirks and other features relevant to 
halfling characters from the Talenta Plains. Also con- 
sider the following: 


Wild Warriors and Tricksters. You were born in the 
wild, and your wits and your weapons helped you 
survive. Talenta warriors are often barbarians or rang- 
ers, relying on speed and skill. Outlander is a logical 
background, but you could easily be a folk hero, enter- 
tainer, or charlatan. You could even be an urchin who 
was stranded in a great city and adapted to life there. 

Surrounded by Spirits. Fey, fiends, and the ghosts of 
ancestors, these are all part of the spirit world, and 
they're all around you. Do you believe that the spirits 
guide your actions? Do you show respect to the spirits 
of a location? Talentan shamans tend to be druids of 
the Circle of the Moon or the Circle of the Shepherd 
(from Xanathar's Guide to Everything), often assum- 
ing the form of dinosaurs. You could also reflect a 
strong bond to spirits by playing a warlock with an 
Archfey patron, a cleric with the Nature domain, a pal- 
adin sworn to the Oath of the Ancients, or a barbarian 
on the Path of the Totem Warrior or Path of the Ances- 
tral Guardian (from Xanathar's Guide to Everything). 


126 


Hermit and outlander are natural backgrounds, but 
you could be an acolyte or a sage who consults spirits 
instead of books. Warriors and shamans both wear 
masks to present a particular face to the spirit world. 
Dinosaurs. Talenta halflings have a close bond to their 
dinosaur companions. If you don't begin the campaign 
with a dinosaur mount or companion, you might ac- 
quire one over the course of your adventures. You can 
also consider whether a fallen dinosaur is part of your 
backstory; perhaps you lost your faithful mount in the 
Last War, but you believe its spirit is still with you. 


CITIES AND SITES 


The Talenta Plains have been described asan ocean of 
grasslands. The nomadic halflings have little interest 

in building towns; most shelter in the Talenta Plains is 
temporary. Halflings shun the ruins scattered across the 
Plains, believing them to be haunted by fiends. 


GATHERHOLD 

Allthe halfling tribes come to Gatherhold to trade, hold 
councils, and settle disputes. House Ghallanda main- 
tains the town, but Gatherhold belongs to the people, 
not the houses. Other dragonmarked houses offer their 
services here as well. The town is on the shore of Lake 
Cyre, and once people came by boat through Cyre; now 
the Mourning has cut off that passage. 


'THE WANDERING INN 

This caravan maintained by members of House Gha- 
llanda is a traveling fair, providing entertainment and 
shelter to any fortunate enough to cross its path. When 
times are dark and travelers are weary, one can always 
hope that the Wandering Inn is just beyond the horizon. 


AFTERMATH OF THE LAST WAR 


The halfling tribes joined together to defend themselves 
from outsiders, and the Talenta Plains were recognized 
as a nation under the Treaty of Thronehold. Now that 
the war is over, most of the tribes have returned to their 
hunting grounds and ancient traditions. They united to 
defend their way of life, and now they wish to enjoy it. 

But the halflings don't yet know if it's possible to 
return to the previous ways. More foreigners visit 
the Plains than at any time in the past. Settlers and 
merchants cross the Plains as they make their way to 
Q'barra, and they clash with Q'barran bandits. The Vale- 
nar elves ride through the Plains in search of adventure. 
Monsters emerge from the Mournland. Dragonmarked 
houses seek to expand their role at Gatherhold and to 
explore the untapped resources of the Plains. 

The halflings have no interest in change, but it might 
be inevitable. Lathon Halpum believes that if the tribes 
can work together, they could become a nation of na- 
tions, but others aggressively oppose such a path. Holy 
Uldra is a powerful shaman and the leader of her own 
tribe. She urges halfling warriors to join together for a 
single purpose: to drive all outsiders from the Plains 
and to maintain the ancient traditions. The halflings 
must decide whether the tribes will choose the path of 
peace or return to war. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


THRANE 


Capital: Flamekeep 
Hallmarks: Divine magic, fine crafts, fruit, livestock, 
the Silver Flame, textiles, wool 


The modern Church of the Silver Flame was founded in 
Thrane, and most of the people of the nation follow this 
faith. During the Last War, the people of Thrane chose 
to set aside the rule of the monarchy and to embrace 
the leadership of the church. For the last seventy years, 
Thrane has been a theocracy. The head of the state is 
11-year-old Jaela Daran, the divinely selected Keeper of 
the Flame. Jaela depends on the Council of Cardinals to 
perform the practical work of running the nation. 

The primary purpose of the Silver Flame is to defend 
the innocent from supernatural evil. The church has 
always had a militant aspect, with battalions of templars 
and peasant militias prepared to face undead, lycan- 
thropes, or other monstrous threats. But compassion 
and charity are core values of the church, and the tem- 
plars are tasked to defend all innocents. Even during the 
Last War, if a fiendish threat arose in a Brelish village, 
Thrane templars would ally with the locals to bring an 
end to the threat. Not all Thranes rise to this ideal. Zeal- 
ous Thranes believe the church is destined to reunite 
Galifar under the Silver Flame, and corrupt priests are 
interested only in power and wealth. 

Not all priests are clerics, and the typical templar is a 
mundane warrior. However, due to the deep faith of its 
people, Thrane produces more clerics and paladins than 
any other nation in Khorvaire. 


deter ec erat rema 0 acm trit 


С-НЕ 


SHARE INQUISITIVE 


vo ly ame rette prt 


I WAS SCORCHED 
BY THE SILVER 
FLAME! 


ees] i] жө ө ө ө ө hi ө ө ө ө ө ө | |t э ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө | 


Growing up on the streets of the Callestan district in 
Sharn, I learned not to put my faith in anything I couldn't 
see or hold. I think that's why my editor sent me to 
Flamekeep to cover the Ascension; surely I'd see clearly, 
with eyes untouched by faith. I thought so, too. But then 
I found myself in the Chamber of Tira's Sacrifice, a pillar 
of silver fire marking the spot where one woman gave 

her life to protect countless innocents. I saw people from 
all nations joined together in song, celebrating both that 
ancient sacrifice and the end of our current war. And 
looking into the innocent eyes of the child priestess, I 
truly heard the words of that song for the first time: a call 
for all of us to be better than we are, to protect those in 
need, to remember that we are all one people in the light 
of the Silver Flame. 


TITUS 


INTERESTING THINGS 
ABOUT THRANE 


* Faith is part of daily life in Thrane, and divine adepts 
provide important services. Magic is also common 
in Thrane. Everbright lanterns light the streets while 
magewrights and wizards practice their trades, 
though there are fewer of them than in other nations. 

• Everytown has a militia ready to deal with super- 
natural threats, and people stand together to fight 
darkness. Champions of the light find support and 
hospitality, but any character who dabbles with dark 
forces—necromancers, warlocks, and the like—finds 
Thrane a dangerous, unwelcoming place. 

• The feudal system of nobility remains in place, but 
ultimate authority rests in the hands of the church. 
Queen Diani ir'Wynarn is the “blood regent,” serving 
as a symbolic advisor to the Keeper of the Flame. A 
small fraction of the population would like to see the 
traditional monarchy restored to power. 


THRANE CHARACTERS 


As you develop a Thrane character, consider the follow- 
ing details: 


The Impact of Faith. If you want to reflect a close bond 
to the Silver Flame, you could gain a few divine spells 
by taking the Magic Initiate feat. Archery is a devo- 
tional practice of the Silver Flame, so as a martial 
Thrane you might focus on archery-related combat 
styles or take the Sharpshooter feat. Any Thrane 


CATHEORAL OF 


THE SILVER FLAME 


could take the acolyte background to reflect a strong 
connection to the church or the soldier background 
based on service with the templars. 

Church or Crown? Do you support the theocracy, or 
would you like to see power restored to the throne? 
Many people of faith believe that miring the church in 
politics distracts it and invites corruption. 

Dealing with Darkness. The Shadow in the Flame can 
tempt even the most virtuous soul. How do you react 
when you encounter corruption and greed? Are youa 
compassionate person who seeks to lead people to the 
light, or a zealot determined to crush all darkness? 


CITIES AND SITES 


The Church of the Silver Flame isa militant faith, and 
Thrane communities are built around fortified churches 
designed to serve as fortresses in times of trouble. 
Larger towns maintain sturdy walls patrolled by skilled 
archers. A Flamic architectural style appears through- 
out the region. Buildings incorporate light and soaring 
spaces, and icons of the Silver Flame and images of the 
martyr Tira Miron appear throughout the nation. 


FLAMEKEEP 

The spiritual heart and capital of Thrane, Flamekeep is 
a massive fortress city. The Keeper of the Flame dwells 
in the great Cathedral of the Silver Flame, which holds 
the pillar of fire born when Tira Miron sacrificed herself 
to bind the demon Bel Shalor. The cathedral is the seat 
of the Council of Cardinals and the primary garrison 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 127 


128 


of the templar order. Flamekeep is also home to Thal- 
ingard, the ancestral palace of the rulers of Thrane and 
current residence of Queen Diani ir'Wynarn. 


SHADUKAR 

Shadukar is a grim reminder of the cost of the war. 
Once known as the Jewel of the Sound, this coastal 

city was destroyed in a bitter siege against Karrnathi 
forces. The city has yet to be reclaimed, and it's said to 
be haunted both by Thrane ghosts and by undead forces 
leftbehind by the Karrns. 


THALIOST 

An ancient Aundairian city seized during the Last 

War, Thaliost was ceded to Thrane under the Treaty 

of Thronehold. Many of its people bitterly oppose the 
Thrane occupation, but it’s also become a haven for 
Aundairian followers of the extremist Pure Flame sect; 
violence often breaks out between these two factions. 


AFTERMATH OF THE LAST WAR | 


The war is over, but deep rifts remain between Thrane 
and its neighbors. Aundairian war magic created a 
blasted wasteland between the two nations. To the east, 
the conflict with Karrnath left farms and cities such as 
Shadukar devastated and abandoned, home only to the 
lingering undead left behind after the Karrnathi retreat. 

For most, these grim reminders of war strengthen 
Thrane resolve. The common people are united by their 
faith and sure of the righteousness of their cause. The 
Silver Flame urges people to stand together in the face 
of evil, and across the nation, villagers work together to 
repair the damage inflicted during the war. People in 
a Thrane village regularly cooperate to raise a barn or 
practice archery in the fields. 

The Silver Flame urges its followers to feel compas- 
sion for all people, which often proves a more difficult 
challenge. Thrane has never forgiven Karrnath for its 
use of undead soldiers, and many Thranes are quick 
to imagine all Karrns as agents of darkness. Likewise, 
Thranes have bitter memories of the conflict with Aun- 
dair, and Aundairian wizards or eldritch knights receive 
acold reception. 

For most Thranes, the war strengthened their faith 
and drew them together. However, some question the 
validity of theocratic rule. Such doubt can be found 
even among the most devout followers of the faith; such 
people fear that the merging of temporal and spiritual 
authority distracts the church from its proper mission. 
If these doubts spread, a serious faction might seek 
to restore Queen Diani to power. 

Thaliost is another open wound. The Coun- 
cil of Cardinals is determined to hold onto 
this prize, but it is a bitter point of conten- 
tion with Aundair and a constant source 
of tension and violence. In creating a 
Thrane character, consider how you 
feel about Thaliost. Would you like to 
see it returned to Aundair, or do you 
support Thrane’s rule? 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


'THRONEHOLD 


Capital: Throneport 
Hallmarks: Entertainers, international intrigue, spies 


After forging a united kingdom, Galifar I realized early 
on that the crown could not rule from one of the existing 
realms. To do so would be to put one of the Five Nations 
above the others, and that would lead to breaks and frac- 
tures that would eventually destroy the kingdom. Thus, 
he established his seat of power on an island in Scions 
Sound. There he built the great castle of Thronehold. 
After Jarot’s death and the rejection of the line of suc- 
cession that led to the Last War, the island and castle 
were largely abandoned. A special detachment of House 
Deneith guards, the Throne Wardens, remained in 
place to protect the castle, but all government functions 
ceased with the collapse of the Kingdom of Galifar. 
Throneport, a town in the shadow of the castle, be- 
came a place for dissidents, criminals, spies, and merce- 
naries, and the once safe port turned into a rough-and- 
tumble town without allegiance to any single nation. 


INTERESTING THINGS 
ABOUT THRONEHOLD | 


* Representatives (and spies) of the Five Nations gather 
in the town of Throneport, where it's impossible to tell 
friend from foe and alliances shift daily. 

* Although Cyre no longer has a peacekeeping force on 
the island, many Cyrans find work here as spies and 
agentsfor other nations. 


THRONEHOLD CHARACTERS . 


As you develop a character or NPC from Thronehold, 
consider the following: 


Cold Warriors. Thronehold is a gladiatorial arena for 
diplomats and spies, a dangerous playground for 
bored nobles, and a haven for treacherous double 
agents. Characters with the charlatan, spy, noble, or 
criminal background might all test their skills here. 


Play It Again. If diplomats and spies have one thing in 
common, it's a weakness for pleasant distractions. 
When not playing their games of deceit, they seek out 
the best entertainment and companionship the island 
has to offer. Characters with the entertainer back- 
ground can make many untrustworthy friends here. 


AFTERMATH OF THE LAST WAR 


By 975 YK, Throneport had grown into a small city in 
which all of the nations and dragonmarked houses had 
at least a small presence, turning it into a hotbed of in- 
ternational intrigue. The Treaty of Thronehold further 
solidified Throneport as a multinational capital under 
the control of small peacekeeping forces from Aundair, 
Breland, Karrnath, and Thrane, with House Deneith 
Throne Wardens in place to make sure the terms of 
the treaty are honored. Today, the small city is neutral 
ground, but the castle and its grounds remain off limits 
and under the watchful protection of the wardens. 


VALENAR 


Capital: Taer Valaestas 
Hallmarks: Elves, horses, mercenaries 


In the midst of the Last War, an army of Tairnadal war- 
rior elves from Aerenal seized this region from Cyre, 
invoking a claim to the land from long before humanity's 
arrival on the continent. The elves of Valenar devote 
themselves to the arts of war. Their cavalry has no equal 
in Khorvaire, and they combine a talent for magic with 
stealth and swordplay. Cyre employed the Valenar as 
mercenaries until the elves betrayed Cyre and took a 
corner of the nation for themselves. These lands es- 
caped the destruction visited upon the rest of Cyre. After 
the Mourning, no one wanted to challenge the Valenar's 
claim to the land they had taken; in the interests of 
peace, the Treaty of Thronehold recognized the new elf 
kingdom of Valenar. 

Valenar elves spend little time at rest, operating in 
small units called warbands. Those who aren't pa- 
trolling the kingdom travel abroad seeking adventure. 
Half-elves handle the civic administration. Some of 
these are the children of Valenar elves, but most are im- 
migrants who've come from elsewhere in Khorvaire in 
search of opportunity. Cyran humans still occupying the 
region fall below them in rank. Once citizens of Cyre, 
now they're citizens of Valenar. Little has changed for 
the commoners, most of whom don't care who wears 
the crown. 

The harsh sands of the Blade Desert cover northern 
Valenar and serve as a natural barrier between this land 
and the rest of Khorvaire. Beyond the desert, Valenar 
transitions from rolling steppes to fertile plains. The 
desert can be deadly, but the Valenar elves pose the 
greatest risk for adventurers. The elves won't interfere 
with peaceful caravans, but a well-armed group of trav- 
elers invites challenges. 


INTERESTING THINGS 
ABOUT VALENAR 


• The dragonmarked House Lyrandar helped the Vale- 


nar elves build the infrastructure of their kingdom. 
The half-elves have no homeland, but House Lyrandar 
hopes to make Valenar a haven for its people. 

* The ancestors of the elves fought goblins for control 
of this region many thousands of years ago. Relics of 
that struggle are still scattered across Valenar and the 
Blade Desert: ruins, haunted fortresses, and battle- 
fields that have slipped out of alignment with time. 

• Valenar warbands include druids and rangers, and 
druidic magic bolsters the military arsenal of the 
elves. Walls of thorns surround elven fortresses, and 
beasts fight alongside the elves. Valenar horses are 
known for being as fearless and stubborn as the elves 
who ride them. 


VALENAR CHARACTERS 


See chapter 1 for additional information about creating 
Valenar elves. When creating a Valenar character or 
NPC, consider the following: 


Martial Role. Valenar was forged in war. As an elf, con- 
sider your role in a warband. Are you a simple soldier, 
an acolyte devoted to the elven ancestors, or a sage 
familiar with your Valenar history? As a half-elf, you 
might be an entertainer, a sailor, or a guild artisan 
working to support the elf army, or you might be a 
charlatan seeking opportunities. As a human from 
Valenar, you could be an urchin born in Taer Valaes- 
tas, or a folk hero fighting for the common people. 

Dreams. Have you left Valenar behind, or are your as- 
pirations tied to the new kingdom? As a half-elf with 
Valenar blood, do you want to be recognized as a true 
Valenar—granted a bond to a patron ancestor and a 
chance at immortality—or are you more interested 
in building a homeland for your people? As a human 
whose land the elves reclaimed, do you want to work 
with the elves or do you want to drive them out—and if 
so, who do you want to replace them? 

Animal Companions. Feytouched beasts play an 
important role in Valenar society. The Valenar are 
knownfor their steeds, but a wide range of Valenar 
beasts bond with non-elves. As a starting character, 
you might not have established a connection to a Vale- 
nar beast. If you return to Valenar later in your adven- 
turing career, perhaps you will find your bondmate. 


CITIES AND SITES 


Most of the communities of Valenar consist of farming 
villages, with fortress towers scattered across the plains 
as military outposts. 


MOONSHADOW 

A peaceful Khoravar village built on the Old Road, 
Moonshadow is a young community, built by immigrants 
who hope that Valenar can become a home for their peo- 
ple. Though small, Moonshadow has drawn half-elves 
from across Khorvaire, and a surprising number of 
gifted scholars and artisans thrive in the village. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


I29 


PyLAS MARADAL 

The second largest city in Valenar, Pylas Maradal is 

a port on the southern coast. House Lyrandar has in- 
vested in the city and built shipyards and a large house 
enclave. The port sees traffic from Q'barra, Sarlona, and 
Aerenal. When the region was part of Cyre, this city was 
known as Southport, a haven for smugglers and pirates. 


'TAER VALAESTAS 

High King Shaeras Vadallia maintains his seat in Taer 
Valaestas. Located in the center of the kingdom, the 

city is built for war and surrounded by a living wall of 
bronzewood thorns. In addition to the royal palace, 
outposts of most dragonmarked houses, and a market 
where foreigners sell their wares, Taer Valaestas hosts 
the primary temple of the Keepers of the Past and a vast 
arena used for horse training, races, and other displays 
of equestrian skill. 


AFTERMATH OF THE LAST WAR 


There's a popular saying in Taer Valaestas: "The 
shadow of war hangslong over Valenar." War defines 
Valenar culture. The Treaty of Thronehold recognized 
Valenar as a sovereign nation, but the elves are already 
pushing the limits of the treaty. Some venture into the 
Mournland or the untamed jungles of Q'barra, and Vale- 
nar warbands have launched raids into Darguun and 
Karrnath. High King Shaeras Vadallia has promised to 
rein in his warriors, but many believe that the elves will 
continue their provocation. Their main interestis con- 
flict with a worthy foe—and they might want Darguun or 
Karrnath to declare war. 

Because of this, the nation remains on a war footing. 
Villages find it challenging to produce the supplies re- 
quired to maintain the elf army. Still, the Valenar are 
rarely cruel overlords. As long as a village can meet its 
quotas, the elves leave it alone, though villages that fall 
below expectations are more likely to receive assistance 
from druidic advisors than punishment. 


ZILARGO 


Capital: Trolanport 
Hallmarks: Alchemy, education, elemental binding, 
entertainment, gnomes, precious stones 


At first glance, the homeland of the gnomes appears 

to be a paradise. City streets are bright and clean, the 
universities and libraries are the finest in Khorvaire, 
everyone seems happy and helpful, and crime is all but 
unheard of. But Zil society teems with layers of intrigue 
and blackmail invisible to human eyes. The Trust, 

a ruthless secret police force, eliminates any threat 

to society. 

Zilargo isn't a tyranny. Each major city has a demo- 
cratically elected ruling council and a seat on the Tri- 
umvirate that governs the nation; the Trust reports to 
the Triumvirate. The Zil gnomes built this system, and 
they are quite happy with it. Their streets are safe, and 
as long as you play by the rules of the game, the Trust 
ignores you. Outsiders find this casual acceptance of 
preemptive assassination to be terrifying, but the Zil 
genuinely trust the Trust. 


FRED HOOPER 


Zil gnomes live within a web of intrigues. The Trust 
condones their actions, as long as they break no laws 
and don't threaten the state or the status quo. A gnome 
charlatan can connive to steal a jewel mine from an- 
other gnome—as long as the charlatan accomplishes the 
deed through cunning, negotiation, or deception rather 
than violence or outright theft, and as long as the mine 
staysin Zil hands. The same applies to adventurers 
planning schemes in Zilargo. Violence draws attention 
and deadly consequences from the Trust, but intrigue is 
perfectly acceptable. 

The Trust is a network of spies and assassins. Most 
agents of the Trust simply pass information through 
dead drops; some estimate that a third of the nation 
works for the Trust in this capacity. When the Trust 
identifies a threat, it acts preemptively. Trust agents 
prefer to solve a problem without violence—by sharing a 
piece of information or a whispered warning sent via a 
message spell. But the Trust won't hesitate to eliminate 
a threat, whether with poison, spell, or blade. Typically, 
a target never sees the agent of their demise. 


INTERESTING THINGS 
ABOUT ZILARGO 


• Most consider the Library of Korranberg the finest 
repository of knowledge in Khorvaire. 

• The Korranberg Chronicle is the leading source of 
news in Khorvaire. Gnome chroniclers travel across 
Khorvaire in search of stories. 

* The major cities of Zilargo maintain temples and 
shrines dedicated to every religion. Most Zil explore a 
few faiths before settling on one; others practice mul- 
tiple religions. 


ZIL CHARACTERS 


As you develop a Zil character, consider the follow- 
ing factors: 


Family Ties. In a nation shaped by intrigue, you need 
someone you can rely on. For the Zil, that's family. 
Unless you're an orphan, discuss your family with 
your DM. What's their business? Who's your favorite 
relative? Are you currently involved in any family 
schemes? Family members might call on you for help 
over the course of your adventurers, but they can also 
be a resource for you. 

Knowledge and Power. The Zil prize knowledge above 
all else. Sage is a suitable background for any Zil; 
charlatan and spy are also appropriate, reflecting 
their love of intrigue. Classes that specialize in melee 
combat are rare among the Zil. The soldiers of Zilargo 
include rogues, bards, wizards, and artificers. 

The Trust. In creating a Zil character, consider whether 
you have any ties to the Trust. A vast number of 
gnomes serve as the eyes and ears of the Trust, re- 
porting interesting information to a Trust handler. 

As an active agent, you could receive missions tied to 
your current adventures. If you and your companions 
are fighting the Emerald Claw, you might have a sec- 

ondary assignment to eliminate a specific Claw agent 
or acquire a particular object from their base. While 

the spy background is a logical choice for a Trust 


agent, the agency recruits characters of every class 
and background. Your class abilities reflect special- 
ized training and granted abilities—the magical equiv- 
alent of spy gadgets! 


CITIES AND SITES 


The gnomes of Zilargo place a high value on appear- 
ances. They design beauty into their architecture, 
featuring delicate carvings, elaborate railings and bal- 
conies, and lavish gardens. Every community contains 
murals and statues scattered throughout. Most fixtures 
and buildings are designed for those of small stature, 
but buildings constructed for taller folk also exist. The 
Zil have a talent for illusion and for binding elementals, 
and they incorporate both of these forms of magic into 
everyday life. 


KORRANBERG 

Nestled against the base of the Seawall Mountains, Kor- 
ranberg is the oldest city in Zilargo. Many aristocrats of 
other nations come to study in the famous library and 
the gnome colleges of Korranberg. The ancestral cita- 
del of House Sivis is located here, as well as a host of 
temples including the Codex Vault, Khorvaire's largest 
shrine to Aureon. 


'THURIMBAR 

This port city draws musicians and artists from across 
Khorvaire. It addition to its legendary clubs and schools 
of music, Thurimbar is on the cutting edge of arcane 
sound—the use of illusion magic to generate music. En- 
tertainers flock to Thurimbar to share their music and 
immerse themselves in its rich musical culture. 


'TROLANPORT 

With its crisscrossing canals and flooded streets, the 
capital of Zilargo serves as the center of the gnome ship- 
building industry and a nexus for trade. Scores of ships 
make port here daily. Among the many beautiful things 
the city is known for are its spectacular coastal thun- 
derstorms. Crowds gather on balconies and verandas to 
watch these awesome displays. 

The Tower of the Triumvirate rises over the central 
portion of the city. House Kundarak, House Sivis, and 
House Cannith maintain outposts in the city, and the 
other dragonmarked houses station agents here as well. 


ZOLANBERG 

Hidden high in the Seawall Mountains, Zolanberg lies 
at the heart of a network of jewel mines. These mines 
face attacks by kobolds living in the mountains, as well 
as goblin raiders from Darguun. Gnomes and dwarves 
inhabit the city. House Kundarak maintains a great vault 
here while House Tharashk has completed construction 
of a large hall for the Prospectors Guild. 


AFTERMATH OF THE LAST WAR 


Walking the streets of Korranberg, one might never 
know that the war occurred. Zilargo avoided most of 
the violence of the Last War, and cosmetic magic and 
illusions were employed to repair the few cities that 
suffered damage. Many Zil prefer to ignore the war 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


131 


completely, referring to it as “that unpleasantness to 
the north." Nonetheless, Zilargo was a staunch ally of 


Breland during the war, providing the nation with ships, 


intelligence, and elemental weaponry. This aid left the 
nation with enemies. The Order of the Emerald Claw 
has launched attacks on Zil communities, and certain 
cells of Breland's Swords of Liberty accuse the Zil of 
manipulating Breland. The Trust has contained these 
attacks, but it always anticipates more trouble ahead. 

The jewel miners of eastern Zilargo often clash with 
the goblins of Darguun and the kobolds that live in Sea- 
wall Mountains. These skirmishes could expand into 
wider conflicts. 

Overall, however, little has changed in Zilargo be- 
cause the Trust keeps the nation on a steady path. Ad- 
venturers who travel through Zilargo would be wise to 
avoid causing trouble or drawing the Trust's attention. 


DISTANT LANDS 


This section of the gazetteer provides a glimpse of the 
wonder and adventure found in the lands beyond Khor- 
vaire's horizon. Use these entries to inspire adventures 
that take place in these distant lands, and to introduce 
trinkets or relics from foreign realms into Khorvaire. 


Мар 2.2: ISLANDS OF AERENAL 


THE ISLANDS OF 


AERENAL 


DAJAR OPISTA 
(THE JUNGLE 
\ OF.DAGGERS) 


The Gates 
of Sorrow 


BLACKWOOD 
JUNGLE ^ 


AERENAL 
In Aerenal, you might ... 


* Consult an elven archmage who's been dead for 
twenty thousand years. 

* Battle sinister forces that have crawled into Eberron 
from a realm of eternal night. 

* Learn secrets of magic unknown in Khorvaire. 


The massive island of Aerenal is the ancient kingdom 
of the elves. Its jungles provide strange and valuable 
lumbers: soarwood used for the hulls of airships, tough 
bronzewood, and trees that remain alive after be- 

ing felled. 

The island’s proximity to the planes of Irian and 
Mabar (both described in chapter 4) allows the lines 
between life and death to become blurred. Danger- 
ous, dark forces creep in from the plane known as the 
Endless Night, but that planar resonance also enables 
the elves to perform feats of necromancy unmatched 
elsewhere in Eberron. Among the Aereni elves, the 
honored dead walk among the living. Heroes who died 
in glorious battle return to serve the Sibling Kings. And 
in the depths of Shae Mordai, the deathless lords of the 
Undying Court study the shifting balance of the planes 
and the path of the Draconic Prophecy. 


Aeren's 


Sound Р, THALANN 


Town 


City 


GoL 


Capital 
Castle/Fort 


Ruin 
Site 


m nlsi igo "t 


SHae MORDAI 


Necromancy is a pillar of Aereni society, distinct from 
the sinister power most adventurers encounter. Positive 
energy sustains the deathless undead of Aerenal—both 
the light of Irian and the devotion freely given by their 
descendants. The elves of Aerenal despise necromancy 
that draws on the negative energy of Mabar, and agents 
of the Undying Court embrace their mandate to seek out 
and destroy vampires, liches, and other such undead. 

Aereni civilization is overtwenty thousand years old. 
Secure in their island sanctuary, the elves watched na- 
tions of goblins and humans rise and fall. The Aereni 
possess secrets and powers the rest of Khorvaire has 
yet to discover, but they are more interested in perfect- 
ing their ancient traditions than in innovation and dis- 
covery. Àn Aereni wizard might spend a decade refining 
the pronunciation of a single spell's incantation. For 
now, humanity can't match the power of the elves. If that 
balance changes, will Aerenal take action? 


NOTABLE LOCATIONS 


Aerenal taunts visitors with its ancient secrets and 
trackless jungles. 


PvLAS TALAEAR 

The gateway to Aerenal, thisport city is the primary 
point of contact between Aerenal and the outside world. 
In this city driven by commerce, almost all the dragon- 


marked houses have outposts here, and it includes vast 
markets, warehouses, and lumber yards. 


SHAE CAIRDAL 

This city is the capital of Aerenal, the seat of the Sibling 
Kings, and the center for commerce and diplomacy be- 
tween the elven families, who otherwise remain isolated 
in their own city-states. Foreigners are encouraged to 
conduct business in Pylas Talaear. 


SHAE MORDAI 

This ancient citadel houses the Undying Court, the 
deathless ancestors who shape the destiny of Aerenal. It 
is built atop a rift to the Plane of Irian and suffused with 
positive energy. Almost no commerce takes place here. 
This center for arcane study also serves as a memorial 
to all the heroes of the elves, both the deathless and 
those lost in the distant past. The Citadel of the Court 

is said to be far larger than it appears and to hold the 
greatest treasures of the elves. 


THE NORTH 

The northern steppes of Aerenal are the domain of 

the Tairnadal, the warrior elves who seized control of 
Valenar. Although much of their population now resides 
in Valenar, many Tairnadal noncombatants—children, 
artisans, and the druids who raise their remarkable 
beasts—remain in Aerenal. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 133 


mo SERE terree as dn. 


134 


ес НЕ атал 


SHARK INQUISITIVE 


NIGHTLIFE OF THE 
WALKING DEAD 


erect] о ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө э э ө ө ө ө э ө ө ө ө ө а э ө ө ө ө ө э ө ө ө ө э ө ө ө ж 


The port city of Pylas Talaear is a place of wonders. Stand 
on the steps of the Grand Temple and look down upon 
the High Street and you'll see fountains of light cast- 

ing shadows across buildings that have stood for over 
ten thousand years. Brilliant motes dance through the 
air—spectral messengers carrying words across the city. 
But the most remarkable feature of Pylas Talaear is the 
dead. If you know anything about Aerenal, you've surely 
heard of the Undying Court, the deathless cabinet that 
guides the nation. Only the grandest members of society 
win elevation to the Undying Court, but there are many 
forms of preservation. Go to the Dalaen Forge and you'll 
see the ghost of Old Dalaen advising his descendants as 
they work wood and steel. Visit the Eidolon Tavern and 
you'll see poltergeists mixing drinks, and you can get 
advice from a spectral bartender with thousands of years 
of wisdom to share. Visit Maer Crossing at midnight and 
you'll see the spirit of Lady Jhaelian dance with a grace 
unmatched by any living elf. 

Wondrous as it is, as a human visitor, I found it more 
than a little unnerving. There's no escaping the past in 
Aerenal; it lingers all around you, whispering advice or 
warning you to avoid transgression. You never know 
when you'll feel the tingle of spectral fingers against your 
skin or hear the whisper of an elf who's older than hu- 
man civilization. There are many wonders in Aerenal ... 
just don't get buried in the past. 


AERENAL'S INFLUENCE IN 
KHORVAIRE 


In Khorvaire, you might ... 


e Team up with an agent of the Undying Court to bring 
down a powerful vampire. 

• Be summoned by a deathless sage who needs your 
help to fulfill an ancient prophecy. 

• Bargain with a merchant offering rare magic items. 


Few Aereni elves are interested in the world beyond 
their island. The Aereni see Khorvaire as a primitive 
backwater, and humans as dangerously impulsive. Aer- 
eni who travel to Khorvaire have a concrete purpose for 
the journey, which could drive an adventure. 

The magewrights and artificers of Aerenal are more 
advanced than those of Khorvaire. Aereni artisans 
fashion rods, staffs, and wands, and other rare or even 
legendary items may come from Aerenal. However, the 
nationis less industrialized than Khorvaire. Legend- 
ary items aren't mass produced; some are personally 
crafted by members of the Undying Court. 

Aereni goods make use of exotic plants and woods. 
Bronzewood has the density and even some of the 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


properties of steel; an Aerenicleric might wear a 
bronzewood breastplate, while a paladin of the Undying 
Court could wear a suit of elaborated engraved bronze- 
wood plate armor. Bronzewood leaves are remarkably 
tough, and the Aereni craft "leaf weave" armor function- 
ally equivalent to leather, studded leather, or chain mail. 
Bronzewood can also be crafted into weapons, and Aer- 
eni warriors use spears or swords made from a single 
piece of bronzewood. 


TRINKETS FROM AERENAL 
d8  Trinket 
1  Abronzewood ring inscribed with the Elvish word for 
"hope" 
2  Adried flower; if it's placed in water, it blooms 
3 An ebony locket; when it's opened, an elven voice 
whispers "Always" 
A tiny skull carved from dark wood 
A finger bone inscribed with an unknown sigil 
An ivory flute which produces no sound 
A small journal made from preserved leaves 


o м су tn fF 


A book of poetry written by undead elves 


ARGONNESSEN 


In Argonnessen, you could ... 


* Clash with tribes of dragon-worshiping barbarians. 
* Explore an ancient city of dragons. 
* Discover mighty artifacts and long-lost spells. 


Argonnessen is home to the oldest civilization on Eber- 
ron. The dragons wield ancient magic, and they have 
shielded their homeland against divination and telepor- 
tation. Tribes of barbarians roam the Seren Islands and 
the coastlines of Argonnessen; these include members 
of almost every humanoid race, perhaps collected by 
dragons in ages past. The Seren barbarians worship the 
dragons and protect the coasts from invaders. To date, 
no one from Khorvaire has ventured into the interior of 
the continent and returned to speak of it. 

No one knows how many dragons live in Argonnes- 
sen, but stories tell of vast cavern complexes filled with 
the treasures of fallen civilizations, of prisons holding 
bound demons, of cities made from adamantine. 

To those of Khorvaire, Argonnessen is a mystery 
space on the map. Only the most powerful characters 
might visit Argonnessen and return to tell the tale. 


ARGONNESSEN'S INFLUENCE IN 
KHORVAIRE 


In Khorvaire, you might ... 


* Prevent a villain from acquiring a powerful artifact 
smuggled out of Argonnessen. 

• Encounter a dragonborn barbarian born on the Seren 
islands, whoshares tales of mighty wyrms. 

* Battle a dragon who guards a hidden vault. 


Some say the mysterious dragons of Argonnessen 
hide in plain sight, that shapechanged dragons scat- 
tered across Khorvaire pull the strings of civilization. 


According to some stories, the dragons seek to protect 
the younger races from vile fiends. In other tales, the 
dragons see the people of Khorvaire as fodder for 
arcane experiments. A dragon could be encountered 
as an ally or as a cruel enemy who casually crushes 
humanoids. 

The magic of Argonnessen is far more powerful than 
the forces wielded by the wizards of Khorvaire. Many 
of the greatest artifacts in history were made in Argon- 
nessen. Dragons are infused with magic, and their cre- 
ations are made from the bones and scales of their kind. 


TRINKETS FROM ARGONNESSEN 
d10 Trinket 


A pierced dragon scale on a cord 


-— 


2  Astatuette of a dragon carved from black bone 

3  Adragon's tooth, engraved with an unknown sigil 

4  Achild's doll of a dragon, woven from leather cords 

5 A dagger carved from a dragon's talon 

6  Abrass disk bearing the silhouette of a black dragon 

7 Asmall egg-shaped piece of polished bone 

8 А bone fragment with brass inlaid runes 

9  Aleather pouch filled with tiny draconic teeth 

10 A single large seed that's warm tothe touch 
KHYBER 


In Khyber, you could ... 


* Fight mind flayers and armies of hideous aberrations. 

* Discover a wondrous realm lit by an inner sun. 

* Prevent a fiendish overlord from escaping its an- 
cient prison. 


The common creation myth contends that when the Pro- 
genitor Dragons fought, Eberron trapped Khyber in her 
coils and became the world, imprisoning her evil sib- 
ling in a living prison. Bound within the world, Khyber 
spawns demons and monsters to plague the children of 
Eberron. This might be myth and metaphor, but it's also 
a description of fact: there are worlds within the world, 
realms inhabited by aberrations, fiends, and all manner 
of monsters. 

Any time someone descends below the surface of the 
world, they enter Khyber. But the underworld takes two 
very different forms. First is the natural realm, networks 
of tunnels and caverns formed from stone and soil. 
These passages are dark and dangerous, but they're ex- 
actly what you expect to find in an underground realm. 
Such passages might be home to carrion crawlers, giant 
beetles, or clans of kobolds. But ultimately these mun- 
dane caverns follow the laws of nature. 

There's another aspect to Khyber: go deep enough and 
you find a seemingly endless array of demiplanes, each 
stranger than the last. When descending into a chasm, 
you could find a labyrinth inhabited by demons or dis- 
cover a realm consisting of the guts of a colossal living 
creature. Anything is possible in Khyber, and these 
"worlds within" are home to all manner of terrors. 

The demiplanes of Khyber are not concretely tied to 
the world above. You could discover a passage in Bre- 
land that leads into a disturbing subterranean swamp 


filled with oozes and slimes. After traveling what seems 
to be a few miles, you might emerge from a different tun- 
nel in Xen'drik, half a world away from where you began. 

The Mror Holds demonstrate this mystery. Over the 
past century, the dwarves discovered a vast subterra- 
nean kingdom within the Ironroot Mountains. Most 
of these halls rest in the natural layers of Khyber. The 
halls connect to one another in logical cartographic or- 
der. But as the ancient dwarves dug deeper, they opened 
passages into the unnatural realms and unleashed the 
hordes of the daelkyr Dyrrn the Corruptor. Passages 
to Dyrrn's realm also exist in the Shadow Marches, on 
the opposite side of Khorvaire. The Corruptor's domain 
doesn't necessarily stretch across the entire world; the 
portals to the worlds within defy natural law. 

These connections impact the world in a number of 
ways. Dark forces can rise anywhere in the world, burst- 
ing out of a previously unknown portal to Khyber. This 
fact dictates the primary mission of the Church of the 
Silver Flame: to stand ready to defend the innocent from 
such unnatural threats. Because the demiplanes con- 
nect to the world at random, you never know what you 
might find when you venture into the depths. A newly 
opened chasm in the sewers could be an entirely mun- 
dane hole in the ground, or it could be a passage to the 
Abyssal Forests of Khar. 

The many layers of Khyber share similarity only in 
their strangeness and deadliness. Eberron is the natural 
world; Khyber is the source of fiends and monstrosities 
and the domain of the alien daelkyr. Some cults of the 
Dragon Below believe that paradise awaits them in the 
Vale of the Inner Sun, but such cultists also consider 
gibbering mouthers and mind flayers to be creatures of 
beauty. Wondrous treasures might wait in the worlds 
below amid hordes of demons and aberrations. 


KHYBER'S INFLUENCE IN KHORVAIRE 
In Khorvaire, you might ... 


- Find a way to close a passage to Khyber before a 
horde of horrors emerges from it. 

* Battle a mind flayer that has established a cult in 
the sewers. 

* Stop the spread of a deadly drug or strange disease 
flowing from a well tied to Khyber. 


Khyber is an ever-present threat. Any deep passage 
could connect to a realm of fiends or spew out an army 
of aberrations. Despite the magnitude of this threat, 
portals to Khyber are very rare, and they are stable 
once found. If you dig a hole in the ground, the odds 
that you'll eventually reach the Vale of the Inner Sun 
are infinitesimal. And if a portal to Khyber existed in 
the sewers of Fairhaven, odds are good that it would al- 
ready have been discovered. The risk arises when you're 
exploring passages where no one has gone before. 

The sewers of Fairhaven might be safe today, but if an 
earthquake opens a new shaft or a group of cultists digs 
deeper, a previously unknown passage to Khyber could 
be uncovered. Wherever a passage to Khyber appears, 
monsters and dark powers can rise up to threaten the 
world above. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 135 


136 


Cults of the Dragon Below often have ties to Khyber. 
Some serve aberrations or fight alongside dolgrims and 
dolgaunts (see chapter 6). Others can unintentionally 
threaten a community by releasing something from the 
underworld: an unnatural disease, a malevolent demon, 
or a strange and addictive drug. In dealing with such a 
cult, the question is not only how to stop their current 
machinations, but how to seal the passage or prevent it 
from posing an ongoing threat. 

Treasures from Khyber can take many forms. The 
daelkyr create living tools, including symbionts (see 
chapter 5), but any magic item could be presented as an 
organic creation: a living cloak of the mountebank that 
teleports its wearer through the plane of madness; a 
dagger of venom made from chitin and muscle, similar 
to a scorpion's barb; a crystal ball made by the daelkyr 
Belashyrra that looks like a giant eye, casting visions of 
distant places directly into the wielder's mind. Items re- 
covered from fiendish demiplanes might be constructed 
from standard materials but have a sinister aspect or 
appearance, such as a sword of life stealing from the 
Abyssal Forest of Khar made of jagged, blackened steel. 
Shadows trail the blade, and it issues a hungry moan 
any time it draws blood. 


TRINKETS FROM KHYBER 


410 Trinket 
1 A pressed flower with vivid green petals; when you 
smell it, you hear eerie music 
2 Atiny ball of putty; if you set it down, it begins to 
slowly crawl around 
A perpetually warm disk of dark iron 


hw 


A small journal with leathery pages; any words you 

write in it slowly disappear 

A four-sided die carved with strange markings 

А cameo with the silhouette of an unknown species 
A preserved finger with purple flesh and four joints 


соо NW їл 


A perfectly preserved eye; if you set it down, it rotates 
to follow your movement 

9  Asmall box when opened, you alone hear screaming 
10 A preserved insect; you've never seen another like it 


NORTH AND SOUTH POLES 


At the world's poles—Everice to the south and the Frost- 
fell to the north—you might ... 


* Discover an ancient civilization hidden be- 
neath the ice. 

* Search for the survivors of a lost expedition. 

• Find the source of a mysterious mystical signal. 


It's common knowledge that Everice is the domain of 
the Queen of Winter, an archfey who commands a host 
of winter wolves and knights carved from living ice. The 
queen lives in a glacial palace, and those who overcome 
her guards and the deadly weather to earn her favor can 
gain powerful boons. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


It's also common knowledge that Everice is the home 
of frost giants who escaped the destruction of Xen'drik. 
Now they hone their arctic magic and plot vengeance. 
However, a clan of white dragons battle the giants to 
keep them from growing too powerful. Woe betide the 
people of Khorvaire if dragon and giant ever set aside 
their ancient vendetta and join forces! 

The Frostfell is thought to be the original homeland of 
the dwarves, and some believe that an ancient nation of 
dwarves still thrives under the ice. Others say that the 
Frostfell was once a verdant realm until the dwarves 
uncovered the prison of an archfiend, which buried their 
nation under endless ice. These scholars warn against 
disturbing this overlord, lest a new age of ice be un- 
leashed across the entire world. 

Mystery shrouds the poles of Eberron. A few expe- 
ditions have ventured to the Frostfell, but no one from 
Khorvaire has set foot in Everice in living memory and 
returned to speak of it. 


THE FROSTFELL'S AND EVERICE'S 
INFLUENCE IN KHORVAIRE 


In Khorvaire, you might ... 


* Clash with a cabal of winter warlocks serving a sinis- 
ter power stirring in Everice. 

* Encounter a group of frost giants or Frostfell dwarves 
establishing a foothold in Khorvaire. 

* Discover a journal from a Frostfell expedition that re- 
veals a horrifying threat. 


The people of Khorvaire have no commerce with the 
arctic regions and no certainty about what lives there. If 
a threat comes from Everice, it might take time for peo- 
ple to identify its origin. 

With this in mind, relics from Everice or the Frostfell 
could take any form. Are these treasures created by gi- 
ants, fey, or dwarves? Are they carved from eternal ice, 
or are they forged from dwarven steel? If the civilization 
of the dwarves truly began in the Frostfell, did it fall 
into ruin, or are there progenitor dwarves who possess 
spells and weapons beyond anything known in Khor- 
vaire? And how would these ancient dwarf lords react to 
their Mror descendants? 


TRINKETS FROM THE FROSTFELL AND EVERICE 

d8  Trinket 

1 Asmall prism carved from ice that doesn't melt 

2  Arusted iron coin, depicting a dwarf lord and the 
worlds “Five Rex Undra" 

3 A pair of eight-sided dice carved from ice that doesn't 
melt 

4 A swatch of silvery fur that's cold to the touch, possibly 
from a winter wolf 

5 A snowball; it doesn't melt and can't be compressed 
into ice 
A tiny white dragon sculpted from ice that doesn't melt 
A key carved from ice that doesn't melt 
A single scale from a white dragon 


FROSTFELL 


SARLONA 


In Sarlona, you could ... 


• Infiltrate an empire ruled by psychic overlords. 

¢ Defend an ancient mountain monastery. 

* Disable a monolith used to control the dreams 
of a city. 


Tens of thousands of years ago, the vast continent of 
Sarlona was the cradle of human civilization. Three 
thousand years ago, the first human colonists left, set- 
ting in motion events shaping modern-day Khorvaire. 

Sarlona was once home to over a dozen distinct king- 
doms, but wars devastated the continent. From this 
chaos, a band of saviors rose up to forge a new world. 
Guided by celestial spirits and endowed with vast 
psionic powers, these champions became known as the 
Inspired. Today, the Inspired have united the broken na- 
tions into a single realm: the Empire of Riedra. Outsid- 
ers aren't welcome in Riedra, and little is known of the 
nation. Merchants tell stories of massive monoliths that 
control the dreams of the people, and of secret police 
who use psionics to root out dissidents. 

A single nation stands against the might of Riedra: 
the mountain refuge of Adar, homeland of the kalashtar 
(see chapter 1). The Adarans lack the numbers to chal- 
lenge Riedra, yet they hold their fortress monasteries 
against endless waves of Riedran assaults. The Adarans 
possess remarkable psychic and martial disciplines. 


NOTABLE LOCATIONS 


Like Khorvaire, Sarlona primarily occupiesthe north- 
ern hemisphere of Eberron, and it has all the climatic 
and topographic variety one would expect given its im- 
mensity. A few places in Sarlona known to Khorvairians 
are described below. 


DAR JIN 

This port city is the only legal point of entry for foreign- 
ers who wish to enter the Empire of Riedra. АП travelers 
remain confined in the foreign quarter. Merchants from 
across Khorvaire trade for exotic Riedran goods, while 
envoys from many nations negotiate with the emissaries 
of the Inspired. To enter Riedra proper, travelers must 
obtain a transit visa from the Iron Gate, the office of for- 
eign relations. The office grants few such visas; visitors 
must make a compelling case for entry or find a secret 
way to evade the watchful eyes of the Iron Gate. 


KAssHTA KEEP 

All but one ofthe monasteries of Adar lie concealed be- 
hind a blend of psychic and arcane techniques. Kasshta 
Keep refuses to hide from outsiders or the Inspired. It is 
the de facto capital of Adar and the abode of the Keeper 
of the Word, who guides the kalashtar people. High in 
the mountains, the monastery is reached by winches 
and lifts. Its inhabitants include wizards, monks, and 
mystics; if you want to play a monk from an exotic land, 
you could have learned your art in Kasshta Keep. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 137 


138 


triste tpi ts RD ces a im Imo d — —— M ráÀ 


OHR KALUUN 

Riedra built its empire on the foundation of a dozen 
shattered nations. Scholars consider the loss of these 
nations to be a tragedy ... except for Ohr Kaluun. The 
lords of this ancient kingdom were driven by deep para- 
noia and an all-consuming thirst for power. The sages 
of Ohr Kaluun studied the darkest paths of magic and 
bargained with fiends and other foul creatures. They 
warped their bodies through mystical rituals and pacts, 
creating the first changelings, skulks, and tiefling blood- 
lines. Ohr Kaluun was ultimately consumed by the feuds 
of its paranoid mage-lords and the crusading legions of 
its neighbors. Today, it is a shunned region, haunted and 
cursed. Dark secrets and great treasures remain in the 
vast war labyrinths of Ohr Kaluun, but fiends, wards, 
and far deadlier threats linger in this fallen kingdom. 


SARLONA'S INFLUENCE IN 
KHORVAIRE 


In Khorvaire, you might ... 


* Struggle to expose the schemes of an order of psychic 
assassins. 

* Steal a memory crystal from an Inspired ambassador. 

* Help an Adaran envoy deliver a vital message to a ka- 
lashtar elder. 


ж. iR 


SHART INQUISITIVE 


EXCLUSIVE 


BENEATH 
THE BASALT 
TOWERS, PART 3 


+++» жж веж ө ө ө ө э ө ө ө ө ө э э ө э ө ө ө ө ө э ө ө ө ө ө ө ө э ө ө ө ө э ө ө ө ө ө ө э ө ө 


When I first spoke to the Morgrave board, I hid the de- 
tails I share with you now. I did this not from malice, 

nor even from fear that I would be ridiculed, but rather 
because I could not bear to revisit the horrors I had seen 
beneath the merciless Menechtarun sands. I force myself 
to revisit them now only in the hopes that in so doing, I 
can prevent any fools from following in our footsteps and 
sharing the fate of my fallen friends. 

We'd made camp in the upper floor of the tower, for 
thousands of years of shifting sand had left that as the 
easiest point of entry. We were surrounded by cyclopean 
bones, and I found myself facing the empty gaze of a 
skull taller than I was. Melanora questioned how these 
grim remnants could linger for so long, but I dismissed it 
as the remarkable effect of the exceptionally dry climate. 
If only I had given more thought to this matter, Melanora 
might still be with us today. Instead she lies lost beneath 
the basalt towers, trapped in hideous service to the an- 
cient powers that dwell in the darkness. 

For the full text of Professor Talbridge's terrifying account, pick 
up the latest issue of the Sharn Inquisitive! 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


нуму үбү: 


Although outsiders aren't welcome in Riedra, the em- 
pire is a powerful nation and a valuable trading partner. 
Riedra offered assistance to multiple nations during 
the Last War. Karrnath relied on Riedran aid to survive 
a wave of terrible famines, and Aundair also received 
support from Riedra. King Sebastes of Q'barra has used 
Riedran troops to maintain order in Newthrone. 

Riedrans rarely appear on the streets of Khorvaire, 
but Inspired ambassadors attend every court. Although 
the Inspired present themselves as generous and kind, a 
darker force followed them across the sea. The Dream- 
ing Dark is an enigmatic order of monks, assassins, 
warlocks, and mystics. Their ultimate agenda remains 
unknown, but they hunt the kalashtar and some believe 
they can control people by manipulating their dreams. 
While most people dismiss the Dreaming Dark as a fool- 
ish story, you might uncover the truth behind the tales. 

Both the Inspired of Riedra and the kalashtar of Adar 
possess psychic powers, and treasures from Sarlona 
reflect this. A set of Sarlonan sending stones might take 
the form of crystals that allow telepathic communica- 
tion. The rod of rulership, ring of mind shielding, ring of 
telekinesis, potion of mind reading, and the medallion of 
thoughts could represent psychic items from Sarlona. 

In addition to psychic treasures, Sarlona is a source of 
a number of exotic plants and medicines. Dreamlily (de- 
scribed in chapter 4) is a useful Sarlonan narcotic, but 
over the course of the past few decades it has become a 
common recreational drug. 


TRINKETS FROM SARLONA 


d8 Trinket 

] A polished crystal sphere; when you clutch it in your 
fist, a telepathic voice recites a story in your mind 

2 Ateardrop pendant made from polished shell; when 
you hold it, you see the image of a young Riedran man 

3 A six-sided crystal die; when you roll it, you feel a 
surge of emotion for six seconds 

4 A sealed vial filled with faintly luminescent blue mist 

5  Acrystal disk engraved with a labyrinthine pattern 

6  Aleather-bound collection of kalashtar poetry called 
Shards of the Light 

7  Asphere of polished crystal; when you hold it in your 
palm, you feel that it knows you and understands you 

8 Асир and ball toy; when you successfully catch the 
ball in the cup, you feel a momentary surge of joy 


XEN'DRIK 
In Xen'drik, you could ... 


* Seekto destroy an ancient mystical weapon before it 
falls into the hands of villains. 

* Battle savage giants in the ruins of their ancient cities. 

* Match wits with cunning drow in the depths of a pri- 
mordial jungle. 


Any follower of the Sovereign Host knows this story 
about Xen'drik. In the dawn of time, the Sovereigns 
bound the fiendish overlords and freed the world from 
chaos. The mighty giants had fought alongside the 


Straights of Shargon 
SORROWDUSK 


THE CONTINENT. OF 


XEN DRIK 


KAPAERIAN: 
{ISLAND 


Phoenix 


500 1000 Basin 


miles THEN 
iU WASTING 

SUN x= PLAINES 
Ж "m 


РА 


Шһгее Вагге! Ё 
‘Gove * ы, А 
.SHARGON'S 


T 


S ЛАРЅН[ОЕЈ 
Obsidian] фз ШОК 


, $ 
cun с 


Pyramid(ofi 
SilEboniElame| 


MU SW SHADOWS А, 
of et. TN = 


q, mE 
Dar é „ФФ & 
P PON 
Qat? POM 


Sea of 
Lost Souls 


p. 7 
[IDOWRONIS 
SHIELD) 


“7 
AS M. erri. 
XE ASH CAUL Dp 


AUS Village 
Town 
City 
Ruin 
Site 


Volcano 


MHWNDERWALL Dark 


ЖЕ ЕЕ! ЕШ - Sea 


Map 2.3: CONTINENT OF XEN'ORIK 


Sovereigns, and in gratitude Aureon granted them do- 
minion over the continent of Xen'drik. Aureon taught 
giants the secrets of wizardry, and they grew powerful. 
The giants built towers that touched the sky and seem- 
ingly endless cities. 

The mightiest among the giants was the titan Cul'sir. 
His power was so great that he pulled the thirteenth 
moon from the sky and crushed it in a fit of anger. The 
giants ruled many lesser races, and eventually the elves 
rose up against them. Cul'sir unleashed plagues upon 
the rebellious elves. He made assassins of elven shad- 
ows and turned them back against their owners. Still 
the rebels persisted. In his anger, Cul'sir prepared to 
pull down the rest of the moons to hurl them at his ene- 
mies, even though he'd destroy the world in doing it. But 
the giants had gone too far, and Aureon set the dragons 
of Argonnessen upon them. The dragons destroyed the 
vast cities and leveled the towers. Cul'sir was slain and 
his people scattered. 

The Sovereigns and Six each laid a curse upon the 
land. Aureon decreed that the creatures of Xen'drik 
would have no knowledge of law, and Boldrei pro- 
claimed that no city would stand. The Traveler distorted 
the land so that no path followed twice. The Devourer 
unleashed fire and storm. And so Xen'drik remains a 
land of mystery, a realm that cannot be mapped, a place 
that holds secrets that could shatter the world. 


This story bears at least some truth. The elves were 
once slaves of the ancient giants, and the dragons did 
eradicate the civilizations of Xen'drik. Great magic has 
warped the land. The environments of Xen'drik are ex- 
treme and unpredictable, and travelers might find a gla- 
cial expanse in the midst of a vast desert. Tens of thou- 
sands of years have passed, yet no civilization has risen 
to the heights of the fallen giants; some believe that 
Aureon's and Boldrei's curses ensure that any city that 
grows too large collapses into madness. The Traveler's 
Curse twists space, and explorers might follow the same 
path twice only to end up in entirely different locations. 

Xen'drik is a continent that defies control. Expeditions 
have unearthed artifacts of immense power, as well as 
fields of Siberys dragonshards (see chapter 5), but once 
you leave a site, you might never find it again. 

Giants still roam Xen'drik, but these creatures have 
never regained the glory of their ancestors. Tribes of 
drow—said to be the shadow-assassins created by the 
Emperor Cul'sir—linger in the darkness. These repre- 
sent just a few of the threats in this vast land. 


NOTABLE LOCATIONS 


Many ports dot the coast of Xen'drik. In addition to the 
treasures of the giants, Xen'drik is a source of Siberys 
dragonshards and other exotic resources. Scholars and 
merchants come to Xen'drik on business, smugglers 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


seek to make extra gold, and pirates prey on everyone. 
Ports come and go, falling prey to monsters or natural 
disasters. But two harbors have stood the test of time. 

Dar Qat. The Inspired lords of Riedra are just as 
interested in the resources of Xen'drik as the people of 
Khorvaire. Dar Qat is a Riedran port, a fortress built 
from glittering crysteel (grown crystal as strong as steel) 
and dwarfed by a nearby monolith believed to serve as 
a psychic anchor for the city. Outsiders are rarely wel- 
come within the walls of Dar Qat. 

Stormreach. Once a haven for pirates and smugglers, 
Stormreach has become a thriving port that serves 
as the passage to the Xen'drik interior. All the dragon- 
marked houses have outposts in the city, and it is home 
to refugees, renegades, criminals, and others who have 
no place on the other continents. The city is ruled by the 
council of Storm Lords, who hold absolute power. As 
Stormreach is built on the foundations of an ancient gi- 
ant city, ruins abound around and below the city. Some 
fear that if the city continues to expand, the growth will 
trigger an ancient curse. But for now, Stormreach is a 
prosperous community and a gateway to adventure. 


XEN' DRIK'S INFLUENCE IN 
KHORVAIRE 
In Khorvaire, you might ... 


* Befriend a drow making their way in the new world. 

* Stop the Emerald Claw from using a giant artifact to 
destroy a city. 

* Aid a scholar in deciphering a book of prophecy found 
in the heart of Xen'drik and brought to Stormreach. 


The tremendous diversity of the people of Xen'drik 
means that no single trait defines objects and artifacts 
from this land. The primitive drow make armor compa- 
rable to studded leather using the chitin of giant scor- 
pions. Rumors abound of more advanced drow civiliza- 
tions in the layers of Khyber that lie beneath Xen'drik. 
The elves lived and fought in Xen'drik before the exodus 
that took them to Aerenal, and elven artifacts remain 
scattered across the region. And the grandest treasures 
include the work of the giants—which can often be diffi- 
cult to use because of their size. The spellbook of a giant 
wizard might hold priceless secrets, but the bulky tome 
can be quite awkward for smaller folk. 


TRINKETS FROM XEN'DRIK 


d8 Trinket 

1 Apunched ticket for a voyage from Sharn to 
Stormreach 

A scorpion's barb engraved with a single Elvish letter 
A copper coin so big you could use it as a dinner plate 
An image of an elf warrior engraved on a giant's tooth 


л 4 WwW ко 


A single page from a giant wizard's spellbook, bearing 
an incomplete spell 
6  Ascrap of parchment, part of a map of Stormreach 
A small book titled Feersome Beests of Zendrik 
8  Ascrimshaw carving of a sahuagin 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


FAITHS OF 
KHORVAIRE 


Religion plays an important role in Eberron. The gods 
don't manifest physically, but people of faith believe that 
divine forces shape everyday life. Shared beliefs unite 
communities and can provide hope in difficult times. 
Most Khorvairians acknowledge the pantheon of 
the Sovereign Host and its malign shadow, the Dark 
Six. The Sovereign Host was the dominant faith of the 
Kingdom of Galifar and holds sway over most of Khor- 
vaire—except for Thrane, which favors the Church of the 
Silver Flame. Other religions connect specific cultures 
or communities; the kalashtar observe the Path of Light, 
and the Undying Court guides the elves of Aerenal. 
Religion is especially importantfor a paladin, cleric, 
or druid, yet any character can have faith in a higher 
power. Following a religion is a way to give your charac- 
ter a deeper connection to the world and a bond to other 
members of the community. The Foundation of Faith 
table can provide ideas for the source of your beliefs. 
Conversely, a lack of faith can also be a meaningful 
part of your story. If you don't believe in any divine 
power, what caused such doubt? The Rejection of Faith 
table offers ideas that can help shape your story. 


FOUNDATION OF FAITH 


d6 Foundation 

1 You were raised in the faith. Your religion is an import- 
ant part of your family and community. 

2 Someone you care about—a mentor, a friend, or a 
lover—introduced you to the faith. 

3 You were raised in a different religion but became 
drawn to the ideals and beliefs of your current faith. 

4 You never took your faith seriously. Then you made a 
vow during the Last War, pledging your devotion if a 
disaster was averted ... and it was. 

5 You're devoted to your religion, but you've never been 
formally educated in its ways. You follow your own 
personal interpretation. 

6 You hada transcendental experience and believe you 
have a divine purpose to fulfill. 


REJECTION OF FAITH 


d6 Rejection 

Т You believe that the magic of clerics and paladins 
doesn't come from deities, but from the caster's inner 
power or belief. 

2 You соте from an agnostic community and give little 
thought to spiritual matters. 

3 You were once deeply devout, but a tragedy during the 
Last War caused you to question your faith. 
A personal loss or betrayal shook your faith. 
You were spiritually scarred by an encounter with a 
fiend or aberration. 

6 You've created your own personal religion and believe 
that all the established faiths are flawed. 


SOVEREIGN HOST 


• The Sovereigns are with us at all times. Onatar stands 
at every forge, and Dol Dorn is with you whenever 
blades are drawn. 

* The Sovereigns shape the world. They offer us guid- 
ance and strength, but we must learn to listen. 

* Honor every Sovereign in their place and time. If you 
hear one voice clearly, embrace their path. 

- Asa follower of the Sovereign Host, you believe that 
the hand of the Sovereigns can be seen in all things. 
What others take to be intuition or instinct, you see 
as the voice of the Sovereigns offering guidance. You 
don't need absolute proof; the fact of a bountiful har- 
vest is evidence of Arawai's benevolence. 


The pantheon of the Sovereign Host embodies all that 
is good in the world. The people of Khorvaire have fol- 
lowed the Sovereigns for thousands of years, and every- 
one knows the names of the Sovereigns and the Dark 
Six. Even people who aren't devout might still swear by 
the Sovereigns or offer a prayer in a moment of crisis. 


DEITIES OF EBERRON 


The Sovereign Host is wondrously diverse. Variations 
and subsects of the faith thrive, and temples are only 
loosely aligned. In a small community, a skilled smith 
might double as the priest because people believe he’s 
close to Onatar. A midwife might symbolically speak for 
Arawai and Boldrei. Typically, the faithful are united by 
their shared beliefs; no central authority seeks to en- 
force a singular creed. 

As a Vassal—a follower of the Sovereign Host—you 
might feel connection to a particular Sovereign, but still 
show reverence to each. Your background can influence 
your particular interpretation of the Sovereigns—the 
Talenta halflings consider the Sovereigns part of a pan- 
theon of spirits, while some Karrns honor only the Sov- 
ereigns of war—but any character can be a Vassal. 


SOVEREIGNS 


These common names and attributes describe the nine 
Sovereigns as they are worshiped in Khorvaire: 


The Sovereign Host 


Arawai 


Aureon 
Balinor 
Boldrei 
Dol Arrah 
Dol Dorn 


Kol Korran 
Olladra 
Onatar 


The Dark Six 
The Devourer 


The Fury 
The Keeper 


The Mockery 
The Shadow 
The Traveler 


Other Faiths 
The Silver Flame 
The Blood of Vol 


Cults of the Dragon 


Below 
The Path of Light 


The Spirits of the Past 


The Undying Court 


Province 
Life, love 


Knowledge, law 
Beasts, the hunt 
Community, home 
Honor, sunlight 
Strength at arms 


Trade, travel 
Good fortune 
Artifice, the forge 


Province 
Nature's wrath 


Passion, revenge 
Death, greed 


Betrayal, bloodshed 


Ambition, dark magic 


Change, chaos 


Province 

Good, protection 
Immortality 
Madness 


Light, self-improvement 


Elven ancestors 
Elven ancestors 


Suggested Cleric Domains 
Life, Nature 


Knowledge, Order* 
Nature, War 

Life 

Light, War 

War 


Trickery 
Life, Trickery 


Forge,** Knowledge 


Suggested Cleric Domains 
Tempest 


War 
Death 


Trickery, War 


Knowledge 


Suggested Cleric Domains 
Life, Light, War 

Death, Life 

Trickery 


Life, Light 
Nature, War 
Grave;** Knowledge, Life 


Common Symbol 


Sheaf of wheat tied with green ribbon or 
bronze dragon 


Open tome or blue dragon 

Pair of antlers or green dragon 

Fire in a stone hearth or copper dragon 
Rising sun or red dragon 


Longsword crossed over a shield or silver 
dragon 


Nine-sided gold coin or white dragon 
Domino or black dragon 
Crossed hammer and tongs or brass dragon 


Common Symbol 


Bundle of five sharpened bones or dragon 
turtle 


Winged wyrm with woman's head and arms 


Dragonshard in the shape of a fang or 
dracolich 


Five blood-spattered blades or flayed dragon 
Obsidian tower 
Four crossed, rune-inscribed bones 


Common Symbol 

Flame drawn on silver or molded from silver 
Red teardrop gem 

Varies 


Brilliant crystal 
Varies 
Golden mask 


The suggested cleric domains are from the Player's Handbook, unless followed by an asterisk: 


*Guildmasters' Guide to Ravnica 


**Xanathar's Guide to Everything 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER щл i 


142 


THE SOVEREIGN dost 


THe BLooo or Vor 


THe Silver FLAME 


Arawai is the Sovereign of Life and Love. She is the 
patron of fertility and of the benevolent aspects of na- 
ture, bringing good harvest and gentle rain. 

Aureon is the Sovereign of Law and Lore. He is consid- 
ered the first wizard, who shared the secrets of wiz- 
ardry with the world. 

Balinor is the Sovereign of Horn and Hunt. He guides 
both the beast and the hunter, and he is the patron 
of those who walk on the edge of civilization and the 
natural world. 

Boldrei is the Sovereign of Hall and Hearth. She guides 
and protects communities and families, inspiring peo- 
ple to work together for the common good. 

Dol Arrah is the sun that drives away the darkness. 
She stands for wisdom in war and for those who fight 
with honor, pursue justice, and make sacrifices for the 
greater good. 

Dol Dorn is the Sovereign of Strength and Steel. He is 
the patron of the common soldier, and he guides the 
hands of anyone who holds a weapon. He embodies 
courage, strength, and martial skill. 

Kol Korranis the Sovereign of World and Wealth. He 
guards travelers and guides traders. Although the 
Trickery domain is suggested for his clerics, Kol 
Korran guides fair negotiation; those driven solely by 
greed prefer the Keeper of the Dark Six. 

Olladra is the Sovereign of Feast and Fortune. She is 
the giver of joy and the granter of luck, patron to enter- 
tainers, gamblers, and anyone who takes a chance. 

Onatar is the Sovereign of Fire and Forge. He guides 
both mundane smiths and artificers, inspiring anyone 
who performs an act of creation. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


THe Dark Six 


THE UNDYING COURT 


THE PATH oF LIGHT 


SYMBOL 
The Octagram is the symbol of the Host as a whole. A 
Sovereign priest either carries a metal Octagram holy 
symbol or holds a staff tipped with the icon. Priests 
dedicated to a particular god also display their deity's 
symbol, and Vassals carry tokens with the symbols of 
the Sovereigns whose favor they seek. There are eight 
points in the symbol for eight Sovereigns; the ninth Sov- 
ereign (Aureon) is represented by the Octagram itself. 


RITES 


Formal prayers to the Sovereigns usually involve song. 
Specific songs invoke each Sovereign and seek their 
favor, appreciate the blessings received, and recognize 
the presence of a Sovereign. Celebrants sing the songs 
of Boldrei and Aureon at weddings, and soldiers sing 
Dol Dorn’s marching songs on the move and Dol Arrah’s 
hymns on the dawn before a battle. 


TEMPLES 


Sovereign shrines arise where people feel the deities 
are close, such as a library for Aureon or a smithy for 
Onatar. The rites of Boldrei or Arawai typically occur in 
the wild, and a tavern could serve as a shrine to Olladra. 
The shrines can take any form, but they prominently dis- 
play the symbol of the particular Sovereign. 

Temple of the Sovereign Host are made of stone and 
have eight doors. The walls depict images of the Sov- 
ereigns, with the icon of Aureon over the altar and the 
Octagram engraved on the floor. 


DARK SIX 


The Dark Six are the shadows of the Sovereign Host. 
These dark gods shape the world and are present at all 
times, speaking to those willing to hear them. Where 
the Sovereigns govern positive forces, the Dark Six are 
the source of fears. Arawai and Balinor reflect the posi- 
tive aspects of nature. The devastating storm, the earth- 
quake, the wildfire? These are the work of the Devourer. 

The Dark Six and the Sovereign Host are opposite 
sides of the same coin. If you believe in one, you ac- 
knowledge the existence of the other. The only question 
is whether you fear the Six or revere them. Those who 
choose to follow these sinister deities embrace dark- 
ness. A barbarian may thank the Fury for the gift of 
rage. An assassin walks the path of the Mockery, while a 
warlock's pact may be a gift of the Shadow. 

The Dark Six inspire worship in different ways among 
diverse cultures. Temples to the Dark Six appear in 
Droaam, along with wild revels driven by the Fury. The 
Dark Six aren't worshiped openly elsewhere in Khor- 
vaire; the gods' shrines are hidden, and it's more com- 
mon to find a cult devoted to a single member of the Six 
than a temple dedicated to the entire pantheon. 


THE Six 


These common names and attributes describe the Dark 


Six as they are known in Khorvaire: 


The Devourer governs the destructive power of nature, 
both pure elemental force and savagery in beasts. 

The Keeper snatches souls before they can reach 
Dolurrh and hoards them along with his vast wealth. 
Those driven by greed call him their patron, and his 
priests often act as criminal fixers. 

The Fury governs both passion and revenge, rage and 
despair. She offers revenge to those who have been 
wronged, but her vengeance often leads to suffering. 

The Mockery is the patron of treachery and of ter- 
ror in battle. He guides those who seek victory 
through guile, both warriors and assassins. He was 
once the brother of Dol Dorn and Dol Arrah, but 
he was stripped of his skin and his name after be- 
traying them. 

The Shadow is the dark side of knowledge and ambi- 
tion. It's said to be Aureon's shadow, given malign 
life when Aureon mastered magic. The Shadow is 
the maker of monsters and the keeper of forbidden 
secrets, and it offers malevolent spells to warlocks 
and wizards. 

The Traveler asserts that chaos drives evolution and 
that change makes us stronger. The Traveler is a 
trickster and the giver of dangerous gifts. Some ar- 
tificers worship the Traveler, seeing it as the lord of 
innovation, but the gifts of the Traveler always have 
unexpected consequences. 


SYMBOL 


The Hexagram represents the entire pantheon of the 
Dark Six. The Deities of Eberron table lists the common 
symbols of the individual gods. However, since the Six 
aren't worshiped openly in most of Khorvaire, each sect 


Te 


THE VOICE OF 


THRANE 


ARE YOU A 


SIX FANATIC? _ 


ee ө ө э n 


The Vassals of the Sovereign Host have long condemned 
the Dark Six as forces of evil. Yet correspondents at the 
Voice of Thrane have uncovered a shocking phenomenon: 
long-standing cults that worship members of the Dark 
Six alongside the Sovereign Host. 

Most of you know of the Restful Watch, the priests 
who tend Vassal cemeteries. What you may not know 
is that the priests of the Watch honor both Aureon and 
the Keeper! They say that the Keeper snatches the souls 
of heroes so they can be preserved from Dolurrh and re- 
turned when they are needed once more. 

Worse still is the Three Faces of War, a cult that wor- 
ships the Sovereigns of War—including the Mockery, 
whom they call Dol Azur. Followers of this foul faith say 
that the battlefield holds a place for all of these gods, ex- 
plicitly embracing a deity they acknowledge as the patron 
of treachery and terror! This cult apparently began in the 
Karrnathi military but spread across the Five Nations 
during the Last War. So next time you're talking to a 
Brelish soldier, remember that they might be a devotee of 
the Mockery! 


ee 


chooses a unique symbol based on the nature of their 
god. Followers of the Devourer might carry a shark’s 
tooth or a piece of wood scorched in a wildfire. A Keeper 
cult might use the nine-sided coin of Kol Korran with 
the face disfigured. A particular sect uses these symbols 
consistently, if not obviously. 


RITES 


The Dark Six are a mirror of the Sovereign Host and 
their worship uses similar rituals, including formal ritu- 
als conducted in song. 

Each of the Six has their own rites. Followers of 
the Fury engage in wild revels. Cults of the Devourer 
gather around enormous bonfires. Cults of the Mock- 
ery conduct ritual combats or gather to torture cap- 
tured enemies. 


TEMPLES 


Temples and shrines of the Dark Six hide behind dis- 
guises. A cult of the Mockery might gather іп a slaugh- 
terhouse, while a shrine to the Shadow remains con- 
cealed in the deep stacks of a library. Dedicated temples 
are built from dark stone, with six doors and the Hexa- 
gram engraved in the floor. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


te pate NTE, 


143 


144 


CHURCH OF THE 
SILVER FLAME 


• The Silver Flame is force of light that holds fiends at 
bay. Those who seek to defend the innocent from evil 
can draw on the power of the Flame. 

* Every mortal soul can find the light. Inspire and guide 

others to virtuous behavior; force is a last resort. 

Listen to the Voice of the Flame; beware the deceiving 

whispers of the Shadow in the Flame. 


Every Thrane child knows the story of Tira Miron. 
Centuries ago, one of the ancient and powerful demons 
chained within the world broke free from its bonds, un- 
leashing terrible suffering on the people of Thrane. The 
nation would have been destroyed if not for Tira Miron. 
This paladin was called by the Silver Flame and battled 
the mighty fiend. When it became clear that the overlord 
couldn't be destroyed, Tira gave her life, combining 

her spirit with the light of the Silver Flame to bind the 
demon once more. Now Tira serves as the Voice of the 
Flame, helping others find the light. Anyone who seeks 
to protect the innocent and battle evil can draw on the 
power of the Silver Flame to aid them, but they must 
beware of the Shadow in the Flame, the demon that still 
lingers and yearns to trick good people into evil. 

A pillar of argent fire marks the point of Tira’s sacri- 
fice, the center of the modern church. This pillar, located 
in Flamekeep, is a manifestation of the Silver Flame, 
not the source of its power. 


THE KORRANBERG 


CHRONICLE 


a ырынар 


NO FAITH IN 
SILVER FLAME 
TOP TYKE 


DEDE Cr |] | s 


The nation of Thrane shocked the world in 993 YK when 
it appointed a six-year-old child as Keeper of the Silver 
Flame, the supreme leadership position of the Church. 
Now eleven years old, Jaela Daran continues to astound 
all who encounter her. She possesses poise and wisdom 
beyond her years, and she displays the blend of courage 
and compassion that is the cornerstone of the faith. 
As Keeper of the Flame, she wields tremendous divine 
power; she has summoned angels to her side and resur- 
rected Cardinal Halidor after his assassination. 

But some claim that these stories are fabrications 
and that Jaela is merely a figurehead for High Cardinal 
Krozen. The reclusive Krozen is a brilliant strategist and 
ruthless leader. Many believe that Krozen was behind the 
death of Keeper Tagor in 992 YK, suggesting that he sup- 
ported the child Keeper to solidify his own influence. Is 
Krozen the true power behind the Flame? 


ssssoseoo 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


The church's templars stand ready to protect the inno- 
cent from supernatural threats, battling undead, fiends, 
and aberrations. Friars and ministers fight evil by do- 
ing good, performing acts of compassion and charity 
across Khorvaire. In contrast to the Sovereign Host, the 
church maintains a defined structure and creed. Arch- 
bishops monitor regions; cardinals lead the church; and 
the ultimate authority is the Keeper of the Flame, who 
maintains the font in Flamekeep and communes with 
Tira Miron. 

The Last War had a serious impact on the church. 
Leaders still respected the Keeper's authority over spiri- 
tual matters, but the war wasn't about good or evil. Tem- 
plars of all nations still joined together to fight demons, 
but if no supernatural threat was present, they fought 
for their own nations. This division allowed cracks to 
form in the foundation. In Breland, some priests fell 
prey to greed or forged ties to criminal organizations. 

In Aundair, a zealous faction known as the Pure Flame 
advocates using violence rather than compassion as 
the primary tool for rooting out evil. And in Thrane, the 
church has become the ruling body. While still driven 
by Tira's principles of redemption and sacrifice, the 
intrusion of politics means that some come to the faith 
seeking power rather than purely to do good. 

In creating a follower of the Silver Flame, decide 
whether you are bound to the church or simply inspired 
by its principles. As a paladin, are you part of the tem- 
plar order, or were you a farmer called to action by the 
Voice of the Silver Flame? 

The Silver Flame is centered in Thrane, but it has a 
strong presence in Breland and Aundair, and followers 
across Khorvaire. Members of the Pure Flame sect treat 
some species—notably shifters and changelings—with 
suspicion, but the faith holds that people of all races 
should stand together. 


SYMBOL Hie 
The faith's symbol is a stylized flame inlaid with silver. 


A silver arrowhead etched with the symbol serves as a 
common token, worn as a necklace. 


RITES 


The Silver Flame has no need of prayers or offerings; 
instead, services focus on the parishioners, encouraging 
virtuous behavior. Church hierarchy is strictly observed, 
and only ordained priests can perform services. 
Archery is a devotional practice of the Silver Flame, 
used both as a means of meditation and a martial art. 
Communities devoted to the Flame engage in archery 
training, and villages have militias of peasant archers. 


TEMPLES 


Fortresses of the Silver Flame are designed to serve as 
templar garrisons and to provide sanctuary against su- 
pernatural threats. Churches feature enormous arches 
and open spaces. The sanctuary of a Flamic church has 
a mosaic floor with a flame burning at its center. 

The seat of the religion is the Grand Cathedral in 
Flamekeep. Built around the site of Tira's sacrifice, this 
fortified temple is the size of a small city. 


BLOOD or VOL 


» Everyone has a spark of divinity. Find that 
power within. 

* Death is the end, Dolurrh is oblivion, and if the gods 
exist, they are cruel. Stand with those you care for; all 
we have is this life and each other. 


What just god would allow death and suffering? The 
Blood of Vol teaches that we all have the potential to 
become divine beings—and that death is a curse, de- 
signed to kill you before you can unlock the divinity 
within you. 

The Blood of Vol is a grim faith, founded by Erandis 
d'Vol, an elf from Aerenal. It asserts that death is obliv- 
ion, that the universe is uncaring, and that if the Sover- 
eigns exist, they are cruel. Its followers study the secrets 
of blood and life, and because they believe that death is 
the end, they see nothing wrong with using the bodies 
of the fallen to serve the living. Seekers of the Divinity 
Within (as the faithful call themselves) are glad to be 
reanimated after death; at leastthey can do some good. 

Because of this association with necromancy, many 
believe the Blood of Vol embraces death and its follow- 
ers want to become undead. Both ideas are false. The 
Blood of Vol sees death as the ultimate evil. Seekers 
don't want to become undead; they want to become 
divine beings. The faith teaches that divinity is tied to 
blood and soul, and the undead can never fully harness 
that power. The mummies and vampires of the Blood of 
Vol have sacrificed their chance at divinity to guide the 
living. They're martyrs, not something to envy. 

In addition to a general revulsion toward the undead, 
the public opinion of the Blood of Vol is colored by the 
actions of the Order of the Emerald Claw. This extrem- 
ist sect serves a lich known as the Queen of Death, and 
it employs necromantic magic in acts of terror. However, 
most Seekers don't support the Emerald Claw. 

The Blood of Vol has its strongest following in Karr- 
nath and the Lhazaar Principalities. For a time, it was 
the national religion of Karrnath. Though fallen from 
favor, the faith is still practiced openly in that nation. 


SYMBOL 


The power ofa Gere me Blood of Vol comes from 
within them. As such, every cleric chooses a unique 
holy symbol—an object that resonates with them. More 
generally, the faith is represented by a tear-shaped red 
gemstone or shard of glass. Priests of the Blood of Vol 
wear robes of red and black. 


RITES 


The services of the Blood of Vol focus on drawing the 
faithful together as a community and encouraging peo- 
ple to find power within themselves. The most import- 
ant ritual of the faith is the Sacrament of Blood. After a 
sermon, each member of the congregation sheds a small 
amount of blood into a basin. This is a symbol of unity, 
and a message that members of the community would 
shed their blood to defend one another. In some temples, 
this blood is donated to vampire champions ofthe faith. 


E MO An o 
«лч me emm tái gts aii s © 


vm ~ — ee 


THE VOICE OF 


BRELAND 


CORPSE CLERIC 
CONDEMNS CLAW 


ey 


Last month, the come Claw took credit for the ghoul 
outbreak in Wroat. This terrorist organization has a new 
and unusual critic: Hask Malevanor, an “abactor” of the i 
Blood of Vol and high priest of the Crimson Monastery, { 
a temple in the city of Atur in Karrnath. Something else 
you should know about Abactor Malevanor: he's been 
dead for over fifty years! This putrid priest says that 
there's nothing unholy about his condition, swearing 
that his people revere all life. Despite the fact that the 
terrorists included priests from his church, Malevanor 
insists that his parishioners despise the Emerald Claw 
and harbor no hostility toward Breland. 

While we'd like to take the abactor at his word, our 
research shows that Malevanor was personally involved 
in the program that produced the infamous Karrnathi 
undead soldiers. After decades of driving the Karrnathi 
war effort, this foul creature expects us to believe that he 
has nothing to do with the necromantic attacks on our 
people? Here at the Voice of Breland, we think something 
about this smells rotten, and it's not just the n 


тэст om ed me a pe ean 


Pru ty ли et cales AP ifie nore enin dag Ima 7 


TEMPLES 


A shrine devoted to the Blood of Vol requires only an al- 
tar and a means for collecting ritually spilled blood. 

Temples of the Blood of Vol are fortified structures, 
built to serve as sanctuaries. In contrast to the Silver 
Flame, such temples are stark and functional. Temples 
include vaults or catacombs, designed to hold undead or 
to store corpses. 


CULTS OF THE 
DRAGON BELOW 


* A paradise exists within the world, a vale bathed in 
the light of the Inner Sun. Earn your passage with the 
blood of worthy foes. 

* Our existence is a chrysalis state, preparing us for 
transcendent immortality within the bowels of the gib- 
bering mouther. 

* The Lord of Eyes sees all secrets. Its gaze elevates 
the worthy and slays the unbeliever. Drive doubt from 
your heart, and you will see reality through new eyes. 


The Cults of the Dragon Below are wildly diverse. The 
tenets above describe the beliefs of three different 

cults. Warlocks draw power from demon overlords, and 
daelkyr cultists serve mind flayers and beholders. Oth- 
ers embrace deep convictions that others see as mad- 
ness. Outsiders use the term "Cult of the Dragon Below" 
as a blanket term to describe these disparate beliefs, 

but the cultists don't use this name or see themselves as 
part of a greater whole. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


145 


| 146 


Ett rtm gts 


THE KORRANBERG 


CHRONICLE 


RAID REVEALS 


The people of Fairhaven were shocked by the revelation 
of bizarre cult activity in the center of one of that city’s 
most trusted institutions. Acting on a tip from the Royal 
Eyes of Aundair, elite forces raided a House Vadalis 
facility and discovered a nightmare. Captain Allis says 
that her soldiers discovered a beating heart that filled an 
entire room, pumping blood through veins in the walls 
of the building. According to Allis, the staff claimed to 
be “creating the heart of Galifar,” apparently believing 
that if completed, this monstrosity could reunite the 
shattered kingdom. 

When pressed to comment, Patriarch Dalin d’Vadalis 
denied any connections to this cult. “These are difficult 
times for all of us. I assure you that House Vadalis will 
conduct a full investigation of this incident and work to 
regain the trust of the good people of Fairhaven.” 


Cults of the Dragon Below are based on madness or 
power. A cult that seeks power chooses to serve a dark 
force because of the gifts they receive from it. A cabal of 
scholars might serve the demon overlord Sul Khatesh 
in exchange for secrets of magic. In the Mror Holds, 
dwarf clans bargain with Dyrrn the Corruptor to gain 
symbionts and sinister gifts. The Shadow Marches con- 
tain cults devoted to the daelkyr Belashyrra and Kyrzin. 
Membership in such a cult is voluntary, and spellcasters 
are more likely to be warlocks or wizards than clerics; 
their power comes from bargaining, not from faith. 

Cults driven by madness have a warped view of re- 
ality. A cultist might believe aberrations are a higher 
form of life and that the daelkyr will elevate mortals. 
Other cultists may not recognize the true nature of the 
beings they serve. A cult of Rak Tulkhesh might truly 
believe their lord will bring peace to the world, even if 
that peace must begin with bloody war. Joining such 
a cult isn’t a choice, it’s something you fall into due to 
madness. New cults can spring up anywhere, as seeds 
of madness take root and spread. 

Cults of the Dragon Below often appear as antago- 
nists. However, your character could be a member of a 
relatively benign cult. You might have been raised in a 
cult but broke free from its influence. If your character 
was or is part of a cult, work with your DM to develop 
the details of your sect. 


SYMBOL 


Many cultists carry pieces of volcanic glass or small 
Khyber dragonshards (see chapter 5), but the cults have 
no unified symbol. Individual cults develop a symbol 
based on their fiendish patron or mad visions. Eyes, ten- 
tacles, and broken weapons are all common themes. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


Е 


1 


V ——— ——— лдар Ут —— 


RITES 


Cult rituals are intense and often violent, includ- 

ing blood sacrifice and ritual combat. Many cultists 
consume unnatural substances, seeking a closer 
communion to aberrations. They perform rituals in 
Undercommon, though most cultists don't have a full 
understanding of the language. 


TEMPLES 


Cults meet underground, whether in caverns or sewers. 
Rural cults seek out places twisted by the powers of the 
plane of Xoriat (described in chapter 4) or Khyber. 


PATH OF LIGHT 


* We live in an age of darkness. We must find the path 
that leads to the light. 

* Act with compassion and courage. Each noble act is a 
step on the path. 

• Hone your body and your mind. You аге the tool you 
will use to change reality. 


Practiced by many kalashtar, the Path of Light seeks 
to change reality by first bringing change within, using 
meditation to focus the mind and athletic discipline to 
improve the body. The next step brings light into the 
world, using courage and compassion to banish the 
darkness in the people around you. Mediate disputes. 
Extinguish hatred by guiding people out of darkness. 
Inspire people to be better than they are. Even the 
smallest change is a victory, yet lightbringers—the fol- 
lowers of this path—hope that this is merely a step on a 
greater journey. 

The Path of Light teaches that this age is dominated 
by il-Lashtavar, "the great darkness that dreams." This 
force poisons the world and promotes darkness. But all 
things change. If enough light can enter the world, it will 
lead to a tidal shift: the age of il-Lashtavar will end and 
usher in the time of il-Yannah, the great light. 

Some followers of this faith believe that meditation 
alone is sufficient to change the path of the world, that 
merely contemplating the light is sufficient to bring 
about the change. Most believe that it is necessary to 
take action, but that darkness must fought with light. 
Violence is never the answer, and the only way to defeat 
evil is to redeem it. Lightbringers seek to inspire those 
who live in fear and enlighten those whose evil is driven 
by ignorance. The faith has followed this path for over 
a thousand years, but now a splinter sect advocates 
greater action. These shadow watchers believe that evil 
must be fought, that sources of darkness that poison 
communities can and should be ruthlessly eliminated. 

The Path of Light is taught to the kalashtar by the 
spirits bound to their bloodlines. It is widespread in the 
nation of Adar in distant Sarlona, but in Khorvaire, it is 
largely unknown outside kalashtar communities. The 
shadow watchers champion a sect born in Khorvaire, 
and the elders of Adar have condemned its methods. 

If you follow the Path of Light, you must choose your 
side. As a lightbringer, you seek to spread hope and 
goodwill. As a shadow watcher, you hunt down and elim- 
inate sources of darkness. Which path will you follow? 


SYMBOL 


The symbol of the Path of Lightis a shard of brilliant 
crystal, carried or worn as an amulet. This crystal may 
be used as a holy symbol; if it'S worn as a necklace, the 
priest must place one hand on it to use it as a focus. The 
formal garb of a priest includes a headdress with curv- 
ing horns and points made from a Sarlonan shell-like 
material called sentira. 


RITES 


Physical and mental discipline are important virtues of 


the Path of Light. Martial arts and guided meditation be- 


come a form of devotion and prayer. A kalashtar priest 
conducts services telepathically, using shrines designed 
to amplify psychic abilities and allowing them to share 
thoughts and images directly with the congregation. To 
an outsider, a service can appear silent and tranquil de- 
spite being an ecstatic experience for the faithful. 


TEMPLES 


The nation olden in qme. is home to vast fortress 
monasteries devoted to the Path of Light. In Khorvaire, 
a mere handful of shrines appear in cities with large 
kalashtar communities. These shrines are calm and 
peaceful, the air scented with Sarlonan incense. The 
chambers are open, providing space for martial arts. 
Labyrinthine patterns engraved on the floors serve as 
an aid to meditation, while the walls hold crystals that 
focus and amplify the psychic abilities of the priests. 


SPIRITS OF THE PAST 


Weare the spiritual anchors of the greatest champi- 
ons of our people. Through our faith, we keep their 
spirits from being lost to oblivion. 

You have been chosen by a hero. Live your life as they 
lived theirs, letting their instincts guide you. 

* Treasure our past and the stories of our people. You 
are the vessel through which new legends will arise. 


As a Tairnadal elf of Valenar, you were raised on the leg- 
ends of your people, on tales of champions who battled 
mighty dragons and armies of giants. When you came 
of age, the Keepers of the Past read the signs to deter- 
mine which of these ancestors chose you to be their 
vessel. Since that day, it has been your duty to emulate 
your patron ancestor. If you're a wizard, you've studied 
the spells created by your ancestor. If you're a warrior, 
you've practiced their specific martial techniques. When 
you trance, you relive their greatest battles. But these 
studies are just preparation. Now it's your sacred duty 
to be a revenant of your ancestor: to live your life as they 
did and allow the champion to walk the world again 
through you. (This title of revenant carried by Speakers 
of the Past is not to be confused with the undead reve- 
nants described in the Monster Manual.) 

The bond between ancestor and living elf is holy. Your 
ancestor doesn't speak to you or control your actions. 
But as a Tairnadal, you believe that they are with you— 
that your instincts and your reflexes are the ancestor 
moving through you, telling you what to do. The closer 


c и ~~ PALE tme Re uertit D as d 


THE VOICE OF 


BRELAND 


THE KALASHTAR 
PROPHECY YOU 
CAN'T IGNORE! 


+++ ж ве ж ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө э ө ж ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө э ө э ө ө ө ө ө ө n ө ө 


Many of the people of Khorvaire have never met a ka- 
lashtar. Some say these people are in contact with celes- 
tial spirits; here at the Voice of Breland, we say they're a 
rare type of lunatic we've imported from Sarlona. So it 
was a special treat for tourists when one of the spiritual 
leaders of the kalashtar of Sharn made an unexpected ap- 
pearance in the grand plaza of Hope's Peak. The enlight- 
ened Havakhad—that's what he calls himself—issued 

a warning that “darkness was gathering" and that “а 
terrible time lies just ahead." He beseeched the assem- 
bled crowds to show kindness to neighbor and stranger 
alike, and not to let "fear cause strife in the hard days to 
come." Apparently Havakhad hasn't heard the news that 
we're winning the war. But if the world does end tomor- 
row, you read it here first! 


— a ee: QE 


you follow the path, the more guidance they provide, 
helping you create new legends. 

The folk of Khorvaire see your people as mercenar- 
ies and conquerors. But you don't care about gold or 
personal glory. All you want is to let your ancestors 
live again, and that means you need to perform deeds 
worthy of champions. That drives you now: seeking out 
adventures that will add to the legends of your patron. 

You and your DM should develop the identity of your 
ancestor. How did they fight? What were some of their 
legendary deeds? Did they have a distinctive weapon 
or favor a particular kind of magic? Equally important 
is your relationship with the ancestor. Are you proud of 
your ancestor and excited to live as they did, or is your 
duty a burden? 

Since the rise of Valenar, half-elves and even some 
humans have sought to be inducted into the faith. But so 
far the Keepers of the Past have declared that only elves 
can be revenants. Beyond the blood connection to the 
ancestor, an elf communes with their ancestor during 
trance, and half-elves can't enter this state. The Keep- 
ers say it can't be done, but perhaps you'll be the one to 
prove them wrong. 


SYMBOL 
The primary symbol of the faith is the zaelshin, an amu- 
let that bears the seal of your patron ancestor and worn 
either as a brooch or embedded in the forehead of a 
helmet. A devotee of the faith typically wears a veil—the 
zaelta, or "spirit mask"—over their lower face while in 
battle or performing rituals, so an opponent sees the 
zaelshin rather than the living elf. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


I— 


147 


148 


OALIAN OF THE TOWERING Wooo 


The zaelshin is the symbol of the faith, but the holy 
symbol used by a cleric is an object associated with their 
personal ancestor. 


RITES 


Services revolve around the stories of the ancestors, 
commemorating their glorious deeds, as well as ritual 
exercises and trance meditation. While resting, an elf 
spends four hours in trance. The faithful spend this time 
in communion with their ancestor, experiencing their 
memories and contemplating their deeds. 


TEMPLES 


The nomadic Tairnadal elves don't raise permanent tem- 
ples. A Keeper of the Past marks a circle on the ground 
with their blade, and the space within becomes sancti- 
fied for the service. 


UNDYING COURT 


* Our greatest champions and sages will never be lost 
to us. Their wisdom guides us, and their power pro- 
tects us all. 

* Honor our past. Respect our traditions. Perfect 

your skills and you may earn your place among the 

Deathless. 

Destroy those foul creatures that channel the power of 

Mabar, for they consume the essence of our world. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


The elves of Aerenal refuse to let their greatest souls be 
lost to the oblivion that is Dolurrh. The wisest and most 
accomplished elves are preserved after death, becoming 
members of the Undying Court. The devotion of the 
living elves sustains the Undying Court, and the Court 
generates a well of mystic energy that empowers their 
clerics. As an Aereni cleric, your spells aren't personally 
granted to you by a specific Undying Councilor. Your 
powers flow from the Court itself, allowing you to serve 
its will and to protect your people. 

Of all the religions of Eberron, the Undying Court is 
most grounded in the world. The Court stands in the 
city of Shae Mordai, and as an Aerenal elf, you could 
seek an audience with one of your deathless ancestors. 
As a devotee of the Undying Court, you recognize it as 
the power that sustains your civilization and as an as- 
sembly of your greatest sages and leaders. Should you 
accomplish great achievements in your life, you can as- 
pire to join the Court. 

As a cleric or paladin of the Undying Court, you have 
a concrete relationship with your deity. In creating your 
character, consider why you've traveled so far from 
home. Are you on a specific mission? Are you serving 
the Court as a whole, or are you acting as an agent of a 
specific councilor—perhaps your own ancestor? The Un- 
dying Court despises undead creatures that prey on the 
living, so if you don't have a concrete mission, you can 
always hunt down undead and evil necromancers. z 


SYMBOL 


The symbol of the Undying Court is a golden mask with 


luminous eyes, worn over the face while a priest is car- 
rying out their duties. Devotees wear a smaller mask as 
a brooch or amulet. 


RITES 


The most sacred rite of the Undying Court is trance 
communion. While in trance, an Aereni elf engages in 
meditation that connects them to the gestalt conscious- 
ness of the Court. This experience affirms the place of 
the individual as part of the greater whole. 

Since trance communion is a personal experience, 
the role of the priest is to provide spiritual and practical 
guidance to their congregation. A masked priest serves 
as the face of the Court, and any elf can approach them 
seeking an ease to their burdens. 


TEMPLES 


In Aerenal, the temples of the Undying Court are step 


pyramids built from stone. In Khorvaire, shrines to the 
Court use imported Aereni densewood, a particularly 
tough lumber that grows only on the island. Regardless 
of form, the walls are engraved with stories about the 
Undying Councilors that serve as the particular patrons 
of the temple, usually those related to the local priests. 


DRUIDS OF KHORVAIRE 


* We, the Ashbound, are the champions of the natural 
world. We defend it from anything and anyone who 
threatens it. 

We, the Children of Winter, preserve the natural cycle 

of life and death. Disease and decay cull the weak and 

strengthen the whole. We must destroy undead and 
ensure that the cycle continues. 

* We, the Gatekeepers, protect the natural world from 

the forces that come from outside it, from those be- 

ings that slither in from the darkness beyond. 

We, the Greensingers, celebrate the magic in the nat- 

ural world, as well as the fey that embody that magic. 

We serve as ambassadors between the fey and mor- 

tals, protecting each from the other. 

* We, the Wardens of the Wood, protect all the children 
of Eberron, from the beasts of the wild to the people 
of the cities. We preserve the balance between nature 
and civilization and help each understand the other. 


All druids look after the natural world, but they act in 
different ways. Five well-established paths define most 
of Khorvaire's druids. In creating a druid character, 
consider whether you have ties to one of these tradi- 
tions, and what led you to leave your order. Are you on 
a mission? Are you exploring the world? Have you been 
banished, with good reason or otherwise? 


ASHBOUND 


The Ashbound defend the natural world from anything 


that threatens it. Some Ashbound consider civilization 
to be a threat and strike at any settlement that en- 
croaches on the wild. Others focus their wrath on the 


dragonmarked houses or seek to free bound elementals. 


pomme o 


28 


——— NE = 


с SHÁPIS INQUISITIVE 


IT HAPPENED IN 


_ THE FOREST: TREE 


HUGGER TELL-ALL! 


The alliance of rebel farmers in western Aundair has 
declared an alliance with the Great Druid Oalian of the 
Towering Wood, asserting that the farmlands that border 
these woods are now part of the Eldeen Reaches. The 
Great Druid is a figure of legend, a powerful mystic who 
serves as the spiritual leader of a diverse range of druids 
spread across the region. Another interesting fact about 
Oalian? He's a tree! Some say he's a child of Eberron her- 
self, while others assert that he’s the spirit of an ancient 
druid trapped in tree form. Whatever the truth, the Great 
Druid Oalian appears as a massive greatpine in a grove 
called Greenheart, deep in the Towering Wood. 


CHILDREN OF WINTER 


The Children of Winter believe that death and decay are 
vital aspects of the natural cycle of life. They believe that 
if the cycle falls out of balance, it will trigger a devastat- 
ing cataclysm as the world resets this balance. They bat- 
tle undead, but they also engage in actions that cull the 
weak. Extremists have been known to spread plagues in 
cities. The Children of Winter are particularly interested 
in unraveling the mystery of the Mourning, as some of 
them believe it is a sign of the apocalypse they fear. 


GATEKEEPERS 


The Gatekeepers are one of the oldest sects, primarily 
found among the orcs of the Shadow Marches. They act 
to protect Eberron from aberrations and other unnatural 
creatures and seek to prevent extraplanar incursions 
and attacks. The Gatekeepers maintain ancient seals 
that hold long-forgotten evils at bay. 


GREENSINGERS 


The Greensingers are devoted to the fey, and serve as 
mediators between the fey and mortals. The ranks of 
the Greensingers include bards as well as warlocks with 
Archfey patrons; a druid or ranger might also serve a 
specific archfey. 


WARDENS OF THE WOOD 


The Wardens of the Wood believe that civilization has 

a place in the world. As a warden, you help others un- 
derstand nature, ensuring that they don't cause uninten- 
tional harm or stumble into danger. Wardens serve as 
militia and mediators in the Eldeen Reaches. This is the 
largest of the druidic sects and the most recognized. 


CHAPTER 2 | KHORVAIRE GAZETTEER 


e 


онаа екооно 


аас о momie r a ~ € Р » m ayt и i 


z 
o 
о 
n 
rJ 
= 
т 
^ 
v 
z 
> 
m 
и 
< 
rJ 
x 
< 
о 
x 
z 
o 
o 
< 
æ 
[г] 
> 
x 
о 
a 
5 
2 
^ 
7 
а 


AMONG THE SKYSCRAPERS OF SHARN AT NIGHT. 


IAN K 


'VE BEEN HERE A WEEK, AND IT'S STILL HARD 
not to feel overwhelmed by the city. The towers 
rise up until they disappear into the clouds. Lights 
gleam in a thousand windows. Skycoaches work 
their way through the maze of bridges connecting the tow- 
ers, and up above I can see the burning ring of an elemen- 
tal airship. 

Distracted by the sights in the sky, I nearly walk into a 
warforged as it brushes past me. It's my first time seeing 
one, but then there are so many things I've never seen in 
this place. Over there, a tattooed elf haggles with a masked 
halfling, arguing about the price of lizard meat. Beyond 
them, a gargoyle watches from a high perch. I gather my 
senses and keep moving. 

It's not until I reach the lift that I realize the warforged 
stole my purse. 

—A newcomer to the big city 


All the major themes of Eberron are manifest in the 
great city of Sharn. It's a place of magic, with sky- 
coaches circling mile-high towers and mystic forges toil- 
ing endlessly in the bowels. It's a place of adventure and 
intrigue. A fallen angel is gathering minions in the ruins 
below the city. A gang war is gaining strength in Calles- 
tan. The corpse of a murdered aristocrat has just been 
discovered in a floating mansion. A Cannith artificer is 
experimenting with a planar gateway—and something is 
about to go terribly wrong. All of these adventures and a 
hundred more are waiting in the City of Towers. 

This chapter details the city for players and DMs alike. 
The DM can find additional information about the city in 
chapter 4. 


THE SHAPE OF SHARN 


Sharnis the largest city in Khorvaire, with a population 
of half a million people. Humans make up about a third 
of that number, and dwarves are a sixth of it; the rest is 
a blend of every race found across Khorvaire. Halflings, 
elves, and gnomes all have a significant presence in the 
city, but even kalashtar and changelings have communi- 
ties in Sharn. Beyond the permanent population, tens of 
thousands of people pass through Sharn every day. Ref- 
ugees from the war still find their way to the city, along 
with tourists, spies, merchants, and folk hoping to find 
their fortune in the grandest city in Eberron. 


CHAPTER 3 


SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


Sharn stands above the Dagger River and its eastern 
tributary, the Hilt. Its an important port for anyone deal- 
ing with Aerenal, Xen'drik, or Sarlona. Mountains line 
the shores of the Dagger, and Sharn can't spread out. So 
instead it has grown ever upward. 

The city is primarily made up of these quarters: 


* Central Plateau 
* Dura 

• Menthis Plateau 
• Northedge 

* Tavick's Landing 


At the hub of each of these quarters is a cluster of 
enormous core towers. А web of bridges and platforms 
connects many of these vast spires, and smaller turrets 
sprout from the edges of the core towers. The district of 
Skyway floats above the highest towers, while the tun- 
nels of the Cogs stretch out below the lower city. 

In between those extremes, each of the quarters is 
divided into an upper ward, a middle ward, and a lower 
ward. Each ward is made up of a number of districts, so 
that the location of a place in Sharn can be expressed 
with a combination of a ward name and a district name. 
More information about each of the wards and the dis- 
tricts in them appears later in this chapter. 


AFTERMATH OF WAR 


Far from the front lines, Sharn never fell under siege 
during the Last War. Regardless, the war's impacts af- 
fected the city's citizens and continue to even today. 


PHYSICAL DAMAGE 

Although Sharn was never subjected to a sustained 
assault, it didn't avoid damage. On many occasions, 
commandos and saboteurs launched significant attacks 
inside Sharn. The most infamous of these was the 
Aundairian attack that brought down the floating Glass 
Tower, devastating the district now known as Fallen. In 
any of the lower or middle wards, you might encounter 
evidence of the conflict in the form of a shattered bridge, 
a building collapsed by an arcane explosion, or an area 
some say is haunted because of the large number of peo- 
ple killed there during the war. 


PSYCHOLOGICAL SCARS 

There are places in the city that house people who suf- 
fered because of the actions of other nations. For exam- 
ple, many of the residents of Dura hold all Aundairians 
responsible for the destruction of Fallen. In another 
district, folk could hate the Karrns for an undead attack 
that occurred during the war, and a different group 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


152 


could blame Thrane for the siege of Vathirond. These 
kinds of sentiments can shape the feelings of an entire 
district, but in the city as a whole there are far more 
people who have personal burdens to carry than those 
who feel resentment toward particular nations. For 
instance, on an individuallevel, most members of the 
Sharn Watch might not care about a gnoll being seen in 
a neighborhood, but a guard who fought on the Droaam 
front during the war might be out for revenge. War- 
forged are sometimes also the targets of this sort of prej- 
udice; a person whose friends were killed by warforged 
soldiers might resent all such creatures. 


SHORTAGES 

Because the ink is barely dry on the Treaty of Throne- 
hold and relationships between the signatories are 
still being normalized, Sharn doesn't currently benefit 
from a lot of commerce with other nations. Problems 
could arise from a short supply of any imported goods, 
whether this manifests as inflated prices, the need for 
rationing, or certain items being simply unavailable. The 
factors of supply and demand also play into smuggling 
and the black market; some desirable goods might be 
available only through the Boromar Clan. 


REFUGEES AND VICTIMS 

Cyran refugees have filled the district of High Walls in 
Lower Tavick's Landing beyond capacity, and Sharn is 
also home to a significant number of refugees from else- 
where in Breland— people whose homes and villages 
were destroyed during the war, and who have come to 
Sharn in search of new lives. The city also has its share 
of other people harmed during the war, soldiers and ci- 
vilians with severe physical or psychological injuries. All 
these folk are most likely to be found in the lower wards. 
They aren't just poor; they're suffering—and they might 
seek vengeance against those they blame for their pain. 


GUIDE TO THE CITY 


WHENYOULIVE ON THE INSIDE LOW, YOU NEVER SEE 
the sun. People hear "towers," they think of graceful little 
spires, the sort of thing you see poking up in the corner of 
your lord's keep. We've got those, and lots of 'em. Butthe 
foundation of the city isthe core towers. The walls of these 
towers are so thick you could fit your lord's castle in one. 
You'vegot your outside districts where you get the open 
air, built on the bridges and platforms that connect the 
core towers together. You've got the little turrets, built 
on the core tower walls and the bridges between. You've 
got the folk in the middle, who live and work in the walls 
themselves. And then you've got those of us on the in- 
side, our districts entirely contained inthe hollow well 
of a great tower. When you look up in Callestan, you see 
twinkling lights, to be sure. Butthosearen't stars, and that 
isn't the sky. You're lookingup through a mile of bridges 
and platforms crossing the well, looking up at the districts 
above you. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


You live up high, you can touch the sky. In the middle уои 
can still see the sun. Down on the inside low, all we have is 
gloom and the constant drip, water and worse descending 
from the city above us. 

—A street urchin describing Sharn 


Sharn is the most cosmopolitan city on the continent. 
Describing all the activities and offerings in the city 
could fill an entire book. Here's a summary of what you 
need to know to appreciate the city to the fullest. 


WATCH YOUR STEP! 


As befits the City of Towers, Sharnis also a city of 
bridges and balconies. These thoroughfares and out- 
croppings can be extremely narrow or comfortably wide. 
Although most of them are bounded by walls or railings, 
there's always a chance that during your time in Sharn, 
youor someone you know will go over the edge. So, how 
do residents cope with this risk? 

Those who can afford it usually carry a feather to- 
ken as insurance. No token? Don't panic! Because of 
the maze of bridges and spans connecting the towers, 
there's an excellent chance that you won't fall more 
than a hundred feet before impacting on a lower bridge. 
Though this alone might seem like small comfort, it's 
also true that the major bridges in the upper and middle 
wards are enchanted with feather fall effects that trigger 
automatically, keeping you from crushing an innocent 
passerby in your descent. 

Many different outcomes could follow a lengthy fall. 
The Falling in Sharn table presents a few possibilities. 


FALLING IN SHARN 


d8 Result 

1 You fall hundreds of feet before striking the ground at 
the base ofthe towers. 

2 Хои fall 3d6 x 10 feet before striking a bridge. A major 
bridge in an upper or a middle ward will have a feather 
fall enchantment; otherwise, it's going to be a hard 
landing. 

3 You fall 2d4 x 10 feet and land in a passing skycoach, 
possibly injuring a passenger. 

4 Хои fall 4d4 x 5 feet and strike an outcropping, flag- 
pole, or projecting statue. If you survive, you're still 
precariously perched on the edge of a tower or bridge. 

5 You fall past a hippogriff—make a successful DC 15 
Dexterity (Acrobatics) check to catch its leg! 

6  Agargoyle or giant owl catches you—then threatens 
to drop you if it doesn't get a reward. 

7 You can fly! Actually, a nearby wizard or artificer casts 
feather fall to save you, but for a moment it felt like 
you can fly. And now the spellcaster wants payment. 

8 You strike a small air elemental that was drawn to the 
city. Doing this cushions your fall, but now you're on 
top of an air elemental. 


As d 


SE = 


SHARE INQUISITIVE 


WATCH FOR 
FALLING DRUNKS 


+++ жж ж ж ж |] жож o] ө ө ө ө ө ө ө э ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө | |] nS 


Just this week а Brelish woman in Middle Central was 
squashed to death when a drunk Cyran man fell on 
her from the upper wards. He survived. A good Brelish 
woman, a veteran of the Last War, cushioned his fall! 
This incident isn't the first of its kind. Last month a 
clumsy warforged crushed two innocent halfling lovers. 
Before that, a shifter thief fell from a tower, injuring an 
unsuspecting griffon. I propose a new law: No traveling 
the middle or upper wards without a feather token. These 
affordable trinkets are all that stand between our safety 
and death caused by some rat who would rather spend 
gold on drink. 


COMMUNICATION SERVICES 


Need to get a message to someone? If you're not in a 
hurry, the Orien post has boxes throughout the city; 
you can mail a letter for 1 cp. Hiring a courier generally 
costs between 5 cp and 5 gp, depending on the size of 
the package and where you need it delivered. You can 
find Sivis message stations in almost every upper and 
middle ward, and if you absolutely have to contact some- 
one instantly, the Sivis enclave in the Dragon Towers 
district (Middle Central) can perform a sending spell 
for 200 gp. 

House Tharashk has brought an innovation to mes- 
sage delivery in Sharn: the use of gargoyles. Tharashk 
has several of these creatures in its employ, and these 
flying couriers are a quick way to get a message across 
the city. If you spot a gargoyle without a burden, you 
can flag it down, and it costs 5 gp to deliver a letter or a 
small package. 


SPELLCASTING SERVICES 


Magewrights and adepts can be found in every district 
of Sharn, selling their services. Standard prices are 
summarized on the Magewright Casting Fees table. 


MAGEWRIGHT CASTING FEES 


Spell Level Price 
Ist 25 gp 
2nd 50 gp 
3rd 100 gp 


These costs can vary depending on the spell and the 
spellcaster, and they don’t include the price of expensive 
components. People who can cast higher-level spells are 
rare, typically found only in the dragonmarked houses 
or the wizard circles; the cost and availability of such 
services varies based on the caster. 


154 


LIFESTYLE AND STANDARDS OF LIVING 


In Sharn, asin any large community, different segments 

of the population occupy different places in the economic 

spectrum. The terms that D&D uses to quantify lifestyle 

expenses—wretched, squalid, poor, modest, comfortable, 

wealthy, and aristocratic (see "Expenses" in chapter 5 of 

the Player's Handbook)—are also used in this chapter as 

an indicator of what it costs for someone to live in a given 

area, and also of the costs of goods and services there. 
For instance, a restaurant that is said to serve food 

of comfortable quality is one where a patron who lives 

a comfortable lifestyle (or better) can afford anything 

on the menu. 


EDUCATION AND RESEARCH 


Morgrave University, though not the most respectable 
institution of higher learning in Khorvaire, has an ex- 
tensive library that boasts definitive collections of lore 
in certain fields, particularly arcana, dungeoneering, 
geography, and history. Characters seeking knowledge 
in any of these fields or others ought to be able to find re- 
sources in the library to aid their search. The university 
is an excellent source of sages who hire their services 
out on a short- or long-term basis. Even those who pro- 
fess to be sages but have no connection to the university 
tend to cluster around Morgrave, with their homes and 
businesses almost all located in the University, Den'iyas, 
and Ivy Towers districts of Upper Menthis. 

Another important site for certain kinds of research is 
the City Archive, in the Highest Towers district of Upper 
Central. The archive contains exhaustive historical doc- 
uments of Sharn; birth, death, and marriage records; 
and copies of legal documents such as identification 
papers and letters of marque issued in the city. Access 
to these records, however, is more restricted than to the 
contents of the Morgrave library. 

Those who want to further their research through 
some hands-on experience might find undiscovered lore 
in the lowest regions of Sharn, where sewers and tun- 
nels snake through ancient ruins. Similarly, the crypts 
of the City of the Dead might hold some relevant histori- 
cal information. 


SHOPPING CENTERS 


Sharn contains a number of major shopping districts. 
The Tradefair district in Middle Central focuses on 
top-quality goods—everything you'll need to maintain a 
wealthy or aristocratic lifestyle. North Market in Lower 
Northedge has a fine selection of common goods. Al- 
most anything can be found in the Bazaar of Middle 
Dura, as long as you're not concerned about the origin of 
secondhand goods. Tavick's Market in Middle Tavick's 
Landing is a center for produce and other goods brought 
in from the farms and artisan workshops outside Sharn. 


HEALING 


House Jorasco operates houses of healing throughout 
the city, largely in the middle and upper wards. The 
Panaceum in Dragon Towers (Middle Central) is the 
primary Jorasco enclave. The houses' services use the 
prices in this book's introduction. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


The Panaceum has an altar that can be used to per- 
form raise dead, but this service isn't without its risks. 
Sometimes the wrong spirit returns to a body, or ma- 
levolent ghosts or wraiths might escape from the neth- 
erworld along with the person being raised. Before the 
healers take gold to perform a resurrection, a Jorasco 
adept will first cast augury. If this divination indicates 
looming disaster, the adept will reject the request. 

A few divine spellcasters in Sharn can raise the dead, 
notably the high priest of the Undying Court in Shae 
Lias. These devout clerics rarely sell their services, 
however, and the high priest would need a compelling 
reason to help someone who has different beliefs. 


HOLIDAYS 


There’s always a celebration happening or about to hap- 
pen in Sharn, whether it’s a parade in a single district or 
a festival that ranges across the entire city. Here area 
few special occasions to put on your calendar. 


THE TAIN GALA (FIRST FAR OF EACH MONTH) 
The ir'Tains are the richest and most powerful family in 
Sharn. Each month, Lady Celyria ir'Tain holds a ball at 
her Skyway mansion. The guest list defines the current 
social order of the city; those families who hold perma- 
nent invitations, known as the Sixty, are the de facto roy- 
alty of Sharn. Celyria does invite unusual guests and at- 
tractions each month, and an up-and-coming entertainer 
or a renowned folk hero might catch her notice. 


CRYSTALFALL (9 OLARUNE) 

During the Last War, saboteurs caused a floating tower 
to fall into Lower Dura. This devastation can still be 
seen today in the district now known as Fallen. On 9 
Olarune, people gather to remember those who were 
lost that day. Many of them carry on a tradition of craft- 
ing elaborate ice sculptures and throwing them into the 
Dagger River. 


THE Day or MOURNING (20 OLARUNE) 

The nation of Cyre was destroyed in 994 YK on this 
date, known as the Day of Mourning. Although that 
event had an impact on everyone in Khorvaire, this day 
of remembrance is especially significant to Cyran sur- 
vivors. It is a time when Cyrans come together to recall 
their lost kingdom. Some tell stories or sing traditional 
songs, ensuring that their culture isn't forgotten. Other 
survivors still seethe with anger at the enemies who 
brought Cyre down, and thus far the holiday has been 
marked by a brief upturn in violence. 


Sun’s BLESSING (15 THERENDOR) 

The festival of Dol Arrah is a day of peace and a time 
when enemies are urged to find a peaceful resolution to 
their conflicts. It's one of the safest days in the city for 
visitors and residents alike. 


AUREON’S CROWN (26 DRAVAGO) 

Elders share their knowledge with the young during 
this celebration. Morgrave University holds its graduate 
services on this day, and a day-long schedule of public 
lectures is presented at the Great Hall of Aureon in Up- 
per Menthis. 


BRIGHTBLADE (12 NYMM) 

The festival of Dol Dorn is noted across the city with 
prizefights, wrestling matches, archery contests, and 
other tests of strength and skill. This activity culminates 
with a grand contest of champions in the Cornerstone 
district in Middle Tavick's Landing. 


THE RACE OF EIGHT WINDS (23 LHARVION) 
This event is an aerial race that takes place around 
Dura Quarter. 


THE HuNT (4 BARRAKAS) 

In honor of the Sovereign Balinor, a fierce beast is 
brought to the city and released on this day into an iso- 
lated section of Old Sharn. Anyone can participate in the 
Hunt by making a donation of 5 gp; the hunter (or group) 
who brings down the beast wins a purse of 500 gp and 
the blessing of Balinor. The motif of the Hunt can vary; 
in some years, multiple beasts are released, and the 
hunter who catches the most of them is the victor. In any 
case, it often turns out that the other competitors are a 
greater threat to hunters than the beasts they stalk. 


FATHEN'S FALL (25 BARRAKAS) 

This celebration commemorates a priest of the Silver 
Flame who was martyred while exposing lycanthropes 
in Sharn. The day's activities often cause tension with 
the shifter community. 


Вогрвег'ѕ FEAST (9 RHAAN) 

Gatherings across the city mark this celebration of 
community. The wealthy compete to throw the grandest 
parties, and the most generous among them will be re- 
membered throughout the year for their largesse. 


THE ASCENSION (1 SYPHEROS) 

The sacrifice of Tira Miron, who gave her life to serve 
as the Voice of the Silver Flame, is honored on this day. 
The holiday is marked by services at all Silver Flame 
churches and shrines, and the faithful are encouraged 
to find some way to help their communities. 


WILDNIGHT (18—19 SvPHEROS) 

Supposedly the Fury, the god of Passion and Revenge, 
reaches the height of her power on this night. Emotions 
run high, and impulse control runs low. Shy and super- 
stitious folk stay indoors, while others see it as a time to 
cast aside inhibitions. The streets fill with revelry that 
lasts well into the night. 


THRONEHOLD (11 ARYTH) 

This observance marks the day that the Treaty of 
Thronehold was signed, officially ending the Last War. 
This year (998 YK) is only the second time the event has 
been commemorated, and the Lord Mayor of Sharn has 
promised a truly epic festival. 


Гомо SHADOWS (26—28 VULT) 

It's said that the power of the Shadow, the sinister de- 
ity of the Dark Six, is at its height during these three 
nights. Careful people spend this time indoors with 
friends, but those who relish the darkness might decide 
to take to the streets to prey on the weak and foolish. 


——THE —— 


SHARE (HHROUISITIVE 


ovrt Étoile ee o seo 


THE RACE OF EIGHT 


Banners are flying across Dura today, and the streets are 
full of color. Walk through Oldkeep wearing brown and 
red, and you'll be invited to raise a glass to the Griffon; if 
you're dressed in white and gold, the colors of the Hip- 
pogriff, you'd best be prepared to defend yourself. 

If you're new to Sharn, you might think our city's gone 
mad. And in some ways it has, but it's a madness that 
reaches its peak every summer with the Race of Eight 
Winds. Long ago, King Galifar used Dura as a proving 
ground for aerial calvary. What's more important, quick- 
ness or strength? Our modern race is a test of speed and 
skill through a course that weaves around and through 
the spires of Dura. There are eight competitors, and 
each of these brave jockeys rides a different flying crea- 
ture—except for the gargoyle Carralag, who relies on his 
own wings! 

Speed is important, but merely surviving the race can 
be a challenge. The spilling of blood isn't prohibited, 
but the only weapon a rider can carry is a light sporting 
crossbow; the steeds can use their talons and beaks, 
which is what makes the Griffon such a fierce contender. 
Poison, magic, or anything else that would directly in- 
terfere with beast or rider is strictly forbidden—though 
over the years we've certainly seen imaginative attempts 
to stretch the rules! 

Dura is divided into eight regions for the race, each of 
which is represented by a different creature. If you're go- 
ing to spend time in Dura, it's best that you know your 
mounts! The beasts of Upper Dura are the fastest in 
the race, and overall have the best record. The reigning 
champion is the Pegasus of Highwater, whose supporters 
wear white and silver. The Hippogriff is tied to Over- 
look and Daggerwatch in Upper Dura, and its colors 
are white and gold. Detractors often say that the Sharn 
Watch favors the Hippogriff and that House Vadalis 
helps the Pegasus, but the referees always insist that the 
race is fair. 

The beasts of Middle Dura are versatile. The Eagle 
represents Broken Arch and Stormhold in Middle Dura, 
and its supporters wear brown and gold. The clever Owl 
flies for Rattlestone and the Bazaar, and its colors are 
brown and gray. The Hawk represents Tumbledown and 
Underlook in Middle Dura, and wearing its blend of tan 
and brown can usually get you a good price at an inn. 

The beasts of Lower Dura are more infamous than re- 
liable. The Griffon flies for Precarious and Oldkeep, and 
its colors are brown and red. It has never won the race, 
but there's gold to be made betting on which opponent 
it will bring down. The Glidewing represents Gate of 
Gold and The Stores, and its supporters wear green and 
gray; many believe that the Boromar Clan pays for the 
upkeep of the mount and its rider. Malleon's Gate used 
to be represented by the Bat, but twelve years ago they 
exchanged that mascot for the Gargoyle, whose colors 
are black and gray. The current Gargoyle is a stone-faced 
fellow named Carralag, and his supporters are quite pas- 
sionate about their winged champion. 


qnte, atc AP ns Ift i ROO P ae EAR 


155 


1 156 


SPORTS AND GAMES 


As befits a metropolis that boasts people of all cultures, 


Sharn hosts a wide variety of sports and athletic events. 
The Race of Eight Winds occurs once a year. Other 
events take place on a daily, weekly, or monthly sched- 
ule. For instance, shifters hold informal hrazhak compe- 
titions every night in Lower Northedge. The ogres of the 
Cogs are fond of tugs-of-war, arm wrestling, and sim- 
ilarly simple tests of strength. People who want to bet 
on sports can usually find a gambler willing to set odds 
in the Firelight district in Lower Menthis, Callestan in 
Lower Dura, Cornerstone in Middle Tavick's Landing, 
or Hareth's Folly in Middle Dura. Three exotic sports 
practiced in the city are described below. 


HRAZHAK 

Two teams of seven shifters play hrazhak on a field 

with a goal at each end. Each team starts out carrying a 
wooden idol. To score, a team must steal its opponent's 
idol and place both idols in its own goal. Obstacles such 
as trees, streams, and piles of rubble can be present on 
a hrazhak field, requiring the competitors to make full 
use of their jumping and climbing abilities. Idols can be 
thrown or carried, and there are no limits on contact 
between participants, although only natural weapons 
are allowed. Typically, a low-level druid or adept is on 
hand to provide healing if needed—but any competitor 
who receives aid is removed from play for the remainder 
of the match. Competitors aren't allowed to use spells or 
similar abilities. 

The only formal hrazhak arena in Sharn is located in 
the Stone Trees, part of the Cornerstone district, where 
the matches serve as both a spectator sport and a rea- 
son for gambling. Shifters created temporary hrazhak 
fields in the slums and warehouse districts of the city 
from time to time, and shifter youths often play im- 
promptu games in the parks. 


SKYBLADES 
Common jousting is popular enough throughout Bre- 
land, but in Sharn, the sport has taken to the air. In a 
formal skyblades match, the goal is to knock an oppos- 
ing rider from the saddle—attacks against mounts are 
forbidden, along with the use of magic or other super- 
natural abilities. Formal matches take place in one of 
Sharn's two aerial arenas, in Cornerstone and Hareth's 
Folly. Skyblades jousters typically ride hippogriffs and 
carry blunted lances that deal nonlethal damage. 
Informal matches, which don't always use the same 
rules, occur from time to time in Lower and Middle 
Dura, Tavick's Landing, and Menthis Plateau. An infor- 
mal match might be played out across an entire district, 
with competitors weaving between towers and around 
bridges. The rules for an informal match are set before 
the start, establishing (among other things) whether 
magic can be used and mounts can be targeted. 


Six STONES 

A Droaam tradition brought to Sharn by immigrants, 
six stones is a game for seven competitors, who each 

pay a base stake. The seven are then sealed in a large 
chamber with a cockatrice. The match ends when six 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


of the players have been turned to stone, at which point 
the survivor is awarded all the stakes (except for a share 
set aside for the organizers). A medusa handler moni- 
tors the competition to ensure that rules are followed. 
Contestants carry no arms or armor, and no magic or 
supernatural abilities may be used. Additionally, no one 
is allowed to attack the cockatrice. The challenge lies 
in outlasting the other contestants and luring them or 
pushing them into the path of the cockatrice. The bat- 
tleground might be barren or littered with rubble and 
cover; it might be lit, or it could be be pitch black. 

Six stones matches are staged by the criminal organi- 
zation Daask (see the “Criminal Activities” section later 
in this chapter). The sport is illegal, but the games go on 
because the matches are confined to Lower Dura and 
the Cogs and well hidden from the eyes of the Watch. 

A match usually occurs only once every few months. 
Sometimes participants voluntarily enter the compe- 
tition, but most are debtors who have been offered a 
chance to pay off their loans by winning the match. 
Daask takes bets on the outcome, and usually earns a 
tidy sum as its share of the proceeds. 


CITY GOVERNMENT 


Sharn has many people in positions of power: beadles, 
ministers, bailiffs, and all manner of minor functionar- 
ies and officials. But ultimate power rests in the hands 
of the City Council. That body has seventeen members: 
one for each ward in the city, plus representatives from 
Skyway and the Cogs. Each ward has its own process 
for selecting a councilor, and there are no legal restric- 
tions on who can govern; if you build up a strong base of 
support in a ward, you could hold the position yourself! 
The members of the City Council are quite diverse. 
Some are crooked, others are idealists, and one of them 
appears to be an owl. All of them are well known in their 
home wards, and any of them could have use for a team 
of adventurers. The Sharn Councilors table describes 
a few of the city leaders you might bump into in Upper 
Central or at the Tain Gala. If your character has the no- 
ble background, you might already know one of them. 


SHARN COUNCILORS 
d12 Councilor 

1 Sorik Sensos (human) represents Middle Central. An 
elder statesman and a brilliant orator, he is rumored 
to be involved in a web of bribery and graft. 

2  SavaKharisa (human) is the outspoken councilor 
from Lower Central. Since taking her seat, she has 
fought to improve conditions for the lower classes of 
Sharn, and she has made many enemies on the coun- 
cil and beyond. 

3  Thurik Davandi (gnome) represents Upper Menthis. 
He is known to have ties to Zilargo and the Boromar 
Clan, and reportedly loves intrigues and blackmail. 

4 Savia Potellas (human) has her hand in the entertain- 
ment industry of Lower Menthis. She hopesto reduce 
the influence of organized crime in her district, but 
it's a dangerous game. 


912 Councilor 

5 Maza Thadian (elf) represents Upper Northedge. A 
venerable elf and owner of one of the finest restau- 
rants in Sharn, she fights to maintain tradition but 
definitely puts the needs of the wealthy ahead of the 
poor. 

6  Shassa Tarr (shifter), from Lower Northedge, rep- 
resents the interests of the merchants and shifters of 
her ward. She is a cunning diplomat and devoted to 
her constituents. 

7 Bestan ir'Tonn (halfling) has represented Upper Ta- 
vick's Landing for thirty years, and largely views his 
ward as a separate city within the city. He has a rep- 
utation for stirring up conflict and setting the other 
councilors against one another. 

8 Kilk (changeling) represents the merchants of Lower 
Tavick's Landing. Whispered rumors suggest that 
the changeling has ties to the mysterious Tyrants. 
Some insist that Kilk is actually an identity shared by a 
group of changelings. 

9 Ний (owl) is a giant owl who can assume human 
form. A former aerial racer, he's a clever negotiator 
who fights for the good of the Bazaar and Middle 
Dura, often opposing the Boromar Clan and its allies. 

10  Ilyra Boromar (halfling) is the councilor for Lower 
Dura, but it's common knowledge that her true alle- 
giance is to her family and its criminal empire. The 
current ongoing conflict with Daask has weakened her 
family and her position. 

1| Еміх іг’ Мағаѕһа (human) represents Skyway. Lady 
Marasha owns the Celestial Vista restaurant, along 
with several other valuable businesses. She's an elo- 
quent speaker who supports many radical positions, 
including abolishing the monarchy after the death of 
King Boranel and recognizing Sharn as an indepen- 
dent province. 

12 Nolan Toranak (dwarf), the councilor for the Cogs, 
is largely seen as a tool of the industrialists who own 
the foundries there. Members of his family were killed 
by warforged during the Last War, and Toranak har- 
bors a bitter grudge against House Cannith and the 
warforged. He has tried to have warforged reclassified 
as property, and seeks to suppress warforged activ- 
ists in the Cogs. 


TEMPLES AND SHRINES 


Every major religion has outposts in Sharn. A number 
of sacred sites draw pilgrims to the city from across 
Breland and Khorvaire. Priests don’t usually sell their 
services; temples are places for worship and spiri- 
tual guidance. 

The Sovereign Host is the dominant religion of Bre- 
land, represented by shrines and small temples through- 
out the city. The Pavilion of the Host in Middle Central 
is the heart of the faith, and most priests of the Host live 


in one of the Pavilion’s nine towers. Pilgrims often come 
to visit one of three particular sites. The Korranath in 
Upper Central features Khorvaire's largest temple of 
Kol Korran. The Great Hall of Aureon in Upper Men- 
this draws scholars and worshipers alike. The Pool of 
Onatar's Tears in the Blackbones district of the Cogs is 
said to impart a blessing to any smith who bathes their 
hands in its waters. 

The Cathedral of the Cleansing Flame, Sharn’s 
largest temple to the Silver Flame, is located in Upper 
Central. Archierophant Ythana Morr is frequently ac- 
cused of corruption and nepotism, but there are smaller 
places of worship around the city devoted to the true 
principles of the faith. The hermit Gaia watches over the 
City of the Dead from Warden Tower. Coldflame Keep in 
Middle Northedge was once a mighty garrison; its glory 
has faded, but Flamebearer Mazin Tana still strives to 
protect his community. The priestess Faela maintains 
asmall shrine in the shadows of Fallen, doing what she 
can to help the wretched people of that forsaken district. 
Finally, the Shrine of Fathen the Martyr is a sacred 
site in North Market, often visited by templars passing 
through the city. 

Even some lesser known religions are represented 
in Sharn. The Graystone district in Middle Tavick’s 
Landing is a haven for followers of the Blood of Vol. 

The Gates of Passage in Upper Northedge is a temple 
of the Undying Court. The Overlook district of Upper 
Dura holds the Shrine of il-Yannah, dedicated to the 
Path of Light. 


GUILDS AND GROUPS 


Guilds and similar associations abound in Sharn. Their 
headquarters are places where people can find the com- 
pany of fellow professionals, or perhaps enlist the assis- 
tance of an organization. 

All the guilds associated with the dragonmarked 
houses are well represented in Sharn; most have 
guildhalls in the Dragon Towers district of Middle 
Central. Aside from those groups, the city features a 
number of less populous associations, such as those de- 
scribed below. 


ADVENTURER’S GUILDS 
Sharn is a magnet for those who seek adventure and 
opportunity. Forgotten treasures are hidden in the ruins 
below the towers, and expeditions leave for Xen'drik 
every day. At any moment, dozens of sages, spies, and 
nobles around the city are searching for capable agents 
to help with their schemes and investigations. If you and 
your friends are searching for adventure, you've come to 
the right place, and you don't have to do it alone. Sharn 
is home to two organizations that provide adventur- 
ers with opportunities for work and camaraderie: the 
Clifftop Adventurer's Guild and the Deathsgate Guild. 
Membership Benefits. Those who are accepted into 
either adventurer's guild must pay dues of 12 gp each 
year. The primary benefit of belonging to a guild is ac- 
cess to work, since the guildmaster can connect parties 
of adventurers with patrons and jobs suited to their tal- 
ents. Beyond that, there are a few additional benefits: 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS - Af 


158 


You can store items at the guildhall free of charge. 
You can book lodging at the guildhall for 5 sp per 
night. The accommodations are modest, but the guild 
provides stronger security for lodgers and their pos- 
sessions than you'd find at an inn. 

* An adventurer's guild is an excellent source of infor- 
mation. By studying records and working with other 
guild members, you can gain advantage on any skill 
check to research a subject in which the guild has ex- 
pertise or experience. 


A strong rivalry exists between the Deathsgate Guild 
and the Clifftop Adventurer's Guild. You might have 
trouble with members of the opposing guild, whether in 
the form of drunken boasting in a tavern or a rival stir- 
ring up trouble in the midst of a mission. 

The Clifftop Adventurer's Guild. Located in the 
Clifftop district of Upper Dura, this organization hasa 
sterling reputation as a source of reliable explorers and 
champions. Clifftop adventurers are known for their 
courage and integrity, and guildmaster Summer Kor- 
ranor holds members to a high standard of virtuous be- 
havior. As a Clifftop adventurer, you're expected to keep 
your word, to stand by your comrades, to uphold the law, 
and never to intentionally endanger innocents with your 
actions. Many of the local businesses cater to adventur- 
ers, and if you're a member of the guild, you can expect 
a warm welcome in the taverns of Clifftop. 

The Deathsgate Guild. Adventurers who are willing 
to take on any job and to do whatever it takes to triumph 
might find themselves suited for membership in the 
Deathsgate Guild. Named for its proximity to the City 
of the Dead, the district of Deathsgate prides itself on 
being a haven for those who challenge death on a daily 
basis. The guild's founder, Kassh "Blackaxe" Droranath, 
doesn't care how his members do their jobs, as long as 
they don't fail. 


THE CIRCLE OF SONG 

A bard is a versatile individual, equally skilled at en- 
tertainment and espionage. These talents are perfectly 
matched to the city of Sharn, which is both the cultural 
heart of Breland and a nexus for intrigue and diplomacy. 
Bards have much to gain from the company of other 
bards, as they exchange news, stories, and songs. For 
this purpose, long ago a group of the finest bards in 
Sharn founded the Circle of Song, an alliance of enter- 
tainers and adventurers. 

The Circle of Song is an informal organization, open 
to any bard who knows its customs and who can find 
an outpost. It has no membership dues; you're expected 
to make a donation if you make significant use of the 
group's resources. Membership provides the follow- 
ing benefits: 


* Youcan always find food and lodging at a circle out- 
post, though you might be expected to entertain the 
patrons in exchange. If times are tough, your food and 
lodging might be a step lower than the usual quality of 
the inn, but at least it's free. 

You have advantage on ability checks made to per- 
form research or gather information while in a circle 
outpost, provided you have an opportunity to peruse 
archives and talk with other members. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


* Circle members are often willing to do minor favors 
for other members—gathering information, embar- 
rassing a minor noble, causing a distraction. There's 
no cost for such a service, but anyone who helps you 
will expect you to provide similar assistance when 
they need it. 


The first and oldest outpost of the Circle of Song is the 
Golden Horn in the University district of Upper Menthis; 
a few bards are almost always in residence and willing 
to share news and stories. Other, less elaborate outposts 
are maintained in Sharn, and over the centuries the 
circle has established outposts in most major cities and 
many smaller communities across Khorvaire. These 
sites are usually taverns or inns that have hidden areas 
accessible only to members of the circle. 

Bards are expected to set aside personal rivalries 
while in a circle outpost, and any kind of combat or vio- 
lence is prohibited. Violating this rule results in immedi- 
ate expulsion from the circle, at the least. 


ARCANE ORDERS 

Its mighty towers and floating spires mark Sharn as a 
symbol of mystic power and achievement. Soon after 
the founding of the city, the greatest wizards of Breland 
chose it to be the seat of their arcane order. Its goal 
was to celebrate excellence in the mystic arts, bringing 
together the greatest practitioners of magic in a society 
that rivals Arcanix and the institutions of Aundair. 

A schism split the original society, but today both 
of the branches of the original organization, the Eso- 
teric Order of Aureon and the Guild of Starlight and 
Shadows, are recognized and respected throughout 
Breland. Each one has lesser halls in every major city in 
the nation. 

Membership Benefits. Someone accepted into an ar- 
cane order must pay 1,000 gp to join, with ongoing dues 
of 250 gp each year thereafter. With this payment comes 
many benefits, including the following: 


* You can stay at the order's hall in any major city 
and enjoy the amenities of a wealthy lifestyle free 
of charge. 

* For as long as you have access to the order's hall, the 

cost of crafting a magic item at the site is reduced by 

10 percent. 

While in the hall, you have advantage on Intelligence 

(Arcana) checks, as well as any ability checks involv- 

ing arcane research. 

* Membership in an arcane order grants prestige within 
Breland. Though this status provides no tangible 
benefit, it proves that you are a gifted mage and stand 
aboveany mere magewright or dabbler. 


The Esoteric Order of Aureon. Members of the 
larger of the two societies, the Esoteric Order of Aureon, 
take a vow to use their talents to preserve and advance 
civilization and to operate within the confines of the law. 
The Esoteric Order helped Galifar I maintain the rule of 
law, and many of its members served Breland during the 
Last War. Although its members aren't prohibited from 
studying any form of magic, the specialties of the order 
are abjuration, divination, and evocation magic. Wizards 
and artificers are almost always welcome in the guild. 


Sorcerers must prove their grasp of arcane theory to 
earn a place, and warlocks are rarely accepted as mem- 
bers. The hall of the Esoteric Order of Aureon is in the 
district of Clifftop in Upper Dura. 

The Guild of Starlióht and Shadows. Breland's other 
arcane order encourages independence and innovation, 
qualities that contribute to a mutually uncomfortable 
relationship between the Guild of Starlight and Shad- 
ows and the Sharn Watch. The schools of conjuration, 
enchantment, and illusion are favored by this group. 
Warlocks, especially those of the Archfey, are generally 
welcome. Members of the Esoteric Order look down 
on Starlight wizards, and in turn the guild members 
often mock the wizards of the Esoteric Order and play 
pranks on them. The Guild of Starlight and Shadows 
has its hall in the Deathsgate district in Middle Tav- 
ick's Landing. 

The Closed Circle. There is one dark stain in the 
shared history of the arcane orders. Three hundred 
years ago, a third order arose in Sharn—a sinister cabal 
called the Closed Circle. This order specialized in trans- 
mutation and necromancy and dabbled in the forbidden 
lore of the daelkyr and the Dragon Below. It's said that 
the members of the Closed Circle went mad and sought 
to summon terrible things; whatever the truth, the guild 
was wiped out more than two hundred years ago by the 
combined action of the Church of the Silver Flame, the 
Esoteric Order, and the Guild of Starlight and Shadows. 
Hidden workshops of the Closed Circle might still be 
found in Sharn, where vengeful liches or other wizards 
of the Circle practice their dark arts in hiding. 


WARDS OF SHARN 


Sharn isa vertical city, and elevation isan indicator of 
status and wealth. Each quarter is roughly divided into 
three levels, and the combination of quarter and level 
defines a ward. Thus, wards have names such as Lower 
Dura, Upper Central, and Middle Menthis. 

Upper wards are the domain of the rich and powerful. 
Here you'll find the finest goods and the most expensive 
services. Only those who maintain a wealthy or aris- 
tocratic lifestyle can easily afford the prices for meals 
and lodging, and adventurers who maintain a squalid or 
wretched lifestyle might be treated with disdain (suffer- 
ing disadvantage on Charisma checks). 

Violence is rare in any of the upper wards, and the 
Sharn Watch actively patrols these areas. Although 
the guards here might be corrupt just as in a middle or 
lower ward, they're already being well paid by powerful 
nobles and criminal organizations, and they work effi- 
ciently in the service of these forces. 

Middle wards are home to the middle classes. Here 
you'll find bustling markets and taverns, along with a 
wide range of entertainment and housing. Most goods 
and services are affordable by those of a modest or 
comfortable lifestyle, with a few higher-priced options 
tucked away. The Sharn Watch has a presence, but not 
as strong as in the upper wards. 

Lower wards house the hard-working laborers, along 
with the destitute and the desperate, including refugees 
who lost everything in the war and orphans who never 
had anything to begin with. Services priced for a modest 


The City of Towers 


n: 


# "PE 
{хут 


The Hilt 


THE COGS 


LAVA POOLS 


lifestyle can be found, but overall the lower wards are 
home to those who have no better than a poor lifestyle; 

a visitor who displays signs of a wealthy or aristocratic 
lifestyle might attract unwanted attention. The watch 
pays little attention to the lower districts, making them a 
haven for criminals and gangs. 

These are stereotypes that don't apply to all wards. 
Dura is a particularly poor quarter, meaning that Upper 
Dura is effectively a middle ward in economic terms; 
similarly, because Central Plateau is a hub of wealth 
and power, Lower Central is effectively a middle ward. 

Each ward is further subdivided into districts, which 
are neighborhoods defined by an economic role, a sep- 
arate culture, or both. For example, Lower Northedge 
includes the districts of Stoneyard, Longstairs, and 
North Market. It's generally true that the combination of 
a district's ward and quarter will give you a broad idea 
of what to expect there. A district in Upper Central will 
typically be well kept and swarming with guards, while 
a district in Lower Dura will be squalid and dangerous. 


GETTING AROUND 


Sharn is an enormous city, and traveling on foot from 
one side of the city to the other can be time-consuming. 
Here are some travel-time guidelines: 


* It takes at least 30 minutes to cross a ward. 

* Ifyou’re traveling between wards, add 30 minutes for 
each ward you pass through. 

* Dura and Tavick's Landing are especially large; dou- 
ble the time it takes to move through one of them. 


For instance, traveling from Lower Menthis to Upper 
Central involves passing through three wards (taking 


CENTRAL PLATEAU: IMPORTANT DISTRICTS 


a bridge from Lower Menthis to Lower Central, then 

ascending two levels) and can take 90 minutes or longer. 
Not all the quarters are linked to one another by 

bridges. The connections that do exist include these: 


* Central Plateau has bridges that lead to Northedge 
and Menthis. 

* Dura is connected to Tavick's Landing and Menthis. 

* Tavick's Landing is connected to Dura, Menthis, and 
Northedge. 

• Menthis is connected to Tavick's Landing, Dura, 
and Central. 

• Northedge is connected to Central and 
Tavick's Landing. 


Traveling from district to district involves the use of 
bridges and ramps, along with magic lifts—vast floating 
disks that slowly ascend and descend along threads of 
mystical energy. Lifts are mainly used to move cargo 
and can be up to 30 feet in diameter. Most lifts have rails 
but aren't fully enclosed; if combatants fight on a lift, 
someone falling or being pushed off the edge is always a 
possibility. 

For a speedier journey through the streets, House 
Orien manages a system of carriages for hire. Taking 
an Orien carriage cuts travel time in half and costs 2 cp 
per ward traveled. Flight is, of course, the fastest way 
to get around in Sharn, cutting travel time down to one- 
sixth of the walking pace (5 minutes per ward). It's also 
more expensive, at 2 sp per ward. The most common 
form of aerial transport is the skycoach, but many flying 
mounts, including hippogriffs, griffons, pteranodons, 
and giant owls, can be found for hire around the city. 


District Description Location 
Highest Towers The seat of city government, this district is also where airships arrive and depart. Upper Central 
Korranath Named for the great temple of Kol Korran that lies at its center, this district is dedicated to Upper Central 
wealth and finance. Moneychangers, banks, and grand vaults are found here, in addition to 
the estates of powerful merchants. 
Platinum Catering to Sharn's elite, this district provides a wide range of shops and services of wealthy ^ Upper Central 
Heights to aristocratic quality. 
Skysedge Park Home to three sprawling rooftop parks, this district provides a touch of wilderness in the Upper Central 


heart of the city. A small community of immigrants from the Eldeen Reaches maintains these 


groves and gardens. 
Ambassador 
Towers 
Dragon Towers 


This district contains the embassies to the Thronehold nations, along with Aerenal and 
Riedra. It's also the seat of the Citadel and home to the Brelish Museum of Fine Art. 
This is the primary place to do business with representatives of the dragonmarked houses. 


Middle Central 


Middle Central 


All the houses have outposts here, and Sivis, Tharashk, Jorasco, and Cannith have their pri- 


mary enclaves in Dragon Towers. 


Middle Central 


Middle Central 


Middle Central 


Sovereign A district filled with a vast assortment of temples and shrines. It is home to the two most im- 

Towers portant temples in Sharn: the Pavilion of the Host and the Cathedral of the Cleansing Flame. 

Sword Point This garrison district houses the forces that police and defend Central Plateau, including the 
Sharn Watch and a detachment of the royal army. 

Tradefair A merchant district offering legal goods and services of modest to comfortable quality. 


Boldrei's Hearth 
quality. 
Olladra's Kitchen 


A haven for travelers, this district contains reliable inns ranging from modest to comfortable 


Neither the best nor worst Sharn has to offer, Olladra's Kitchen is home to a wide number of 


Lower Central 


Lower Central 


taverns and restaurants of modest to comfortable quality. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 161 


162 


DURA QUARTER: IMPORTANT DISTRICTS 


District 
Clifftop 


Daggerwatch 
Highhold 
Highwater 
Hope’s Peak 
Overlook 
The Bazaar 
Broken Arch 


Hareth's Folly 


Rattlestone 
Stormhold 
Tumbledown 
Underlook 
Callestan 
Fallen 


Gate of Gold 
Malleon's Gate 


Oldkeep 
Precarious 


The Stores 


Description 
This district caters to adventurers, with a wide array of businesses aimed at explorers and 
fortune hunters. It is the home base of the Clifftop Adventurer's Guild. 


Daggerwatch holds garrisons for both the Sharn Watch andthe Brelish army, along with busi- 


ness and residences for those who support the garrisons. 

A district built by dwarves for dwarves, Highhold has strong Mror influences in its architec- 
ture. It's a good place to find Mror goods and is home to talented smiths and brewers. 

The finest residential district in Dura and the seat of House Vadalis, Highwater is largely 
comfortable in quality with a few wealthy estates. 

A relatively new temple district, with shrines and churches that have relocated from Fallen in 
Lower Dura. Hope's Peak includes several monasteries and a sacred grove. 

Overlook is noteworthy for its kalashtar community, which maintains a community center, a 
shrine devoted to the Path of Light, and a few restaurants serving Sarlonan cuisine. 

The largest commercial district in Sharn, an excellent place to buy or sell used—and possibly 
stolen— goods. 

Once a proud residential district, Broken Arch has fallen into disrepair. Its housing is poor to 
modest in quality, though the shells of wealthy manors can still be seen. 

A jumble of architectural styles, Hareth's Folly is a place to gamble and enjoy modest food 
and drink. The Hollow Tower is a center for aerial sports, and Hareth's Folly is where the 
Race of Eight Winds begins and ends. 

Rattlestone is a tenement district. Its people have little but their pride, but there's a strong 
camaraderie between them. 

A comfortable residential district, Stormhold is home to the few powerful families that have 
remained in Dura. It's in better condition than most of Middle Dura, and Deneith mercenar- 
ies protect the streets. 

A poor residential district, Tumbledown has experienced recent incursions from Daask. 

The center of Sharn's nightlife before Menthis Plateau was built, Underlook is a collection of 
poor taverns and inns. 

Home to an assortment of squalid and poor businesses, Callestan is a nexus for criminal ac- 
tivity and known as a stronghold of the Boromar Clan. 

Sharn's oldest temple district, Fallen was abandoned after a floating tower crashed into the 
district during the Last War. Now it's a collection of wretched ruins. 

A squalid slum, providing miserable housing for desperate people. 

A poor district originally inhabited by goblins, Malleon's Gate has become a haven for mon- 
strous immigrants from Droaam and Darguun, along with members of Daask. 

Another poor slum, largely home to dockworkers from Precarious. 

The skydocks of Precarious pass goods between the towers and the port on the Dagger River 
below. The district is filled with warehouses, along with a handful of poor taverns. A small 
community of Sarlonans lives here. 

A warehouse district with a large halfling population, with ties to the Boromar Clan. 


MENTHIS PLATEAU: IMPORTANT DISTRICTS 


District 


Den'iyas 


Ivy Towers 


Seventh Tower 


University 


Description 

Founded by gnome immigrants from Zilargo, Den'iyas is a haven for those interested in Zil 
culture. It's home to many sages and artisans, and a hotbed of schemes and intrigue. 

This residential district includes comfortable homes and modest apartments. Many of the 
students and faculty of Morgrave University live in Ivy Towers. 

A shopping district, with restaurants and goods of comfortable to wealthy quality. Seventh 
Tower is especially noteworthy for Little Xen'drik, a collection of galleries whose owners buy 
and sell goods from Xen'drik. 

This district is dominated by Morgrave University. It's also a nexus for sophisticated enter- 
tainment, including the Art Temple, the Grand Stage, and the Great Hall of Aureon. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


Location 
Upper Dura 


Upper Dura 


Upper Dura 


Upper Dura 


Upper Dura 


Upper Dura 


Middle Dura 


Middle Dura 


Middle Dura 


Middle Dura 


Middle Dura 


Middle Dura 


Middle Dura 


Lower Dura 


Lower Dura 


Lower Dura 
Lower Dura 


Lower Dura 
Lower Dura 


Lower Düra 


Location 
Upper Menthis 


Upper Menthis 


Upper Menthis 


Upper Menthis 


District 
Cassan Bridge 


Everbright 


Little Plains 


Smoky Towers 


Warden Towers 


Downstairs 


Firelight 


Torchfire 


Description 

A mercantile district with goods of modest to comfortable quality. Home to a significant 
number of immigrants from the Shadow Marches, Cassan Bridge is the place to visit for ex- 
otic Marcher herbs and cuisine. 

This district is a source of magical goods and services. Exotic components, magewrights for 
hire, common or uncommon magic items—all of these and more can be found here. 
Founded by Talenta halflings, this district includes a central campground for visiting halfling 
nomads. The permanent residents are mostly halflings as well. Talentan foods and crafts can 
be found here, along with displays of traditional skills and pastimes. 

Safer than the lower wards and less expensive than Upper Menthis, Smoky Towers has plenty 
of entertainment options. The Classic Theater is its most popular venue, but Smoky Towers 
offers a wide variety of more exotic fare. Dinner theater, changeling burlesque, and other 
diversions can be found in Smoky Towers. Thovanic Hall has begun performing works from 
Darguun and Droaam featuring monstrous performers. Smoky Towers has also become a 
haven for Cyran refugees wealthy enough to avoid High Walls. 

This district is the primary garrison ofthe Sharn Watch in Menthis. It's home to a community 
of Lhazaar immigrants, and the Broken Anchor is a tavern catering to Lhazaar travelers. 

The Downstairs district is primarily known for food and drink. Though most of its taverns 
and inns are only modest in quality, the Four Sails serves some of the finest seafood in 
Sharn. The recent success ofthe Diamond Theater has also drawn travelers to the district. 
This district is a destination for those who seek illicit forms of entertainment. Many forms of 
illegal gambling and paid companionship can be found in Firelight. It's also the most com- 
mon location of the Burning Ring. 

A district with a notorious reputation, celebrated for cheap entertainment and infamous for 
its dangerous alleys. Its theaters specialize in musical comedy and lowbrow entertainment, 
and there arelots of opportunities for hopeful amateurs to get on a stage in Torchfire. 


NORTHEDGE QUARTER: IMPORTANT DISTRICTS 


District 
Crystal Bridge 


Oak Towers 


Shae Lias 


High Hope 


Holdfast 


Longstairs 


North Market 


Stoneyard 


Description 
A peaceful residential district with many wealthy and aristocratic estates. 


A residential district where housing ranges from comfortable to aristocratic. Construction in 
Oak Towers uses materials and styles drawn from Aerenal, and the district is home to many 
of Sharn's established elf and half-elf families. 

This district is a bastion for the culture and traditions ofthe elves of Aerenal. It includes a va- 
riety of businesses specializing in Aereni goods, as well as a temple of the Undying Court. 

A center for worship for the people of Northedge, High Hope includes temples of the Silver 
Flame and the Sovereign Host, along with many smaller shrines. It lacks the grandeur of Sov- 
ereign Towers in Central Plateau, but has an atmosphere of solemn devotion. 

Holdfast is the heart of Sharn's native dwarf population. The ancestors ofthe Holdfast 
dwarves helped build Sharn, and many of its people are stonemasons, architects, and 
smiths. Holdfast dwarves are proud of their Sharn roots and have little interest in Mror cus- 
toms or traditions. 

The population of this peaceful residential district is mostly made up of dwarves, humans, 
and half-elves. Neighbors here generally stand together to deal with any trouble. 

The open market in this region largely deals in simple, locally produced goods. Due to the 
significant shifter population in Lower Northedge, North Market offers goods and services 
aimed at shifters (grooming services, claw care, and so forth) as well as those reflecting an 
Eldeen influence. 

This residential district is home to the majority of Sharn's shifters, including both recent im- 
migrants from the Eldeen Reaches and long-established local families. The district includes 
a makeshift hrazhak court and a shrine devoted to the Wardens of the Wood. Conditions are 
poor to modest. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


Location 
Middle Menthis 


Middle Menthis 


Middle Menthis 


Middle Menthis 


Middle Menthis 


Lower Menthis 
Lower Menthis 


Lower Menthis 


Location 
Upper 
Northedge 
Upper 
Northedge 


Upper 
Northedge 
Middle 
Northedge 


Middle 
Northedge 


Lower 
Northedge 
Lower 
Northedge 


Lower 
Northedge 


163 | 


TaAvick's LANDING: IMPORTANT DISTRICTS 


District 
Copper Arch 


Ocean View 
Silvergate 
Sunrise 
Twelve Pillars 
Cornerstone 
Deathsgate 


Graywall 


Tavick's Market 


Black Arch 


Cogsgate 


Dragoneyes 


High Walls 


Terminus 


Wroann's Gate 


Description 

This district is built around the Deneith garrison that polices the upper ward. It contains 
shops and services catering to the wealthy elite. 

This residential district is home to some of the most influential citizens of Sharn. It has a mix 
of wealthy mansions and aristocratic estates. 

This shopping district is patronized by those with gold to spare. All manner of fine jewelry 
and expensive clothing can be found here, along with aristocratic food and lodging. 

This district provides housing for the shopkeepers and servants who keep Upper Tavick's 
Landing running. Housing is largely modest in quality, with a few comfortable towers. 

This is the civic heart of Upper Tavick's Landing. The twelve pillars it's named for surround a 
courthouse, the Tower of Law, where visitors can get licenses to carry weapons in the ward. 
A haven for travelers, Cornerstone has a range of comfortable inns and taverns. It's built 
around the vast Cornerstone arena and is a center of activity for many major sporting events. 
Named for the nearby City ofthe Dead, this district houses the Deathsgate Guild and busi- 
nesses that cater to adventurers. House Deneith recruits mercenaries at its outpost here. 
This district was founded long ago by Karrnathi immigrants, and its people are proud oftheir 
heritage. It is a haven for any Karrnathi travelers passing through Sharn. Rumors say there's a 
temple devoted to the Blood of Vol in Graywall, but ifthat's the case, it's kept hidden. 

This district specializes in produce and other goods brought in by the farmers from the sur- 
rounding countryside. 

This district is filled with checkpoints and enchanted gates. These portals are generally open, 
but in times of trouble, Black Arch can become an impassable fortress. The Sharn Watch 
maintains the local garrison. House Orien and House Sivis both maintain outposts here, en- 
suring that messages can be swiftly delivered through the city and beyond. 

This warehouse district is the gateway to the Cogs, and shipments of ore and other goods 
regularly pass through here. House Kundarak has high-security storage facilities for rent, and 
a House Deneith outpost hires out Blademark mercenaries for venturing below. 

Dragoneyes tends to the needs of weary travelers, providing a wide range of lodging, food, 
and entertainment for tourists. It's also the home of most of Sharn's changeling population, 
and many changelings use their gifts to entertain and amuse travelers. Some say that it’s the 
home ofthe Tyrants criminal guild, but if so, that place is well hidden. 

This district was converted into an internment center during the Last War. Since the end of 
the war, it has been transformed into a refugee camp. Most of the residents are Cyrans who 
fled the Mourning, but High Walls also includes Brelish citizens who losttheir homes in the 
war. It's a crowded and dangerous place, but it allows residents to maintain a squalid lifestyle 
at no cost. Currently the gates are open, but the Sharn Watch could seal them at any time. 
This district is based around Terminus Station, where the lightning rail enters and leaves 
Sharn. Most local businesses serve the station or travelers. 

Travelers who arrive on the main road enter Sharn through Wroann's Gate, passing below a 
huge statue of the legendary Queen Wroaan. Many of the dragonmarked houses maintain 
shops here so travelers can send messages, hire bodyguards, or make use of other services. 


ABOVE AND BELOW SHARN: IMPORTANT DISTRICTS 


District 
Skyway 


Cliffside 


Ashblack 


Blackbones 


Description 

Skyway is a district that floats above Central Plateau and Menthis, built atop an island of so- 
lidified clouds. The richest people in Sharn live here. 

Boats bring cargo and passengers to the dock at Cliffside, on the edge of the Dagger River. 
From there, enormous lifts carry people up to Precarious. This dangerous district contains 
an assortment of taverns, shabby inns, and warehouses. 

The first foundries of Sharn were built here. The district is devoted to industry, and the envi- 
ronment here is sweltering and claustrophobic. 

Blackbones is newer than Ashblack, and it shows. The district's corridors are wider and bet- 
ter lit. The foundries are well maintained, and the district has a few thriving businesses. Most 
of the warforged that reside in Sharn work in Blackbones. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


Location 
Upper Tavick's 
Landing 
Upper Tavick's 
Landing 
Upper Tavick's 
Landing 
Upper Tavick's 
Landing 
Upper Tavick's 
Landing 
Middle Tavick's 
Landing 
Middle Tavick's 
Landing 
Middle Tavick's 
Landing 


Middle Tavick's 
Landing 
Lower Tavick's 
Landing 


Lower Tavick's 
Landing 


Lower Tavick's 
Landing 


Lower Tavick's 
Landing 


Lower Tavick's 
Landing 
Lower Tavick’s 
Landing 


Location 


Above the city 


On the banks of 
the Dagger River 


The Cogs 


The Cogs 


a ПЕ 


SHARK INQUISITIVE 


WHO OWNS SHARN? PORTRAIT OF 
THE IR'TAINS AND THE 60 FAMILIES 


Petre] ж ж ө ө ж ө ө ө ж ө э ө ө ө ө э э ө ө ө э ө ө ө ө ө ө э ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө э э 55 


If you've read more than two issues of the Sharn Inquis- 
itive, you've seen at least two stories about the ir’Tain 
family. King Boranel might rule Breland, and the Lord 
Mayor might be our highest appointed official, but the 
ir'Tains аге the true royalty of our city. What citizen of 
Sharn doesn't have an opinion about the fate of Lord 
Dalian ir'Tain, lost at sea a decade ago? Many are sure 
that he's a prisoner of the sahuagin, which would ex- 
plain why Lady Celyria has been funding expeditions 
into the sahuagin realms. Another camp maintains 
that Lord Dalian staged his death so he could embrace 
a swashbuckling life as a pirate king. If the truth ever 
comes out, you can be sure you'll read about it here! 
Matriarch Lady Celyria ir"Tain is the queen of high 
society in Sharn. Her activities and those of the ir'Tain 
children account for just as much newsprint as their 
father used to. Dalian's eldest son, Dalas ir'Tain, 
shocked society last week when he publicly denounced 
the Brelish monarchy. The dalliances of younger sib- 
lings Cyra and Daral sell more issues of the Inquisitive 
whenever such are reported, and the wedding of mid- 
dle sister Cariana ir'Tain and Mayne Jhaelian of Aere- 
nal will surely be the biggest social event of 998 YK. 


—€— E n К айай байынын 


CENTRAL PLATEAU 


The power and wealth of Sharn are concentrated in 
Central Plateau. Whether you're looking to deal with 
powerful merchants, city councilors, dragonmarked 
barons, or the ambassadors of other nations, Central 
Plateau is the place where big deals are made. 


UPPER CENTRAL 


Gold and power flow down from Upper Central. The 
district of Highest Towers is the seat of government, 
where city hall and the municipal archives are located. 
The Korranath is the name of both the central financial 
district and the grand temple of Kol Korran that dom- 
inates it. This district also houses the Kundarak Bank 
of Sharn and the Vaults, House Kundarak's ostensibly 
impenetrable storage facility. 

Some of Sharn's wealthiest citizens live in the Mithral 
Tower district, and Platinum Heights is the most expen- 
sive market district in Sharn. It has fewer shops than 
the Bazaar of Dura, but if you're looking for top-quality 
goods or services, there's no finer—or more expensive— 
source to be found. 

If you maintain no better than a poor lifestyle, many 
people in Upper Central will assume you're a servant or 
vagrant; this could cause you to have disadvantage on 
Charisma checks involving residents. 


«++» ж в в ж ө ө ж ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ж ]| ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө || | ө ө 


The ir’Tain fortune is tied to the City of Towers. 
Tain gold funded the construction of many of the tow- 
ers of Sharn, and the family owns vast sections of the 
city. You've likely heard of the Sixty Families of Sharn, 
considered the guiding lights of the city. Most assume 
that these luminaries are ancient and established, 
their status tied to a royal decree. In fact, when the 
Tains built their mansion on Skyway, they ordered the 
architects to design a banquet hall that would seat 
sixty families and their servants. The original Sixty 
Families were those that received standing invitations 
to the first Tain Gala. Though the list has remained 
generally stable through the years, just last year Ce- 
lyria expelled the ir'Moros family and gave their place 
to Saiden Boromar—a surprising advancement for a 
family that began as Cliffside hooligans. 

Anyone who strives to rise in Sharn society must 
earn the favor of the Sixty. Similarly, those who seek 
to explore and adventure in the wake of the Last War 


MIDDLE CENTRAL 


This part ofthe city is a center for intrigue. The district 
of Ambassador Towers contains embassies and consul- 
ates from the Thronehold Nations, as well as Aerenal 
and Sarlona. Ambassador Towers is also home to the 
King's Citadel, the headquarters of Brelish intelligence. 
Across the ward, the district of Dragon Towers holds the 
primary enclaves of the dragonmarked houses. 

The Sovereign Towers district has the grandest tem- 
ples in Sharn. The Pavilion of the Host is a complex 
of nine towers devoted to the Sovereign Host, and the 
Cathedral of the Cleansing Flame is the seat of the reli- 
gion. Although these temples are the locations of grand 
ceremonies and celebrations, many of the most devout 
priests serve in the city's smaller shrines. 


LOWER CENTRAL 


This district is peaceful and largely residential; it's the 
safest and most pleasant of the lower wards. Goods and 
services are largely priced for those with a comfortable 
lifestyle, and the Sharn Watch is plentiful and well paid. 
The district of Boldrei's Hearth has many reasonably 
priced inns (most run by House Ghallanda), and Ol- 
ladra's Kitchen has a wide assortment of taverns and 
restaurants. Myshan Gardens is a residential district 
that caters to affluent artists, while Vallia Towers has a 
large community of half-elves. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


can surely find patrons among these elite. And from [ 
our desks, we will be watching to see which families a 
will be next to rise and fall. { M 
g 
we amr etm p tein ae 


165 


166 


CENTRAL PLATEAU: NOTEWORTHY LOCATIONS 


Location 


Aurora Gallery 
City Archive 
Council Hall 

Gray Dragon Inn 
The Korranath 
Kundarak Bank of 
Sharn 

Lyrandar Tower 
Sannid's 

The Vaults 
Wayfinder 
Foundation 
Brelish Museum of 
Fine Art 
Cathedral of the 
Cleansing Flame 
The Citadel 


The Panaceum 


Pavilion of the Host 


THINGS TO Do IN CENTRAL 


Description 

The most prestigious auction house in Sharn, Aurora deals in magic items, exotic 
finds from Xen'drik, and other wonders. 

This enormous edifice holds the historical and legal records of Sharn and the sur- 
rounding regions. 

The seat of city government and the site of City Council meetings. The council meets 
weekly, and visitors can watch from the gallery. 

This inn provides aristocratic and wealthy lodging for those who can afford it. 


The temple of Kol Korran is an ostentatious display of wealth and a popular tourist at- 
traction, since many believe praying at the Korranath ensures success in business. 
This is thelargest bank in Sharn and the center of House Kundarak urban operations 
in the city. 

All airship travel to and from Sharn passes through the docking spires of Lyrandar 
Tower, the house's primary enclave in Sharn. 

One of Sharn's most celebrated restaurants, Sannid's serves Brelish cuisine of wealthy 
quality and has a legendary wine cellar. 

Located below the Kundarak Bank, the Vaults are Kundarak's heavily guarded storage 
facility. 

The guildhall for this legendary association of explorers. 


The museum displays work produced by Brelish artists and relics recovered from 
Xen'drik. 

The central temple of the Church of the Silver Flame serves both as a templar garrison 
and the site of grand rituals and celebrations. 

The headquarters of the King's Citadel, Breland's elite military and intelligence service. 
The Citadel is also a high-security prison holding Sharn's most dangerous criminals. 
Thelargest House Jorasco enclave in Sharn provides high-priced healing servicesto all 
who can pay for them. 

The center for worship of the Sovereign Host is a grand open tower surrounded by 
nine temples, each dedicated to one of the Sovereigns. 


DURA 


District 

Platinum Heights, 
Upper Central 
Highest Towers, 
Upper Central 
Highest Towers, 
Upper Central 
Platinum Towers, 
Upper Central 
Korranath, Upper 
Central 

Korranath, Upper 
Central 

Highest Towers, 
Upper Central 
Platinum Towers, 
Upper Central 
Korranath, Upper 
Central 

Korranath Upper 
Central 
Ambassador Tow- 
ers, Middle Central 
Sovereign Towers, 
Middle Central 
Ambassador Tow- 
ers, Middle Central 
Dragon Towers, 
Middle Central 
Sovereign Towers, 
Middle Central 


PLATEAU 


Looking for work or amusement in this quarter? Some 
of the things you can do here include: 


Attend an auction. The Aurora Gallery in Platinum 
Heights is the finest auction house in Sharn and spe- 
cializes in auctions of exotic magic items and relics 
from Xen'drik. You never know what's going to be 
available—or who will be bidding against you. 

Plan a heist. Perhaps your goals depend on recovering 
an item a villain has hidden in the vaults of Korranath. 
Can you penetrate the most secure facility in Sharn? 

Go to jail. The King's Citadel in Ambassador Towers is 
also Sharn's high-security prison. 

Worship. The primary temples of the Sovereign Host 
and the Silver Flame are located in Middle Central, 
along with a host of shrines to specific sovereigns 
and lesser faiths. Take part in a festival or drop in for 
some spiritual guidance! 

Engage in espionage. Whether you workfor your nation 
or get entangled in the schemes of the dragonmarked 
houses, Middle Central is home to a lot of powerful 
people who have a use for capable agents. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


Sharn began where Dura stands, but the city has left it 
behind in many ways. Many nowadays consider the old- 
est quarter of Sharn to be a blight on the City of Towers. 
The place is full of cracked and crumbling stonework, 
abandoned lift shafts, and everbright lanterns that have 
burned out and never been restored. Dura is riddled 
with poverty and crime; it's easily the most dangerous 
section of the city. But it also holds opportunities you 
can't find anywhere else. If you're looking for smuggled 
goods or a place to lie low, head to Dura. 


UPPER DURA 
This ward is full of activity. Its people are prospering, 
but there’s an edge of desperation about them; many 
folk are on the lookout for opportunities to better them- 
selves. Upper Dura has the general properties of a 
middle ward, with most goods and services priced for a 
modest or comfortable lifestyle. The merchants and ar- 
tisans are accustomed to dealing with unusual individu- 
als, and adventurers receive a warm welcome here. 
Clifftop is a home away from home for explorers and 
mercenaries. Daggerwatch is a fortress district, contain- 
ing garrisons for the Sharn Watch and the Brelish army. 


The Gold & White is a Daggerwatch tavern that caters 
to Brelish soldiers; those who hold a Brelish military 
rank will receive a warm welcome, while those who 
served other nations would be wise to take their busi- 
ness elsewhere. 


BAZAAR MERCHANTS 
910 Merchant 


1 


Secondhand Strings. А must-stop shop for the bard on 
a budget, with a variety of gently used instruments. 


In the dwarven district of Highhold, a center of activ- 2  Korryn's Quill. A reliable source for cartographers, cal- 
ity is Morragin's, which serves the strongest spirits in ligraphers, and scribes of all stripes. 
Sharn, but it’s no mere tavern; often patronized by Mror 3 Seven Leagues. Owned by the cobbler Boots, this 
merchants and Kundarak agents, it maintains the high- small stall has a remarkable selection of footwear. 
est of standards (with prices to match). 4  Borran's Blades. Borran is one of the few halfling 

The Highwater district is home to the wealthiest in- — — a анаа 
habitants of Dura and is the site of Pegasus Spire, the чш 4 > z - = 
enclave of House Vadalis. The temple district of Hope's Sm mbleanty Seales: A Sel а griledie сагы 
Peak features the Citadel of Light, a grand temple of other Talentan delicacies. 
Dol Arrah and a bastion for the virtuous. The Overlook 6 Во! апа Conquer. One of Sharn's only game stores. It 
district is home to Sharn's kalashtar community and does most of its business in cards and dice. 
includes the only temple of the Path of Light in Breland. 7  TheOld Apothecary. Selling supplies for herbalists and 

alchemists, this claims to be Bazaar's oldest shop. 

MIDDLE DURA 8 Illumination. This shop sells lamps, lanterns, candles, 
Middle Dura caters to the working class. Its taverns are and torches. Some are magical. 
modestly priced, but there’s gold among the dross. 9 The Magewright’s Miscellany. This little shop deals in 

The Bazaar of Dura is the largest commercial dis- spell components. The clerks love to discuss magic. 
trict in Sharn. In addition to the dozens of permanent 10 Sundry’s Shop. A gnome named Sundry runs a pawn 


shops and smithies, the streets of the bazaar are an ev- 
er-changing tapestry of stalls and tents. It’s said that you 


shop filled with all manner of trinkets. 


can find anything here, if you’re not too worried about 
where it came from and if you're prepared to contend 
with the cutpurses that prey on the crowds. 

A small selection of merchants that regularly do busi- 


Elsewhere in Middle Dura, the district of Hareth's 
Folly is a bizarre blend of architectural styles. One of the 
primary attractions is the Hollow Tower, an enormous 
arena that features aerial jousting and racing. The King 


ness at the bazaar is given on the Bazaar Merchants 
table; roll a 410, or choose a location of interest. 


THe DRUNKEN DRAGON 


iN UPPER Dura 


168 


DURA QUARTER: NOTEWORTHY LOCATIONS 


Location 

The Citadel of the 
Sun 

The Clifftop 
Adventurer’s Guild 
The Drunken Dragon 


The Esoteric Order 
of Aureon 

The Gold & White 
Moraggan’s 


The Mystic Market 


Pegasus Spire 


Ghallanda Hall 


The Hollow Tower 
The King of Fire 


The Anvil 


The Broken Mirror 


The Silvermist 
Theater 


Description 

A temple devoted to Dol Arrah, noteworthy for the three blessed griffons that reside 
there. 

An institution that provides adventurers with camaraderie and profitable work. 


A tavern frequented by members of the Clifftop Adventurer’s Guild. The food is modest, 
but it has the widest selection of exotic alcohol in Sharn. 

The guildhall of one of Sharn’s most prestigious arcane orders. A reliable source for ar- 
cane spellcasting services. 

This tavern offers fare of comfortable quality at modest prices. It caters to members of 
the Sharn Watch and Brelish veterans, but others will receive a cold welcome. 

A posh tavern specializing in strong Mror spirits. Food and drink are wealthy in quality 
and cost. 

A collection of shops specializing in different categories of magic items. Most merchan- 
dise is common or uncommon, but rare items are occasionally available. 

The seat of House Vadalis in Sharn is one of the few enclaves where pegasi are raised and 
trained. Native to Syrania, these celestial beasts can become stranded in Sharn; Vadalis 
heirs care for them and match them with virtuous companions. 

This proud Ghallanda enclave continues to operate amid the fading squalor of Middle 
Dura, and has become a tourist attraction. It offers a range of services, with food and 
lodging of poor to comfortable quality. 


A vertically oriented arena used for aerial jousting and other unusual sporting events. 


A comfortable tavern and gambling hall, known as one of the safest places to bet on the 
Race of Eight Winds and the events at the Hollow Tower. 

This fading Ghallanda inn struggles to maintain its poor to modest quality. It’s known to 
be under the protection of the Boromar Clan, which makes it one of the safest establish- 
ments in Lower Dura. 

A curious tavern owned bya family of changelings, the Broken Mirror changes its appear- 
ance and theme every week. It’s rumored to be connected to the Tyrants. 

A remnant of Callestan’s glory days, this place is a shadow of the grand establishment 

it once was. The current owners are known for staging bizarre events at the Silvermist. 
Since the Sharn Watch stays out of Callestan, anything can happen here. 


District 
Hope’s Peak, 
Upper Dura 
Clifftop, Upper 
Dura 

Clifftop, Upper 
Dura 

Clifftop, Upper 
Dura 
Daggerwatch, 
Upper Dura 
Highhold, Upper 
Dura 

Clifftop, Upper 
Dura 
Highwater, 
Upper Dura 


Underlook, 
Middle Dura 


Hareth's Folly, 
Middle Dura 
Hareth's Folly, 
Middle Dura 
Callestan, Lower 
Dura 


Callestan, Lower 
Dura 
Callestan, Lower 
Dura 


of Fire is a grand tavern that hosts a broad range of gam- 
bling and bookmaking activities, legal and otherwise. 
Many people make their homes in Middle Dura, 
even if their jobs take them elsewhere. Rattlestone and 
Tumbledown are mostly poor tenements. Stormhold 
contains crumbling manors still occupied by some of 
Sharn’s oldest families, while many that have prospered 
have moved on to more prestigious districts. 


LOWER DURA 


The aptly named Precarious district in Lower Dura 
leans out over the edge of the cliffs, and the Sky- 
docks—a system using gigantic arcane cranes and levi- 
tation—carry material up from Cliffside and the docks. 
Precarious is also filled with warehouses that hold 
these goods. Because Precarious plays an important 
role in the economy of the city, it’s the only district in 
Lower Dura where the Sharn Watch maintains a signifi- 
cant presence. 

The rest of Lower Dura, in stark contrast, has been 
left to.rot. Ignored by the Watch, it is the domain of 
gangs‘and crime lords. The inhabitants of the ward are 
often protected from violence by their criminal connec- 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


tions or by virtue of having nothing worth stealing, but 
adventurers ought to tread lightly here, especially those 
who display the trappings of a wealthy lifestyle. 

There was a time when Lower Dura was the heart 
of Sharn, and remnants of this glory remain. The Sil- 
vermist Theater in Callestan was built to entertain no- 
bles. The ward boasted manors, temples, and a garrison 
for the watch. But all of these edifices were abandoned 
long ago, and now most are home to nothing but squat- 
ters and vermin. 

The district of Callestan is a nexus of sorts, where all 
the major criminal powers of Sharn have a stake. Those 
groups are described in more detail later in this chapter. 

The district of Fallen is a haunted ruin; this temple 
district was abandoned after it was struck by a falling 
tower. It's covered in more detail later in this chapter. 

Malleon's Gate is home to the goblins of Sharn, along 
with other monstrous immigrants from Droaam and 
Darguun. The district can be an especially dangerous 
place for halflings or anyone tied to the Boromar Clan. 

Oldkeep and Gate of Gold are wretched tenement 
districts. A significant halfling community lives in the 
district known as The Stores, which is also a stronghold 
for the Boromar Clan. 


THINGS TO Do IN DURA 


Dura is a quarter of extremes, from the nearly idyllic at- 


mosphere of Upper Dura, down to the danger of Lower 
Dura. Among its attractions and diversions are these: 


Gamble. Legal gambling is heavily taxed in the city and 
limited in its scope. Dura is the place to find a wide 
range of shadier and more profitable games. 

Go shopping. The Bazaar of Middle Duraisan ex- 
cellent source for exotic goods, legal or otherwise. 
Clifftop, in Upper Dura, caters to adventurers and has 
a reasonable selection of magical goods. 

Bend the law. Looking for a fence or need to hire an 
assassin? Lower Dura is the nexus for criminal activi- 
ties in Sharn. 

Talk about the race. The inhabitants of Dura are de- 
voted to the Race of Eight Winds and are always will- 
ing to discuss the latest news. 

Suffer a terrible accident. The Sharn Watch ignores 
much of Lower Dura. Stories circulate continuously 
about dragonmarked houses and mad wizards con- 
ducting dangerous experiments in Lower Dura with- 
out interference from the law. 


MENTHIS PLATEAU 


The hub of Sharn's entertainment industry and home 
to Breland's largest university, Menthis Plateau is one 
of the most diverse quarters in Sharn. Whether you're 
looking for classical theater, a fine bookstore, or an ille- 
gal fighting ring, Menthis has something to offer. 


UPPER MENTHIS 


Elegant and civilized, Upper Menthis is home to four of 
the finest theaters in Breland: the cutting-edge Art Tem- 
ple, the colorful Khavish Theater, the traditional Grand 
Stage, and the open-air Stargazer Theater, as well as 
the Kavarrah Concert Hall. 

The shops in Upper Menthis deal mainly in fine food, 
fashion, and exotic goods. For instance, in the Seventh 
Tower district, Window on Yesterday, Echoes of the 
Past, the Mekdall Gallery, and Cloud Antiquities all 
buy and sell interesting antiques and trinkets from dis- 
tant lands. 

The district of Den'iyas is a gnome neighborhood 
that provides a glimpse into the culture of Zilargo. Da- 
vandi Fine Tailoring is the source of some of the finest 
glamerweave clothing in Khorvaire, and the district also 


MENTHIS PLATEAU: NOTEWORTHY LOCATIONS 


District 
Art Temple 


Davandi Fine 
Tailoring 


Dezina Museum 
of Antiquities 
Golden Horn 
Grand Stage 
Great Hall of 
Aureon 


Khavish Theater 


Little Xen'drik 


Sharn Opera 
House 
Stargazer Theater 


Classic Theater 


The Burning Ring 


Diamond Theater 


Ten Torches 


Description 


This theater is renowned for its avant-garde techniques and subjects. 


In addition to being the city councilor representing Upper Menthis, the gnome Thurik 
Davandi is an accomplished tailor and magewright who produces the finest glamerweave 
clothing available in Sharn. 

Attached to Morgrave University, this building displays the relics recovered on the univer- 
sity's many expeditions. 

This wealthy inn includes a library, a few large meeting rooms, and a small concert hall. 
Performing atthe Horn is an excellent opportunity for aspiring bards. 

This stage hosts grand performances of the beloved classics of Galifar, along with more 
modern works that follow classical traditions. 

Sharn's largest temple to the Sovereign Aureon, the Great Hall celebrates knowledge and 
learning. The clergy are sages and savants in a wide variety of fields. 

Established by and for gnomes, the Khavish has ample seating for small creatures, and its 
shows make extensive use of illusions. 

This area of small shops deals in antiquities and relics recovered from Xen'drik and the ru- 
ins below Sharn. Cloud Antiquities specializes in giant artifacts, while the Mekdall Gallery 


deals in ancient elven and drow goods. Windows on Yesterday looks for items with histori- 


cal significance, and Echoes of the Past deals in magic items with practical uses. 
Performances at the Sharn Opera are one ofthe most highbrow forms of entertainment in 
the city. 

This open-air theater focuses on popular entertainment with family appeal. 


A small and inexpensive theater, the Classic performs only works written before the start 
of the Last War. 

The Ring offers blood sport and gladiatorial combat. These dangerous matches aren't 
sanctioned by law, and the Burning Ring constantly changes locations to avoid the Sharn 
Watch. It's always last seen somewhere in Lower Menthis. 

A cheap theater once known for bawdy humor, the Diamond has gained fame due to its 
playwright in residence and has produced several plays about the impact ofthe Last War. 
The cheapest ticket in Sharn's theater scene, Ten Torches alternates between lowbrow 
comedy and bizarre shows that no respectable theater would stage. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


Location 
University, Upper 
Menthis 
Den'iyas, Upper 
Menthis 


University, Upper 
Menthis 
University, Upper 
Menthis 
University, Upper 
Menthis 
University, Upper 
Menthis 
Den'iyas, Upper 
Menthis 

Seventh Tower, 
Upper Menthis 


University, Upper 
Menthis 
University, Upper 
Menthis 

Smoky Towers, 
Middle Menthis 
Lower Menthis 


Downstairs, 
Lower Menthis 
Torchfire, Lower 
Menthis 


169 


170 


hosts a number of businesses that specialize in alchemy, 
illusion, or divination. Visitors should be aware that in- 
trigue is the primary pastime in Den'iyas, and that hap- 
less adventures can easily find themselves pulled into 
intricate schemes or feuds. 

Upper Menthis also contains the University district, 
home to Breland's finest institutions of learning. More 
information about this district can be found in chapter 1. 


MIDDLE MENTHIS 


Middle Menthis boasts the most diverse population of 
any ward in Sharn. The Little Plains district is the desti- 
nation for halfling immigrants from the Talenta Plains. 
Cassan Bridge has a significant population of orcs and 
half-orcs from the Shadow Marches. Immigrants from 
the Lhazaar Principalities have settled in the Warden 
Towers district, which is primarily a garrison for the 
Sharn Watch. The district of Smoky Towers had a sig- 
nificant Cyran community even before the Last War; 
now, this area has become a haven for Cyrans wealthy 
enough to escape the refugee camps of High Walls. 

One of the most prominent attractions In Smoky Tow- 
ers is the Classic Theater. The place lives up to its name 
by staging only traditional works written before the start 
of the Last War. Although the Grand Stage in the Uni- 
versity district also performs more recent works echo- 
ing the classical style, the Classic has a stated policy of 
not even considering new works. 

The Everbright district might be of particular interest 
to adventurers. A wide assortment of magewrights ply 
their trade here, and the shops have a good selection 
of magic items (of common and uncommon rarity). The 
people of Middle Menthis are law-abiding folk; visitors 
looking for spellcasters to help with illegal activities or 
who want to sell stolen artifacts will likely have better 
luck in Lower Dura. 


LOWER MENTHIS 


Providing cheap entertainment for the masses, Lower 
Menthis is crowded. The Firelight district is filled with 
sketchy taverns and theaters ranging from the innocent 
to the risque, as well as gambling halls, brothels, and 
spontaneous performances in the streets. 

Lower Menthis is also home to the Burning Ring, a 
fight club where spectators bet on amateur gladiators. 
Technically illegal, the Burning Ring moves around 
the ward. Competitors are armed but unarmored; 
matches continue until a contestant yields, but fatalities 
do happen. 


WHAT'S ON THE BILL? 


People come from across Breland to experience the 
Menthis art scene. All manner of entertainment can be 
found in this quarter, from bawdy Lower Menthis events 
to the traditional works of the Classic Theater in Middle 
Menthis. The Shows in Menthis table provides a sam- 
pling of the many performances staged in Menthis. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


SHOWS IN MENTHIS 
d8 Event 

1 Tira’s Tears. A speculative drama about the founder of 
the Church of the Silver Flame. (Grand Stage, Upper 
Menthis) 

2 Facade. A comedy of errors about a family of change- 
lings, involving a tangled web of mistaken identities. 
(Art Temple, Upper Menthis) 

3 Еме Lives. A bitter reflection on the tragedy of the 
Last War, as seen through the eyes of five soldiers. 
Written by up-and-coming playwright Luca Syara. 
(Diamond Theater, Lower Menthis) 

4 Galifar Triumphant. A beloved history based on the 
legendary king and the conflict that established the 
Kingdom of Galifar. (Classic Theater, Middle Menthis) 

5 The Late Count. A comic opera by the bard Kessler, 
revolving around a Karrnathi count who is resurrected 
as a Zombie. (Sharn Opera House, Upper Menthis) 

6 Тһе Carnival of Shadows. House Phiarlan's traveling 
circus, a mesmerizing blend of illusions, physical arts, 
and exotic beasts. The traveling troupe always visits 
Smoky Towers (Middle Menthis). 

7 The Brelish Symphony Orchestra. A performance of 
some of the finest works of Seventh Century Brelish 
composers. (Kavarrah Concert Hall, Upper Menthis) 

8 Reflection. A one-person show performed by the 
changeling Adi, exploring the multitudes that exist 
within us all. (Ten Torches, Lower Menthis) 


THINGS TO Do IN MENTHIS 
PLATEAU 


Any list of attractions that tries to summarize what 
Menthis Plateau has to offer, even without considering 
all the performance events, is doomed to be incomplete. 
Of the countless possibilities, some of the most popular 
reasons to come here are the following: 


Consult a sage. Morgrave University might not be the 
finest institute of learning in Khorvaire, but it's the 
best Sharn has to offer. Whether you want to conduct 
your own research in the library or find a specialist in 
goblin history, Morgrave likely has what you need. 

Go into show business. Menthis has a wide range of 
performance venues, from the Grand Stage to the 
many taverns of Lower Menthis. In addition to enjoy- 
ing the entertainment, you could try to find work—ei- 
ther showcasing your artistic talents on stage or dis- 
playing another sort of prowess in the Burning Ring. 

Join an expedition. Scholars at Morgrave often spon- 
sor expeditions to Xen'drik and into the ruins below 
Sharn. Cyran nobles in Smoky Towers sometimes 
hire brave souls to venture into the Mournland to re- 
claim lost treasures. 

See other cultures. Den'iyas brings a touch of Zilargo 
to Sharn. You might find a clawfoot raptor running 
down the streets in Little Plains, or a Gatekeeper 
druid casting bones on Cassan Bridge. 


КЫЛА: 
645и 


NORTHEDGE 


The Northedge residential area is the quietest quarter 
of Sharn. At first glance there's little to attract adventur- 
ous sorts, unless someone is interested in purchasing 
top-quality real estate. At the same time, you never 
know when this charming and innocuous area could be 
the site of a nefarious cult or a devilish plot. 


UPPER NORTHEDGE 

Upper Northedge is the perfect place for the noble who 
can afford a manor in the clouds but wants to avoid the 
bustle of Upper Central. The districts of Crystal Bridge 
and Oak Towers are filled with spire-topped manors and 
grand estates. A host of rooftop parks and gardens pro- 


vide lovely spaces to sit and reflect. 


ax ПЕ 


SHARK INQUISITIVE 


ENIGMA OF THE 
DIAMOND VOICE 


«+++» жж э ж э ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ® ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө | |! | vn 


I challenge anyone to leave a performance of The Broken 
Sword with dry eyes. I believe that even a warforged 
would be moved to tears by this unflinching look at the 
spiritual cost of war. It's brutal, painful, and true—which 
is why it was all the more shocking when it first opened 
at the Diamond Theater. The Downstairs district of 
Lower Menthis is mainly known for its bawdy enter- 
tainment and base comedy, not cutting-edge political 
commentary. Thus, we critics assumed that this dra- 
matic work was a singular event, until a new play titled 
Fallen Angels exceeded our every expectation. Month after 
month in recent times, the Diamond has struck us to the 
quick with emotional works about the Last War and the 
psychic wounds we're still struggling with. 

Who is the playwright of the Diamond Theater re- 
sponsible for these stirring stories? Her name is Luca 
Syara, but beyond that, she's an enigma. There's no such 
person on the rolls of the bardic colleges of Breland, 
and House Phiarlan and House Thuranni claim to know 
nothing about her. Syara shuns the spotlight and refuses 
all interviews. While her works are being debated and 
celebrated in classrooms and taverns, the artist spends 
her days in the dingy back rooms of the Diamond The- 
ater. This seclusion has led to a number of fanciful ru- 
mors. Some say Syara fought in the Last War and that 
she was in Metrol on the Day of Mourning. A wilder ru- 
mor maintains that she is an exile from the Faerie Court 
of Thelanis, an archfey bound to human form. 

While we wait for answers to this mystery, we encour- 
age you to sample Syara's latest work. Five Lives is a gut- 
wrenching tragedy that forces us to look at our darkest 
hours, and to consider the suffering of our enemies and 
the common threads that unite us all. If you're looking 
to forget your troubles, by all means, go see Facade or The 
Late Count. But if you want to take in a performance that 
might make you a better person, do whatever it takes to 
get tickets to Five Lives. 


REST tmt men comun din венер“ 


Shae Lias is arguably the most remarkable district of 
Upper Northedge. Its population is largely composed of 
elves, and it is a bastion of Aereni culture and traditions. 
The heart of Shae Lias is the Gates of Passage, a grand 
structure that is both the Aereni embassy and a temple 
to the Undying Court. The priests of the Undying Court 
don't share this information with outsiders, but many 
residents believe that an actual member of the Court— 
an ancient undead elf possessing vast knowledge and 
divine power—resides in the temple. 

Other points of interest in Shae Lias include the Oaks, 
one of the finest restaurants in Sharn, which serves 
food of the highest quality (and priced accordingly). 

The Veil of Flesh specializes in Aereni body art, in the 
form of both traditional tattoos and temporary illusions 
woven directly into the skin. The business known as 
Nightshade might be the most unusual watering hole 
in Sharn, doubling as apothecary and tavern; the house 
specialty is beverages tainted with weak poisons, de- 
signed to take the imbiber to the very edge of death. 


MIDDLE NORTHEDGE 


This ward caters to the middle class of Sharn, offering 
a wide range of comfortable housing. Dwarves make up 
most of the population, with the highest concentration 
in the district of Holdfast. In contrast to the residents of 
Highhold in Upper Dura, the dwarves of Holdfast have 
deep roots in Sharn and feel no strong connection to the 
Mror Holds or its traditions. 

High Hope is a temple district; although the city's 
most impressive churches and shrines are located 
in Upper Central, it's commonly known that if you're 
looking for a truly devoted priest, you should go to High 
Hope. The most notable feature of the district is Daca's 
Watch. Twelve feet high, this pillar is thought to have 
once held a statue or monument. Over a century ago, 
a gnome named Daca climbed atop the pedastal. She 
has remained there ever since, and shouts advice to 
anyone who passes by. Although Daca doesn't claim to 
be a priest, the people of the community say that she's 
blessed by the god Boldrei and speaks with the Sover- 
eign's voice. True or not, Daca's advice has proven to be 
remarkably sound, and she and her pillar have become a 
tourist attraction. 


LOWER NORTHEDGE 


Although it's poverty-stricken, Lower Northedge is a 
significant step up from the slums of Lower Dura. The 
people of Lower Northedge don't look for trouble, and 
they don't like it coming to their doorstep. North Mar- 
ket is one of the largest markets in Sharn, though in 
contrast to the Bazaar of Dura it mostly offers simple, 
everyday goods. 

Lower Northedge has a significant shifter population. 
The Rat's Nest is a tavern that caters to shifters, and the 
Bear's Rest is an inn run by a family of shifters. Tooth 
& Nail is an apothecary specializing in the care of fangs 
and claws. Particularly in the districts of North Market 
and Stoneyard, shifter children play hrazhak in the 
streets; this flamboyant sport involves making dramatic 
leaps and scaling walls. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


I7I 


172 


The Shrine of Fathen the Martyr is an infamous spot 
in North Market. It is dedicated to a crusading priest of 
the Silver Flame who uncovered a group of wererats in 
the early days of Sharn. Fathen was torn apart by the 
wererats he had exposed, and in his honor the Church 
of the Silver Flame raised the shrine on this site. It's 
said that any lycanthrope that enters the shrine will be 
forced into its true form. Pilgrims devoted to the Sil- 
ver Flame come from across Khorvaire to pray at the 
shrine, but the local shifter population has no love for 
the pilgrims or the church. 


THINGS TO Do IN NORTHEDGE 


Northedge is the most peaceful quarter in Sharn. It does 


have a few taverns and temples, but if you're looking for 
excitement or a wide selection of goods and services, 
you'll want to go elsewhere. Even so, Northedge boasts 
some notable special attractions: 


Settle down. If youre looking for a place to live in 
Sharn, Lower Northedge residences are of reason- 
able quality and price and offer more security than 


high priest of the Gates of Passage is capable of rais- 
ing the dead. 

Find a patron. Many eccentric nobles make their homes 
in Upper Northedge. A patron of the arts could take 
an interest in the career of a bard or an entertainer. 

A collector might keep capable adventurers on re- 
tainer with the understanding that they'll deliver any 
Dhakaani artifacts they come across in their travels. 
You never know what benefits a patron will provide; at 
the very least, having a patron can provide you with an 
introduction to high society. 


'TAVICK'S LANDING 


Everyone who comes to Sharn, whether by land or air, 
passes through Tavick's Landing. The quarter took on 
a martial aspect during the Last War, and the tense 
atmosphere can still be felt today. On the positive side, 
Watch Commander Iyanna ir Talan has gone to great 
efforts to purge corruption in the local garrisons of the 
Sharn Watch; as a result, this is one of the few districts 
where the Watch is both helpful and competent. On the 


Lower Dura. 


Die in style. The elves of Shae Lias are experts in 
funerary customs and embalming. In addition, the 


downside, visitors from any nation that fought against 


or hostility. 


NORTHEDGE QUARTER: NOTEWORTHY LOCATIONS 


Location 


Gates of Passage 


Nightshade 


The Oaks 


The Silver Bough 


The Winding Root 
The Veil of Flesh 


Coldflame Keep 


Daca's Watch 


The Bear's Rest 
Fathen's Shrine 
The Horse and 


Hearth 
The Rat's Nest 


Description 

Built from Aereni densewood, this spire serves both as the embassy of Aerenal and 
a temple of the Undying Court. Aereni citizens who die in Sharn are interred in the 
temple crypts until their remains can be transported to Aerenal. 

An apothecary dealing in exotic herbs and salves, Nightshade is also a tavern spe- 
cializing in lightly poisoned beverages. 

A legendary restaurant that serves Aereni and Brelish cuisine. The quality is un- 
matched, as are the aristocratic prices. Head chef Maza Thadian has maintained 
the Oaks for over three hundred years, but after her recent appointment as city 
councilor for Upper Northedge she is often occupied with other matters. 

This establishment deals in arms crafted in the Aereni tradition. This merchandise 
includes magic items, but woodshaper Tanar Mendyrian takes time to produce his 
wonders, and only a limited selection is available at any given time. 

A marketplace and gallery that showcases the work of elven artisans, including 
sculptures, textiles, and fine clothing. 

This studio deals in Aereni body art and alteration, such as tattoos and cosmetic 
transmutation. 

A garrison temple of the Silver Flame, this place once housed a hundred templars 
dedicated to protecting Sharn from supernatural threats. It has largely been aban- 
doned; only a dozen devoted templars and adepts remain in residence. 

A dwarf named Daca has been sitting on a pillar in Northedge for over a century, 
offering advice and encouragement. Though she doesn't claim to be a priest, many 
believe that Daca is blessed and guided by Boldrei. 

A modest inn maintained by a beasthide shifter named Leara, who usually gives a 
discount to traveling shifters. The decor features various exotic hides. 

This marker in North Market commemorates a miracle that exposed a network of 
wererats in Sharn, along with the priest ofthe Silver Flame who died while fighting 
them. Pilgrims devoted to the Silver Flame often visit the shrine. 

Though not as colorful as the Bear's Rest, this large inn is maintained by House 
Ghallanda and offers rooms of modest and comfortable quality. 

A modest tavern catering to the shifters of Lower Northedge, the Rat's Nest is a 
haven for gossip and serves food and drink in the Eldeen style. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


Breland during the war might be greeted with suspicion 


District 
Shae Lias, Upper 
Northedge 


Shae Lias, Upper 
Northedge 
Shae Lias, Upper 
Northedge 


Shae Lias, Upper 
Northedge 


Shae Lias, Upper 
Northedge 

Shae Lias, Upper 
Northedge 

High Hope, Middle 
Northedge 


High Hope, Middle 
Northedge 


North Market, Lower 
Northedge 
North Market, Lower 
Northedge 


North Market, Lower 
Northedge 
North Market, Lower 
Northedge 


HOWARD LYON 


UPPER TAVICK'S LANDING 


This ward is effectively a self-contained city catering to 
the nobles that live there. It has fine housing, skilled ser- 
vices, a luxurious mercantile district, and even an entire 
district —Sunrise—designed for the servants of the no- 
bles. The services and lodging in Sunrise accommodate 
those with poor or modest lifestyles, as opposed to the 
higher-priced goods found elsewhere in the ward. 

For those willing to put up with its restrictive laws, 
Upper Tavick's Landing has many fine features. 
Wyredd's Spirits is the best source for wine in Sharn. 
The shop Crystals of Denion buys and sells rare magic 
items, though it only has a handful of such items at any 
given time. Transmutation is a renowned beauty salon 
providing both mundane and arcane services. House 
Deneith maintains a fortified garrison and training facil- 
ity in the Copper Arch district. 


THE LAws OF UPPER TAVICK’S LANDING 
During the war, fears of attacks by foreign agents re- 
sulted in the establishment of a number of laws here 
that affect visitors, including adventurers, to this day. 
The soldiers of House Deneith have full authority 
to act as agents of the Sharn Watch in Upper Tavick’s 
Landing, and staff of Deneith’s elite Blademark merce- 
naries maintain checkpoints at the district’s edges. 


House Jorasco’s 
House OF HEALING IN 
MIDDLE Tavick’s LANDING 


You need a license to carry a weapon in Upper Tav- 
ick’s Landing. It costs only 5 gp, but you have to plead 
your case to a clerk. Any Blademark or member of the 
watch can demand to see your license and might con- 
fiscate unauthorized weapons. You also need a license 
to cast spells in the ward. It costs 10 gp, and you must 
specify the spells you intend to cast. A fine can be levied 
for any unauthorized use of magic. To get licenses for 
weapons or spellcasting, you'll have to go to the court- 
house in the Twelve Pillars district. 

Another law requires inhabitants to dress “in a man- 
ner that upholds the solemn dignity of this proud ward.” 
Blademarks and officers of the watch can choose how 
they interpret this. Typically, armor is considered in- 
appropriate unless you're tied to House Deneith or the 
Sharn Watch, or you've served with the Brelish military. 
Anyone in contempt of this law is escorted out. 

Any sort of unruly behavior—fighting, shouting in the 
streets, and the like—brings a fine of up to 5 gp and tem- 
porary expulsion from the ward. 


MIDDLE TAVICK'S LANDING 


Unlike the upper ward, Middle Tavick's Landing wel- 
comes travelers and tourists. The ward features a host 
of lively taverns and excellent inns. The Cornerstone is 
a huge arena that hosts eventsranging from circuses to 


P| 
e 


173 


174 


aerial jousting. The Deathsgate district caters to adven- 
turers, much as the Clifftop district of Upper Dura does. 
Like Clifftop, the district has an adventurer's guild— 
though the Deathsgate Guild has a dark reputation, and 
its members often pick fights with Clifftop adventurers. 
(See the "Adventurer's Guilds" section for more informa- 
tion.) House Jorasco has a large house of healing in the 
ward, and House Deneith maintains a recruiting station 
for would-be mercenaries. 

The Graystone district has deep roots in Karrnathi 
culture that predate the Last War; Slogar's and the 
Bloody Mug are places where homesick Karrns can 
enjoy blood sausage and Nightwood ale. The district is a 
haven for Karrnathi soldiers who want to avoid Brelish 


aggression and a place where followers of the Blood of 
Vol can practice their faith. 

Tavick's Market is one of Sharn's major market dis- 
tricts; located directly above the Terminus lightning rail 
station, it's filled with stands selling produce and goods 
brought in by local farmers. 


LowER TAVICK'S LANDING 


Two land routes to Sharn both end at Lower Tavick's 
Landing. The Orien lightning rail deposits passengers 
in the district of Terminus, while those who travel to 
Sharn on the Old Road arrive at Wroann's Gate. Getting 
to the better parts of Sharn from here means passing 
through Black Arch, a heavily fortified garrison district 


TAVICK’S LANDING: NOTEWORTHY LOCATIONS 


Location 


Crystals of Denion 


The Three Towers 


Transmutation 
Wyredd's Spirits 


The Bloody Mug 


The Cornerstone 


The Deathsgate Guild 


The Guild of Starlight 
and Shadows 
Maynard's Menagerie 
Redblade's 

Slogar's 

Tooth and Nail 


Chance 


Terminus Station 


Velvet's 


Description 

This gallery deals in rare and expensive magic items. The selection is limited, 
and Denion looks for items that are both beautiful and powerful. 

A fortress enclave of House Deneith. One tower is a garrison for the Blademark 
mercenary forces that police Upper Tavick's Landing. The second is dedicated to 
house business and training. The third is a private mansion for Deneith heirs. 

A beauty salon that employs both magical and mundane cosmetic techniques. 


Wyredd deals in fine wines and exotic spirits. Wyredd's has the finest selection 
in Sharn, but his prices are high. 

A comfortable tavern catering to Sharn's Karrnathi immigrants. Travelers from 
Karrnath always receive a warm welcome and a tankard of nightwood ale in ex- 
change for stories from the old country. 

A massive arena that hosts a wide array of sporting events. These include jousts 
and races, both on foot and through the air. The Stone Trees is an offshoot of 
the Cornerstone that serves as the playing field for hrazhak competitions. 

A society where adventurers can hone their skills and seek profitable work. The 
Deathsgate Guild has a sinister reputation, earned because its members will do 
anything in pursuit of success. 

The guildhall of one of Sharn's most prestigious arcane orders. A reliable source 
for arcane spellcasting services. 

This Vadalis storefront deals in exotic pets and animal companions, along with 
barding and other useful gear. 

A comfortable tavern catering to the adventurers of the Deathsgate Guild. Red- 
blade is rumored to have a side business selling poison and venoms. 

This modest restaurant serves traditional Karrnathi cuisine. The ambience is a 
bit gloomy, but the prices are reasonable, and the food is very filling. 

A comfortable tavern devoted to the sport of hrazhak. Most of the clientele are 
shifters, but anyone willing to talk hrazhak will find friends here. 

A legendary gambling hall. In addition to standard games, it's said that the host 
can cover a wide range of unusual wagers. 

An enclave of House Orien, this site contains the lightning rail station. The ad- 
ministrators coordinate the many Orien caravans that come and go from Sharn. 
Many ofthe other dragonmarked houses have small outposts in or around Ter- 
minus Station, allowing travelers to immediately access the services of House 
Sivis, House Deneith, and others. 

Staffed by changelings, this comfortable inn specializes in fulfilling fantasies; 
both the staff and the rooms can be adapted to fit any scenario. Though some 
clients have romance in mind, others come to Velvet's to relive triumphs, to pre- 
pare for debates or trials, or for help in developing a new identity. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


District 

Silvergate, Upper 
Tavick's Landing 
Copper Arch, Upper 
Tavick's Landing 


Copper Arch, Upper 
Tavick's Landing 
Copper Arch, Upper 
Tavick's Landing 
Graywall, Middle 
Tavick's Landing 


Cornerstone, Middle 
Tavick's Landing 


Deathsgate, Middle 
Tavick's Landing 


Deathsgate, Middle 
Tavick's Landing 
Deathsgate, Middle 
Tavick's Landing 
Deathsgate, Middle 
Tavick's Landing 
Graywall, Middle 
Tavick's Landing 
Cornerstone, Middle 
Tavick's Landing 
Dragoneyes, Lower 
Tavick's Landing 
Terminus, Lower 
Tavick's Landing 


Dragoneyes, Lower 
Tavick's Landing 


designed to repel enemies and withstand a full siege. 
The ward offers a variety of services catering to travel- 
ers; the Dragoneyes district is a maze of taverns, inns, 
brothels, and gambling halls. Dragoneyes is also note- 
worthy for being the site of one of thefew changeling 
communities in Breland. 

House Orien has a strong presence in Lower Tavick's 
Landing, and Orien heirs, laborers, and teamsters can 
be found in many of the districts. House Lyrandar and 
House Deneith are also well represented, with their 
representatives arranging matters of trade, transport, 
and security. 

These days, Lower Tavick's Landing is best known 
for High Walls, a former residential district converted 
into a home for refugees from the Last War. High Walls 
is filled past capacity, mostly by Cyrans who were dis- 
placed by the Mourning. The gates are open at present, 
but High Walls is designed to serve as a fortress 
prison if the need arises, and the Sharn Watch 
keeps an eye out for any signs of unrest. 


THINGS TO Do IN TAVICK’S 
LANDING 


Asa metropolitan district filled with immigrants, mer- 
chants, and travelers from across Khorvaire and beyond 
it, Tavick’s Landing offers a host of opportunities to 
enjoy food and entertainment from distant lands. Or you 
might find yourself here for one of a few specific rea- 
sons, such as: 


Take a chance. The Dragoneyes district is filled with 
ways to lose your wages, both in established gambling 
halls and on street corners. If you you're looking for 
something a little more exotic, see if you can find 
Chance. This is the name both of a secret, roaming 
gambling den and of the changeling who runs it. In 
addition to offering all manner of mundane games and 
bets, Chance is said to be able to arrange and cover 
nearly any sort of wager or duel. Are you ready to 
gamble with a fiend? Would you wager a year of your 
life for a moment of good fortune when you need it the 
most? If any of the rumors are true, these are exam- 
ples of what's possible at Chance. 

Find refuge. Though most of the refugees in High Walls 
come from Cyre, the district is a haven for anyone 
displaced in the war, including Brelish. The place is 
overcrowded, however, and resources are stretched 
thin. Tensions are high, and feuds and power strug- 
gles among the refugees take place regularly. If you're 
from Cyre, you might be able to find a cot in High 
Walls, especially if you already have friends or family 
living there. 

Bond over blood. The Graystone district in Middle 
Tavick's Landing is one of the few places in Breland 
where the Blood of Vol religion is practiced openly. 
Residents are circumspect about their activities, and 
undead servants are largely kept off the streets. But if 
you're a follower of the faith, it’s a place where you can 
participate in the Sacrament of the Blood or consult 
with a priest. It's also the best place to find a skilled 
necromancer, or to hear rumors about the latest 
schemes of the Order of the Emerald Claw. 


ABOVE AND BELOW 


The five main quarters of Sharn make up the bulk of the 
city. But a few additional districts lie above and below 
the metropolis proper, including wondrous sites and 
dangerous places that most folk prefer to avoid. 


SKYWAY 


A number of floating towers drift above the upper wards 
of Sharn, but these are dwarfed by Skyway, an entire 
district suspended above and between Central Plateau 
and Menthis Plateau. Built on an island of solidified 
cloud, Skyway holds the mansions of the wealthiest 
people in Khorvaire—nobles whose feet never touch the 
ground. It's a realm of wonders, filled with the finest 
examples of luxury and extravagance that gold can buy 
and magic can produce. For instance, Cloudpool Park is 
formed from sculpted cloudstuff, with window panels of 
ice that provide a view of the city below. 

Skyway is home to lavish estates. Prior to the Last 
War, noble families from across the Five Nations main- 
tained mansions here. Though some of these places 
remain in the hands of their original owners, others 
were seized by the crown during the Last War and sold 


THE VOICE OF 


BRELAND 


ee E ee ee ep ee ЧРЧРОЧ 


IS YOUR NEIGHBOR 
A CYRAN INVADER? 


wes] |] ]) y] ee 1 n | | |] ж s жо ж || ce ж э э ожо ее» эээ» 


In the wake of the Mourning, our king welcomed the | 
survivors of that tragedy into our cities. In Sharn, High 1 
Walls alone holds more Cyran refugees than Karrnath | 
has allowed across its borders. If you read the Sharn In- | 
quisitive or the Korranberg Chronicle, you've heard the end- 
less litany of how difficult life is, tales of overcrowding, 
starvation, and disease. Although we at the Voice of Bre- 
land sympathize with all who suffer, we refuse to ignore 
the deadly threat in our midst. The majority of Cyrans 
who survived the Mourning did so because they were 
beyond the borders of their nation. And why is that? Be- 
cause they were soldiers. 

The Sharn Inquisitive talks about starving children and 
ailing peasants, but it doesn't mention the Cyran spe- 
cial forces and elite war mages who now reside in High 
Walls. As Brelish, we all want to show compassion to 
the truly innocent, but let us never forget that these 
people were once our enemy and could be again. And 
let us also remember that the cause of the Mourning 
remains a mystery. Was it divine punishment for Cyran 
sins that have yet to be washed clean? Or could it have 
been a premature activation of an arcane weapon—and 
if so, could Cyran artificers already be working on an im- 
proved version in the heart of our greatest city? 

Remain alert, people of Breland! Don't let the current 
plight of these unfortunates blind you to the danger! 


Mer mee eme e 


————— альні 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 175 


Um 


to wealthy citizens of Breland. The resulting influx of 
residents has brought more diversity to the district, with 
dragonmarked heirs and even wealthy criminals living 
alongside the nobility. The grandest estate in Skyway is 
Tain Manor, home of the ir'Tain family and the monthly 
Tain Gala (see "Holidays" earlier in this chapter). 

This district offers the highest-priced services in the 
city. The Dragon's Hoard is a Ghallanda resort, where 
travelers can enjoy the utmost in luxury if they can af- 
ford the most expensive amenities. The Celestial Vista 
and the Cloud Dragon are wondrous restaurants. The 
Azure Gateway is a new hotel and restaurant that has 
replaced a Ghallanda establishment. The owner has 
remained anonymous, and this touch of mystery has 
piqued interest in the place. 

If you'reinterested in mingling with nobles or celeb- 
rities, or if you want to pull off a heist that targets the 
richest people in Sharn, Skyway is the place to do that. 

No bridges or lifts connect Skyway to the rest of the 
city, so the usual way to reach the floating district is by 
taking a skycoach or hiring a flying mount. 


CLIFFSIDE 


Cliffside encompasses the docks and waterfront of 
Sharn, running along the edge of the Dagger River and 
up the cliff above it. Massive lifts levitate goods up to the 
skydocks in the district of Precarious. The area's rough 
and poor, filled with sailors and dockworkers. Many of 
these boisterous folk love the life in Cliffside; as a com- 
mon saying goes, "Better a tankard of ale in Cliffside 
than a barrel of Central wine." 

Plenty of legitimate services can be found here—ships 
need supplies and repairs, goods need to be stored, 
captains need to hire crew, and sailors need a dry bed to 
sleep in once in a while—but other businesses meet dif- 
ferent kinds of demands. These services include bordel- 
los, taverns, gaming dens, and shadier entertainments 
for sailors to spend their off duty hours and wages on. 

Even though the Sharn Watch has a token presence 
here, Cliffside remains one of the most crime-ridden 
districts in the city. This situation is exacerbated by the 
presence of sahuagin, who sell their services as guides 
to help ships traveling to Xen'drik. In fact, the sahuagin 
rarely initiate violence, but there have been clashes be- 
tween them and aggressive, drunken sailors. 


THE Cocs 


The Cogs lie deep beneath Sharn, below the sewers 
and Old Sharn (described later in this chapter). Streams 
of Fernian lava flow through this area, and over the 
centuries, House Cannith has helped Breland establish 
vast foundries that tap this mystic resource. Ashblack 
and Blackbones are industrial districts, largely inhab- 
ited by warforged laborers and miserable workers of 
other races. It is said that House Cannith maintains a 
forgehold in the Ashblack district, and that this is where 
Baron Merrix d'Cannith conducts his experiments. 

The Sharn Watch maintains a presence in the Cogs, 
and overseers from House Cannith are stationed here 
to keep things in order. Beyond these industrial dis- 
tricts lies the deeper tunnels of Khyber's Gate, a tene- 
ment district. 


ABOVE AND BELOW SHARN: NOTEWORTHY LOCATIONS 


Location 
The Azure Gateway 


The Celestial Vista 


The Cloud Dragon 
The Dragon's Hoard 
Tain Manor 


Mud Caves 


Sharn's Welcome 
Ship's Towers 
Keldoran Forge 

The Pool of Onatar's 


Tears 
The Red Hammer 


Deascription 


its high prices. 


together to form a floating community. 


District 
This luxurious hotel and restaurant recently replaced an old Ghallanda inn. The menu isa Skyway 
"Galifar fusion," combining styles from across the Five Nations. 
This legendary restaurant is owned by Skyway's city councilor, Lady Evix ir'Marasha. The Skyway 
floor is studded with crystal windows, allowing diners to look down into the city below. 
The food isn't incredible, but tourist crowds keep the Vista filled with customers. 
This restaurant serves traditional Brelish cuisine, and it does so exceptionally well. It's Skyway 
rarely as crowded as the other venues in Skyway, but locals know its value. 
This resort, maintained by House Ghallanda, offers every luxury for those who can afford Skyway 
Sharn's social life revolves around the ir'Tain family. The monthly Tain Gala is the hottest Skyway 
ticket in town, and it's held at the family estate in Skyway. 
This shantytown sits on the edge of Cliffside, where generations of destitute people have Cliffside 
carved out homes in the cliff walls. It's a wretched existence, but most ofthe inhabitants 
have no other options. It also makes an excellent hiding place for fugitives. 
Also known as the docks of Cliffside, this area is rough and dirty. Its taverns frequently Cliffside 
host brawls, while the inns offer travelers a wide variety of ways to be cheated or robbed. 
Drifting alongside the Cliffside docks is a collection of rafts, ships, and houseboats lashed Cliffside 
Though most of the foundries in the Cogs are devoted to large-scale industry, the dwarf ^ Ashblack 
Antos Keldoran maintains a small forge and produces bespoke arms and armor. 
A small temple in the Blackbones district holds a pool said to be blessed by the god Ona- — Blackbones 
tar. Smiths come from across Khorvaire to dip their tools in the pool. 

Blackbones 


The Red Hammer is Sharn’s only inn maintained by and for warforged. It offers those who 
work in the Cogs opportunities to socialize, along with repair and cosmetic services. 


Blackbones has a number of remarkable locations. 
For example, the Pool of Onatar’s Tears is sacred to the 
Sovereign of the Forge. The current caretaker is a war- 
forged priest named Smith, who believes that Onatar 
has plans for the warforged, and that the warforged and 
creatures of flesh are meant to live together. 

Most of the citizens of Sharn have never been to the 
Cogs. The area does house the bulk of the city’s war- 
forged population, and if you're looking for a particular 
warforged, it’s the best place to start. Industrial espio- 
nage and labor struggles can add drama to adventures 
in the great foundries, not to mention the possibility of 
artificers with secret forges hidden in the Cogs. 


DUNGEONS OF SHARN 


Sharn boasts countless opportunities for adventurers. 
You can get caught up in espionage in Upper Central or 
drawn into a crime war in Lower Dura. Aside from the 
intrigues and politics of the city, Sharn has a wide range 
of cursed ruins, haunted slums, shunned catacombs, 
and other dangerous places. Wise folk avoid these ar- 
eas, but those whose hunger for adventure outweighs 
their good sense might do the opposite. 


THE CITY OF THE DEAD 


Look to the cliffs to the north of Sharn, and you'll see 

a collection of crypts embedded into the cliff face. This 
is the City of the Dead, the final resting place of the 
wealthiest citizens of Sharn. Common folk are cremated 
after death, but members of the Sixty Families and oth- 
ers with sufficient wealth have their remains interred in 
the tombs and tunnels of this necropolis. 


Few people reside in this area. Among its major fea- 
tures are Aureon’s Holt, a temple of the Restful Watch, 
where Sovereign priests conduct funerals and serve 
as the caretakers of the tombs. Warden Tower is an 
outpost of the Church of the Silver Flame, staffed by a 
single hermit tasked to watch for supernatural threats. 

Though the City of the Dead is largely peaceful, sto- 
ries circulate about dark powers lurking there. Some 
parents warn their children of the Lich-Priest Gath, who 
steals disobedient children and forces them to work in 
his kingdom of the dead, polishing the bones of his skel- 
etal subjects. 


OLD SHARN 


Sharn was built on the foundations of an older city, 
which was itself built atop goblin ruins. This old city was 
destroyed by dark magic, courtesy of the elemental pow- 
ers of the infamous Halas Tarkanan and his consort, the 
Lady of the Plague. It is said that vile powers still linger 
in these ruins, and for this reason King Galifar I had all 
the passages to this undercity sealed with gates of metal 
and magic. These portals remain sealed today, and it’s 
illegal to tamper with them. But it’s generally assumed 
that many treasures are hidden in the ruins of Old 
Sharn, along with untold secrets of the past. 

No one knows exactly what lurks in Old Sharn. The 
ruins could contain ghosts or other undead, the vengeful 
spirits of the aberrant-marked people who took refuge 
in the fallen city. In olden times, the Lady of the Plague 
had power over vermin and disease, and a fanciful 
tale says that even today the undercity is inhabited by 
swarms of sentient rats and beetles. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


178 


———JTHE = 


SHARK INQUISITIVE 


You'll hear warning bells toll tomorrow morning. You'll 
see packs of people with their faces hidden by plague 
masks or strips of cloth. Jorasco healers will roam the 
streets offering free examinations and blessings. If you're 
new to Sharn, have no fear! This isn't the outbreak of 
disease it appears to be; it's how Sharn observes the La- 
dy's Day, commemorating a tragic incident in our past. 

Today, aberrant dragonmarks are rare. But there was 
a time long ago when they were far more common. An 
army of aberrant heirs made their home here in the 
early days of Sharn, led by Halas Tarkanan—known 
as the Earthshaker—and the Lady of the Plague, who 
had power over vermin and disease. When the dragon- 
marked houses laid siege to the city and their defeat 
became inevitable, the two unleashed their full might. 
Tarkanan's power reduced the early towers to rub- 
ble, and the Lady of the Plague called forth a horde of 
disease-infested vermin. 

For centuries afterward, the region was shunned. 
When our moderncity was built, the cursed ruins were 
sealed away. But one never knows when the darkness 
could rise up again. On the Lady's Day, we remember 
the tragedy that once befell Sharn, and we prepare for 


. the possibility that it could happen again. 


FALLEN 


The Fallen district in Lower Dura was once known as 
Godsgate. When the first towers were raised, Godsgate 
was the temple district. It had shrines and statues ded- 
icated to the Sovereigns, a proud church of the Silver 
Flame, even a monument to the Undying Court. But 
as Sharn grew and prospered, religious services were 
moved to grander temples in the upper wards. Gods- 
gate became a tenement district, and the shrines and 
monuments were forgotten and leftto decay. The final 
blow to this once-proud district came early in the Last 
War. A team of Aundairian saboteurs brought down one 
of Sharn's floating towers, and the falling spire struck 
Godsgate. Buildings collapsed, and hundreds died. Un- 
tended corpses led to infection and disease. The City 
Council had no interest in sinking gold into Lower Dura 
to restore the area, and the district was abandoned. 
Today, the district known as Fallen is strewn with the 
rubble of the fallen tower, mingled with shattered build- 
ings and broken statues. Those who venture into Fallen 
must deal with the Ravers, feral savages that lurk in the 
shadows. There's no question that the Ravers exist, but 
their true nature remains a subject of debate. A common 
hypothesis is that they're the descendants of the origi- 
nal inhabitants of the district, who were possessed and 
driven mad by the ghosts of those who died when the 
tower fell. Others claim that House Vadalis has been try- 
ing to magebreed super-soldiers, and the Ravers are the 
result of failed experiments. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


Only the most desperate people live here, and the 
forces of the law won't come near it. As a result, the 
district has a lot of space available for any cult or secret 
society that needs a lair. The followers of a radiant idol, 
the Cult of the Dragon Below, or any other cabal could 
lay claim to a shattered church in Fallen. 


KHYBER'S GATE 


Beyond the Cogs lies Khyber's Gate, a maze of tunnels 
and tenements carved into the stone. The Sharn Watch 
has no presence here, and the closest thing to an au- 
thority is the criminal organization known as Daask; if 
you're seeking the leaders of this group, this is where 
you'll find them. Many of the inhabitants of the Gate are 
goblins and immigrants from Droaam, but it's also home 
to fugitives, war criminals, and other unsavory types. 

Khyber's Gate is part of the ruins of a goblin city that 
was abandoned thousands of years ago. No one knows 
how deep it goes. The monstrous inhabitants of the dis- 
trict have no love for treasure hunters or adventurers, 
and it's a dangerous place to explore. 

Shamukaar is the most successful tavern in Khyber's 
Gate. The place is a safe haven for all within it, regard- 
less of species or politics; once you make it through the 
door, you can breathe easy. 


THE SEWERS 


The upper wards of Sharn use a network of chutes to 
funnel garbage down into the sewers. Refuse and filth is 
channeled into cavernous midden chambers, where it is 
left to rot or be devoured by the vermin and oozes that 
inhabit the sewers. Smaller tunnels channel wastewater 
into purification centers, where magewrights use magic 
to cleanse the water. A special unit of the Sharn Watch 
protects the purification chambers. Beyond these small, 
vital areas, the sewers are lawless. 

Though the sewers were never intended to support a 
population, over the centuries a subculture has evolved 
in this region. A few tribes of people—mostly goblins, 
along with a few shifters, dwarves, and feral halflings— 
live in the sewers, rummaging through the midden 
heaps and selling their goods in the lower city. These 
sewer clans constantly battle over territory, as control 
of one or more midden chamber can be critical to sur- 
vival. The sewer clans can pose a threat to adventurers, 
but they can also be valuable allies; there are no better 
guides to the sewers and what lies beneath them than 
one of the folk who live there. 


CRIMINAL ACTIVITIES 


Under the laws of Sharn, crime takes many forms. Any 
sort of theft is illegal, including “malicious theft of iden- 
tity"—the use of shapeshifting abilities or illusion magic 
to impersonate someone with the intent to cause harm. 
Assault, murder, and fraud will all land you in hot water. 
Other activities walk the edge of legality. Gambling and 
prostitution are legal in Sharn, but these industries are 
heavily taxed and regulated. Likewise, smuggled goods 
include illegal merchandise such as drugs and mystical 
explosives, but also heavily taxed goods, such as the 
drug known as dreamlily (described in chapter 4). 


Although crime occurs throughout Sharn, it is most 
apparent in Lower Dura and the Cogs. The Sharn 
Watch has a minimal presence in these wards, which 
are the easiest places to sell stolen goods or to hire 
an assassin. Of course, they're also good places to get 
robbed or caught up in a street brawl. 

Sharn is home to a large number of minor gangs and 
independent criminals. Even so, most criminal activities 
in the city come under the purview of one of four crim- 
inal organizations: the Boromar Clan, Daask, House 
Tarkanan, and the Tyrants. Even independents usually 
have an arrangement with one of these power groups. If 
your character has the criminal background, work with 
the DM to determine which of these organizations you're 
connected to (the DM has more information about these 
groups in chapter 4). 


THE BOROMAR CLAN 
The Boromar Clan began as a family of halfling immi- 
grants from the Talenta Plains. Today the Boromars are 
one of Sharn's most influential families; there's a Boro- 
mar on the City Council. Also, the Boromars have close 
ties by marriage to the local branch of House Jorasco, 
and clan members can be seen at every Skyway gala. 

The Boromar Clan specializes in gambling, theft, and 
smuggling. In addition, it governs a wide network of 
lesser gangs and crimelords across the city. In the past, 
the clan's reputation was sufficiently strong to prevent 
any challenges. Over the last decade, however, the Boro- 
mars have been fending off a serious challenge from 
Daask. Those monsters have been aggressively target- 
ing Boromar agents and holdings, and the feud between 
the two forces grows more heated all the time. 

Having a connection to the Boromar Clan makes you 
part of the established power in Sharn. It's an organiza- 
tion that values tradition and prefers to avoid violence. 
As an associate of the clan, you'll be expected to respect 
the hierarchy and follow the rules, and you might be tar- 
geted by Daask just as if you were a Boromar yourself. 

If you have a contact in the Boromar Clan, you might 
know someone on the Boromar Contacts table. 


BOROMAR CONTACTS 


d6 Contact 

1 Sundry (gnome) is a fence who runs a pawn shop in 
the Bazaar of Dura and has ties to many smugglers, 
sailors, and burglars. 

2 Canon (halfling) is a pickpocket who works across 
Sharn and is at home throughout the lower districts. 

3 The Rake (dwarf) runs a handful of gambling dens and 
sets odds on the sporting events of Sharn. 

4 Myri Olar (halfling) is a burglar and socialite, familiar 
with many of the mansions of the upper districts. 

5 Hass Faldren (half-elf) is a smuggler and the captain 
of the elemental sloop /ce Storm. Hass is also well con- 
nected on the docks and in the warehouse districts. 

6 Cala Boromar (halfling) is a lawyer by trade but with 
specialties in blackmail and intimidation. Cala loves 
engaging in the art of negotiation and is always inter- 
ested in acquiring secrets. 


DAASK 


Founded by monstrous immigrants from Droaam, the 
criminal organization known as Daask has been build- 
ing its power for a decade and has recently begun an ag- 
gressive campaign of expansion. Daask engages mainly 
in violent crime, including armed robbery, assault, 
arson, and murder. As its reputation has grown, it has 
added extortion to this list. 

If you have a contact in Daask, you might know some- 
one on the Daask Contacts table. 


DAASK CONTACTS 


d6 Contact 

1 Whyhyr (gnoll), a talented tracker, loves a good hunt 
and finding people who don't want to be found. 

2  Ralscar Shal (goblin) is a fence and information broker, 
who is happy to be paid in gold or secrets. 

3  KarBloodhorn (minotaur) is an enforcer who leads 
raiding parties in Callestan. Kal is rough and loud but 
well liked in the organization. 

4 Ash (kobold) is a sorcerer with talent in fire magic, 
who specializes in arson and assault. 

5 Cask (changeling), an artificer and alchemist, supplies 
Daask with drugs and explosives and likes devising 
new concoctions and finding people to test them on. 

6 Teller (human) is one of the few humans with a posi- 
tion of influence in Daask. A grifter, Teller serves as 
a spy in the upper levels of the city where monsters 
aren't able to move around freely. 


HOUSE TARKANAN 


House Tarkanan isan elite force of mercenary thieves 
and assassins. The criminal talents of the Tarkanans 
are enhanced by another trait they share: every member 
of the house possesses an aberrant dragonmark. Thus, 
every Tarkanan has an unpredictable magical gift—and 
all of them are united by the fear and prejudice that 
most aberrant heirs elicit from other people. 

If youhave a contact in House Tarkanan, you might 
know someone on the Tarkanan Contacts table. 


TARKANAN CONTACTS 


d6 Contact 

1 Rotting Bal (human) is an assassin, an expert in un- 
armed combat, and a founding member of the house. 

2 Fileon (halfling) is a healer with a deadly touch, who 
evaluates and trains potential recruits. 

3 Nightshade (gnome) is an assassin and alchemist spe- 
cializing in exotic poisons, who's always interested in 
acquiring new toxins or unusual herbs. 

4 Whisper (elf) is a thief whose aberrant dragonmark ab- 
sorbs sound. Whisper appreciates fine things and has 
a vast collection of unusual trinkets. 

5 Zae (halfling) can influence vermin and see through 
rats' eyes—an ability often used to spy on people. 

6 Mala Shol (half-elf) is an expert pickpocket and a mas- 
ter of disguise, with a talent for illusion. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 79 
1 


THE IYRANTS 


The Tyrants are forgers and grifters, specialists in de- 
ception and the acquisition of information. Most of the 
members are changelings, who use their shapeshifting 
abilities to fool marks and acquire secrets. There are 
magewrights among the Tyrants who can permanently 
alter your appearance. So, the Tyrants can steal some- 
one's identity, but they can also provide a fugitive with 
a new life. 

If you have a contact in the Tyrants, you might know 
someone on the Tyrants Contacts table. 


TvRANTS CONTACTS 


d4 Contact 

1 Korryn (elf) maintains Korryn’s Quill, a shop in the Ba- 
zaar of Dura that sells supplies for artists and scribes. 
In addition to being a remarkable calligrapher, Korryn 
is an expert forger. 

2 Gray (changeling) is a bartender at the Crooked Mirror 
in Callestan and is an information broker, with access 
to a wide array of rumors. 

3  Chaela Tas (half-elf) is a grifter with dozens of plots 
afoot at any given time. Though this identity is the face 
they wear with you, they maintain many different per- 
sonas tied to their schemes. 

4 Weave (changeling) is a body artist who runs a salon in 
the Dragoneyes district. 


FORCES OF THE LAW 


In Precarious, a dwarf tries to smuggle a portable hole 
filled with treasures pillaged from Xen'drik past the 
guards of the Sharn Watch. 

In Clifftop, a patrol of guards calls on two dueling 
barbarians to throw down their weapons; the fierce war- 
riors just snarl and rush at each other once more. 

In the court of Upper Central, a magistrate orders the 
Justiciar of Aureon to blind the prisoner in preparation 
for his sentence of perpetual darkness. 

The law is a force to be reckoned with in Sharn. Even 
in places where the watch is notoriously ineffective, 
those who would break the law still need to be wary of 
zealous guards resistant to bribes or threats. 


THE SHARN WATCH 


The Sharn Watch is responsible for enforcing the laws 
of the city. The sentinels of the watch patrol the streets 
of Sharn, to all outward appearances vigilant for signs 
of unrest. In truth, the Sharn Watch is riddled with cor- 
ruption, from the commanding officers down to the low- 
liest patrollers. Dedicated guards who truly want to pro- 
tect the innocent do exist. But bribery nonetheless runs 
rampant, and the watch has a way of failing to show up 
somewhere at the same time that Daask or the Boromar 
Clan is perpetrating some misdeed. The DM can find 
more information on the watch in chapter 4. 


AN ARTIFICER, WITH Two ELORITCH 
CANNONS, SPIES ON A MEMBER OF THE 


SHARN WATCH 


BOR 


ZOLTAN 


THE KING’S CITADEL 


The members of the King’s Citadel are the direct agents 


of the Brelish Crown. As such, the King’s Citadel stands 
above the Sharn Watch. Its members have the authority 
to take control of any investigation and to command the 
service of any guard or sentinel. Typically the Citadel 
leaves the daily chores of law enforcement (including 
the conflicts between the criminal organizations of the 
lower towers) in the hands of the Sharn Watch. The 
Citadel is concerned with forces that threaten the entire 
city, or even the kingdom. Foreign spies, mad necroman- 
cers, and ancient fiends—these are the foes of the King’s 
Citadel, rather than pickpockets and burglars. 

Of course, many of these greater threats might be be- 
yond the capabilities of the typical Citadel agents. Much 
as the Blackened Book does, the Citadel keeps a close 
eye on unusual and talented individuals, and a party of 
adventurers might be called upon to assist the Citadel in 
a dangerous mission. 

Unlike the Sharn Watch, the Citadel doesn’t ask for 
help: it demands it. The knights of the Citadel are the 
representatives of the King of Breland, and any Brelish 
citizen who refuses to help them is committing an act of 
treason. The Citadel isn’t required to provide compen- 
sation for the services it demands, but an adventurer 
who wins the respect of the Citadel can certainly benefit 
from the relationship. 

The Citadel is made up of these four divisions: 


The King’s Dark Lanterns gather intelligence and en- 
gage in covert operations. 

The King’s Shields protect the royal family and its clos- 
est associates. 

The King’s Swords are elite soldiers used in the most 
dangerous military operations. 

The King’s Wands are wizards and sorcerers, serving 
the crown in all arcane matters. 


The headquarters of the Citadel is in the Ambassador 
Towers district of Middle Central, in Andith Tower. That 
structure also serves as the city jail. 


THE REDCLOAK BATTALION 


The soldiers of the Redcloak Battalion are among the 
deadliest warriorsin Sharn. When a situation calls for 
extreme military force, both the Sharn Watch and the 
King’s Citadel turn to the Redcloak Battalion. This elite 
unit fought in the forefront of the Last War, and the 
bards in Menthis today sing of the exploits of Khandan 
the Hammer and Meira the Huntress. At the end of the 
war, the battalion was split up, and one unit was as- 
signed to Sharn. Its headquarters is located in the Dag- 
gerwatch district of Upper Dura. 

Many of the members of the Redcloak Battalion resent 
being relegated to mere law enforcement, and there is 


a strong rivalry between the Redcloaks and the King’s 
Swords of the Citadel, who generally have less military 
experience even though they enjoy far greater authority 
and prestige. 

As veterans and heroes of the Last War, many of the 
Redcloaks are unfriendly toward travelers from other 
nations. As far as the Redcloaks are concerned, the 
Treaty of Thronehold is merely an intermission, and 
soon King Boranel will come to his senses and finish 
the job that Wroann ir’Wynarn began. 


CRIMES AND PUNISHMENTS 


Officers of the watch can levy fines on the spot when 
they catch culprits, which is the typical way that minor 
crimes are dealt with. For a serious offense, the perpe- 
trator is taken to a garrison and held until a trial can be 
arranged. A criminal who is considered to be a serious 
flight risk will be taken to the most secure facility in 
Sharn—the King’s Citadel headquarters. 

Typically, a prisoner’s case comes to the attention 
of a local magistrate within 1d4 days. The magistrate 
reviews the facts of the case and asks the victim to 
confirm or deny their role in the crime while under the 
influence of a zone of truth spell. The magistrate will 
then propose a punishment to the accused; if the offer is 
refused, the case goes to trial. 

Punishment for convicted criminals varies, but long- 
term imprisonment is quite rare. Prisoners who deemed 
to be too dangerous to be allowed to roam free are more 
likely to be executed than imprisoned. Typically, a long 
prison sentence is used only for criminals who can't be 
allowed to go free, but whose deaths would have nega- 
tive diplomatic repercussions. 

Fines are the typical form of punishment. The amount 
of a fine is generally based on the nature of the crime, 
but a magistrate has the right to increase a fine to en- 
sure that it is an effective punishment. For example, 

a fine of 10 gp is crippling to a commoner but can be 
inconsequential to an adventurer or a member of the 
Aurum, and in such cases it will be increased. Also, the 
court can confiscate possessions in lieu of receiving 
payments in gold; you might not care about having to 
pay a fine of 100 gp, but having your grandfather's magic 
sword confiscated instead might sting. If a criminal 
can't afford to pay a fine, the sentence might be changed 
to hard labor—or, in the case of adventurers, performing 
special services on behalf of the city or the Crown. 

Other kinds of punishment include branding (gener- 
ally in a visible location, warning others of your criminal 
actions), exile, or several magical measures: an ongoing 
curse, a period of induced blindness, and so on. A repeat 
offender might be declared an outlaw, which status is 
often indicated by a brand. An outlaw is stripped of the 
protection of the law, and anyone can take any action 
against them without fear of legal retribution. 


CHAPTER 3 | SHARN, CITY OF TOWERS 


BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES | | í 


ET YOUR OWN EBERRON ADVENTURES UP AND 
running using the inspiration in this chap- 
ter. Eberron is filled with political intrigue, 
extraplanar threats, magical mysteries, and 
back-alley detective work—all in the context 
of a world emerging from the turmoil of war. 

The tables and advice in this chapter expand on the 
material in chapter 3 of the Dungeon Master's Guide. 
Think of this chapter as an extensive library of ideas— 
villainous schemes, interesting locations, adventure 
hooks, encounters, and more—to help you flesh out an 
adventure you create for your Eberron campaign. 

This chapter begins with a look at three key themes 
that pervade many Eberron adventures: recurring 
villains, action, and intrigue. Following that overview 
is an in-depth look at various organizations and other 
elements you can use to drive the adventures you create. 
Such elements include maps of locations that can serve 
as thrilling set pieces; information on the planes of 
existence, elemental-powered airships, and the lightning 
rail; and an introductory adventure set in Sharn. 

Specific monsters and nonplayer characters (NPCs) 
mentioned in this chapter can be found either in the 
Monster Manual or in chapter 6 of this book. When a 
creature's name appears in bold type, that's a visual cue 
pointing you to the creature's stat block in the Monster 
Manual or in chapter 6. If the stat block appears in chap- 
ter 6, the text tells you so. 


ADVENTURE THEMES 


A group of adventurers leaves the dark, rainy city, put- 
ting its mean streets behind them. They board a flame- 
ringed airship for a journey across the continent, but 
they're attacked by wyvern-riding bandits on the way 
and must fight for their lives as the airship hurtles to- 
ward the ground! 

After surviving the crash through a combination of 
quick thinking and heroic effort, they find themselves 
stranded in the gray mists of the Mournland, facing the 
dangers of a war-ravaged land as they try to find their 
way back to their original destination. The greatest hor- 
rors they are about to face might be the ones that lurk in 
the depths of their own hearts. 

As discussed in the introduction to this book, pulp 
adventure and noir intrigue are two major themes that 
interlace in Eberron. Weaving these themes together, 
or exploring either one in isolation, can give Eberron 
stories a unique feel. Adventures that take advantage 
of those themes help to reinforce a sense of place, 
immersing the players (and you) in a world that is still 
reeling from the effects of a hundred years of war, that 


CHAPTER 


is shaped by modern ideas and aesthetics, and that is 
set apart from the rest of the D&D multiverse by a magi- 
cal barrier. 

This section is an introduction to those themes, de- 
signed to help you tell stories that fit well in Eberron. It 
explores techniques for making compelling recurring 
villains, and for keeping the action moving over the 
course of an adventure. It discusses how to use the Last 
War as a theme and a setting for adventures, and details 
the Mournland as an adventure location. It goes on to 
describe adventures and encounters that can occur in 
transit—on airships, on lightning rails, and at resting 
spots along the way. Finally, this section discusses the 
role that creatures typically defined as “monsters” play 
in Khorvaire, and explores Eberron’s cosmology. 


RECURRING VILLAINS 


The most effective villains are the ones that return, over 
and over, to plague their heroic nemeses. When the he- 
roes foil the schemes of an evil mastermind, the clever 
villain escapes to fight another day. A well-developed 
recurring villain can put a face to the sinister conspir- 
acies that lurk in the darkness and thus strengthen the 
players’ sense of immersion in the world. 

You can make a recurring villain in your campaign 
more intriguing by introducing moral ambiguity into the 
villain’s background, possibly through references to the 
individual's experiences during the Last War. 


How TO KEEP VILLAINS ALIVE 

The first task in crafting a good recurring villain is 
ensuring that the villain survives a first encounter with 
the adventurers in order to come back and plague them 
again. What follows are some tactics to make sure that 
even the most resourceful characters can't dispose of 
your villain at the first possible opportunity. 


Have Lackeys Do the Work. A villain can easily post- 
pone that first face-to-face confrontation with the ad- 
venturers by having lackeys soften the party up, all the 
while making sure that the adventurers know whom 
they work for—thus enhancing the villain's reputation. 

Use All Available Resources. A smart villain, espe- 
cially one with access to magic, can put a lot of obsta- 
cles in the way of an adventuring party. Mechanical 
and magical traps, wards against divination, and pro- 
tective magic items are just a few of the security mea- 
sures available to a resourceful villain. Keep in mind 
that reports from surviving lackeys—and news about 
the adventurers from other sources—can give the vil- 
lain enough information about the party's capabilities 
to prepare appropriate countermeasures. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


184, 


WRITE OF PASSAGE 


BACK FROM 
THE DEAD? 


It was too good to be true. 

A year ago, the nefarious Alais ir'Rannan was pre- 
sumed dead when she fell from an airship into the mid- 
dle of Lake Galifar. Her scheme to bring the towers of 
Arcanix to the ground likewise seemed ended. 

But yesterday, according to eyewitness reports, ir'Ran- 
nan was seen in the common room of Passage's own 
King's Star Inn, talking with two other unsavory-looking 
characters who could not be identified. 


Have an Escape Plan. Secret passages, spells of invis- 
ibility or teleportation, flying mounts, and throngs of 
minions can help a villain escape when a confronta- 
tion with the adventurers goes badly. Any villain likely 
has at least one fallback plan. 

Take Hostages. Most adventurers wouldn't be willing to 
attack the villain if they fear that the villains’ lackeys 
are about to slaughter innocent captives the moment 
they draw their swords. 

Returning from Death. Of course, death is not a final 
fate for player characters, and it doesn't need to be for 
villains either. After the adventurers kill their nemesis, 
they might next encounter the villain raised from the 
dead or as an undead. It's conceivable that dying could 
make a villain more powerful and more angry at the 
meddling adventurers. Alternatively, the characters 
might assume a villain is dead—after falling over a wa- 
terfall, being trapped in a burning building, or getting 
swallowed by a purple worm—only to discover later 
that the villain survived and is hungry for revenge. 


IMPROVING VILLAINS 

Adventurers get more powerful over time, so if a villain 
is going to remain a relevant threat, the villain needs to 
get more powerful as well. There are three ways you can 
approach this issue: 


Mechanical Improvement. Use the guidelines in chap- 
ter 9 of the Dungeon Master's Guide to add class levels 
or Hit Dice to the villain and improve its challenge rat- 
ing to make it relevant to the higher-level characters. 

NPC Stat Blocks. Some of the stat blocks in the Mon- 
ster Manual can reflect the same character at different 
stages of advancement. For example, the adventurers 
might confront a villain who uses the stat block of a 
mage (9th-level wizard) and then returns later as an 
archmage (18th-level wizard). You could also use stat 
blocks in other sources to add to the sequence, so the 
characters could even meet this aspiring villain as an 
apprentice wizard and later as an evoker (both in Vo- 
Jo’s Guide to Monsters). 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


Organizations as Villains. Rather than use an individ- 
ual as a recurring villain, you could think in terms of 
the organization the villain belongs to or represents. 
For example, low-level adventurers might fight low- 
level agents of the Order of the Emerald Claw and 
grow to loathe the sight of their claw-shaped symbol 
and green cloaks. As they attain higher levels, the 
characters will face increasingly more powerful mem- 
bers of the order. 


SHADES OF EVIL 

Moral ambiguity is a feature of the noir genre that can 
add richness and complexity to an Eberron adventure. 
In a world where a red dragon isn’t necessarily evil (and 
a bronze one isn’t necessarily good), it’s impossible 

to know who you can trust, and even the actions of a 
so-called villain might not fit neatly into clear-cut defini- 
tions of good and evil. Even adventure villains are more 
often driven by human motives than by cosmic concepts 
of good and evil. People sometimes do evil things for 
good reasons. 

Exercise some caution when exploring these noir 
themes in the stories you develop. It can be fun for some 
people to wrestle with moral quandaries in adventures, 
but it doesn’t work for all play groups. In particular, if 
there’s no good solution to the quandary—if the charac- 
ters have no choice but to follow a course of action they 
abhor—some players might end up unhappy. 

The Morally Ambiguous Villains table offers some 
twists you can add to the villains in this chapter, giv- 
ing them more or less good reasons to perform their 
evil deeds. 


MORALLY AMBIGUOUS VILLAINS 


d4 Villain 

1 The villain is targeting people with aberrant dragon- 
marks in the desperate hope of preventing another 
War of the Mark. 

2 The villain is suffering under a terrible curse, and their 
increasingly serious crimes are an effort to fight off 
the curse. 

3 The villain is rising to power through entirely legal 
means, winning popular support (through generous 
campaign promises) and working within the system. 

4  Thevillain's schemes are directed at preventing the 
release of a demonic overlord. 


THE VILLAIN You KNow 
Not every villain is a mastermind who schemes in the 
shadows or a world-destroying horror. Sometimes the 
most significant villain is someone the characters see 
every day—someone who moves around society in plain 
sight but keeps their evil deeds well hidden. The law en- 
forcers and adventurers who are trying to bring the vil- 
lain to justice are thwarted at every turn, unable to find 
proof of the villain's crimes. If the players come to loathe 
the villain, everything is going according to plan. 

Use the Villain You Know table to add some depth 
and detail to the actions and motivations of a villain who 
plagues the characters on a regular basis. 


VILLAIN You KNOW 

d6 Villain 

1 Acon artist takes advantage of people who fall for 
their scams, but leaves behind no proof of any crime. 

2 A cowardly politician fleeces the poor of their last few 
coins without technically doing anything wrong. 

3 A righteous zealot is continually poking into the char- 
acters’ business, judging their actions and methods 
while doing even worse things in the shadows. 

4 A powerful figure in a dragonmarked house is using 
the house's resources for criminal deeds, but there's 
no trail of evidence leading back to the villain. 

5 Acrime lord has the local authorities on the payroll, 
so no official action will ever be taken to stop their 
criminal activities. 

6  Avillainous mastermind cooperates with local law 
enforcement to track down and eliminate rival villains, 
without ever giving the authorities a peek into their 
own evil deeds. 


THE MYSTERIOUS VILLAIN 

In contrast to a villain whois a part of the characters’ 
everyday life, an otherworldly villain isn’t only anony- 
mous but also fundamentally mysterious. It’s not just a 
question of who the villain is, but also of what the villain 
is, and what extraordinary measures might be required 
to put a stop to their villainy. Even after the adventurers 
discover that their long-term nemesis is one of the In- 
spired, for example, they still need to learn the secrets 
of the Inspired and their quori masters in order to figure 
out how to deal with this threat. 

Sometimes the mystery is enough to make sucha 
villain compelling, with curiosity driving the adventur- 
ers to delve ever deeper into their foe’s secrets. When 
the time is right, you can turn a mysterious villain into 
an unnervingly familiar villain—as a quori spirit takes 
delight in speaking through the mouths of multiple dif- 
ferent Inspired hosts, taunting the adventurers for their 
inability to reach the spirit itself. Then resentment com- 
bines with curiosity to drive the adventurers to further 


exploration. When characters dig deeply into the myster- 


ies of the world, your campaign benefits as they become 
more immersed in and attached to the setting. 


Ultimate Evil. Some mysterious villains wield enough 


power to threaten the entire world through colossal 
strength, mastery of magic, dizzying intellect, or 
overwhelming charisma (or often some combination 
of these factors). These villains typically lurk in the 
shadows, pulling the strings of minions and partners 
while rarely making an appearance themselves. 
These villains are especially hard to get rid of, even 
if they are banished or imprisoned—their magic and 
their network of servants ensure that their reach ex- 
tends far beyond their physical presence. 

Driving Forces. Most villains in this category are 
numbered among the driving forces described later 
in this chapter. You can use the Villain You Don't 
Understand table to choose one of these forces, then 
consult the adventure seeds and villain ideas in the 
appropriate section. 


VILLAIN You DON’T UNDERSTAND 
d6 Driving Force 
The Chamber (see page 193) 
The Cults ofthe Dragon Below (see page 188) 
The Daughters of Sora Kell (see page 199) 
The Dreaming Dark (see page 196) 
The Lords of Dust (see page 215) 
The Order of the Emerald Claw (see page 225) 


ОСУ Un A Wù N = 


ACTION! | 
Adventures in the pulp tradition tend to start with а 


bang and proceed at a breakneck pace, reaching a cli- 
max in pulse-pounding encounters aboard high-speed 


vehicles and grand melees in dramatic locations. Action 
doesn't have to mean combat, but ensuring that the 
world is in constant motion around the player characters 
is a good way to keep their interest high. 


KICKING OFF THE ACTION 

When you begin an adventure with a bang, you catch the 
characters up in the action right away, grabbing their 
interest and sending them off on a wild ride. The Story 
Kickoff table offers some action-packed ways to get 
things moving. 


STORY KICKOFF 

d6 Event 

1 On a quiet night, the tavern door bursts open and a 
group of soldiers calls for one of the party members 
by name. 

2 An explosion rocks a market, sending things flying. 

3  Avehicle crashes near the party: people are hurt 
and need help, and whatever caused the crash is still 
around somewhere. 

4 Two groups of people start fighting each other, blood 
is drawn, and bystanders are getting hurt. 

5 Chanting words of the Draconic Prophecy, a dragon 
appears and starts causing mayhem. 

6  Atavern patron suddenly leaps up and attacks one of 
the adventurers, scratching and biting in blind fury. 


KEEPING THE ACTION GOING 
"When in doubt, have a man come through a door with 
a gun in his hand." Author Raymond Chandler offered 
this advice to writers of hard-boiled fiction, but the ad- 
vice applies just as well to an action-driven adventure. 
Whenever the pace of the story lags, a new injection of 
excitement keeps things moving. 

A new arrival on the scene might be an integral part of 
the plot or an independent event. The New Development 
table presents some ideas. 


NEW DEVELOPMENT 
d8 Event 

Т | One or more minions of the adventure's primary vil- 
lain arrive to put a stopto the party's meddling. 

2 Someone else with the same goal as the party shows 
up to get them out of the way. 

3 | Someone is out for revenge against the party for a 
past wrong (perhaps something that happened in a 
previous adventure). 

4 Someone has a violent argument with an NPC in the 
same room as the adventurers. 

5 Someone wants a special item carried by one of the 
characters. 

6  Ajealous person thinks one of the adventurers is 
meddling with the person’s romantic partner. 

7 A person in love with the villain tries to stop the party 
from interfering with the villain’s business. 

8 А monster bursts in looking for food. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


INTRIGUE 


Stories in the noir tradition tend to start slowly and 
build gradually as the mystery gets deeper and more 
convoluted, until the situation erupts in a climactic con- 
frontation. In contrast to the pulse-pounding action of a 
pulp adventure, noir typically relies on intrigue—in ev- 
ery sense of the word—to keep the protagonists engaged 
as they move deeper into the story. 


SETTING THE STAGE 

Putting a mystery in front of the characters at the very 
start of the adventure sets the tone for what's ahead and 
draws them in to the story. The Story Opening table of- 
fers some ways to draw the characters into the mystery. 


STORY OPENING 


d6 Event 

1 The party receives a detailed reading from a street 
fortune-teller that lays out the start of the adventure. 

2 A courier escorts the party to an elemental airship, 
where a wealthy patron outlines their mission. 

3 Atan extravagant costume ball, a masked guest asks 
for the party's help. 

4 Ina seedy section of town, the disguised heir of a 
dragonmarked house approaches the characters with 
an offer. 

5 Ahomunculus delivers an anonymous letter that 
contains an offer of employment, but no clue to the 
author's identity. 

6 A professor from Morgrave University reaches out to 
one of the party members, a former student, to ask 
an important favor. 


THE PLOT THICKENS 

A key point in most intrigue adventures is a significant 
plot twist. As you plan the trail of clues, events, and 
interactions, consider a point where you can shake 
things up with a twist like the ones shown on The Plot 
Thickens table. 


THE PLOT THICKENS 


d8 Plot Twist 

1 The apparent victim in the situation is actually the 
villain. 

2 A supposedly valuable object is actually worthless (or 
vice versa). 

3  Avaluable object doesn't belong to the person who 
claims to own it. 

4 What's actually precious is not a work of art but 
a map or other information hidden on it (inside a 
statue, behind a painting in the frame, and so on). 

5 Someone is in love with one of the party members, or 
with the villain. 

6 | Someone is a relative of one of the party members. 

7 A friend or former ally is working with the villain. 

8 The initial plot is a distraction from the actual plot. 


THE AURUM 


On the surface, the Aurum appears to be an exclusive 
society for the richest and most influential people of 
Khorvaire. Merchants, priests, military officers, and 
other luminaries gather for grand galas and salons. Be- 
neath this gilded veneer, the members of the Aurum use 
their shared wealth and power to pursue their selfish 
goals, and a secret cabal at the heart of this fraternity 
dreams of global domination. 

The Aurum is divided into four suborders called 
Concords—copper, silver, gold, and platinum, in order 
of ascendance. Higher rank provides a member with 
improved access to the resources of the Aurum and 
a greater voice in society meetings. The Aurum isn’t 
a secret society, and its meeting halls can be found in 
most major cities. Many powerful people openly wear 
the eight rings—one on each finger, with the metal 
indicating the rank of the wearer—that label them as 
Aurum members. The Aurum frequently engages in acts 
of philanthropy, and thus some members might be cele- 
brated by their local communities. 

When members gather, they discuss shared interests, 
especially in history and archaeology. Aurum members 
often take an interest in a particular civilization or era 
of history; one Concordian collects relics of the Cul'sir 
giants of Xen'drik, while another pursues artifacts of 
the dragons of Argonnessen. One of the most common 
waysin which adventurers cross paths with the Aurum 
is through these collectors. Members of the Aurum 
often fund expeditions to exotic lands or newly discov- 
ered ruins, interested in expanding their private hoards. 
Occasionally a Concordian tries to acquire prized relics 
through less honorable means; adventurers could be 
employed to acquire an exotic prize from a rival through 
any means necessary, legal or otherwise. 

All of these activities are entirely legitimate. The 
Aurum is a society for wealthy scholars and philanthro- 
pists. But there is a secret order that ranks higher than 
the Platinum Concord—an inner circle known as the 
Shadow Cabinet. The members of this cabal are nobles 
but not kings; they are powerful industrialists, but not 
dragonmarked barons. They are determined to become 
the true rulers of Khorvaire, whether by binding the 
current barons and monarchs to their will or by tearing 
down the current systems and creating something new. 

In stories driven by action, the Aurum can fund expe- 
ditions to exotic lands and use magical doomsday de- 
vices to hold cities for ransom. In adventures driven by 
intrigue, the Aurum provides an opportunity to explore 
the lure of gold, and how far the characters might go in 
the service of an amoral patron. 


THE AURUM AND THE WAR 


The Last War gave birth to the Shadow Cabinet. The 
warignited the passions of Concordians who blamed 
the monarchs of the Five Nations for the vast devasta- 


LJ 
tion and loss. It also created opportunities that never 
existed under the united Galifar. Many of the members 
of the Aurum gained influence by bankrolling one or 
more war efforts, or by stepping in to maintain the infra- 
structure while the government directed its attention to 
military matters. The Aurum also includes a number of 
powerful military officers and warlords. Some despise 
the nobles that drove them to war; others are furious 
that the war ended without a decisive victory. Either 
way, these can provide the Shadow Cabinet with unex- 
pected military power. 

Now, amid the war's cooling ashes, the Aurum's 
power is fragmented. On several occasions, investments 
and gambles that paid dividends in money and power to 
one Concordian sapped the fortune of another, because 
each was unknowingly working against the other's inter- 
ests. Huge collections of art, historical artifacts, and pre- 
cious tomes were destroyed or lost during the war, and 
the Aurum’s leaders salivate at the thought of recovering 
some of those riches. 


AURUM NPCs __ 


Aurum Concordians are defined by their wealth and 
power. When you create an Aurum NPC, consider the 
source of that person's wealth and how it is expressed. 
The dwarf Antus ir'Soldorak is chancellor of the Plat- 
inum Concord and founder of the Shadow Cabinet. 
He owns vast gold and silver mines in the Mror Holds 
and mints his own currency, and he travels in a gilded 
airship. Loyal Daison is a Karrnathi slumlord who has 
made a fortune providing low-rent (and low-quality) 
housing for refugees. He lost his hand in an industrial 
accident and had it replaced with a golden prosthetic. 
Members of the Aurum become villains if their quest 
for greater influence, personal power, and wealth vic- 
timizes the innocent. Whether villains or allies, all Con- 
cordians wield significant political influence. They have 
access to minions and resources in the higher levels of 
society. They prefer to pursue schemes of coercion and 
conspiracy, putting their money and influence to work, 
than resort to blatant violence in any form. 


AuRUM NPCs 


d4 NPC 

1 An aging dwarf—a retired general and an Aurum Con- 
cordian—collects unusual constructs, hoping to find 
a way to transfer his mind into a superior body. 

2 Ап Аигит Concordian is renowned for having the 
finest arcane library in Khorvaire. Adventurers might 
help them collect more tome, but when a number of 
prominent wizards are murdered and their research 
goes missing, is the Concordian to blame? 

3 А member of the Gold Concord is on the run from the 
Aurum after learning a terrible secret. 

4  Animprisoned Concordian mobilizes a network of 
contacts and well-placed Aurum members in order to 
secure their own release. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


AURUM CAMPAIGN THEMES 


It's easy to introduce the Aurum to the characters early 
in a campaign. Its members are public figures, some- 
times eccentric but not necessarily evil. A Concordian 
could hire the adventurers to solve a mystery or to ac- 
quire a harmless curio. A Concordian could be tied to 
the party's group patron (see chapter 1)—the owner of 
the newspaper, a major donor to the university, or the 
power behind a criminal syndicate. 

Alternatively, an Aurum Concordian can be a be- 
hind-the-scenes villain: low-level adventurers could 
clash with the Concordian's hired goons as they pur- 
sue the same treasure, or the adventurers could be 
trying to solve a mystery the thugs are covering up. As 
the campaign progresses, the characters might face 
higher-ranking members of the Aurum, or recurring 
mercenaries who are increasing in power and status at 
the same rate they are. 

Whether they interact with the Aurum as ally or en- 
emy, at some point the adventurers might well realize 
that the Concordians aren't just greedy plutocrats, but 
participants in an international conspiracy. The Aurum's 
arc in the campaign might climax with the characters 
learning of the Shadow Cabinet and thwarting one of its 
grand schemes. 


AURUM MISSIONS 


The Aurum Missions table suggests a variety of assign- 


ments that adventurers might be asked to undertake on 
behalf of the Aurum or one of its members, whether or 
not they're aware of their patron's affiliation. 


AURUM MISSIONS 
d6 Mission 

1l Retrieve a journal from a ship that sailed to Xen'drik 
and never returned. 

2 Locate the grave of a certain dragonmarked scion, 
and retrieve the signet buried with them. 

3 Маке friends with a scholar at the local university and 
learn their vices. 

4 Recover a trove of art, artifacts, or recorded 
knowledge that was thought lost in a battle during the 
Last War. 

5 Capture an officer from a rival nation's army, or con- 
vince the officer to defect, to gain access to their spe- 
cialized knowledge. 

6 Sabotage the negotiations between a dragonmarked 

house and the local government on a plan that will 
undermine the Aurum's status. 


EBERRON ADVENTURES 


CULTS OF THE 
DRAGON BELOW 


The Cults of the Dragon Below are made up of people fa- 
natically devoted to the daelkyr or the fiendish overlords 
(both described in chapter 6). Though some choose 
this path, most are drawn to it by strange visions and 
corrupting madness. Like weeds breaking through the 
foundation of Khorvaire, Cults of the Dragon Below can 
spring up anywhere, at any time. 

Unlike other organizations with global reach, the 
cults have no organizing structure or principle. They 
are an infection inflicted on the world without reason. 
"Cult of the Dragon Below" is a term that outsiders 
use to describe any sect devoted to the daelkyr or the 
overlords. Each cult pursues its own mad schemes, tied 
to its dark patron. Even cults associated with the same 
master might not recognize one another as allies. You 
can roll on the Cult of the Dragon Below table to get a 
quick description of a cult, or you can create something 
entirely new. Whatever purpose cultists find or create 
for themselves from their twisted devotions, they pursue 
it with fanaticism. Even the most urbane and cultured 
cult leaders are unwavering in their convictions, entirely 
sure that their beliefs are good, true, and just. 


CULTS OF THE DRAGON BELOW 


d8 Cult 

1  Acult of Belashyrra murders innocents and steals 
their eyes, magically preserving the image ofthe last 
thing the eyes beheld. The cultists collect the eyes in 
a deep vault, while new eyes growin strange places 
on their own bodies. 

2 Accult of Dyrrn the Corrupter seeks to transcend hu- 
manity by bonding with aberrations and symbionts. 

3  Acult of Kyrzin, the daelkyr Prince of Slime, keeps a 
gibbering mouther in the basement and feeds their 
elders to this creature, believing their voices can still 
be heard in the whispers ofthe beast. 

4 Acult of Rak Tulkhesh believes that this life is only a 
stepping stone, and members earn a path to paradise 
by spilling blood and spreading strife. 

5  Acult of Belashyrra serves a beholder messiah, be- 
lieving that only the eye tyrant has the vision to lead 
them to a golden age. 

6  Acultof Dyrrn led by a mind flayer kidnaps people 
with dragonmarks, seeking to decipher the marks and 
transfer them to others. 

7 Anarcane think tank has become a cult of Sul 
Khatesh; the members believe they can healthe dam- 
age ofthe Mourning, but the eldritch machine they 
are building will surely cause more horror. 

8  AcultofRak Tulkhesh has sprung up among a local 
militia. Its members are convinced that refugees from 
the war are secretly inhuman monsters, and must be 
destroyed. 


Meca 


THE CULTS AND THE WAR 


The war and its aftermath created a fertile breeding 
ground for the Cults of the Dragon Below. In this time 
of uncertainty and fear, it's easy for people to gravitate 
toward a group that provides a sense of purpose or a 
promise of security. This mindset is intensified by the 
spread of refugees in the wake of the Mourning, and by 
the lingering animosity that continues to divide people. 
In the Mror Holds, the conflict with Dyrrn the Corruptor 
has begun to leave its mark, with new cults appearing 
throughout the nation. In general, the chaos of the war 
has left behind ample areas of shadow in which new 
cults can form and thrive. 


CULTS OF THE 
DRAGON BELOW NPCs = 


Some Cults of the Dragon Below are bizarre yet harm- 
less, but most of them are dangerous and destructive 
forces that prey on innocents and vulnerable people. 
Some cultists are aware of the true nature of the be- 
ings they serve, but many are delusional; cultists might 
perceive their mind flayer master as a wise and gen- 
tle priest. 


Сит NPCs 
d8 NPC 

Т А monstrous aberration (such as a beholder, a mind 
flayer, or a gibbering mouther) lairs beneath a popular 
inn, from where it twists the thoughts and dreams of 
those sleeping above. 

2 The headmaster of an exclusive magic academy is ac- 
tually a cult leader who is indoctrinating the students 
into a cult of Sul Khatesh. 

3  Awizardfound mad scrawlings hidden in a library 
book, used the writing to make contact with a daelkyr, 
and began creating aberration servants. 

4 А mind flayer serving Dyrrn dominates a magistrate 
and takes control of the city watch using intellect 
devourers. 

5 An assassin mixes mind-altering poisons laced with 
the whispers of a dark entity. 

6  Adragonmarked heir whose fortunes were ruined in 
the Last War founds a cult within their house. 

7 The local thieves’ guild turns from mundane orga- 
nized crime activities to bizarre murders and acts of 
chaos. 

8 A respected noble behaves more erratically as time 
goes on, treating their servants and family with ran- 
dom and escalating cruelty. 


CULT CAMPAIGN THEMES 


Cults of the Dragon Below make versatile villains in a 
campaign. They can be introduced as a threat early on, 
in the form of low-level cultists and small, disorganized 
cells. As the campaign moves through the tiers of play, 
stronger aberrations and fiends become viable antago- 
nists, as well as more powerful cult leaders who serve 
the daelkyr, the Lords of Dust, or other dark entities. 

The cults can also serve different styles of play. One 
would be perfect for a slowly unfolding investigation that 
starts out seemingly mundane, but slowly delves deeper 
into otherworldly influences and dark magic. Allies 
become suspect, and perhaps even erstwhile enemies 
become necessary bedfellows. 

Alternatively, a cult can burst explosively onto the 
scene with a spray of gore and a horde of shrieking 
dolgaunts. Such an incident leaves no doubt about the 
cultists' evil nature, making them the obvious villains of 
the story. 


CULT ADVENTURES 


The Cult Adventure Hooks table offers suggestions for 
story opportunities involving the cults. 


Сит ADVENTURE HOOKS 
d8 Adventure Hook 

1 Children throughout town begin reciting the same 
nursery rhyme, adding increasingly disturbing de- 
scriptions as the verses progress. No one knows 
where they learned the rhyme. 

2 Shadows around the old asylum take on a deep, inky 
cast, and things move just outside the light. Then the 
whispered laughs begin. 

3 A seemingly healthy noble dies of heart failure 
brought on by extreme terror, but with no clear 
source. The noble recently had an exquisite portrait 
painted. Every other person portrayed by the same 
artist has also died in a similar fashion. 

4 Inaremote village, the local herbalist is condemned 
for practicing dark magic against the villagers. They 
swear their innocence to the characters and beg to be 
exonerated before their scheduled execution. 

5 Magic items begin exhibiting strange side effects, 
causing minor warping of their users' flesh, or fraying 
their users' sanity. 

6 Strange bounty hunters stalk the characters, seem- 
ingly aware of all their secrets and loved ones. Odd 
lumps writhe beneath the hunters' cloaks. 

7 Acrazed hermit wanders into town and commits 
suicide in a grisly fashion. All the food in the village 
spoils instantly, and aberrant creatures attack every 
midnight thereafter. 

8 Several caravans have gone missing over the course 
of months. The authorities hire mercenary help after 
an aberration attacks while wearing the signet ring of 
a missing caravan master. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 189 


190 


DRAGONMARKED HOUSES 


No other group exerts as much influence over the Five 
Nations as the combined membership of the dragon- 
marked houses. Each dragonmarked house is part noble 
family and part business cartel, involved in businesses 
ranging from hospitality to espionage-for-hire. 

The reach of the houses is so extensive that they have 
interests in every facet of life in the civilized lands of 
Khorvaire and beyond. Those interests often bring them 
into conflict with local rulers and national governments. 
Unified Galifar had the strength and influence to impose 
its will on the collected dragonmarked houses, but in 
the wake of the war it remains to be seen if any single 
nation has the resources to challenge them. 

Although most houses have distinct spheres of inter- 
est, their concerns overlap just enough to cause friction. 
House Orien's control of transportation and shipping is 
threatened by the growing reach of House Lyrandar's 
airships. House Tharashk's arrangement with Droaam 
threatens House Deneith's monopoly on providing mer- 
cenary services. House Cannith lost its leadership in the 
Mourning, and rival barons are fighting for control of 
the house. 

An organization called the Twelve seeks to medi- 
ate disputes and encourage cooperation between the 
houses. Adventurers could be caught up in the rivalries 
and schemes of the houses, or they could work with the 
Twelve in an effort to resolve these feuds. 


THE HOUSES IN THE WAR 


The dragonmarked houses generally thrived during 
the Last War. Each house's unique talents were easily 
adapted to the war effort. Ostensibly neutral in the con- 
flict, the houses made huge profits by selling services 
and material to every nation involved in the war. For all 
the houses, ultimately, the war years were a time of vig- 
orous growth and increased influence. 

In some ways, though, the dragonmarked houses 
did feel the brunt of the conflict. House Cannith, for in- 
stance, suffered great setbacks near the end of the war. 
Many of its foundries and factories were destroyed, and 
the Treaty of Thronehold forced the house to dismantle 
the creation forges that produced the warforged. Worst 
of all for the house, the destruction of Cyre left Cannith 
without a clear leader, resulting in the house being frag- 
mented into three semi-independent branches. 

In another major development, House Thuranni broke 
away from House Phiarlan during the war, in part be- 
cause of the conflicts of interest that arose within an 
espionage organization that was being called on to serve 
multiple sides in a complex conflict. 


ARCANE WORKSHOP 


Map 4.1 depicts an arcane workshop, of a sort com- 
monly constructed by the fabricators of House Cannith. 
These facilities are well stocked with raw materials, 
artisans' tools, and magical reagents. Most of them have 
small libraries containing works related to the work- 
shop's signature creations. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


ARCANE WORKSHOP FEATURES 

Arcane workshops have many features in common, 
from workbenches and tools to diagrams etched into 
the floors and walls. Although most workshops are 
controlled by House Cannith, that house is not the only 
group of artificers who build and operate such locations. 
Zil gnomes who bind elementals and Mror dwarves who 
forge powerful weapons and armor must have spaces 
devoted to that work. The wizards of Arcanix in Aundair 
who create magic items and test new spells build spe- 
cialized workshops for those purposes. 


ARCANE WORKSHOP ADVENTURES 

Characters might find their way to an arcane workshop 
for a variety of reasons. Some possibilities are outlined 
in the Arcane Workshop Adventures table. 


ARCANE WORKSHOP ADVENTURES 


912 Adventure Goal 

Т Steal a pattern for creating a magic item, before the 
workshop's artificers finish making the item. 

2 Petition the ranking artificer for access to the work- 
shop's specialized library. 

Use the workshop to create a crucial magic item. 
Locate a stolen construct that has been modified for 
use as a servant in the workshop. 

5  Stormthe workshop before the artificers complete а 
doomsday weapon. 

6 Investigate the workshop for signs of the illegal 
creation of warforged. 

7 Defend the workshop against an invasion while the 
artificers try to repair a magic item. 

8 Bring an unknown artifact to the workshop so the 
artificers can identify it. 

9 Сопуіпсе the owners of the workshop to give up one 
of their subordinates, who is wanted for crimes in 
another nation. 

10 Escort a newly discovered bearer of the Mark of Mak- 
ing to the closest Cannith workshop. 

11 Seek assistance from the workshop's masters to 
determine why a young artificer's magic is producing 
unpredictable, often dangerous results. 

12 Request assistance from the artificers in recovering 
crucial memories from a destroyed construct or 
warforged. 


DRAGONMARKED NPCs 


The reach and influence of the dragonmarked houses 
means that they can play many roles in a campaign. 
Dragonmarked heirs can be valuable patrons. 


DYSON LOGOS 


Mezzanine 
Level 


Upper Workshop 


aee eo cot oocsococteoc s, 


View 
Downstairs 


CRE ttt n tg 


Ore errr er ee 5.5. o’ 


1 square = 5 feet 


Мар 4.1: ARCANE WORKSHOP 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


192 


Dragonmarked villains usually covet magical knowl- 
edge, wealth, or influence, and their methods are appro- 
priate to the marks they bear. Dragonmarked agents can 
range from lowly spies bearing the Mark of Shadow hid- 
den within a circus troupe, to a dragonmarked warlord 
of House Deneith who has decided to establish their 
own fiefdom. Examples of NPCs from dragonmarked 
houses appear in the Dragonmarked NPCs table. 


DRAGONMARKED NPCs 


912 NPC 

1 A renegade from House Cannith arms a group of ban- 
dits with fearsome elemental-bound weapons to prey 
on caravans as well as facilities belonging to other 
houses. 

2 Agang from the League of the Bitter Blade in House 
Deneith squeezes tribute from local towns in ex- 
change for "protection." 

3  Anheirof House Ghallanda poisons members of 
other dragonmarked houses who stay in non-Ghal- 
landa inns, discrediting rival businesses while attack- 
ing the houses. 

4 During a plague, a House Jorasco healer chooses 
which victims to cure and which to let die—and 
worse, which ones live to spread the plague to the 
house's enemies. 

5 A House Kundarak thief from the Warding Guild 
breaks into non-Kundarak vaults and banks to dis- 
credit them. 

6 А House Lyrandar airship captain uses the vessel to 
terrorize the countryside. 

7 Arogue heir of House Medani starts selling secrets, 
effectively establishing a new espionage guild within 
the house. 

8  Adisgraced caravan leader turns to banditry, hoping 
to win back House Orien's favor by disrupting non- 
Orien trade along a busy route. 

9 Two elfassassins, one from House Phiarlan and the 
other from House Thuranni, are each working to dis- 
credit or slay the other while spying on local nobility. 

10 AnheirofHouse Sivis starts blackmailing people 
based on the content of intercepted messages. 

11 A bounty hunter of House Tharashk hunts one of the 
characters or an associate of theirs. 

12 A rogue heir of House Vadalis is breeding monstrous 
animals and setting them loose in the countryside. 


DRAGONMARKED HOUSE 
CAMPAIGN THEMES 


The dragonmarked houses provide an opportunity for 
your campaign to explore the role of magic in society 
and the power of industry in the postwar world. If the 
adventurers are allied with a dragonmarked house, you 
can concentrate on the house's positive aspects and its 
work in moving Khorvaire beyond the feudalism of Gali- 
far. At the same time, the houses also represent a way to 
explore the consequences of corporate greed and unre- 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


strained expansion. This self-interest can be a defining 
feature of some or all of the houses, or you can focuson 
factions within certain houses, with idealistic leaders 
seeking to direct the house along a more responsible 
path while barons are driven by greed alone. 

As a prominent part of society, the dragonmarked 
houses strive to maintain the appearance of respect- 
ability and propriety. Thus, even when a house is utterly 
corrupted, any agents who are caught in their evil deeds 
are quickly and convincingly disavowed, preserving the 
house's image and reputation. If the plays a significant, 
recurring role as a villain in your campaign, the charac- 
ters' eventual task will be to prove that these so-called 
"rogue agents" have actually been taking orders from 
the top of the house's leadership. 


DRAGONMARKED HOUSE 
ADVENTURE HOOKS 


The Dragonmarked House Adventure Hooks table pres- 
ents a few ways to pull characters into tales concerning 
the houses. 


DRAGONMARKED HOUSE ADVENTURE HOOKS 


412 Adventure Hook 

1 A House Cannith artificer hires adventurers to steal 
secrets from a forge associated with a rival branch of 
the house. 

2 House Deneith is recruiting adventurers to oppose a 
sudden rise in bandit or monster activity in a nearby 
forest. 

3  Ahostel run by House Ghallanda has gained a rep- 
utation for being haunted, and the disturbances are 
growing more dangerous. 

4 People healed at a local Jorasco enclave suddenly 
manifest strange abilities they never could before— 
and soon thereafter, a strange curse as well. 

5 Тһе Kundarak Bank needs brave adventurers to test 
their new wards by trying to break into their vault. 

6  ALyrandar sky captain lost much of their crew in a 
recent attack by flying monsters, and hires hands to 
defend the ship on its return voyage. 

7  AMedani bodyguard is killed defending their charge 
from assassins, but manages to force the attackers to 
drop a clue to the identity of their employer. 

8 . The characters are hired to protect a crucial shipment 
aboard an Orien lightning rail. 

9  Atacarnival run by House Phiarlan, customers begin 
acting strangely. They all hum the same song, which 
spreads like a virus as more people hear it. 

10  ASivis translator has gone missing after being hired 
to decipher a trove of scrolls thought destroyed 
during the Last War. 

11 A House Tharaskh mine collapses, and time is run- 
ning out for the trapped miners. 

12 House Vadalis needs help recovering a herd of mage- 
bred horses stolen from a local ranch. 


DRAGONS 


The dragons of Eberron are much more than mere 
monsters; adventurers will rarely barge into a dragon's 
lair in search of its treasure horde. Dragons in the world 
are either aloof and unapproachable, or they are curious 
and manipulative, pulling strings behind the scenes or 
trying to influence the world in arcane ways. 

Most dragons live on the mystery-shrouded continent 
of Argonnessen and avoid contact with those they see as 
lesser creatures. They are obsessed with the Draconic 
Prophecy, which is a map of possible futures rather 
than a clear-cut prediction. Its paths are revealed in the 
motion of planes and moons, in the actions of the drag- 
onmarked houses, and in dozens of other more subtle 
manifestations. Most dragons that are active in Khor- 
vaire are part of a cabal known as the Chamber. 

A dragon in Khorvaire that isn't part of the Chamber 
could be an exile driven from Argonnessen for some 
crime or a scholar pursuing independent research. 
Some orphaned dragons grow up in Khorvaire without 
contact with Argonnessen, and some dragons have 
been twisted by the daelkyr or corrupted by fiends; any 
of these could be an antagonist if the adventure you're 
crafting calls for a cruel dragon. 

The dragons of Eberron aren't restricted in align- 
ment—good red dragons and evil gold dragons are 
equally common. Most dragons tend toward neutrality. 
Even those with good alignments often don't consider 
the impact of their actions on lesser beings; if a Cham- 
ber dragon must destroy a human village to foil the 
plans of a demon, it will do so without hesitation. 


THE CHAMBER 


Conspiracy theorists insist that a network of dragons 
is hidden in Khorvaire, and these mighty creatures use 
powerful magic and humanoid agents to work their will 
across the continent and beyond. These claims are usu- 
ally dismissed as madness, but they are in fact correct. 
The Chamber is a cabal of dragons that have monitored 
Khorvaire for thousands of years, treating humanoids 
as pawns in an ancient game. 

First and foremost, the dragons of the Chamber are 
observers, gathering information about new aspects 
of the Prophecy and sharing it with their elders in Ar- 
gonnessen. They are also charged with stopping any 


creature that seeks to use the Prophecy for its own ends. 


This responsibility sets them against the Lords of Dust, 
who must manipulate the Prophecy in order to release 
their fiendish overlords. It also leads them to recruit 

or eliminate any humanoid who learns too much about 
the Prophecy. 

The Chamber is loosely organized. Each dragon mon- 
itors its own small corner of the world and maintains a 
network of humanoid agents. Although the mission of 
the Chamber is one of observation, individual dragons 
often have their own agendas. Some seek to manip- 
ulate the Prophecy personally, directing the future 
along a particular path. Others conduct experiments 
on dragonmarked humanoids, trying to understand the 
connection between these creatures and the Prophecy. 
Still others are obsessed with the Lords of Dust engage 


in century-spanning games of cat-and-mouse with their 
fiendish counterparts. In general, the Chamber seeks to 
maintain the status quo and opposes demons, so agents 
of the Chamber can often be useful allies or patrons. 
But ultimately humanoids are just pawns in the dragons' 
eyes, and they readily sacrifice any of those pawns to 
ensure the sanctity of the Prophecy and the defeat of the 
Lords of Dust. 


'THE CHAMBER AND THE WAR 

The lives of humanoids and the welfare of their nations 
mean little to the ancient dragons. A member of the 
Chamber who is friendly now might turn out to be little 
more than a war criminal, responsible for horrible atroc- 
ities while directing critical events of the war to ensure 
that a skirmish or an untimely assassination didn't de- 
rail some crucial stanza of the Prophecy. An even more 
disturbing prospect is that the Mourning might have 
been orchestrated by the Chamber, either as part of its 
struggle against the Lords of Dust or even directly in 
response to the dictates of the Prophecy. 

Whatever the truth, the Last War's impact on the 
Chamber was small in the grand scheme of things. 
Planar observatories were damaged here and there, 
humanoid servants died in droves, and the clash of 
armies derailed short-term plans. But even the effects of 
a hundred years of war are minor in the context of plans 
that span continents and millennia. 


PLANAR OBSERVATORY 


A planar observatory is a structure at the heart of the 
Chamber's efforts to divine the meaning of the draconic 
Prophecy. The observatory consists of great chambers 
of crystal and metal, lined with huge orreries that track 
and align with the planes and the Ring of Siberys. 


PLANAR OBSERVATORY FEATURES 

Map 4.2 shows what a planar observatory might look 
like. These immense locations are constructed by and 
for dragons. The orreries that surround the central 
space track the courses of the planes as they shift to- 
ward and away from Eberron. All about the observatory 
are enormous dragonshards of all three kinds (Eberron, 
Khyber, and Siberys). 

Each observatory must be built in a location that is 
balanced between Siberys and Khyber; finding such a 
site might take years of careful study and surveying, and 
these places are typically remote. Several are located 
in Argonnessen; those in Khorvaire are usually found 
in mountain ranges and hidden forest clearings. Many 
have crystal roofs, or domes that open with the aid of 
great mechanisms to allow an unobstructed view of 
the night sky, since the movements of Eberron's moons 
are thought to correspond to the shifting relationships 
among the planes. 


PLANAR OBSERVATORY ADVENTURES 

The characters might find their way to a planar obser- 
vatory as unwitting minions of a Chamber observer, as 
a destination in their struggles against servants of the 
Lords of Dust, or even accidentally. The Planar Obser- 
vatory Adventures table presents some possibilities. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


193 


194 


Mae 4.2: PLANAR OBSERVATORY 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


Library 


1 square = 5 feet 


DYSON LOGOS 


PLANAR OBSERVATORY ADVENTURES 


d8 Adventure Goal 

1 A disguised dragon requests assistance repairing a 
damaged orrery within the observatory. 

2 One of the character's contacts is secretly the servant 
of a Chamber dragon observer. When the contact 
goes missing, their notes point toward a hidden 
"library" in the mountains. 

3 Тһе planar observatory might offer a way to prevent 
or at least predict what seems to be an epidemic of 
destructive manifest zones. 

4 Ап observatory has been taken over by demonic cult- 
ists, and the characters must reclaim the facility or 
destroy it before the cult makes use of it. 

5 Adragonmarked character has recurring nightmares 
that lead them to the observatory. 

6  Athief or assassin has been using a derelict obser- 
vatory as a hideout, occasionally selling bits of the 
observatory's dragonshards and equipment. 

7 Ascholar hires the characters to assist with studying 
and restoring a rediscovered observatory. 

8 Several observatories across the region will produce 
a powerful effect if each is brought into a specific, 
simultaneous alignment. 


CHAMBER NPCs 

The dragons of the Chamber typically use magic to dis- 
guise their true nature and move unseen among human- 
oids. Although their goals of acquiring knowledge and 
opposing the Lords of Dust can make the dragons suit- 
able as allies, their devotion to their long-term interests 
can blind them to the short-term impact of their actions. 


CHAMBER NPCs 


d6 МРС 

1 A wizard agent of the Chamber seeks to eliminate all 
the people they worked with in the past to cover their 
tracks and preserve the Chamber's secrecy. 

2 Тһе Prophecy requires the eventual destruction of 
a humanoid city. A disguised silver dragon, cunning 
and subtle, works to destabilize the city and bring 
about its ruin. 

3  Alocallibrarian is a disguised gold dragon in the 
service of the Chamber, who provides useful leads to 
send the characters down paths vital to the Prophecy. 

4 A dragon becomes convinced that the dragonmarked 
houses are corrupting the Prophecy. It might specif- 
ically target dragonmarked heirs, or start a popular 
movement that seeks to destroy the houses. 

5  Aroyaladvisor or prominent noble, secretly a servant 
of the Chamber, guides the leader in a direction vital 
to the Prophecy but disastrous to the region. 

6  Adisguised dragon is convinced that an adventurer 
has a critical role to play in the Prophecy, but an agent 
of the Lords of Dust is determined to drive them 
down a different path. 


CHAMBER CAMPAIGN THEMES 


In a campaign featuring the Chamber, the adventurers 
might initially carry out simple tasks on behalf of a dis- 
guised dragon or secret Chamber agent, not necessarily 
doing anything shady or villainous, but maneuvering 
pieces into position so they can play their designated 
parts. As the campaign unfolds, the dragons of the 
Chamber might reveal that the adventurers have their 
own part to play—in particular, perhaps, any member of 
the party who bears a dragonmark. The Chamber be- 
gins interfering in the characters' activities, for good and 
for ill, and the Lords of Dust might also get involved. Un- 
fortunately for the adventurers, the dragons are not nec- 
essarily any more concerned for their well-being than 
the Lords of Dust are, and the characters might have to 
consort or cooperate with demons in order to escape the 
clutches of the dragons. 

Throughout the campaign, the goals of the Chamber 
might not be readily apparent. Locations such as the 
planar observatory described here might be able to give 
the adventurers some insight into the substance of the 
Prophecy they have become tangled up in, and seers 
and sages might be able to offer further insight into the 
different ways that the demons and the dragons could 
be interpreting those words. Ultimately, the adventurers 
might be in the position of having to choose between 
an outcome that is bad for them but good for the world 
in the long term, or a short-term triumph that carries 
tremendous risk for the world in the distant (or not too 
distant) future. 

Another possibility is that the adventurers are openly 
working with the Chamber to gather information on the 
Prophecy and fight the Lords of Dust. In this case, the 
Chamber could act as a group patron; see the "Immortal 
Being" section of chapter 1. 


CHAMBER MISSIONS 


The Chamber Missions table suggests several ways that 


adventurers might (knowingly or unknowingly) be asked 
to advance the Chamber's agenda, while the Chamber 
Adventures table offers a few more ways in which the 
activities of the Chamber could lead to an adventure. 


CHAMBER MISSIONS 


d6 Mission 
1 Gather pristine dragonshards to expand or repair an 
observatory. 


2 Seek out a group of people who must be eliminated 
in order to bring about the fulfillment of a stanza of 
Prophecy. 

3 Discover who killed another minion of the characters' 
dragon patron. 

4 Defenda Chamber safe house against a rival draconic 
attack. 

5 Steal a local sage's research to prevent them from dis- 
covering the Chamber's activities. 

6 Recreate an ancient ritual that will bring a new piece 
of the Prophecy to light. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


196 


THE DREAMING DARK 


In the spaces between sleeping and waking, nightmares 
wait with grasping claws. The quori spirits that rule Dal 
Quor spent a thousand years seizing control of the con- 
tinent of Sarlona. Now they have turned their many eyes 
toward Khorvaire. The ultimate goal of the Dreaming 
Dark is to control all the nations of the world. The plane 
of Dal Quor goes through cycles of light and darkness, 
and the current age is coming to an end. The nightmare 
spirits that rule the plane believe that by seizing control 
of mortal civilization—by forcing all the people of Eber- 
ron to dream the dreams they devise—they can maintain 
this current age of darkness indefinitely. So the fiends of 
the Dreaming Dark aren’t merely hungry for power; they 
are fighting for survival. 

The quori can't manifest physically in Eberron, but 
they have other options. They can possess willing hu- 
manoids, creating agents known as the Inspired (see 
chapter 6). They can also manipulate the dreams of 
mortals. The Dreaming Dark can trick a priest by send- 
ing dreams that appear to be divine visions, or inspire a 
soldier to rebel against their lord. 

The greatest weapon of the Dreaming Dark is its 
ability to infiltrate other organizations. Anyone could 
become an Inspired vessel, or be prompted into tak- 
ing foolish action by a dream. Its agents are scattered 
across the world and have no obvious connection to one 
another, until they reveal their true nature and purpose. 


THE DREAMING DARK IN THE WAR 


The chaos that reigned during the Last War enabled the 
agents of the Dreaming Dark to move and act with abso- 
lute freedom throughout Khorvaire. Any direct conflict 
among Eberron’s humanoid populations is a boon to 


THE ROLE or DREAMS 

If you plan to usethe Dreaming Dark as a major villain 

in your campaign, it can be helpful to establish the role 
of dreams early on. If dreams feel like a regular part of 
the story, it will be less obvious when the Dreaming Dark 
starts manipulating the characters' dreams. For example, 
you might establish a pattern of picking one adventurer 
and discussing their dreams each time the group takes 

a long rest. Consider these ideas for the basic seed 

ofa dream: 


Revisit recent events. This can be a useful opportunity 
to call attention to a detail the characters overlooked. 
Clearly, this character's subconscious registered the de- 
tail as important! 

Involve a current villain. This can help build the players' 
hatred for an elusive recurring villain! 

Foreshadow the future. This could simply reflect a char- 
acter's fears, but it might also convey a warning from a 
celestial or other supernatural creature. 

Explore the character's past. Give the player an opportu- 
nity to add depth to one element of the character's story. 

Reflect anxiety. An anxious character might dream about 
showing up in a dungeon with no armor or at school 
with no clothes. Narratively, these dreams can provide a 
moment of comic relief or heighten the players own con- 
cern about what's happening in the game. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


this group, which wants to destabilize all of them. Many 
of the intense battles near the end of the war might 
have been avoided, if not for Dreaming Dark agents fan- 
ning the flames of fear and hate—often by invading the 
dreams of soldiers and rulers alike. 

The feelings of mistrust and festering animosity 
between the nations that linger after the Treaty of 
Thronehold provide the Dreaming Dark with countless 
points of possible infection. Refugees, expatriates, and 
other displaced people provide the perfect vehicle for 
the Dreaming Dark to spread its influence across Khor- 
vaire, carrying its corruption into new populations. 


THE ROLE OF DREAMS 


All dreams occur in the plane of Dal Quor. When 
mortals sleep, their minds touch the plane and shape 
a shard of it. Normally, a dream is shaped by the 
memories and emotions of the dreamer. But the dream 
spell and similar effects (such as a night hag’s Night- 
mare Haunting) can influence a dream from the outside, 
to a specific and often sinister purpose. The quori are 
masters of using the dream spell as a weapon to terror- 
ize their foes. 

It's possible for an entire adventure to take place in 
a dream. The trick with a dream adventure is ensuring 
that it feels meaningful, even consequential, and not just 
a waste of time. One of four basic approaches can help 
you do that: 


* Areal monster inhabits a character's dreams and 
poses a real threat to that character's mind or body. 
The goal of the adventure is to defeat that monster. 

* A dreaming character is incapable of waking com- 
munication—they might be comatose or possessed. 
The goal of the adventure is to communicate with the 
dreamer and free them from whatever is preventing 
them from communicating. 

* A villain has implanted some kind of psychic lock in a 
character's mind, which prevents them from accessing 
some knowledge or capability. The goal of the adven- 
ture is to remove the psychic lock, which might take 
the form of a complex trap or maze in the dream. 

* The actual objective of the adventure lies in Dal Quor. 
The first goal is to find a way to break out of the mun- 
dane dreamscape and enter the wider plane. 


The second challenge in crafting a dream adventure is 
how to bring all the characters in a party together in the 
same dream, which might or might not belong to one of 
them. Consider these possibilities: 


• One of the characters is dreaming, and the others 
appear in the dream as memories and impressions in 
the dreamer's mind. 

• Some exotic magic—a kalashtar ritual or an eldritch 
machine, perhaps—allows the characters to share a 
dream or to enter someone else's dream. This magic 
could also allow a character who ordinarily can't 
dream (such as an elf, a warforged, or a kalashtar) to 
enter the dreamscape as well. 

• Agents of the Dreaming Dark use their magic to bring 
the dreams of the characters together so they can in- 
fluence or target the whole party at once. 


The Dream Adventures table puts these principles to- 
gether and suggests hooks into this kind of adventure. 


DREAM ADVENTURES 


d4 Adventure Goal 

1 Break a psychic lock that is preventing a House Thu- 
ranni spy from remembering what they learned about 
a sinister Dreaming Dark plot. 

2 Escape into Dal Quor to find an artifact that can be 
brought back to the Material Plane when the charac- 
ters awaken. 

3 Rescue a character who is suffering from debilitating 
recurring nightmares by defeating the quori inhabit- 
ing the character's mind. 

4 Stop the construction of an eldritch machine in Dal 
Quor that will give the quori physical access to the 
Material Plane again. 


DYING IN DREAMS 

Death in dreams is less severe than in reality, but it's 
not without consequence. Of course, characters who are 
mere figments of a dreamer's imagination are simply 
removed from the dream. But a character dies while ac- 
tually dreaming, the character receives no benefit from 
the rest and takes 3d6 psychic damage. 

If you want to establish more severe consequences, 
you can. À dreamer killed by a quori could be trapped in 
Dal Quor while the quori possesses their body, forcing 
their allies to try to rescue them from their nightmares. 


DREAMING DARK NPCs 


Agents of the Dreaming Dark are insidious villains that 


can appear anywhere, in almost any context. They re- 
ceive orders from a cabal of powerful quori. The leader 
of the organization, known as the Devourer of Dreams, 
communes with the nightmare spirit of Dal Quor itself. 
The Dark's chief agent in Eberron is a kalaraq quori 
(see chapter 6) named Tirashana, who has planted mind 
seeds—mental copies of herself —across Khorvaire. 

The Dreaming Dark has Inspired agents and kalaraq 
quori mind seeds (see chapter 6) scattered across Khor- 
vaire, hidden within the membership of dragonmarked 
houses, noble families, and other driving forces. Be- 
cause Dreaming Dark agents can communicate and co- 
ordinate with one another in dreams, they never have to 
risk losing their cover to receive assignments or trans- 
mit information. 


DREAMING Dank NPCs 


d4 NPC 

1 A servant in a manor house overhears everything the 
visiting nobles whisper about in their private rooms. 

2 The captain of a successful mercenary company sud- 
denly changes the kinds of contracts they'll accept. 

3  Alocaldruid searches out monsters in the wilderness 
and drives them into murderous rampages. 

4 A charismatic Cyran stirs up anger and discontent 
among the frightened refugees. 


DREAMING DARK 
CAMPAIGN THEMES 


Long ago, the Dreaming Dark caused a long period of 
strife on the continent of Sarlona, fostering suspicion, 
rebellion, fear, prejudice, and greed among and within 
the various nations that held power at the time. While 
chaos reigned, the quori also carefully nurtured the 
human bloodlines that would become the Inspired, 
perfectly suited to serve as hosts for quori spirits. Then, 
when the destruction of the old kingdoms was complete, 
a group of bold champions—Inspired vessels of the 
Dreaming Dark—formed a new nation from the ashes 
of the old. Having conquered Sarlona by means of such 
manipulation, the Dreaming Dark has turned its sights 
to Khorvaire—which is already a continent in turmoil. 

With the conquest of the entire continent in mind, 
the Dreaming Dark has three objectives in Khorvaire. 
The first is to cause chaos and strife whenever possible, 
turning allies against one another and spreading fear. 
The second is to promote their chosen champions. A 
champion could be a nation, a mercenary company, a 
dragonmarked house, or a religion—whatever it is, it will 
have been thoroughly subverted by the Dreaming Dark. 
Finally, the Dreaming Dark relentlessly pursues the ka- 
lashtar and takes every opportunity to bring down these 
enemies. The kalashtar are descended from rebel quori 
that defied the Dreaming Dark and want to push Dal 
Quor into an age of light. 

Given those objectives, the Dreaming Dark can drive 
events on a small scale, by setting bandits in motion or 
triggering local feuds, or the adventurers might uncover 
evidence of plans that could reignite the Last War or 
bring an entire nation or religion under the sway of the 
Dreaming Dark. 


DREAMING DARK 
ADVENTURE HOOKS 


The Dreaming Dark Adventure Hooks table offers some 
ideas for strange occurrences and nightmarish events 
that can touch off stories involving the Dreaming Dark. 


DREAMING DARK ADVENTURE HOOKS 
d4 Adventure Hook 

1 The high priest of a temple falls into a deep sleep 
from which nothing can awaken them. 

2 The characters notice a pattern after defeating sev- 
eral foes: each enemy exhibited a particular quirk of 
speech or gesture. They now recognize that quirk in 
an ally or mentor. 

3 A mad wizard encoded the remedy to a destructive 
spell in their own dreams. The characters must enter 
the dreamscape and recover the remedy. 

4 Awar criminal imprisoned during the Last War 
reaches out, claiming to have evidence of their 
innocence and warning that a destructive force is 
influencing the government. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 197 


prote —— —€——B APA 


A 


C: 

E 
A 
x 


2: 


» "etatem ee trm e i hc rne Pg t pts 


198 


THE VOICE OF 


BRELAND 


BORANEL CEDES 
_ WESTERN REACHES 


Ina "ow move, King Boranel has oido that all 
Brelish citizens who live west of the Graywall Mountains 
must leave their homes and return to the eastern lands, 
or else forfeit their claim to the king's protection. In 

the face of a few withered hags and a ragtag "army" of 
filthy ogres and mangy gnolls, King Boranel's legendary 
courage has apparently faltered. We can only assume he 
means to yield to Cyre next. 


l————— 


DROAAM 


Once, Droaam was a wild frontier that marked the edge 
of civilized Khorvaire. Today, it is home to one of the 
strangest nations on the continent. In the streets of the 
Great Crag, ogres and minotaurs rub shoulders with 
gnolls and goblins. Gargoyles and wyverns circle in the 
sky, while harpies call work crews to the quarries with 
their songs. Under the rule of the enigmatic Daugh- 
ters of Sora Kell, this land grows stronger with each 
passing year. 

Thanks to the guidance of the hags, the diverse inhab- 
itants of Droaam are learning to worktogether and find- 
ing ways to use their supernatural gifts to help build and 
sustain society. A medusa might use its petrifying gaze 
to preserve the life of an injured ally until medical atten- 
tion can be obtained. Harpies in the taverns of Droaam 
use their hypnotic songs to entertain rather than to 
harm. When you bring creatures from Droaam into the 
campaign, consider how different monsters can work 
together in unusual ways and how their special abilities 
could be used outside combat. 

Droaam offers a way to introduce monsters into any 
adventure, and for characters to encounter these mon- 
sters in untraditional ways. Droaam demonstrates that 
even monstrous creatures want the same things that 
members of other races do, more or less. 

Droaamish monsters of a civilized bent could appear 
anywhere in Khorvaire. House Tharashk brokers the 
services of Droaamish monsters across the continent. 
Some of these monsters can appear in traditionally 
aggressive roles, as mercenary soldiers, a crime lord's 
bodyguards, or assassins in the shadows of Sharn. But 
Tharashk also provides less violent services. Ogre la- 
borers put their strength to practical use in many of the 


continent's cities. Gargoyle couriers are in high demand. 


Though monstrous workers of these sorts are still rare 

in many nations, their numbers are growing. 
Conversely, a visit to Droaam gives adventurers a 

chance to explore a land untethered by the laws of the 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


dere te bene 


— 


treaty nations, a realm where they are the outsiders and 
the monsters are at home. Adventurers might have to 
pursue a fugitive or a war criminal into Droaam, or go 
there in search of unusual services or information found 
only in the land of monsters. 


WARLORDS OF DROAAM 


Droaam is hometo a vast array of creatures. Many of 
theseraces maintain isolated enclaves: the medusa 

city of Cazhaak Draal, the harpy flights of the Byeshk 
Mountains, the scattered minotaur clans, the mysteri- 
ous changeling city known as Lost. But other creatures 
have long been commingled. The ogres, orcs, trolls, hill 
giants, goblins, and kobolds of Droaam have never had 
distinct cultures; they have always been blended. Al- 
though enclaves made up of a single kind of creature do 
exist, most communities contain a mix of creatures. 

In bygone days, many of these groups of creatures 
lived in transient communities, ruled by the most pow- 
erful among them and constantly in conflict with neigh- 
boring forces. When the Daughters of Sora Kell rose to 
power, they used force and persuasion to bring an end 
to this violence. They recognized the most powerful 
existing warlords as rulers of their domains, and they 
appointed lieutenants—including oni and other powerful 
and intelligent creatures—to govern other regions. 

Within Droaam, any creature that commands the 
loyalty of a band and has successfully claimed and held 
territory can call itself a warlord, but only a small num- 
ber of such leaders wield significant power. А few of the 
most notable warlords and factions are described below. 


Cairngorm. А remarkably intelligent gargoyle, Cairn- 
gorm is the lord of Grimstone Keep. He leads the 
largest host of gargoyles in Droaam, and Grimstone is 
also home to orcs and other creatures. 

The Dark Pack. An alliance of lycanthropes, worgs, 
and other bestial creatures is led by an elf werewolf 
named Zaeurl. The Dark Pack bears a deep hatred for 
followers of the Silver Flame. 

Gorodan Ashlord. A fire giant exiled from Xen'drik has 
earned the loyalty of a powerful force of ogres and hill 
giants. Gorodan knows a great deal about Xen'drik 
and could prove a valuable resource to adventurers. 

Harpy Flights. The harpies have long dwelled in the 
Byeshk Mountains. Several flights across the nation— 
including the Stormsinger, Last Dirge, and Rotwing— 
have pledged themselves to the Daughters of Sora 
Kell. Other flights remain in isolation in the moun- 
tains. The largest of these is the Wind Howlers, whose 
leader, Callain of the Bloody Word, despises the hags. 

Kethelrax the Cunning. The kobold lord Kethelrax 
has laid claim to Shaarat Kol in the south of Droaam 
and leads host of kobolds and goblins—creatures that 
have been traditionally enslaved and oppressed by the 
larger and more powerful inhabitants of the region. 
Though his epithet, “the Cunning,” is used mockingly 
by other warlords, Kethelrax has the favor of Sora Ka- 
tra and has proven to be clever in his ownright. The 
kobolds are thrilled to have their own territory and 
are fiercely loyal to the Daughters, but many yearn for 
revenge against their former masters. 


Rhesh Turakbar. The minotaur warlord Rhesh Turak- 
bar has united the small clans of his people into a 
deadly force. His fortress is on the eastern edge of 
Droaam, and he often leads raiding parties into Bre- 
land in the name of his fiendish patron, the Horned 
Prince—also known as Rak Tulkhesh (see chapter 6). 

Sheshka, the Queen of Stone. The medusas have long 
held the ancient citadel of Cazhaak Draal. Though 
they are not numerous, their deadly gaze and trained 
basilisk pets make the medusas a force to be reckoned 
with. Medusa priests of the Dark Six are spiritual 
leaders in many Droaamish communities. Queen 
Sheshka is a skilled warrior and general. She has 
been loyal to the Daughters, but she is devoted to her 
people and will always do what's best for them. 

Tzaryan Rrac. A cunning oni with a large force of ogres 
and orcs at his disposal, Tzaryan Rrac was quick to 
embrace the arrival of the hags, but he also yearns 
for greater power. Rrac is a skilled alchemist and a 
scholar of arcane lore. 

Venom Lords. A group of tieflings called the Venom 
Lords leads a community of warlocks, some of whom 
are also tieflings. Their domain, called the Venomous 
Demesne, is hidden away in the desolate marshes 
south of Blackwater Lake, shrouded by powerful 
magic. Warlord Bal Molesh is a strong ally of the 
Daughters, and some of his tiefling kin can be found 
in the service of Daask. 

Xor'chylic. A mind flayer serves as the governor of 
Graywall. It's said that the Daughters found Xor'chylic 
in Khyber, and received his loyalty in exchange for a 
pledge that the hags would give him an opportunity 
for vengeance against one of the daelkyr. 

Znir Pact. The gnolls of Droaam, once servants of Rak 
Tulkhesh, broke ties with the demons long ago and 
swore an oath of loyalty to the pack above all else. 
Since standing together and being bound by this 
Znir Pact, the gnolls have never been subjugated by 
any other force, and have never sought to conquer. 
Instead, they sell their services as hunters and sol- 
diers, serving all warlords. The gnolls are trusted 
across Droaam. 


RUINED DHAKAANI FORT 


Ruined forts of ancient Dhakaani design are common 
in Droaam, and in many cases the structures have been 
remodeled into homes or refitted for defense. They also 
make ideal lairs for less intelligent monsters, places 
where they can bring their next meals along with any- 
thing those poor souls happened to be carrying. 


RUINED DHAKAANI FORT FEATURES 
Map 4.3 shows an ancient Dhakaani fort built into a cliff 
face. It consists of four tiers in varying states of ruin. 
The cellar, including a cistern and storage areas, is 
accessed by way of secret trap doors in the floor above. 
The ground floor features a statue of a great hobgoblin 
hero of old in a large enclosed courtyard, and a cluster 
of unidentifiable statues in one back corner. The outer- 
most area of the ground floor is the most severely dam- 
aged part of the fort. 


The middle tower consists of two crumbling floors 
with arrow slits, accessed by spiral staircases from the 
ground level. The upper level of the tower has been se- 
verely damaged, with only old wooden planks and a rick- 
ety ladder allowing movement between the two floors. 

The top level of the fort overhangs the tower. Large 
portions of the floor are missing, making certain areas 
difficult to reach. Arrow slits on the perimeter of this 
level made it instrumental to the fort's defense, and the 
largerooms here were used for arms storage and mus- 
tering troops for battle. 


RUINED DHAKAANI FORT ADVENTURES 
The Ruined Fort Adventures table offers some ideas for 
drawing a party to the location. 


RUINED FoRT ADVENTURES 
d6 Adventure Goal 

1 Gnolls lairing in the fort have been attacking caravans 
and travelers near the Darguun border. But the gnolls 
are mercenaries. Who are they working for? 

2 The ruins are said to hold a powerful magic item that 
was used by the ancient Dhakaani goblins against the 
daelkyr. 

3 The party is hired to recruit several hill giants for 
a building project in western Breland. Step one is 
making sure the giants lairing in the fort don't kill 
the party; steptwo is persuading them to work for 
humans. 

4 The characters must rescue prisoners being held by 
the monsters in the ruins. 

5 A group of Brelish humans determined to "take 
Brelish lands back from the monsters" have settled 
and started rebuilding the ruined fort. The party is 
asked to help them defend the fort—or to protect 
them as they flee back to Breland, pursued by angry 
Droaamites. 

6  ABrelish noble hires the party to retrieve a family 
heirloom lost in the fort's ruins. 


DAUGHTERS OF SORA KELL 


Sora Kell isan ancient night hag with exceptional pow- 
ers. She is said to have dealt with dragons and demons 
in the first age of the world, and to have tricked the 
Sovereigns themselves. Even though she is immortal, 
there have been no new legends of her deeds since the 
advent of Galifar, but that's when her daughters rose to 
infamy. All three of the Daughters of Sora Kell possess 
powers far beyond what's usual for their kind. They are 
creatures of legend, beings who have defeated many of 
the greatest heroes of Galifar. 

Sora Katra is the voice of the Daughters. Charismatic 
and clever, she is an accomplished illusionist and shape- 
shifter who rarely wears the same face twice. Stories 
say that she weaves curses on her loom, and that she 
loves to match wits with heroes and champions. She 
speaks for Droaam, and is always interested in intrigues 
and plots. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 199 


200 


1square = 5 feet 


Upper Fortress 


Tower Level 2 


Tower Level 1 


Lower 
Fortress 


Map 4.3: RuiNED DHAKAANI Fort 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


DYSON LOGOS 


Sora Maenya is the commander of Droaam's armies. 
It's said that she can crush a giant with her bare hands, 
then eat the whole thing and still be hungry. She binds 
the souls of her victims to their skulls, which she keeps 
in her lair. Though many stories depict her as merely a 
brute, she is a clever strategist and a master of intimida- 
tion and terror. 

Sora Teraza is a mystery. Though blind, or perhaps 
because of her blindness, she possesses vast powers 
of divination. She is the most gifted oracle of the age, 
but her answers are often cryptic, even when dealing 
with her sisters; she might give vital advice even to her 
enemies. There is little that can be hidden from Sora 
Teraza, but the question is always whether she'll share 
what she knows. 


THE DAUGHTERS AND THE WAR 

Droaam emerged as a nation in the final decade of the 
Last War. King Boranel of Breland brokered an uneasy 
truce with Droaam, but the other nations of Khorvaire 
have refused to recognize the Daughters' sovereignty. 
Most leaders believe Droaam will soon collapse into 
chaos, or that Breland will gather its strength and crush 
the Daughters. Others think that either of those assump- 
tions gravely underestimates the abilities of the Daugh- 
ters and their subjects. 

In the aftermath of the war, the fighting forces of 
Droaam have become a significant resource for other 
nations of Khorvaire. Gnolls, minotaurs, ogres, and 
other creatures have proven to be capable mercenar- 
ies and laborers, and the Daughters have worked with 
House Tharashk to make these resources available to 
the rest of Khorvaire. This exchange both puts gold into 
the Daughters' coffers, and spreads their eyes and ears 
throughout the wider world. 


THE DAUGHTERS CAMPAIGN THEMES 

When involving the Daughters of Sora Kell in your cam- 
paign, the first question you need to answer is: what are 
their goals for Droaam? 

One possibility is that the Daughters believe in their 
nation—that it is important to them to unite the mon- 
sters of Droaam and to give their charges a voice in the 
world. In this case, the Daughters can be ultimately sym- 
pathetic figures. They are fighting against the fears and 
prejudices of the people of the Five Nations, and also 
the selfish ambitions of many of their own power-hungry 
warlords. Once the adventurers learn that the Daugh- 
ters truly want peace and prosperity, they could become 
envoys of the Daughters in the Five Nations or help to 
fight their enemies in Droaam. A character of a mon- 
strous race could even become a warlord of Droaam. 
Even if the adventurers don't work directly with the 
Daughters, they could have need of their assistance; 
Sora Teraza might hold the answer to a vital mystery, 
or the adventurers might need an artifact hidden in the 
vaults of the Great Crag. 

If you'd rather use the Daughters as straightforward 
villains, they could be driven by a thirst for power or a 
desire to end humanity's dominance over Khorvaire. 
Sora Teraza's visions enable them to target enemies 


with unerring precision and reveal enemy plans before 
they are carried out. Can the adventurers find a way 

to deal with Sora Teraza and end this threat before 

the armies of Droaam and agents of Daask make 

their move? 

A middle-of-the-road view is that the Daughters are 
motivated solely by Sora Teraza's visions. They have no 
interest in gaining power or in maintaining their king- 
dom; they are fulfilling their role in a story that is still 
unfolding, and once it's resolved, they will abandon their 
thrones and return to their hidden haunts. Can Droaam 
survive without the Daughters, or will the nation dis- 
solve into chaos? 

Whatever path you choose should also be reflected 
in the nature of the criminal organization Daask, de- 
scribed later in this chapter. Those monsters are agents 
of Sora Katra; how do their actions support her agenda? 
Are they seizing power on behalf of Droaam, or are they 
pursuing a more mysterious agenda? 

As described in chapter 1, Sora Kell herself could be a 
group patron for a party of adventurers. In this case, the 
characters' relationship with the sisters is complicated. 
Do the Daughters consider the adventurers to be allies, 
or are they bitter rivals? Does Sora Kell support the na- 
tion of Droaam, or are the Daughters defying the wishes 
of their mother? 


DROAAM ADVENTURE HOOKS 


Any adventure that takes place in Droaam or involves 
creatures that hail from that nation gives the players 
and their characters a chance to deal with monsters that 
don't always behave monstrously. The Droaam Adven- 
ture Hooks table presents a variety of story links involv- 
ing Droaam, the Daughters of Sora Kell, or both. 


DROAAM ADVENTURE Hooks 


d6 Adventure Hook 

Т A medusa sends authorities a broken stone finger 
bearing a distinctive signet ring, and invites emissar- 
ies to bring gold, a magic item, or some other ransom 
for the petrified individual's release. 

2 A House Lyrandar airship has gone down just beyond 
the Graywall Mountains. The characters must move 
immediately to rescue any survivors and secure a se- 
cret message the ship was carrying. 

3 Sora Teraza appears in a character's dreams every few 
nights, urging the character to explore a particular 
ruin. 

4  Thecharacters must entreat the Daughters of Sora 
Kell for knowledge of how to remove a seemingly 
unbreakable curse. 

5 The characters must purchase or steal a daelkyr tome 
or artifact from the tower of Mordain the Fleshweaver, 
a powerful wizard banished from the Twelve who now 
makes his home in western Droaam. 

6 An ogre warlord is accused of destroying a village just 
outside the borders of Droaam. The characters must 
bring the warlord to justice or work with the ogre to 
find the real culprit. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


202 


GATEKEEPERS 


The Gatekeepers are a druidic sect dedicated to protect- 
ing the natural world from unnatural forces. They battle 
aberrations and guard against extraplanar invasions 
and the release of ancient evils. 

The Gatekeepers maintain the oldest druidic tradi- 
tion on Khorvaire. Over fifteen thousand years ago, the 
green dragon Vvaraak came to the Shadow Marches 
and gathered a following from among the orcs of the 
region. In her studies of the Prophecy, Vvaraak had 
foreseen a great threat that could be stopped only by 
the younger races. So she taught the orcs the secret 
language of the natural world and showed them how 
to work with stone and soil, and how to read the future 
in the movement of the Ring of Siberys. She charged 
her students to remain ever vigilant against the threat 
that was to come, and to protect nature from those that 
would corrupt it. 

Thousands of years later, the daelkyr (see chapter 6) 
opened gates from the plane of Xoriat and unleashed 
hordes of mind flayers, beholders, and other foul crea- 
tures into the world. The conflict that followed destroyed 
the goblin empire of Dhakaan, and the daelkyr's inva- 
sion left scars across Khorvaire. Ultimately, Vvaraak's 
students sealed the gates and imprisoned the daelkyr 
in Khyber. Even after this triumph, the orcs couldn't be 
sure if they had turned back the threat Vvaraak had fore- 
seen, or if a greater danger lay ahead. So, in addition to 
guarding the seals that bind the daelkyr and keep Xoriat 
at bay, the Gatekeepers remained vigilant against the 
possibility of worse to come. 

In the millennia since that struggle ended, the Gate- 
keepers have shared Vvaraak's wisdom and druidic 
magic with humans, shifters, and others who came 
to Khorvaire. New interpretations of Vvaraak's teach- 
ings gave birth to new druid sects: the Wardens of the 
Wood, the Greensingers, and the Ashbound. Today, the 
Gatekeepers are one of the smaller sects, and many of 
the sites of their long-ago battles have been abandoned 
and forgotten. But some Gatekeepers still remain in the 
Shadow Marches and the Eldeen Reaches, continuing 
their vigil to this day. 


THE GATEKEEPERS IN THE WAR 


The Last War had only minimal impact on the Gate- 
keepers, and vice versa. The druids' primary concern 
was to prevent military activity from disrupting the seals 
they guarded. Occasionally the Gatekeepers attacked 
groups of scouts or military patrols, driving them away 
to ensure that battles didn't erupt in their vicinity. Some- 
times the Gatekeepers failed in those efforts, and Xori- 
at's corruption spread over some remote regions while 
the war raged around them. 


GATEKEEPER SEAL 


The seals forged by the Gatekeepers have a variety of 
purposes and forms. Some are tied to specific daelkyr, 
keeping those individuals bound in Khyber and strip- 
ping them of some of their powers. Others ward against 
aberrations in general, or suppress the influence of the 
plane of Xoriat. Some seals are amulets, objects that 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


can be carried and stolen. It's said that one of the seals 
is a druidic bloodline, and it will last until the last mem- 
ber of the line is slain. 

The most common form of Gatekeeper seal is a great 
stone slab set into the ground or a cavern wall. It is 
carved with mystical symbols that hedge out the influ- 
ence of Xoriat and maintain the barrier. The map de- 
picts one such seal, along with the druidic trappings and 
dwellings surrounding it. 


GATEKEEPER SEAL FEATURES 

Map 4.4 shows what a Gatekeeper seal might look like. 
A seal is a protected site, usually attended at all times 
by Gatekeepers who live at or near the seal. The one 
depicted in the map lies on the edge of a swamp, but it 
could be located in any kind of terrain. A circle of stand- 
ing stones serves to focus the magic of the area toward 
the seal itself, and the stones also serve as a place of 
worship for the druids' devotions and ceremonies. 


GATEKEEPER SEAL ADVENTURES 

The location of a Gatekeeper seal might bethe site of 
an adventure's climax, or the characters might need to 
find one in order to consult with the guardians there. 
The Gatekeeper Seal Adventures table presents some 
possibilities. 


GATEKEEPER SEAL ADVENTURES 


d4 Adventure Goal 

1 Deliver a specially treated Khyber dragonshard to the 
Gatekeepers to repair a widening crack in the seal. 

2 Petition the keepers of a seal for information on an 
aberration that has been terrorizing the countryside. 

3 Assist the Gatekeepers in an annual ritual that will re- 
energize the seal and keep it shut for another year. 

4 Escort a new Gatekeeper guardian safely to the seal 
after its previous guardians were corrupted. 


GATEKEEPER NPCs 


Gatekeepers are sworn to protect the world, and thus 
are more likely to be encountered as allies than as ene- 
mies. It's always possible, though, for even noble Gate- 
keepers to fall prey to madness and corruption, thus 
becoming the very evils they are sworn to fight. 


GATEKEEPER NPCs 


d4 NPC 

1  Thespirit of a long-dead Gatekeeper lives on in the 
body of an ancient toad. It speaks in a deep, croaking 
voice. 

2  Ahalf-orc Gatekeeper works in House Tharashk 
as an investigator, searching for signs of planar 
disturbances. 

3  Ahuman Gatekeeper is on a pilgrimage, carrying an 
amulet that serves as aseal on a journey to a number 
of sacred sites to restore its power. 

4 An old orc ranger is murdering people in Ѕһагп, 
claiming that they've been corrupted by the daelkyr. 


ae i 


d. square £ 5 feet 


E E 
Druids’ = 
ш 
Cottages 
565 і 0 


J 
ape” 


e 


$. 


Tea Standing 
: tius h. 
e 
ГА Brun 
NA CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 203 
pm fi мы aa à 


DYSON LOGOS 


Map 4.4. GATEKEEPER SEAL 


GATEKEEPER CAMPAIGN THEMES 


The Gatekeepers are the remnants ofan ancient order. 
Once they saved the world. Now they are all but forgot- 
ten, and the world needs saving again. The surviving 
Gatekeepers might not have the strength to win the fight 
alone, and that's where adventurers come in. Gatekeep- 
ers can serve as patrons or advisors, providing crucial 
information or setting the adventurers on the proper 
path. They can also come to the rescue of adventurers 
who are close to being overwhelmed by mind flayers or 
dolgaunts. 

At certain points in a campaign, the Gatekeepers 
might seem to be villains. The druids' mission to protect 
their seals and to oppose the rise of aberrations is of 
the utmost importance. Anyone who threatens a seal 
or assists the machinations of the daelkyr, no matter 
how unwittingly, risks making relentless enemies in the 
Gatekeepers. A simple shift in circumstances, such as 
the death of a noble that causes ownership of a trackless 
parcel of land to change hands, could bring the charac- 
ters into sudden conflict with the Gatekeepers. 


GATEKEEPER ADVENTURE HOOKS 


Gatekeepers can be at the center of any number of po- 
tential stories. The Gatekeeper Adventure Hooks table 
offers some options. 


GATEKEEPER ADVENTURE HOOKS 


d8 Adventure Hook 

1 While pursuing rumors of lycanthrope activity, the 
characters discover a good-aligned werebear that is 
working with the Gatekeepers to stop an incursion 
from Khyber. 

2 A Gatekeeper seal in the form of a stone tablet falls 
into the characters’ hands. They must return the seal 
to the Gatekeepers before its magic fades. 

3  Alogging operation is moving close to the area pro- 
tected by a seal, and the party must convince the 
loggers to relocate before their work touches off a 
conflict with the Gatekeepers. 

4 Working with an agent of the Chamber, the Gatekeep- 
ers are convinced the actions of the characters will 
bring а daelkyr one step closer to freedom. 

5 The characters discover evidence suggesting that the 
rituals performed by the local Gatekeepers are weak- 
ening their seal, not empowering it. 

6 Pilgrims traveling through a forest draw the attention 
of Gatekeepers, who think they are spies sent to sabo- 
tage the nearby seal. 

7 . One of the kidnapped victims who was rescued from 
a marauding band of aberrations turns out to be a 
Gatekeeper initiate. 

8 Тһе adventurers are sent to the Mror Holds to investi- 
gate the activity of Dyrrn the Corruptor and uncover a 
daelkyr cult among the dwarves. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


GOBLINOIDS 
(HEIRS OF DHAKAAN) 


War drums are sounding in the depths beneath Dar- 
guun. Bugbear champions hone their adamantine 
greatswords, and hobgoblin dirge singers call the le- 
gions to battle. The warriors of Dhakaan are preparing 
to reclaim their stolen lands, and the nations of Khor- 
vaire have no idea what's coming. 

During the struggle with the daelkyr, some Dhakaani 
leaders saw the madness spreading among their people 
and knew it would destroy their civilization. They led 
their forces into deep subterranean chambers and sev- 
ered all contact with the outside world. In recent years 
these ancient clans—who call themselves the Kech 
Dhakaan ("bearers of [the traditions of] Dhakaan")— 
have finally returned to the surface. 

The Dhakaani are utterly devoted to war, matched 
only by the Valenar elves in their devotion to the martial 
arts. Their weaponsmiths and armorers know tech- 
niques that even the artificers of House Cannith cannot 
duplicate. Throughout the Last War, no nation faced any 
other force that had the skill and resources of the resur- 
gent Dhakaani. 

But there is one obstacle to their rise: the Heirs of 
Dhakaan have no emperor. The goblinoids are divided 
into clans, and each clan, or kech, believes its leader has 
the right to control all the others. And so the champions 
of Dhakaan continuously compete with each other to 
prove their right to rule. The Kech Sharaat (Bladebear- 
ers) believe that leadership is best achieved through 
force of arms. The Kech Volaar (Wordbearers) believe 
that knowledge is the greater weapon, and they seek to 
recover artifacts and weapons that were lost when the 
empire fell. These and several less influential clans are 
competing for overall leadership, while the spies and as- 
sassins of the Khesh'dar (Silent Folk) remain neutral in 
the struggle, gathering information on the modern world 
and serving every clan. 

At the moment, the Heirs of Dhakaan are maintaining 
alow profile. They fight most of their battles under- 
ground, and occasionally dispatch small squads to carry 
out missions on the surface. Humans usually don't know 
enough about goblins to tell the difference between the 
Dhakaani and the people of Darguun. The truth of the 
matter is gradually spreading within Darguun, but no 
one yet realizes the power of the force that lies beneath 
their nation. 


THE HEIRS AND THE WAR 


The Last War caused the Heirs of Dhakaan to finally 
stir and emerge from their deep vaults. They recognize 
that humanity has been weakened by its self-inflicted 
wounds. The rise of Darguun and the proliferation 

of that nation's Ghaal'dar mercenaries enables the 
Dhakaani to move around Khorvaire without drawing 
undue attention. And the Mourning, ultimately, demon- 
strated that the races of the Five Nations could not 

be trusted with ruling Khorvaire. It was time for the 
Dhakaani to return and subjugate the other races to 
their firm hand once again. 


The Heirs of Dhakaan are devoted to war, with an 
unmatched focus on sheer martial skill. Their weap- 
onry and artillery are of the highest quality, and they 
place their trust in strength of arms, not on magic. The 
Dhakaani don't worship gods, and no clerics or paladins 
are among them. The Kech Volaar have picked up some 
of the elven traditions of wizardry, and all clans have 
bards known as duur’kala (dirge singers), but in general 
the Dhakaani don't rely on magic on the battlefield. 


DHAKAANI FORT 


All across Darguun, the Heirs of Dhakaan are reclaim- 
ing surviving remnants of their fallen empire, and they 
even cautiously range out into surrounding nations. You 
can use Map 4.3: Ruined Dhakaani Fort as the basis for 
a fort that has been reclaimed by the Heirs, which would 
be in better repair and guarded by competent troops. 


DHAKAANI FORT ADVENTURES 
The Dhakaani Fort Adventures table describes some 
tasks that could bring characters to such a place. 


DHAKAANI FoRT ADVENTURES 


d10 Adventure Goal 

1 Steal an ancient magic weapon from the fort's 
commander. 

2 Bringa treaty proposal to the fort, in hopes of having 
it conveyed to the leader of the occupying kech. 

3 Gather intelligence about the force occupying the fort 
in preparation for a raid. 

4 Rescue prospectors who were taken prisoner and 
held in the fort's dungeons. 

5 Steal the fort commander's notes on troop move- 
ments in the surrounding areas. 

6 Lead a strike force against the fort to drive out or de- 
stroy the occupying Dhakaani. 

7 Rush to support a small squad besieging the fort 
before Dhakaani reinforcements arrive and break the 
siege. 

8 Assassinate or kidnap the advisor to the fort's 
commander. 

9 Work with the occupying commander to discover the 
spy from another kech in their ranks. 

10 Break a siege by Darguun goblinoids that has trapped 
the characters' Dhakaani allies within the fort. 


GOBLINOID NPCs 


Characters who approach the Heirs of Dhakaan expect- 
ing a ragtag band of goblinoids are in for a rude awaken- 
ing. The Heirs of Dhakaan are well equipped and fight 
with precision and efficiency, coordinating their efforts 
to eliminate spellcasters and other obvious threats. 
Dhakaani squads are utterly devoted to their kech 
leaders and their empire. All are bound by the principles 
of muut and atcha (honor and duty), but they believe 
that humans and their kin don't deserve to be treated 
with honor. All the goblinoid races work together among 
the Dhakaani, and all are convinced of the superiority 
of their culture. When forced to fight other Dhakaani, 


they will usually spare the lives of their opponents, but 
against all other adversaries—including other gobli- 
noids—they are ruthless. 


GoBLiNOID NPCs 


d8 NPC 

1 A hobgoblin bard ofthe Kech Volaar leads an elite 
team of dungeon delvers to recover Dhakaani arti- 
facts from ancient ruins. 

2 Aremarkably intelligent goblin studying at Arcanix 
or Morgrave is actually a Khesh'dar spy identifying 
tomes of arcane knowledge worth stealing. 

3  AbDhakaani strike force assaults a museum or a 
noble's private holdings, reclaiming goblin artifacts 
"pillaged" from ruins. These relics could be part of 
an eldritch machine, or could simply have important 
ceremonial value. 

4  Agoblin spy stirs up trouble among the city goblins in 
a major city, using tales oftheir former glory to incite 
them to violence. 

5  Astring of mysterious bombings are actually the work 
of Dhakaani sappers testing the strength of modern 
fortifications. 

6  AbDhakaani strike force attacks a Deneith outpost 
built atop a goblin ruin. Are the goblins just angry 
about the desecration, or is something hidden be- 
neath the outpost? 

7 A bugbear of the Kech Sharaat, to test the mettle of 
the adventurers, engages them in a series of guerrilla 
attacks as they are traveling through the wilderness. 

8 А hobgoblin warlock seeks to harness the power of 
the daelkyr or the fiendish overlords to win the impe- 
rial crown for her kech. 


GOBLINOID CAMPAIGN THEMES 


The Heirs of Dhakaan are a substantial military 
threat. The goblins can clash with adventurers while 
they are exploring ancient ruins, or they can launch 
strikes against outposts or vaults the adventurers are 
guarding. Whatever the Dhakaani do, it should be part 
of a mission objective. Is the goal to strengthen their 
kech? Gather information about the enemy? Recover 
Dhakaani relics? 

Initially the Dhakaani should be mysterious: remark- 
ably skilled goblins that fight to the death or disappear 
into the shadows. The characters might logically as- 
sume that they are Darguul mercenaries. Over time, the 
adventurers should learn more about them and realize 
that they are the advance force of a great army. 

The Heirs of Dhakaan can remain an enigmatic 
foe, encountered only when they attack. But a group 
of adventurers could come to earn the respect of their 
Dhakaani foes and learn more about the enemy. Per- 
haps a group of adventurers chooses to respect the 
Dhakaani's claim to an artifact, surrendering it willingly. 
If they do so, they could find out more about the goblins 
and the struggle for leadership among the clans. Of all 
the goblins, the Kech Volaar are the most interested in 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 205 


understanding the people of Khorvaire; if there's any 
chance to negotiate a peace with Dhakaan, it would be 
with this clan. 

As far as the goblins are concerned, humans stole 
their lands, pillaged their tombs, and enslaved their 
descendants. The Dhakaani aren't evil, but they believe 
humanity to be brutal and cruel, people without muut or 
atcha. Faced with an adventurer wielding a magic sword 
taken from a Dhakaani ruin, the Heirs of Dhakaan are 
rightfully angry and violent in their response to this 
tomb robber. 


HEIRS OF DHAKAAN 
ADVENTURE Hooks 


The Heirs of Dhakaan Adventure Hooks table of- 
fers some options for kicking off stories that involve 
the Dhakaani. 


HEIRS OF DHAKAAN ADVENTURE HOOKS 


d12 Adventure Hook 

Т A scout patrol has gone missing near the border of 
Darguun. 

2 A mining tunnel has collapsed, revealing a network 
of caverns leading into Khyber. The Heirs of Dhakaan 
are waiting in the darkness and decide to strike first. 

3  Asquad ofgoblins attempts to steal back spoils of 
a recent adventure, cursing the characters for being 
grave robbers. 

4 Alone hobgoblin warrior stands at the gates of a 
town, intent on dueling the mercenary captain who 
slew their brother. The warrior has already killed ten 
soldiers that tried to remove them. 

5 Race against a Dhakaani force to recover an ancient 
artifact from a ruin. 

6 Defend a series of temples against Dhakaani raiders 
targeting these “houses of false gods.” 

7 Explorers discover a fragment of an ancient Dhakaani 
song that seems to tell of the true heir of Dhakaan. 
The complete lyrics might settle the question of 
succession. 

8 Тһе Dhakaani begin kidnapping warforged so that 
their artificers can learn how to make their own con- 
struct soldiers. 

9 In a sacked human settlement, a battle between two 
opposing forces of goblinoids breaks out. Which side 
was the cause ofthe destruction? 

10 The Kech Sharaat send emissaries to a nearby city 
with a simple message: abandon the town within one 
week, or die. 

11 Goblin scouts have been spotted far from Darguun, 
moving with uncharacteristic coordination and 
precision. 

12 A representative ofthe Kech Volaar approaches the 
characters to request their help in confronting their 
rivals to maintain the balance of power among the 
Dhakaani. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


THE LAST WAR 


Khorvaire is still rising from the ashes of the Last War. 
The consequences of a century of conflict can’t be offset 
with a single treaty. The Last War didn’t end because 
people resolved their differences, and it didn’t end with 
a victor. It ended when the Mourning destroyed Cyre, 
because people were afraid that the war itself was the 
cause of that cataclysm, and that continuing the strug- 
gle could doom them all. Many are sick of the endless 
conflict and embrace the peace. But just as many yearn 
to finish what their ancestors started, and others see po- 
tential profit for themselves in war. Some leaders focus 
on healing the lingering wounds of the conflict, while 
others work to ensure that their people will have an 
edge when fighting begins anew. 

The Last War is one of the primary themes of Eber- 
ron. When developing an adventure in Khorvaire, 
consider how the lingering impact of the war could 
affect the story. Some element of the war could drive 
the entire adventure; the heroes could be tasked with 
recovering a relic lost in the war, or capturing a fugitive 
war criminal. But it can also be a background note that 
simply adds flavor to a story. If the adventure features a 
group of bandits, perhaps they’re deserters, which can 
be all the more interesting if they once served in the 
army of the same nation as one of the player characters. 

This section looks at the different ways that the Last 
War can influence an adventure. 


PERSONAL IMPACT 


As players develop characters in an Eberron campaign, 
you can work with them to determine the role that the 
war played in their background. Here are a few topics 
for conversation: 


Military Service. Did the character fight in the war? If 
so, which nation did they serve and what role did they 
fill? If more than one of the characters fought in the 
war, did they serve together (or as allies) or fight on 
opposing sides? Military service can be the basis of a 
strong connection for two or more characters. 

Civilian Life. If the character is from one of the Five Na- 
tions and didn't fight in the war, how and why did they 
remain on the sidelines? Did they oppose the war? Did 
they do something to avoid conscription, or was there 
areason they were considered unsuitable for service? 

Personal Loss. What did the characters lose during the 
war? Did members of their family die, and if so, how? 
Was the village they grew up in destroyed, and if so, 
who was responsible? If the characters are from Cyre, 
they have lost their nation. Do they have any loved 
ones left? Did they spend time in a refugee camp or in 
the outpost of New Cyre in Breland? Do they support 
Prince Oargev as the leader of Cyre, or do they have 
other ideas for the nation's future? 


For example, when an Aundairan player character 
meets a group of Eldeen druids, it's an opportunity to 
exploit the bad blood between Aundair and the Eldeen 
Reaches and to determine if this interaction has any 
personal relevance to the character. If a player character 
has the soldier background, you can introduce an NPC 


as a former comrade and work out the details with the 
player on the spot. The Personal Impact table provides 
ideas for plot hooks that could directly involve a player 
character in a scenario. 


PERSONAL IMPACT 


d6 Impact 

1 A former comrade-in-arms asks a player character for 
help. 

2 One of the adventurers is from a place destroyed 
during the war; refugees from that location ask for 
their help. 

3 One of the characters served with the villain during 
the war, and the villain betrayed them or their nation. 

4 The villain was the cruel commander of a camp where 
one of the characters was held as a prisoner of war. 

5 One of the adventurers made a promise to a comrade 
during the war, and achieving the goal of the adven- 
ture will fulfill that promise. 

6 The adventure revolves around something one of the 
characters saw during the war: a powerful weapon, an 
unusual battlefield, or a unique warforged. 


BITTER GRIEVANCES 


Alliances shifted during the war, and almost every na- 
tion has grievances with every other one. Some of these 
postwar feuds rage more fiercely than others. One of 


these sources of tension could play a role in a charac- 
ter's back story, the plot of an adventure, or the reactions 
of an NPC. Although the nations are afraid to return to 
all-out war, any of these feuds could escalate. 


AUNDAIR AND THE ELDEEN REACHES 

Forty years ago, the farmers of western Aundair joined 
with the druids of the Towering Woods in seceding from 
the kingdom and founding the Eldeen Reaches. Most 
Aundairians consider this an unforgivable act of treason 
committed at a time of national weakness. The Reach- 
ers say their actions were precipitated by the neglect 
and corruption of the Aundairian nobles. Now that the 
war is over, many Aundairians believe Queen Aurala 
should reclaim the Eldeen Reaches, whether through 
diplomacy or force. 


BRELAND AND DROAAM 

Monstrous raiders from the western wilderness have 
plagued Breland for centuries. A decade ago, the 
Daughters of Sora Kell united the scattered warlords 
of the region under the flag of Droaam. Furious clashes 
erupted between Breland and Droaam, centering on 
the fortress of Orcbone and Brelish settlers in the west. 
Breland led the opposition to recognizing Droaam as a 
nation under the Treaty of Thronehold, and some Brel- 
ish believe King Boranel should take dramatic action to 
end this threat. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 207 


208 


CYRE AND THE WORLD 

Cyrans maintain that they alone were in the right during 
the Last War, which began when the other nations 
refused to acknowledge the Cyran queen's rightful 
claim to the throne of Galifar. Proud until the end, Cyre 
clashed with all the other nations. Now Cyre is de- 
stroyed, and Cyran refugees everywhere are dependent 
on the kindness of their former enemies. But many of 
those people believe that Cyre deserves no mercy, and 
that the refugees should be treated as enemy combat- 
ants rather than offered charity and compassion. 


KARRNATH AND THRANE 

The enmity between these two nations runs far deeper 
and longer than what was wrought by the Last War. 
Thrane is the bastion of the Church of the Silver Flame, 
while Karrnath resorted to necromancy in the course of 
the war. Thranes accuse Karrns of being morally bank- 
rupt; Karrns say that the Thranes are arrogant and na- 
ive. This long-standing rivalry led to intense conflict in 
the early days of the war, and it only grew worse. When 
Thrane became a theocracy, Karrns seized on this act 
as proof that the nation had abandoned the traditions 

of Galifar. When Karrnath integrated undead into its 
armies, Thrane swore it would never be at peace with 
those who would use such foul magic. Both nations have 
accepted the terms of the Treaty of Thronehold, and the 
Karrnathi king has forsworn the creation of new undead 
soldiers, but the treaty has done nothing to ease the en- 
mity between the two. 


THALIOST 

The ancient city of Thaliost was once part of Aundair, 
and it has many proud ties to the history of that nation. 
It was seized by Thrane during the Last War, and the 
Treaty of Thronehold ratified its occupation of the 
place. Thrane placed an Aundairian archbishop, Solgar 
Dariznu, in charge of the city, and it has become a haven 
for Aundairian followers of the Silver Flame. But many 
of its citizens consider themselves to be Aundairians, 
and many prominent citizens of Aundair are putting 
great pressure on Queen Aurala to retake the city. The 
tension has been exacerbated by Archbishop Dariznu, 
who has taken brutal action to suppress Aundairian op- 
position to Thrane’s occupation of the city. 


VALENAR 

The elves of Valenar have broken the terms of the Treaty 
of Thronehold on several occasions. They regularly 
antagonize their neighbors, raiding and provoking ev- 
eryone in reach of their war bands; some independent 
war bands have even crossed the Talenta Plains to raid 
across the borders of Karrnath and Q’barra. High King 
Vadallia insists that these are the actions of individual 
soldiers, but he refuses to take action against the perpe- 
trators. Some scholars believe Vadallia and the Valenar 
are trying to provoke a full-scale conflict—by the stric- 
tures of their religion they don’t want to be conquerors, 
but they want a powerful enemy to attack their nation. If 
this hypothesis is true, they might continue to escalate 
their activity until Karrnath or another powerful nation 
is forced to react. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


Though the Valenar regularly raid their neighbors, 
these attacks rarely target civilians. The elves aren't 
interested in wealth or territory; they are looking for 
challenging battles. They might attack military outposts, 
patrols, adventurers, or other brigands—any force that 
seems like it could put up a good fight. 


EVERYDAY IMPACT 


There's no place in Khorvaire that escaped the Last War 
unscathed. Even villages that were never attacked lost 
their children to conscription or suffered from short- 
ages. Some towns far from the front lines suffered dam- 
age from long-distance magic weapons or terror attacks. 
Any time you are setting a scene, you could add some 
element that speaks to the ongoing impact of the Last 
War. The Everyday Impact table offers some suggestions 
for these elements. 


EVERYDAY IMPACT 


d6 Impact 

1  Asupply shortage is causing tension in the commu- 
nity. This shortage could be of a basic commodity 
(such as bread), a luxury item (such as wine), or an 
important service. 

2 Demonstrators in the streets are protesting against 
refugees or warforged, urging a return to war, com- 
plaining about shortages or neglect, or drawing atten- 
tion to the needs of veterans, refugees, or others. 

3 A disabled veteran shares war stories while begging 
for copper. 

4  Acrowd has gathered around two people engaged in 
a heated discussion about the war. 

5  Astreet vendor is selling unusual souvenirs from the 
war—pieces of a warforged titan, shards of an airship, 
and other curiosities. 

6 А memorial has been raised to commemorate mem- 
bers of the community lost in the war. 


THE COLD WAR 


No one knows what caused the Mourning, and the fear 
of repeating this cataclysm—not the Treaty of Throne- 
hold—is what keeps potential combatants at bay. No one 
is happy with the outcome of the war, but no one dares 
to continue fighting, since all believe that renewed full- 
scale conflict could result in utter destruction. That said, 
the general belief is that the mystery of the Mourning 
will eventually be solved. Either someone will learn how 
to control the power that caused the Mournland, or the 
precise cause will be determined and people will be able 
to tell if it still poses a threat. 

Many people truly hope that the Last War will live up 
to its name forever. But others prepare for more war 
even as they pursue peace. First and foremost, every 
nation wants to unravel the mystery of the Mourning; a 
nation that could learn how to use this power would be 
unstoppable. Other forces are searching for weapons or 
forgotten powers that could turn the tide if another war 
breaks out. Adventurers could find themselves racing 
through ruins in Xen'drik, trying to destroy a weapon of 


the ancient giants before the Emerald Claw can claim it 
for Karrnath and Lady Штаггоу. 

The characters can stumble into a web of intrigue 
without seeing the sticky strands. Perhaps a patron 
hires the adventurers to transport what seems to be an 
ordinary backpack full of goods, and they don't realize 
that it has a secret magical compartment until enemy 
spies come looking for whatever is inside it. Or a dying 
spy presses an amulet into the hand of one of the ad- 
venturers, saying, "The fate of Breland depends on you 
getting this to Boranel. Don't trust anyone!" Assuming 
the adventurers care about the fate of Breland, they're 
pressed into an urgent adventure that has implications 
they might not see or understand. 


PLAYING DURING THE LAST WAR 


In your campaign, you might want to take a look back at 
the war as it unfolds. Setting an adventure during the 
Last War puts the characters in a tumultuous time of 
political intrigue, tenuous alliances, and brutal conflicts. 
Consider these ways to make the Last War a present 
reality in your campaign: 


The players create new characters who live during a 
specific phase of the war. These characters could be 
figures of legend whose great deeds are known to the 
present-day characters, or they could be unknowns 
caught up in events much larger than themselves. In 
either case, the adventure they undertake can set the 
stage for events in the “present day” of your campaign. 
* You might run an introductory session or flashback 
set during the waning years of the war, bringing the 
characters' backgrounds to life. Maybe the charac- 
ters are all part of the same unit in the war, or they 
might be enemies forced to cooperate when disaster 
strikes. Are the characters participants in a memora- 
ble battle? Do they take actions they'll later regret? Do 
they make a bitter enemy who comes back to haunt 
them years later, when the campaign continues in the 
present day? 

A magical phenomenon might send the characters 
back in time, putting them in the middle of the 
conflict. Are they transported there to learn some- 
thing? Toalter the course of history? Or are they 

just stranded in a twisted time stream? How will 
they escape the horrors of the war and get back to 
their own time? 


VILLAINS OF THE LAST WAR 


Just as adventurers are shaped by their experiences in 
the Last War, villains often carry the physical and men- 
tal scars of the conflict. When developing the details of a 
villain's background, consider the following options. 


WAR CRIMINAL 

What horrific actions did the villain take during the 
Last War? Did they massacre civilians? Betray their 
comrades or their nation? A brilliant artificer might 
have designed arcane weapons that violated the rules 
of engagement. A Karrnathi bone knight (see chapter 
6) could have overseen a camp where prisoners of war 
were used as subjects in necromantic experiments. 


Is the villain infamousfor their crimes, or yet to be 
exposed for what they did? Do they believe that their 
crimes were justified? Is the criminal protected by 
powerful people in their nation, or reviled by the people 
they served? 


GRIM INSPIRATION 

Something the villain saw or experienced during the 
war made a lasting impression that still drives them 
today. Perhaps their family was killed in a senseless 
attack, and everything they are doing is motivated by a 
desire to avenge this loss. Maybe they think that they 
were betrayed by their own nation. Perhaps they were 
caught in the Mourning, and even though they somehow 
survived it, what they lived through drove them insane. 


FORMER COMRADE 

A former comrade-in-arms can be a useful hookto draw 
adventurers into a story—or a compelling villain. Which 
one of the characters served alongside the villain? Were 
they equals, or was one of higher rank? Did the villain 
abandon or betray the adventurer, or was it the adven- 
turer who betrayed the villain? This option can be espe- 
cially interesting for a warforged villain; while searching 
for their own identity following the war, they have em- 
braced a dark path. If you use this motif, it’s important 
to develop the story in conjunction with the players 
whose characters are connected to the villain—either 
establishing crucial details ahead of time, or developing 
them together by way of a flashback. 


WAR-TORN SURVIVOR 

At first meeting, the villain of an adventure might seem 
to be a person of honor, or at the least a hardscrabble 
survivor doing what they think is right after surviving 
the war. The villain might have experienced some of the 
same things in the war that the characters did, making 
it easy for the characters to understand the villain’s 
point of view—or at least to harbor a sliver of doubt that 
makes them think twice before rushing to condemn the 
villain. The War-Torn Villains table suggests twists you 
can add to villains mentioned elsewhere in this chapter 
to give them and their schemes a tie to the Last War. 


War-TORN VILLAINS 

de  Villain 

1  Thevillain doesn't know (or refuses to believe) that 
the war has ended. 

2  Thevillain experienced horrors during the war and 
targets the people they believe to be responsible. 

3 The villain is using the skills they learned during the 
war to target war profiteers or national leaders. 

4 — The villain is a former military commander who com- 
mands soldiers who served under them in the war. 

5 The villain is an ex-soldier with a grudge against citi- 
zens of a former enemy nation. 

6  Thevillain wants the power to restart, and "properly" 
finish, the war. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 209 


x ШЕ. 


1 square = 5 feet 


Fortress Cellars 
& Dungeons 


Мар 4.5: Fortiriep Outpost 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


a 
9 
o 
9 
5 


FORTIFIED OUTPOST 


Military outposts across Khorvaire serve a variety 

of purposes during and after the war: rest stops for 
platoons on the move, garrisons for inactive troops, 
armories where weapons are stored, staging points for 
scouts and rangers who keep an eye on nearby enemy 
movements, and defensive fortifications meant to protect 
passes, bridges, or other key strategic locations. In an 
adventure, virtually anything can happen in or around it. 


FORTIFIED OUTPOST FEATURES 

This outpost, as shown on map 4.5, is a simple building 
holding barracks, officers’ quarters, and storage areas 
encased within multiple rings of fortification. A nor- 
mal approach to the inner compound involves passing 
through one of two gate houses (protected by arrow 
slits and murder holes), crossing an open courtyard 
(with more arrow slits and defenders on the rooftop 
above), passing through another small gate area, and 
traversing the training yard before finally reaching the 
lone entrance. 

An enormous magic weapon akin to a ballista is 
mounted atop the outpost and supported by a massive 
stone column. Depending on the outpost, this weapon 
might launch ballista bolts with tremendous force 
and speed, expel surges of lightning, hurl fireballs, or 
otherwise send devastating munitions at approach- 
ing enemies. 

A basement area is dedicated to storage, including 
holding cells to contain prisoners of war while they wait 
to be transported to dedicated prison camps. 


FORTIFIED OUTPOST ADVENTURES 
The Fortified Outpost Adventures table provides some 
possibilities for adventures set in such a location. 


FORTIFIED OUTPOST ADVENTURES 


d8 Adventure Premise 

Т The Order of the Emerald Claw has seized the outpost 
and is raising a legion of undead soldiers. 

2 The outpost is said to be haunted by the vengeful 
spirit of a former commander who was slain by their 
own troops. 

3  Atunnel beneath the outpost leads to a sealed portal 
to Xoriat. 

4 The outpost borders the Mournland, where mutant 
monstrosities emerge from the mists. 

5 When a force of aberrations arises from Khyber, this 
abandoned outpost is the adventurers’ only chance to 
stop their advance. 

6 The outpost is in a critical location, but it was dam- 
aged during the war. It needs to be protected while it 
is being restored. 

7 The outpost is located on a manifest zone linked to 
Thelanis. It has been seized by a group of fey, and the 
locals want it reclaimed. 

8 The outpost was built on the foundations of an an- 
cient goblin fortress, and treasures are rumored to lie 
buried beneath it. 


LORD OF BLADES 


Stalking the Mournland like a spectral juggernaut, the 
Lord of Blades has emerged from the turmoil of the 
Last War as asymbol that calls to all the warforged of 
Khorvaire. Regardless of what they have become, the 
warforged were created to fight and die on the orders 
of their creators. Some warforged accept their history 
for what it is and look toward the future, but others hold 
a grudge because of how they were exploited by their 
creators. Those warforged make up the followers of the 
Lord of Blades. 

The Lord of Blades preaches of an apocalyptic future 
in which the warforged will destroy or enslave the na- 
tions of flesh and blood. “We were made as weapons,” 
the Lord of Blades has declared over and over. “Let us 
be weapons! Let the nations of the land reap what they 
have sown!” 

Today, warforged roam the Mournland in service to 
the Lord of Blades, patrolling the devastated terrain 
and salvaging resources from the ashes of Cyre. Most 
of these dissidents despise creatures of flesh, and any 
meeting with outsiders usually ends in blood being 
spilled. Other disciples of the Lord of Blades launch 
attacks on targets across Khorvaire: destroying Can- 
nith workshops, killing nobles known for their abuse of 
warforged, and seizing shipments of weapons or arcane 
research to further deplete their enemy. 

To the flesh-and-blood citizens of Khorvaire, the Lord 
of Blades is a figure of terror and pain. But the war- 
forged under his sway (and some objective observers of 
other races) believe that his rage is fueled by the injus- 
tice heaped upon the warforged after their creation. The 
warforged were treated as disposable soldiers, almost 
slaves, during the war, and the postwar arguments over 
what rights the warforged should be granted—as if fun- 
damental rights were meant to be bestowed or withheld 
by political authorities—gave the warforged themselves 
no voice, as if they were still the property of their cre- 
ators. The Lord of Blades’ call to action is appealing to 
many warforged because it is grounded in legitimate 
grievances, even if the proposed action is abhorrent. 

Compared to the total number of warforged created 
and deployed in combat during the Last War, the follow- 
ers of the Lord of Blades are not especially numerous. 
His existence and message are well-known in the coun- 
tries bordering the Mournland (especially Breland), but 
less familiar in the rest of Khorvaire. Hoping to swell 
the ranks of his followers, the Lord of Blades has agents 
spreading his apocalyptic message in every city with sig- 
nificant warforged populations. 


THE LORD OF BLADES IN THE WAR 


The Lord of Blades didn’t appear in the world until after 
the Day of Mourning. Only he knows what his identity 
was before then, but many suppositions have been put 
forth. Some scholars say that he was originally a war- 
forged named Bulwark, the personal bodyguard of King 
Boranel of Breland. Others believe that he was the last 
warforged to emerge from the creation forges at Eston, 
completed in the last moments before the Mourning. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


мә 


Perhaps the most outlandish idea is that the Lord of 
Blades is not a true warforged at all. The first warforged 
were created by an artificer named Aaren d'Cannith, 
who became furious when the house used his invention 
to create weapons of war. Based on that knowledge, 
some believe Aaren transferred his consciousness into 
a warforged body so that he could personally seek ven- 
geance for the wrongs done to his children. 

In the years following the war, the Lord of Blades is 
a force to be reckoned with. The warforged are some 
of the few beings able to thrive in the desolation of the 
Mournland, so the followers of the Lord of Blades are 
building a nation of their own amid the devastation. 
They search out and scour sites that were devastated in 
the Mourning to gather lost weapons and magic, all part 
of their preparations for full-scale war against the crea- 
tures of flesh. 


WARFORGED OSSUARY 


A warforged ossuary is a former temple, crypt, or 
warehouse deep in the Mournland that now houses the 
remains of slain warforged. It is a place of honor and re- 
flection for the Lord of Blades and his followers. 


WARFORGED OSSUARY FEATURES 

The ossuary depicted in map 4.6 was once a temple, 
which has been refitted into a resting place for the Lord 
of Blades' followers. Equal parts crypt, monument, 
vault, and workshop, the ossuary serves many functions 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


for the warforged who maintain it. Other ossuaries exist 
in a variety of locations. The basic functions of these 
places remain the same, regardless of the original pur- 
pose of the structure. The Lord of Blades' warforged 
troops defend these sites with their lives. 


WARFORGED OSSUARY ADVENTURES 
The Warforged Ossuary Adventures table offers some 
reasons why characters might seek out such a place. 


WARFORGED OSSUARY ADVENTURES 


d6 Adventure Goal 

Т Rescue an artificer who is being forced to graft war- 
forged components onto the Lord of Blades’ warriors. 

2 Locate a docent (see chapter 5) carried by a warforged 
wizard who has joined up with the Lord of Blades. 

3 Capture a warforged artificer thought to be an advisor 
to the Lord of Blades, who is touring a series of ossu- 
aries and inspecting the remains. 

4 Steal a House Cannith spellbook and workshop log 
from before the Day of Mourning that is being held in 
the ossuary’s vault. 

5 Extract a warforged spy from within the Lord of 
Blades’ followers who is close to being discovered. 

6 Retrieve a Cannith schema supposedly held within the 
ossuary that tells of a process for transferring a war- 
forged consciousness from one body to another. 


ZOLTAN BOROS 


DYSON LOGOS 


1 square = 5 feet 


View Downstairs 


Buttresses 


^ 
з 


Sanctuary EET 

Workshop  Кеһаџагу 
2 SS Vaults 
eis 


Poe 


6. v Te 5. 
43-Récessed 27! 


ДЕ, 
ee Cal Nave 
| Floor (Scrap) ^| 
Lacs AUN ER Mi "y ЕЁ), 
ae — 


c3 


T. 
0 
P 
ИВ 
Ы 
© 


Mar 4.6: WARFORGED OssuARYv 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


213 


SE eme 


214 


Eu. HEEL KE 
pomme (A —— TRIBU йени SUAE S —— mr 


| 


i 


У 


THE VOICE OF 


THRANE 


DO THEY KNOW 


+++» жж ж е ж ө ө ө ж ж а ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө өө 


Against all logic and reason, people in Breland continue 
to argue that the warforged—creations of House 
Cannith, lest we forget—are living people with souls, 
deserving of the samerights as the rest of us. And yet, 
while philosophical debates rage and street protests 
grow heated, warforged who inhabit the dead land 

of Cyre continue to fight as if the war had not ended, 
launching raids out of the “dead-gray mist" to the neigh- 
boring lands—including, of course, Thrane. Proclaiming 
allegiance to something called the “Lord of Blades,” 
these warforged don’t seem to recognize the people 

of Thrane as living people with souls, so it’s hard to 
appreciate why we should treat them that way. 


ieget ortam В A tento AI А qud em semen Pe esee At a 


LORD or BLADES NPCs 


The Lord of Blades highlights the issues surrounding 
the creation of the warforged. He and his followers are 
ready antagonists, employing deadly methods in pursuit 
of their aims, but their ire isn’t born from evil. The Lord 
of Blades’ greatest desire is to ensure that his people 
havea future, but his methods are colored by his anger 
at the injustices the warforged have suffered, and in 
some cases are still being subjected to. Examples of vil- 
lains linked to the Lord of Blades appear in the Lord of 
Blades NPCs table. 


Lord or BLADES NPCs 

d6 МРС 

1 А House Cannith apprentice warforged becomes ob- 
sessed with the Lord of Blades' message, disrupting 
house operations in the hope of becoming a warrior 
in the Mournland. 

2 Awarforged druid devises diseases and poisons that 
have no effect on warforged, and starts to unleash 
them on the general populace. 

3  Awarforged ranger relentlessly hunts creatures of 
flesh in the wilderness near the Mournland. 

4  Awarforged assassin poses as a simple workshop 
assistant while exterminating those who speak out 
against the rights of the warforged. 

5 A mad artificer is trying to reactivate a destroyed war- 
forged colossus. 

6 A band ofwarforged attacks a lightning rail, intent on 
stealing something in one ofthe cargo carriages. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


— — ——— 


LORD OF BLADES CAMPAIGN THEMES 


The Lord of Blades isa charismatic leader seeking to 
incite the warforged to violence and thereby to take ven- 
geance against their former oppressors. Although low- 
level characters might not be prepared to face the Lord 
of Blades himself, they can easily encounter a squad of 
his followers anywhere on Khorvaire. 

While the Lord of Blades and his minions can be a 
straightforward foe, it’s also possible to add more depth 
to the conflict. Perhaps a squad of warforged attacks a 
foundry in Sharn. After repelling the attack, the adven- 
turers realize that the owners are mistreating the war- 
forged who work the forges. What do they do? 

Another way to explore the facets of this issue is to 
introduce a warforged supporter of the Lord of Blades 
who doesn’t engage in violence personally, such as a 
bard who moves among the warforged of a major city 
while speaking about the many abuses leveled against 
warforged. Especially if one of them is a warforged, how 
would the characters react to this individual? 

The Lord of Blades can serve as a long-term op- 
ponent, as he continue to escalate his attacks over 
the course of the campaign. While he builds up his 
stronghold in the Mournland, he is also gathering the 
components to construct eldritch machines and other 
weapons. What would happen if the Lord of Blades were 
to discover the power that caused the Mourning and un- 
leashed that power across Khorvaire? 


LORD OF BLADES 
ADVENTURE HOOKS 


The Lord of Blades Adventure Hooks table sets out 
some reasons how the characters could come in contact 
with the Lord of Blades. 


LORD OF BLADES ADVENTURE HOOKS 


d6 Adventure Hook 

1 А newly awakened docent (see chapter 5) tells its new 
owner that the Lord of Blades is the only hope for 
averting a coming catastrophe. 

2 А military officer hires the characters to retrace the 
steps of a lost scouting party into the Mournland and 
rescue the commander, who is the officer's son. 

3 Warforged go missing over the course of several 
weeks; then one resurfaces, badly damaged and 
raving about the Lord of Blades. 

4 Characters strike out into a ruin held by the Lord of 
Blades and recover a lost relic that has resurfaced in 
the possession of warforged soldiers. 

5  Awarforged accused of murdering several members 
of their mercenary company claims to have no mem- 
ory of the night in question. 

6 The characters are met by a warforged who delivers a 
written summons from the Lord of Blades himself. 


THE LORDS OF DUST 


Evil entities spawned at the dawn of time still haunt 
Eberron. The cities raised by those ancient overlords 
are now only ashes, but the Lords of Dust still dream of 
restoring their primordial dominion. These fiends bide 
their time in an inconceivably long game, sparring with 
the dragons of Argonnessen as they manipulate events 
in order to fulfill the words of the Draconic Prophecy in 
a way that will bring them victory. 

Though the Lords of Dust are mighty enough on their 
own, they serve greater masters known as the overlords 
(see chapter 6). Unfathomably powerful fiends, the over- 
lords were bound at the end of the Age of Demons by the 
power of the Silver Flame, and an overlord can be re- 
leased from this binding only if doing so can be made to 
fulfill the Draconic Prophecy. Every fiend spawned from 
Khyber owes fealty to one of these overlords. 

In many ways the Lords of Dust are a reflection of the 
Chamber. Each group is trying to steer the fulfillment 
of the Prophecy to serve its own ends. The goal of the 
Lords of Dust is to release the overlords from their 
bindings and loose them upon Eberron in a new age of 
darkness. Despite this unified goal, the Lords of Dust 
operate as an alliance of like-minded cabals rather than 
a single monolithic organization. Each cabal serves its 
particular overlord above all others, and the conditions 
that release one overlord could actually contradict those 
that would free another. 

Accomplished shapeshifters, the Lords of Dust have 
agents spread across Khorvaire. Some might wonder 
why, with all their talents, they haven't tried to conquer 
the world already. The reason is that they have no in- 
terest in ruling this world; they want to return it to the 
state of unnatural glory that existed before. Their only 
interest in humanoids races is in directing them and 
their affairs down the paths necessary to release their 
overlords; aside from that, dealing with mortals is a te- 
dious chore. 


THE LORDS OF DUST AND THE WAR 


The Lords of Dust took part in the events of the Last 
War whenever they saw opportunities to further their 
dark version of the Prophecy. It remains difficult to 
identify what events might have been manipulated by 
one of these fiends, because their schemes take so long 
to play out. Far in the future, it might become apparent 
that a seeming victory for the forces of good, or a battle 
averted that spared hundreds from death was ultimately 
the first step in an overlord's release. (For instance, a 
soldier who was otherwise fated to die in the battle that 
was avoided goes on to tempt a good-hearted priest into 
becoming corrupted.) 

In the years since the Thronehold Accords, the Lords 
of Dust continue on as they ever have, advancing one 
small step at a time. 


DEMON RUIN. 


The Lords of Dust maintain a variety of safe houses and 
sanctums across Eberron, but their most tightly bound 
locations are the ruins left behind from the Age of De- 
mons, scattered across the Demon Wastes. 


DEMON RUIN FEATURES 

Map 4.7 what a demon ruin might look like. A demon 
ruin is an echo of grandeur swathed in flame and rav- 
aged by time. Despite the rich appointments and impec- 
cable construction evident even in the broken remains 
of the building, the place carries the unmistakable air of 
anguish and torment. 


DEMON RUIN ADVENTURES 
The Demon Ruin Adventures table offers some reasons 
why characters might risk death in the Demon Wastes. 


DEMON RUIN ADVENTURES 


d4 Adventure Goal 

1 Make a desperate request for aid from a Lord of Dust 
who is, by all accounts, an enemy of the characters’ 
adversary. 

2 Escort ап innocent who is prophesied to destroy the 
Lord of Dust to the ruin, and there confront the fiend. 

3 Carry an artifact to the river of black lava that runs 
through the demon ruin, which is the only place 
where the item can be truly destroyed. 

4 Gather obsidian shards from the ruin as components 
forarare spell. 


Lorps oF Dust NPCs 


Most of the Lords of Dust are rakshasas, but any sort of 
fiend—devil, demon, or otherwise—could be part of this 
organization. Such fiends are spawned in Khyber and 
aren't actually from the Outer Planes. These fiends gen- 
erally work through a wide network of duped pawns and 
indebted servitors. 

Each overlord has a chief servant, and these leaders 
meet in the ruins of Ashtakala in the Demon Wastes. 
Chapter 6 contains statistics for the overlord Rak Tulk- 
hesh and his speaker, Mordakhesh the Shadowsword. 
The overlord Sul Khatesh is served by the rakshasa 
Hektula, also known as the First Scribe. Durastoran the 
Wyrmbreaker is the speaker of Bel Shalor, the overlord 
said to be bound in Flamekeep. 

The Lords of Dust NPCs table describes some possi- 
ble antagonists who might cross paths with adventurers. 


Lonps or Dust NPCs 
d6 МРС 

1  Avirtuous paladin is hunting and destroying those 
who might one day thwart the Lords of Dust. 

2 А possessed lord or lady spreads corruption through- 
out the noble house. 

3  Awizard who sought to accelerate their own power 
by making a dark bargain must now pay the price de- 
manded by their sinister patron. 

4  Apowerful demon has corrupted the local ruler in the 
name of its overlord. 

5 A succubus or incubus tempts a mercenary warlord to 
engage in greater and greater battles. 

6 One of the characters’ most trusted allies or servants 
turns out to be a rakshasa in disguise. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


216 


Map 4.7: DEMON RUIN 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


|" 


= 4 


Upstairs 
Suites 


Great Hall 


ij Cellar 
~~ Stairs 


1 square = 5 feet 


DYSON LOGOS 


z 
о 
2 
о 
с 
х 
© 


LORDS OF DUST CAMPAIGN THEMES 


The Lords of Dust have two basic goals. The first is to 
encourage activities that strengthen the influence of 
their overlords. Rak Tulkhesh embodies war and con- 
flict, and his minions are always eager to cause strife. 
The servants of Sul Khatesh entice cruel and selfish 
people to become warlocks, drawing mystical powers 
from their mistress. These activities won't release an 
overlord, but they help to sustain it. 

To release an overlord, the Lords of Dust must ensure 
that the Prophecy unfolds along a specific path. Often, 
following this path requires specific mortals to do spe- 
cific deeds. For example, one shred of the Prophecy 
could stipulate that King Boranel has to be killed by 
one of the characters. The Lords of Dust could easily 
kill Boranel themselves, but that wouldn't be sufficient 
to bring about the desired end; somehow, they'll have to 
trick the adventurer into doing it. 

Because the Lords of Dust so often work through 
pawns and minions, it might take a while for adventur- 
ers to realize that an apparently unconnected series of 
encounters early in a campaign are actually all part of 
the complex schemes of the Lords of Dust. These fiends 
are so devious that it is often impossible to discern a 
pattern to their actions until their plans have come to 
fruition and the connections have finally been made 
clear. (You could retroactively decide that what you in- 
tended as unconnected encounters were all part of the 
plan from the beginning!) 


LORDS OF DUST ADVENTURE HOOKS 


The Lords of Dust Adventure Hooks table pres- 
ents some ways to get the characters into a fiendish 
adventure. 


LORDS or Dust ADVENTURE HOOKS 


d6 Adventure Hook 

1 A retainer who died recently shows up again, as if 
nothing happened and with no memory of having 
"died," or of the events immediately preceding their 
supposed demise. 

2 Agents ofthe Chamber show up intent on murdering 
the characters, because their recent actions have 
unwittingly been at the behest of a Lord of Dust and 
havetwisted a portion of the Prophecy. 

3  Atrusted mentor changes their tune abruptly and be- 
gins sending the characters on unusual tasks. 

4 Everyone the characters used to deal with in town 
suddenly acts as if they've never seen the characters 
before. 

5 Increasingly vicious fiends attack the camp every few 
nights. 

6 Agents ofa Lord of Dust apologetically kidnap a char- 
acter's loved one, politely requesting that the charac- 
ter perform a series of favors to secure the hostage's 
release. 


THE MOURNLAND 


Once, Cyre shone more brightly than any ofits sibling 
nations in the kingdom of Galifar. It was the center of 
the kingdom’s wealth, a monument to its artistic and ar- 
cane achievements, and the site of great centers of learn- 
ing where preeminent masters of magic, architecture, 
and artifice taught at the forefront of their craft. It was 
also the home of House Cannith and its massive found- 
ries: some of them built on mountains or in mountains, 
some gracefully spanning canyons, and others erected 
in vast labyrinths deep underground. 

Today, this region is a festering wound across Khor- 
vaire. A wall of mist surrounds a land twisted into 
strange and terrible shapes. Cyre was once called the 
Jewel of Galifar. Now it is the Mournland. 


THE MOURNING 


No one knows the reason for what happened on 20 
Olarune 994 YK. Though it had been battered, Cyre 
stood defiant; Cyran soldiers had recently driven deep 
into Karrnathi territory and were holding their lines 
against the combined forces of Breland and Thrane. 

And then it all came to an end. 

Some say that the dead-gray mist began in Metrol, 
initially flowing out of the royal palaces of Vermishard. 
Others swear that the disaster began in the Cannith 
stronghold of Making. All that is known is that the mist 
swiftly spread across the kingdom, transforming the 
lands and creatures caught within it. Over a million 
people died in the Mourning, including nearly all of the 
inhabitants of central Cyre. The mist slowed its advance 
as it spread, and some of those in the borderlands heard 
of the disaster in time to flee. Others survived because 
they were already beyond the borders of Cyre; the mist 
stopped mere feet away from the camps of Cyran sol- 
diers holding sections of the Brelish front. And though 
the vast majority of people caught in the Mourning died, 
thousands did survive. Most have no clear memory of 
the event, and there’s no explanation for why they were 
spared. The superstitious say that these people are 
cursed, that anyone touched by the Mourning is now 
an agent of darkness. (See the book’s introduction for 
further details on how the Mourning might have affected 
characters.) 

In the days immediately following the Mourning, 
many assumed that the mist would continue to spread. 
Intense panic slowly turned to curiosity as it became 


MurATEO WORGS IN 
THE MOURNLAND 


clear that the border had stabilized. Over the last four 
years, people have ventured into the mist for many rea- 
sons. Some sought to plunder the abandoned treasures 
of the richest nation in Galifar. Others hoped to find lost 
loved ones, or some explanation for the disaster. Few of 
these explorers have returned, and those survivors all 
tell tales of a land twisted in unpredictable and inexpli- 
cable ways. 


MOURNLAND ENVIRONMENT 


The arcane energies that caused the Day of Mourning 
and that linger in the remains of Cyre are mysterious 
and unpredictable, so they can be the cause of any 
bizarre magical effect you want to bring to bear in 
your game. 

Maps of Cyrefrom before the Day of Mourning are of 
limited use nowadays. The land beyond the gray mist 
has been twisted and warped, and distances seem to 
expand and shrink even as one treks across the wastes. 
As a result, any Wisdom (Survival) check or any check 
using navigator's tools made to negotiate the Mournland 
is made with disadvantage. 

As if the difficulties of navigation weren't bad enough, 
explorers must bring their own provisions into the 
Mournland, unless they want to risk the danger of in- 
gesting tainted food and water. 


TERRAIN FEATURES 

The Day of Mourning redefined the geography of Cyre. 
The cataclysm raised land, swallowed lakes, and moved 
whole cities. In some areas, the earth has been torn and 
gouged as if by some colossal beast. In others, it has be- 
come iridescent glass or semiliquid sludge. Trees in one 
place turned to crystalline onyx; the flowers in another 
place begin eerily buzzing when touched by a breeze. 
Nothing in the Mournland is as it was; the entire land is 
a scar leftby the catastrophe of the Mourning. 

Mist Wall. The borders of the Mournland are defined 
by a wall of thick, gray mist that rises thousands of feet 
into the air and forms a canopy that hides the ruined 
realm even from above. 

The area covered by the mist is a shadowy, muffled re- 
gion devoid of life, sunlight, and sound. The wall of mist 
ranges in thickness from a few hundred feet to as much 
as five miles. Travelers who linger in the mist suffer a 
growing sense of claustrophobia and despair. It's easy 
to get lost in the impenetrable fog, and some travelers 


BRIAN HAGAN 


have wandered in circles, unable to find their way either 
through the mist or back outside it, until their food or 
water ran out or they blundered into the path of some 
mutated terror. The DC for Wisdom (Survival) checks 
to avoid getting lost in the mists is 15. (See "Becoming 
Lost” in chapter 5 of the Dungeon Master's Guide.) 

Patches of mist and less oppressive fog dot the inte- 
rior of the Mournland, but the worst effects of the mist 
are confined to the border region. 

Glowing Chasm. The northern part of the Mournland 
is dominated by a great crack in the ground that emits a 
cold purple light. This supernatural glow emanates from 
deep within the Glowing Chasm, so far beneath the sur- 
face that its source hasn't been identified. The mutated 
monsters that roam the Mournland seem drawn to this 
location, and those that spend any significant time near 
the Glowing Chasm mutate further, becoming more 
twisted and misshapen than before. 

Crimson Water. Before the Mourning, a spring in the 
eastern part of Cyre fed the Rushing River as it traced 
a short but fertile path south to Kraken Bay. The bed 
of the Rushing River is now as dry and barren as the 
rest of the Mournland, and the location of the spring 
is marked by the Crimson Water, a stagnant lake of 
blood-colored liquid. 

The shores of the Crimson Water are littered with 
the remains of animals and travelers that have strayed 
into the Mournland and sought to slake their thirst with 
a drink from the lake. At the lake bottom is the ruined 
town of Eastwood Springs, which once served as a re- 
sort for the leisure classes of Cyre. As yet, no one has 
been brave or foolish enough to search for lost treasures 
in the depths of the Crimson Water. 

Unusual Locations. At places smaller in scale than 
the major features described above, explorers in the 
Mournland might encounter any kind of terrain feature 
with bizarre magical properties. The Unusual Locations 
table offers some ideas. 


UNUSUAL LOCATIONS 
d6 Location 

1 A pool of glowing water sits in the middle of a ruined 
and abandoned village. Anyone who looks into the 
water sees brief reflections ofthe long-dead villagers 
going about their lives in harmony and joy. 

2 In the middle of the wreckage of a carnival stands a 
perfectly preserved carousel. If the carousel is ridden, 
the characters doing so see visions of Cyre as it was 
before the Last War. 

3 All the trees and plants in a forest have been turned 
to objects of glossy white stone with blood-red flecks. 

4 The battlefield before the characters contains no bod- 
ies, only the clothing and weapons of thousands of 
missing soldiers. 

5 The broken bodies of soldiers lie scattered across a 
battlefield, refusing to decompose. 

6 Тһе characters find a fallen warforged colossus 
(described later in this section). 


$ 


THE KORRANBERG 


CHRONICLE 


CATACLYSM 
IN CYRE! 


ry Dn 


A magical catastrophe of unknown origin engulfed the 
nation of Cyre yesterday, bringing a century of war to an f 
explosive climax. Surely when the children of King Jarot i 
began their squabbles over succession a hundred years i 
ago, they could not have foreseen the horror that would 
engulf the home of Queen Mishann. Our reporters are 

still sifting through accounts of what has happened, 

but it is clear at this point that beautiful Cyre, the jewel 

of Galifar's vast holdings, has disappeared behind a 

churning cloud of dead-gray mist. 


en NUTS mcntis empto MS em узур уг urn voy sry cte Pts He Stem Y ey rotten ei 


CREATURES OF THE MOURNLAND 

Many creatures were slain outright by the Mourning. 
Others were mutated as the land was transformed. 
Sometimes the result was an entirely new life form; any 
previously unseen monster could appear as a spawn of 
the Mourning. Other creatures retained a semblance of 
their original physiology while taking on some sort of al- 
teration. The Monstrous Mutations table has options for 
altering existing monsters to reflect this phenomenon. 

Most warforged were unaffected by the Mourning, and 
the race as a whole seems immune to many of the lin- 
gering effects that plague the Mournland. As such, the 
warforged who follow the Lord of Blades constitute the 
closest thing to a humanoid society that can be found in 
the Mournland. Similarly, golems and other constructs 
were largely unaffected by the Mourning. 

The Mourning had no effect on existing undead, and a 
large number of new undead came into being when the 
cataclysm occurred. Various spirits (such as ghosts and 
specters) linger near the places where they died, and the 
corpses that litter an abandoned battlefield might rise 
up to continue fighting whenever a living creature comes 
near. Some of these entities are similar to undead that 
might be encountered outside the Mournland, but others 
have alterations that are tied to the unusual manner of 
their deaths. You can use the Monstrous Mutations table 
(page 220) to generate some details. Many of the muta- 
tions on this table might increase a creature's challenge 
rating by 1 or 2. Use the guidelines in chapter 9 of the 
Dungeon Master's Guide to determine whether its chal- 
lenge rating should increase and by how much, or you 
can simply increase it by 1 or 2 as you see fit. 

Many Mournland creatures have mutations that are 
purely cosmetic and don't change their stat blocks. For 
example, one might have eyes that look like gemstones 
or might display glowing patterns on its skin or fur. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


| 220 


MONSTROUS MUTATIONS 
d6 Mutation 

1 The creature has grown to an unusual size. You сап 
either set its new size and alter its statistics using the 
guidelines in the Dungeon Master's Guide, or apply 
the enlarge effect ofthe enlarge/reduce spell to it. 

2 The creature has developed magical camouflage. It 
gains proficiency in the Stealth skill, and it has the 
Chameleon Skin trait: it has advantage on Dexterity 
(Stealth) checks made to hide. 

3  Thecreature's body has been infused with one kind 
of energy: acid, cold, fire, or lightning (your choice, or 
determine randomly). Its melee attacks deal an extra 
1d6 damage of that type, and it has the Elemental 
Body trait: a creature that touches it or hits it with a 
melee attack while within 5 feet of it takes 5 (1410) 
damage ofthat type. You can adjust these damage 
numbers to suit the creature's challenge rating. 

4 The creature has the Magic Resistance trait: it has 
advantage on saving throws against spells and other 
magical effects. 

5 The creature has a supernatural ability to heal its 
wounds. It has the Regeneration trait: it regains hit 
points at the start of its turn equal to the maximum 
value of one of its Hit Dice. If it takes acid or fire 
damage, this trait doesn't function at the start of the 
creature's next turn. (A particular creature might be 
susceptible to different damage types.) The creature 
dies only if it starts its turn with O hit points and 
doesn't regenerate. 

6 The creature has two heads. If it has a bite attack, it 
can use Multiattack as an action to make two bite 
attacks. (If it already has Multiattack, it adds a bite 
attack to its attack routine.) It also gains the Two 
Heads trait: it has advantage on Wisdom (Percep- 
tion) checks and on saving throws against being 
blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened, stunned, and 
knocked unconscious. 


MAGICAL EFFECTS 

The catastrophe of the Mourning altered more than the 
landscape and living creatures. The devastation caused 
localized alterations in the way magic functions. In 
some places, magic barely functions, or certain magical 
functions are warped. In other places, spells persist past 
the instant of their casting and start behaving as if they 
were independent, living creatures. 

А common misunderstanding about the Mournland is 
that healing spells refuse to work. The fact is that heal- 
ing spells are impeded within the dead-gray mist, and 
occasionally in other areas, making it harder for some- 
one to cast them effectively. Because so few expeditions 
make it far past the mist, the inability to heal is widely 
assumed to be a property of the Mournland as a whole. 

The Environmental Effects table provides suggestions 
for weird magic that might pervade a small or large area 
of the Mournland. Effects might shift from day to day or 
even hour to hour. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS 
d8 Effect 

1 Healing spells are impeded here. Any spell that re- 
stores hit points does so as if it were cast at a level 
one lower than the spell slot expended. A spell cast 
using a Ist-level slot restores no hit points. 

2 A character who casts a spell must make a Constitu- 
tion saving throw against the character's own spell 
save DC. On a failed save, the character takes psychic 
damage equal to the spell's level and gains one level 
of exhaustion. 

3 Апу Medium humanoid that dies in the area reani- 
mates as a zombie at the start of its next turn. The 
zombie is under the DM's control. 

4 The area is affected by a silence spell. 

Each creature that enters the area is affected by an 
enlarge/reduce spell, with an equal chance for each ef- 
fect. The effect lasts until the creature leaves the area. 

6 The pull of gravity is lessened. Creatures can jump 
twice the normal distance in any direction, and every- 
thing effectively weighs half its actual weight. 

7  Allcreatures are linked to every other creature in the 
area as if by the telepathy spell. 

8  Acreature that casts a spell of 1st level or higher in 
thearea rolls on the Wild Magic Surge table in chap- 
ter 3 ofthe Player's Handbook. 


SITES AND RUINS 


Ofall the bizarre and horrific spectacles of the Mourn- 
land, perhaps the greatest tragedy is represented by 

the ruins of the once-glittering cities of Cyre. Some 
have been reduced to rubble, while others are eerily 
preserved, devoid of life but otherwise unharmed. In 
some of them, treasures left behind by the former inhab- 
itants await discovery, and many people across Khor- 
vaire are eager to get their hands on such spoils for a 
wide variety of reasons. 


BATTLEFIELDS AND THE FIELD ОЕ RUINS 
Cyre was the site of incessant battles during the Last 
War, from the first extended campaign—the siege of 
Eston in 895 YK—to the running battle on the Saerun 
Road that was cut short when the Mourning occurred. 
Battlefields across the Mournland, both ancient and 
recent, stand like open graves as evidence of the horrors 
of the war. In some places, armies that were fighting on 
the Day of Mourning became stone statues anchored in 
position. Others were crystallized or reduced to ash. 

On the Field of Ruins—around the Saerun Road in the 
southwest part of the Mournland, where allied forces 
of Thrane and Breland battled an outnumbered Cyran 
army on the Day of Mourning—the fallen soldiers are 
preserved just as they fell, with no sign of rot or decay. 
Thousands upon thousands of corpses lie scattered 
across the field, facedown in the dirt or staring lifelessly 
at the gray sky. Even seasoned bands of treasure hunt- 
ers are loath to enter the Field of Ruins. 


METROL 


ESTON 

House Cannith was born in Eston, and the house's la- 
bors transformed the city into a place of wonders. Clock- 
work birds perched and sang in silvery trees covered in 
steel bark. Skycoaches carried smiths and magewrights 
from forge to forge, and an iridescent dome protected 
the city from storms and harsh winds. On the proving 
grounds of the Cannith creation forges, cadres of new- 
born warforged learned the combat skills that would 
prepare them for active duty. 

Eston began as a successful mining settlement, 
extracting iron and rare ores from the nearby hills. 
Drawing on these resources, the Cannith artificers in 
Eston spent decades researching all sorts of artificial 
creatures, which eventually gave rise to the warforged. 

Because of these wonders, Eston is an irresistible at- 
traction for treasure hunters hoping to access the vaults 
of House Cannith. Reports suggest, however, that it has 
become a strange and deadly place. It's said that the city 
is overrun by living spells. In addition to the remnants of 
damaging spells (see “Living Spells” in chapter 6), there 
are stranger phenomena: living continual flames that 
crawl along the streets, cling to lampposts, and flee from 
strangers, and living scrying spells that shift and shim- 
mer, displaying distant scenes on their amorphous skin. 

Eston was renowned for its clockwork menagerie and 
its steel gardens, a showcase that chronicles House 
Cannith's centuries of work developing constructs and 
homunculi. These creatures have been twisted by the 
Mourning and have become deadly monsters. Stories 
tell of an enormous gorgon golem, of razor-winged 
swarms of silver songbirds, and many other equally 
strange things. 


MAKING AND THE GLASS PLATEAU 

Many people believe that the city of Making was at the 
epicenter of whatever caused the Mourning. The cata- 
clysm reshaped the terrain around the city, creating the 
great highland formation known as the Glass Plateau. 

The Glass Plateau is mostly smooth and flat, though 
jagged spikes and spires jut up from the ground in 
seemingly random places. The central portion of the 
highland plain is obsidian, and bursts of fiery light can 
sometimes be seen in its dark depths. Toward the edges 
of the plateau, the glass becomes lighter in color and 
more transparent, appearing almost pale white along 
the jagged cliffs at the edge. Nothing grows on the plain 
of glass, and few creatures haunt its jagged peaks and 
flat expanse. 

The ruins of Making still peek through the obsidian 
flats of the Glass Plateau. Those who believe that the 
Mourning started here also expect that Making is where 
the mystery of its origin will be unraveled. A secret 
Cannith facility is supposed to lie in the city's subterra- 
nean depths. 


METROL 

This city wasonce the capital of Cyre. Now it lies empty, 
seemingly waiting along the Cyre River for its people to 
return. Parts of Metrol have been shattered, their build- 
ings crushed and tumbled by whatever force destroyed 
the nation. Other portions of the city escaped with 
superficial damage; aside from the absence of people 
and the shroud of mist that hangs over the area, it looks 
much as it did before Cyre fell. The days in Metrol are 
quiet, but the nights bring a cacophony of chaos and 
violence to the streets—at night, misshapen monsters 
emerge from their lairs to prowl and wail as they hunt 
each other for food. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES EA 


222 


MOURNLAND VILLAINS 


Few people have reason to spend time anywhere near 
the Mournland. Among the exceptions are those who 
seek to plunder the riches of lost Cyre, such as Ikar's 
Salvage (described below). These treasure hunters are 
also the kind of people who make interesting villains, 
teaming up with adventurers one day and betraying 
them the next. 

In addition to these salvagers, the Lord of Blades 
(described in more detail earlier in this chapter and 
in chapter 6) is a major force in the Mournland. The 
Mournland Villains table suggests other possible evil 
schemes and influences that might arise in connection 
with the Mournland. 


MOURNLAND VILLAINS 


d6  Villain 

Т The Lord of Blades maintains a detention center 
where experiments are performed on adventurers and 
scavengers that his forces capture in the Mournland. 

2  Theleader ofa cult devoted to Belashyrra, the Lord of 
Eyes, uses daelkyr-made tentacles totearout the eyes 
of victims and attaches them to members of the cult. 

3  Apowerful member of House Cannith hopes to find 
something in the Mournland that will guarantee the 
ascendancy of her branch of the house. 

4  AkKarrnathi bone knight (see chapter 6) wants to raise 
up an undead army from the corpses in the Mourn- 
land. 

5 Arakshasa works tofree a fiendish overlord trapped 
in a whirlwind of stone and sand somewhere in the 
Mournland. 

6 A servant ofthe Lords of Dust maintains an extensive 
collection of severed heads and continues to draw on 
the knowledge in their brains. 


ADVENTURES AND ENCOUNTERS 


In contrast to the salvagers and treasure hunters who 
undertake most of the expeditions to the Mournland, 
some individuals enter the churning mist with good 
intentions in mind. Most of these adventurers are dis- 
placed Cyrans or are hired by such people, ranging from 
common folk hoping to retrieve family heirlooms to 
servants of Prince Oargev, who hopes to recover the lost 
regalia of the Cyran crown. 

Two of the dragonmarked houses, Orien and Cannith, 
also have vested interests in investigating the Mourn- 
land's ruins and often hire adventurers to pursue those 
interests. House Orien wants to restore the lightning 
rail line that crosses the Mournland, which would re- 
connect the western and eastern halves of Khorvaire. 
House Cannith wants to recover trade secrets, exper- 
imental artifacts, and magic items from the creation 
forges, foundries, and secret laboratories it lost on the 
Day of Mourning. 

The Mournland Adventure Hooks table includes a 
range of potential opportunities that could lead a group 
of adventurers into the Mournland. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


MOURNLAND ADVENTURE Hooks 


d6 Adventure Hook 

1 A Gatekeeper druid wants a rock sample from the 
Glass Plateau. 

2 Amagewright from House Cannith wants the party to 
escort him to a warforged colossus (see page 223). 
The magewright wants to retrieve the docent network 
from the colossus before an unscrupulous House 
Phiarlan operative does so. 

3  Onherdeathbed, the visionary artist who designed 
the lightning rail station at Metrol reveals that she hid 
a treasure map within a lamp in her old office. 

4  Awealthy eccentric asks the party to go into the 
Mournland and retrieve his most prized possession 
(aletter from a lover, a mechanical caterpillar, or any- 
thing else you devise) from his mansion. 

5 A young Cyran paladin is morose because she was 
away from Cyre on a mission when the Day of Mourn- 
ing occurred and never got to say goodbye to her fam- 
ily. She longs to retrieve her father's sword. 

6 An elderly knight is strapping on his armor one last 
time so he can ride into the Mournland and die on 
the battlefield where his companions perished and 
"where I should have been." 


ENCOUNTERS AND TRINKETS 

The Mournland is a dangerous place full of bizarre, 
inexplicable, and often localized magical effects—liter- 
ally anything can happen in this place. The Mournland 
Encounters table and the Mournland Trinkets table offer 
just a glimpse of the weirdness that adventurers might 
come across in their travels into the ruins of Cyre. 


MOURNLAND ENCOUNTERS 


d6 Encounter 

Т The party meets flickering images of their future 
selves who are trying desperately to communicate, 
but their message is garbled. 

2 The party encounters a revenant who was murdered 
by House Cannith assassins after she learned too 
much about the house's secret research. The char- 
acters can appease her by promising to help her get 
revenge. 

3  Atiny kitten mews from inside a hollow log. Within 
a few hours after being freed, it grows into an adult 
displacer beast. 

4 The apparition of a parent searches for their lost 
child. As soon as the two are reunited, parent and 
spirit child both vanish. 

5 Тһе mist congeals into the form of a long-lost love 
of one of the adventurers. The mist apparition (use 
the ghost stat block) wants the character to stay here 
forever. 

6 The characters come across the skull of a buried 
warforged colossus. 


MOURNLAND TRINKETS 


d10 Trinket 
1 The favorite childhood toy of one of the adventurers, 
floating in midair 
2 Atin whistle that makes beautiful colors and patterns 
magically appear when it's played 
3  Atoy lightning rail car 
A glass eye 
A silver lapel pin of a finely detailed gorgon's head 
with ruby eyes 
A monocle that can be used as a telescope 
A six-inch-tall mechanical marmoset in need of minor 
repairs 
8  Asmall medallion made of silver, depicting a tower 
with an eye at the top of it and other smaller eyes em- 
bedded in the sides 
9  Acloak pin made of iron in the shape of two hammers 
joined by a semicircular haft 
10 A wooden dinosaur toy that has movable legs 


WARFORGED COLOSSUS 


Mere weeks before the Day of Mourning, House Cannith 
unleashed its mightiest creations: the warforged colossi. 
Hundreds offeet tall, these gargantuan warriors thun- 
dered across Cyre, crushing everything in their path 
and leaving ruin in their wake. Meant to end the war 
decisively, these arcane war machines could pulverize 
soldiers beneath their feet and incinerate entire legions 
with beams of red light radiating from their mouths. But 
as the colossi were beginning to turn to the lands out- 
side Cyre, the Mourning came, and the colossi perished. 
Now their remains lie, like mountains, in the Mourn- 
land, filled with secrets and waiting to be explored. 


HisTORY OF THE COLOSSI 
House Cannith spent much ofthe war working on var- 
ious kinds of constructs that could serve as soldiers, 
siege engines, or other weapons of war. Their earliest ef- 
forts, which lumbered onto Cyran battlefields in the late 
930s YK, were barely more than golems with limited 
sentience, difficult to command in the field. The war- 
forged titans were developed over the next twenty years, 
and the modern warforged— often perceived as the pin- 
nacle of Cannith engineering—first saw battle in 965. 
Successful as the warforged were, though, House 
Cannith never lost interest in building a better titan. 
Cyre didn't lose its desire for deadly weapons that 
could give it an edge over its enemies, and tremendous 
amounts of gold flowed from Cyre's coffers into the 
vaults of House Cannith as research and development 
continued, working toward a new kind of warforged that 
would bring an end to the war once and for all, and es- 
tablish Cyre's martial supremacy for centuries to come. 
With Cyre's immense wealth fueling its effort, House 
Cannith called upon the ingenuity of its best artificers 
and magewrights. Construction began on enormous 
new creation foundries, hundreds of feet tall, carved 
into the sides of mountains or secretly nestled within 
remote canyons. 


The project succeeded beyond Cyre's wildest dreams. 
When the original warforged colossus took its first 
thunderous footsteps, it was met with a reaction of equal- * 
parts awe and horror—and it was almost immediately 
sent north toward Metrol, where armies from Karrnath 
were menacing the Cyran capital. 


OPERATING A COLOSSUS 

A warforged colossus is part warforged and part vehicle. 
It stands between 200 and 300 feet tall. For optimal per- 
formance, a colossus required an active crew including 
a captain with the Mark of Making, a weapons officer 
with the Mark of Storm, and a helmsman with the Mark 
of Passage. When absolutely necessary, though, the 
colossus could direct itself but at diminished power. A 
colossus also carried a sizable contingent of elite troops, 
who could ride in safety within the colossus while it 
crushed through enemy lines or smashed through a 
wall, then pour out through hatches once the colossus 
was in position. 

Docent Network. Controlling a construct of such size 
proved to be a greatchallenge for the Cannith artificers. 
The solution entailed creating a large number of docent 
nodes and joining them together in a single network 
distributed throughout the body of the colossus. Docent 
nodes are modeled after the ancient docents found 
in Xen'drik (described in chapter 5), and though they 
lack the full sentience or functionality of a true docent, 
collectively they can guide and control a colossus. The 
network converged at one place, where the captain 
could stand and control the colossus's every movement 
through the use of a mithral helmet with hundreds 
of semi-organic tendril-wires attached. By way of the 
central master docent—a true docent recovered from 
Xen'drik—the whole network fed information back to 
the operator. Several smaller "hubs" of the network 
gave other operators access to the relevant parts of that 
information and enabled them to control parts of the co- 
lossus as well. The techniques and tools used to create 
docent nodes were lost in the Mourning. The various 
branches of House Cannith are sending adventurers 
into the Mournland in hopes of salvaging some or all of 
the network inside a fallen colossus. 

Colossus Power Core. The power source of a colos- 
sus is a Khyber dragonshard of unusually large size, cut 
into a specific pattern that allows the dragonshard to 
contain raw magical energy without exploding. A single 
power core is about the size of a wine barrel, hooked up 
to an elaborate harness that distributes power through- 
out the colossus. 

Weapons of Mass Destruction. Warforged colossi 
were physically powerful, but their principal weaponry 
involved the use of bound elementals. Some expelled 
blasts of elemental fire from their hands or mouths; 
others wielded adamantine swords they could wreathe 
in flame. Some colossi also used bound elementals for 
defense: manifesting shields of elemental rock, blasting 
out elemental air to deflect ranged attacks, and so on. 
The captain of the colossus could control all this weap- 
onry through the docent network, but for optimal perfor- 
mance the captain relied on a weapons officer with the 
Mark of Storm to employ this elemental weaponry. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


1 square = 5 feet 


Head Mouth 
Level Level 
(Control Platform) (Weapon System) 
Shoulder 
Level 
(Meeting & Ballista) 
Arm 
(Side View) 
Leg 
(Side View) 


Bc Abdomen 


(Power Cores) 
к= = 


Hips р TD 


DYSON LOGOS 


ч 
d Mar 4.8: FALLEN WARFORGED Corossus 
E 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


FiNDING A COLOSSUS 
When adventurers discover a colossus, it might be in 
any state. Some have fallen or collapsed and become 
overgrown with vegetation to the point where one could 
be mistaken for a small hill. One was engulfed when the 
rock under its feet turned to liquid and swallowed it up, 
encasing it in a stone prison when the rock hardened. 
Some are buried—except for the head, perhaps, or a 
hand, which serves as a clear indicator that something 
lies underneath. 

Adventurers might even stumble upon a reality the 
world isn't ready to face: an operational colossus (see 
the stat block in chapter 6). 


ENTERING A COLOSSUS 

Map 4.8 shows a fallen colossus. The mostly hollow 
interior of a colossus is large enough for the crew and 
soldiers to travel in safety. The area features tunnels, 
ladders, hallways and crawlways, control rooms, storage 
rooms, arbalest turrets, and observation decks. With 
comfort a low priority, only minimal crew quarters are 
provided, and the inside has no kitchen or dining areas. 
Normal operating procedure called for the crew to exit 
the colossus at night and camp outside it. 

A colossus usually has multiple hatches to allow en- 
trance and egress: on the legs, on the back, in the chest, 
in the mouth or on the back of the head, and so on. But 
entering the remains of a warforged colossus is not a 
task to be taken lightly, since the Mournland can have 
bizarre effects on the colossus's docent network, power 
core, and weaponry, as well as its mind. 

Elemental Life. Even though a colossus has fallen, 
its docent nodes and elemental defenses might still be 
active. The dragonshards that once bound the elemental 
that powered the colossus's main weapon might have 
been broken, allowing the elemental to escape from 
its bondage and roam the body of the colossus, which 
has become its lair. Or perhaps it has come under the 
control of the master docent and now does its twisted 
will, defending the interior of the colossus and giving 
voice and form to the docent's otherwise disembodied 
intelligence. 

A Deadly Dungeon. House Cannith's artisans lined 
the interior of each colossus with magic wards and traps 
in case enemy soldiers breached its defenses. As long as 
the primary operator remained connected to the master 
docent and in control, the traps were inactive, but if the 
operatorgave an alert (or simply left their station, or 
died), the master docent would send a signal through 
the network to seal the doors, activate the arcane wards, 
and arm the traps in any area that was under attack. 

A Grisly Tomb. Most colossi are tombs, filled with the 
bodies of the crews that perished in the cataclysm. But 
the Mourning affected everything in bizarre ways, so a 
venture inside a colossus is often terrifying. A horrific 
monster might have made its lair in a colossus’s interior 
in the years since the Mourning. The master docent in 
another one might speak through the brass horns that 
the crews used to communicate, growing increasingly 
incoherent and/or sinister. The crew of a colossus might 
be undead—zombies lumbering through the colossus’s 
interior, or spirits doomed to haunt it until they can find 
blessed release. 


ORDER OF THE 
EMERALD CLAW 


What arose as an order of militant knights within the 
nation of Karrnath fell into disgrace and became a 
shattered remnant. The Order of the Emerald Claw now 
operates as a collection of cells of fanatical warriors, 
necromancers, and spies. On the surface, its members 
seem to be driven by Karrnathi patriotism, and they 
purport to be adherents of the Blood of Vol. The most 
cursory investigation reveals that claim to be a facade. 
The truth behind the Emerald Claw is that they serve 
the lich Lady Illmarrow, and in her name they carry out 
acts of destruction, murder, and necromantic terrorism. 
They have been linked to the theft of powerful items 
imbued with necromancy magic, and they often employ 
vicious undead minions that make even other Karrns 
uncomfortable. Most worshipers of the Blood of Vol are 
quick to point out that they don’t accept the order’s claim 
to membership in their faith, and those true worshipers 
vehemently reject the Emerald Claw’s violent fanaticism. 


THE EMERALD CLAW AND THE WAR 


During the Last War, Karrnath was forced to embrace 
the practice of necromancy to bolster the ranks of its 
army. At the same time, a number of chivalric orders 
were founded by devoted worshipers of the Blood of Vol. 
These groups included necromancers and bone knights 
that were trained to raise and command the undead 
troops used during the war. The Order of the Emerald 
Claw was one of the most infamous of these groups, re- 
nowned for its fighting skills but often sanctioned for its 
brutal treatment of enemy soldiers. The Emerald Claw 
were also accused of slaughtering civilians so they could 
be raised as skeletons or zombies—behavior that was 
strictly forbidden by the Karrnath commanders. 

When King Kaius III came to power near the end of 
the war, he turned against the Blood of Vol. The orders 
were disbanded, and many members of the Emerald 
Claw were condemned as war criminals. While the 
other orders complied with the king’s edict, many 
knights of the Emerald Claw refused to surrender. The 
order fragmented as its original members scattered, but 
a number of those rebellious knights started their own 
cells, rallying all who wanted to see Karrnath achieve 
its rightful glory. The order experienced a surge in mem- 
bership following the Treaty of Thronehold because 
many Karrns thought that Kaius III had betrayed their 
nation by embracing peace. 

Six years ago, shortly after Kaius’s accession, a figure 
known as Lady Illmarrow emerged as the leader of the 
Order of the Emerald Claw. Few of her followers know 
anything about her, other than her great skill as a nec- 
romancer; many members of the Order refer to her as 
Queen of the Dead. Some members of the order believe 
she will ultimately raise Karrnath above all other na- 
tions. Others simply trust that she will grant them per- 
sonal power. They believe that she is poised to become a 
god of death, and that when she ascends to divinity, they 
will be granted immortality or at least the eternal life 
of undeath. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


LIBRARY VAULT 


Map 4.9 shows a library vault maintained by the Order 


of the Emerald Claw. The order collects dark materials 
and forbidden magic and holds them for safekeeping in 
these heavily defended locations. Each vault also func- 
tions as a chapter house or a sanctuary for a local cell. 


LIBRARY VAULT FEATURES 

Library vaults can be found in a variety of locations. 
Some of them are crypts or dungeons secreted away 
underground, while others are hidden in plain sight 
inside a home or a business. Whatever its specific loca- 
tion, a vault is always equipped with defensive features, 
some of which remain active even after the outer door 
is breached. 


LIBRARY VAULT ADVENTURES 
The Library Vault Adventures table outlines some possi- 
bilities for adventure involving one of these locations. 


LIBRARY VAULT ADVENTURES 


d6 Adventure Goal 

1 Destroy a scroll containing an incantation that allows 
even non-spellcasters to animate the dead. 

2  Stealthe journal of a powerful necromancer that's 
being held in the vault's collection. 

3 Trade a powerful dark magic weapon in return for the 
rescue of important hostages taken by the order. 

4  Steala suit of armor that contains the soul of a hero 
slain during the Last War. 

5 Search the collection for information on the Queen of 
the Dead, or "Lady Illmarrow," as she is known. 

6  Infiltrate the vault to get close to a new Emerald Claw 
recruit, then convince them to come to their senses 
and return to their family. 


ORDER OF THE 
EMERALD CLAW NPCs 


Given the undeniable nature of the order, villains asso- 
ciated with the Emerald Claw present an opportunity to 
provide characters with adversaries that are memorably 
evil, and that revel in their villainy. 


EMERALD CLAW NPCs 


d6 МРС 

1 Though mortal, this fanatical warrior drinks the blood 
of those he slays in battle. 

2 Accleric tries to convince her enemies to embrace the 
order, promising eternal life through undeath. 

3  Anoble with sympathies toward the order hides a 
cell's library vault within the grounds of their estate. 

4  Asuave vampire would rather charm its enemies than 
crush them in battle. 

5 An artificer is obsessed with infusing necromantic 
curses into their construct creations. 

6 A changeling necromancer often poses as a vampire 
or a mummy, even though it's still alive. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


EMERALD CLAW CAMPAIGN THEMES 


At low levels, adventurers can clash with Emerald Claw 
skeletons and zombies. As the characters grow more 
capable, the threats escalate. They might have to protect 
a village from a necromancer who is sucking the life out 
of the land, or race through a dungeon to acquire a nec- 
romantic relic before the Claw can claim it. The Emer- 
ald Claw is ideally suited to pulp action; it's a force that 
is blatant in its villainy and has hordes of evil minions 
to do its bidding. Defeating the schemes of the Emerald 
Claw should always feel like the right thing to do. 
Although many members of the Emerald Claw believe 
that they are fighting for Karrnath, they are truly serving 
the lich Lady Illmarrow (see chapter 6). The greatest 
necromancer of the age, she seeks to unlock the secrets 
of her inactive dragonmark, the Mark of Death. If she 
succeeds, she could come to possess unimaginable 
power. This makes her a formidable villain to drive the 
action of an entire campaign. 


EMERALD CLAW ADVENTURE Hooks 


The Emerald Claw Adventure Hooks table offers some 
options to kick off adventures featuring the Emerald 
Claw that take place outside their sanctuaries. 


EMERALD CLAW ADVENTURE Hooks 


d8 NPC 

1 What at first appears to be a renegade group of 
Aundairian soldiers turn out to be undead under the 
order’s control. 

2 The order strikes at a small keep, demanding the 
inhabitants surrender a particular volume from their 
library. 

3 Investigating strange lights and sounds emanating 
from a crypt in the dead of night reveals the Emerald 
Claw experimenting on the corpses within. 

4 The Emerald Claw violates graves near a small village, 
animating the corpses into undead laborers to help 
build an eldritch machine. 

5 The Emerald Claw claims a village's town hall for its 
own use, and any who come near are attacked. The 
sounds of torture ring out from within the building. 

6 Investigating disappearances among an elf commu- 
nity reveals that the Order of the Emerald Claw has 
been attempting to inscribe something like a dragon- 
mark in their skin, then reanimating the failed experi- 
ments as zombies. 

7 While searching for a magic item in Dhakaani ruins 
across southern Khorvaire, the characters discover 
that Emerald Claw agents are looking for the same 
thing and seem to have access to information the ad- 
venturers lack. 

8  Alarge force of Emerald Claw knights offers the char- 
acters a choice: join the order, or submit themselves 
to death and an eternity of servitude from beyond the 


grave. 


LOG 


Scrolls 


Secondary 
Stacks 


NZ 
I 


у 


ZZ 


ANSA. 


(Aen N 
A 7 ZS Artifact Z 
YNDNA I ASSI: w Examination: 


^ 


‚ МШШ 
ү\©опуегеа; SX 
Barracks ` 


Map 4.9: LIBRARY VAULT 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


228 


= 


: ЛТ {тш | 


Ө 


x 3 
ae aha 


YN UU 
ysis T 


PLANES OF EXISTENCE 


Eberron is part of the Great Wheel of the multiverse, as 
described in the P/ayer's Handbook and the Dungeon 
Master's Guide. At the same time, it is fundamentally 
apart from the rest of the Great Wheel, sealed off 
from the other planes even while it's encircled by its 
own wheeling cosmology. Eberron's unique station in 
the multiverse is an important aspect of the world: its 
planes have profound and shifting influences on the 
Material Plane, and it is sheltered from the influences 
and machinations of gods and other powers elsewhere 
on the Great Wheel. 

The planet of Eberron is the heart of its own Material 
Plane. It is surrounded by the Ring of Siberys. Beyond 
this band of dragonshards, thirteen moons orbit the 
world. To date, no creature from Eberron has explored 
the moons, and none can say whether they are lifeless 
rocks or thriving worlds. Some sages believe that the 
moons are connected to the planes, or that they might 
even be physical extensions of the planes, but the truth 
of these assertions remains unknown. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


Planes of Existence 


No other planets have been discovered within Eber- 
ron’s Material Plane. The underworld of Khyber, how- 
ever, contains a host of demiplanes, tiny pockets of 
altered reality. As such, venturing beneath the surface 
of Eberron can lead you to a network of caverns and 
passages, and if you find the right passage, it can take 
you to fantastic and deadly places inhabited by fiends, 
aberrations, and other children of Khyber. 


PLANES OF EBERRON 


The Material Plane is enfolded by thirteen planes of 
existence. Many of these have aspects of both Outer 
Planes and Inner Planes. All of them overlap with Eber- 
ron in some way, and they influence and are influenced 
by the Material Plane. The intensity of this influence 
waxes and wanes; scholars often depict the planes as 
orbiting Eberron—sometimes coming close, other times 
far away—though this manner of expression is merely 

a metaphor for their shifting influence. When another 
plane’s influence on the Material Plane is especially 
strong, the plane is said to be coterminous. When its 
influence is weak, a plane is remote. The state of a plane 


LEE MOYER 


can be important for performing epic rituals, creating of 
eldritch machines, or interacting with extraplanar enti- 

ties. Whether or not a plane is remote or coterminous at 
a given time depends entirely on the needs of your story. 


MANIFEST ZONES 
Atcertain places in the Material Plane, the barriers 
between worlds are thin, and some characteristics of 


another plane can bleed through into the material world. 


These places are called manifest zones, and the nature 
of each one is strongly shaped by the plane it connects 
to. The city of Sharn is located in a manifest zone linked 
to Syrania that keeps its towers reaching toward the sky 
and aids flight. Ghosts might linger in a manifest zone 
associated with Dolurrh, while a manifest zone tied 

to Lamannia might have wild vegetation and enhance 
druidic magic. A manifest zone might include a portal 
that allows free passage from either plane to the other. 
The descriptions of other planes in this section offer 
some other possible effects. Most manifest zones have 
reliable, persistent effects. Some have only weak con- 
nections to their planes, and their properties influence 
the world only when the plane is coterminous. 


TOUR OF THE PLANES 


Each of the thirteen planesin Eberron's cosmology is 
briefly described below, both in general terms as well as 
by the effects that occur or appear on the Material Plane 
in manifest zones linked to that plane. 


DAANVI, THE PERFECT ORDER 

Daanvi embodies absolute order, along with the ideals 
of law and discipline and their impact on civilization. 
The perfectly ordered, immaculate districts of the plane 
represent different aspects of law: precisely maintained 
fields, legalistic tribunals, and hordes of modrons com- 
piling archives of every rule or regulation ever created. 
Some districts are governed by a justice system based 
in goodness, where laws help to maintain harmony. In 
more oppressive locations, harsh laws are imposed on 
the suffering populace by tyrannical devils. 


DAANVI MANIFEST ZONE FEATURES 


d4 Feature 

1 People who live in the manifest zone are inclined to 
follow duly enacted regulations without question, re- 
gardless of moral implications. 

2 Creatures can't tell deliberate lies while in the area. 

3 Flora and fauna are preternaturally orderly and ho- 
mogeneous. Trees here grow in neat rows without 
needing to be tended, rocks are situated in geometric 
patterns, and identical cattle graze in unison. 

4  Acontingent of modrons is methodically deconstruct- 
ing and reorganizing the zone, heedless of their effect 
on the other inhabitants. 


DAL QuOR, THE REGION OF DREAMS 

Mortal creatures come into contact with Dal Quor when 
they dream (except for elves, kalashtar, and warforged, 
which don't dream). The outer fringes of the plane are 


shaped by the memories and experiences of dreamers. 
The dark core at the heart of the plane is shaped by the 
nightmare force known as the Dreaming Dark. The 
primary inhabitants of Dal Quor are the quori, enig- 
matic master manipulators that can inhabit the dreams 
of others. 

Tens of thousands of years ago, the quori fought a 
bitter war with the giants of Xen'drik. The giants ended 
the war by severing the connection between Dal Quor 
and Eberron and disrupting the cycle of the planes. As a 
result, Dal Quor is always remote in relation to the Ma- 
terial Plane, and no manifest zones are tied to Dal Quor. 
The only way to reach Dal Quor from the Material Plane 
is through the psychic projection of dreaming, and the 
quori are forced to possess mortal hosts to work their 
will on Eberron. 


DOLURRH, THE REALM OF THE DEAD 

When a mortal soul dies, it is drawn to Dolurrh, a place 
defined by despair and apathy. Over time, memories 

are leached out of these trapped spirits until only husks 
remain. Although this seems a bleak fate, most religions 
maintain that Dolurrh isn't the end of a soul's journey; 

it is a gateway to whatever lies beyond. They assert that 
what appears to be dissolution is the natural process 

of the soul moving to a higher plane of existence that 
mortals can never realize: joining with the Sovereigns, 
merging with the Silver Flame, or simply rejoining the 
cycle of life in a new form. That claim notwithstanding, 
Dolurrh is a gloomy plane filled with the lingering traces 
of the dead. 


DOLURRH MANIFEST ZONE FEATURES 


d4 Feature 

1 Bodies buried here reanimate in 1d4 days, possessed 
by restless spirits. These spirits might be malevolent 
or benign. 

2 Any necromancy spell of Ist level or higher cast 
within the zone is treated as if it were cast at a level 
one higher than the spell slot that was expended. 

3 Spells and abilities that raise the dead have a 50 per- 
cent chance to bring back 1d4 angry spirits as well. 
These might be banshees, ghosts, shadows, specters, 
wraiths, or other incorporeal undead. 

4 п order to cast a spell of Ist level or higher in the 
zone, the caster must succeed on a Constitution 
check with a DC equal to 10 + the level of the spell. 
On a failed check, the spell is not cast and its spell 
slot is not expended, but the action is lost. 


FERNIA, THE SEA OF FIRE 

This plane encompasses both the raw elemental power 
of fire and its versatility: flame used as a weapon, as a 
force that holds darkness at bay, or as a destroyer and 

a force for change. Fernia is home to all manner of fire 
elementals and to celestials and fiends that embrace the 
same ideals. Efreeti pashas and fiendish satraps rule 
city-islands of obsidian that drift atop seas of magma, 
their minions producing metalcraft of surpassing beauty 
and quality. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


230 


FERNIA MANIFEST ZONE FEATURES 

d4 Feature 

1 Spells that deal fire damage are empowered here. 
Such a spell of 1st level or higher cast within the 
zone deals fire damage as if it were cast at a level one 
higher than the spell slot that was expended. 

2 Weapons and armor with unusual abilities can be 
forged here, though their enchantments are not 
always stable. 

3 The area is dotted with pools of molten earth and 
fissures of scalding water, from which mephits and 
elementals emerge with regularity. 

4  Motes of continual flame are spontaneously generated 
in this region, typically attached to some vegetation 
or minerals from the area. These flames persist even 
if they are removed from the region. 


IRIAN, THE ETERNAL DAWN 
Irian is the plane of light and hope, the wellspring of 
positive energy which is the foundation of light, life, and 
love. The regions of Irian reflect the idea of beginnings 
and of resurgent life: fertile lands untouched by any tool, 
glittering crystal forests, and thriving homesteads and 
communities. Angels dwell in a grand city reflecting the 
first days of a glorious empire. The sun never sets here. 
Positive energy flows into Eberron from Irian, and 
the denizens of Irian believe that the simple fact of their 
existence helps the mortals of the Material Plane. The 
celestials of Irian are also those most likely to respond 
to planar ally and similar spells. 


IRIAN MANIFEST ZONE FEATURES 


d4 Feature 

1 The waters of a spring hold curative powers—curing 
disease, healing wounds, even restoring lost senses. 

2 Clusters of radiant crystals sprout from the earth. A 
spell of 1st level or higher cast within 30 feet of these 
crystals, if it restores hit points or deals radiant dam- 
age, is treated as if it were castat a level one higher 
than the spell slotthat was expended. 

3  Amaple tree with translucent, violet-hued bark and 
shimmering leaves grows in the heart of a swamp. 
Creatures that live near it age very slowly. 

4 Undead within the zone have disadvantage on attack 
rolls, ability checks, and saving throws. 


KYTHRI, THE CHURNING CHAOS 

The plane of chaos and change, Kythri is a realm in con- 
stant flux. The elements collide in fantastic explosions 
of unbridled power, motes of earth careen erratically 
through space as gravity constantly shifts, and a riot of 
colors blazes through the ever-shifting sky. Still, stoic 
githzerai monks exert their will over the elements, 
crafting monasteries on islands of earth amid the chaos. 
Several varieties of slaadi dwell here as well, exulting in 
the endless turmoil. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


KvrHR! MANIFEST ZONE FEATURES 
d4 Feature 

1 The earth here is highly changeable and unstable. А 
creature that succeeds on a DC 14 Wisdom (Nature) 
check as an action can alter a 20-by-20-foot square of 
terrain in some way. For example, they might choose 
to turn the earth to mud, cause stony spikes to erupt 
from the soil, or warp local plant life. Failing the check 
causes random, uncontrolled effects. 

2 Fabulous formations of precariously balancing rocks 
dot these badlands. They randomly collapse, only to 
slowly reassemble over the course of days. 

3 Packs of slaadi erupt from inside a local cave net- 
works at random intervals, terrorizing travelers. 

4 Any spell that deals acid, cold, fire, force, lightning, 
or thunder damage cast within the zone instead deals 
one ofthose damage types determined at random. 


LAMANNIA, THE TWILIGHT FOREST 

Though it is referred to as a forest, Lamannia contains 
every possible natural environment. It is home to great 
beasts, lycanthropes, and other beings that reflect the 
power of nature. The splendor of nature in this place is 
intoxicating to druids. Animals born here are paragons 
of their species, infused with primal power that put even 
the finest specimens of House Vadalis to shame. 


LAMANNIA MANIFEST ZONE FEATURES 


d4 Feature 

Т Spells that summon elementals are empowered here. 
Such a spell of 1st level or higher cast within the zone 
is treated as if it were cast at a level one higher than 
the spell slot that was expended. 

2 The forces of nature work to tear down anything built 
within the zone. Weather, vegetation, and a rapid rate 
of decay combine to quickly destroy structures built in 
the region and overgrow the ruins. 

3 The zone is dominated by towering trees and thick 
undergrowth. Animals come from the surrounding 
area to live in the zone, where they grow larger and 
stronger than usual for their species. 

4 What appears to be a circle of stones is in truth a 
group of slumbering earth elementals that came from 
Lamannia during its most recent coterminous period. 


MABAR, THE ENDLESS NIGHT 
Mabar is the darkness that promises to swallow even 
the brightest day, the hungry shadow that yearns to 
consume light and life. It is the plane of entropy, hunger, 
and loss, slowly sucking the life from the multiverse. It 
is the source of negative energy in Eberron. Most un- 
dead are animated by the power of Mabar, and the life 
they drain from mortals flows into the Endless Night. 
Mabar is made up of many fragments, each one rep- 
resenting a different vision of desolation. The fiends of 
Mabar scheme to steal fragments of other planes and 
draw them down into their eternal darkness, creating a 
jumble of broken worlds in varying states of decay. 


MABAR MANIFEST ZONE FEATURES 


d4 Feature 

1 | Undead animated here have 2 extra hit points per Hit 
Die and make saving throws against being turned or 
frightened with advantage. 

2 Vegetation here is sour and stunted, animals are still- 
born or deformed, and a malaise hangs in the air. 

3  Onnights during the month of Sypheros, when the 
Shadow Moon is dominant in the sky, horrific mon- 
sters stalk the area, prompting residents to leave of- 
ferings outside their doors to ward off the evil. 

4  Theradius of any light source in the zone is halved, 
and saving throws against necromancy spells are 
made with disadvantage in the zone. 


RISIA, THE PLAIN OF ICE 

The counterpoint to Fernia, Risia embodies winter's 
chill and the stoic constancy of the glacier. Across Ri- 
sia's icy expanse, blizzards ceaselessly howl over floes 
of thick, blue ice, and frost giants carve great fortresses 
from glaciated mountains. Unprotected visitors perish 
quickly, but those who adapt to the cold or protect them- 
selves from it can plumb the plane's frigid depths for 
ancient secrets. 


RisiA MANIFEST ZONE FEATURES 


d4 Feature 

1 Spells that deal cold damage are empowered here. 
Such a spell of 1st level or higher cast within the zone 
deals cold damage as if it were cast at a level one 
higher than the spell slot that was expended. 

2 Veins of cobalt-blue ice run through a glacier in the 
area. If extracted, this ice maintains its temperature 
and doesn't melt. An object carved from it can func- 
tion as a spellcasting focus for spells dealing with 
water or ice. 

3 Abominable yetis lair in a network of bitterly cold, 
frost-rimed caves in the mountains. 

4  Anyspellthatdeals fire damage deals just half the 
normal damage. 


SHAVARATH, THE BATTLEGROUND 

Shavarath is the plane of war, ravaged by a conflict that 
will never end. Since the dawn of time, armies of fiends 
and celestials have fought one another in Shavarath, 
their eternal battles a microcosm of the struggle be- 
tween good and evil that rages across all of reality. New 
arrivals are subject to forced conscription when encoun- 
tered (whether by angel, demon, or devil), if they aren't 
summarily dispatched. Amid the constant strife, wind- 
storms of blades scour the landscape, capable of cutting 
the unprepared to ribbons. For all its danger, Shavarath 
holds weapons of legend and a wealth of knowledge on 
the art of war. 


SHAVARATH MANIFEST ZONE FEATURES 


d4 Feature 

1 Blades crafted here have a reputation for being es- 
pecially fine and sharp. When a creature in the zone 
scores a critical hit with an attack that deals piercing 
or slashing damage, the attack deals one additional 
die of damage. 

2 Blood spilled here never washes away. Any Charisma 
checks made in the zone to avoid hostility are made 
with disadvantage; Charisma checks made to encour- 
age violence are always successful. 

3 Storms of whirling blades cut the sky during times 
of combat, randomly attacking the participants. The 
effect is the same as that ofthe cloud of daggers spell, 
but the area and the damage might both increase. 

4 Devils, demons, and angels duel in the remains of a 
ruined fortress that serves as a portal to Shavarath. 


SYRANIA, THE AZURE SKY 

Crystal spires float in a perfect blue sky. Farms and 
serene communities stretch across clouds. Syrania is 
the plane of peace and all that flourishes in times of 
peace. This includes commerce; the Immeasurable 
Market of Syrania draws merchants and travelers from 
across reality. 

Syrania is home to a host of angels that devote their 
immortal lives to serene contemplation. Each angel 
seeks to achieve mastery of one pure concept, such as 
holding all the knowledge on a subject or ceaselessly 
abiding by the tenets of a virtue. An angel of dreams isn’t 
a quori, but it understands dreams, it can explain and 
interpret them, and it can shape them if it chooses. Like- 
wise, an angel of war isn’t constantly embroiled in battle 
as the celestials of Shavarath are; instead, it seeks per- 
fection in the art and theories of war. Angels of Syrania 
can be useful sources of information for adventurers, 
and sometimes travel to Eberron to observe mortals. 


SYRANIA MANIFEST ZONE FEATURES 


d4 Feature 

1 This zone suppresses all aggressive thought. Any 
creature that wants to make an attack or cast a dam- 
aging spell must succeed on a DC 13 Wisdom saving 
throw or it doesn't make the attack or cast the spell, 
but loses its action. 

2 Those with great will and fortitude who ascend 
a mountain peak in this area can try to bend the 
weather for miles around to their will, as if they had 
cast the control weather spell. 

3  Inthis sun-dappled field, children—as well as 
free-spirited, childlike folk— find themselves able to 
fly for 1 hour. 

4  Avillage is built into the side of a cliff face here. Wind- 
mills protruding from the cliff collect energy from the 
power of the wind, which is used to operate elevators 
throughout the community. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


231 


THELANIS, THE FAERIE COURT 

Thelanis is the home of the fey and a realm where narra- 
tive and metaphor shape the nature of reality. Its many 
dominions are governed by the archfey, and the deni- 
zens of each realm reflect the nature and the story of 
their lord. For instance, the realm of the Prince of Frost 
is trapped in endless winter, and pale eladrin lead packs 
of winter wolves in their hunts. It's not the same envi- 
ronment as on Risia, because the prince's realm isn't 

an embodiment of the idea of cold—rather, it’s a domain 
frozen by its prince's broken heart. If the prince's story 
were changed, the realm would change with it. 

Time and space are both malleable in the Faerie 
Court, and a mortal who wanders into Thelanis might 
never return—or might leave after a few days to discover 
that weeks, months, or years have passed back home. 


THELANIS MANIFEST ZONE FEATURES 


d4 Feature 

1 Fey trees whose wood is imbued with magical proper- 
ties grow here, along with a copse of guardian treants 
and awakened flora. 

2  Acircle of mushrooms serves as a portal to Thelanis 
when the proper offering is placed in its center. 

3  Aneladrin commune that holds powerful esoteric 
knowledge is nestled in the depths of a forest inhab- 
ited by large numbers of pixies. 

4 Тһе magic of the fey runs deep here. Saving throws 
against enchantment and illusion spells are made 
with disadvantage. 


XORIAT, THE REALM OF MADNESS 

Xoriat's bizarre geometry and unspeakable inhabitants 
seem like the product of an insane person’s nightmare. 
In this utterly alien environment, beings whose appear- 
ance can shatter a person’s sanity live in cities crafted 
from gargantuan, fleshy tumors. Seas of protoplasm, in 
a shade of purple that hurts the eyes, lap against shores 
of chitin. Some can look upon Xoriat and see it asa 
place of revelations, but most mortals who come too 
close to Xoriat fall prey to madness. Xoriat is the source 
of many aberrations, including the terrifying daelkyr. 


XORIAT MANIFEST ZONE FEATURES 


d4 Feature 

1 Reality is frayed here. Casting any spell of 1st level or 
higher triggers a roll on the Wild Magic Surge table in 
chapter 3 of the Player's Handbook. 

2 Acharacter must make a DC 14 Charisma saving 
throw at the end ofeach hour spent in this place. On 
a failed save, the character is afflicted with a random 
form of short-term madness (see chapter 8 ofthe 
Dungeon Master's Guide). 

3 Residents of a settlement here display bizarre muta- 
tions and unsettling behavior. Visitors who stay too 
long develop odd characteristics as well. 

4  Acavern here is a cancerous tumor that issues forth 
aberrations to prey upon the world, and it is growing. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


EBERRON AND THE MULTIVERSE 


Itis theoretically possible to travel between Eberron 
and other worlds in the multiverse by means of the Deep 
Ethereal or various spells designed for planar travel, but 
the cosmology of Eberron is specifically designed to pre- 
vent such travel, to keep the world hidden away from the 
meddling of gods, celestials, and fiends from beyond. 

The three progenitor wyrms worked together to form 
Eberron and its planes as a new cosmic system in the 
depths of the Ethereal Plane. They recreated the elves, 
orcs, dragons, and other races found throughout the 
multiverse and placed them in their new world, but al- 
lowed them to develop beyond the reach of Gruumsh, 
Corellon, Lolth, and other influences for good and ill. 

In your campaign, you might decide that the barrier 
formed by the Ring of Siberys is intact, and contact 
between Eberron and the worlds and planes beyond its 
cosmology is impossible. This is the default assumption 
of this book. On the other hand, you might want to incor- 
porate elements from other realms. Perhaps you want 
to use a published adventure that involves Tiamat or the 
forces of the Abyss meddling in the affairs of the world. 
In such a case, it could be that the protection offered by 
the Ring of Siberys has begun to fail. You might link the 
weakening of Siberys to the Mourning—perhaps what- 
ever magical catastrophe caused the Mourning also 
disrupted the Ring of Siberys, or perhaps a disruption of 
the Ring of Siberys actually caused the Mourning! 

If contact between Eberron and the wider multiverse 
is recent and limited, consider the implications for ev- 
eryone involved. In the Great Wheel, Asmodeus is an 
ancient threat, with well-established cults, lines of tief- 
lings, and a long history of meddling that sages might 
uncover in dusty old tomes hidden in remote libraries. 
But if Asmodeus has only just discovered Eberron and 
begun to influence it for the first time, there is no lore 
about him to be discovered on Eberron. He has no 
power base and needs to recruit new followers. Unusual 
alliances might form against him, as celestials and 
fiends join forces to expel this hostile outsider. 


GODS, CELESTIALS, AND FIENDS 


The people of Eberron believe their gods are omnipres- 
ent—not bound to a single coherent form, but present in 
all places. If you revere the Silver Flame, its power is al- 
ways with you. The Sovereign Onatar guides the hand of 
every smith who knows how to listen for his voice, and 
Dol Arrah and Dol Dorn are active on every battlefield, 
guiding every soldier. This outlook means that religion 
is driven by faith, as opposed to the concrete actions of 
deities. The faithful believe that their triumphs reflect 
the assistance of a divine influence. They don't expect a 
god to physically show up and solve their problems. 
Fiends and celestials certainly do have physical form, 
however. Fortunately for the folk of the Material Plane, 
these extraplanar creatures are deeply invested in their 
own affairs and have little interest in Eberron. Demons 
and angels battle one another in Shavarath, but they've 
been doing this since before humanity existed, and they 
dare not leave their posts to fool around elsewhere. Ex- 
ceptions do exist, such as the daelkyr and the Dreaming 


Dark, but by and large these natives of other planes are 
exclusively concerned with where they live. As such, 
player characters are more likely to encounter celestials 
and fiends that are native to Eberron, spawned by Khy- 
ber or Siberys, rather than extraplanar entities. 


COUATLS 

Couatls are a celestial race born from Siberys at the 
dawn of time. Along with the dragons, they battled the 
fiendish overlords of Khorvaire and Sarlona. Ultimately, 
the couatls sacrificed most of their number and com- 
bined their souls to form a prison to hold the overlords. 
Scholars have theorized that their combined souls even- 
tually became the force that is worshiped by the Church 
of the Silver Flame. The church is ambivalent on the 
topic, preaching that regardless of how the Flame was 
first kindled, there is a place within the Flame for all 
noble souls. 

The few couatls that remain on Eberron are devoted 
servants of the light. They are most often found guard- 
ing the prison of the ancient fiendish overlords, and in- 
dividuals sometimes act directly to aid adventurers who 
fight the forces of darkness. 


FIENDS 

The mightiest of the fiends born from Khyber are crea- 
tures of immense power known as the overlords. Doz- 
ens of overlords were imprisoned by the Silver Flame 
at the dawn of time; two of them, Rak Tulkhesh and 
Sul Khatesh, are detailed in chapter 6. Another—Bel 
Shalor, the Shadow in the Flame—is bound within the 
Silver Flame itself in the great cathedral in Flamekeep 
in Thrane. You can adapt other evil gods or archfiends 
for an Eberron campaign (assuming you don’t want 
Eberron to be connected to the wider multiverse) by 
recasting them as overlords. For example, Tiamat could 
be an overlord embodying the pride and potential for 
evil within dragons, Lolth could be an overlord who 
preys on the elves, and Asmodeus the insidious maker 
of profane bargains. 

Any fiend—whether devil, demon, yugoloth, or some- 
thing else—could be spawned by Khyber if it suits your 
story. Such fiends might be bound to an overlord, or they 
might be independent incarnations of evil unleashed on 
the world. Two other races of fiends, though, play im- 
portant roles in its history. 

Night Hags. Night hags have been around since the 
Age of Demons, when they often served as ambassadors 
and carried messages between the fiends and the drag- 
ons. Today, they remain impartial mediators, and ad- 
venturers who are about to deal with outsiders or other 
planes of existence might want to seek the advice of a 
night hag—although one can be quite difficult to find. 

Rakshasas. As the primary agents of the fiendish 
overlords, rakshasas once dominated Khorvaire and 
Sarlona. When the overlords were defeated in the first 
age of the world by the combined might of the dragons 
and the couatls, the rakshasas largely disappeared into 
Khyber as well. The Lords of Dust are made up largely 
of rakshasas, scheming in the shadows—many trying to 
free their imprisoned overlords, others looking for a way 
to claim their masters’ power for their own. 


TRAVEL 


Thanks to the industrious innovation of multiple dragon- 
marked houses and workshops full of magewrights, the 
people of Khorvaire can cross the continent in a week 
or less using magical means. The lightning rail and 
vessels powered by bound elementals and operated by 
the dragonmarked houses, can carry passengers as far 
in an hour as a horse can walk in a day. This section dis- 
cusses issues related to travel in an Eberron campaign 
and presents the Gold Dragon Inns, a chain of hotels 
that offer consistent accommodation for travelers any- 
where in Khorvaire. 

As described in chapter 5 of the Dungeon Master's 
Guide, it’s up to you whether you gloss over travel in 
your campaign or narrate it in more detail. If the point 
is to get the characters to their destination so they can 
get the adventure underway, it’s fine to assume that their 
journey (whether it’s by lightning rail, airship, or more 
mundane means) passes without incident. After all, 
the people of Khorvaire make such trips every day, and 
most of them reach their destinations safely. 

The alternative is to make the journey an important 
part of the adventure. Travel can play a crucial role in a 
story, and when it does, you should give it as much time 
at the game table as it needs. 


ELEMENTAL VESSELS 


Long ago, gnome artificers and specialists from House 
Cannith discovered and developed a means of magical 
travel. The heart of the process is a set of techniques 
for binding elementals that uses Khyber dragonshards. 
This closely guarded procedure requires delicate engi- 
neering, arcane skill, and rare materials from around 
the world, and different workshops employ varying 
esoteric techniques. Building a new vehicle can occupy 
a workshop for months while magical energy is pains- 
takingly inlaid into the vessel's hull. Such work is a 
complicated task requiring the labor of many; it is not 
something that can be undertaken by a lone wizard for 
any amount of compensation. 

The construction of elemental vessels requires the use 
of two kinds of dragonshards. A Khyber dragonshard 
of the largest size and finest quality is required to bind 
the elemental to the vessel, and a Siberys dragonshard 
is needed to craft the vehicle's helm. Production of new 
vessels grinds to a halt without a steady supply of both 
kinds of dragonshards, and a workshop with an order 
to fill will pay a handsome fee to adventurers who can 
find them. 


ELEMENTAL MATRIX 

Every elemental vessel is imbued with an invisible, 
arcane matrix. This magical essence extends from the 
containment chamber at the core of the vehicle to the 
binding struts, then through the rest of the vehicle's 
hull. When a Khyber dragonshard holding a bound 
elemental is placed in the containment chamber, the ma- 
trix comes alive. The unsuppressed elemental emerges 
from the shard and flows along the matrix in the way 
that blood moves through the arteries and veins of a 
living creature. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


233 


234 


The binding struts force the elemental into a ring 
shape and give every elemental vessel its distinctive 
appearance. From there, the elemental continues to flow 
along the matrix through the hull, appearing as jagged, 
snaking lines of living energy that pulse and shift. These 
conduits of elemental energy take on an appearance 
associated with the type of elemental bound into the ves- 
sel. A fire elemental, for example, sends tendrils of flame 
along the hull of its ship. 

At the command of the vehicle's dragonmarked pilot, 
the bound elemental can be suppressed, causing its 
essence to flow back into the containment chamber and 
the matrix to disappear from view. A vehicle whose ele- 
mental is suppressed ceases to be propelled. 


CONTROLLING THE ELEMENTAL 

Piloting an elemental vessel requires effective commu- 
nication between the pilot and the bound elemental. 
The elemental controls the vehicle's movement, and 
everything from basic propulsion to delicate maneu- 
vering is dependent on the ability of the pilot to control 
the elemental. If the elemental is uncontrolled and not 
suppressed, the vehicle moves according to the elemen- 
tal's whim until a pilot asserts control again. 

A dragonmarked heir at the helm of a vessel can com- 
mand the elemental easily. Without such a pilot, it's very 
difficult to control the vessel. A character who is touch- 
ing either the Khyber dragonshard where the bound ele- 
mental is housed or the magic item at the vessel's helm 
can try to communicate with the elemental, but with no 
guarantee of success. 

A character can make a DC 20 Charisma (Persuasion 
or Intimidation) check to persuade the elemental to co- 
operate or demand its obedience. On a successful check, 
the elemental obeys the character for 1 minute. 

The dominate monster spell can also enable a charac- 
ter without a dragonmark to control an elemental vessel, 
even wresting control away from a dragonmarked pilot. 
The charm monster spell (found in Xanathar's Guide to 
Everything) also makes the elemental compliant to the 
caster's wishes, but the elemental remains obedient to 
the commands of a dragonmarked pilot at the helm. 


FREEING THE ELEMENTAL 

Shattering the Khyber dragonshard that binds it can 
free an elemental, preventing the vehicle from moving. 
On most elemental vessels, the shard is sealed in a 
protective metal chest with 10 (3d6) hit points, usually 
made of iron (AC 19) but sometimes of mithral (AC 21) 
or adamantine (AC 23). The chest is often guarded with 
a glyph of warding and housed in a room behind locked 
and possibly trapped doors. The shard itself has AC 17 
and 10 (3d6) hit points. 


LYRANDAR AIRSHIP 


The airshipis the most advanced elemental-powered 
vehicle on Eberron, the pride of House Lyrandar and the 
forerunner of the magical advances that many hope will 
become commonplace in the aftermath of the Last War. 
The first airships emerged from the Cannith and Zilargo 
workshops and appeared in House Lyrandar's service 
just eight years ago (in 990 YK). For now, though, 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


they remain rare, because the soarwood required for 
their construction is exceedingly scarce and tightly 
controlled. 

Soarwood is a form of buoyant timber found only on 
the island of Aerenal, and the elves who live there limit 
their annual harvest of the precious wood. As a result, 
production of new airships proceeds at a snail's pace, 
unable to satisfy the fervent demand for new vessels. 
The discovery of a new supply of soarwood could liter- 
ally change the world, and even convincing the elves of 
Aerenal to part with more of it would be an achievement 
worth a handsome reward from House Lyrandar. 


How Ir Works 

A standard airship (at least as far as standards have 
been defined for this relatively new creation) looks simi- 
lar to an oceangoing ship but is rigged with control fins 
and rudders rather than sails. An air or fire elemental is 
bound into a ring around the hull, which is suspended 
on four struts jutting outward. Most airships are outfit- 
ted with the finest amenities, including many decorative 
flourishes and creature comforts. 

Operation. A dragonmarked heir of House Lyrandar 
must pilot a Lyrandar airship, channeling the power of 
the Mark of Storm through the wheel of wind and water 
that controls the vessel. The helm is typically situated 
near the rear of the ship, inside the shelter of a wheel- 
house. Controlling the vessel (without the benefit of 
something like the conductor stones that dictate a light- 
ning rail route) requires constant attention, so at least 
two pilots typically travel on every journey. 

Only a dragonmark heir with the Mark of Storm can 
use the wheel and command the bound elemental. 
House Lyrandar pilots train for months to gain a deep 
understanding of the ship's powers and limitations. 
Because of this training, a skilled pilot can execute acro- 
batic maneuvers in the sky. 

Airships can move in all three dimensions, with or 
without the aid of the wind. Unlike most flying crea- 
tures, they don't rely on wings for lift thanks to their 
soarwood hulls. They are able to fly equally well on their 
sides or even upside down (notwithstanding the risks 
that such maneuvers present to passengers and crew). 

Airships cannot actually land, because the struts that 
hold the elemental ring in place protrude 10 feet from 
the bottom of the vessel. Thus, passengers and cargo 
are lifted in elevators and loaded at towers in major 
cities. Each ship carries rope ladders for use at smaller 
stations, in open terrain, or in cases of dire emergency. 

A typical airship can reach a speed of 20 miles per 
hour in clear skies carrying up to 30 tons of cargo. 
Airships are most often employed by explorers and by 
wealthy travelers who demand luxury—clients who 
have a need to move quickly to places that might not be 
served by the lightning rail. 

Suppression. Although the elemental bound to the 
airship is essential for propulsion, the vessel's soar- 
wood hull provides its lighter-than-air buoyancy. When 
the elemental is suppressed, the ship remains aloft but 
can't move. The pilot always suppresses the elemental 
before docking, then uses ropes to maneuver the vessel 
into position. 


HOWARD LYON 


LYRANDAR GALLEONS 


A House Lyrandar galleon, also called an elemental 
galleon, resembles a Lyrandar airship except that it has 
a water elemental ring that propels it across oceans and 
seas instead of through the air. This vessel has a speed 
of 10 miles per hour but otherwise is similar to a Lyran- 
dar airship. 


ORIEN LIGHTNING RAIL 


The wondrous lightning rail system once linked the 
farreaches of the Kingdom of Galifar, prior to the Last 
War. Now the system is divided, splitinto eastern and 
western circuits. Reestablishing the conductor stone 
paths across Scions Sound and the Mournland is often 
discussed in the halls of power in the Five Nations, but 
formidable challenges are involved. 


How Ir Works 
A lightning rail train is made up of an elemental vessel 
linked to a series of connected carts, all of which float 
about 5 feet off the ground. Each cart, similar in form 
to a large wagon with no wheels, has a conductor stone 
embedded in its underside. A corresponding set of con- 
ductor stones laid out in a line on the ground interacts 
with the stones in the carts to form a rail for the train to 
follow. Lightning arcs between the two sets of stones, 
accounting for the system’s name. 

The elemental vessel at the front of the train, called 
a crew cart, holds a bound air elemental that propels 
the train along its route at a speed of about 30 miles 


per hour. The elemental appears as a ring of lightning 

encircling the crew cart while the train is in motion. A 

bound air elemental can move a train of up to ten carts 
without obvious strain, and most trains are configured 
accordingly. 

The other carts that make up the train have various 
purposes. A typical train has a crew cart at each end, 
with two cargo carts, four passenger carts, and two 
lounge carts in between. Doors at both ends of each cart 
enable crew and passengers to walk from one to the 
next, even while the train is in motion. Both crew carts 
are identical, except that the bound elemental in one is 
suppressed. On the return trip, the roles of the carts and 
the states of their elementals are reversed. 

Specialized carts of other sorts vary in configuration 
depending on their purpose and the degree of luxury 
afforded to them. Some have solid sides and roofs, while 
others are covered only with canvas. 

Map 4.10 shows the different carts that comprise most 
lightning rail trains. 

Operation. The vessel’s pilot, a House Orien dragon- 
marked heir, stands at the helm, high atop the crew cart, 
beneath the elemental binding struts. The pilot controls 
the elemental and communicates with it during the trip, 
watching the path ahead through broad windows that 
encircle the helm platform. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 235 


 MIIEREEEREREREREEES ЕЕ: ЕЕ SERIE, 


x z 

< 
о @ 
2 
< [5] 
a @ 
= ы 
—— — = ka 5 g 

oO 

[| O ONE 
л 2 е 
E — 3} Ed n £ 8 

\ © 
= [dj | LN IL aa 
E a E] z E Ў 
щл Ж [5] 
Cle] d Ib mL o i 
ц. E: E 
= == с < 
s T 
23 о 

Ф 
ч 


| 


MYSTERIOUS PASSENGERS 


d100 Passenger 

01-02 А human merchant of obvious means seems to be 
deliberately drawing attention, loudly calling out 
their name and the time of day. 

03-04 Two shifters drinking and spoiling for a fight. 

05-06 А warforged quietly reads a book called The Ma- 
chine Manifesto. 

07-08 Ahalf-elf sits down, says, "Beware—the wolf howls 
at midnight," and leaves without further comment. 

09-10 А gnome watches everyone carefully, writing down 
observations in a tiny orange book. 

11-12 A one-armed Brelish veteran verbally assaults any 
warforged he sees, blaming them for his injury. 

13-14 A well-dressed human sits awkwardly next to the 
wall, seemingly trying to avoid touching or being 
touched by anyone else. 

15-16 A cloaked figure moves slowly past, pausing briefly 
upon catching sight ofthe party. 

17-18 Ап acolyte of the Silver Flame preaches loudly in an 
attempt to convert an essentially captive audience. 

19-20 A destitute bard plays the harp with mediocre skill 
while asking for donations. 

21-22 А deaf couple communicate with each other by 
sign language, but suddenly stop when they notice 
they are being watched. 

23-24 A frail human with a small strongbox shackled to 
one of her wrists is in the company of two heavily 
armed half-orc bodyguards. 

25-26 Three hobgoblin mercenaries from House Deneith 
discuss their plans in their native tongue. 

27-28  Aharried dwarf tries to keep three children cor- 
ralled, but the oldest one keeps sneaking away. 

29-30 A bored changeling practices duplicating the faces 
of the guests. Not all of them are amused. 

31-32 A shifter glowers in a corner booth, looking angry 
at the world. 

33-34 А warforged bard uses its body as a percussion 
instrument to entertain the patrons. 

35-36 Adog with no apparent owner wanders around. 

37-38 Two Karrnathi soldiers seem extremely nervous 
and speak to no one. 

39-40 A halfling leads a tiny pet dinosaur on a leash, tug- 
ging at it whenever it tries to examine something. 

41-42 Ahalf-orc sits with a small potted plant, whisper- 
ing to it in Orc. 

43-44  Awell-dressed dwarf wearing eight copper rings 
paces restlessly. 

45-46 A halfling from House Ghallanda offers food and 
drink to all passengers except elves or half-elves. 

47-48 Ап elf bard from House Phiarlan whispers conspir- 
atorially with a member of the vehicle's crew. 

49-50 Akalashtar is trying too hard to pass as human, 
conspicuously and awkwardly using human slang. 

51-52  Ayoung half-elf in adventuring garb weeps openly. 


d100 
53-54 


55-56 


57-58 


59-60 


61-62 


63-64 


65—66 


67—68 
69—70 


71—72 


73-74 


75-76 


77-78 


79-80 


81-82 


83-84 


85-86 


87-88 


89—90 


91—92 


93-94 


95—96 


97—98 


99—00 


Passenger 

A silver dragon in human form observes the inter- 
actions of the clientele, paying close attention to 
any dragonmarked characters. 

A House Cannith tinker examines the structure of 
the vehicle closely, looking concerned and asking 
questions about possible escape procedures. 

A one-eyed human (actually an Inspired agent of 
the Dreaming Dark) watches everyone carefully. 

A disheveled human magewright offers meager 
magical skills in return for food or spare coins. 

A warforged leaning on a wooden staff carries on a 
conversation with the docent attached to its chest. 
A human pickpocket circulates among the passen- 
gers, looking for another victim. 

A human from Aundair obsessively checks and re- 
checks their traveling papers. 

An artificer tinkers with a new invention. 

An attractive half-elf makes advances toward a 
number of other passengers. 

An apprentice wizard draws arcane symbols on the 
window, glaring at anyone who interrupts. 

A dwarf with a bandaged wound checks it re- 
peatedly, occasionally pouring whiskey on it and 
wincing. 

A young, red-haired human flirtatiously tries to get 
other passengers to buy drinks. 

An Aerenal elf sits silently, trying to ignore the 
stares of other passengers. 

A disheveled old human loudly proclaims that the 
end of the world is nigh, according to the dragons. 
A human child is apparently traveling with no par- 
ent or guardian. 

A nervous goblin holds traveling papers out to any- 
one passing by, as if expecting to be challenged at 
any moment. 

Four kalashtar monks meditate, burning incense 
and chanting quietly. 

A rogue tries to swindle other passengers by using 
marked cards. 

A House Tharashk inquisitive examines the floor of 
the vessel very carefully, offering no explanation. 

A group of unremarkable farmers are transporting 
a strange device that bears Draconic runes. 

A cleric of the Sovereign Host seems annoyed and 
is rude to several pious passengers who ask for 
blessings. 

An older human reads the Korranberg Chronicle, 
loudly proclaiming outrage at every story. 

Roll again; the travelers are one or more change- 
lings appearing to be whatever the second roll 
indicates. 

Roll twice more; the two travelers indicated are 
about to come to a very obvious conflict of some 
kind (verbal or physical). 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 237 


The placement of conductor stone lines dictates where 
a lightning rail train can travel, but the pilot still must 
make operational decisions as the coach moves from 
one city to the next. The pilot controls the vessel's speed 
based on conditions around the train. When conductor 
stone lines split, as they do at various hubs along the 
way, the pilot selects the intended route and directs the 
elemental down the correct line, 

The crew of a train includes handful of chief stew- 
ards overseeing a number of lesser stewards who are 
charged with seeing to the needs of passengers and 
keeping cargo secured. 


LIGHTNING RAIL STATIONS 
Lightning rail stations, where passengers and cargo can 
be disembarked or loaded, are located in or just outside 
villages, towns, and cities along the conductor stone 
paths. There are no stations in the expanses between 
these settlements, and House Orien rules prohibit light- 
ning rail pilots from stopping anywhere but at a station. 
Stations throughout Khorvaire have a similar look 
and feel, to ensure that each one lives up to the high 
expectations of House Orien’s patrons. White and gold 
everbright lanterns continually illuminate each station. 
When а train pulls into the station, loading ramps are 
moved into position beside each cargo cart, and stairs 
by each passenger cart. The cargo is unloaded from one 
side of the train and the passengers from the other. 


Individual stations do have distinct touches that reflect 
local features. For example, the station in Gatherhold, in 
the Talenta Plains, is decorated with traditional halfling 
motifs and offers specialized stables for travelers leav- 
ing their dinosaurs behind. On a larger scale, the station 
at Passage, which is the seat of power for House Orien, 
is a multistoried structure designed as a monument to 
the majesty and storied history of the house. 


MYSTERIOUS PASSENGERS 


Lightning rails and airships are good places to encoun- 
ter a broad sample of Khorvaire's diverse population. 
You can use the Mysterious Passengers table (page 

241) to bring curious characters in contact with an 
adventuring party on any kind of journey. Each of these 
characters might spark an entire new adventure, or 
might be little more than a momentary diversion. Deter- 
mine details about these travelers are, and the stories 
behind them, as you see fit. 


GOLD DRAGON INNS 


Travelers and explorers making their way across Khor- 
vaire, especially in out-of-the-way areas, often find them- 
selves in need of a safe place to spend the night. Thanks 
to the efforts of House Ghallanda, there's no better 
place to take a rest than at one of the hundreds of Gold 
Dragon Inns that the house operates. 


ENNA 


JENN RAV 


Every city, most towns, and even some villages have a 
Gold Dragon Inn, and a large city might boast several. 
Every major road through the countryside has Gold 
Dragon Inns along much of its length, spaced roughly a 
day's travel apart. Sometimes an inn is the nucleus of a 
small community whose industry is focused on provid- 
ing for the needs of travelers. A few Gold Dragon Inns 
are found in locations that offer no other comforts for 
the weary traveler—for example, high in a pass through 
the Byeshk Mountains, deep in the Karrnwood, or be- 
neath the surface of the Mror Holds. 


INN FEATURES AND AMENITIES 

Every Gold Dragon Inn provides a standard menu of 
reliable services at reasonable rates. Prices are fixed 
(equal to those given in chapter 5 of the Player's Hand- 
book), and the quality of services is reliably modest, with 
some comfortable upgrades available. Every inn uses 
one of a small number of possible floor plans, and every 
inn's restaurant offers the same menu. 

The size and number of guest rooms can vary from 
inn to inn: a small roadside inn has four rooms and a 
moderately sized common room, while a thriving inn in 
a large city has forty rooms, a restaurant, and a sepa- 
rate common room, with two stages for entertainment. 
Because the inns are owned by House Ghallanda, the 
buildings all include accommodations for halfling-sized 
guests as well as taller folk. 

Because travelers often carry valuables with them, 
each inn has a heavy strongbox secured with an arcane 
lock spell. To make a traveler's stay more enjoyable, 
perhaps even memorable, House Ghallanda has ar- 
ranged with House Thuranni and House Phiarlan to 
employ guild-licensed entertainers at almost every Gold 
Dragon Inn. 

To populate an inn with some distinctive individ- 
uals, you can use the Mysterious Passengers ta- 
ble (page 237). 


INN ATTRACTIONS 
The Inn Attractions table offers some ideas for unique 
twists on an inn's character or atmosphere. 


INN ATTRACTIONS 


d6 Attraction 

1 The bartender is a changeling who is always mimick- 
ing the patrons for a laugh. 

2 Тһе innkeeper is 7 feet tall, claiming to have grown 2 
feet after venturing into the mist of the Mournland. 

3 Rumor has it that the innkeeper here is a gold dragon 
cloaked in a humanoid guise. 

4 This inn is haunted by a ghost who loves to sit by the 
fireplace and tell stories—but it has been accused of 
more sinister activities once the fire burns down to 
embers and the guests are in their beds. 

5 The inn has a blink dog that wanders around with her 
five pups, all of them eager for attention and treats. 

6 This inn offers "the true Talenta experience"—the 
halfling family that runs it keeps pet dinosaurs. 


ADVENTURES IN SHARN 


Chapter 3 describes the city of Sharn in detail; the 
following sections focus on the adventures that can hap- 
pen there. These adventures can unfold among the tall- 
est towers of Skyway, in the deepest depths of the Cogs, 
or anywhere in between. At the end of this chapter is an 
introductory adventure, "Forgotten Relics," set in Sharn. 

Sharn can be a grim place that makes good people 
bad and bad people worse. In its mean streets, gritty 
detectives contend with corrupt law officers while try- 
ing to foil the efforts of merciless gangs and monstrous 
thugs. In the highest towers, wealthy barons from the 
dragonmarked houses make shady deals with crime 
bosses, each of them making profits by exploiting both 
the ordinary folk and the well-heeled upper crust alike. 
Corruption can be found among the ranks of govern- 
ment, the watch, the temples, and large businesses. This 
atmosphere makes Sharn a perfect location for adven- 
tures inspired by the noir genre. 

Sharn can also be a place of unrelenting action, rang- 
ing from soarsleds speeding between the towertops to 
confrontations in the dungeon depths far beneath the 
city's lowest tier. Fallen angels, sinister shapeshifters, 
and monstrous mercenaries do battle with heroes from 
all walks of life, while unscrupulous collectors and 
smugglers carry on a brisk trade in artifacts brought 
back from the cyclopean ruins of Xen'drik. All these 
factors make Sharn an equally ideal location for adven- 
tures inspired by pulp action. 

You can use the Life in the City table to generate ideas 
for adventures set in Sharn. 


LIFE IN THE CITY 
d6 Adventure Seed 

1 A homicidal changeling has killed two members of 
different dragonmarked houses, and doesn't plan to 
stop until one heir from each of the dragonmarked 
houses is dead. 

2  Ajeweled statuette has fallen into the hands of House 
Tarkanan, and a powerful member of the Aurum will 
stop at nothing to obtain it. The statuette's real worth 
lies in the secret plans hidden inside it. 

3  AkKarrnathi undead soldier troubled by sporadic 
memories of his former life is trying to locate his 
wife and family, who have fled Karrnath and now live 
somewhere in the lower districts of Sharn. 

4  Ashifter shopkeeper in Lower Northedge is being ha- 
rassed by ruffians who believe that she and her family 
are lycanthropes. 

5  Adragonmarked baron is found dead in her Upper 
Central mansion, seemingly a victim of some sort of 
ritual slaying. Outside help is needed to solve this 
delicate matter. 

6  Aradiant idol (see chapter 6) has formed a cult that 
attracts professors and staff of Morgrave University, 
promising them knowledge beyond imagining in ex- 
change for their worship. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


240 


If you're creating a campaign based in Sharn, it's a 
good idea to establish a location that serves as a home 
base for the adventurers. You can use the Home Base 
table as a source of inspiration, or you can develop a 
unique location. 

Work with the players to develop the connections that 
each character has to the site. If the location is a tavern, 
for instance, a bard character might perform there two 
nights a week. A fighter could be a regular who has a 
drink named after them. A ranger could be the unde- 
feated champion of the local darts league. If the players 
enjoy this creative exercise, you could also allow each 
player to add a physical detail to the place or to describe 
one of the location's NPCs—the stuffed gorgon head 
over the hearth, another regular among the customers, 
and so on. This is a way to make this location truly feel 
like home, and to give each player a personal investment 
in it. This location becomes an automatic starting point 
for adventures, the place where the adventurers will 
meet with patrons and conduct business. 

The Home Base table can also be useful to determine 
the venue if a patron wants to set up a meeting at a neu- 
tral location. 


THE STREETS OF SHARN 


The Street Events tables starting on page 241 are 

filled with random events the characters can witness 
while they wander around Sharn. You can expand on an 
entry to make it the start of an encounter or adventure, 
though not every event needs to draw the characters into 
a longer story. Each table is meant to be used on a differ- 
ent level of Sharn: the lower wards, middle wards, upper 
wards, and Skyway. You can choose results from the 
tables, or randomly determine what happens, and you 
can modify results as you please, tailoring the details 

of an event to be a better fit for a particular district. The 
events on the tables are phrased so they can be read 
aloud or summarized to players. 


WHAT HAPPENS NEXT? 
After the adventurers witness an event on the streets 
of Sharn, what happens next depends largely on what 
they do. Maybe they avert their eyes and keep walking, 
as many residents of Sharn have trained themselves to 
do. Maybe they rush to get involved, or poke around del- 
icately to learn more. An event like one of these doesn't 
have to be the start of an adventure, but it can be—par- 
ticularly if it really catches your players' imagination. 
When the players decide to learn more, it's up to you 
to figure out what they can discover. Ask yourself these 
questions: 


* How did the people involved in this event get to this 
place? What were they doing earlier today? Where 
were they going when this event happened? 

* Why isn't anyone else getting involved? What is com- 
plicating this situation? 

• What do the people involved hope is going to happen 
next? What are they afraid might happen next? How 
are the circumstances changed because the charac- 
ters have witnessed the event? 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


Home BASE 
412 Location 

1 Тһе Drunken Dragon (Clifftop, Upper Dura) is а 
tavern frequented by members of the Clifftop Ad- 
venturer's Guild. It has a wide selection of spirits, 
and its walls are covered with adventuring trophies. 
The owner, a middle-aged halfling named Hascal 
d'Ghallanda, is a former adventurer who lost an eye 
and a leg in Xen'drik; he always has a story to share. 

2 The Anvil (Callestan, Lower Dura) was one of the 
first Ghallanda halls in Sharn. Its glory days are long 
past, but the young innkeeper, Eranna d'Ghallanda, is 
determined to keep it alive. The Anvil is frequented by 
members ofthe Boromar Clan and is a good choice if 
one of the player characters has ties to this group. 

3 The Dezina Museum of Antiquities (University, Upper 
Menthis) is attached to the library of Morgrave Uni- 
versity. The museum has a remarkable collection of 
relics, but it's always looking for more. The curator is 
an elf named Emeron Sennared. He might be a per- 
sonal friend or former teacher of one of the adventur- 
ers, or simply one who indulges their enthusiasm for 
antiquities and exotic locations. 

4 Coldflame Keep (High Hope, Middle Northedge) is a 
garrison church dedicated to the Silver Flame. Once 
it supported a troop of templars, but it was largely 
abandoned during the war and now maintains a mini- 
mal staff. The priest, Mazin Tana, is a faithful servant 
ofthe Silver Flame and will provide modest food and 
lodgingto adventurers who aretryingto make the city 
a better place. 

5 The Red Hammer (Blackbones, the Cogs) caters to 
warforged. It is run by two warforged, the envoy Blue 
and a juggernaut named Crucible. Although this place 
is a haven for warforged, other humanoids are al- 
lowed inside if their warforged allies vouch for them. 

6 A Gold Dragon Inn (described earlier in this chapter) 
operated by House Ghallanda and located in almost 
any part of Sharn. 

7 The district of Fallen (Lower Dura) was abandoned 
after a floating tower fell on it. The adventurers might 
have taken over an old temple or tavern on the edge 
of the district. 

8 An abandoned bell tower, which could be anywhere in 
the city. The spells that drovethe massive mechanism 
failed long ago. 

9 An abandoned library, damaged during the war or 
thought to be cursed or haunted. 

10  Ashuttered tavern, whichis a failed business tied to 
the family of one of the adventurers. 

11 Ifone ofthe adventurers is a noble, the characters’ 
base of operations is in the basement of the family 
estate or a tower apartment owned (but not currently 
used) by a dotty old aunt. 

12 A ramshackle skycoach tethered to a condemned 
tower on the edge of the city. 


LOWER SHARN STREET EVENTS 


d100 Event 

01-02 A minotaur holding a large piece of wood that 
could serve as a maul approaches you and politely 
asks if you have any copper to spare. 

03-04 Down a nearby alleyway, a dwarf punches a goblin 
in the stomach, then walks away laughing. 

05-08  Athin human child has been following you, but 
never gets too close. She keeps coughing, and you 
can see red marks on her neck that might be an 
aberrant dragonmark. 

09-10 A human priest of Boldrei wheels a cart of bread 
loaves through the city, giving food to the home- 
less. 

11-15 A goblin pushing a cart ofrusty weapons and 
broken clay pots calls out, “Real artifacts of an- 
cient Dhakaan for sale! Recovered from the ruins 
below!" 

16-18 А man dressed in the livery of House Vadalis 
descends a tower wall mounted on the back of a 
giant spider. He shouts, "Need a ride? No faster 


way to get to the middle and upper wards! Reason- 


able rates!" 

19-22  Anogre eating several rats on a skewer spits out a 
rodent skull at your feet. 

23-26 A playful stray mastiffwags its tail as it ap- 
proaches, drops a very large egg at your feet, and 
looks up expectantly. 

27-30 A small, jovial crowd gathers around a goblin and 
a kobold that are getting ready to have an arm 
wrestling match. A dwarf calls for the crowd to 
place their bets. 

31-34 Three harpies fly through the streets singing a 
jolly drinking song. Each carries a bucket around 
her neck, and passersby occasionally drop coins 
in one. 

35-38 A human woman and a warforged with a silvered 
body are walking down the street together. They're 
too well dressed for this district, and are looking 
around as if lost. 

39-42 А Khoravar half-elf in the robes of an oracle ap- 
proaches and promises to give you the answer to 
all of life's problems for 42 copper crowns. 

43-44 A human and an elf kiss passionately in an alley 
near your path. They notice you and quickly move 
apart. 

45-46 Three shifter children run by you, yelling and chas- 
ing each other with wooden swords. They duck 
into a boarded-up building. 

47-48 “Stop her! She stole my necklace!" a priest of the 
Sovereign Host cries, pointing to a grimy halfling 
clutching a silver chain and climbing up the side 
of a tower. 

49-50  Ayoung woman using a crutch and missing a leg 
approaches, asking if you can spare any coin to 
help a Brelish veteran of the Last War. 


d100 
51-52 


53-56 


57-60 


61-62 


63-64 


65-66 


67-68 


69-72 


73-74 


75-76 


77-80 


81-82 


83-84 


85-86 


87-90 


91-92 


93-94 


95-96 


97-00 


Event 

Cries of alarm fill the street as a wooden crate 
from somewhere above crashes down into the 
lower city. 

A splash of unidentified, putrid liquid falls from 
above, soaking you. 

The generally unpleasant smell of the lower wards 
is pierced by the scent of something delicious be- 
ing baked nearby. 

A gnome sits at a table with a sign attached to it 
that reads, “I say Breland would have won the Last 
War. Change my mind." 

Two changelings sit on a bench in front of a tav- 
ern, sharing a flask. They take turns changing 
their forms into the people who enter and exit the 
building. 

A human woman shouts at a group of Cyran ref- 
ugees, "Go home! Stop taking our jobs. Let the 
Mournland have you!" 

A group of students from Morgrave University 
moves through the street, asking for directions to 
Dragoneyes. 

You turn down an empty street. A door suddenly 
materializes on a nearby building that previously 
showed no entrances. 

Faded graffiti on a wall reads, "Need someone 
knifed? Tarkanan's got you covered!” 

A crowd gathers around a kobold playing a pan 
flute and leading a group of rats in a merry dance. 
Four orcs jab at an ochre jelly with long staffs, try- 
ing to herd the ooze into the sewers. 

Several Cyran refugees are gathered in a circle, 
singing a haunting song. 

An old goblin offers to pierce your ears or nose for 
5 copper crowns. She claims, "It will be painless. | 
know magic!" 

A figure in red robes preaches, "The Last War was 
not the last! As long as the monarchy rules in Bre- 
land, another war is inevitable. Rise up!" 

A member of the Sharn Watch looks uncom- 
fortable as she wanders the street. It's clear she 
doesn't come down here often. 

Two humans run into an alley, drawing daggers as 
they go. 

Two drunken humans exit a tavern singing a Karr- 
nathi battle hymn. Another human shouts at them 
to "shut up or get shut up." The drunken pair 
sings louder in response. 

Two children reeking of sewage argue over who 
gets to wear a shiny helmet that sits on the 
ground between them. 

You find a pamphlet on the ground advertising the 
Silvermist Theater. Someone has scrawled on it, 
"The real party is in the basement." 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


UPPER SHARN STREET EVENTS 


d100 
01-03 
04-06 
07-09 


10-12 


13-15 
16-18 
19-21 
22-25 
26-29 


30-32 


33-35 


36-38 


39-40 


41-42 


43-44 
45-46 
47-48 


49-51 


| 242 


Event 

A group of adventurers approaches, telling you to 
move along and stop trying to steal their business. 
(If the characters belong to the Deathsgate Guild 
or the Clifftop Adventurer's Guild, these could be 
members of the rival guild.) 

Outside a House Kundarak bank, a human noble 
screams at a dragonmarked dwarf, "What do you 
mean it's lost?" 

A priest of Kol Korran preaches to a crowd, saying, 
"The best way to invest in yourself is to invest in 
your gods." 

An elf riding a pegasus with bulging saddlebags 
asks you for directions to the Aurora Gallery. 

Two drunk dwarves pass a bottle of spirits back 
and forth and sing a bawdy song. Passersby are 
mortified. 

Two kalashtar play dragonchess at an outdoor ta- 
ble. They move pieces without touching them. 

A halfling chef stands in a large skycoach that is 
equipped with a stove, oven, and washbasin. Sev- 
eral spectral hands prepare and plate food as the 
chef serves a party of smiling customers. 

A harpy decked out in colorful ribbons flies over- 
head, calling, “Get the best deals on adventuring 
gear at Old Claggin’s in Clifftop.” 

Some Morgrave students follow their dwarf 
professor onto a lift as she says, “Next stop: the 
Cogs!” 

An out-of-breath gnome carrying bagpipes asks 
you for directions to Kavarrah Concert Hall. 

A flustered gnome carries a stack of papers taller 
than he is—unaware of the plume of smoke com- 
ing from inside a scroll case slung on his back. 
You walk by a shirtless elf tattooed from head to 
waist with images of dragons battling each other. 
A groomed hobgoblin wearing a jeweled vest 
approaches you and says, “Ah! Adventurers. Any 
interest in securing some Dhakaani relics for me?” 
Someone has painted, “The crown dies with 
Boranel!” across the gates of a noble’s mansion. 
A member of the Sharn Watch is talking to the 
household staff. 

A magewright offers to shine your shoes instantly 
with magic for 2 gold galifars, saying, “You can’t 
be seen with those dirty things up here.” 

A human wearing the livery of House Vadalis 
struggles to carry a 3-foot-tall speckled blue egg 
down the street. 

An aasimar oracle approaches and promises to 
give you the answer to all the problems that ever 
existed for 42 gold galifars. 

A shifter with flowers in her hair and a wand in her 
hand offers to magically gild any item of clothing 
you wear for 20 gold galifars. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


d100 
52-54 


55-57 


58-60 


61-63 


64—66 


67—70 


71—73 


74—76 


77-80 


81-82 


83-84 


85-86 


87-88 


89—90 


9197 


93-94 


95-96 


97—98 


99—00 


Event 

Four warforged work together to operate an enor- 
mous tarrasque puppet as publicity for a new play 
at the Art Temple. 

A horrified crowd is gathered around a burning ef- 
figy of King Boranel. No one claims responsibility 
for the act. 

A human noble is berating a warforged servant for 
losing her invitation to the next Tain Gala. 

A young noble proposes to his boyfriend in a 
beautiful garden on a tower balcony. Nearby, a 
changeling looks on in tears. 

You walk down a path lined with trees on which 
are growing candy-coated apples. 

Three children sparring with wooden swords play 
dangerously close to the edge of a bridge. 

A kalashtar on the street approaches you, saying, 
"| can help you talk with the dead. Is there anyone 
you miss?" 

An artist offers to draw caricatures of everyone in 
your group at the same time by using several mag- 
ically animated quills. 

You approach a fresco painted on the ground that 
depicts King Boranel ir'Wynarn. As you get closer, 
the fresco speaks, delivering an inspiring line 
taken from one of the king's speeches. 

A dragonborn standing near several soarsleds 
offers you a tour of upper Sharn's most impressive 
mansions. 

Two nobles, one Aundairian and one Brelish, heat- 
edly debate which of their countries would have 
wonthe war had it been fought to a conclusion. 

A gilded warforged plays a sad song on a trumpet, 
honoring those who fell during the Last War. 

A group of well-outfitted adventurers snicker and 
whisper to each other as you pass. 

You turn a corner and notice a shifter who imme- 
diately puts her hands in her pockets and starts 
whistling, obviously trying to act inconspicuous. 
A pseudodragon flies out of a nearby bush. As 

the playful creature licks your faces, you notice it 
wears a collar engraved with the letter M. 

You walk past a placid pond in a small park filled 
with colorful fish. An attendant removes dead fish 
from the water with a net. 

You come near a mansion, and an illusion of an 
old man dressed in noble finery appears. “Get off 
my lawn!” the figure gripes. 

An elf child with a faerie dragon on a leash walks 
toward you and asks if you'd like to touch the 
exotic pet. 

You find a small brass key on the ground that 
glows blue whenever it is touched. 


1 square = 5 feet 


Residential 
Tower 


Tailgate 
Market ^ 


| 


|1" Suspended Garden 


| 


Stalls 


Trinket$Store A í 


Mar 4.11: SHARN HEIGHTS 


Xue 


244. 


SKYWAY STREET EVENTS 


912 Event 

1 A few gargoyles perch on а mansion's walls. They're 
seemingly there for security, but they offer lively com- 
mentary about everyone who passes by. 

2 A noble with auburn hair held in a silver diadem holds 
a darkwood staff encrusted with dragonshards, and 
taps it impatiently while waiting for a skycoach. 

3 You pass by a hope well. Supposedly, any coins you 
throw in the well are gathered and transported down 
to help the troubled people of the lower wards. 

4 “Make way! Make way!” A boy clears a path for a jew- 
el-encrusted warforged wearing a lavish fur cloak. 

5 You come upon a fountain of cold fire. In the center, 

a brass dragon spits brilliant flames into the air, and 
they spill down and out into the surrounding pool. 

6  Ateam of handlers from House Vadalis walk along- 
side a small gelatinous cube. "We're trying it out, see- 
ing ifit can help keep things clean," they say. 

7  Amagewright offers to use a simple charm to polish 
the coins in your purse for just 3 copper crowns. 

"We wouldn't want anyone here to get grime on their 
gloves from handling those filthy coins ofyours from 
the lower wards." 

8 Atour group pauses to marvel at a mansion. 

A large statue commemorates Lord Dalian ir'Tain, a 
noble philanthropist lost at sea at the end of the Last 
War. He holds a spyglass in one hand and a miniature 
dragon turtle in the other. 

10 А warforged with roses twined around her limbs of- 
fers to sell you a bouquet for five silver sovereigns. 

11  Itstarts to drizzle. A well-dressed half-elf glares at the 
sky and snaps his fingers. The rain immediately stops. 

12 А member of the Sharn Watch stops you. “Can | help 
you? Are you sure you're in the right ward?" 


SHARN HEIGHTS 


Sharn heights are intersections of bridges and platforms 
in Sharn that make the perfect place for a meeting, 
theft, or assassination. The crisscrossing paths of Sharn 
heights allow criminals to come and go in different 
directions, looking like normal passersby as they trade 
information, cut purses, or throw people to their dooms. 


SHARN HEIGHTS FEATURES 

Map 4.11 shows a typical Sharn location that contains 
intersections of bridges and platforms. Each bridge 

is 20 feet higher (on average) than the one immedi- 
ately below it. 

The bridges are connected to businesses and resi- 
dences. The residences are usually locked, while most 
shops lock up at night. The taverns and gambling dens 
are open for business all day and well into the night. 
One of the bridges connects to a skycoach parking 
station, which houses several of those vehicles. Other 
bridges lead to an elevator, garden overlooks, and 
staircases that take pedestrians farther up and down 
into the city. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


SHARN HEIGHTS ADVENTURES 

Adventures in Sharn heights are perfect for pulp action 
scenes. Narrow bridges, moving platforms, and great 
heights come together in a public place that's a perfect 
location for swashbuckling battles, tense hostage nego- 
tiations, and over-the-top heists. The Sharn Heights Ad- 
ventures table offers reasons why your characters might 
need to visit such a location. In addition, the characters 
could meet with a Boromar Clan or House Tarkanan 
patron in Sharn heights. 


SHARN HEIGHTS ADVENTURES 


d4 Adventure Goal 

1 Pose as House Tarkanan operatives to capture a 
wanted criminal with an aberrant dragonmark. The 
criminal is waiting on a bridge for his House Tarkanan 
escortto arrive. 

2 Obtain a satchel of evidence obtained by a goblin who 
has infiltrated Daask. The goblin, who is working with 
the Boromar Clan or the Sharn Watch to take down 
key Daask operatives, is waiting on a bridge. 

3 Break into a building connected to Sharn heights to 
steal something valuable. 

4 Stop acrooked Sharn Watch official who is trying to 
reach a skycoach and flee the city to escape arrest. 


ee SN 
NARCOTICS IN SHARN 
From the owners of incense-clouded dens to fast-talking 
street dealers, many entrepreneurs—legitimate and oth- 
erwise—make a profitable business selling narcotics in 
Sharn. The following drugs are just two of the most notori- 
ous substances available in the City of Towers and beyond. 
Dragon’s Blood. Introduced into Sharn by Daask, drag- 
on's blood is a potent and highly addictive stimulant. In 
addition to inducing euphoria, it can enhance spellcasting 
ability or even temporarily imbue a user with the ability to 
cast sorcerer spells. The drug’s effects are potentially dan- 
gerous and always unpredictable. This isn’t something a 
player character should want to use; adventurers are more 
likely to interfere with Daask smugglers or deal with an 
addict who accidentally casts a fireball in a crowded street. 
The specific effects of dragon's blood are up to you, but 
you can take inspiration from the Wild Magic Surge table 
in the Player's Handbook. 
Dreamlily. A psychoactive liquid that smells and tastes 
like your favorite beverage, essence of dreamlily is a 
Sarlonan opiate. First imported to help manage pain 
during the Last War, it’s now the most commonly abused 
substance in Sharn. Though dreamlily isn't illegal if used 
for medicinal purposes, it's heavily taxed, and thus most 
dreamlily is smuggled in and sold on the black market. 
Dreamlily dens can be found across the lower wards. Con- 
suming dreamlily causes disorienting euphoria and brings 
about remarkable resistance to pain. A creature under the 
effects of dreamlily is poisoned for 1 hour. While poisoned 
in this way, the creature is immune to fear, and the first 
time it drops to O hit points without being killed outright, 
it drops to 1 hit point instead. A dose of dreamlily costs 
around 1 gp, or up to ten times that if purchased through 
legal channels. There are many varieties of the drug, how- 
ever, and the duration or the price might vary accordingly. 


= — —— —» 


CRIME IN SHARN 


Crime is part of everyday life in Sharn, and just as in 
any other city, sometimes such acts are carried out by 
people who have no ties to organized crime. An upstand- 
ing citizen could be driven to murder by passion. A ref- 
ugee could become a cutpurse out of desperation. The 
rowdy Brelish veterans who call themselves the Broken- 
bridge Brawlers don't think of themselves as criminals, 
and they have no connection to any larger organization. 

Any professional criminal in Sharn, however, is likely 
to be affiliated with one of four organizations. The Boro- 
mar Clan is the most entrenched and widespread of the 
four, and has dominated the business of crime in Sharn 
for centuries. The group called Daask is on the rise, 
directly challenging the Boromars. The Tyrants and 
House Tarkanan are smaller organizations with more 
specialized areas of operation. These groups are sum- 
marized in the Criminal Organizations of Sharn table 
and described in the later sections that follow. 

Each of these organizations has a core of operatives 
and enterprises under the direct control of its leaders. 
But each also has a network of secondary relationships. 

For example, the Little Fingers are a group of pick- 
pockets and cutpurses that work in the Bazaar of 
Middle Dura. They aren't directly tied to the Boromar 
family. But the master of the gang paysa tithe to the 
Boromars, and if the Boromars send word to them that 
certain targets are to be avoided, the Little Fingers 
do so. In return, the Boromars ensure that the Sharn 
Watch in Middle Dura largely leaves the Fingers alone. 
So although the Boromar Clan itself has a few hundred 
members, it has interaction with thousands of criminals 
throughout the city. 

Chapter 3 provides an overview of the four major 
criminal organizations and a body of information about 
them that's more or less common knowledge in Sharn. 
This section explores the roles that each one could play 
in a Sharn-based campaign. 

Although the powerful organizations in Sharn have 
a hand in most criminal activity, sometimes you might 
want an adventure to involve a smaller gang. The Street 
Gangs table presents a number of lesser criminal 
groups adventurers could tangle with. 


CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS IN SHARN 


Organization Description 
Influential criminal syndicate founded 
by Talenta halflings, with blood ties to 


House Jorasco 


The Boromar Clan 


Daask Violent monsters and thugs loyal to 
Droaam and answerable to Sora Katra 
House Tarkanan Enemies of the dragon marked houses 
dedicated to protecting and training 
individuals with aberrant dragonmarks 
The Tyrants Evil-minded changelings interested in 
gathering secrets and using them for all 


sorts of nefarious purposes 


STREET GANGS 


Gang 
The Broken Mirror 


The Brokenbridge 
Brawlers 
The Eyes 


The Five Faces 
The Gremlins 


The Little Fingers 


The Mourners 


Muut 


The Quiet Folk 


The Red Jackals 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


Description 

Khoravar half-elves who often target 
elves with acts of violence, frequently 
disfiguring their victims 

Brelish veterans who antagonize Cyrans 
and former soldiers from other nations 
Collection of odd individuals who paint 
symbolic eyes on their clothing and 
armor and claim to see things others 
cannot (in fact, they are a cult dedicated 
to the daelkyr Belashyrra and serve a 
hidden beholder) 

Changeling pickpockets who work 
Middle Menthis 

Gnomes and halflings who specialize in 
illusion magic 

Child pickpockets active in Middle Dura 
(their leaders are adult halflings loosely 
allied with the Boromar Clan) 

Cyran veterans who present themselves 
as a vigilante militia that protects Cyran 
refugees, but some say they're just pur- 
suing selfish interests 

Bugbears in Lower Dura who have been 
"protecting" Malleon's Gate for decades 
(recently they've aligned with Daask, but 
their focus is their home district) 
Goblins who live in the sewers below Ta- 
vick's Landing and avoid violence, using 
stealth and knowledge of the sewers to 
pull off their thievery 

Primarily shifters and half-orcs who live 
in the sewers below Menthis and clash 
with anyone who invades their territory 


246 


CLawroor Dinosaur 


THE BOROMAR CLAN 


The most powerful criminal organization in Sharn 
started as a family of halfling immigrants from the Tal- 
enta Plains. Operating out of its headquarters and key 
holdings in the Little Plains district of Middle Menthis, 
the Boromar Clan controls gambling, smuggling, and 
theft in Sharn. Most of the city's burglars, pickpockets, 
and fences either work for or pay tithes to the organiza- 
tion. The Boromar Clan's network of extortion, bribery, 
and blackmail extends from Lower Dura to Skyway. 

The Boromars' influence extends beyond criminal 
enterprises into many legitimate circles of power. Ilyra 
Boromar sits on the city council, and a number of 
other councilors are close allies of the clan. The family 
has ties by marriage to House Jorasco. A Boromar at- 
tends every Skyway party. The family owns tenements 
throughout Sharn and invests in shipping, storing both 
legal goods and contraband in many of the warehouses 
in Precarious and Cogsgate. In many districts, local offi- 
cials and Sharn Watch officers have been taking bribes 
from the Boromars for generations. 

The criminal nature of the Boromar Clan is an open 
secret, and in some districts the Boromars are seen as 
hometown heroes. They are immigrants who've made 
good, common people who've risen to rival the barons 
and kings. They give the people what they want, whether 
it's untaxed gambling, cheap spirits, or dreamlily. The 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


clan operates with a degree of impunity because its op- 
eratives adhere to an unspoken rule: whenever possible, 
criminal acts against individuals should target tourists 
and travelers. Boromar pickpockets don't prey on the 
people they see every day. Instead, they seek out the 
many strangers who move around the city all the time. 
The Watch officer who turns a blind eye to a pickpocket 
thus feels justified, since it's not the citizens of Sharn 
that are victimized. 

Boromar's longstanding status at the head of Sharn's 
criminal enterprises has recently come under challenge. 
After nearly a decade of slow growth, the Droaamish 
mob known as Daask has recently started targeting 
Boromar holdings. The halfling clan hasn't faced such 
a serious threat before, and it's scrambling to figure out 
how to deal with Daask's guerrilla tactics. 


BOROMAR OPERATIONS 

The Boromar Clan has ahand in all types of crime in 
Sharn. Most Boromar leaders despise unnecessary 
violence, but the clan has a host of enforcers and a hand- 
ful of capable assassins. The clan's web of extortion is 
so thoroughly woven into society that many residents 
simply consider it another form of tax. Boromar spe- 
cializes in three fields of activity: gambling, smuggling, 
and thievery. 

Gambling isn't illegal in Sharn, but all legal games are 
taxed by the Brelish crown and are required to follow 
regulations that spoil the experience for many. Boro- 
mar's operations are cheaper to participate in and offer 
the lure of greater profits. 

Smuggling has become an increasingly important 
business since the Last War disrupted many traditional 
lines of trade. The clan's primary import is the narcotic 
called dreamlily. But the Boromars traffic in a wide 
range of goods, from arcane and alchemical weapons to 
foreign luxury items that have been made scarce by em- 
bargoes and sanctions. Under Boranel's law, it's forbid- 
den to sell Aundairian wine in Breland, so if you want 
the good stuff, you'll need to work with the Boromars. 

Boromar-sanctioned acts of thievery include the ac- 
tivities of the ubiquitous pickpockets that can be found 
across the city as well as the well-planned jobs of profes- 
sional burglars. As mentioned earlier, Boromar thieves 
focus their attention on visitors to Sharn, thus avoiding 
friction with local law enforcement. When appropriate, 
stolen goods are transported out of the city by the fences 
and porters that drive the clan's smuggling operations. 


BOROMAR CLAN NPCs _ 


The Boromar Clan employs people ofall races, but most 
of the organization and nearly all of its inner circle are 
made up of halflings. Some of the organization’s most 
important people are these: 


* Saidan Boromar is the current patriarch of the family. 
He grew up in Lower Dura and worked as a thief and 
assassin there before taking over the organization. 

* Mala Boromar d'Jorasco is an heir of House Jorasco 
and the Boromar family matriarch. Her position in 
the family ensures that important members of the 
Boromar Clan receive Jorasco healing services at no 


cost to them; Saidan reimburses Jorasco from the 
clan's treasury. 

* Councilor Ilyra Boromar is the eldest daughter of 
Mala and Saidan and a member of the city council. 
The Boromars' enemies on the council have grown 
bolder in the face of increased Daask attacks against 
the clan, and some of Ilyra's influence has eroded 
as a result. 

• Halak Boromar is the family's chief enforcer. A recent 
immigrant from the Talenta Plains, Halak leads the 
Clawfoots, the Boromars' personal guard, and is an 
accomplished warrior. 

* Ilsa Boromar is the family’s leader in Callestan. She is 

ruthless in protecting her family's interests. 

Castar, a gnome, is the lone non-halfling in the Boro- 

mars' inner circle. He serves as Saidan's chief advisor 

and the organization's intelligence expert. The fam- 
ily looks to Castar to come up with a plan to defeat 

Daask, but so far none of his ideas have worked. 


SHADY NIGHTCLUB 


The Boromars control gambling dens and nightclubs 
throughout Sharn. The finer establishments are places 
for the Boromar Clan to wine, dine, bribe, and extort the 
city's powerful elite. At the other end of the spectrum, 
the run-down gambling halls and dreamlily dens in the 
poorer districts are places where those in the employ of 
the Boromars plan heists, store smuggled goods, hide 
bodies and wanted criminals, interrogate Daask spies, 
make good on threats, and unwind. 

These places are public and expertly run by the city's 
most powerful criminals, so an openly violent approach 
to problem-solving in such a spot is likely to end in 
tragedy for the characters. When combat does occur in 
one of these nightclubs, it's usually because the instiga- 
tors have brought enough strength of arms to take on 
the Boromars. 


SHADY NIGHTCLUB FEATURES 

The nightclub shown on map 4.12 could be tied to the 
Boromar Clan, or it could be any Sharn nightclub you 
need it to be. Made to accommodate customers from 
halflings to ogres, the club's double doorways are 10 feet 
wide, and its ceilings are 15 feet tall. Hooks, shelves, 
handrails, and furniture are provided at three different 
levels and sizes. 

The nightclub has three entrances. Two are connected 
to the outside: a main entrance guarded by a bouncer 
and a back door that is locked from inside. Another 
locked entrance is connected to a stair that leads up and 
down to other levels in the nightclub's tower. 

The club's main entrance opens into an entry vesti- 
bule. The attached cloakroom has a hidden door that 
leads to a secret room where criminal meetings and ille- 
gal activities take place. 

The casino floor in the nightclub has tables running 
games of chance, a bar, and a raised stage. Bathrooms, 
a kitchen, and private rooms for high-roller games (and 
more criminal meetings and illegal activities) are acces- 
sible from the casino floor. 

Boromar's security and management offices are 
connected by a hallway to the casino floor, the secret 


meeting room, and a second secret area used to store 
illegal contraband or captives. Occupants of both offices 
can see into these attached areas by way of magic one- 
way mirrors. 


SHADY NIGHTCLUB ADVENTURES 

The Shady Nightclub Adventures table offers reasons for 
the characters to enter one of these dangerous places. If 
the characters have a Boromar patron, that NPC could 
use a shady nightclub as a base of operations. 


SHADY NIGHTCLUB ADVENTURES 
d6 Adventure Goal 

1 Get accepted into a private high-stakes card game, 
and try to win the grand prize. 

2 Find out which Sharn Watch captain has a private 
meeting with a Boromar fence, and steal whatever the 
captain is buying. 

Track down a missing noble hunted by assassins. 
Steal a hidden stash of dreamlily. 

Broker a deal with the Boromars on behalf of a city 
councilor who's too scared to face the family in 
person. 

6 Find evidence that could be used to blackmail a 
member of a dragonmarked house. 


BOROMAR VILLAINS 


With few exceptions, Boromar villains shun violence 
and would prefer to bribe, deceive, or manipulate the 
characters rather than send a squad of goons to attack 
them. That said, any of these villains and their minions 
will respond in kind if they are attacked or threatened. 

Examples of Boromar Clan villains appear on the 
Boromar Clan Villains table. 


BOROMAR VILLAINS 


d6 Villain 

1 А halfling dreamlily dealer (an excoriate of House 
Ghallanda) smooth-talks new customers into sam- 
pling her wares. If pressed, she can call in favors from 
a number of dangerous clients. 

2 A judge known as "the Turnkey” always rules in favor 
of Boromar Clan members. 

3 A halfling pickpocket using alter self to pose as a 
child of another race plants contraband on people the 
Boromars are trying to frame. 

4 А Воготаг rogue has kidnapped the child of a 
strongly anti-Boromar city councilor. 

5 Akalashtar psychic serves the clan by detecting 
thoughts that suggest possibilities for blackmail. 
What stray thought might they pick up from an 
adventurer? 

6  ABoromar smuggler is bringing unstable explosives 
or an especially addictive form of dreamlily into 
Sharn, and innocents are being hurt. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


ji 
Pn 
UP ues 


11 


View 
Downstairs 


Meeting Room 


Back Entrance $ = „рван . 
а Ж of | „Q SPEM 


Map 4.12: NiGHTCLUB 


j 248 CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


BOROMAR CLAN CAMPAIGN THEMES 


The true power of the Boromar Clan liesin its institu- 
tions: watch officers who have been allied to the clan 
for generations, judges who are blackmailed into com- 
pliance, and officials who receive lucrative bribes in ex- 
change for their cooperation. Adventurers who oppose 
the Boromars might discover that people they think of 
as friends and allies are in the pocket of the clan. The 
Boromars are villains in the noir tradition, and adven- 
turers determined to tangle with them will be drawn 
down into the mud. 

The Boromar Clan could serve as a group patron for 
a party of adventurers, as described in chapter 1. The 
Boromar Clan Assignments table provides goals for 
adventurers who are working with the clan, and the 
"Crime Syndicate" section of chapter 1 includes addi- 
tional ideas. 


BOROMAR CLAN ASSIGNMENTS 
d6 Assignment 
1 Find evidence of an affair between two members of 
different dragonmarked houses. 
Collect from a fence who is late with a payment. 
3  Stealthe bank records of a city councilor. 
4 Convince a Sharn Watch captain to aggressively root 
out Daask operatives. 
5 Retrieve a package of dreamlily that has gone astray. 
6 Discover the location of a Daask safe house. 


BOROMAR CLAN ADVENTURE Hooks 


The Boromar Clan Adventure Hooks table presents 
ideas for additional adventures themed around the 
Boromar Clan. 


BOROMAR CLAN ADVENTURE HOOKS 


d4 Adventure Hook 

1 Daask forces capture Boromar family members who 
are visiting Sharn from the Talenta Plains. The Boro- 
mars offer a reward for the safe return of their family 
and a larger reward for the kidnappers' heads, leading 
to gang violence in the streets. 

2 A beloved Sharn Watch captain who openly spoke out 
against the Boromar Clan disappears. The Boromars 
claim they had nothing to do with it, but some Sharn 
Watch members use the incident as an excuse to go 
after the organization. 

3  Achangeling stole a smuggled artifact of great value 
from the Boromar Clan. Boromar enforcers shake 
down people all over Sharn to find it, and clan leaders 
consider going to war with the Tyrants. 

4 The Boromars stage a festival in Callestan for 
Saidan's birthday. All of the family's allies will be 
there, creating opportunities for espionage and 
assassination. 


DAASK 


Formed by monstrous immigrants from Droaam, Daask 
has been building its power in the Khyber's Gate and 
Malleon's Gate districts of Sharn for the last decade. It 
is most infamous for its monstrous enforcers, but the or- 
ganization also draws members from the destitute pop- 
ulace of Sharn—largely goblins and shifters, but also hu- 
mans, dwarves, and any other humanoid who feels that 
the current system has failed them. Daask makes its 
money through acts of violence, from mugging to armed 
robbery to outright pillaging. The group has diversified 
in recent years, building an extortion racket—threaten- 
ing violence if tribute isn't paid—and entering into the 
drug trade, selling both dreamlily and a mysterious sub- 
stance called dragon's blood. 

From the outside, Daask appears to be interested 
solely in fomenting violence and chaos. The monstrous 
nature of its members reinforces this impression; most 
people consider the members of Daask to be savage 
beasts. The truth is more complicated. The Droaamites 
who make up the core of Daask aren't merely criminals; 
they are elite soldiers of Droaam working for Sora Ka- 
tra, and part of an operation that is taking root in larger 
cities across Khorvaire. The seemingly random attacks 
by Daask are part of a larger plan that, if it succeeds, 
will eventually give Sora Katra a foothold in the heart of 
Khorvaire. 

Over the last two years, the Daask cell in Sharn 
has been waging a slowly escalating war against the 
holdings of the Boromar Clan. The Boromars were sur- 
prised by the violence of these attacks and have suffered 
significant losses. Daask prefers guerrilla tactics, using 
only as many combatants as necessary to get a job done, 
never staying in one place too long, and quickly retreat- 
ing back to their turf. Though the Boromars still control 
much of criminal activity in the middle and upper parts 
of Sharn, Daask is gaining ground in the lower level of 
the city and controls crime in the Cogs. 


DAASK OPERATIONS 


Violence and intimidation are Daask's most used 

tools. Rather than using bribery, Daask manipulates 
the Sharn Watch through displays of force and brutal 
reprisals against officers who dare to stand in the way. 
Coupled with the fact that Daask primarily targets busi- 
nesses with ties to the Boromars, this means that many 
of the Watch officers of the lower wards will step aside 
and allow a Daask raid to run its course. 

As Daask has seized territory from the Boromar Clan, 
it has also begun taking over a few of the clan's tradi- 
tional businesses. In addition to dreamlily, Daask sells a 
highly addictive drug called dragon's blood. 

Daask has another, perhaps surprising area of oper- 
ation: religion. The organization has brought priests of 
the Dark Six to Sharn and has restored a ruined temple 
to the Dark Six in Khyber's Gate. Followers of the Dark 
Six have few other opportunities to practice their faith, 
and providing this new facility for them has made many 
allies for Daask across the city. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 249 


po 


| 250 


DAASK NPCs 


Daask's lower ranks are made up of goblinoids, humans, 


shifters, and other humanoids recruited from the pop- 
ulation of Sharn. The Droaamish soldiers that make 
up the core of the organization include changelings, 
gnolls, harpies, ogres, minotaurs, medusas, trolls, and 
other monstrous beings. Basilisks, cockatrices, death 
dogs, displacer beasts, and similar monsters are kept 
by Daask, though these creatures are usually used only 
within the Cogs. 

Some of Daask's most important members are these 
individuals: 


* Sora Katra is the ultimate leader of Daask, but as one 
of the Daughters of Sora Kell, she remains in Droaam. 
The hag stays in contact with all of her main subor- 
dinates by magic and keeps a detailed ledger of the 
group's activities. 

* Cavallah is a disciplined female oni and the current 
leader of the Daask cell in Sharn. She is the mas- 
termind of the organization's machinations against 
the Boromar Clan, a scholar obsessed with studying 
Sharn's manifest zone, and a devoted servant of Sora 
Katra. The oni wears a hag eye (see "Hags" in the 
Monster Manual) that enables Sora Katra to both see 
and hear what occurs in her presence. 

• Harash, a male medusa, is Cavallah's right hand. He 
is a specialist in diplomacy and intimidation whom 
Cavallah trusts to monitor the members of Daask and 
maintain morale. 

* Ashis a female human priest of the Shadow. As the 

most powerful and beloved of Daask's priests, she 

runs the Temple of the Six. Some worry that Ash 
plans to challenge Cavallah for leadership, which 
could cause а rift in the organization's membership. 

The gnoll Keshta commands a small unit of elite gnoll 

commandos. Disciplined and ruthless, these soldiers 

are often called upon to carry out retaliatory strikes 
against those who defy Daask. 

* Zaeran, an elf werewolf, is a recent arrival to Sharn. 
He's one of the sons of the Droaamish warlord Zaeurl. 
Zaeran has come to the city with a small group of wer- 
erats and werewolves, and has an agenda known only 
to himself and Sora Katra. 


Сос Нов 


Daask members congregate in safe houses that are hard 
to find and easy to defend or escape from. The most 
popular gathering location is a Cog hub. The dark, twist- 
ing halls of these underworld hot spots are familiar to 
Daask members and confusing to their enemies. A Cog 
hub's tight passages have plenty of choke points, forcing 
one-on-one confrontations in which Daask's powerful 
monsters often have the advantage. Daask also uses 
Cog hubs to stash bodies, drugs, or prisoners. 

Trying to find a Daask hub in the Cogs is an adventure 
in itself. Most members are understandably tight-lipped 
about the location of their meeting and hiding places. 
Once the characters know a hub's location, they still 
must navigate the mazelike Cogs to find the place. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


Сос Нов FEATURES 
The Cog hub shown in map 4.13 could be a Daask loca- 
tion, or it could be any Sharn underworld location you 
need it to be. Several crafted and natural labyrinthine 
passages no more than 10 feet wide lead to the main 
chamber. Many of these passages connect with stairs, 
ladders, and wells that lead higher or lower in the Cogs, 
in addition to small chambers that could be ambush 
points, temporary quarters for criminals or squatters, or 
places to lay a trap or place an alarm trigger. 

These passages converge into a single large chamber 
that can hold a large group for meetings and serve as 
a temporary safe house or a place to stash contraband. 
When criminals occupy the area, at least one guard is 
always on duty, and typically there is one guard at every 
entrance to the chamber. 

Smaller rooms with heavy iron doors adjoin the larg- 
est chamber. These rooms can serve as holding cells for 
captives, vaults for valuables, or hiding spots. 


Coc Hus ADVENTURES 

The Cog Hub Adventures table offers reasons why your 
characters might need to visit such a location. In addi- 
tion, the characters could meet with a Daask patron in 
a Cog hub. 


Coc Hus ADVENTURES 
d10 Adventure Goal 

1 Obtain samples of dragon’s blood hidden іп the Cog 
hub. 

2 infiltrate a Daask meeting to discover the next Boro- 
mar Clan holding they plan to target. 

3 Capture a Daask worg and replace it with a worg loyal 
to the Boromar Clan. 

Sniff out a traitor among Daask lieutenants. 
Escape the Cog hub after being captured by Daask 
forces. 

6 Kick out squatters to get the Cog hub ready to serve 
as a Daask safe house. 

7 Assault Daask members meeting in the Cog hub to 
disrupt the organization. 

8 Defend a Daask Cog hub from a Boromar Clan attack. 
Rescue an injured Daask soldier hidden inside a Cog 
hub that has been taken over by the Boromar Clan. 

10 Place a lethal trap in a Cog hub, to be triggered the 
next time Daask forces enter the place. 


DAASK VILLAINS 


If Daask villains want something, they take it, and they 
destroy anything that gets in their way. Though some 
members of the organization are brutes, many are more 
cunning than they appear. Often what seems to be ran- 
dom violence might be motivated by something other 
than greed and cruelty. 

Examples of Daask villains appear on the Daask Vil- 
lains table. 


DYSONLOGOS 


TSS 


p 
SARS 
ANS) 


DA 


1 square = 5 feet 


Y 

& S 
D SCANS ТА] р 
Ў f il yee SA ү 
ч Down ^ ЖЕ), 
M-K ^ NA 
j| 1 
A А 
у { 
A]. EN 


NER 


(Ж 


у, d 
SZ у 


2n) 


The Hub 


= 
ae MM УС : 
gril 


ANZ S " 
A R 


K 


Rw 


iN 
Wi [7] 
M 


hy 


з Ancient *| 
'YyFurnaces 


А 
А (7 
S IIA 
IK 
9 2) 
DW, 
Ik 
ID. ZEISS E 
/ 


Mar 4.13: Сос Hus 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


1 


TTT euer m ennt a, He Т meh me ts pe In 


DAASK VILLAINS 
d6  Villain 

1 Several harpies travel to the upper wards and use 
their luring songs to make rich people fall to their 
deaths. The harpies pick the corpses for valuables. 

2  Apackofgnolls rampages through the lower wards, 
killing any halflings they come across. The gnolls take 
the halflings' ears as trophies. 

3  Ashifter priest of the Devourer wants to crash Skyway 
by performing a ritual to create a cataclysmic storm. 
Sacrifices to the Devourer fuels the ritual. 

4  Achangeling agent of Daask seeks to frame the 
Tyrants for attacks on the Boromar Clan, driving a 
wedge between the two organizations. 

5 Awererat priest of the Mockery starts a cult in Lower 
Dura, teaching its followers the arts of assassination. 

6  Agargoyle sharpshooter continually finds new van- 
tage points in the upper wards from where it can as- 
sassinate targets in the middle and lower wards. 


DAASK CAMPAIGN THEMES 


On the surface, Daask appear to be nothing more com- 
plicated than a gang of violent monsters wreaking havoc 
in the worst parts of the city. If you want, this can be 
the only role they play in a campaign: a ready source of 
sudden violence. Low-level characters might work with 
the Sharn Watch or the Boromar Clan to curtail Daask 
muggings and raid dreamlily houses. This crusade 
against Daask will escalate as the adventurers become 
more powerful; Daask will unleash ever more power- 
ful monsters, and its forces might start targeting the 
adventurer's allies and loved ones. Those attacks won't 
end until the adventurers delve deep into the Cogs and 
defeat Cavallah herself. 

Another option is to delve deeper into the motives of 
Daask, to explore the idea that these monsters aren't as 
savage as they appear. The elite members of Daask are 


= THE == 


SHAR INQUISITIVE 


MONSTROUS 


Monsters are infiltrating our city! Though the Sharn 
Watch acts as though Daask is a problem only for 
Malleon’s Gate, and not a threat to law-abiding citizens, 
there is clear cunning in the criminal cabal's actions. 
Their recent attacks have targeted properties throughout 
the lower wards, all owned by a certain halfling family, 
as if Daask were attempting a violent takeover of Sharn’s 
underworld. Once these monsters control the city’s 
crime, what will they do next? 


meus | 
i 


— 


———  " 


spies, soldiers, and saboteurs using their criminal activ- 
ities as a cover for their true agenda. What is Sora Katra 
really trying to accomplish in Sharn? This question ties 
to how you decide to use the Daughters of Sora Kell, de- 
scribed earlier in this chapter. Do the Daughters simply 
want to ravage their enemies? Or, guided by the oracular 
visions of Sora Teraza, are they actually working toward 
some greater good? For instance, Daask agents could 
break into the vaults and workshops of dragonmarked 
houses and discover secret projects forbidden by the 
Treaty of Thronehold. They could clash with spies of for- 
eign powers in Sharn, or pursue ancient artifacts in the 
ruins below the city to keep them out of others' hands. 

Dreamlily is relatively safe; dragon's blood is not. Its 
effects are intentionally unpredictable, and you can take 
this idea wherever you like. Could drinking dragon's 
blood cause someone to develop a dragonmark? Could 
it turn addicts into crazed, draconic creatures? Is Daask 
simply selling it to make money, or is the drug's intro- 
duction part of a grander plan? Neither the Boromar 
Clan or the dragonmarked houses have been able to 
learn anything important about dragon's blood. 

Daask can also serve as a group patron for a party 
of adventurers, as described in chapter 1. The Daask 
Assignments table provides objectives for adventurers 
working with the organization, and the discussion of 
crime syndicates in chapter 1 includes additional ideas 
for parties with a crime syndicate patron. 


DAASK ASSIGNMENTS 
d6 


1 Convince several new businesses in the lower wards 


Assignment 


to pay protection fees to Daask. 

2 Саиѕе as much death and destruction as possible in- 
sidea Boromar-owned establishment. 

3 Guard a priest ofthe Dark Six as he preaches the 
word of the Mockery on the street. 

4 Assassinate a member of the Boromar Clan. 
Convince a dragonmarked noble to offer the house's 
services to Daask for free. 

6 Мир someone to steal a magic item in their 
possession. 


DAASK ADVENTURE HOOKS 


The Daask Adventure Hooks table presents ideas for 
additional adventures themed around Daask. 


DAASK ADVENTURE HOOKS 


d4 
1  Daaskharpies raid a Skyway mansion and tear the 


Adventure Hook 


place apart looking for a Boromar Clan member. 

2 People who take dragon's blood begin turning to 
stone, and no one can figure out why. 

3  Cavallah announces a contest within the organization, 
promising a valuable magic item to whichever Daask 
soldier kills the most members of the Boromar Clan. 

4 Ash challenges Cavallah for control of Daask, creating 
a schism that erupts into a violent gang war. 


HoUsE TARKANAN 


Long ago, the dragonmarked houses sought to extermi- 
nate the bearers of aberrant dragonmarks (described 
in chapter 1). Today, those who carry aberrant dragon- 
marks are still treated with fear and suspicion. During 
the Last War, the King's Dark Lanterns of Breland 
trained a team of covert operatives who all bore aber- 
rant marks. Considered expendable, this group was 
sent on one suicide mission after another. After half its 
members died in the field, the survivors turned on their 
masters. Six years ago, they fled to Sharn and founded 
House Tarkanan. The group takes its name from Lord 
Halas Tarkanan, who fought the dragonmarked houses 
long ago and used his aberrant dragonmark to destroy 
Old Sharn. 

The smallest of the four criminal organizations de- 
scribed here, House Tarkanan has no interest in claim- 
ing territory or dominating the criminal underworld. 
The house takes neither side in the war between the 
Boromar Clan and Daask, and it will not assassinate 
high-ranking members of either organization. In other 
matters, it sells its services to all who have the gold to 
pay for them. House Tarkanan's top priority is using its 
wealth to protect, train, and care for people who have 
aberrant marks. The leaders of the house are pragma- 
tists and soldiers, and they train their recruits to be war- 
riors and thieves. 

Despite its name, House Tarkanan is not a drag- 
onmarked house; it has taken the name to mock its 
enemies, and it doesn't have the recognition, power, or 
resources of a dragonmarked house. In fact, many mem- 
bers of House Tarkanan hate the dragonmarked houses 
for being prejudiced against their kind and fear that they 
will instigate a second purge of aberrant marks. Others 
are more idealistic, and see the growing power of the 
houses as a threat to all of the nations of Khorvaire. 


HoUsE TARKANAN OPERATIONS 


House Tarkanan provides two basic services to clients: 
theft and murder. Fees for jobs are based on the task's 
complexity and riskiness; a simple cutpurse contract 
costs far less than the assassination of a Sharn Watch 
captain in Skyway. 

What differentiates the assassins of House Tarkanan 
from those of House Phiarlan and Thuranni is their ac- 
cessibility. The dragonmarked houses sell their services 
only to a select list of wealthy and powerful clients, and 
they can pursue contracts anywhere in Khorvaire. Con- 
versely, anyone with enough gold can hire House Tar- 
kanan's assassins, but they take jobs only within Sharn. 


HousE TARKANAN NPCs 


Because House Tarkanan helps all those who have ab- 
errant dragonmarks, the organization has allies across 
a wide range of society, from beggars to nobles. Some of 
the organization's most important people are these: 


* Thora, a female human, has the ability to sense mysti- 
cal energies—a gift that enables her to identify others 
with aberrant marks. She founded the organization 
and serves as its leader. While she uses the name 


Thora Tarkanan among her compatriots, she has es- 
tablished herself as Thora Tavin among the wealthy 
elite of Sharn and has cultivated relationships with 
many influential people. 

* Rotting Bal is one of Thora's most trusted lieutenants. 
A male elf, Bal was part of the original squad of aber- 
rant commandos. He's an exceptional martial artist 
whose skills are enhanced by his mark. 

* Zae is a female halfling who has the power to speak to 
and control vermin. Though she’s no warrior, her gift 
helps the house gather information. 


HOUSE TARKANAN VILLAINS 


Some House Tarkanan villains are obsessed with bring- 
ing down the dragonmarked houses. Others are willing 
to take innocent lives if doing so means saving one per- 
son with an aberrant mark. Sample villains appear on 
the House Tarkanan Villains table. 


HOUSE TARKANAN VILLAINS 
d4 Villain 

1 А member of House Tarkanan murders members of 
dragonmarked houses, reducing her victims to smol- 
dering piles of ash. 

2 Driven mad by his aberrant dragonmark, a dwarf be- 
comes obsessed with destroying Sharn in the same 
manner that Halas Tarkanan collapsed Old Sharn. 

3 A House Tarkanan half-elf kidnaps children with 
aberrant marks, believing the organization is better 
suited to bring up the children than their parents. 

4 А House Tarkanan mage starts drinking the blood of 
dragonmarked nobles, believing it will increase the 
strength of his aberrant mark. 


HousE TARKANAN 
CAMPAIGN THEMES 


As assassins for hire, the members of House Tarkanan 
can appear in a campaign as agents of other enemies of 
the adventurers. But they can also play a central role in 
a campaign. 

To use House Tarkanan as a recurring villain, you can 
stress its ruthlessness and emphasize its hatred of the 
dragonmarked houses. If any of the adventurers have 
ties to one of the houses, this confrontation could begin 
with a number of small attacks against the adventurer 
or their friends. Over time, these actions could escalate. 
In addition, you could build a story around Thora Tar- 
kanan's quest to discover the secrets of aberrant drag- 
onmarks. Long ago, Halas Tarkanan and the Lady of the 
Plague possessed marks so powerful that they could 
destroy cities. Can Thora find a way to amplify her own 
power in the ruins of Old Sharn? 

If one or more of the adventurers has an aberrant 
dragonmark, House Tarkanan can also serve as a group 
patron for a party of adventurers, as described in chap- 
ter 1. The House Tarkanan Assignments table provides 
hooks for adventurers who are working with the organi- 
zation, and the discussion of crime syndicates in chapter 
1 includes additional ideas. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


254 


i 


HOUSE TARKANAN ASSIGNMENTS 


d4 Assignment 

1 Steal a satchel full of research on the War of the Mark, 
carried by a wizard who works at Morgrave University. 

2 Killa Karrnathi warlord who is visiting Sharn, and 
make it look like an accident. 

3 Killa target before she signs her last will and testa- 
ment to assign her property to a new heir. 

4 Rescue a dreamlily dealer with an aberrant mark who 
has been captured by the Sharn Watch. 


HOUSE TARKANAN 
ADVENTURE HOOKS 


The House Tarkanan Adventure Hooks table presents 
ideas for adventures themed around House Tarkanan. 


HOUSE TARKANAN ADVENTURE HOOKS 
d4 
1 | House Tarkanan disturbed the dead during an expe- 
dition to Old Sharn, causing undead to terrorize the 

city above. 


Adventure Hook 


2 House Tarkanan declares war on the dragonmarked 
houses in Sharn and begins killing nobles in the 
streets. Many of the houses' businesses in the city are 
shut down as fear spreads. 

3  Avictim who was killed by a House Tarkanan assassin 
returns as an undead that tries to kill anyone who 
bears an aberrant mark. 

4 House Tarkanan steals a key that can disable a ticking 
time bomb created by an artificer. 


vrbe patte rm noe mes Ret met ———— AG RS 


THE VOICE OF 


BRELAND 


ASSASSINS ON 
THE LOOSE! 


It is common knowledge that those with aberrant marks 
can't be trusted. It’s not their fault; they're touched by 
Khyber, and the Dragon Below twists their minds. All 
aberrants will eventually become killers. And though I 
can see the appeal in using these creatures as weapons 
against our enemies, how could we bring such vipers 
into our midst? 

According to a high-ranking source in the King’s Cit- 
adel, this secret operation predictably ended in disaster. 
After a few missions, the strike force slew their handlers 
and deserted, disappearing into the criminal underworld. 
They could be anywhere. There can be no clearer sign 
that it’s time to bring down the monarchy and institute 
a government that is chosen by and answerable to the 
common people! 


Ко loei rc, amet side ees peg tt nse четтей, 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


monete 


deest etes e Tit tpe tse ce AEn tete eset е 


THE TYRANTS 


Nocriminal guild in Sharn is more shrouded in mystery 
than the Tyrants. This organization of changelings deals 
in secrets and lies, selling forgeries, running long cons, 
and treating identities as a commodity. The Tyrants 
have spies throughout the city, even in places where 
they have no current plans or contracts. The organiza- 
tion gathers as many secrets as possible, then sells that 
information to the highest bidder, uses it for blackmail, 
or stores it for a time when it becomes useful. 

The Tyrants have been operating in Sharn for over 
three hundred years from a base of operations in the 
Dragoneyes district, in Lower Tavick's Landing. They 
have agents spread across the city. A beggar, a bar- 
tender, or a courtier could actually be a persona crafted 
by a Tyrant changeling. The Tyrants have a long-stand- 
ing truce with the Boromar Clan and don't take a side in 
the halfling family's conflict with Daask. 


TYRANTS OPERATIONS 


The Tyrants are master grifters, conducting a host of 
short and long cons throughout the city. Much like the 
Boromar Clan, they have a general live-and-let-live rela- 
tionship with the Sharn Watch. As long as the Tyrants 
focus their crimes on foreigners and tourists—and 
donate generously to the local Watch—the officers will 
look the other way. In addition to pursuing their own 
schemes for gold, Tyrant charlatans offer a host of ser- 
vices to their clients; they can help to frame innocents 
for crimes, or make it possible for a criminal to seem to 
be in two places at once, providing an ironclad alibi. 

The finest forgers in the city are in the ranks of the 
Tyrants, capable of duplicating anything from identifi- 
cation papers to works of art. Magewrights among the 
Tyrants have the ability to permanently alter someone's 
appearance. 

First and foremost, the Tyrants deal in information. 
They hoard secrets, and for the right price they can be 
persuaded to share what they know. Occasionally a Ty- 
rant approaches someone with an offer of information in 
exchange for gold. 


TYRANTS NPCs 


Members of the Tyrants have a loose definition of iden- 
tity. The majority of the members are changelings. They 
often maintain multiple identities, and a particular 
identity might be shared among a group of changelings. 
A captain in the Sharn Watch who is actually an agent 
of the Tyrants might be portrayed by a member of the 
Tyrants’ inner circle in the morning, when he has to in- 
teract with a wide range of people. But when he goes off- 
duty in the evening and keeping up the identity is an eas- 
ier task, the role might be taken over by a young recruit. 

The following individuals are some of the Tyrant's 
most important identities: 


* Ek, often called Tyrant One, guides the inner circle of 
changelings that leads the organization. 

• Kilk is the city councilor for Lower Tavick's Landing 
and is a fictional persona created by the Tyrants, 
played by a variety of changelings at different times. 


• The Spider is a changeling information broker who 
owns a cosmetics store called Honest Faces in the 
Dragoneyes district. This location is a common desti- 
nation for people who want to purchase secrets from 
the Tyrants. Though the Spider often sells secrets for 
gold, sometimes it will trade its knowledge only for 
services or other secrets. 


TYRANTS VILLAINS 


The Tyrants are a covert force. They operate in the shad- 
ows, trade identities, and like to manipulate their ene- 
mies into fighting each other. Tyrant villains rarely show 
their true faces. Examples of Tyrants villains appear on 
the Tyrants Villains table. 


TYRANTS VILLAINS 
de Villain 

1 A changeling rogue infiltrates adventuring parties to 
steal their magic items. 

2 Acabalofchangelings shares an identity as a Sharn 
Watch captain. They use the disguise to free criminals 
from prison. 

3 A changeling assassin murders members ofthe Boro- 
mar Clan, Daask, and House Tarkanan, then takes on 
the identities of its victims. 

4  Achangeling bard gathers incriminating information 
about members of the King's Dark Lanterns, then 
blackmails them. 

5 ABrelish changeling veteran of the Last War 
was distrusted by fellow soldiers because of the 
shapechanger's heritage. The veteran now exposes 
those soldiers' darkest secrets to their friends, 
families, and employers. 

6 A changeling mage masquerades as a priest of the 
Silver Flame and uses spells to send the religion's 
faithful "signs" from Tira Miron that encourage them 
to spy, steal, and kill for the Tyrants. 


TYRANTS CAMPAIGN THEMES 


The primary theme of the Tyrants is mystery. In dealing 
with the Tyrants, there is always a question of what is 
real and what the true objective actually is. With the Ty- 
rants, anything could be a long con, and both allies and 
enemies may not be who they appear to be. 

The Tyrants have three objectives: acquiring gold, 
gathering secrets, and protecting the changelings of 
Sharn. In working the Tyrants into a campaign, the first 
question is which of these objectives will take prece- 
dence. Are they primarily grifters, trying to squeeze as 
much profit as possible out of the situation? Are they 
mainly working to gather secrets, and to use those se- 
crets to manipulate others? Or are they most concerned 
with helping other changelings, who are often with the 
objects of fear and suspicion? 

The Tyrants offer an easy way to provide adventurers 
with information. The Spider can be a strong ally for 
adventurers, and you can always arrangefor an agent of 
the Tyrants to step out of the shadows with and offer to 
sell a secret. 


The Tyrants could also have a long-term sinister 
agenda—something they've been working on for gen- 
erations, which is only coming to fruition now. Do they 
want to replace the entire city council of Sharn, or are 
their aspirations even higher than that? In a campaign 
that examines this idea, the Tyrants might impersonate 
the patrons and allies of the adventurers, thereby trick- 
ing them into carrying out questionable tasks. 

The Tyrants can also serve as a group patron for a 
party of adventurers, as described in chapter 1, espe- 
cially if the party includes one or more changelings. The 
Tyrants Assignments table provides hooks for adventur- 
ers working with the organization, and the discussion of 
crime syndicates in chapter 1 includes additional ideas. 


TYRANTS ASSIGNMENTS 


d6 Assignment 

1  Killan important figure without leaving evidence 
behind so a member of the Tyrants can replace the 
target. 

2 Steal a formal badge of office or uniform for a mem- 
ber of the Tyrants to use as partof an assumed 
identity. 

3 Actas bodyguards for a member of the Tyrants who is 
pretending to be an important figure. 

4 Assume new identities to infiltrate the Sharn Watch 
and steal criminal records. 

5  Useincriminating information to blackmail a member 
of the city council. 

6 Find evidence that can be used to blackmail a mem- 
ber of a dragonmarked house. 


TYRANTS ADVENTURE HOOKS 


The Tyrants Adventure Hooks table presents ideas for 
additional adventures themed around the Tyrants. 


TYRANTS ADVENTURE Hooks 


d6 Adventure Hook 

1 A friendly NPC dies in combat. The corpse reveals its 
true form to be that of a changeling. 

2  Alistof Tyrants agents and their identities exists 
somewhere in Sharn. Every legitimate and criminal 
organization in the city competes to find it. 

3 Тһе Sharn Inquisitive publishes an anonymous article 
accusing several members of the Sharn Watch, the 
city council, and the dragonmarked houses of being 
changeling members of the Tyrants. The accused indi- 
viduals vehemently deny the claims. 

4  Ashamed Brelish general of the Last War goes on a 
killing spree against changelings, claiming the Tyrants 
ruined his life by exposing his extramarital affair. 

5 ASharn Watch captain being blackmailed by the Ty- 
rants has had enough. He publicly exposes his incrim- 
inating secrets, then offers a reward for information 
concerning the organization. 

6 Roll on another organization's Adventure Hooks ta- 
ble; the Tyrants are secretly involved in the situation. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


255 


E Ert 


256 


SHARN WATCH 


А common viewpoint among the citizens of Sharn is 
that in the upper wards, the Sharn Watch works for the 
wealthy; in the middle wards, it works for the Boromar 
Clan; and in the lower wards, it doesn't work at all. 

This assessment is close enough to the truth. There's 
an important undercurrent in the situation, however. 
Although most officers of the Watch take bribes, that 
doesn't mean all of them don't care about their city and 
won't try to keep their communities safe; they do so be- 
cause they see their benefactors as being an important 
part of the continued health of their community. For 
instance, those officers who take gold from the Boro- 
mar Clan believe that the Boromars help keep the city 
running and give the people what they want. But if some 
strangers in town break the law, they're just troublemak- 
ers who deserve to be run in. 

As another example, the guards of the Dura Bazaar 
have an understanding with the gang of pickpockets 
known as the Little Fingers. As long as the thieves 
target only tourists and foreigners, the Watch will dis- 
miss any charges brought against them. Why should 
an officer of the Sharn Watch care if some Aundarian 
with more gold than sense gets robbed? But if the Lit- 
tle Fingers pick on a local, they're asking for trouble. 
The relationship works both ways; the pickpockets are 
privy to things the Watch officers aren't, and they often 
warn the Watch about suspicious people or activities 
they witness. 

Watch officers do exist who are entirely crooked and 
care nothing for the law. At the other extreme, some 
officers are entirely honorable and place the law above 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


all else, and most of those are willing to risk their lives 
to save an innocent bystander from a rampaging Daask 
troll. But most members of the Watch are pragmatists 
who put the needs of their clients uppermost, the needs 
of the citizenry second, and generally don't take action 
against locals. 

The upshot of all this is that the Watch's response to 
a crime can vary significantly depending on the nature 
of the crime and where it's committed. As a rule, when 
a crime is committed in Skyway, any of the upper or 
middle wards, Lower Central, Lower Tavick's Landing, 
or Precarious, members of the Watch arrive to intervene 
and investigate as soon as possible. In Cliffside, Lower 
Menthis, and Lower Northedge, the few Watch members 
in these locations address crimes in order of priority. In 
Lower Dura and the Cogs, the Watch's reponse is typi- 
cally very slow. 


SHARN WATCH DIVISIONS 


The discussion above primarily concerns the rank and 
file of the Sharn Watch, the guards who walk the streets 
day in and day out and the officers who supervise them. 
The Watch also includes a few special divisions that 
could cross the paths of the adventurers. 

The Blackened Book is an elite core of abjurers and 
diviners, charged with investigating and containing 
magical threats. These wizards are highly dedicated 
to their work and their city, and generally don’t take 
bribes. It’s up to the higher-ups, however, to decide what 
missions to assign to the Blackened Book; if there’s a 
case that a noble doesn’t want investigated, it proba- 
bly won't be. 


The Guardians of the Gate came into being during 
the Last War to monitor the activities of foreign nation- 
als and immigrants. Their duties have expanded since 
the surge of refugees into Sharn following the Mourn- 
ing, and the Guardians of the Gate closely supervise the 
district of High Walls. The Guardians are chosen from 
among the best soldiers of the Watch and are devoted to 
their city. Many of them, however, place the safety of the 
city ahead of strict adherence to the law, and complaints 
are raised against them from time to time for unneces- 
sary violence against refugees. 

The Redcloak Battalion is an exceptional unit of sol- 
diers that is called upon if a situation calls for extreme 
military force. The Redcloaks are heroes of the Last 
War, and now that the fighting is over most of them don't 
appreciate being used as local police. The Redcloaks 
are absolutely faithful to Breland: they are willing to lay 
down their lives in the service of their nation. Trying 
to bribe a Redcloak is a good way to lose a hand. Like 
the Blackened Book, however, the Redcloaks are elite 
troops that act only when they're mustered by a captain 
of the Watch; typically, they won't be asked to respond 
to a situation if it's not in the interests of the Boromar 
Clan. The Redcloak Battalion is described in more de- 
tail in chapter 3. 


SHARN WarcH NPCs 


The Sharn Watch includes people from all walks of life: 
veterans of the Last War, retired adventurers, lifelong 
residents of the city, and immigrants who have become 
Brelish citizens. You can select from or roll on the 
Sharn Watch Races and Sharn Watch Personalities 
tables to generate a Watch NPC. There is a 75 percent 
chance the NPC is taking bribes from the Boromar Clan 
or another wealthy patron. This doesn't necessarily 
mean that the officer is willing to take a bribe from one 
of the adventurers. 

Some of the Sharn Watch's most important people are 
as follows: 


* Lord Commander Iyan ir'Talan is a male human 
in charge of the Sharn Watch. As long as the city's 
wealthy elite are content to keep Iyan in power, he 
does little more than maintain the status quo. 

* Commander Lian Halamar is a male halfling who 
leads the garrison in the Daggerwatch district in 
Upper Dura. The Boromar Clan bribes Lian to make 
sure the Watch is away from the scene during their 
criminal activities. The Boromars are pressuring Lian 
to crack down on Daask, but he has no desire to put 
his officers in danger unnecessarily. 

* Commander Belew Yorgan is a male dwarf who 
leads the Sword Point garrison in Middle Central. 

He does his best to serve the interests of the nobles 
and wealthy patrons in the Central Plateau, and as a 
result these wards are among the safest in Sharn. But 
Yorgan's loyalties are first and foremost to his purse, 
and the troops under his command serve whoever's 
paying the most. 

* Commander Silaena Cazal is a female elf who runs 
the Warden Towers garrison in Middle Menthis. Over 
a century of service, she has woven a net of graft and 


uet mm maf mes eme лиге onm M tte б л чу о жет 


ee Реч anas! 
e 


| 


= THE SSS 


SHART INQUISITIVE 


— 


A LIFE OF 
WATCHFUL 
SERVICE 


Brelish folk often forget that the Guardians of the Gate 
have a civilian branch that handles administrative issues 
and special customs investigations. Tethyn Olar has led 
that arm of the Sharn Watch for more than a decade. 

Many immigrants owe their safe and comfortable lives 
in our city to this man, but claims have surfaced re- 
cently charging him with corruption, saying that he took 
money from immigrants in exchange for a faster path 
into Sharn. Olar has refuted those claims with this state- 
ment: "Look at the lower wards to see the vast number 
of poor immigrants the Gate allows to enter in the city. 
Those with wealth tend to be more responsible and 
quicker to put their paperwork together, but none with 
worthy cause to be here are barred." 


‚уч ront Phy Pi чу cm B ittm mime m eo mos — трн RR teint tnt 


extortion across Menthis Plateau; she looks after 
those who pay their dues. Her mother was driven 
from House Phiarlan when she developed an aberrant 
dragonmark. Because of that treatment, Silaena har- 
bors deep resentment for the dragonmarked houses 
and will occasionally take actions to inconvenience 
them. Thora Tavin of House Tarkanan is working to 
strengthen her relationship with Commander Cazal. 

* Commander Іуаппа ir Talan is a female human who 
commands the Black Arch garrison in Lower Tav- 
ick's Landing. The daughter of the Lord Commander, 
Iyanna is idealistic and honorable. She fights for the 
good of the common people. If the adventurers need 
an honest ally in the Watch, Iyanna is perhaps their 
best hope. Despite her father's best efforts to keep her 
from getting entangled in the criminal underworld, 
her actions have won her no friends among Sharn's 
crime lords, and her life could be in danger despite 
her parentage. 

* Lady Warden Maira ir’Talan, a distant relative of the 
Lord Commander, leads the Blackened Book. A gifted 
diviner, Maira is a highly effective leader. What none 
know is that she's also an agent of the Dreaming 
Dark. Five years ago, a kalaraq quori (see chapter 
6) named Tirashana implanted a mind seed in her 
thoughts. Maira continues to do her job while conceal- 
ing any evidence of the Dreaming Dark's schemes. 

* Captain Daja Brel is a female human who commands 
the Guardians of the Gate. Daja firmly believes that 
the Guardians are all that stands between order 
and chaos in Sharn, and she acts with unbridled 
force if she believes a group or an individual threat- 
ens the city. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 257 


258 


* Captain Khandan Dol is a male dwarf who leads 
the Redcloak Battalion. Khandan is a local legend 
who served in the Brelish army throughout the Last 
War; he was knighted by the last king of Galifar and 
swore an oath to the first queen of Breland. He enjoys 
drinking and gambling. He takes discipline seriously, 
though, and expects his soldiers to show complete loy- 
alty to their country and its king. Because of his expe- 
riences in the war, he has a deep dislike for Thranes 
and followers of the Silver Flame, but he rarely lets 
these feelings interfere with his duties. 


SHARN WATCH RACES 


d20 Race d20 Race 
1 Changeling 12-13  Halfling 
2-4 Ома 14-16 Human 
5-6 ЕҤ 7 Kalashtar 
7 Gnome 18 Shifter 
8-9  Half-elf 19-20  Warforged 


10-11  Halforc 


SHARN WATCH PERSONALITIES 


d10 Personality 

1 Disgruntled veteran of the Last War who has seen 
everything 

2 Lifelong Sharn resident who loves discussing rumors 
and debating the city's best haunts 
Layabout who tries to do as little work as possible 

4 Eternal optimist who encourages victims of crime to 
have hope and look on the bright side 

5 Investigator who loves to get to the bottom ofa 
mystery 

6 Rookie with no experience in facing danger who is a 
bundle of nerves 

7 Вгамту meathead who believes all problems can be 
solved with force 

8 Greedy opportunist who's always angling for a bribe 
Uptight perfectionist who appears to do everything 
by the book 

10 Unfriendly interrogator who assumes everyone spills 
their secrets to the Tyrants. 


WATCH STATION 


Sharn Watch stations are located throughout the city. 
The largest are the garrison posts like Daggerwatch and 
Sword Point; smaller stations in various places are used 
to hold criminals, dispatch patrols, and take care of day- 
to-day business. 

A typical Sharn Watch station has two well-guarded 
entrances. One is connected to a main vestibule, where 
an officer in a security room with a magically reinforced 
window signs visitors in and confiscates their spell com- 
ponents, spellcasting focuses, and weapons. The other 
entrance is a large barred and warded door that leads to 
the garage, which holds skycoaches and soarsleds. Both 
of these areas are connected to the station’s bullpen by 
way of locked and warded doors. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


The Watch Station Adventures table offers reasons 
why the characters might need to visit (or break into) 
such a location. 


WATCH STATION ADVENTURES 


d6 Adventure Goal 

1 Destroy evidence of a crime that's being stored in a 
Watch station, or plant evidence in a Watch station to 
frame someone for a crime. 

2 Learn which members of a station’s crew are on the 
payroll of a criminal organization. 

3 Ensure the station’s Watch officers are indisposed 
during an upcoming crime spree. 

4 Help defend a Watch station from a siege. 
Free someone being held at a Watch station. 


Steal uniforms from a Watch station. 


SHARN WATCH VILLAINS 


Corrupt or extremist members of the Sharn Watch are 
villains of a special sort: legitimate authority figures 
who have access to the city's law-enforcement re- 
sources. The protections these villains enjoy often call 
for drastic measures to stop them, which the characters 
might be labeled as criminals themselves and might 
have to go underground to avoid arrest or harassment. 
Examples of Sharn Watch villains appear on the Sharn 
Watch Villains table. 


SHARN WATCH VILLAINS 


de Villain 

1  Adwarfarrests random halflings on the streets in the 
lower wards and allows Daask agents to interrogate 
and torture them. 

2  ABrelish veteran of the Last War arrests and murders 
innocent Cyran refugees, claiming each time that the 
victim tried to attack him. 

3 A changeling investigator works for the Tyrants and 
pins unsolved crimes on other Sharn Watch members 
who interfere with the Tyrants' business. 

4  Ahalfelf works her way through the ranks ofthe 
Sharn Watch by assassinating her superiors but mak- 
ing it look like they died in the line of duty. 

5 An elf in the lower wards comes to the aid of only 
those who pay a monthly protection fee. 

6 А Blackened Book mage confiscates magic items 
from others to auction off to criminals. 


SHARN WATCH CAMPAIGN THEMES 

If you want to make the Sharn Watch a significant part 
of the campaign, you can develop a story for a particu- 
lar commander. Lian Halamar is the primary agent of 
the Boromar Clan, and if the adventurers are fighting 
the Clan, any interaction with the Watch can ultimately 
come to Lian's attention, with his corruption slowly be- 
coming more and more evident. If the characters oppose 
House Tarkanan, it could be Commander Cazal who 
keeps interfering with their investigations and placing 


obstacles in their way. Can the adventurers find a way to 
remove their rival from power? 

Another option is to focus a story on Commander 
Iyanna and her efforts to purge corruption from the 
Watch. A chance encounter could bring the two to- 
gether; perhaps the adventurers are on the scene when 
Iyanna is targeted by assassins. Iyanna could call on the 
adventurers to investigate corruption and to deal with of- 
ficers who are breaking their oaths. How deep are they 
willing to go? 

If the adventurers do form an alliance with a Watch 
officer, you can use the Sharn Watch Assignments table 
to create adventure hooks for parties and side quests for 
individual characters—cases their ally doesn't trust the 
Watch regulars to handle fairly. 


SHARN WATCH ASSIGNMENTS 


d8 Assignment 

Т Solve a murder that occurred in Skyway. 

2  Findadreamlily den and arrest the place's owner and 
its supplier. 

3 Protect an ambassador from Sarlona who is joining а 
Morgrave University expedition to the Cogs. 

4 Monitor the Lyrandar Tower airship dock for a specific 
criminal reportedly trying to leavethe city. 

5 Apprehend a war criminal rumored to be arriving in 
Sharn by lightning rail, and deliver the criminal to the 
nearest Watch station. 

6 Take a visiting dignitary on a tour of the city and keep 
them happy. 

7 Venture into the bowels of the city to find a wanted 
terrorist who has kidnapped a magewright and stolen 
the parts needed to build an explosive device. 

8 Handle a prisoner exchange—one captured criminal 
for one captured Sharn Watch officer. 


SHARN WATCH ADVENTURE HOOKS 


The Sharn Watch Adventure Hooks table presents 
ideas for additional adventures themed around the 
Sharn Watch. 


SHARN WATCH ADVENTURE HOOKS 


d4 Adventure Hook 

1 The Sharn Watch cracks down on Daask, which leads 
to violent confrontations in the city's lower wards. 

2  TheSharn Inquisitive publishes an article claiming 
that changelings of the Tyrants have stolen the iden- 
tities of many Watch officers, leading to citywide dis- 
trust of the organization. 

3 After a Thrane immigrant opens a sealed entrance to 
Old Sharn's ruins, the Guardians of the Gate do not 
allow anyone in or out ofSharn until the immigrant is 
found and the entrance is resealed. 

4 Agents ofthe Blackened Book find scrying sensors in 
Sharn Watch stations throughout the city. 


FORGOTTEN RELICS 


"Forgotten Relics" is a short adventure for a party of 
four to six Ist-level characters, who advance to 2nd level 
by the adventure's conclusion. It is set in Sharn and 
serves as an introduction to the city. A balance of char- 
acter classes is helpful, since the adventurers will face a 
variety of challenges. 


STORY OVERVIEW 


Niho Koi, an imposing oni and Daask sub-boss in 
Sharn, ordered a half-ogre lieutenant named Garra to 
assemble a team and search the ruins of Old Sharn for 
arcane relics at the behest of someone much higher 

up in the organization. With a lot of ground to cover 
beneath the City of Towers, Garra kidnapped Caden 
d'Orien, the only son of Alden d'Orien, forcing Alden to 
use his position in his dragonmarked house to recruit 
out-of-work warforged—people no one would miss—to 
scour Old Sharn's ruins. Alden branded the work as a 
"secret research-gathering mission" for his house, paid 
the warforged workers for their silence, and signed 
them to binding contracts. 

It took several weeks of dangerous exploring and a 
few deaths, but eventually the warforged workers found 
a library of arcane texts and schemas buried in the 
ruins. These items were moved to a Daask safe house 
in Tavick's Landing near the Terminus Lightning Rail 
station. The organization plans to smuggle the relics out 
Breland to Droaam with Alden's help. 

Coal, a destitute warforged hired by Alden, witnessed 
her good friend Razor die, executed in the ruins of Old 
Sharn as an example to the other workers. Coal made 
an appointment to talk to Sergeant Germaine Vilroy of 
the Sharn Watch, to report the shady operation, Razor's 
murder, and the kidnapping of the House Orien scion, 
Caden. Thanks to crooked members of the Sharn Watch 
in Daask's pocket, Garra found out about the appoint- 
ment and dispatched killers to prevent Coal from ratting 
out the operation. 

Germaine is also crooked, but she is on the payroll of 
the Boromar Clan crime syndicate, whose members are 
enemies of Daask. Not wanting to put the Sharn Watch 
or herself between two criminal organizations at war, 
Germaine called in a few old contacts to meet with Coal 
and find out what's going on. 


RUNNING THE ADVENTURE 


This adventure requires the fifth edition D&D rulebooks 
(Player's Handbook, Dungeon Master's Guide, and 
Monster Manual). You should read the entire adventure 
before attempting to run it. If you'd prefer to play, you 
shouldn't read any farther. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


The Monster Manual contains statistics for many of the 
creatures found in this adventure. When a creature's 
name appears in bold type, that's a visual cue pointing 
you to the creature's stat block in the Monster Manual. 
If the stat block appears elsewhere, the adventure's text 
tells you so. 


ADVENTURE SUMMARY 


The adventure begins one evening in Upper Central 
Plateau, where the characters meet Sergeant Germaine 
Vilroy, who hires them to meet with a warforged named 
Coal, hear her out, and bring her back to Vilroy for fur- 
ther questioning. Coal has already been told to wait for 
the characters at the Cog Carnival, a warforged bar in 
the High Walls district of Lower's Tavick's Landing. 

After talking to Coal and learning her employer was 
Alden d'Orien, the characters are confronted by Daask 
forces sent to kill Coal. If they survive the fight, the char- 
acters can meet with Alden in the Mithral Tower district 
Upper Central Plateau. The scion stays tight-lipped, 
but Vishtai, Alden's kalashtar bodyguard, telepathically 
gives the characters directions to the Old Sharn ruin 
where Caden d'Orien is imprisoned. 

If Caden is rescued and returned to his father, Alden 
shares what he knows of Daask's operation and tells the 
characters where to find Garra. The half-ogre knows 
the characters are coming for her. She tries to flee on a 
lightning rail while drawing them into a trap. If the char- 
acters chase down the half-ogre, she attempts to make 
a deal to keep her freedom, which they can either refuse 
or accept, setting the stage for further adventures. 


How Do You KNow VILROY? 


Before the adventure begins, inform each character 
that they are an acquaintance of Sergeant Germaine 
Vilroy of the Sharn Watch, a Brelish veteran of the Last 
War. Ask each character to come up with a friendly 
connection to Germaine, or have them choose or roll on 
the Germaine Connections table. If a rolled connection 
doesn't make sense with the character's background, 
simply roll for a new connection or choose one that 
seems appropriate. 


GERMAINE CONNECTIONS 


d6 Connection 

Т You served alongside Germaine during the Last War. 

2 You have been friends with Germaine since at least 
one of you was a child. 
Germaine saved your life. 
You saved Germaine's life. 

5 You had several friendly conversations with Germaine 
during a long airship or lightning rail journey. 

6 Germaine helped you while you were living in or visit- 
ing Sharn. 


STARTING THE ADVENTURE 


Once the players are ready to begin, read or paraphrase 
the following boxed text to them: 


An orange glow covers the top of Lyrandar Tower as the 
sun sinks in the sky. Above, the great airships of House 
Lyrandar float like leviathans surrounded by brilliant 
rings of elemental energy. Below, bridges crisscross at all 
levels ofthe city, connecting Sharn's great towers. The 
sounds of crying children, barking vendors, cursing sky- 
coach drivers, and braying hippogriffs rise up to become 
a unique din that can only be heard in the City of Towers. 
Each of you carries a letter from your acquaintance 
Sergeant Germaine Vilroy of the Sharn Watch that reads, 
“I'm calling on you for a job. | can't write the details, but 
it pays well and requires your skills. Meet me at the air- 


ship dock on top of Lyrandar Tower. Come armed." 


Have the players introduce their characters to each 
other, if they aren't already acquainted. Ask characters 
who aren't from Sharn how they arrived, perhaps on an 
airship (likely paid for by Germaine whose Kundarak ac- 
count is flush with Boromar gold) or a lightning rail. For 
characters who are Sharn natives, provide a brief de- 
scription of various districts that fit the characters' back- 
grounds if needed using the information in chapter 3. 

This is also a good time for characters to make per- 
sonal connections that might link them, such as having 
the same birthplace, fighting for the same side in the 
Last War, or having common backgrounds or interests. 
Once the characters' relationships to one another have 
been established, read or paraphrase the following 
boxed text to the players: 


As darkness descends on the city, you see windows light 
up the towers around you from bottom to top. A cool 
wind whisks between you, drowning out the other noises 
of the city. A nearby lift rises, carrying a human in her 
mid-thirties with close cropped black hair and a glowing 
pipe in her mouth. Germaine gives a wry smile as she 
nods to you all, saying, "Thanks for coming." 


Sergeant Germaine Vilroy (neutral female Brelish 
human veteran) greets the characters then gets down 
to business. 


ROLEPLAYING SERGEANT VILROY 


Germaine is gruff and doesn'tlike wasting time. She 
gives the characters the information she has and tries 
to send them on their way before they can ask questions 
about her involvement in the case. The sooner the char- 
acters solve her problem, the sooner she can get back to 
collecting extra money from the Boromar Clan for doing 
nothing other than ignoring their crimes. 


-=H F 


SHARK INQUISITIVE 


DRE 


AT THE 
MERCY OF 
MERCENARIES 


+++ жж ж tir] ө ө ө ө ] ] ө ө ө ө ө ө ж ө ө | ө ж ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө ө э n 


It seems the Sharn Watch is outsourcing more and more 
of their jobs to contractors, also known as adventurers, 
also known as mercenaries, which is what these blood- 
soaked hirelings are. While many of these second-rate 
thugs act like they have the absolute authority of the 
Sharn Watch, know your rights! These sellswords can 
get away with atrocities, including murder, but only 

if such crimes are committed in the pursuit of their 
contracts. Should one of these ruffians steal from or 
harm you or your loved ones for no reason other than 
their barbaric attitudes, report them to the Watch and 
this publication immediately. The Sharn Watch is bound 
by law to arrest these hooligans when they show their 
criminal natures. 


Ursus cma E ЧРНИРР СОА 


Germaine gives the characters the following 
information: 


* Germaine has an appointment to meet with a war- 
forged named Coal, who claims to have knowledge 
of a crime being committed in Old Sharn. Germaine 
wants the party to meet with Coal first and see if what 
she says adds up. Germaine is worried that, with her 
status as a Watch sergeant, her presence will call un- 
due attention and endanger Coal. 

* Germaine can give the characters 25 gp each now and 
another 50 gp each if they bring in Coal. 

• If the characters consent to meet with Coal, Germaine 
provides the location of the Cog Carnival, a bar in 
High Walls frequented by warforged, and the ap- 
pointed meeting time. 

* Germaine also provides a Sharn Watch writ of en- 
forcement. The writ authorizes the bearers to conduct 
official duties of the Watch under Sergeant Vilroy's au- 
thority. City workers and other members of the Watch 
respect the writ, sometimes grudgingly, as long as the 
characters don't engage in flagrantly illegal activity. 


Germaine tries to play up her concern for Coal as her 
reason for hiring the characters, but a character who 
succeeds on a Wisdom (Insight) check contested by the 
Germaine's Charisma (Deception) check can sense that 
she's holding something back. A character who talks to 
Germaine privately and succeeds on a DC 13 Charisma 
(Persuasion) check gets her to reveal that she some- 
times takes money from the Boromar Clan to look into 
crimes, and the family is interested in Coal's informa- 
tion (though Germaine also points out that the charac- 
ters really are Coal's best shot at surviving this ordeal, 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


аьр тесттеги теь 


261 


262 


m 


what with Coal being caught between the two largest 
criminal syndicates in the city). 

If the characters have no place to stay in Sharn, Ger- 
maine puts them up at Ghallanda Hall in Middle Dura 
for the duration of their investigation. 


HiGH WALLS 


Sharn's neighborhood of High Walls in Lower Tavick's 
Landing is a district mostly enclosed by walls. All of the 
bridges from other districts to High Walls have massive, 
magically warded gates that can be sealed at a mo- 
ment's notice. Each gate incorporates a fortified Sharn 
Watch station. The neighborhood is home to refugees of 
the Last War, mainly the displaced peoples of Cyre. 
When the characters arrive in the district, read or 
paraphrase the following boxed text to the players: 


It is a simple matter to find the Cog Carnival, and just 
about any resident can give directions. It's the only war- 
forged bar in the neighborhood. 


THE CoG CARNIVAL 


The Cog Carnival is a dilapidated warforged dive bar. 
The bar has a crumbling stone outside marred with 
graffiti that says things like, "Forged Are Scrap!" and 
"Leave, Metalheads!” Ingot, a neutral warforged soldier 
(see chapter 6) with a carved chunk of wood replacing a 
severed foot, collects a cover fee from creatures that en- 
ter the room. Warforged can enter the building for free, 
but other humanoids must pay 5 cp each. 

When the characters enter the Cog Carnival, read or 
paraphrase the following boxed text to the players: 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


Smelt, a lawful good warforged soldier (see chapter 6), 
is the owner of the Cog Carnival. She wanted to create 
a safe place where warforged could gather and social- 
ize in this district. She can't afford the city's expensive 
gambling license, so she made the Cog Carnival a place 
where warforged can play games for free. 


ANYBODY KNOw COAL? 

The warforged patrons of the Cog Carnival do not freely 
give information about their own to outsiders. If asked 
about Coal, most of them remain tight-lipped. A charac- 
ter who provides a bribe of 1 gp or succeeds on a DC 13 
Charisma (Persuasion) check convinces one of the pa- 
trons to point out who Coal is: a black, one-armed metal 
warforged sitting alone near the bar. 

Coal, a neutral good warforged soldier (see chapter 
6), is missing her right arm. If the characters approach 
her without identifying that they work for Sergeant 
Vilroy, Coal immediately notifies the bartender, Smelt, 
that she’s being bothered by the party. If things start to 
get tense, Coal gets spooked and bugs out; move on to 
“Catching Coal,” below. 


CHATTING WITH COAL 


If the characters mention Sergeant Vilroy as they meet 
Coal, she stays calm but still asks why Vilroy didn’t 
come herself. Vilroy’s explanation to the party about 
attracting attention soothes Coal, as does the party ex- 
plaining they are Vilroy’s trusted confidants. 

Once Coal is calmed, she hurriedly explains the kid- 
napping of a child from House Orien, the murder of 
her friend Razor, and Daask’s hunt for artifacts in Old 
Sharn. Just as Coal is finishing her exposition, a bolt of 
fire explodes inches from Coal's head, causing bedlam 
in the Cog Carnival. Coal runs for her life, shouting that 
the party set her up. The chase is on! 


CATCHING COAL 


Coal sprints 60 feet away from the characters into High 
Wall's streets, intent on escape. The warforged has no 
particular destination in mind. She simply wants to get 
away from the characters, whom she believes set her up 
to be assassinated. This chase takes place in the "the- 
ater of the mind," and there is no map for it. 

If Coal runs away and the characters pursue her, use 
the chase rules and Urban Chase Complications table 
in chapter 8 of the Dungeon Master's Guide to resolve 
the scene. The chase ends when the characters catch up 
to Coal or after three rounds, when a Daask hit squad 
intercepts Coal as she runs through an alley. 


DAASK Hir SQUAD 
If they fail to catch up to Coal before the Daask hit squad 
attacks, the characters hear the warforged scream for 
help in a nearby alley. If the characters rush to help her, 
they find the warforged unconscious on the ground, 
but stable, surrounded by the Daask criminals. If the 
characters resolve the chase by catching up to Coal, the 
Daask criminals attack as soon as the chase ends, and 
the warforged aids the characters in battle. 

The Daask force consists of Hound, a chaotic evil 
female shifter (see chapter 6), leading three cranky 


kobolds and one kobold acolyte. Each Daask criminal 
fights until reduced to half its hit points then flees. If the 
characters capture one of the criminals, a successful 
DC 13 Charisma (Intimidation) check compels the cap- 
tive to reveal the following information: 


* The group worksfor Daask, a criminal organization. 

* The criminals were told to kill Coal via a letter sent by 
a Daask lieutenant named Garra. The letter has since 
been destroyed. 


The criminals have no other useful information to 
share with the characters. They don't know Garra is 
a half-ogre, and they don't know how to contact her. A 
character who succeeds on a DC 13 Intelligence (His- 
tory) check knows Daask's members are mostly immi- 
grants from Droaam and some of the local population 
from the Cogs and lower wards of Sharn. 


ROLEPLAYING COAL 

After the Daask attack, Coal realizes she mistook the 
characters for assassins and apologizes. The warforged 
is soft-spoken and mild-mannered. If the characters ask 
her about Razor, she gets sad and offers the following 
information: 


* Razor served with Coal in the Cyran military during 

the Last War, during which Coal lost her right arm. 

Razor and Coal had trouble finding work in Sharn, 

due to the fact that many businesses are reluctant to 

hire warforged foreigners. The pair became desperate 
for money. 

* A month ago, Razor told Coal she had a job working 
on a long-term secret mission for Alden d'Orien, the 
scion of a dragonmarked house. Warforged from other 
parts of the city were also recruited to help in the 
task. The job required physical labor, so Coal's injury 
prevented her from being able to do the job. Razor 
planned to save money then buy Coal a new arm so 
she could work with her. 

e Razor would often come back from work sullen or 
wounded but never opened up about the job until 
shortly before she died. Razor confessed that the job 
was more dangerous than it seemed when she was re- 
cruited. Razor was planning to quit before she died. 


After providing the characters with this information, 
Coal encourages the characters to question Alden 
d'Orien. The warforged then leaves Sharn, believing she 
is no longer safe in the city. 


DEAD COAL 

If Coal dies at the hands of Daask forces, the characters 
can still salvage the mission by bringing Coal’s corpse 
to Sergeant Vilroy, who calls in a favor and gets a mem- 
ber of the Blackened Book to cast a speak with dead 
spell on Coal’s corpse. 


DEVELOPMENT 


While many of the House Orien members live in the 
house's enclave in Terminus, the more powerful mem- 
bers of the dragonmarked family live in the upper wards 
of the city. If the characters ask around, they learn Alden 
d'Orien has a residence called Unicorn Estate in the 


Mithral Tower district of Upper Central Plateau. If the 
characters consult with Sergeant Vilroy, she suggests 
that they confront Alden d'Orien, but cautions them to 
be diplomatic. 


MITHRAL TOWER 


Mithral Tower is Sharn's most desirable downtown 
residential district in Upper Central Plateau and is oc- 
cupied by some of the city's wealthiest citizens. When 
the characters enter this district, read or paraphrase the 
following boxed text to the players: 


The gates of Unicorn Estate are open, allowing the 
characters walk onto the property after first presenting 
themselves to the guards and stating their business. 

A detect magic spell reveals that the grounds of the es- 
tate radiate auras of abjuration and illusion magic. Any 
humanoid that takes a long rest in the estate can attune 
to the property as if they were attuning to a magic item 
(see “Attunement” in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master's 
Guide). A creature attuned to Unicorn Estate can't be 
affected by enchantment spells of 3rd level or lower 
while it is on the property unless it wishes to be. When 
a creature not attuned to the estate enters the property, 
the illusion of a unicorn appears wherever the creature 
is and brays loudly, announcing its presence. Four hu- 
man guards provide security at the estate, with two at 
the front gate and two following Alden. 

Alden d'Orien (neutral male Brelish human noble) 
and his assistant, Vishtai (chaotic good male kalashtar; 
see chapter 6), are talking about official house business. 
Vishtai records notes in a spellshard (see chapter 5). 
When the pair notices the characters, Alden calls them 
over and asks their business. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


8 


263 


ROLEPLAYING ALDEN 


Alden, normally charming and inviting, is exhausted, 
guilty, and worried about his son Caden. He has not yet 
informed his wife, Iyana, that their son has been kid- 
napped. Alden and Iyana are separated, and Iyana lives 
in distant Fairhaven with her sister. 

Alden is terse with the characters and wants them to 
leave him alone. The moment they bring up Daask, the 
Sharn Watch, or Coal, he becomes agitated, placing his 
hands over his face and emits a strangled scream. Use 
the following to guide the party's interaction with Alden: 


• Alden badly wants to rescue his son but is terrified of 
taking action and seeing Caden harmed. 

* Caden was abducted almost a month ago. Alden 

tucked him in one night, he was gone the following 

morning with a message in his place. 

A hulking half-ogre met with Alden in the following 

days, explaining she needed expendable labor and 

easy transit of said labor and goods. As long as he 
complied, Caden would be returned unharmed when 
her business was done. 

• If Alden backed out of the deal, the half-ogre said she 
would visit horrors on Caden that would make the 
Mockery sick. 

* Alden breaks down sobbing after relaying this infor- 
mation and staggers inside. 


ROLEPLAYING VISHTAI 


Vishtai is Alden's confidant and knows all about the situ- 
ation with Daask. He hates bullies and pushes for Alden 
to try to rescue his son rather than to keep giving in to 
Daask's demands. After the characters speak to Alden, 
Vishtai telepathically relays this message to them before 
hurrying to follow Alden inside: 


If the party wishes to speak further, Vishtai will hur- 
riedly offer the following bits of information: 


• The kidnapper asked for warforged laborers, prefera- 

bly immigrants. These laborers are digging for some- 

thing in a sparsely inhabited area of Old Sharn. 

The lift the characters must use has been modified in 

some way to reach Old Sharn. 

* If the characters rescue Caden, Vishtai is certain that 
he and Alden can help them track down the kidnapper. 


ENCLOSED LIFT 


If the characters follow Vishtai's directions, they find a 
lift with an enclosed car that Daask uses to reach the 
ruins of Old Sharn. Anyone wishing to use the lift must 
open a hidden panel and hot-wire it. An *out of order" 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


sign hangs above a nearby button which opens the lift's 
doors. When the doors open, read or paraphrase the fol- 
lowing boxed text to the players: 


Luna (chaotic neutral female shifter; see chapter 6) 

and Vonnie ir'Cardwan (neutral female Brelish human 
noble) are having a secret date on the lift. This is where 
they first met, so it's a frequent rendezvous. They are 
bemused by the interruption and politely ask the party to 
leave, pointing out the lift is broken and growing more 
insistent and annoyed if the characters don't comply. 
Any character who succeeds on a DC 12 Charisma (Di- 
plomacy or Intimidation) check convinces the couple to 
leave the lift. If a character fails the Intimidation check 
or removes the secret panel (see "Medusa Panel" below), 
Vonnie gets upset and plainly states she is summoning 
the Watch and stalks away with Luna. Two minutes 
later, Vonnie returns with three city Watch guards and 
accuses them of harassing her, vandalizing the lift, or 
both. The guards arrest the party if the lift appears tam- 
pered with. Presenting Vilroy's writ and explaining the 
situation causes the guards to back off. Hostile action 
toward the young lovers or the guards results the guards 
attempting to subdue the party. 


MEDUSA PANEL 

Upon entering the lift, the characters notice that the 
head of a medusa engraved amid all the unicorn heads 
hides the seams of a secret panel. A tool or weapon can 
be used to pry open the panel, behind which are several 
wires connecting the lift car to a small Eberron dragon- 
shard. Each wire is connected to an individual pin-sized 
hole in the dragonshard. A character who is proficient 

in Arcana knows the dragonshard and wires control 

the movement of the lift. A character who makes a suc- 
cessful DC 13 Intelligence (Investigation or Arcana) 
check finds a loose wire among those attached to the 
dragonshard and a hole in the dragonshard with no wire 
attached. A character who attaches the loose wire to the 
dragonshard causes the lift to descend into the ruins of 
Old Sharn. While that wire is attached to the crystal, the 
lift cannot be called anywhere else in the city. 


BUGBEAR GOING DOWN 

If the characters can't find the hidden panel or figure out 
how to get the lift to Old Sharn, eventually the lift goes 
down, called to the tavern district of Olladra’s Kitchen 
in Lower Central by Orgon, a male bugbear working 
for Daask. Orgon wants to go down to Old Sharn's 

ruins to help guard the relic excavation site. If Luna and 
Vonnie are on the lift when Orgon enters, they leave 
immediately. 


When Orgon enters the lift, he demands the char- 
acters get out of the car. If the characters don't leave, 
Orgon attacks them. Orgon fights until reduced to 10 hit 
points then surrenders. A successful DC 12 Charisma 
(Intimidation) check gets Orgon to admit to being a 
member of Daask and gets him to show the characters 
how to bring the lift down to the ruins of Old Sharn. 


SAVING CADEN 


Ifthe characters rescue Caden d'Orien, his father can 
point the characters toward the boy's kidnapper, Garra. 
This section details the Daask excavation site in Old 
Sharn where Caden and several warforged laborers are 
being held. 


DAASK EXCAVATION SITE | 


When the characters take the lift down to the Daask 
excavation site, read or paraphrase the following boxed 
text to the players: 


The lift seems to descend forever into the belly of Sharn. 
Several minutes pass as and the lift rattles and shakes, 
as if passing into some place it was not meant to go. This 
rumbling builds to a violent peak then the lift stops, and 
its doors open. 

By the lift's interior light, you can see into a vast, unlit 
cavern strewn with broken stonework from ancient build- 
ings as far as youcan see in every direction. The air is 
stale, and filled with dust and the scent of decay. These 
are the ruins of the cities atop which Sharn is built. 

Ahead of you yawns a fifty-foot-diameter, ten-foot-deep 
pit that seems to have been intentionally dug. You hear 
the soft sobs of a young child coming from a wooden 
shed on the far side to the pit. 


The cavern is irregular in shape and hundreds of feet 
in diameter. Its uneven ceiling ranges in height from 15 
to 30 feet. Due to the rubble, the ground around the pit 
counts as difficult terrain. 

Four Daask goblins guard this area and rely on dark- 
vision to see. They hide in the pit when the characters 
arrive then leap out to attack. A successful Wisdom 
(Perception) check contested by the goblins' Dexterity 
(Stealth) check notices the goblins. Otherwise the gob- 
lins surprise the characters. The goblins fight until one 
remains who flees into Old Sharn's ruins. If a goblin is 
captured, a successful DC 12 Charisma (Intimidation) 
check gets the goblin to reveal that it works for Daask 
and that it was told by a half-ogre named Garra to guard 
this area. The goblins don't know where Garra is. 


EXCAVATION PIT 

The excavation pit that the warforged dug for Daask has 
also become the workers' holding area. A warforged 
corpse lies at the bottom of the pit, its head struck from 
its shoulders. Eleven other warforged in various states 
of disrepair sit chained together on the pit floor. Climb- 
ing the walls of the pit doesn't require an ability check. 


If the party does not intervene, the warforged laborers 
simply sit until release by Garra or another member 
of Daask. If the party frees them, the warforged scat- 
ter to other parts of the Cogs, grateful for the rescue. 
They might assist the party in a future adventure if you 
so choose. 


CADEN D'ORIEN 

Caden d'Orien (noncombatant) is kept manacled hand 
and foot in a filthy, 15-foot-square shed on the side of 
the excavation pit opposite the lift. When the characters 
peer inside the shed, read or paraphrase the following 


boxed text to the players: 


The wooden shed contains a small child covered in dust, 
wearing the once-fine, now-ruined livery of a House 
Orien. The boy sobs, shrunken into one corner, his face 
slack. Stale bread, smelly water, a pile of rags, and a 
chamber pot round out the accommodations. 


Caden's manacles, originally designed to bind goblins, 
are sturdy but old. A character who makes a successful 
DC 15 Dexterity check with thieves' tools picks the man- 
acles' lock, and a character who succeeds on a DC 17 
Strength (Athletics) check breaks the manacles loose. 

A character who succeeds on a DC 11 Intelligence (In- 
vestigation) check finds the manacles' lock is smeared 
with oil of taggit. Any character that attempts to pick 
the lock without gloves is exposed to the poison and 
must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or 
become poisoned for 24 hours. The poisoned creature is 
unconscious. It wakes up if ittakes damage. 

Roleplaying Caden. Caden is nearly catatonic from 
his ordeal. If freed, the six-year-old simply sits and 
stares in to the middle distance. Any character trained 
in Medicine knows that the boy needs proper food and 
water, rest, and his father. Using any sort of healing 
magic on the boy rouses him almost immediately. A suc- 
cessful DC 13 Charisma (Persuasion) check gets him to 
open up about his experience. A character who spends 
an hour consoling Caden and giving him something to 
eat and drink brings him around, no check required. If 
either of these methods succeed, Caden tells the charac- 
ters he was kidnapped by a big, mean lady named Garra 
and imprisoned here by her goblin friends. 


TREASURE 

Each goblin carries 146 gp and 1d6 spin a pouch. One 
goblin (determined randomly) also wears a cheap neck- 
lace that consists of a banded agate (10 gp) tied toa 
loop of rope. 


OPTIONAL ENCOUNTER: 
GHOST OF PFINGSTON NEZZELECH _ 


When the characters decide to leave the Daask excava- 
tion site and return to the City of Towers, Old Sharn’s 
ruins reveal one final surprise. The ghost of a gnome 
inquisitive who died when the old city collapsed during 
the War of the Mark rises from the rubble and looks 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


265 


quizzically at the party. This encounter is optional; 
its purpose is to provide a fun way to give some back- 
ground on the city. 

The ghost's name is Pfingston Nezzelech, and he's 
been dead for over 500 years. This encounter can take 
as long as you'd like. Consider mentioning some of the 
different wards of the city you'd like the party to know. 

Pfingston's dress, mannerisms, and lack of contempo- 
rary knowledge mark him as belonging to a bygone era. 
He is cursed to walk this section of ruins, investigating 
a jewel heist that, by now, can't be solved. Pfingston is 
eager to question the party about their whereabouts on 
the night of the heist and if they have any leads. If one 
or more party members opts to spend an hour listening 
to Pfingston's theories and following him in his search 
of this ruined area, they witness Pfingston finding his 
skeleton tucked in a rubble-strewn corner. Upon finding 
his bones, Pfingston looks amazedly about at the party 
before fading away. Anyone who assisted him gains ad- 
vantage on Wisdom (Perception) or Intelligence (Investi- 
gation) skill checks for the next 24 hours. 


RETURNING TO ALDEN 


If the characters return Caden d'Orien safely to his 
father at Unicorn Estate, Alden is overjoyed. Still, he is 
saddened by the deaths of the warforged that he hired 
to work for Daask, but he doesn't regret the actions that 
kept his son alive. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


Alden thanks the characters and tells them everything 
he knows, which is all the information contained in the 
first three paragraphs of the "Story Overview" (page 
260). In addition, he gives the characters the address 
of a Terminus apartment in Lower Tavick's Landing 
that Garra uses as a safe house and a place to store the 
books and schemas found in Old Sharn's ruins. 

When the characters have all the information they 
need from Alden to find Garra, the Orien heir offers 
them a sum of 50 gp to leave his name and House Orien 
out of their report to the Sharn Watch. Alden is deeply 
ashamed of being manipulated in this way and doesn't 
want to tarnish his reputation or his house. A charac- 
ter who succeeds on a DC 15 Charisma (Intimidation 
or Persuasion) check gets Alden to raise this amount 
to 100 gp. If the characters report Alden's actions to 
the Sharn Watch, he manages to bury the scandal on 
his own, and the characters become his enemies (see 
"Conclusion," page 273). If the characters conclude 
their business with Alden on friendly terms, he offers 
his residence as a place where they can rest and grab a 
bite to eat before moving on. 


TREASURE 

As a gesture of goodwill and thanks, Vishtai offers each 
character a unicorn-shaped feather token (see chapter 5) 
inset with the sigil of House Orien. 


SKYCOACH RIDE 


While the characters were off rescuing Caden d'Orien, 
Garra captured and interrogated Sergeant Vilroy and 
learned about the characters' meddling. In this section, 
Garra orders a changeling named Jas to adopt Sergeant 
Vilroy's appearance and lead the characters into a trap. 


NEED A LIFT? | 


Jas (neutral evil changeling; see chapter 6) approaches 
the characters in the guise of Sergeant Vilroy sometime 
after they leave Mithral Tower. Read or paraphrase the 
following boxed text to the players when this occurs: 


As you cross a bridge that views the city from a dizzying 
height, you hear a familiar voice from above. “Need a 
lift?” asks Sergeant Vilroy as she descends toward you in 
a skycoach. 


"Vilroy" urges the characters to board the skycoach and 
share what they have learned thusfar. If the characters 
mention Garra's safe house, the changeling tells them 
there's no time to waste and suggests the skycoach is 
the fastest means of getting there. If the characters 

ask the sergeant how she found them, the changeling 
replies, "I work for the Sharn Watch. Knowing things is 
my job!” If the characters accept the ride, the skycoach 


takes them to area T1 of Terminus. Unknown to Jas, 
Garra has also arranged for a Daask strike team to at- 
tack the skycoach en route. 

Any character who suspects that "Vilroy" is hiding 
something can make a Wisdom (Insight) check con- 
tested by the changeling's Charisma (Deception) check. 
A character who wins the contest detects slight differ- 
ences in the sergeant's facial expressions, suggesting 
that she's not the same person the party interacted with 
previously. Jas doesn't have details of any prior conver- 
sations the party had with the real Sergeant Vilroy and 
flubs any sustained questioning. 

If the characters realize they're not dealing with the 
real Sergeant Vilroy and confront the changeling, Jas 
leaps out of the skycoach, uses a feather token (see 
chapter 5) to land safely, and flees into the crowded city. 
Each character has one turn to act before the unpiloted 
skycoach crashes. A character proficient with air vehi- 
cles who makes a successful DC 12 Intelligence check 
as an action gains control of the skycoach and stops it 
from falling. If the coach crashes, the characters are 
thrown from it as it hurdles down. Use the Falling in 
Sharn table in chapter 3 to determine what happens to 
characters who fall. The party has three rounds to catch 
Jas before the changeling adopts a new guise. 

If the characters capture Jas, the changeling reveals 
that Garra is leaving Sharn on a lightning rail bound for 
Wroat. The changeling doesn't know about Garra's trap 
and simply has instructions to deliver the characters. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 267 


268 


DAASK GNOLLS 


Asthe characters travel to Terminus either on foot or 
by skycoach, they are accosted by a Daask strike team 
consisting of five gnolls. Garra has sent the gnolls to 
kill the characters if possible, or at least soften them up 
before they arrive at her Terminus safe house. You can 


describe them to the players as follows: 


Zipping between the towers of Sharn and converging on 
your location are five creatures riding disks of crackling 
green energy. Each creature is a lanky humanoid covered 
in fur, with the head of a hyena. They cackle maniacally, 

. nock arrows, and take aim at you with their longbows. 


Each gnoll rides a magical, 3-foot-diameter disk that 
can support up to 250 pounds. A creature on a disk can 
use its bonus action to move the disk up to 60 feet in any 
direction—fast enough to keep pace with the skycoaches 
of Sharn. A disk otherwise hovers in place. These disks 
were created using a spell similar to Tenser’s floating 
disk that was cast by a Daask wizard who does not ap- 
pear in this adventure. The spell ends in 30 minutes, 
after which the disks disappear. 

The gnolls initially keep their distance, peppering the 
characters with arrows. The gnolls become frustrated 
and close to melee range if the characters take advan- 
tage of cover and the gnolls' ranged attacks prove inef- 
fective. Once three gnolls are disposed of, the remainder 
flee on their disks or on foot. 


TERMINUS 


Terminus in Lower Tavick’s Landing is named for 
Terminus Station, a massive House Orien enclave that 
serves as the endpoint for the Orien lightning rail. Map 
4.14 shows a cross-section and floor plan of the station. 
The Terminus district is right near Wroann's Gate, most 
travelers' entry point into Sharn. It bustles with crowds, 
pickpockets, con artists, and other criminals looking to 
take advantage of the city's visitors. 

Garra has an apartment in Terminus where she left a 
trap for the characters. The half-ogre took the books and 
schemas recovered in Old Sharn's ruins and boarded a 
lightning rail bound for Wroat that's about to leave Ter- 
minus Station. 


TERMINUS FEATURES 


The buildings in Terminus are made of stone. Their 
walls require a successful DC 15 Strength (Athletics) 
check to climb without equipment. The interior areas of 
buildings are built to accommodate creatures of various 
sizes and have 15-foot-high ceilings and doorways. 

A building's doors are made of wood. Each door has 
AC 15, 27 hit points, and immunity to poison and psy- 
chic damage. If a door is locked, its lock can be picked 
with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check with thieves’ 
tools, and the door can be forced open with a successful 
DC 17 Strength (Athletics) check. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


Everbright lanterns (see chapter 5) hanging from the 
ceilings and walls illuminate interior areas. 

Buildings in Terminus have openable glass windows 
large enough that a Medium or smaller creature can fit 
through one without a problem, while a Large creature 
can squeeze through. These windows have AC 13, 4 hit 
points, and immunity to poison and psychic damage. 
The windows сап be locked from the inside. A character 
that succeeds on a DC 15 Dexterity check with thieves' 
tools unlocks a window from the outside. 

If a creature makes a Strength (Athletics) check to 
shove another creature against a window (see "Shoving 
a Creature" in chapter 9 of the Player's Handbook) and 
succeeds on the check by 5 or more, the window's glass 
is destroyed and the shoved creature falls through the 
window's opening (see "Falling" below). 


BYSTANDERS 

Terminus has busy streets, and most of the visitors 

and residents flee at the first sign of trouble. However, 
some bystanders might assist the party in their fight 
with Daask. Kraz, described below, is one example of a 
helpful bystander. 

Kraz is a gnoll porter who has endured several run- 
ins with Daask criminals in the past and bears them no 
love. At the time of your choosing, Kraz rushes a mem- 
ber of Daask and knocks the affected creature prone. 
Consider having Kraz intervene in area T14. 


FALLING 

Use the Falling in Sharn table in chapter 3 when a crea- 
ture falls through a window or off the top of a bridge or 
structure in the higher levels of Terminus and doesn't 
have a way to land safely (such as the feather fall spell). 


SHARN WATCH GUARDS 


The Sharn Watch has a modest presence in Terminus. 
Its guards defend wealthy visitors and the holdings of 
House Orien. If combat breaks out in the streets or if a 
bystander calls for the Sharn Watch, roll a d20 on initia- 
tive count О during each round the disturbance occurs. 
On aresult of 18 or higher, 1d4 Sharn Watch guards 
arrive and attempt to arrest anyone involved in a crime. 


DAASK FORCES 


Several members of Daask are stationed in Terminus, 
ready to attack the characters to give Garra a chance to 
get away. Unless noted otherwise, members of Daask 
attack the characters, fighting until reduced to half hit 
points then fleeing. If any member of Daask is captured, 
a character who makes a successful DC 12 Charisma 
(Intimidation) check gets the Daask member to reveal 
that Garra is leaving Sharn on a lightning rail bound 
for Wroat. 


CHANGELING TREACHERY 

If the characters are traveling with Jas (see "Skycoach 
Ride" earlier in the adventure), the changeling attempts 
to lead them into the trap laid in Garra's safe house 
(area T4b). The changeling attacks the characters the 
first time they battle other members of Daask. 


DYSON LOGOS 


PISA 


1 square = 5 feet 


Map 4.14: Terminus 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


269 


270 


WHERE'S TERMINUS STATION? 


At some point during their exploration of Terminus, the 


characters learn that Garra has boarded a lightning 
rail getting ready to leave Sharn if they don't know this 
already. If the characters ask any bystanders, they learn 
the location of the lift (area T10) that leads to Termi- 
nus Station. 


AREAS OF TERMINUS 


The following encounter locations are keyed to map 
4.14. This map does not depict the entire district of Ter- 
minus, but it shows the most likely places the characters 
explore in this adventure. 


ТІ. SKYCOACH PLATFORM 


A large platform at the top of a tower is crowded with a 
diverse crew of humanoids. A prominent dock juts out 
from the tower, overlooking the crowded bridges and 

_ streets below. An unoccupied skycoach with a dragon- 
shaped prowis chained to the south platform. 


A crowd of 2d8 commoners and 1d4 nobles is gathered 
on the platform waiting to hire skycoaches. 

The docked skycoach belongs to an off-duty profes- 
sional driver named Belga Twillo. The chain anchoring 
the skycoach to the dock has AC 19, 10 hit points, and 
immunity to poison and psychic damage. A character 
who makes a successful DC 17 Dexterity check with 
thieves’ tools picks the chain’s lock. A bystander who 
catches a character trying to steal the skycoach shouts 
for the Sharn Watch (see “Sharn Watch Personali- 
ties,” page 258). 


T2. COMMERCE STAIR 

This 10-foot-wide outdoor spiral staircase wraps around 
a tower containing several taverns and shops that sell 
souvenirs and giftsfor the city’s visitors to bring home 
to loved ones. The stair leads from the skycoach plat- 
form (area T1) to the roof of the tenement tower. 


T3. TENEMENT TOWER STAIRS 


This interior staircase connects the tenement tower roof 
to areas T4, T5, and T6. 


T4. Top-LEVEL APARTMENTS 
The doors to both apartments on this level are locked. 

T4a. Martisha’s Apartment. Martisha Kullandra 
(neutral female Brelish human magewright; see chapter 
6) lives in this modestly furnished studio apartment. If 
the characters break into the 80-year-old’s apartment, 
Martisha flees, fighting for her life if she must. If the 
characters knock on her door, Martisha shouts to them 
through the door to go away. 

A character who succeeds on DC 12 Charisma (Per- 
suasion) check convinces Martisha to talk to the charac- 
ters. If asked about Garra, Martisha gives the characters 
the following information: 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


e Martisha has a half-ogre neighbor who lives in the 
other apartment on this floor. 

* The half-ogre never bothered Martisha but does have 
loud guests from time to time, including many mon- 
strous immigrants from Droaam, coming and going at 
all hours. 

• Martisha saw the half-ogre leave the apartment min- 
utes before the characters arrived. 


ТАЬ. Garra's Living Area. When the characters enter 
this area, read or paraphrase the following boxed text to 
the players: 


Cabinets hang on the north wall of this large room, which 
is hazy with the smell of tobacco. Near the east wall 
stands an overstuffed couch. An rectangular table turned 
on its side blocks a closed door on the south wall. 


Four kenku cutpurses working for Daask hide in two 
groups of two: one group behind the couch, the other 
behind the table. A character with a passive Wisdom 
(Perception) score of 13 or higher is not surprised by the 
kenku, which prefer to attack from behind the furniture. 
When using the couch and table for protection, a crea- 
ture gains half cover. The cabinets are empty. 

T4c. Garra's Bedroom. When the characters enter 
this area, read the following boxed text to the players: 


A frantic gnoll is picking up papers from the floor to. 
throw into a burning brazier at the center ofthe room. 
Beyond the brazier, Sergeant Vilroy is bound at the hands 
and feet with rope, lying bloodied and unconscious on a 


large mattress. 


Nur, a Daask gnoll, is burning Garra's documents as or- 
dered by the half-ogre. Of the documents that remain on 
the floor, two are of interest. One is a receipt for a light- 
ning rail ticket, indicating the time, date, and journey of 
Garra's lightning rail trip to Wroat. The other document 
contains a list of the names and addresses of the war- 
forged hired to work in the ruins of Old Sharn. You can 
add other documents that could act as story hooks for 
future adventures. 

Sergeant Germaine Vilroy (neutral female Brelish 
human veteran) is restrained and unconscious and 
currently has 5 hit points remaining. After getting the 
information she needed from Germaine, Garra knocked 
her out using oil of taggit (see "Caden d'Orien" earlier in 
this adventure). A character can remove the ropes bind- 
ing the sergeant as an action. If the characters wake up 
Germaine, she tells the characters to continue pursuing 
Garra and that she can get help for herself. 


T5. LOWER-LEVEL APARTMENTS 

The lower-level apartments have similar layouts to the 
ones in area T4 but house different creatures. The door 
to every apartment is locked. If you need occupants for 
an apartment, use the Apartment Occupants table to 
generate them. There is a 10 percent chance that an 


occupant knows what Martisha Kullandra knows about 
Garra (see area T4a). 


APARTMENT OCCUPANTS 
412 Occupants 
1-6 No current occupants 
7-9 А family of 144 commoners 
10 =A shifter (see chapter 6) 
11 Awarforged soldier (see chapter 6) 
12  Achangeling (see chapter 6) 


T6. SkvBRIDGE 

This stone skybridge connects the tenement building 

to the building containing the lift. A Daask harpy and a 
group of 1d4 commoners loiter on the bridge when the 
characters arrive. The commoners pose no threat, but 
the harpy attacks the characters on sight, using her Lur- 
ing Song to bring them to her if they flee. 


T7. GRAFFITI HALL 


This stone hall is covered in graffiti. Crude paintings and 
phrases such as “TYRANTS RULE!” and "CYRANS GO 
HOME!” adorn the walls and ceiling. 


A hidden door with a peephole in this hall connects to 
a Daask hideout (area T8). A character with a passive 
Wisdom (Perception) score of 15 or higher notices the 
peephole and the outline of the door. 

A Daask shifter operative in area T8 watches the hall 
through the peephole. If the shifter notices the charac- 
ters, the creatures in area T8 open the door and attack. 


T8. DAASK HIDEOUT 


This room reeks of urine and body odor. The floor is cov- 
ered in empty liquor bottles, food waste, and old copies 
of the Sharn Inquisitive. 


Two Daask operatives, a chaotic neutral shifter named 
Bartram (see chapter 6) and his worg companion are 
stationed here. Bartram and the worg are surly and 
never shy away from a fight. That said, they will happily 
leave the party alone if handed a bribe of 10 gp or more. 


T9. INTERROGATION ROOM 


A groaning halfling is tied to a wood chair in the center 
of this room, his shirt stained with blood and sweat, and 


his head covered in a canvas bag. 


Corrin Delmaco is a male lightfoot halfling who works 
for the Boromar Clan. The halfling tried to infiltrate 
Daask and was captured. He is being held in the hideout 
while Daask agents torture him for information. 

Corrin is alawful evil spy with the following changes: 


* Heis Small, has a hit point maximum of 21 (6d6), and 
has 10 hit points remaining. 

• He has the following racial traits: He can move 
through the space of a Medium or larger creature. He 
has advantage on saving throws against being fright- 
ened. He speaks Common, Halfling, and thieves' cant. 


Corrin claims to have no idea why Daask abducted 
him and begs for the characters to free him. A character 
who succeeds on a Wisdom (Insight) check contested by 
Corrin's Charisma (Deception) check knows the halfling 
is lying. If pressed, Corrin admits his connection to the 
Boromar Clan, and tells the characters it would be mean 
a lot to the powerful halfling family if they freed him. 

A character can untie Corrin from the chair as an ac- 
tion. Corrin then flees the scene and tells the Boromars 
of his rescuers, which could lead to more adventures 
(see "Conclusion" at the end of this chapter). 


T10. TERMINUS STATION LIFT 
This lift connects Terminus Station with the higher lev- 
els of the Terminus district. 


Tll. BODEGA 


A small bell above the door rings as you enter this store. 
Its many shelves are packed with bottled drinks, pack- 
aged food that is ready to eat, souvenirs, and newspa- 
pers. A kenku wearing spectacles and standing behind a 
counter says, "Buy something, will ya?" in an old wom- 
an's voice. 


This store sells is run by Gurty, an elderly kenku. If the 
characters ask Gurty about Garra, the kenku mimics 
the half-ogre's voice, saying, "My coach is leaving soon. 
Hurry it up, or I'll pluck ya, stupid bird." 


T12. Ticker Воотн 

A commoner in the livery of House Orien works in 

this area, selling tickets through a small opening ina 
glass window to people on the platform. The door to the 
booth is locked from the inside. Money collected from 
ticket sales is placed in a small slot in a magic floor safe 
that can only be opened by a dwarf bearing the Mark 

of Warding. 


T13. BATHROOM 

The bathroom contains six stalls, each with a toilet, 
and a 3-foot-high pillar at the center of the room with a 
cleansing stone (see chapter 5) embedded in its top. 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


271 


272 


T14. STATION PLATFORM 


The sound of lightning rail trains stopping and starting 
elsewhere in Terminus Station echoes throughout the 
platform. A crowd of people is gathered near a lightning 
rail train crackling with arcs of blue energy. "If you're 
headed to Wroat, you'll have to catch the next опе!” cries 
a conductor in the livery of House Orien as the train be- 
gins moving out of the station. 


A crowd of 2d10 commoners and 2d4 nobles gathers 
on the platform along with six hostile human bandits 
who belong to Daask. The bandits are here to cover Gar- 
ra's escape and attack characters who try to board the 
departing train. 

Tocatch Garra, the characters need to board the light- 
ning rail train leaving the station. The coach has ten 
cars: a helm car (at the front), a first-class car, a galley 
car, a dining car, two standard cars, two sleeper cars, a 
Steerage car, and a cargo car (at the rear). 

The characters have 30 seconds (5 rounds) to catch 
the coach before it leaves Terminus Station. A character 
can jump onto a lightning rail car by making a success- 
ful DC 10 Strength (Athletics) check. A character who 
fails this check takes 3 (1d6) bludgeoning damage and 
falls prone on the platform. At the start of round six, the 
coach moves 20 feet per round for three rounds before 
accelerating to top speed. 

Left at the Station. If none of the characters board 
the lightning rail train, Garra gets away with the books 
and schemas found in Old Sharn's ruins. A more likely 
scenario is that one or more characters are left behind 
as the others board the train. In this case, keep the ini- 
tiative order and alternate between the characters stuck 
on the platform with the Daask bandits and the charac- 
ters exploring the train. The characters who remain at 
the station can seek out an adventurous skycoach driver 
and bribe them to fly after the train before making a DC 
13 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check to leap onto the roof of a 
train car safely. Characters who fail the check take fall 
prone on the roof of the car and take bludgeoning dam- 
age based on the distance fallen (1d6 per 10 feet). 


LIGHTNING RAIL TO WROAT 


After making it onto the lightning rail train, the charac- 
ters must explore it to find Garra. 


EXPLORING THE COACH 


Each car has a human conductor (commoner) wearing 
the livery of House Orien. When a character enters a 
car, the conductor asks to see the character's ticket. If 
the character doesn't have a ticket, the conductor de- 
mands the character pay 15 gp (the price of the ticket 
plus a modest fine) or face armed guards who attempt 
to arrest the character at the next stop. А character who 
makes a successful DC 14 Charisma (Intimidation or 
Persuasion) check convinces the conductor to stand 
down without the character paying. If the character can't 
pay and fails to convince the conductor to stand down, 


CHAPTER 4 | BUILDING EBERRON ADVENTURES 


this conductor sends word throughout the train to the 
other conductors to keep an eye on the character. 

If the characters move outside the coach, they must ei- 
ther move along the roof or cling to the sides of the train 
cars to find Garra. 

Walking on Rooftops. ^ creature moving across the 
train car roofs must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity (Ac- 
robatics) check to keep its balance. A creature that fails 
this check by 4 or less slips and falls prone on the roof. 
A creature that fails this check by 5 or more falls off the 
train and takes 7 (2d6) bludgeoning damage. 

Climbing the Sides. ^ creature climbing along the 
sides of the cars must succeed on a DC 10 Strength 
(Athletics) check to hang on. A creature that fails this 
check almost loses its grip and makes no progress. A 
creature that fails this check by 5 or more falls off the 
train and takes 7 (2d6) bludgeoning damage. 


CONFRONTING GARRA 


When the characters peer into the foremost cabin of the 
first-class car, read or paraphrase the following: 


An eight-foot-tall muscular woman with a tusked, pro- 
truding jaw lounges on a couch іп a luxury passenger — 
car. She reads the Sharn Inquisitive and keeps а battleaxe _ 
within arm’s reach. A wooden chest rests by her feet, and 
a table lined with fine foods and bottles of spirits stands 


close by. 


Garra paid for the privilege of a private car. She is a cha- 
otic evil half-ogre with Intelligence and Wisdom scores 
of 14 (+2). Her passive Wisdom (Perception) score is 12. 

Rot, a chaotic evil male sprite that works for Daask, is 
also in the car and invisible when the characters enter. 
The sprite is Garra's servant—a gift from Niho Koi. If 
the characters attack Garra, Rot shoots at them with his 
bow; if Garra falls, the sprite flees. Rot's mind has been 
warped by Niho Koi's magic, and he can't provide any 
useful information to the characters if captured. 

If Garra feels outnumbered, she smashes the closest 
window and climbs onto the roof, where she can more 
easily shove enemies off the train. 


ROLEPLAYING GARRA 

Garra has no remorse when it comes to her crimes and 
can always rationalize her behavior. When she notices 
the characters, Garra puts up her hands to indicate she 
means them no harm. She is impressed that the charac- 
ters managed to catch up with her. The half-ogre offers 
a 100 gp bribe to the group for the characters to tell the 
Sharn Watch she escaped and have that be the end of 
it. If the characters express interest in joining Daask, 
she chuckles asks why they'd do such a thing, and if 
she's satisfied with the answer, obliges. Garra pays new 
recruits 100 gp each, promises there is more reward to 
come, and says the characters' first task is to help her 
transport the chest to Droaam from Wroat. If the char- 
acters refuse, Garra attacks. Garra is willing to die for 
Daask and fights accordingly. 


Garra doesn't know what is in books or schemas, as 
these items are written in a coded magical language. 
She only knows that Niho Koi desires the items. 

Garra holds the key to her chest, which weighs 50 
pounds. A character who makes a successful DC 13 
Dexterity check with thieves' tools picks the lock, and a 
character who makes a successful DC 15 Strength (Ath- 
letics) check forces the chest open. The chest contains 
Garra's treasure (see below), thirteen books, and three 
paper schemas in scroll tubes. Each book and schema is 
written in a magically coded language that can't be read 
by the comprehend languages spell. Finding a way to 
read these documents is another adventure. 


‘TREASURE 

In addition to the books and schemas, the chest con- 
tains gem of brightness with 32 charges, a feather token 
(see chapter 5), and 600 gp. 


STOP THE COACH! . 


If the characters kill Garra in noisy combat, the light- 
ning rail coach stops, and a House Orien conductor 
(commoner) checks on the disturbance. If the charac- 
ters explain that they are working with the Sharn Watch 
to catch a murderer and present their writ, the conduc- 
tor has the coach halted at the next stop, with guards 
waiting to verify the characters’ claims. 


CONCLUSION 


If the characters fail to stop Garra, she gets away and 
brings the books and schemas to Niho Koi in Droaam. 
The information contained in these documents is up to 
you, but it might be dangerous information the Daugh- 
ters of Sora Kell could weaponize. The characters could 
face the rising threat of Droaam in future adventures. 
See the "Droaam" section earlier in this chapter for 
more adventure ideas. 


There are several other possibilities for future adven- 
tures, depending on how this story played out: 


* If the characters killed Garra, they are paid their re- 
ward of 50 gp each, and members of the Sharn Watch 
continue to contract the characters for work. 

• If the characters agreed to work for Garra, they be- 
come members of Daask. If the characters killed 
Garra, they become enemies of Daask. 

• If the characters returned Caden d'Orien to his father, 
Alden might ask the characters for help with other 
tasks, or he might see them as his enemies if they re- 
ported him to the Sharn Watch. 

* If the characters freed Corrin Delmaco (see area T9 
of Terminus) or if they killed Garra, the Boromar Clan 
sees them as potential allies. If the characters ally 
with Daask, the Boromar Clan sees them as enemies. 

* The characters' heroics catch the attention of a House 
Lyrandar airship captain seeking a crew for a danger- 
ous expedition to some far-flung corner of Khorvaire, 
or perhaps even as far away as Xen'drik or Argonnes- 
sen. See chapter 2 for possible adventure locations. 


KHYBER DRAGONSHARDS GLIMMER AS A DOLGAUNT AND 
DOLGRIMS TRY TO PRY OPEN A GATEKEEPER SEAL. 


AGIC PLAYS A VITAL ROLE IN THE DAY-TO-DAY 
life of Khorvaire. Common magic items 

are widespread, and the crystals known 

as dragonshards serve as the fuel of the 
magical economy and are used in items that 
amplify the powers of dragonmarks. 


DRAGONSHARDS 


Dragonshards aren't magic items themselves but are 
crystals imbued with magical energy. They play a vital 
role in the creation of magic items and the performance 
of certain rituals in Eberron. Dragonshards come in 
three varieties, each found in a different environment. 

Eberron dragonshards are found in shallow soil 
and often encased in geode-like stone shells. Eberron 
dragonshards can be found almost anywhere, but the 
most significant deposits have been discovered in jungle 
environments, notably Q'barra and Xen'drik. In their 
raw form, Eberron dragonshards are rosy crystals with 
crimson swirls flowing in their depths and are typically 
refined into a glowing powder. This dragonshard dust 
can be used to fuel almost any act of magic. When cast- 
ing a spell, you can use Eberron dragonshard dust in 
place of any spell component that has a cost, unless the 
DM says otherwise (the dust's market value is the same 
as the replaced component). Eberron dragonshard dust 
is used in the creation of some magic items, and many 
powerful tools—such as the lightning rail and elemental 
airships—require an ongoing expenditure of Eberron 
dragonshards to maintain their enchantments. 

Khyber dragonshards are found deep in the earth, 
often near layers of magma. These crystals typically 
grow on cavern walls, and superstition says they flour- 
ish in areas with significant fiendish activity. Khyber 
dragonshards are deep blue or dark violet, laced with 
gleaming veins. Khyber dragonshards have an affinity 
for binding magics. Elemental binding—which is behind 
airships, the lightning rail, and elemental galleons— 
requires a Khyber dragonshard to hold the elemental. 
Khyber shards are used for phylacteries, planar binding, 
and other effects that trap or manipulate spirits. Khyber 
dragonshards can also be used for necromantic rites. 

Siberys dragonshards fall from the Ring of Siberys, 
the ring of crystals that encircles the world. While rare 
in Khorvaire, there are significant Siberys dragonshard 
fields in the continent of Xen'drik, and this is a potential 
source of great wealth for explorers. Siberys dragon- 
shards are amber in color, with swirling golden veins 
gleaming within. These dragonshards are used in the 
crafting of magic items that require dragonmarks for 
attunement. Larger ones may be required for eldritch 
machines or the creation of legendary items or artifacts. 


TREASURES 


MAGIC ITEMS 


The world of Eberron thrums with the power of magic. 
Artificers, magewrights, wizards, and other spellcast- 
ers produce an abundance of magic items, particularly 
those with the common rarity. 


MAGIC ITEM DESCRIPTIONS 


This section presents a selection of magic items in al- 
phabetical order. See the Dungeon Master's Guide for 
the rules on using magic items. 

Some of the magic items in this chapter are symbiotic 
objects created by the daelkyr. While not fully sentient, 
these symbiotic items are partially organic. Attuning to 
such an item reflects physically bonding with it. While 
these objects aren't evil, some people might be dis- 
turbed upon seeing your living armor or tentacle whip! 


CHAPTER 5 | TREASURES 


275 


276 


ARCANE PROPULSION ARM 
Wondrous item, very rare (requires attunement by a 
creature missing a hand or an arm) 


This prosthetic appendage was developed by artificers 
of House Cannith. To attune to this item, you must at- 
tach it to your arm at the wrist, elbow, or shoulder, at 
which point the prosthetic magically forms a copy of the 
appendage it's replacing. 

While attached, the prosthetic provides these benefits: 


The prosthetic is a fully capable part of your body. 

You can take an action to remove the prosthetic, and it 
removes itself if your attunement to it ends. It can't be 
removed against your will. 

* The prosthetic is a magic melee weapon with which 
you're proficient. It deals 1d8 force damage on a hit 
and has the thrown property, with a normal range of 
20 feet and а long range of 60 feet. When thrown, the 
prosthetic detaches and flies at the target of the attack, 
then immediately returns to you and reattaches. 


ARMBLADE 
Weapon (any one-handed melee weapon), common (re- 
quires attunement by a warforged) 


An armblade is a magic weapon that attaches to your 
arm, becoming inseparable from you as long as you're 
attuned to it. To attune to this item, you must hold it 
against your forearm for the entire attunement period. 

As a bonus action, you can retract the armblade into 
your forearm or extend it from there. While it is ex- 
tended, you can use the weapon as if you were holding 
it, and you can't use that hand for other purposes. 


BELASHYRRA'S BEHOLDER CROWN 
Wondrous item, legendary (requires attunement) 


This symbiotic crown is carved from dark purple and 
mauve stone, with ten points like stalks set with gem- 
stones resembling the eyestalks of a beholder. To attune 
to this item, you must wear it on your head for the entire 
attunement period, during which the crown’s hidden 
tendrils burrow into your scalp to bond with your skull. 

While wearing the crown, you can see normally in 
darkness, both magical and nonmagical, to a distance 
of 120 feet. 

Spells. The crown has 10 charges. While wearing it, 
you can use an action to expend some of its charges to 
cast one of the following spells from it (spell save DC 
16): charm person (1 charge), disintegrate (6 charges), 
fear (3 charges), finger of death (7 charges), flesh to 
stone (6 charges), ho/d person (2 charges), ray of enfee- 
blement (2 charges), sleep (1 charge), slow (3 charges), 
telekinesis (5 charges). 

The crown regains 1d6 + 3 expended charges 
daily at dawn. 

Symbiotic Nature. The crown can’t be removed from 
you while you're attuned to it, and you can't voluntarily 
end your attunement to it. If you’re targeted by a spell 
that ends a curse, your attunement to the crown ends, 
and it detaches from you. 

The daelkyr Belashyrra made these crowns. While on 
the same plane of existence as the crown, Belashyrra 
can see through its eyestalks. 


CHAPTER 5 | TREASURES 


CLEANSING STONE 
Wondrous item, common 


A cleansing stone is a sphere 1 foot in diameter, en- 
graved with mystic sigils. When touching the stone, 
you can use an action to activate it and remove dirt and 
grime from your garments and your person. 

Such stones are often embedded in pedestals in public 
squares in Aundair or in high-end Ghallanda inns. 


DOCENT 
Wondrous item, rare (requires attunement by a war- 
forged) 


A docent is a small metal sphere, about 2 inches across, 
studded with dragonshards. To attune to a docent, you 
must embed the item somewhere on your body, such as 
your chest or your eye socket. 

Sentience. A docent is a sentient item of any align- 
ment with an Intelligence of 16, a Wisdom of 14, and 
a Charisma of 14. It perceives the world through your 
senses. It communicates telepathically with you and can 
speak, read, and understand any language it knows (see 
"Random Properties" below). 

Life Support. Whenever you end your turn with O hit 
points, the docent can make a Wisdom (Medicine) check 
with a *6 bonus. If this check succeeds, the docent sta- 
bilizes you. 

Random Properties. A docent has the following 
properties: 


Languages. The docent knows Common, Giant, and 
1d4 additional languages chosen by the DM. If a 
docent knows fewer than six languages, it can learn 
a new language after it hears or reads the language 
through your senses. 

Skills. The docent has a *7 bonus to one of the follow- 
ing skills (roll a d4): (1) Arcana, (2) History, (3) Investi- 
gation, or (4) Nature. 

Spells. The docent knows one of the following spells 
and can cast it at will, requiring no components (roll 
а d6): (1-2) detect evil and good or (3—6) detect magic. 
The docent decides when to cast the spell. 


Personality. A docent is designed to advise and assist 
the warforged it's attached to. One of the simple func- 
tions of a docent is to serve as a translator. The docent’s 
properties are under its control, and if you have a bad re- 
lationship with your docent, it might refuse to assist you. 


DyYRRN’S TENTACLE WHIP 
Weapon (whip), very rare (requires attunement) 


This long, whip-like strand of tough muscle bears a 
sharp stinger at one end. To attune to this symbiotic 
weapon, you wrap the whip around your wrist for the 
entire attunement period, during which time the whip 
painfully embeds its tendrils into your arm. 

You gain a +2 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic whip, but attack rolls made against aber- 
rations with this weapon have disadvantage. A creature 
hit by this weapon takes an extra 1d6 psychic damage. 
When you roll a 20 on the d20 for an attack roll with 
this weapon, the target is stunned until the end of its 
next turn. 


As a bonus action, you can sheathe the whip by caus- 
ing it to retract into your arm, or draw the whip out of 
your arm again. 

Symbiotic Nature. The whip can't be removed from 
you while you're attuned to it, and you can't voluntarily 
end your attunement to it. If you're targeted by a spell 
that ends a curse, your attunement to the whip ends, 
and it detaches from you. 


EARWORM 
Wondrous item, uncommon (requires attunement) 


To attune to this symbiont, you must hold it against the 
skin behind your ear for the entire attunement period, 
whereupon it burrows into your head and bonds to your 
skull. While the earworm is inside you, you can speak, 
read, and write Deep Speech. 

Spells. The earworm has 4 charges. You can cast 
the following spells from it, expending the necessary 
number of charges (spell save DC 15): detect thoughts 
(2 charges) or dissonant whispers (1 charge). Each time 
you use the earworm to cast the detect thoughts spell, it 
sends the information gleaned to the nearest daelkyr, or 
to the next nearest earworm until it reaches a daelkyr. 

The earworm regains 144 expended charges 
daily at dawn. 

Symbiotic Nature. The earworm can't be removed 
from you while you're attuned to it, and you can't volun- 
tarily end your attunement to it. If you're targeted by a 
spell that ends a curse, your attunement to the earworm 
ends, and it exits your body. 


EVERBRIGHT LANTERN 
Wondrous item, common 


This bullseye lantern contains an Eberron dragonshard 
that sheds light comparable to that produced by a con- 
tinual flame spell. An everbriéht lantern sheds light in a 
120-foot cone; the closest 60 feet is bright light, and the 
farthest 60 feet is dim light. 


FEATHER TOKEN 
Wondrous item, common 


This small metal disk is inscribed with the image of a 
feather. When you fall at least 20 feet while the token 
is on your person, you descend 60 feet per round and 
take no damage from falling. The token's magic is ex- 
pended after you land, whereupon the disk becomes 
nonmagical. 


FINDER’S GOGGLES 
Wondrous item, uncommon (requires attunement by a 
creature with the Mark of Finding) 


The lenses of these garish goggles are carved from Si- 
berys dragonshards. While wearing these lenses, you 
gain the following benefits: 


* When you make a Wisdom (Insight) check, you can 
roll a d4 and add the number rolled to the check. 

- As an action, you can use the goggles to examine an 
object to identify the aura of the last creature that 
touched it. Make a Wisdom (Insight) check against a 
DC of 13 + the number of days since the last contact 
occurred. On a success, you learn the creature’s type 


and can immediately use the goggles to cast locate 
creature to find that creature. This property can’t be 
used again until the next dawn. 


GLAMERWEAVE 
Wondrous item, common or uncommon 


Glamerweave is clothing imbued with harmless illusory 
magic. While wearing the common version of these 
clothes, you can use a bonus action to create a moving 
illusory pattern within the cloth. 

Uncommon glamerweave can have the pattern rise 
from the cloth. For example, a glamerweave gown might 
be wreathed in harmless, illusory flames, while a glam- 
erweave hat might have illusory butterflies fluttering 
around it. 

When you make a Charisma (Performance) or Cha- 
risma (Persuasion) check while wearing the uncommon 
version of glamerweave, you can roll a d4 and add the 
number rolled to the check. Once you use this property, 
it can’t be used again until the next dawn. 


IMBUED Woop Focus 
Wondrous item, common (requires attunement) 


An imbued wood focus is a rod, staff, or wand cut from 
a tree infused with extraplanar energy. If you're a spell- 
caster, you can use this orb as a spellcasting focus. 

When you cast a damage-dealing spell using this item 
as your spellcasting focus, you gain a +1 bonus to one 
damage roll of the spell, provided the damage is of the 
type associated with the item's wood. The types of wood 
and their associated damage types are listed in the Im- 
bued Wood Focus table. 


IMBUED Woop Focus 


Wood Damage Type 
Fernian Ash Fire 
Irian Rosewood Radiant 


Kythrian Manchineel Acid or poison 


Lamannian Oak Lightning or thunder 


Mabaran Ebony Necrotic 
Risian Pine Cold 
Shavarran Birch Force 
Xorian Wenge Psychic 


KEYCHARM 
Wondrous item, common (requires attunement by a 
creature with the Mark of Warding) 


This small stylized key plays a vital role in the work of 
House Kundarak. If you cast the alarm, arcane lock, or 
glyph of warding spell, you can tie the effect to the key- 
charm so that whoever holds it receives the notification 
from the alarm spell, bypasses the lock of the arcane 
lock spell, or avoids triggering the glyph placed by the 
glyph of warding spell. In addition, the holder (who 
needn't be attuned to the item) can take an action to end 
any one spell tied to it, provided the holder knows the 
command word you set for ending the tied spells. The 
keycharm can have up to three tied spells at one time. 


“ч 
js 

Nd 

Say 


278 


KvnziN's OOZE 
Wondrous item, very rare (requires attunement) 


This opalescent, symbiotic goo comes sealed in a jar 
and slowly shifts and moves, as if endlessly exploring 
the jar's interior. To attune to this item, you must first 
drink the contents of the jar, unlocking the following 
properties. 

Resistant. While attuned to Kyrzin's ooze, you have 
resistance to poison and acid damage, and you're im- 
mune to the poisoned condition. 

Amorphous. As an action, you can speak a command 
word and cause your body to assume the amorphous 
qualities of an ooze. For the next minute, you (along 
with any equipment you're wearing or carrying) can 
move through a space as narrow as 1 inch wide without 
squeezing. Once you use this property, it can't be used 
again until the next dawn. 

Acid Breath. As an action, you can exhale acid in a 
30-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line 
must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 36 
(848) acid damage on a failedsave, or half as much dam- 
age on a successful one. Once you use this property, it 
can't be used againuntil the next dawn. 

Symbiotic Nature. The ooze can't be removed from 
you while you're attuned to it, and you can't voluntarily 
end your attunement to it. If you're targeted by a spell 
that ends a curse, your attunement to the ooze ends, as 
it seeps out of you. 

If you die while the ooze is inside you, it bursts out 
and engulfs you, turning your corpse into a black pud- 
ding allied with the daelkyr (see the Monster Manual for 
the black pudding's stat block). 


LIVING ARMOR 
Armor (any), very rare (requires attunement) 


This hideous armor is formed from black chitin, beneath 
which veins pulse and red sinews glisten. To attune 

to this item, you must wear it for the entire attune- 

ment period, during which tendrils on the inside bur- 
row into you. 

While wearing this armor, you have a *1 bonus to 
Armor Class, and you have resistance to the following 
damage types: necrotic, poison, and psychic. 

Symbiotic Nature. The armor can't be removed from 
you while you're attuned to it, and you can't voluntarily 
end your attunement to it. If you're targeted by a spell 
that ends a curse, your attunement to the armor ends, 
and it detaches from you. 

The armor requires fresh blood be fed to it. Immedi- 
ately after you finish any long rest, you must either feed 
half of your remaining Hit Dice to the armor (round up) 
or take 1 level of exhaustion. 


LIVING GLOVES 
Wondrous item, uncommon (requires attunement) 


These symbiotic gloves—made of thin chitin and 
sinew—pulse with a life of their own. To attune to them, 
you must wear them for the entire attunement period, 
during which the gloves bond with your skin. 


CHAPTER 5 | TREASURES 


While attuned to these gloves, you gain one of the 
following proficiencies (your choice when you attune to 
the gloves): 


* Sleight of Hand 

* Thieves' tools 

* One kind of artisan's tools of your choice 

• One kind of musical instrument of your choice 


When you make an ability check using the chosen pro- 
ficiency, you add double your proficiency bonus to the 
check, instead of your normal proficiency bonus. 

Symbiotic Nature. The gloves can't be removed from 
you while you're attuned to them, and you can't volun- 
tarily end your attunement to them. If you're targeted by 
a spell that ends a curse, your attunement to the gloves 
ends, and they can be removed. 


ORB OF SHIELDING 
Wondrous item, common (requires attunement) 


An orb of shielding is a polished, spherical chunk of 
crystal or stone aligned to one of the planes of existence. 
If you're a spellcaster, you can use this orb as a spell- 
casting focus. 

If you're holding the orb when you take damage of the 
type associated with the orb's material, you can use your 
reaction to reduce the damage by 1d4 (to a minimum of 
0). The materials and their associated damage types are 
listed in the Orb of Shielding table. 


ORB ОЕ SHIELDING 


Planar Material Damage Type 
Fernian basalt Fire 
Irian quartz Radiant 


Acid and poison 
Lightning and thunder 


Kythrian skarn 
Lamannian flint 


Mabaran obsidian Necrotic 
Risian shale Cold 
Shavarran chert Force 
Xorian marble Psychic 


PROSTHETIC LIMB 
Wondrous item, common (requires attunement by a 
creature missing some or all of a limb) 


This artificial limb replaces a hand, arm, foot, leg, or 
similar appendage that was lost or removed. While the 
prosthetic is attached and attuned to you, it functions 
identically to the body part it is replacing. You can de- 
tach or reattach it as an action, and it can't be removed 
by anyone else. 

If you have multiple prosthetic limbs, they count as a 
single magic item with regard to the number of magic 
items you can attune to. 


SCRIBE'S PEN 
Wondrous item, common (requires attunement by a 
creature with the Mark of Scribing) 


You can use this pen to write on any surface. You decide 
whether the writing is visible or invisible, but the writing 
is always visible to a person with the Mark of Scribing. 


Any creature with the Mark of Scribing can use an ac- 
tion to touch the invisible writing, making it visible to all. 

If you use the pen to write on a creature that isn't a 
construct, the writing fades after 7 days. 


SHIFTWEAVE 
Wondrous item, common 


When a suit of shiftweave is created, up to five different 
outfits can be embedded into the cloth. While wearing 
the clothing, you can speak its command word as a bo- 
nus action to transform your outfit into your choice of 
one of the otherdesigns contained within it. Regardless 
of its appearance, the outfit can't be anything but cloth- 
ing. Although it can duplicate the look of other magical 
clothing, it doesn't gain their magical properties. 


SPEAKING STONE 
Wondrous item, very rare 


The key to long-distance, virtually instantaneous com- 
munication across Khorvaire is House Sivis's network 
of message stations. Each station contains at least one 
speaking stone, which is carved from a Siberys dragon- 
shard and inscribed with arcane symbols that uniquely 
identify it. If you're a gnome with the Mark of Scribing, 
you can touch the stone and use an action to cast the 
sending spell from it. The target is any other speaking 
stone whose location or unique sequence of symbols 
you know. A creature within 5 feet of the stone hears the 
message as if they were the target. 

In a Sivis message station, a gnome is always on duty 
by the speaking stone, listening for messages that might 
come in and transcribing them for delivery to their in- 
tended recipients. 


MI ProstHetic Lims (Arm) 
К. 


SPELLSHARD 
Wondrous item, common 


This polished Eberron dragonshard fits in the hand and 
stores information similar to a book. The shard can 
hold the equivalent of one book that's no more than 320 
pages long. A shard can be created blank or already 
filled with information. When the shard is created, the 
creator can set a passphrase that must be spoken to ac- 
cess the information stored within. 

While holding the shard, you can use an action to 
open your mind to the shard, seeing its content in your 
mind. On subsequent rounds, reading the text or scrib- 
ing new text on blank "pages" in the shard requires 
concentration (as if concentrating on a spell) and takes 
the same amount of time it takes you to read and write 
normally. Thinking of a particular phrase or topic draws 
you to the first section in the shard that addresses it. 

A wizard can use a spellshard as a spellbook, with 
the usual cost in gold and time to "scribe" a spell into 
the shard. 


VENTILATING LUNGS 
Wondrous item, rare (requires attunement) 


These metallic nodules were created in response to the 
poisonous gases used on the battlefields of the Last War. 
When you attune to these lungs, they replace the lungs 
in your chest, which disappear. The lungs allow you to 
breathe normally, even in an antimagic field, and their 
breathing function can't be suppressed by magic. 

Outside an antimagic field or any other effect that 
suppresses magic, these lungs allow you to breathe 
normally in any environment (including a vacuum), and 
you have advantage on saving throws against harm- 
ful gases such as those created by a cloudkill spell, 

a stinking cloud spell, inhaled poisons, and gaseous 
breath weapons. 

As an action, you can use these lungs to exhale a gust 
of wind, as if you had cast the gust of wind spell (spell 
save DC 15) with no components. This property of the 
lungs can't be used again until the next dawn. 

If your attunement to the lungs ends, your original 
lungs reappear. 


WAND SHEATH 
Wondrous item, common (requires attunement by a war- 
forged) 


A wand sheath clamps onto your arm and imparts the 
following benefits: 


* The wand sheath can't be removed from you while 
you're attuned to it. 

* Youcan insert a wand into the sheath as an action. 

The sheath can hold only one wand at a time. 

You can retract or extend a wand from the sheath as a 

bonus action. While the wand is extended, you can use 

it as if you were holding it, but your hand remains free. 


If a sheathed wand requires attunement, you must 
attune to the wand before you can use it. However, the 
wand sheath and the attached wand count as a single 
magic item with regard to the number of magic items 
you can attune to. If you remove the wand from the 
sheath, your attunement to the wand ends. 


CHAPTER 5 | TREASURES 


279 


WHEEL OF WIND AND WATER 
Wondrous item, uncommon 


When mounted at the helm of an elemental galleon or 
airship, this wheel allows a creature that possesses the 
Mark of Storm to telepathically control the elemental 
bound inside the vessel. 

If a wheel of wind and water is mounted on a mun- 
dane sailing ship, a creature with the Mark of Storm 
who is using the wheel can create an area of ideal 
conditions around the vessel, increasing its speed by 5 
miles per hour. 


ELDRITCH MACHINES 


Ina Cannith enclave, a team of artificers maintain a 
creation forge that produces warforged. In the Shadow 
Marches, druids guard the seals that hold the daelkyr 
atbay. In the sewers below Sharn, a mad necromancer 
puts the final touches on a device that will turn the 
city'sresidents into undead. Such contraptions are 
categorized as eldritch machines—magical devices of 
immense power that are too large to be moved easily. El- 
dritch machines are marvels of magic and engineering 
that require special components and conditions to func- 
tion. For example, a particular eldritch machine might 
function only in a manifest zone where two or more 
planes are coterminous. 

Ultimately, eldritch machines are plot devices that can 
represent the culmination of a villain's master plan or a 
last defense against evil. 


CREATION FORGE 

A creation forge is a spherical chamber that contains a 
floating obelisk. This obelisk creates warforged souls 
and places them in newly constructed warforged bodies. 
Only dragonmarked members of House Cannith can 
create and maintain such devices, and though the Treaty 
of Thronehold mandated the destruction of all creation 
forges in Khorvaire after the Last War, at least one cre- 
ation forge is rumored to exist in the bowels of Sharn. 


DIMENSIONAL SEAL 

A dimensional seal is a massive stone slab covered with 
a complex pattern of runes and sigils. The seal projects 
an invisible field in a 2-mile radius. This field blocks 

all forms of conjuration magic and any other effect that 
involves teleportation or planar travel. Dimensional 
seals are usually found in the Eldeen Reaches and the 
Shadow Marches—reminders of the conflict between 
the Gatekeepers and the daelkyr. The techniques used 
to create these seals have been long lost. It's said that as 
a whole, the dimensional seals keep the daelkyr bound 
in Khyber and prevent Xoriat from becoming cotermi- 
nous with Eberron. If enough of these seals are de- 
stroyed, there could be dire consequences for the world. 


Storm Spire 


MABARAN RESONATOR 

This dread device draws on the power of Mabar, in- 
fusing the dead with the malign energy of the Endless 
Night. While it is active, any humanoid that dies within 
2 miles of the resonator reanimates 1 minute later as a 
zombie (see the Monster Manual for its stat block) under 
the control of the creature controlling the device. 


MASTER'S CALL 

While this looks like a scrap heap assembled from 
shattered constructs, this eldritch machine possesses 
great power. A creature in control of it can sense the 
presence and location of all warforged within 10 miles 
of the device and can, as an action, send a telepathic 
message to them laced with enchantment magic. Such a 
message can be sent no more than once every 24 hours. 
A warforged who receives the message is compelled 

to follow one command contained within it, unless the 
warforged succeeds on a DC 12 Wisdom saving throw. 
The affected warforged breaks free of the command 
after 24 hours. 


SPELL SINK 

This device emanates an antimagic field (same effects as 
the antimagic field spell) in a radius of 1 to 3 miles. The 
field can be activated or deactivated as an action with a 
touch by its controller. 

The form that the device takes depends on the nature 
of its creator. The Ashbound druids despise unnatural 
magic, so a spell sink created by them might be a living 
artifact, such as a twisted tree that consumes the magi- 
cal energy around it. Conversely, a spell sink created by 
a mad artificer might be a massive vessel composed of 
dragonshards and exotic metals. 

A variant device called the spell siphon not only neu- 
tralizes magic but also absorbs all magical energy in the 
area, storing that power for a cataclysmic effect. 


STORM SPIRE 

This eldritch machine can only be controlled by crea- 
tures that bear the Mark of Storm. Storm spires allow 
House Lyrandar to influence the weather, which can be 
a boon for the local population or a curse if a Lyrandar 
baron chooses to demand payment for ideal weather. 


EVERYDAY MAGIC ITEMS 


Thanks to dragonshards, common magic items—includ- 
ing the ones in Xanathar's Guide to Everything—are 
readily available in Khorvaire. 


BUYING A COMMON MAGIC ITEM 


In Eberron, common magic items can be found for sale 
in most communities. The DM determines the stock that 
is available, or the DM has the shoppers make a group 
Intelligence (Investigation) check to find a shop or ped- 
dler that has the desired item in stock. The DC for this 
check is 10 in a city, 15 in a town, and 20 in a village. If 
the check fails, at least 24 hours must pass before look- 
ing for the same item in that community. 

The DM sets the price of acommon magic item or de- 
termines it randomly: 2d4 x 10 gp, or half as much fora 
consumable item such as a potion or scroll. 


CREATING COMMON MAGIC ITEMS 


Normally, a magic item in Eberron is created using the 
crafting rules in the Dungeon Master's Guide or Xana- 
thar's Guide to Everything. But if you have a dragon- 


shard, you can more easily create a common magic item. 


To create such an item with a dragonshard, a charac- 
ter must have proficiency in the tools used to create a 
nonmagical version of the item or proficiency in the Ar- 
cana skill. For example, a potion of healing can be cre- 
ated by a character who has proficiency with the herbal- 
ism kit. A spellcaster can scribe a spell scroll of a spell 
they know if they have proficiency in the Arcana skill, 
and they must provide all material components required 
for the spell. A cantrip scribed onto a scroll works as if 
the caster were Ist level. 

The Creating Common Magic Items table states how 
much time and money you must spend to craft a com- 
mon magic item with a dragonshard, which is expended 
in the creation process. The hours of creation can be 


spread over multiple days, which needn't be consecutive. 


CREATING COMMON MAGIC ITEMS 


Common Magic Item Time Cost 
Spell scroll (cantrip) 
Potion of healing 


8 hours 15 gp 
8 hours 25 gp 


Any other common magic item 32 hours* 50 gp* 


*Halved for a consumable item like a potion or scroll 


CRAFTING COMPLICATIONS 


If the DM is using the crafting rules in Xanathar's Guide 


to Everything for items that aren't common, the creation 
process can involve complications. Assume there's a 10 
percent chance of a complication arising for every five 
workweeks (25 days) spent on crafting the item. Xana- 
thar's Guide to Everything presents a number of possi- 
ble complications, or you can use the Eberron Crafting 
Complications table. 


EBERRON CRAFTING COMPLICATIONS 


d6 Complication 

1 House Cannith or another dragonmarked house takes 
an interest in your work. Do they view you as a threat, 
or are they impressed by your techniques? 

2 A mishap creates a temporary manifest zone (see 
"The Planes of Existence" in chapter 4 for information 
on manifest zones). 

3 You need to acquire an additional rare component їо 
complete your work. Time for adventure! 

4 Тһе shifting balance of the planes interferes with your 
work; you must wait for the current planar alignment 
to change. This delays your work by 2d6 days. 

5 Your efforts draw the attention of the Aurum, the 
Chamber, the Emerald Claw, or the Lords of Dust. 

6 Your item becomes sentient (see chapter 7 of the 
Dungeon Master's Guide for rules on sentient items). 


CHAPTER 5 | TREASURES 


281 


ABOARD A LIGHTNING TRAIN, A HEROIC MONK, AIDED BY HER MAGICAL 
ARM, STRIKES AT A MEMBER OF THE VILLAINOUS Emeraco Craw. 


VEN AS THE FIVE NATIONS SLOWLY RECOVER 
from the Last War, rumors spread of the 
alien daelkyr, the Emerald Claw, the Lord of 
Blades, and other threats growing in power 
across the world. This chapter provides stat 
blocks for many of the creatures that can play a role in 
an Eberron campaign, including enemies that might 
overrun a town, powerful entities threatening all Khor- 
vaire, and NPCs that can serve as either friends or foes. 
The chapter's monsters appear first in a bestiary. 
They're followed by a collection of generic NPCs—vari- 
ous people who can populate your Eberron adventures. 
Remember that few intelligent creatures in Eberron 
are inherently evil. Even dragons, which on other worlds 
are associated with certain alignments, choose their 
own paths. The adventure ideas and encounter tables in 
chapter 4 offer abundant examples of monsters behav- 
ing in ways that aren't traditionally monstrous. 


STAT BLOCKS BY CREATURE TYPE | 


Here are the creatures in this chapter sorted by 
creature type. 


CHAPTER 6 


FRIENDS AND FOES 


ABERRATION FEY 
Belashyrra Dusk hag 
Dolgaunt Valenar hawk 
Dolgrim Valenar hound 
Dyrrn Valenar steed 


Hashalaq quori 
Kalaraq quori 
Tsucora quori 


BEAST 
Clawfoot 
Fastieth 


CELESTIAL 
Radiant idol 


CoNsTRUCT 
Expeditious messenger 
Iron defender 

Living burning hands 
Living cloudkill 

Living lightning bolt 
Warforged colossus 
Warforged titan 


FIEND 
Mordakhesh 
Rak Tulkhesh 
Sul Khatesh 
Zakya rakshasa 


HUMANOID 
Bone knight 
Changeling 
Inspired 
Kalashtar 

Lord of Blades 
Magewright 
Shifter 

Tarkanan assassin 
Warforged soldier 


UNDEAD 

Karrnathi undead soldier 
Lady Illmarrow 

Undying councilor 
Undying soldier 


BESTIARY 


The following pages feature stat blocks for various crea- 
tures of Eberron, arranged in alphabetical order. For 
guidance on how to use a creature's stat block, consult 
the introduction of the Monster Manual. 


DAELKYR 


The daelkyr are the lords of madness and the emissar- 
ies of Xoriat, who invaded Eberron with a host of mind 
flayers, beholders, and other foul aberrations. Wherever 
they walked, the daelkyr reshaped the world in their 
image, sowing madness and creating monsters. They 
fused goblins together to create the gibbering dolgrims 
and crafted the blind dolgaunts from hobgoblin stock. 
The goblinoid champions of Dhakaan fought fiercely. 
But in the end, it was the orc Gatekeeper druids who 
closed the portals to Xoriat and drove the daelkyr into 
Khyber. The Gatekeepers crafted seals to hold both the 
power of Xoriat and the daelkyr at bay, and as long as 
those seals remain intact, the lords of madness can't 
rise from the depths. Today, those seals are thousands 
of years old and the Gatekeepers are all but forgotten. 
Mind flayers scheme in the sewers of Sharn, and cultists 
beseech beholder priests for the blessings of Belashy- 
rra, the Lord of Eyes. And in the shadows of Khyber, the 
daelkyr are waiting. 
p TT EE Es 
THE Six DAELKYR 
Six daelkyr are known on Eberron through their cults and 
legends: Belashyrra and Dyrrn, who are detailed in this 
chapter, and the four described below. Other daelkyr surely 
lurk in the depths of Khyber. 

Avassh. The Twister of Roots devotes its attentions to 
plants. Avassh is said to be the source of sham bling 
mounds and myconids, but any unnatural and deadly veg- 
etation might be its work. 

Kyrzin. The cults of the Prince of Slime are based in the 
Shadow Marches and are infamous for cultivating gibber- 
ing beasts. Kyrzin creates sentient slimes that can enter 
humanoid bodies. In some tales, these creatures control 
their hosts, while in others, they are parasites that burn 
their way out of the body when it’s time to strike. 

Orlassk. The Master of Stone is said to have created 
basilisks, medusas, gorgons, cockatrices, and other mon- 
strosities and aberrations with the power of petrification. 
Orlassk's citadel is carved into the body of a gargantuan 
gargoyle that roams the chasms of Khyber. 

Valaara. The Crawling Queen works its will on insects, 
arachnids, and other vermin. Swarms with malign sen- 
tience, worms that consume victims from within, cultists 
that slowly become insects—all of these delight Valaara. 

lp SS OO|UUo-Oo OoU|E|UEOEOAAMEG-. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


283 


^b 


| 284 


Held Loosely in Space. The daelkyr have lairs within 
Khyber, but these are no mere caverns. Each daelkyr's 
domain is a demiplane reflecting the twisted vision of its 
master. These realms are connected to the surface by 
tunnels and chasms, but they defy conventional geogra- 
phy. Passages to Belashyrra's domain can be found in 
the Shadow Marches, but tunnels also connect its realm 
to Xen'drik. Adventurers can potentially cross great dis- 
tances quickly by passing through a daelkyr's domain. 

Unfathomable Evil. The daelkyr are utterly alien, 
and their physical forms can't be fully perceived by 
mortals. Viewers perceive the same general impression 
of a daelkyr, but the details vary in ways that can't be 
controlled. For example, Belashyrra mightappear as a 
female humanoid surrounded by floating eyes to some 
viewers, while other viewers see a haggard male elf. 


SPAWN OF THE DAELKYR 


Most of the aberrations on Eberron are the creations of 
the daelkyr. The daelkyr are masters of flesh-shaping, 
and they altered existing life forms—often beyond rec- 
ognition—to create soldiers for their wars against the 
peoples of Khorvaire. 

When a character faces a creature twisted by the 
daelkyr—an aberration or another creature bearing a 
daelkyr's corruption—consider rolling on the Daelkyr 
Modifications table to add strange cosmetic details to 
the creature. 


DAELKYR MODIFICATIONS 


d10 Modification 
1 The creature is fused with another creature or object. 
2 The creature has additional eyes, or its existing eyes 
are replaced with the eyes of a different creature. 
The creature produces eerie music instead of speech. 
The creature's skin has an unusual texture or color. 
The creature's hair is replaced by spines or tentacles. 
The creature's flesh is transparent. 
The creature has extra limbs. 
The creature is bioluminescent. 


iD со ы о їл & w 


The creature has an additional head. 
The creature sheds its skin every 60 days. 


= 
© 


BEHOLDERS 

Beholders served as the living artillery of the daelkyr 
forces, shattering hobgoblin armies with their deadly 
eye rays. When the Gatekeepers drove back and impris- 
oned the daelkyr, most of the beholders were driven into 
Khyber along with their creators. 

Today, beholders are solitary, egocentric creatures. 
Some have remained among the daelkyr and dolgaunts 
(presented later in this chapter), while others have 
accumulated their own followings among the Cults of 
the Dragon Below. A few have abandoned the path of 
aggression in favor of solitary philosophy and reflection. 
A beholder philosopher might manipulate events in a hu- 
manoid city not to gain power or wealth, but to stimulate 
and then study a particular social or economic situation. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


CHARACTERS WITH TIES TO THE DAELKYR 

Player characters might manifest connections to the 
daelkyr in many ways. The Great Old One warlock patron 
is an excellent match to Belashyrra or Dyrrn, but other 
classes can just as easily reflect a connection to this dark- 
ness. For example, а barbarian's rage might be seen as a 
form of daelkyr-induced madness, or a sorcerer's Sorcer- 
ous Origin could be the result of a daelkyr experiment. 

When a character has a tie to a daelkyr, consider whether 
that tie was chosen or thrust upon them. Is the character 
a cultist who embraces their dark path, believing that a 
world transformed by the daelkyr will be a better place? Or 
is the character a victim ofthe daelkyr, consumed by the 
fear of what they might become? 

The touch of the daelkyr might be purely mental, or it 
might be accompanied by a physical transformation. A 
barbarian touched by Belashyrra might serve as an eye of 
the All-Seer but remain physically unchanged, even as a 
barbarian tied to Dyrrn takes on aberrant features while 
raging. When a warlock character gains the Devil's Sight 
invocation, they might literally gain the fiery red eyes 
of a devil. 


DOPPELGANGERS 

The daelkyr Dyrrn the Corruptor enhanced the latent 
psychic abilities of changelings to develop doppelgang- 
ers, while implanting a desire to cause chaos in the com- 
munities around them.—even when there's no benefit in 
it for the doppelganger. Some doppelgangers, driven by 
visions from the daelkyr, can be found working with the 
Cults of the Dragon Below or fighting alongside aberra- 
tions in Khyber. Others operate alone. 


LYCANTHROPES 

Many people believe that shifters are descended from 
lycanthropes, but shifter druids often assert the op- 
posite—that the abilities of the shifters are a gift from 
Eberron or Lamannia, but the gift was corrupted by the 
daelkyr to create the curse of lycanthropy. 

Whatever the origin of lycanthropy, in the ninth cen- 
tury YK, the power of the curse surged dramatically, 
and all lycanthropes were drawn toward evil. The 
Church of the Silver Flame engaged in a long crusade to 
defend civilization from this brutal scourge, eventually 
all but eradicating lycanthropy from the Five Nations. 
The lycanthropes that survived hid in dark places, deep 
within the woods of the Eldeen Reaches and Droaam. 

The common people of Khorvaire still see lycan- 
thropes as a dire threat. Most folks don't understand 
that good-aligned lycanthropes exist. 


MIND FLAYERS 

The illithids of Eberron are the creations of the daelkyr 
Dyrrn the Corruptor. Most mind flayers on Eberron 
dwell in Khyber with their daelkyr masters, command- 
ing cities of dolgaunts and dolgrims. A few can be found 
on the surface, working with the Cults of the Dragon 
Below or pursuing their own enigmatic goals. The mind 
flayers often seem to pursue reopening the gates to Xo- 
riat with more urgency than the daelkyr themselves do. 
The immortal daelkyr can afford to wait for another ten 
thousand years; the illithids aren't so patient. 


DNER 


REGO-ER 


CORY T 


BELASHYRRA 


Belashyrra is the Lord of Eyes, also known to its cultists 
as the All-Seer or the Glorious Eye. Stories told of Be- 
lashyrra in the Shadow Marches whisper that the Lord 
of Eyes can see every evil deed a person commits, and 
that those touched by this daelkyr suffer terrible halluci- 
nations that inevitably drive them to violence or death. 

Dreadful Visions. The madness of Belashyrra is tied 
to sight: images that can't be unseen, horrific hallucina- 
tions, the fear of blindness and of being watched—or re- 
alizing that something else is using your eyes. Belashy- 
rra can force its victims to question whether what they 
perceive is real, or can fill their world with such terrors 
that they willingly blind themselves to escape. 

Belashyrra sees mortals as raw materials to be ex- 
ploited or insects to be exterminated. However, the Lord 
of Eyes has been known to take an interest in specific 
mortals. Belashyrra's warlocks serve as its envoys in the 
world and are often directed to seek out creatures and 
sites that the daelkyr wishes to see through their eyes. 

Belashyrra's Cults. The Lord of Eyes has followers 
across Khorvaire, and its cults are typically driven by 
mad visions. Devoted cultists can grow eyes in unusual 
locations, and might have darkvision or other supernat- 
ural abilities when they view the world through those 
eyes. Beholderkin often advise or lead Belashyrra's 
cults, and cultists typically treat these aberrations as 
divine beings. 


BELASHYRRA'S LAIR 

Belashyrra makes its lair in the Citadel of Lidless Eyes 
deep in Khyber, a site that appears to have been molded 
from molten stone, chitin, and flesh. Across its warped 
and liquid expanses, thousands of eyes of every size and 
shape peer into the endless darkness. Beholders, dol- 
grims, and stranger aberrations dwell within the halls 
of the citadel, which is one of the few places where such 
creatures are willing to live side by side. 

Some beholderkin serve Belashyrra as guards and 
agents, while others spend their lives in deep medita- 
tion, pursuing inner visions known only to the Lord of 
Eyes. It's rumored that anyone whosits on the citadel's 
throne can see through the eyes of any sentient creature 
on Eberron or in Khyber. If encountered in its lair, Be- 
lashyrra has a challenge rating of 23 (50,000 XP). 

Lair Actions. While within the Citadel of Lidless 
Eyes, Belashyrra can invoke the ambient magic to take 
lair actions. On initiative count 20 (losing initiative 
ties), Belashyrra can take a lair action to cause one of 
the following effects; it can't use the same effect two 
rounds in a row: 


* An eye opens on a solid surface within 60 feet of Be- 
lashyrra. One random eye ray of Belashyrra's shoots 
from that eye at a target of Belashyrra's choice that it 
can see. The eye then closes and disappears. 

* Belashyrra creates a wave of madness. Each creature 
it can see within its lair must succeed on a DC 22 Wis- 
dom saving throw or be charmed for 1 minute. While 
charmed in this way, a creature must use its action 
at the start of its turn before moving to make a melee 
attack against another creature of Belashyrra's choice 


within reach. If there are no creatures within reach, 
the charmed creature can act normally for that turn. A 
charmed creature can repeat the saving throw at the 
end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on 

a success. 

• Belashyrra taps into the eyesight of creatures in its 
lair and alters their perception. Each creature of 
Belashyrra's choice in the lair must make a DC 22 
Wisdom saving throw. On a failure, the affected crea- 
ture perceives objects and creatures a short distance 
from their actual locations, imposing disadvantage on 
the creature's attack rolls against those targets. An 
affected creature can repeat the saving throw at the 
end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on 
a success. If a creature's saving throw is successful 
or the effect ends for it, the creature is immune to this 
lair action for the next 24 hours. 


Regional Effects. Belashyrra's lair is known to touch 
remote areas of the Shadow Marches and caverns 
below Xen'drik. A region containing a passage to Belas- 
hyrra's lair is warped by its magic, which creates one or 
more of the following effects: 


* Creatures within 1 mile of the passage sometimes feel 
as if they're being watched. 

* Beasts that live within 5 miles of the passage undergo 
magical transmutation, growing eyes or eyestalks that 
Belashyrra can see through. 

• A humanoid who spends at least 1 hour within 1 mile 
of the passage must succeed on a DC 21 Wisdom 
saving throw or descend into a type of madness (see 
"Madness of Belashyrra" below). A creature that 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


286 


succeeds on this saving throw can't be affected by this 
regional effect again for 24 hours. 


If Belashyrra dies, these effects fade over the course of 
1d10 days. 


MADNESS OF BELASHYRRA 

If a creature goes mad in Belashyrra's lair or while 

it can see the daelkyr, it gains a form of indefinite 
madness. Roll on the Madness of Belashyrra table to 
determine the nature of this madness, which takes the 
form of a character flaw that lasts until cured. Chapter 
8 of the Dungeon Master's Guide has more information 
on madness. 


BELASHYRRA 


Medium aberration, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 304 (3248 + 160) 
Speed 40 ft., fly 40 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
24 (+7) 21(5) 20(45) 25 (47) 22(+6) 23 (+6 
eee ee 
Saving Throws Int +14, Wis +13, Cha +13 
Skills Arcana +14, Perception +13 
Damage Resistances poison, psychic 
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, exhaustion, 
frightened, poisoned, prone 
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive perception 23 
Languages Deep Speech, telepathy 120 ft. 
Challenge 22 (41,000 XP) 
Rpm nn 1 LLLLLLLLLLLLLLLL 


Alien Mind. If a creature tries to read Belashyrra's thoughts or 
deals psychic damage to it, that creature must succeed оп a 
DC 22 Intelligence saving throw or be stunned for 1 minute. 
The stunned creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Eye Thief. Belashyrra can see through the eyes of all creatures 
within 120 feet of it. It can use its Eye Ray through any creature 
within 120 feet of it, as though it were in that creature's space. 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Belashyrra fails a saving 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


Magic Resistance. Belashyrra has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Regeneration. Belashyrra regains 20 hit points at the start of 
its turn. If it takes radiant damage, this trait doesn't function at 
the start of its next turn. Belashyrra dies only if it starts its turn 
with 0 hit points and doesn't regenerate. 


Teleport. As a bonus action, Belashyrra can teleport up to 30 
feet to an unoccupied space it can see. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Belashyrra makes two attacks with its claws and 
uses its Eye Ray once. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (3d6 + 7) slashing damage. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


MADNESS OF BELASHYRRA 

d6 Flaw (lasts until cured) 

1 “Il constantly see shapes moving in the shadows." 

2 “| perceive certain types of people—vocations or en- 
tire societies—as hideous monsters.” 
“Someone is watching everything | do.” 
“When I close my eyes, | see my past misdeeds.” 
"| don't trust my sight. | have no idea what's real and 
what's a hallucination." 

6 "Something watches the world through my eyes. To 
thwart them, | keep my eyes closed or covered." 


Eye Ray. Belashyrra shoots one of the following magical eye 
rays of its choice, targeting one creature it can see within 120 
feet of it: 


=~ 


Psyche-Reconstruction Ray. The target must make a DC 22 
Wisdom saving throw, taking 49 (9d10) psychic damage on 
a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 
If this damage reduces a creature to 0 hit points, it dies and 
transforms into a spectator (see its entry in the Monster 
Manual) under Belashyrra's control and acts immediately 
after Belashyrra in the initiative order. The target can't be re- 
turned to its original form by any means short of a wish spell. 
2. Domination Ray. Thetarget must succeed on a DC 22 Wis- 
dom saving throw or be charmed by Belashyrra for 1 min- 
ute or until the target takes damage. Belashyrra can issue 
telepathic commands to the charmed creature (no action 
required), which it does its best to obey. 

3. Mind-Weakening Ray. The target must succeed on a DC 22 
Intelligence saving throw or take 36 (8d8) psychic damage 
and be unable to cast spells or activate magic items for 1 
minute. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of 
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 

4. Blinding Ray. The target and each creature within 10 feet of it 

must succeed on a DC 22 Constitution saving throw or take 

19 (3d12) radiant damage and be blinded for 1 minute. Until 

this blindness ends, Belyshyrra can see through the blinded 

creature's eyes. The blinded creature can repeat the saving 
throw at the end ofeach of its turns, ending the effect on 
itself on a success. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Belashyrra can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op- 
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be usedat a 
time and only at the end of another creature's turn. Belashyrra 

regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Claw. Belashyrra makes one claw attack. 

Implant Fear (Costs 2 Actions). Belashyrra targets a creature it 
can see within 60 feet of it. The target must succeed on a DC 
22 Wisdom saving throw or take 22 (4d10) psychic damage 
and immediately use its reaction, if available, to move as far 
as its speed allows away from Belashyrra. 

Rend Reality (Costs 3 Actions). Belashyrra rips at the bonds 
of reality in its immediate area. Each creature within 10 feet 
of Belashyrra must succeed on a DC 22 Constitution saving 
throw ortake 19 (3d12) force damage and gain one level of 
exhaustion. 


РЗ 
Fpj A \ =, 
Xe ENS ESL 


DYRRN 


Dyrrnis known to its followers as the Corruptor, the 
Stealer of Thoughts, the Slithering Lord, and the Foul 
Labyrinth. In the lore of the Gatekeepers, it is said that 
Dyrrn plants thoughts in the weak minded—the seeds 
of terrible ideas that fester and grow. Those who are 
particularly brilliant often draw the attention of the Foul 
Labyrinth, which hungers to consume unique minds. 

Twisting Flesh and Thought. The mind flayers of 
Eberron know Dyrrn as the Overmind, and it serves as 
the cornerstone of their collective consciousness. Of all 
the daelkyr, the Corruptor is the most adept at twisting 
minds and bodies to create monsters. It was Dyrrn who 
turned goblinoid prisoners into the first dolgaunts and 
dolgrims, creating the legions that would savage the 
nations of Khorvaire. Dyrrn is also a prolific creator of 
symbionts—treasures that tempt people to bind alien en- 
tities to their flesh. 

Dyrrn's Cults. Dyrrn's lair touches the Eldeen 
Reaches, and the druids of the Towering Wood are al- 
ways watching for Dyrrn's influence. At the start of the 
Last War, the dwarves of the Mror Holds discovered 
passages to the daelkyr's realm below their halls, and 
Dyrrn’s cults have spread from there. 

Mind flayers often work with Dyrrn's cults, many of 
which are obsessed with evolution—through the use of 
symbionts or by becoming an aberration. Those who 
worship the Stealer of Thoughts believe that Dyrrn will 
consume all sentient beings, except for its servants. 


Dyrrn most often appears as a tall humanoid male 
with pale skin, clad in a heavy cassock of interwoven 
black leather that slithers unsettlingly around the 
daelkyr's form. Dyrrn can extend tentacles from its 
body, using them to extract the brains of others. 


DyYRRN’S LAIR 

Dyrrn makes its lair in the Palace of Sinew, a horrid site 
shaped from the leftover flesh and bones of the daelkyr's 
sculpting. The walls of the palace undulate as air flows 
through them, as if the space were breathing. 

Lair Actions. While within the Palace of Sinew, 
Dyrrn can invoke the ambient magic to take lair actions. 
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), Dyrrn can 
take a lair action to cause one of the following effects; it 
can't use the same effect two rounds in a row: 


* Dyrrn uses its Corruption action. 

* A 30-foot-square area of ground within 120 feet of 
Dyrrn sprouts tentacles until initiative count 20 on the 
next round. Any creature that starts or ends its turn 
in the area must succeed on a DC 23 Strength saving 
throw or be restrained. A creature can escape the ten- 
tacles with a successful DC 23 Strength (Athletics) or 
Dexterity (Acrobatics) check as an action. 

Each creature of Dyrrn's choice that it can see within 
120 feet of it must succeed on a DC 23 Wisdom saving 
throw or take 26 (4d12) psychic damage. Unless the 
target has immunity to psychic damage, its Intelli- 
gence score is reduced by 1d4 each time it fails the 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


288 


saving throw for this lair action. The target dies if its 
Intelligence score is reduced to 0. The reduction lasts 
until the target finishes a short or long rest. 


Regional Effects. А region containing a passage to 
Dyrrn's lair is warped in one or more of these ways: 


e Plants and animals raised within 2 mile of the pas- 
sage have twisted, aberrant forms. Use the Daelkyr 
Modifications table for inspiration. 

Creatures within 1 mile of the passage frequently feel 

as if something is crawling under their skin. 

* If a humanoid spends at least 1 hour within 1 mile of 
the passage, that creature must succeed on a DC 22 
Wisdom saving throw or descend into a type of mad- 
ness (see "Madness of Dyrrn" below). A creature that 
succeeds on this saving throw can't be affected by this 
regional effect again for 24 hours. 


If Dyrrn dies, these effects fade away after 1d10 days. 


DYRRN 


Medium aberration, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 21 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 325 (3148 + 186) 
Speed 40 ft., fly 40 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
26 (+8) 21 (+5) 22 (+6)  26(48) 23(«6) 24 (+7) 
ee —————————— | 
Saving Throws Int +15, Wis +13, Cha +14 
Skills Arcana +15, History +15, Insight +13, Perception +13 
Damage Resistances poison, psychic 
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, exhaustion, 
frightened, poisoned, prone 
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive perception 23 
Languages Deep Speech, telepathy 120 ft. 
Challenge 24 (62,000 XP) 
L—————————————————A——————— 21 1 T 


Alien Mind. If a creature tries to read Dyrrn's thoughts or deals 
psychic damage to it, that creature must succeed on a DC 

23 Intelligence saving throw or be stunned for 1 minute. The 
stunned creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each 
of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Dyrrn fails a saving throw, it 
can choose to succeed instead. 


Magic Resistance. Dyrrn has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Regeneration. Dyrrn regains 20 hit points at the start of its 
turn. If Dyrrn takes radiant damage, this trait doesn't function 
at the start of its next turn. Dyrrn dies only if it starts its turn 
with 0 hit points and doesn't regenerate. 


Teleport. As a bonus action, Dyrrn can teleport up to 30 feet to 
an unoccupied space it can see. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Dyrrn makes one Tentacle Whip attack and uses 
its Corruption once. Dyrrn can replace its Tentacle Whip attack 
with Extract Brain if it has a creature grappled. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


MADNESS OF DYRRN 

If a creature goes mad in Dyrrn's lair or while it can see 
the daelkyr, it gains a form of indefinite madness. Roll 
on the Madness of Dyrrn table to determine the nature 
of this madness, which takes the form of a character 
flaw that lasts until cured. Chapter 8 of the Dungeon 
Master's Guide has more information on madness. 


MADNESS OF DYRRN 

d6 Flaw (lasts until cured) 
"There's an illithid parasite living in my brain!" 
"| can feel myself evolving into an aberration." 
"Aberrations are the only natural things." 
"A part of me has become a conscious entity." 
"My opponents must bow down to a mind flayer!” 


CQ ол > t9 х ко — 


"Dyrrn and the mind flayers simply want to unite 
all sentient creatures in collective consciousness. 
And | receive messages from the group mind!” 


Tentacle Whip. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 10 ft., 
one target. Hit: 24 (3410 + 8) slashing damage. If the target 

is a Medium or smaller creature, it is grappled (escape DC 
23), pulled into an unoccupied space within 5 feet of Dyrrn, 
and must succeed on a DC 23 Intelligence saving throw or be 
stunned until this grapple ends. Dyrrn can't use the same ten- 
tacle whip on another target until this grapple ends. Dyrrn has 
two tentacle whips. 


Corruption. Dyrrn targets one creature it can see within 60 feet 
of it. The target must succeed on a DC 23 Constitution saving 
throw or take 22 (446 + 8) necrotic damage and become cor- 
rupted for 1 minute. 

A corrupted creature's flesh twists in alien ways. The creature 
has disadvantage on attack rolls, its speed is reduced by half, 
and if ittries to cast a spell, it must first succeed on a DC 15 In- 
telligence check or the spell fails and is wasted. The corrupted 
creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Extract Brain. Melee Weapon Attack: 415 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
incapacitated creature grappled by Dyrrn. Hit: 55 (10d10) pierc- 
ing damage. If this damage reduces the target to 0 hit points, 
Dyrrn kills the target by extracting and devouring its brain. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Dyrrn can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the options 
below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a time 
and only at the end of another creature's turn. Dyrrn regains 
spent legendary actions atthe start of its turn. 


Tentacle Whip. Dyrrn makes one attack with its Tentacle Whip. 

Spawn Aberration (Costs 2 Actions). Dyrrn regurgitates an in- 
tellect devourer (see its entry in the Monster Manual) in an 
unoccupied space within 5 feet of it. The intellect devourer is 
under Dyrrn's control and acts immediately after Dyrrn in the 
initiative order. 

Mind Blast (Costs 3 Actions). Dyrrn magically emits psychic 
energy in a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that area must 
succeed on a DC 23 Intelligence saving throw or take 30 (5d8 
+ 8) psychic damage and be stunned for 1 minute. A creature 
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, 
ending the effect on itself on a success. 


DINOSAURS 


Dinosaurs are widespread on Eberron, particularly 
in Q'barra, the Talenta Plains, Xen'drik, and Argon- 
nessen. Smaller dinosaurs are the rule in Q'barra 
and the Talenta Plains, including varieties commonly 
used by Talenta halflings as mounts. 


CLAWFOOT 


Clawfoot dinosaurs are two-legged saurians with sharp 
teeth and toe claws that resemble deadly sickles. They 
are imposing creatures, about the size of a tall human, 
and are fierce enough to take down even larger prey. 

In the wild, an untrained clawfoot can easily hold its 
own in combat, but they are even fiercer when hunting 
in packs. Their instinct for pack structure has made 
these dinosaurs a traditional war mount for the hal- 
flings of the Talenta Plains, with clawfoots quickly and 
eagerly responding to training and control. 


ШЕЕ ОЕР ЛЫШЫ ТОЕТ EI i BEAL ILD TE EEE 
CLAWFOOT 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 19 (3d8 + 6) 
Speed 40 ft. 


wis 
12 (+1) 


CHA 
6 (-2) 


DEX 
16 (+3) 


CON 
M (+2) 


INT 
4 (-3) 


STR 
12 (+1) 


Skills Perception +3, Stealth +5 
Senses passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Pack Tactics. The clawfoot has advantage on an attack roll 
against a creature if at least one ofthe clawfoot's allies is within 
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


Pounce. If the clawfoot moves at least 20 feet straight toward 

a creature and then hits it with a claw attack on the same turn, 
that target must succeed on a DC 11 Strength saving throw or 
be knocked prone. Ifthe target is prone, the clawfoot can make 
one bite attack against it as a bonus action. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The clawfoot makes two attacks: one with its bite 
and one with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (148 + 3) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (148 + 3) slashing damage. 
EXLLUUELUIZUULT A UE CDD CUT = сас >] 


FASTIE TH 


FASTIETH 
Fastieth are human-sized, two-legged saurians with 
large eyes, brightly colored and patterned scales, and 
strong legs. They are the most common mounts of the 
halflings of the Talenta Plains, bred for speed. Although 
too small to bear larger riders, a fastieth can carry a hal- 
fling with light gear easily and at a good pace. Fastieths 
are typically stubborn creatures, so specimens with an 
even temperament are prized among the Talenta tribes. 

Being herbivores, fastieths prefer to flee rather than 
fight. However, even though not trained for battle, they 
can deliver a vicious bite if pressed. 


eee ae eee ee ee ee ed 
FASTIETH 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 
Hit Points 9 (2d8) 
Speed 50 ft. 


CHA 
4 (-3) 


INT 
4 (-3) 


WIS 
11 (+0) 


CON 
10 (+0) 


STR 
12 (+1) 


DEX 
18 (+4) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Quickness (Recharge 5-6). The fastieth can take the Dodge ac- 
tion as a bonus action. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: + 6to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) piercing damage. 
A SSI OEE] 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 289 


290 


DOLGAUNT ~— 


Dolgaunts are emaciated hobgoblins with disease-hued 
flesh. Their eye sockets gape open and empty above 

a mouth with a wormlike tongue. Writhing cilia cover 
their bodies, with longer tendrils around their heads and 
two wiry tentacles protruding from their bare shoulders. 
A dolgaunt is blind but can perceive its surroundings 
through the sensitive cilia that cover its skin. It can also 
absorblife through its tentacles, allowing it to drain the 
vitality out of any creature it touches. 

Warped by Chaos. When the daelkyr emerged from 
Xoriat to conquer Khorvaire, they captured and trans- 
formed that land's indigenous creatures to create armies 
of hideous warriors. Dyrrn the Corruptor shaped dol- 
gaunts from hobgoblin stock, turning them into intelli- 
gent, cold, and efficient killers. 

When the daelkyr were defeated, the dolgaunts de- 
scended into the depths of Khyber with their masters. 
There, they study in cavernous monasteries, forging 
their bodies into living weapons dedicated to the mis- 
sions given them by those masters. Dolgaunts are often 
found commanding squads of dolgrims, and can also be 
found working with the Cults of the Dragon Below—par- 
ticularly those devoted to Dyrrn the Corruptor. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


DOLGAUNT 


Medium aberration, lawful evil 


Armor Class 16 (Unarmored Defense) 
Hit Points 33 (648 + 6) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14 (+2) 18(4) 12 (+1) 13 (+1) 1(42) T1 (40) 


D. nn cr 


_ Skills Acrobatics +6, Perception +4, Stealth +6 
1 Condition Immunities blinded 


Senses blindsight 120 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
passive Perception 14 
Languages Deep Speech, Goblin 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 
e mp 


Evasion. If the dolgaunt is subjected to an effect that allows it 
to make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, the 
dolgaunt instead takes no damage if it succeeds on the saving 
throw, and only half damage if it fails. It can’t use this trait if it's 
incapacitated. 


Unarmored Defense. While the dolgaunt is wearing no armor 
and wielding no shield, its AC includes its Wisdom modifier. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The dolgaunt makes two tentacle attacks and two 
unarmed strikes. Up to two tentacle attacks can be replaced by 
Vitality Drain. 


Tentacle. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 15 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. The target is grap- 
pled (escape DC 12) ifit is a Large or smaller creature. Until 
this grapple ends, the dolgaunt can't use the same tentacle on 
another target. The dolgaunt has two tentacles. 


Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 6 (1d4 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


Vitality Drain. One creature grappled by a tentacle of the 
dolgaunt must make a DC ТЇ Constitution saving throw. On a 
failed save, the target takes 9 (2d8) necrotic damage, and the 
dolgaunt regains a number of hit points equal to half the ne- 
crotic damage taken. 


DOLGRIM 


Dolgrims are squat, deformed things. Warped by the 
daelkyr, a dolgrim is essentially two goblins crushed 
into one creature, their misshapen body boasting four 
arms and a pair of twisted mouths that gibber and 
slather at the front of a headless torso. The two mouths 
of a dolgrim sometimes carry on demented conversa- 
tions with one another. However, a dolgrim has only a 
single personality—sadistic, bloodthirsty, and brutally 
dedicated to serving itself. 

Small numbers of these creatures sometimes make 
their way to the surface, often under the command of 
dolgaunts, and undertaking missions advancing the 
inscrutable schemes of their malevolent masters. But 
great hordes of dolgrims remain clustered in Khyber 
with the daelkyr, dreaming of the day when they will be 
released into Eberron to feast and destroy. 


DOLGRIM 


Small aberration, chaotic evil 


| Armor Class 15 (natural armor, shield) 
Hit Points 13 (3d6 + 3) 


Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA | 
15 (+2) 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 8 (-1) 10 (+0) 8(-1) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Deep Speech, Goblin 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Dual Consciousness. The dolgrim has advantage on saving 
throws against being blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened, 
stunned, and knocked unconscious. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The dolgrim makes three attacks. 


Morningstar. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (148 + 2) piercing damage. 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 2) piercing damage, or 
6 (148 + 2) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a 
melee attack. 


Hand Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120 
ft., onetarget. Hit: 5 (146 + 2) piercing damage. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


Dusk НАС 


Dusk hags resemble gnarled crones with shriveled or- 
ange skin, tangled gray hair, and eyes that burn like hot 
coals. They see visions of the future in their dreams, and 
their dark magic allows them to influence the dreams 

of others, sending messages or inflicting nightmares 
with a touch. Tales talk of ambitious wizards, frantic 
monarchs, and desperate heroes undertaking quests 

or making bargains with a dusk hag in exchange for its 
prophecies and visions of the future. But the information 
gained from a dusk hag often has a way of causing more 
pain than joy. Like all hags, dusk hags enjoy causing 
strife to those who bargain with them, and find ways to 
twist and turn promises to their own advantage. The 
Dusk Hag Prophecies table provides examples of the 
sort of dreams dusk hags might share with unsuspect- 
ing sleepers. 


Dusk НАС PROPHECIES 


d10 Prophecy 
1  "Ared hat approaches with ill intent. Be wary." 
2 "А ship comes on a sea of bones, but treasure waits 
behind a silver skull." 
"Three days, three deaths, three eyes, three breaths." 
4 "Doom falls on the peacock and the sparrow alike. 
Best be a raven." 
"A white hand on a black field holds the golden key." 
"Beware the black horse." 
"The fish is your friend." 
"The stairs downward lead to that which you seek." 


о o му nM 


"Look for two crossed swords. There your goal lies." 
10 “If you see two crows, turn back. Beyond is death." 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


Dusk Hac 


Medium fey, neutral evil 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 82 (15d8 + 15) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
"(40 14 (+2) 12 (+1) 17 (+3) 16 (+3) 18 (+4) 


Saving Throws Int +6, Wis 46 

Skills Deception +7, Insight +6, Perception +6 

Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, frightened 
Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 16 

Languages Common, Giant, Infernal 

Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 
Č 


Innate Spellcasting. The hag's spellcasting ability is Charisma 
(spell save DC 15). She can innately cast the following spells, 
requiring no material components: 


At will: detect magic, disguise self 
3/дау each: dream, hypnotic pattern, sleep (948) 
1/аау each: legend lore, scrying 


Magic Resistance. The hag has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The hag makes two Nightmare Touch attacks. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) slashing damage. 


Nightmare Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one creature. Hit: 18 (4d6 + 4) psychic damage. If the target is 
unconscious, it takes an extra 10 (3d6) psychic damage and is 
cursed until the hag dies or the curse is removed. The cursed 
creature's hit point maximum decreases by 5 (1410) whenever 
it finishes a long rest. 


REACTIONS 


Dream Eater. When an unconscious creature the hag can see 
within 30 feet of her regains consciousness, the hag can force 
the creature to make a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw. Unless 
the save succeeds, the creature takes 11 (2d10) psychic dam- 
age, and the hag regains hit points equal to the amount of 
damage taken. 


LEMEN 


HOMUNCULI 


А homunculus is a construct servant created for certain 
tasks. Artificers and wizards are responsible for most of 
the homunculi in existence. 
Each kind of homunculus has a body constructed from 
different kinds of materials, including clay, iron, and 
bits of hair and feathers. The process that creates a ho- 
munculus sees those materials mixed with the creator's 
blood and animated through an extended magical ritual. 
Constructed Nature. А homunculus doesn't require 
air, food, drink, or sleep. 


EXPEDITIOUS MESSENGER 


An expeditious messenger is a speedy flier, designed to 
quickly carry messages for its creator. Their speedy and 
efficient attitude makes expeditious messengers quite 
chatty, and they natter on as fast as they move. 
These messengers come in a variety of forms, 
often looking like mechanical birds or sprites. 


IRON DEFENDER 


An iron defender fights for its creator. They come in 
many shapes and are often crafted in the form of ani- 
mals. More creative artificers craft iron defenders in the 
shape of hybrid animals or other fantastical creatures. 


EXPEDITIOUS MESSENGER 


Tiny construct, neutral 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 7 (2d4 + 2) 
Speed 25 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
662). 16(+3), 8 (M) .84-) TA. 7462) 
ee 
Skills Acrobatics +5, Stealth +5 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages one language spoken by its creator 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 
ee 


Flyby. The messenger doesn’t provoke opportunity attacks 
when it flies out of an enemy’s reach. 


Telepathic Bond. While the messenger is on the same plane of 
existence as its master, it can magically convey what it senses 
to its master, and the two can communicate telepathically. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage. 


IRON 
DEFENDER 


IRON DEFENDER 


Medium construct, neutral 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 30 (4d8 + 12) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16023) 14 (x2) Te aB (л) 11,0) ee 


Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 

Languages understands the languages of its creator but can't 
speak 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 

кнн нна 


Keen Senses. The defender has advantage on Wisdom (Percep- 
tion) checks. 


Telepathic Bond. While the defender is on the same plane of ex- 
istence as its master, it can magically convey what it senses to 
its master, and the two can communicate telepathically. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: + 5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 

Hit: 6 (146 + 3) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, 

it must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or take an 

extra 3 (1d6) piercing damage and be grappled (escape DC 13). 

The defender can have only one creature grappled in this way 

at a time. 
ELLO E CU I 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 293 


294 


INSPIRED 


The rulers of distant Sarlona are known as the Inspired. 
These noble families are said to be bound to celestial 
spirits that guide and empower them, but the truth is far 
darker. The Inspired are the mortal hosts of the night- 
mare spirits of Dal Quor, and they carry out the foul 
agenda of the Dreaming Dark. 

Any humanoid who can dream can volunteer to serve 
as a quori vessel. But the Inspired of Sarlona are hu- 
mans bred to be such vessels. They have no choice in 
this destiny, since they can’t resist quori possession. 
Physically, Inspired resemble the kalashtar, possessing 
an almost supernatural beauty. 

Most of the people of the Five Nations have heard 
of the Inspired lords in Riedra—never realizing that 
Inspired are spread throughout Khorvaire as well. 
Beggars and generals, mayors and merchants might 
all be secret servants of the Dreaming Dark. Such In- 
spired have to willingly accept quori possession, but the 
Dreaming Dark has long experience in weaving dreams 
that can convince mortals to surrender their bodies. 


a 


VARIANT: QUORI VESSEL 

The Inspired are vessels for quori spirits, allowing the 
quori to manifest a portion of their power while the vessel 
is possessed. An Inspired can gain benefits depending on 
the type of quori possessing it. The quori also gains access 
to the Inspired’s knowledge and features. 


HASHALAQ 

Suggestion (3/Day). The Inspired can castthe sugges- 
tion spell (spell save DC 13), requiring no material 
components. 


KALARAQ 

All Around Vision. The Inspired can't be surprised. 
Arcane Eye (3/Day). The Inspired can cast the arcane eye 
spell, requiring no material components. 


TSUCORA 
Fear (1/Day). The Inspired can cast the fear spell (spell 
save DC 13), requiring no material components. 


INSPIRED 


Medium humanoid (human), lawful evil 


Armor Class 12 (15 with mage armor) 
Hit Points 40 (9d8) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS СНА 
11 (+0) 14 (+2) 10 (+0) 16(+3) 10(40) 16 (+3) 


Saving Throws Int +5, Wis 42 

Skills Deception +7, Insight +2, Persuasion +7 
Damage Resistances psychic 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened 
Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages Common, Quori 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


grec scree ЕХ Ж ЕВС эээ 


Dual Mind. The Inspired has advantage on Wisdom sav- 
ing throws. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


> 


pi 
Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The Inspired's spellcasting abil- 


ity is Intelligence (spell save DC 13). It can innately cast the 
following spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: mage hand, vicious mockery (see "Actions" below) 
1/day each: charm person, dissonant whispers, hex, hold person, 
mage armor 


ACTIONS. 


Multiattack. The Inspired makes two crysteel dagger attacks. It 


can replace one attack with vicious mockery. 


Crysteel Dagger. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 4 (144 + 2) piercing damage plus 10 (346) 
force damage. 


Vicious Mockery (Cantrip). The Inspired unleashes a string of 
insults laced with subtle enchantments at one creature it can 

see within 60 feet of it. If the target can hear the Inspired, the 

target must succeed on a DC 13 Wisdom saving throw or take 
2 (1d4) psychic damage and have disadvantage on the next at- 
tack roll it makes before the end of its next turn. 


LAKE HURWIT 


KARRNATHI UNDEAD 
SOLDIER 


Undead soldiers form the elite core of the army of Karr- 
nath. Fearless and tireless, they are a terrifying sight on 
the battlefield. With the end of the Last War, most Kar- 
rnathi undead have been sealed in vaults below the city 
of Atur. However, the Karrnathi army keeps numerous 
undead in its service, while others have been comman- 
deered by the malevolent Order of the Emerald Claw. 
The Odakyr Rites. The nation of Karrnath has a 
proud martial heritage, and its soldiers are unmatched 
in discipline. But in the early years of the Last War, 
Karrnath was crippled by famine and plague. In desper- 
ation, King Kaius I embraced the Blood of Vol, whose 
priests bolstered the armies of Karrnath with undead. 
Initially, those skeletons and zombies required con- 
stant control and served as cannon fodder. Over de- 
cades, a high priest named Malevanor worked with the 
necromancers of the Blood of Vol to develop the Odakyr 
Rites, which grant Karrnathi undead the ability to make 
tactical decisions and operate without direct guidance. 
The Odakyr Rites work only when performed on the 
remains of a soldier slain in battle, and only in manifest 
zones tied to the plane of Mabar. The most significant 
such zones in Karrnath exist in the cities of Atur and 
Odakyr (now called Fort Bones). The number of Karr- 
nathi undead soldiers steadily increased over the course 
of the war, with the losses of Karrnath's living troops 
offset by the recovery and raising of their remains. 
Malevanor claimed that Karrnathi undead are ani- 
mated and granted intelligence by the patriotic spirit of 
Karrnath. However, many Karrns fear that the undead 
are vessels for a darker power—and that Lady Illmarrow 
or someone else will turn the undead against the living. 
Intelligent and Inhuman. Karrnathi undead bear 
little resemblance to the people they were in life. These 
undead are content to stand motionless and silent for 
days. They show no emotion, and certainly no mercy or 


compassion. Undead soldiers kill any opposing forces— 
including civilians among those forces—unless given 
explicit instructions to the contrary. 

A few exceptional Karrnathi undead retain their indi- 
viduality and the memories of their former lives. Such 
undead are often found as champions of the Blood of Vol 
or agents of the Order of the Emerald Claw. 

Undead Nature. A Karrnathi undead soldier doesn't 
require air, food, drink, or sleep. 


KARRNATHI UNDEAD SOLDIER 


Medium undead, lawful evil 


Armor Class 17 (half plate) 
Hit Points 52 (748 + 21) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 14 (+2) 16(+3) 12(41) 8B(+) 5 (-3) 


Skills Athletics +5, Perception +3 

Damage Resistances cold, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages Common 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Pack Tactics. The soldier has advantage on an attack roll 
against a creature if at least one ofthe soldier's allies is within 
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


Undead Fortitude. If damage reduces the soldier to 0 hit 
points, it must make a Constitution saving throw with a DC 
of 5 + the damage taken, unless the damage is radiant or 
froma critical hit. On a success, the soldier drops to 1 hit 
point instead. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The soldier attacks three times with one of 
its weapons. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage, or 8 (1d10 + 3) slashing 
damage if used with two hands. 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 150/600 ft., 
one target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage. 


REACTIONS 


Parry. The soldier adds 3 to its AC against one melee attack 
that would hit it. To do so, the soldier must see the attacker 
and be wielding a melee weapon. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


295 


296 


LADY ILLMARROW 


Lady Illmarrow is a legend—an ancient lich said to dwell 
in a castle of bone and ice in the coldest regions of the 
Lhazaar Principalities. Some stories say that she is 
served by a legion of undead and that she maintains a 
court of vampires and ghosts in her palace of ice. Other 
tales claim that when anyone dies in Lhazaar, Штаггоу 
chooses whether to take their soul before it passes on to 
the Keeper and Dolurrh. 

But Lady Illmarrow is no folk tale. She is the greatest 
necromancer in Eberron, and after centuries of silence, 
she is setting ancient plots into motion at last. She is 
the power behind the Order of the Emerald Claw, but 
her motives for founding the order are buried in her 
past. Lady Illmarrow has no interest in ruling the living. 
Rather, she seeks to become Queen of the Dead. 

The Mark of Death. lllmarrow is a fiefdom on the isle 
of Farlnen—home to a community of elves exiled from 
Aerenal, who have practiced necromancy for centuries. 
But Lady Illmarrow's roots extend far beyond her is- 
land domain. 

Long ago, it was revealed that the elven line of Vol—a 
house that practiced the art of necromancy and bore 
the Dragonmark of Death—was engaged in secret blood 
rites with a clan of dragons. The discovery of this pact 
triggered an unprecedented alliance between the Sib- 
ling Kings of Aerenal and the dragons of Argonnessen. 
The Sibling Kings proclaimed that House Vol would be 
exterminated to the last member, and the Mark of Death 
would be eliminated from the world. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


Theline of Vol had long been rivals of the Undying 
Court, and many whisper even today that the attack on 
House Vol was nothing more than an excuse to elimi- 
nate a political rival. But others believe that what the 
Undying Court truly feared was a path shown in the 
Draconic Prophecy—that a child born of dragon and elf 
could become a godlike avatar of death. 

Ilimarrow Rises. Even as dragons and elves fought 
to destroy the line of Vol, a child was born to the house: 
Erandis. A scion of elf and dragon, Erandis bore a Mark 
of Death unlike any other. In time, it might have been 
her gateway to immortality and unrivaled power, but she 
was hunted down and killed long before she could mas- 
ter the mark's magic. Her mother, Minara Vol, escaped 
with her daughter's body to the icy reaches of Farlnen, 
farfrom the conflict. There, Minara unleashed all her 
necromantic power to raise Erandis as a lich. 

As an undead being, Erandis lost the use of her drag- 
onmark. Thus, when the diviners of Aerenal asked if 
the line of Vol had been exterminated and the Mark 
of Death destroyed, they received a vision affirming 
that the bloodline of Vol was no more. To the world, 
the last survivor of that bloodline is known as Lady 
Illmarrow. But in truth, she is Erandis Vol, heir to the 
Mark of Death. 

Trapped in Undeath. When Minara restored Erandis 
as alich, she hid her daughter's phylactery, weaving 
enchantments into it that cause Erandis to be reborn in 
arandom safe haven after she is destroyed. Thus, even 
Erandis herself doesn't know the location or form of her 
phylactery. 


Restoriné the Mark. Though she takes great pleasure 
in fighting the dragons and elves who destroyed her 
ancestors, Lady Illmarrow has a more important goal: 
restoring her dragonmark and unlocking godlike pow- 
ers. The agents of the Emerald Claw who serve her fight 
either for the good of Karrnath or for personal gain, 
but Штаггоу cares for nothing except increasing her 
necromantic knowledge and finding a way to restore her 
lost mark. 


LADY ILLMARROW 


Medium undead, neutral evil 


Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 199 (21d8 + 105) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3)  16(43) 20(45) 27 (+8) 21 (+5) 24(47) 
ИННИ 
Saving Throws Con +12, Int +15, Wis +12 
Skills Arcana +15, History 415, Insight +12, Perception +12 
Damage Resistances cold, lightning 
Damage Immunities necrotic, poison; bludgeoning, piercing, 
and slashing from nonmagical attacks 
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 
frightened, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, stunned 
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive perception 22 
Languages Common, Draconic, Elvish 
Challenge 22 (41,000 XP) 
Н 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If IlImarrow fails a saving throw, 
she can choose to succeed instead. 


Magic Resistance. lllmarrow has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Rejuvenation. lllmarrow's body turns to dust when she drops 
to 0 hit points, and her equipment is left behind. She gains 

a new body after 1d10 days, regaining all her hit points and 
becoming active again. The new body appears within two hun- 
dred miles of the location at which she was destroyed. 


Spellcasting. lllmarrow is a 20th-level spellcaster. Her 
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 23, +15 to 
hit with spell attacks). IIlmarrow has the following wizard 
spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): chill touch (see "Actions" below), fire bolt, 
mage hand, prestidigitation, ray of frost 

Ist level (4 slots): magic missile, shield, sleep 

2nd level (3 slots): blur, detect thoughts, mirror image 

3rd level (3 slots): animate dead, counterspell, fireball, fly, 
lightning bolt 

Ath level (3 slots): blight, confusion, polymorph 

5th level (3 slots): cloudkill, cone of cold, hold monster, scrying 

6th level (2 slots): chain lightning, circle of death, create undead 

7th level (2 slots): finger of death, forcecage, prismatic spray 

8th level (1 slot): incendiary cloud, maze 

9th level (1 slot): power word kill, time stop 


ll ж > 
LADY ILLMARROW AND THE BLOOD OF VoL 
The Blood of Vol and Lady IlImarrow are both legacies of 
the line of Vol, but they aren't one and the same. As far as 
the world knows, the line of Vol was exterminated. Follow- 
ers of the Blood of Vol who have heard of Lady lllmarrow 
believe that she's a champion of their faith, but they don't 
worship or serve her. And the powers of priests of the 
Blood of Vol don't come from Lady тагом. 
———————————— ‚ӨЄ—С—С—ч—счс©с——— 


ACTIONS 


Chill Touch (Cantrip). Ranged Spell Attack: +15 to hit, range 120 
ft., one creature. Hit: 18 (4d8) necrotic damage, and the target 
can't regain hit points until the start of lllmarrow's next turn. 
If the target is undead, it also has disadvantage on attack rolls 
against lllmarrow until the end of her next turn. 


Paralyzing Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one creature. Hit: 13 (346 + 3) slashing damage plus 10 (346) 
cold damage, and the target must succeed on a DC 20 Consti- 
tution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. The target 
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, end- 
ing the effect on itself on a success. 


Poison Breath (Recharge 5—6). lllmarrow exhales poisonous gas 
in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 
20 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes 
35 (10d6) poison damage and is poisoned for 1 minute. While 
poisoned in this way, the creature can't regain hit points. On a 
successful save, the creature takes half as much damage and 
isn't poisoned. 

A humanoid reduced to 0 hit points by this damage dies and 
rises at the start of lllmarrow's next turn as a zombie (see its 
entry in the Monster Manual). The zombie acts immediately 
after Illmarrow in the initiative count and is permanently under 
her command, following her verbal orders. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


\IImarrow can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the op- 
tions below. Only one legendary action option can be used at 
a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. Ill marrow 
regains spent legendary actions at the start of her turn. 


Cantrip. Ill marrow casts a cantrip. 

Paralyzing Claw. lilmarrow uses her Paralyzing Claw. 

Frightening Presence (Costs 2 Actions). Ill marrow targets up 
to three creatures she can see within 30 feet of her. Each 
target must succeed on a DC 20 Wisdom saving throw or be 
frightened for 1 minute. A frightened target can repeat the 
saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect 
on itself on a success. If a target's saving throw is successful 
or the effect ends for it, the target is immune to Illmarrow's 
Frightening Presence for the next 24 hours. 

Poison Breath (Costs 3 Actions). llImarrow recharges her Poi- 
son Breath and uses it. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


297 


298 


LIVING SPELLS 


Of all the anomalies that emerged from the magical 
cataclysm that created the Mournland, the appearance 
of living spells might be the most mysterious. In some 
unknown fashion, the magical energy unleashed during 


the Last War caused spell effects to take on sentience. A 


living spell appears much like a normal spell effect, ex- 
cept that its magical energy endures indefinitely. 

Living spells haunt the Mournland and other areas 
blasted by the Last War, somehow subsisting on am- 
bient magical energy as they writhe and across the 
landscape. Though they have no need for sustenance, 
they attack any creatures they come into contact with, 
lashing out indiscriminately with their corrupted magic. 


Constructed Nature. A living spell doesn't require air, 


food, drink, or sleep. 


CUSTOMIZING A LIVING SPELL 


Living spells come in many varieties; the stat blocks 
here are three examples. Living spells most often 
manifest from evocation and conjuration spells. To 
make a living spell from a different spell, choose a 
damage-dealing evocation or conjuration spell from the 
wizard spell list of up to 5th level. Then consult the Liv- 
ing Spell Customization table to see which stat block to 
customize, based on the chosen spell's level. 


LiviNG SPELL CUSTOMIZATION 


Spell Level Stat Block to Customize 
1-2 Living burning hands 
3-4 Living lightning bolt 


5 Living cloudkill 


Now make the following changes to that stat block: 


Damage Immunity. Replace the living spell's damage 
immunity with immunity to the type (or types) of dam- 
age dealt by the chosen spell. 

Magical Strike. Replace the damage that Magical 
Strike deals with one type of damage dealt by the 
chosen spell. 

Spell Mimicry. Replace the effect of Spell Mimicry with 
the effect of the chosen spell. If that spell requiresa 
saving throw, use spell save DC from the replaced 
spell, and if the spell involves an attack roll, use the 
attack bonus from the living spell's Magical Strike. 


For example, if you turn fireball (a 3rd-level spell) into 
a living spell, customize the living lightning bolt. The 
living fireball has immunity to fire damage, instead of 
lightning damage; deals fire damage with its Magical 
Strike; and replicates fireball with Spell Mimicry. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


LIVING BURNING HANDS 


Medium construct, unaligned 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 15 (248 + 6) 
Speed 25 ft., fly 25 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS СНА 
10(+0) 1201) 6a 3(04* '602- 6(=2) 


Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical attacks 

Damage immunities fire 

Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 
frightened, grappled, poisoned, prone 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8 

Languages — 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 

eee 


Amorphous. The living spell can move through a space as nar- 
row as 1 inch wide without squeezing. 


Magic Resistance. The living spell has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 
ACTIONS 


Magical Strike. Melee Spell Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) fire damage. 


Spell Mimicry (Recharge 5—6). The living spell unleashes a thin 

sheet of flames in a 15-foot cone. Each creature in that area 

must make a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw, taking 10 (3d6) 

fire damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a suc- 

cessful one. 
SSS EAEE E EE А ны са 


——— — 


- LIVING LIGHTNING BOLT 


| Large construct, unaligned 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 57 (6410 + 24) 
Speed 25 ft., fly 25 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

10 (+0) 15 (+2) 18 (+4)  3(-4 10(+0) 6(-2) 

“и Ээ 

Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical attacks 

Damage Immunities lightning 

Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 
frightened, grappled, poisoned, prone 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages — 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


[P LL 


Amorphous. The living spell can move through a space as nar- 
row as 1 inch wide without squeezing. 


Magic Resistance. The living spell has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The living spell makes two Magical Strike attacks. 


Magical Strike. Melee Spell Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 21 (5d6 + 4) lightning damage. 


Spell Mimicry (Recharge 5—6). The living spell unleashes a 
stroke of lightning in a line 100 feet long and 5 feet wide. Each 
creature in the line must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, 
taking 28 (8d6) lightning damage on a failed save, or half as 
much damage on a successful one. 


LIVING CLOUDKILL 


Large construct, unaligned 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 73 (7d10 35) 
Speed 25 ft., fly 25 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

10(*0) 15(2) M | 3(-4. 1009). 62) 

eee ————————— LTLIZTILELITRCLCCITETII TlIIDBÜIILIIIILLLI  LIKL. 

Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical attacks 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 
frightened, grappled, poisoned, prone 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages — 

Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


pA 


Amorphous. The living spell can move through a space as nar- 
row as 1 inch wide without squeezing. 


Magic Resistance. The living spell has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The living spell makes two Magical Strike attacks. 


Magical Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., 
one target. Hit: 22 (5d6 + 5) poison damage. 


Spell Mimicry (Recharge 5—6). The living spell creates a 
40-foot-diameter sphere of fog within 60 feet of it (the fog 
spreads around corners). When a creature enters the fog for the 
first time on a turn or starts its turn there, it must make a DC 
16 Constitution saving throw, taking 22 (5d8) poison damage 
on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 
The fog moves 10 feet away from the living spell at the start 
of each of its turns, rolling along the ground and through open- 
ings. The fog lasts for 10 minutes or until the living spell's con- 
centration ends (as if concentrating on a spell). 
DE OE CC EI 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 299 


300 


THE LORD or BLADES 
Medium humanoid (warforged), lawful evil 


Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 195 (23d8 + 92) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
20 (+5) 15 (42 18 (+4) 19 (+4) 17 (+3) 18 (+4) 


Saving Throws Str +11, Con +10, Int +10, Wis +9 
Skills Arcana +10, Athletics +11, History +10, Perception +9 
Damage Resistances necrotic, poison 
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened 
Senses passive Perception 19 
Languages Common, Draconic, Dwarvish, Elvish 

‚ Challenge 18 (20,000 XP) 


 ——— —Ó— MH МШШ 


Adamantine Plating. Any critical hit against the Lord of Blades 
| becomes a normal hit. 


Bladed Armor. A creature that grapples the Lord of Blades or 
is grappled by him takes 13 (3d8) slashing damage. A creature 
takes 13 (3d8) slashing damage if it starts its turn grappling or 
being grappled by the Lord of Blades. 


Charge. !f the Lord of Blades moves at least 10 feet straight 
toward a target and then hits it with his adamantine sixblade 
on the same turn, the target takes an extra 11 (2410) slashing 
damage. If the target is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 
19 Strength saving throw or be pushed up to 10 feet away and 
knocked prone. 


Spellcasting. The Lord of Blades is a 20th-level spellcaster. 
His spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 18, 
+10 to hit with spell attacks). He has the following artificer 
spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): fire bolt (see "Actions" below), mage hand, 
mending, prestidigitation 
Ist level (4 slots): expeditious retreat, sanctuary, thunderwave 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


THE LORD OF BLADES 


The Lord of Blades is a warforged warlord who has bro- 
ken all ties with his former masters. He has established 
a nation for his people deep in the Mournland, centered 
in a great fortress where warforged from all over Khor- 
vaire can come and feel a sense of belonging. No one 
knows what the Lord of Blades plans for his followers, 
but many fear that he intends to build a legion of war- 
forged zealots, primed to march from the Mournland to 
unleash destruction on their former masters. 

Some tales assert that the Lord of Blades led the 
warforged armies of Cyre in the Last War. Others cast 
him as a newer warforged, perhaps the last to come out 
of the Cannith creation forges before the Thronehold 
Accords led to their dismantling. One story claims the 
Lord of Blades caused the destruction of Cyre and 
warns that he plans to repeat the Day of Mourning in 
each of the remaining Five Nations. Whatever the truth, 
he has become a beacon for warforged everywhere. 

Warforged Nature. The Lord of Blades doesn't re- 
quire air, food, drink, or sleep. 


2nd level (3 slots): blur, heat metal, scorching ray, see invisibility 

3rd level (3 slots): dispel magic, fly, haste 

4th level (3 slots): freedom of movement, Mordenkainen's 
faithful hound 

5th level (2 slots): animate objects, wall of force 


Warforged Resilience. The Lord of Blades has advantage on 
saving throws against being poisoned, is immune to disease, 
and magic can't put him to sleep. 


ACTIONS = 


Multiattack. The Lord of Blades makes three attacks: two with 
his adamantine sixblade and one with his bladed wings. 


Adamantine Sixblade. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 
10 ft., one target. Hit: 21 (3d10 + 5) slashing damage plus 7 
(2d6) force damage. 


Bladed Wings. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, 
reach 5 ft. or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 8 (1d6 + 5) slash- 
ing damage. 


Fire Bolt (Cantrip). Ranged Spell Attack: +10 to hit, range 120 
ft., one target. Hit: 22 (4d10) fire damage. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The Lord of Blades can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from 
the options below. Only one legendary action option can be 
used at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. 
The Lord of Blades regains spent legendary actions at the start 
of his turn. 


Attack. The Lord of Blades makes one weapon attack. 

Cantrip. The Lord of Blades casts one of his cantrips. 

Cast a Spell (Costs 2 Actions). The Lord of Blades casts a 
spell of 2nd level or lower from his spell list that takes 1 ac- 
tion to cast. 

Blade Dash (Costs 3 Actions). The Lord of Blades moves up to 
his speed without provoking opportunity attacks, then makes 
one attack with his adamantine sixblade. He can make one 
bladed wings attack against each creature he moves past. 


STEVE PRESCOTT 


 MORDAKHESH 


Medium fiend, lawful evil 


Armor Class 18 (plate) 
Hit Points 170 (20d8 « 80) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
20 (+5) 16 (+3) 18 (+4) 15 (+2) 17 (+3) 20 (+5) 


ШИН 

Saving Throws Str +10, Con +9, Wis +8, Cha +10 

Skills Athletics +10, Insight +8, Perception +8, Persuasion +10 

Damage Vulnerabilities piercing from magic weapons wielded 
by good creatures 

Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical attacks not made with silvered weapons 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 18 

Languages Common, Infernal 

Challenge 15 (13,000 XP) 


реза 


Innate Spellcasting Mordakhesh's spellcasting ability is Cha- 
risma (spell save DC 18, +10 to hit with spell attacks). Mor- 
dakhesh can innately cast the following spells, requiring no 
material components: 


At will: chromatic orb (see "Actions" below), detect thoughts, 
disguise self 

1/аау each: banishing smite, destructive wave, fly, mass sugges- 
tion, staggering smite, suggestion, true seeing 


Limited Magic Immunity. Mordakhesh can't be affected or 
detected by spells of 6th level or lower unless he wishes to be. 
Mordakhesh has advantage on saving throws against all other 
spells and magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


d 


Multiattack. Mordakhesh makes three greatsword attacks. 


Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage plus 5 (1410) 
force damage. 


Chromatic Orb. Ranged Spell Attack: +10 to hit, range 120 ft., 
one creature. Hit: 13 (348) damage of a type chosen by Morda- 
khesh: acid, cold, fire, lightning, poison, or thunder. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Mordakhesh can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. Morda- 
khesh regains spent legendary actions at the start of his turn. 


Attack. Mordakhesh makes one weapon attack or casts 
chromatic orb. 

Chromatic Resistance. Modakhesh gains resistance to one 
damage type of his choice—acid, cold, fire, lightning, poison, 
or thunder—until the start of his next turn. 

Warlord's Command (Costs 2 Actions). Mordakhesh targets up 
to two allies that he can see within 30 feet of him. If a target 
can see and hear him, the target can make one weapon attack 
as a reaction and gains advantage on the attack roll. 


MORDAKHESH 


In the age when fiends and dragons waged war across 
Eberron, rakshasas served the fiendish lords as strate- 
gists and generals. A rakshasa named Mordakhesh rose 
up through the ranks to become one of the greatest com- 
manders of his age, and a dragon-slaying specialist. For 
this, he earned the nickname Shadowsword, along with 
a legendary reputation for leaving death in his wake. 

Mordakhesh serves as the prakhutu or "speaker" of 
his imprisoned master, Rak Tulkhesh, and he seeks to 
free his lord by bathing the world in blood. Like a spider 
with multiple webs, he has agents and pawns (which he 
calls his "claws") established in armies across Khor- 
vaire. The most significant of those is the barbarian 
horde he amasses in the Demon Wastes—warriors who 
threaten to sweep into Aundair on a tide of blood. 

Many of the horrors of the Last War were instigated— 
or at least encouraged—by Mordakhesh's operatives, and 
his claws are known to have perpetrated some of the 
most brutal massacres of that conflict. No one knows 
how far the Shadowsword's reach extends, or which 
commanders in the armies of Khorvaire serve him. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


301 


302 


OVERLORDS 


In the first days of the world, the children of Khyber rose 
from the darkness to reign over Eberron. The greatest 
among them were the overlords, who held dominion 
over a world of fear, war, and death until the children of 
Eberron and Siberys rose up against them. Armies of 
dragons fought against the fiends of Khyber. And though 
the overlords couldn’t be destroyed, the couatl sacrificed 
their lives to build a prison of celestial light: a silver 
flame that bound the overlords in Khyber once more. 
These bonds have held for countless generations, but 
the overlords still yearn to break free and reclaim the 
world above. 

As long as the overlords are bound by the Silver 
Flame, they can’t physically manifest in the world. But 
each overlord embodies a particular aspect of evil, 
which grows in strength as their servants—the fiends 
known as the Lords of Dust—scheme to unleash their 
ancient masters. The overlords gain strength when mor- 
tals embrace the dark paths laid down for them. And as 
they grow stronger, they gain more influence. 

Some thirty overlords are bound in Khyber. Two are 
described here: Rak Tulkhesh and Sul Khatesh, both of 
whom remain imprisoned and can’t take physical form. 
The stat blocks provided here reflect the powers they 
would wield if they were ever unleashed upon the world. 

Immortal Nature. An overlord doesn't require air, 
food, drink or sleep. It also can't die permanently. Upon 
its death, it reforms elsewhere in the multiverse and be- 
comes active again at a time set by the DM. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


RAK TULKHESH 


Called the Rage of War, Rak Tulkhesh is the incarnation 
of impulses that drives many mortals to battle. Fear, 
greed, hatred—these are seeds that the Rage of War 
sows in the hopes of producing a bloody harvest. 

Rak Tulkhesh typically takes the form of a vaguely 
draconic creature twisted by demonic rage. Covered 
in iron spikes protruding from his bleeding flesh, this 
overlord looms fifteen feet high at the shoulders, and his 
wings span over forty feet. While in combat, Rak Tulk- 
hesh roars in rage as new weapons are spawned from 
his body, called forth by the Rage of War to slaughter all 
who dare stand before him. 

Khyber Shards. Rak Tulkhesh's soul is divided 
among a group of Khyber shards spread through the un- 
derworld and is confined to those shards by the light of 
the Silver Flame. While shattered and bound, the Rage 
of War can't bring his full power to bear on the world. 
But he can influence events in the vicinity of any of his 
shards, drawing power from acts of violence. 

The Last War was a boon that allowed Rak Tulkhesh 
to darken the hearts of soldiers and civilians alike, 
whose actions then weakened the overlord's bonds to 
give him even greater sway over the regions surround- 
ing his shards. The violence seen in Thaliost and other 
occupied cities, the hatred against warforged and Cyran 
refugees, the calls for a return to war—all these things 
bear the mark of Rak Tulkhesh's malign influence. 

Minions of Rak Tulkhesh. Any organization that 
fosters hatred unwittingly serves Rak Tulkhesh, and 
countless soldiers in the Five Nations are devoted to 


the Rage of War. Many of the Carrion Tribes of the De- 
mon Wastes likewise serve Rak Tulkhesh and yearn to 
carry his bloody banner into the soft lands of the south. 
The minotaurs of Droaam revere Rak Tulkhesh as the 
Horned Prince. But the most powerful of the overlord's 
follower's is the rakshasa Mordakhesh the Shadow- 
sword—Rak Tulkhesh's exarch among the Lords of 
Dust, who commands a host of fiends exerting the over- 
lord's will across Khorvaire. 
SUL KHATESH 


Sul Khatesh is known as the Keeper of Secrets and the 
Queen of Shadows. She embodies the fears and super- 
stitions surrounding magic, from malevolent warlocks 
to mad wizards, from deadly curses to magical power 
that draws those who wield it deeper into darkness. 

Sul Khatesh is subtler than the Rage of War. She em- 
powers warlocks and whispers secrets into the minds of 
wizards and artificers, helping them master spells and 
create relics they could never shape on their own. But 
few of those inspired by Sul Khatesh understand what 


RAK TULKHESH 


Huge fiend, neutral evil 


Armor Class 23 (natural armor; 25 versus ranged attacks) 
Hit Points 478 (33412 + 264) 
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft., fly 80 ft. 

CHA 
26 (48) 


WIS 
22 (46) 


CON INT 
27 (+8) 21 (+5) 


STR DEX 
29 (+9) 19 (+4) 


FE SRE o green cn 


Saving Throws Str +17, Con +16, Wis +14, Cha 416 

Skills Athletics +17, Intimidation +16, Perception 414 

Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning 

Damage Immunities poison; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, poisoned, stunned 

Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 24 

Languages all, telepathy 120 ft. 

Challenge 28 (120,000 XP) 


D 


Deadly Critical. Rak Tulkhesh scores a critical hit on a roll of 19 
or 20 апа rolls the damage dice three times, instead of twice. 


Innate Spellcasting. Rak Tulkhesh's spellcasting ability is Cha- 
risma (spell save DC 24). He can innately cast the following 
spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: detect thoughts, dispel magic, spirit guardians 
1/day each: banishing smite, blinding smite, staggering smite 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Rak Tulkhesh fails a saving 
throw, he can choose to succeed instead. 


Magic Resistance. Rak Tulkhesh has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


Whirlwind of Weapons. ^ magical aura of weapons sur- 
rounds Rak Tulkhesh in a 10 foot radius. At the start of each 
of his turns, any other creature in the aura takes 14 (4d6) 
force damage. 


forces they are dealing with, or recognize the danger 
inherent in her gifts. 

The Queen of Shadows. An entity of shadow, Sul 
Khatesh can assume any form. Her favored shape is 
a twelve-foot-tall humanoid figure draped in a flow- 
ing, hooded robe formed of swirling mist and cling- 
ing shadow. 

Minions. Most of Sul Khatesh's followers are wizards 
and warlocks, and she is one of the primary patrons for 
warlocks in Khorvaire. Covens devoted to the Queen of 
Shadows use dark magic and fear to dominate whole 
communities, while isolated warlocks make pacts with 
Sul Khatesh to pursue power and revenge. By sharing 
her power in this way, the overlord perpetuates the im- 
age of the evil warlock, inciting fear that strengthens the 
Keeper of Secrets even more. 

Sul Khatesh's chief agent among the Lords of Dust 
is the rakshasa Hektula, who serves as the librarian in 
the demonic citadel of Ashtakala. Known as the First 
Scribe, Hektula presides over an immense trove of ar- 
cane knowledge and artifacts. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Rak Tulkhesh makes four weapon attacks. 


Spawned Melee Weapon. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, 
reach 10 ft., one target. Hit: 28 (3412 + 9) force damage. 


Spawned Ranged Weapon. Ranged Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, 
range 150/600 ft., one target. Hit: 17 (348 + 4) force damage. 


Change Shape. Rak Tulkhesh magically polymorphs into a hu- 
manoid, beast, or giant that has a challenge rating no higher 
than his own, or back into his true form. He reverts to his true 
form if he dies. Any equipment he is wearing or carrying is ab- 
sorbed or borne by the new form (his choice). 

In a new form, Rak Tulkhesh retains his alignment, hit points, 
Hit Dice, ability to speak, proficiencies, Legendary Resistance, 
and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as well as this 
action. His statistics and capabilities are otherwise replaced by 
those of the new form, except any class features or legendary 
actions of that form. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Rak Tulkhesh can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from 
the options below. Only one legendary action option can be 
used at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. 
Rak Tulkhesh regains spent legendary actions at the start 

of his turn. 


Attack. Rak Tulkhesh makes one weapon attack. 
End Magic (Costs 2 Actions). Rak Tulkhesh casts dispel magic. 
Provoke Rage (Costs 3 Actions). Each creature within 60 feet of 


Rak Tulkhesh must succeed on a DC 24 Wisdom saving throw 


or use its reaction to make a melee weapon attack against 

a random creature within reach. If no creatures are within 
reach, it makes a ranged weapon attack against a random 
creature within range, throwing its weapon if necessary. This 
attack is made with advantage and gains a +4 bonus tothe 
damage roll. 


recs tine mee ОАР 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


303 


304 


) 
[ 
f 
} 
] 
| 


SUL KHATESH 
Large fiend, lawful evil 


Armor Class 22 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 475 (50410 + 200) 
Speed 40 ft., fly 40 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 21 (+5) 19 (+4) 30 (+10) 22(+6) 25 (+7) 
ee 
Saving Throws Con +12, Int +18, Wis +14, Cha +15 
Skills Arcana +18, History +18, Insight +14, Religion +18 
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning 
Damage Immunities poison; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical attacks 
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned 
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 16 
Languages all, telepathy 150 ft. 
Challenge 28 (120,000 XP) 
 ————MUÜ—i—À———J—— MM M —— 


Innate Spellcasting. Sul Khatesh's spellcasting ability is Intel- 
ligence (spell save DC 26, +18 to hit with spell attacks). She 
can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material 
components: 


At will: counterspell, detect magic, detect thoughts, dispel magic, 
eyebite, fireball, lightning bolt, shield 

3/day each: chain lightning, create undead, dream, hold monster, 
mass suggestion, scrying 

1/day each: foresight, gate, power word kill, teleport 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If Sul Khatesh fails a saving 
throw, she can choose to succeed instead. 


Magic Resistance. Sul Khatesh has advantage on saving throws 


© against spells and other magical effects. 


Master of Magic. Sul Khatesh has advantage on Constitution 


saving throws to maintain concentration. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Sul Khatesh makes four attacks with Arcane Blast. 


Arcane Blast. Ranged Spell Attack: +18 to hit, range 120 ft., one 
target. Hit: 15 (1410 + 10) force damage. 


Magic Staff. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
| target. Hit: 36 (5d12 4) force damage. 


| Arcane Cataclysm (Recharges after a Long Rest). Sul Khatesh 
conjures orbs of magical energy that plummet to the ground 
at three different points she can see within 1 mile of her. Each 
creature in a 40-foot-radius sphere centered on each point 
must make a DC 26 Dexterity saving throw, taking 71 (11412) 
force damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a 
successful one. A creature in the area of more than one arcane 
burst is affected only once. The area of each arcane burst then 
acts as an antimagic fieldfor 1 hour. Sul Khatesh and spells she 
casts are unaffected by these fields. 


Change Shape. Sul Khatesh magically polymorphs into a hu- 
manoid, beast, or giant that has a challenge rating no higher 
than her own, or back into her true form. She reverts to her true 
form if she dies. Any equipment she is wearing or carrying is 
absorbed or borne by the new form (Sul Khatesh's choice). 

In a new form, Sul Khatesh retains her alignment, hit points, 
Hit Dice, ability to speak, proficiencies, Legendary Resistance, 
and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as well as this 
action. Her statistics and capabilities are otherwise replaced by 
those of the new form, except any class features or legendary 
actions of that form. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Sul Khatesh can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from 

the options below. Only one legendary action option can 

be used at a time and only at the end of another creature's 
turn. Sul Khatesh regains spent legendary actions at the start 
of her turn. 


Attack. Sul Khatesh makes two attacks with her Arcane Blast or 
one attack with her magic staff. 

Consume Magic (Costs 2 Actions). Sul Khatesh targets a crea- 
ture within 120 feet of her who is concentrating on a spell. 
The target must succeed on a DC 26 Constitution saving 
throw or its concentration is broken on the spell, and Sul 
Khatesh gains 5 temporary hit points per level ofthat spell. 

Maddening Secrets (Costs 3 Actions). Sul Khatesh whispers an 
arcane secret into the mind of a creature she can see within 
60 feet of her. The target must succeed on a DC 26 Wisdom 
saving throw or expend one of its spell slots of 3rd level 
or lower and deal 26 (4d12) force damage to each creature 
within 30 feet of it. A creature that fails the saving throw but 
can't expend a spell slot is instead stunned until the end of 
its next turn. 


_ HASHALAQ QUORI 


- Medium aberration, lawful evil 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 99 (1848 + 18) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12 (+1) 14 (+2) 13 (+1)  18(44) 16(43) 13 (+4 


Saving Throws Wis +7, Cha +8 

Skills Arcana +12, History +12, Insight +11, Persuasion +8 
Damage Resistances psychic 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 

Languages Common, Quori 

Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 
Rr 


Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The quori’s spellcasting ability is 
Intelligence (spell save DC 16). It can innately cast the following 
spells, requiring no components: 


At will: charm person 

3/day each: detect thoughts, disguise self, suggestion 
l/day: dominate person, dream 

ACTIONS 

Multiattack. The quori uses its Mind Thrust twice. 


Idyllic Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 9 (1410 + 4) force damage. If the target is a creature, it 
must succeed on a DC 16 Wisdom saving throw or fall prone in 
a fit of laughter. 


Mind Thrust. The quori targets a creature it can see within 60 
feet of it. The target must make a DC 16 Wisdom saving throw, 
taking 18 (4d8) psychic damage on a failed save, or half as 
much damage on a successful one. 


Possession (Recharge 6). One humanoid that the quori can see 
within 5 feet of it must succeed on a DC 16 Charisma saving 
throw or be possessed by the quori; the quori then disappears, 
and the target is incapacitated and loses control of its body. The 
quori now controls the body but doesn't deprive the target of 
awareness. The quori can't be targeted by any attack, spell, or 
other effect, and it retains its alignment, Intelligence, Wisdom, 
Charisma, and immunity to being charmed and frightened. It 
otherwise uses the possessed target's statistics, but doesn't gain 
access to the target's knowledge, class features, or proficiencies. 

The possession lasts until the body drops to 0 hit points, the 
quori ends it as a bonus action, or the quori is forced out by an 
effect like the dispel evil and good spell. When the possession 
ends, the quori reappears in an unoccupied space within 5 feet 
of the body. The target is immune to this quori's Possession for 
24 hours after succeeding on the saving throw or after the pos- 
session ends. 


REACTIONS 


Empathic Feedback. When the quori takes damage from a crea- 
ture it can see within 60 feet of it, the quori can force that crea- 
ture to succeed on a DC 16 Intelligence saving throw or take 11 
(2410) psychic damage. 

ELIT LIUM EUREN 


QuoRI 


Dal Quor is the plane of dreams and is currently dom- 
inated by a dark power known as il-Lashtavar, or the 
Dreaming Dark. Il-Lashtavar is served by a host of aber- 
rations that are the embodiments of dreams and night- 
mares—the quori. Because it is difficult for anything to 
physically travel to or from Dal Quor, quori in Eberron 
are typically encountered while possessing a host body. 
The Inspired are the most common type of willing host 
for the quori and are described earlier in this chapter. 


HASHALAQ QUORI 

Hashalaq quori are loremasters and judges, and are 
commonly known as dreamstealers. In their natural 
form, hashalaqs are composed of hundreds of translu- 
cent tendrils. They can compress and configure these 
tendrils to form a wide range of simple shapes. A point 
of blue light suspended within its tendrils serves as the 
hashalaq’s sensory organ, which can be moved around 
to suit the creature’s current shape. 

The Power of Pleasure. Hashalaq quori have stud- 
ied their mortal prey for centuries. Inhabiting human 
bodies as Inspired has granted the hashalaq a deep 
understanding of the hedonistic urges of humanity. As 
a result, they have developed numerous ways to control 
humanoids through pleasure—even as they have devel- 
oped a taste for such things themselves. 

The Learned of Dal Quor. Hashalaq quori are the 
loremasters of Dal Quor. Even those hashalaqs who 
don't make use of Inspired vessels dedicate themselves 
to studying Eberron and the planes, and they are among 
the few quori castes whose members understand the 
ways of magic. In Dal Quor, the hashalaq quori are typ- 
ically found as advisors to the kalaraq. They also serve 
as judges, policing the quori and ensuring that the rival- 
ries of the tsucora never threaten the greater plans of 
the Dreaming Dark. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 305 


306 


KALARAQ QUORI 


The most powerful quori are the kalaraqs, also known 
as eyebinders—entities formed of pure shadow that is 
outlined by a nimbus of energy. A host of disembodied 
eyes whirl around a kalaraq, each reflecting a conscious- 
ness the creature has consumed. 

Kalaraq quori guide the quori race, and the Devourer 
of Dreams—the personal emissary of the Dreaming 
Dark—is of this order. Although the kalaraqs never fight 
one another overtly, each has its own agenda, and each 
hopes to someday seize the throne of the Devourer of 
Dreams. Because of this internal conflict, it is unusual 
for a kalaraq to leave Dal Quor to inhabit a mortal vessel 
and become one of the Inspired. 


KALARAQ QUORI 


Medium aberration, lawful evil 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 161 (19d8 + 76) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12 (+1) 21 (+5) 18(44) 23(46) 24(47) 25(+7) 
L—-—ssnnná—————— ————:» —À—,2 
Saving Throws Int +12, Wis +13, Cha +13 
Skills Deception +13, Perception +13, Persuasion +13 
Damage Resistances cold, necrotic, poison, psychic; 
bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks 
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, exhaustion, 
frightened, grappled, paralyzed, petrified, prone, restrained 
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 23 
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft. 
Challenge 19 (22,000 XP) 
Lo ---—-———————  ———————À——M 21 DD 


All-Around Vision. The quori can't be surprised while it isn't 
incapacitated. 


Incorporeal Movement. The quori can move through other 
creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It takes 5 
(1910) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object. 


Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The quori's spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 21, +13 to hit with spell attacks). It can 
innately cast the following spells, requiring no components: 


At will: arcane eye 
3/day each: clairvoyance, confusion, dream, eyebite 


Magic Resistance. The quori has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The quori makes two Soul Binding attacks. Alter- 
natively, it can make four attacks with Arcane Blast. 


Arcane Blast. Ranged Spell Attack: +13 to hit, range 120 ft., one 
target. Hit: 12 (1d10 + 7) force damage. 


Soul Binding. Melee Spell Attack: +13 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 29 (4d10 + 7) necrotic damage. A creature reduced 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


to 0 hit points from this attack dies and has its soul imprisoned 
in one of the quori's eyes. The target can't be revived by any 
means short of a wish spell until the quori is destroyed. 


Mind Seed (1/Day). The quori touches one humanoid, which 
must succeed on a DC 21 Intelligence savingthrow or be 
cursed. The curse lasts until it's removed by a remove curse or 
greater restoration spell. 

The cursed target suffers 1 level of exhaustion every 24 
hours, and finishing a long rest doesn't reduce its exhaustion. 
If the cursed target reaches exhaustion level 6, it doesn't die; it 
instead becomes a thrall under the quori's control, and all its 
exhaustion is removed. Only the wish spell can free the thrall 
from this control. 


Swarm of Eyes (Recharge 6). The quori creates a swarm of spec- 
tral eyes that fills a 30-foot-radius sphere centered on a point 

it can see within 60 feet of it. Each creature in that area must 
make a DC 21 Wisdom saving throw. On a failure, a creature 
takes 45 (10d8) psychic damage, and it is blinded for 1 min- 
ute. On a success, a creature takes half as much damage and 
isn't blinded. A blinded creature can repeat the saving throw 

at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on 

a success. 


Possession (Recharge 6). One humanoid that the quori can see 
within 5 feet of it must succeed on a DC 21 Charisma saving 
throw or be possessed by the quori; the quori then disappears, 
and the target is incapacitated and loses control of its body. 
The quori now controls the body but doesn't deprive the target 
of awareness. The quori can't be targeted by any attack, spell, 
or other effect, and it retains its alignment, Intelligence, Wis- 
dom, Charisma, and immunity to being charmed and fright- 
ened. It otherwise uses the possessed target's statistics, but 
doesn't gain access to the target's knowledge, class features, 
or proficiencies. 

The possession lasts until the body drops to 0 hit points, the 
quori ends it as a bonus action, or the quori is forced out by an 
effect like the dispel evil and good spell. When the possession 
ends, the quori reappears in an unoccupied space within 5 feet 
of the body. The target is immune to this quori's Possession 
for 24 hours after succeeding on the saving throw or after the 
possession ends. 


TSUCORA QUORI _ 


Tsucora quori are nightmarish creatures. Their head- 
less torsos are covered with eyes and twitching limbs, 
including two massive arms that end in powerful pin- 
cers, and a serpentine tail tipped with a vicious stinger. 
They are cruel and calculating, enjoying the power they 
wield over others as they concoct elaborate schemes to 
advance their own positions and discredit their rivals. 

Relentless Schemers. Constantly jockeying for posi- 
tion, each tsucora hopes to be reincarnated as a more 
powerful servant of the Dreaming Dark. As such, their 
plans are as often focused on the ruination of competi- 
tors as they are on the furthering of il-Lashtavar's plans. 
When they aren't serving in the cities of their nightmare 
realm, they hunt the dreaming spirits of mortals. 

Fearmonéers. Their ability to manipulate the fears of 
mortals sees tsucoras often sent to Eberron as Inspired. 
Nothing keeps humanoid chattel in line like fear, and 
the tsucoras are the masters of manipulating the un- 
certainty of mobs and high-ranking officials alike. The 
effectiveness of tsucora Inspired keeps the members of 
this order in the good graces of the kalaraq quori. 


TSUCORA QUORI 


Medium aberration, lawful evil 


Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 68 (8d8 + 32) 
Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
17 (+3) 14 (+2) 18 (+4) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 16 (+3) 


Saving Throws Wis +5, Cha +6 

Skills Insight +5, Perception +5 

Damage Resistances psychic 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15 

Languages Common, Quori 

Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 

Ln —-————————— À————Á——"————»———————X 


Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The quori's spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 14). It can innately cast the following 
spells, requiring no components: 


At will: charm person 
1/day: fear 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The quori makes three attacks: one pincer attack, 
one attack with its claws, and one stinger attack. 


Pincer. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (1410 + 3) bludgeoning damage. The target is grappled 


(escape DC 14) if it is a Large or smaller creature. The quori has 
two pincers, each of which can grapple one target. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (4d4 + 3) slashing damage. 


Stinger. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one crea- 
ture. Hit: 8 (1410 + 3) piercing damage plus 10 (3d10) psychic 
damage, and the target must succeed on a DC 14 Wisdom 
saving throw or be frightened of the quori for 1 minute. The tar- 
get can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, 
ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Possession (Recharge 6). One humanoid that the quori can see 
within 5 feet of it must succeed on a DC 14 Charisma saving 
throw or be possessed by the quori; the quori then disappears, 
and the target is incapacitated and loses control of its body. 
The quori now controls the body but doesn't deprive the target 
of awareness. The quori can't be targeted by any attack, spell, 
or other effect, and it retains its alignment, Intelligence, Wis- 
dom, Charisma, and immunity to being charmed and fright- 
ened. It otherwise uses the possessed target's statistics, but 
doesn't gain access to the target's knowledge, class features, 
or proficiencies. 

The possession lasts until the body drops to 0 hit points, the 
quori ends it as a bonus action, or the quori is forced out by an 
effect like the dispel evil and good spell. When the possession 
ends, the quori reappears in an unoccupied space within 5 feet 
of the body. The target is immune to this quori's Possession 
for 24 hours after succeeding on the saving throw or after the 
possession ends. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


307 


308 


\ 


м 
== | > z3 
> = —* >ш [-А —A “Ж —» —X b 


^. 
< 
~ 


RADIANT ÍDOL 


A radiant idol was an angel that was banished from the 
celestial realm of Syrania and cast down to the Material 
Plane. One sin led to their fall: the desire to be wor- 
shiped by mortals. Now in the mortal realm, most radi- 
ant idols gather cults of devoted followers. 

Fallen Angels. The insatiable hunger to be adored 
can transform a fallen angel, physically and mentally. 
In its true form, a radiant idol appears to be a warped 
angel. It might have bloody stumps in place of its wings, 
or its wings could be weighted down with chains repre- 
senting its pride. A radiant idol uses disguise self to hide 
its corruption, presenting an image of celestial glory. 

The Weight of Corruption. When a radiant idol 
achieves a sizable following through silvered words and 
demonstrations of power, its facade begins to crack, 
and a downward spiral ensues. As the radiant idol sinks 
deeper into the realm of material power, it begins twist- 
ing its followers, leading them ever deeper into ominous 
ritualism, hedonistic folly, and fanatical doom. 

Immortal Nature. A radiant idol doesn't require food, 
drink, or sleep. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


RADIANT IDOL 


| Large celestial, lawful evil 


| Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 142 (15410 + 60) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
23 (+6) 18 (+4) 19(«4) 17 (+3) 20(+5) 21 (+5) 


Saving Throws Wis +9, Cha +9 

Skills Deception +9, Insight +9, Perception +9, Persuasion +9 

Damage Resistances radiant; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 19 

Languages all, telepathy 120 ft. 

Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) 

D nf]f0ías— M !)r———————————! À——MÀ9 


Aura of False Divinity. A creature that starts its turn within 
30 feet of the radiant idol must make a DC 17 Wisdom saving 


save, the creature is charmed by the radiant idol. A creature 
charmed in this way can repeat the saving throw at the end of 


it succeeds on the saving throw, a creature is immune to this 
radiant idol's Aura of False Divinity for 24 hours. 


Innate Spellcasting. The radiant idol's spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 17). The radiant idol can innately cast 
the following spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: charm person, cure wounds, disguise self, thaumaturgy 


1/day each: commune, dominate person, insect plague, mass sug- 


gestion, raise dead 


Magic Resistance. The radiant idol has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The radiant idol makes two melee attacks. 


Flail. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 10 (148 + 6) bludgeoning damage plus 18 (448) radi- 
ant damage. 


Radiant Strike (1/Day). The radiant idol chooses a point on the 
ground it can see within 60 feet of it. A 30-foot-radius, 40-foot- 
high cylinder of bright light appears there until the start of the 
radiant idol's next turn. Each creature in the cylinder when it 
appears or that ends its turn there must make a DC 17 Consti- 
tution saving throw, taking 36 (8d8) radiant damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


throw, provided the radiant idol isn't incapacitated. On a failed | 


each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Once | 


SPEARINC 


CRAIG 


RAKSHASA 


Millions of years before the rise of the humanoid races, 
the rakshasas of Eberron ruled a civilization that 
spanned Khorvaire. Masters of combat, the rakshasas 


of Eberron wield their weapons with demonic fury, rush- 


ing into battle seeking vengeance against those who 
bound their fiendish masters. 

Rakshasas are described in the Monster Manual. A 
martial variant—the zakya rakshasa—is presented here. 


ZAKYA RAKSHASA 
Zakya rakshasas are the bloodthirsty foot soldiers of 
the rakshasa horde. They are driven to free their fiend- 
ish rulers, seeking vengeance against the dragons and 
those who revere the couatls. Unlike other rakshasas 
with their luxurious robes and fineries, zakya rakshasas 
are almost always clad in battle gear: well-worn scale 
mail, a razor-sharp longsword, and a heavy shield bear- 
ing the emblem of their demonic master. 


ZAKYA RAKSHASA 
Medium fiend, lawful evil 


Armor Class 18 (scale mail, shield) 
Hit Points 59 (748 + 28) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 14 (+2) 18 (+4) 12 (+1) 13 (+1) 1 (+0) 


Č — 

Skills Athletics +7, Perception +4 

Damage Vulnerabilities piercing from magic weapons wielded 
by good creatures 

Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical attacks 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 

Languages Common, Infernal 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 

Ln —s— ———P à À— an i12 11LLOLOLLILIÉL | 


Innate Spellcasting. The rakshasa's innate spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 11). The rakshasa can innately cast the 
following spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: detect thoughts, disguise self 
1/аау: shield 


Limited Magic Immunity. The rakshasa can’t be aff ected or 
detected by spells of 1st level or lower unless it wishes to be. 
It has advantage on saving throws against all other spells and 
magical effects. 


Magic Weapons. The rakshasa's weapon attacks are magical. 


Martial Prowess (1/Turn). When the rakshasa hits a creature 
with a melee weapon attack, the attack deals an extra 11 (2410) 
damage of the weapon's type, and the creature must make a 
DC 15 Strength saving throw. On a failure, the rakshasa can 
push the creature up to 10 feet away from it, knock the creature 
prone, or make the creature drop one item it is holding of the 
rakshasa's choice. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The rakshasa makes three melee weapon attacks. 


Alternatively, it can make two ranged attacks with its javelins. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) slashing damage, or 9 (1d10 + 4) slashing 
damage if used with two hands. 


Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) piercing damage. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


310 


UNDYING 


The undying are undead creatures sustained by positive 
energy or the devotion of mortal beings. Where strong 
negative emotions can trap a spirit as a ghost or wraith, 
the undying are spirits who linger because they are 
cherished and who in turn seek to protect and guide the 
people of their community. 

Though it's possible for undying to appear anywhere, 
it is rare for them to manifest naturally. The only place 
where they are found in significant numbers is the is- 
land of Aerenal, a land whose close ties to the plane of 
Irian suffuse it with positive energy. The elves of Aere- 
nal spent thousands of years working to develop rituals 
that tap into this energy, allowing them to preserve their 
greatest citizens as undying. 

The Face of Death. The light of Irian sustains the 
spirit, but it doesn't preserve the physical body. The 
undying appear as desiccated corpses, their flesh with- 
ering away over centuries. At the same time, the spirit of 
the undying surrounds the body—an aura of light form- 
ing a spectral shadow of the soul. The light shed by an 
undying doesn't generate heat, but it provides a sense of 
warmth and comfort. 

The most powerful of the undying can separate their 
spirits from their physical forms, existing as beings of 
pure light. This state is the ultimate goal of the elves 
of Aerenal, and such beings are known as ascendant 
councilors. 

Bound by Love and Light. Undying are sustained by 
positive energy, whether found in manifest zones tied 
to Irian—such as in Shae Mordai, the Aereni City of the 
Dead—or freely given by the devotion of mortal beings. 
The worship of the Undying Court is what sustains the 
undying of Aerenal, but devotion is a finite resource. As 
such, each elf that becomes an undying must earn their 
afterlife. If an undying elf leaves Aerenal, they require a 
community of elves or another source of positive energy 
to sustain them. Failing this, their light fades and they 
eventually die. 

The Undying Court. The honored undead of Aerenal 
are united in the Undying Court. Based in the city of 
Shae Mordai, the members of the Undying Court spend 
their time meditating, engaging in research, or continu- 
ing to perfect the arts they practiced in life. They serve 
as guides and advisors to the living, and members of the 
noble lines of Aerenal can exercise the rite of counsel to 
consult with ancestors in Shae Mordai. 

The greatest members of the Undying Court are the 
ascendant councilors. These beings of pure light are 
focused on contemplating the mysteries of life and the 
planes, and can work together to wield godlike power 
that allows them to shield Aerenal from almost any 
threat. However, the ascendant councilors can exercise 
power beyond Aerenal only by acting through devoted 
mortals—paladins and clerics of the Undying Court. 

Undead Nature. An undying doesn't require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


UNDviNG SOLDIER 


UNDYING COUNCILOR 


Undying councilors guide and protect the people of Aer- 
enal. They are the most powerful members of the Undy- 
ing Court who still maintain their physical forms. While 
many undying councilors spend their days advising the 
living, some devote years projecting their consciousness 
into the Astral Plane, seeking new knowledge to share 
with their people. Still, not all minds are capable of 
assimilating immortality, and undying councilors some- 
times buckle under the strain and go mad. 


UNDYING SOLDIER 


Undying soldiers make up the army of Aerenal's City of 
the Dead. They guard the temples of the Undying Court 
and the mansions of the noble lines of Aerenal, and 
Aereniambassadors are often accompanied by undead 
bodyguards. Undying soldiers wear heirloom armor and 
wield ornate weaponry. 


UNDYING COUNCILOR 


Medium undead, neutral good 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 104 (1648 + 32) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 10 (+0) 14 (+2) 17 (3) 21 (+5) 16(43) 


Saving Throws Соп +6, Int +7, Wis +9 

Skills Arcana +7, History +11, Insight +9, Perception +9, 
Religion +7 

Damage Vulnerabilities necrotic 

Damage Immunities poison, radiant 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive perception 19 

Languages Common, Elvish 

Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) 


Aura of Radiance. The councilor magically sheds bright light 

in a 15-foot radius and dim light for an additional 15 feet. The 
councilor can extinguish or restore this light as a bonus action. 
If the bright light overlaps with an area of darkness created by 
a spell of 3rd level or lower, the spell that created that darkness 
is dispelled. 


Magic Resistance. The councilor has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


Spellcasting. The councilor is a 13th-level spellcaster. Its spell- 
casting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 17, +9 to hit with spell 
attacks). It has the following cleric spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): guidance, mending, sacred flame, spare the 
dying, thaumaturgy 

Ist level (4 slots): bless, command, create or destroy water 

2nd level (3 slots): augury, calm emotions, hold person 

3rd level (3 slots): daylight, dispel magic, spirit guardians 


UNDYING SOLDIER 


Medium undead, neutral good 


Armor Class 17 (breastplate, shield) 
Hit Points 26 (448 + 8) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16(3) 12 (+1) 1(2) т (+0) (0) 14 (+2) 
ПНИН —— 
Skills Athletics +5, History +4, Perception +3, Religion +4 
Damage Vulnerabilities necrotic 
Damage Resistances radiant; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical attacks not made with silvered 
weapons 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 


4th level (3 slots): banishment, divination, guardian of faith 

5th level (2 slots): dispel evil and good, flame strike (see "Ac- 
tions" below), scrying 

6th level (1 slot): forbiddance, planar ally 

7th level (1 slot): plane shift 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The councilor makes two Radiant Touch attacks. 


Radiant Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 15 (346 + 5) radiant damage. 


Healing Touch (3/Day). The councilor touches another crea- 
ture. The target magically regains 18 (348 + 5) hit points and is 
freed from one curse afflicting it (councilor's choice). 


Flame Strike (5th-Level Spell; Requires a Spell Slot). The coun- 
cilor chooses a point it can see within 60 feet of it. Each crea- 
ture in a 10-foot-radius, 40-foot-high cylinder centered on that 
point must make a DC 17 Dexterity saving throw. A creature 
takes 14 (4d6) fire damage and 14 (4d6) radiant damage on 

a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. If 
the councilor casts this spell using a spell slot of 6th level or 
higher, the fire damage or the radiant damage (its choice) in- 
creases by 1d6 foreach slot level above 5th. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The councilor can take 2 legendary actions, choosing from 
the options below. Only one legendary action option can be 
used at atime and only at the end of another creature's turn. 
The councilor regains spent legendary actions at the start 
of her turn. 


Touch. The councilor makes one attack with its Radiant Touch. 

Shimmering Aura (Costs 2 Actions). The councilor channels 
positive energy into its Aura of Radiance. Until the end of the 
councilor's next turn, it sheds bright light in a 30-foot radius 
and dim light for an additional 30 feet. Any creature that 
starts its turn in the bright light must succeed on a DC 17 
Constitution saving throw or be blinded until the end of the 
councilor's next turn. 


Languages Common, Elvish 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 
Ls ———————— Mss 9: ^"^] "Un^-— | 


Illumination. The soldier magically sheds bright light in a 10- 
foot radius and dim light for an additional 10 feet. The soldier 
can extinguish or restore this light as a bonus action. 


Turn Resistance. The soldier has advantage on saving throws 
against any effect that turns undead. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The soldier makes two spear attacks. 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (146 + 3) piercing damage 
or 7 (148 + 3) piercing damage if used with two hands to make 
a melee attack, plus 9 (2d8) radiant damage if the target is a 
fiend or undead. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


зп 


312 


VALENAR ANIMALS 


The elves of Valenar say that when their ancestors 
fought the giants of Xen'drik, elf druids took the forms 
of animals on the battlefield. The cruel and mighty Em- 
peror Cul'sir of the giants laid a curse upon the druids 
and trapped them in the forms of animals. Just as the 
ancestors of the Valenar guide their warriors in battle, 
the spirits of these druids can awaken power in an ani- 
mal to create a companion worthy of a champion. 

Valenar animals are awakened to advanced intelli- 
gence and power by the touch of an ancestral spirit. 
Traditionally, Valenar animals choose Valenar elves as 
companions, reflecting a bond between the ancestors 
of elf and animal. To be chosen by a Valenar animal is a 
great honor, and any such elf is treated with respect and 
reverence. Still, on the rare occasions when a Valenar 
animal chooses an adventurer of a different ancestry as 
a companion, it is universally accepted. 

The Valenar animals presented here—hawk, hound, 
and steed—are but examples, for the ancestral spirits 
can take on many animal forms. 


VALENAR HAWK 
Tiny fey, neutral 


Armor Class 14 
Hit Points 10 (4d4) 
Speed 10 ft., fly 60 ft. 


CHA 
11 (40) 


STR 
8 (-1) 


DEX 
18 (+4) 


CON INT 
10 (+0) 9 (-1) 


WIS 
16 (+3) 


Skills Perception +5 

Senses passive Perception 15 

Languages understands Common, Elvish, and Sylvan but can't 
speak 

Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Bonding. The hawk can magically bond with one creature it can 
see, immediately after spending at least 1 hour observing that 
creature while within 30 feet of it. The bond lasts until the hawk 
bonds with a different creature or until the bonded creature 
dies. While bonded, the hawk and the bonded creature can 
communicate telepathically with each other at a distance of up 
to 100 feet. 


Keen Sight. The hawk has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d4 4) slashing damage. 
|а сри ULLUS 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


VALENAR HOUND = 


Medium fey, neutral 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 19 (3d8 + 6) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
17 (+3) 15 (+2) 14 (+2) 10 (+0) 15 (+2) 1 (+0) 


Skills Perception +4 

Senses passive Perception 14 

Languages understands Common, Elvish, and Sylvan but can't 
speak 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Bonding. The hound can magically bond with one creature it 
can see, immediately after spending at least 1 hour observing 
that creature while within 30 feet of it. The bond lasts until the 
hound bonds with a different creature or until the bonded crea- 
ture dies. While bonded, the hound and the bonded creature 
can communicate telepathically with each other at a distance of 
up to 100 feet. 


Keen Hearing and Smell. The hound has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell. 


ACTIONS 

Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (146 + 3) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, 
it must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or be 


knocked prone. x 


VARIANT: ANCESTRAL TRAITS 


Each Valenar animal can be customized with an ances- 


tral gift, a supernatural trait granted by its ancestral 


spirit. Choose a trait or roll on the Ancestral Traits table 


for each Valenar animal. 


ANCESTRAL TRAITS 


d8 Trait 

1 Bestow Luck (1/Day). As a bonus action, the animal 
chooses one creature it can see within 30 feet of it. 
The next ability check, attack roll, or saving throw 
the target makes in the next hour has advantage. 

2 Burst of Speed (Recharge 6). The animal can take the 
Dash action as a bonus action. 

3 Camouflage. The animal has advantage on Dexterity 
(Stealth) checks it makes while outdoors. 

4 Lie Detector. The animal knows when a creature 
within 15 feet of it tells a lie. 

5 Fey Ancestry. The animal has advantage on saving 
throws against being charmed or frightened, and 
magic can't put it to sleep. 

6 Fey Step (1/Day). The animal, along with anything it 
is wearing or carrying, teleports up to 30 feet to an 
unoccupied space it can see. 

7 Quickness (Recharge 6). The animal can take the 
Dodge action as a bonus action. 

8 Shrouded Step. The animal can't be tracked except 
by magical means, and it leaves behind no tracks or 
other traces of its passage. 


VALENAR STEED 


Large fey, neutral 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 22 (3410 + 6) 
Speed 60 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS CHA 
14 (+2) 16 (+3) (42) 10(40) 15 (+2) T (+0) 


Skills Perception +4 

Senses passive Perception 14 

Languages understands Common, Elvish, and Sylvan but can't 
speak 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Bonding. The steed can magically bond with one creature it 

can see, immediately after spending at least 1 hour observing 
that creature while within 30 feet of it. The bond lasts until the 
steed bonds with a different creature or until the bonded crea- 


ture dies. While bonded, the steed and the bonded creature can 


communicate telepathically with each other at a distance of up 
to 100 feet. 


ACTIONS 


Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 їо hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


Hit: 10 (246 + 3) bludgeoning damage. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


aet — | 


314 


WAR FORGED C OLOSSUS + "Hanamar" (Colossus WX-42) stands at the bottom of 


Kraken Bay, near the coast of Valenar, buried up to its 


In the final days of the Last War, House Cannith un- knees in sand and flooded, but it is otherwise intact. 
leashed its mightiest creations: the warforged colossi. - "Karrnslayer" (Colossus WX-31) lost its legs but 
These enormous mechanical warriors thundered across crawls through the Mournland, using its arms to 
Cyre, crushing everything in their paths and leaving drag its great bulk across the ground. It is always 
ruin behind them. Meant to end the war decisively, the prone and can't use its Stomp action, but makes three 
colossi pulverized hundreds of soldiers beneath their extra turret attacks when it takes the Multiattack ac- 
feet and incinerated whole legions with beams of fiery tion option. 
light that shot from their mouths. This rampage was cut + “Landro” (Colossus WX-33) is partially phased into a 
short on the Day of Mourning. The arcane cataclysm mountainside on the border of Cyre and Breland, but 
that engulfed Cyre destroyed most of the warforged co- still explorable and potentially salvageable. 
lossi, causing them to collapse into lifeless heaps. e “Norr” (Colossus WX-5) is slumped amid the ruins of 
Colossal Survivors. Some warforged colossi survived Metrol, the former capital of Cyre. 
the Day of Mourning more or less intact and are thought + "Tymber" (Colossus WX-12) squats in the Crawling 
to only be in stasis, waiting to be awakened. Cannith Swamp, in the northwest corner of the Shadow 
artificers are eager to track them down and determine Marches. How it got there, no one knows. 


whether they can be awakened or, at the very least, 
salvaged for docents and other magic items. Here are 
locations where operational warforged colossi are ru- 
mored to dwell: 


Hollow Structure. Although it can operate without a 
crew, a warforged colossus is built to carry wizards, ar- 
tificers, magewrights, and elite troops. For this reason, 
these constructs are largely hollow on the inside, with 


* "Arkus" (Colossus WX-11) lies prone at the bottom of tunnels, ladders, storage areas, and observation decks. 
the Glowing Chasm in the northern part of the Mourn- A colossus might be filled with monsters and secrets, 
land, with one of its arms torn off. in addition to the corpses of those who died inside it. 

* "Artorok" (Colossus WX-73) sits at the bottom of Lake In chapter 4, map 4.8 illustrates an inactive warforged 
Cyre amid the scaffolding of a sunken House Cannith colossus, and the text that accompanies it explains how 
workshop, flooded but otherwise intact. the colossus might serve as an adventure location. 

WARFORGED COLOSSUS ACTIONS 

Gargantuan construct, unaligned Multiattack. The colossus makes three attacks—one with its 


ЫШ slam and two with its eldritch turrets—and then uses Stomp. 


Armor Class 23 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 410 (20d20 -- 200) Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +18 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target. 


Speed 60 ft. Hit: 29 (3412 + 10) bludgeoning damage, and the colossus can 
push the target up to 20 feet away from it. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 


30 (+10) 11 (+0) 30(410) 3(-4) T(40 8(-) Eldritch Turret. Ranged Spell Attack: +18 to hit, range 300 ft., 


one target. Hit: 18 (4d8) force damage, and if the target is a 
creature, it is knocked prone. 


Saving Throws Int +4, Wis +8, Cha +7 


Damage Immunities necrotic, poison; bludgeoning, piercing, 
and slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
incapacitated, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, stunned 


Stomp. The colossus stomps one of its feet at a point on the 
ground within 20 feet of it. Any creature in a 20-foot-radius, 
20-foot-high cylinder centered on this point must succeed on 
a DC 26 Dexterity saving throw or take 33 (6d10) bludgeoning 


Senses truesight 150 ft., passive Реве еп 10 damage and fall prone. Until the colossus uses its Stomp again 
Languages understands Common but can't speak or moves, the creature is restrained. While restrained in this 


Challenge? 0509370) way, the creature (or another creature within 5 feet of it) can 
І use its action to make а DC 26 Strength check. On a success, 


Immutable Form. The colossus is immune to any spell or effect the creature relocates to an unoccupied space of its choice 
that would alter its form. within 5 feet of the colossus and is no longer restrained. 


Structures, as well as nonmagical objects that are neither be- 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the colossus fails a saving ing worn nor carried, take the same amount of damage if they 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. аге їп the cylinder (no save). 

Magic Resistance. The colossus has advantage on saving Incinerating Beam (Recharge 5—6). The colossus fires a beam 
throws against spells and other magical effects. of light in a 150-foot line that is 10 feet wide. Each creature 


in the line must make a DC 26 Dexterity saving throw, taking 
60 (11d10) radiant damage on a failed save, or half as much 
damage on a successful one. A creature reduced to 0 hit points 
Towering Terror. Any enemy outside the colossus that starts its by this beam is disintegrated, leaving behind anything it was 
turn within 30 feet of it must succeed on a DC 26 Wisdom sav- wearing or carrying. 

ing throw or be frightened until the start of the enemy's next 

turn. If the enemy's saving throw is successful, it is immune to 

this colossus's Towering Terror for the next 24 hours. 


Siege Monster. The colossus deals double damage to objects 
and structures. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


WARFORGED TITAN 


Warforged titans are hulking constructs built to wreak 
paths of destruction through enemy armies. Some of 
the most feared combatants of the Last War, warforged 
titans are barely sentient, with just enough intelligence 
to follow commands. 

Legacy of Giants. In the Age of Giants, giant artifi- 
cers built mindless war golems to aid them in their war 
against the quori. Millennia later, some of these golems 
were unearthed by adventurers searching for the se- 
crets of that age, then turned over to artificers working 
for the dragonmarked houses during the Last War. 
House Cannith studied these designs, and in the course 
of uncovering the secrets of the golems and the giant ar- 
tificers who made them, House Cannith created the first 
warforged titans. 


WARFORGED TITAN 


Huge construct, lawful neutral 


Armor Class 20 (natural armor) 

Hit Points 125 (10412 + 60) 

Speed 40 ft. 

DS 

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA bM 

za sg  22(«6).-3(-4 T (+0)  T(-5) 

E 

Damage Immunities poison, psychic 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages understands the languages of its creator but can't 
speak 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


[LLL 


Platforms. The warforged titan has two platforms built into 
its chassis. One Medium or smaller creature can ride on each 
platform without squeezing. To make a melee attack against a 
target within 5 feet of the warforged, they must use spears or 
weapons with reach and the target must be Large or larger. 


Siege Monster. The warforged titan deals double damage to 
objects and structures. 
ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The warforged titan makes one axehand attack 
and one hammerfist attack. 


Axehand. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 19 (348 + 6) slashing damage, plus 11 (2d10) slashing 
damage if the target is prone. 


Hammerfist. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 19 (348 + 6) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a 
creature, it must succeed on a DC 17 Strength saving throw or 
be knocked prone. 


Sweeping Axe (Recharge 6). The warforged titan makes a sweep 
with its axehand, and each creature within 10 feet of it must 
make a DC 17 Dexterity saving throw. A creature takes 19 (3d8 
+ 6) slashing damage on a failed save, or half as much damage 
ona successful one. 
SE OE IEE IS а 2 Sie eae su 


| 316 
\ 


wes T 


GENERIC NPCs 


Wherever you go in Eberron, you're likely to meet one 

or more of the folk detailed in this section. Presented in 
alphabetical order, these generic NPCs are ready for you 
to customize with personality traits and the like. 


BoNE KNIGHT 


Bone knights are the champions of the Order of the Em- 
erald Claw. Clad in distinctive bonecraft armor—heavy 
armor adorned with the bones of fallen enemies—these 
fearsome warriors command squads of undead soldiers 
as they pursue the sinister goals of Lady Illmarrow. 

Karrnathi Patriots. Early in the Last War, Karrnath 
turned to the necromancers of the Blood of Vol to bol- 
ster the nation's army with undead forces. The skeletons 
and zombies created by the necromancers were mind- 
less creatures that required guidance. The first bone 
knights were appointed to provide this control. 

Devoted paladins of the Blood of Vol were fused into 
suits of bonecraft armor, whose magic focused their di- 
vine gifts, allowing them to command units of mindless 
undead. Bonecraft armor can't be removed without kill- 
ing the knight who wears it, and when donning it, each 
bone knight understood that their former life was over. 

The Fall of the Emerald Claw. During the Last War, 
many bone knights took service with the Order of the 
Emerald Claw, helping that name strike fear into the en- 
emies of Karrnath. In the last decade, King Kaius III of 
Karrnath has done much to ensure a peaceful end to the 
Last War. Under the terms of the Treaty of Thronehold, 
Kaius sealed most of Karrnath's undead in deep vaults, 
and the Order of the Emerald Claw was disbanded. A 
few bone knights remained in service to the crown, but 
most were cast aside—still bound to their bonecraft ar- 
mor and still convinced of Karrnathi supremacy. These 
bone knights felt that Kaius had betrayed both them and 
their nation, leading their once-proud order to find a 
new purpose in the service of Lady Illmarrow. 


BONE KNIGHT 


Medium humanoid (any race), any non-good alignment 


| Armor Class 20 (bonecraft armor) 
Hit Points 84 (1348 + 26) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 13 (41) (42) 12(4) 14 (+2) 16(+3) 


Saving Throws Wis +5, Cha +6 
| Skills Athletics +7, Deception +6, Intimidation +6 
| Damage Resistances necrotic, poison 


| Senses passive Perception 12 


| Languages any one language (usually Common) 
_ Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Commander of Bones. As a bonus action, the knight can target 
one skeleton or zombie it can see within 30 feet of it. The tar- 
| get must make a DC 14 Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, 
| the target must obey the knight's commands until the knight 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


dies or until the knight releases it as a bonus action. The knight 
can command up to twelve undead at a time this way. 


Master of the Pallid Banner. While within 60 feet of the knight, 
any undead ally of the knight has advantage on saving throws 
against any effect that turns undead. 


Spellcasting. The knight is an 8th-level spellcaster. Its spellcast- 
ing ability is Charisma (spell save DC 14, +6 to hit with spell 
attacks). It has the following paladin spells prepared: 


Ist level (4 slots): command, compelled duel, hellish rebuke, 
wrathful smite 

2nd level (3 slots): branding smite, crown of madness, darkness, 
find steed, magic weapon 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The knight attacks twice with one of its weapons. 


Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage. 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 150/600 ft., 
onetarget. Hit: 5 (1d8 4 1) piercing damage. 


)MAS GIORELLO 


CHANGELING 


Changelings are a humanoid race of shapechangers 
who conceal their true identities behind false faces. 
Their gifts of mimicry allow them to appear as members 
of any humanoid culture, playing the part of a dwarf one 
day and a dragonborn the next. Although changelings 
can adopt any guise, most rely on a few established per- 
sonas, each with a developed history and a network of 
friends and acquaintances. 


KALASHTAR 


The kalashtar have bonded with good-aligned quori 
spirits, which communicate with their hosts through 
dreams and visions. Descended from monks who of- 
fered their bodies as sanctuaries to those quori escaping 
the evil of Dal Quor, the kalashtar now fight to herald in 
a new age of light and balance. 


Cee See ee ee ee ed 
CHANGELING 


Medium humanoid (changeling, shapechanger), any alignment 


Armor Class 13 (leather armor) 
Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4) 
Speed 30 ft. 


wis 
10 (+0) 


CHA 
16 (+3 


INT 
14 (+2) 


DEX 
15 (+2) 


STR 
8 (-1) 


CON 
12 (+1) 


Skills Acrobatics +4, Deception +5, Insight +2, Perception +2, 
Persuasion +5 

Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages Common, Dwarvish, Elvish, Halfling, thieves’ cant 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Change Appearance. The changeling can use its action to 
polymorph into a Medium humanoid it has seen, or back into 
its true form. Its statistics, other than its size, are the same in 
each form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying isn’t trans- 
formed. It reverts to its true form if it dies. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The changeling makes two attacks with its dagger. 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


Unsettling Visage (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). Each 
creature within 30 feet of the changeling must succeed on a DC 
13 Wisdom saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. A crea- 
ture can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, 
ending the effect on itself on a success. 
ET EU CUP PEE 


KALASHTAR OR 
CHANGELING 0156015Е0 
AS A KALASHTAR 


KALASHTAR 


Medium humanoid (kalashtar), any alignment 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 16 (3d8 + 3) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
ПА) 14(+2), 127(+1)‚ 1360)? 153062) 18,099] 


Skills Acrobatics +4, Insight +4, Persuasion +6 
Damage Resistances psychic 

Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages Common, telepathy 20 ft. 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Dual Mind. The kalashtar has advantage on Wisdom sav- 
ing throws. 


ACTIONS 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


Mind Thrust. The kalashtar targets a creature it can see within 

30 feet of it. The target must succeed on a DC 12 Wisdom sav- 

ing throw or take 11 (2d10) psychic damage. 
ELLA mm MEE ESSI 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 317 


MAGEWRIGHT 
In Khorvaire, magic is part of everyday life. A chef might 
use prestidigitation to heat and season food, while a 
blacksmith uses mending to perform minor repairs and 
&uidance to help inspire their work. Those who work mi- 
nor magic into their labors are called magewrights. 

Far more limited in magical power than a typical 
spellcaster, a magewright is dedicated to learning a 
handful of spells, and magewrights cast their non-can- 
trip spells as rituals—even spells that can't normally 
be cast in this way. Most magewright rituals take 10 
minutes to perform, but certain complex rituals can 
take up to 1 hour. However long the ritual takes, it re- 
quires extra material components, usually in the form of 
dragonshards. 


CREATING A MAGEWRIGHT 

The magewright stat block provides the baseline statis- 
tics for a magewright. You then add to that baseline by 
choosing a specialty from the Magewright Specialties 
table, or roll for one. The specialty determines addi- 
tional spells the magewright knows, including ones that 
can be cast only as rituals. The specialty also gives the 
magewright more proficiencies. 


MAGEWRIGHT SPECIALTIES 


d8 Specialty Spells Proficiencies 


1 Artisan Guidance, mending One type of 


artisan's tools 
Performance (+3) 


2 Entertainer Minor illusion, thau- 


maturgy. Ritual only: 


disguise self. 

3 Healer Resistance, spare the Medicine (+4), 
dying. Ritual only: herbalism kit 
detect poison and dis- 
ease, lesser restoration 
(1 hour). 

4 Lamp- Light. Ritual only: con- — Tinker's tools 

lighter tinual flame (1 hour). 

5 Locksmith Mending. Ritual only: Thieves’ tools, 
arcane lock (1 hour), tinker's tools 
knock. 

6 Mediator Guidance. Ritual only: — Insight (+4), 
comprehend languages, Persuasion (+3) 
zone of truth. 

7 Medium Minor illusion. Ritual Deception (+3), 
only: speak with dead. ^ Religion (+4) 

8 Oracle Guidance. Ritual only: History (+4), 
augury, divination (1 Religion (+4) 


hour). 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


MAGEWRIGHT 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 9 (2d8) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
11 (40) (4) 10(+0) (+2) (2) 12 (+1) 


Skills Arcana +4 

Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages Common plus any two languages 
Challenge 0 (0 XP) 


Spellcasting. The magewright's spellcasting ability is Intelli- 
gence (spell save DC 12). To cast one ofits rituals, the mage- 
wright must provide additional material components whose 
value in gold pieces is 20 times the spell's level. These com- 
ponents are consumed when the ritual is finished. The mage- 
wright knows the following spells: 


At will: mage hand, prestidigitation 
Rituals: knock 


ACTIONS 


Dagger. Melee от Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 


range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 3 (1d4 1) piercing damage. 


SHIFTER 


SHIFTER E 


Shifters are tied to primal spirits, which most of them 
refer to as the beast within. They are lithe of form and 
have bestial features: large eyes, flat noses, pointed 
ears, and light fur over much of their bodies. When a 
shifter fully embraces the beast within by "shifting," 
these features become even more pronounced. 


SHIFTER 


Medium humanoid (shifter), any alignment 


Armor Class 14 (leather armor) 
Hit Points 19 (3d8 4 6) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS CHA 
12 (+1) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 11 (+0) 15 (+2) 10 (+0 


Skills Acrobatics +5, Insight +4, Nature +2, Perception +4 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages Common 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Shif ting (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). As a bonus 
action, the shifter takes on a more bestial form for 1 minute 
or until it dies. The shifter gains 5 temporary hit points. It can 


make a bite attack when it activates this trait and also as a bo- 


nus action on each of its turns while in its bestial form. 


ACTIONS 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage. 


TARKANAN 
ASSASSIN 


TARKANAN ASSASSIN 


Tarkanan assassins are the elite killers, spies, and 
thieves who work for House Tarkanan, a criminal orga- 
nization specializing in theft and assassination. In addi- 
tion to their deadly skill, a Tarkanan assassin possesses 
an aberrant dragonmark—a twisted sigil that provides 
them with magical power. House Tarkanan actively 
seeks and recruits people with aberrant dragonmarks. 


WARFORGED SOLDIER 


Warforged soldiers are humanoids formed from wood 
and steel, then magically imbued with life and sentience. 
The warforged were created to fight in the Last War, and 
in the aftermath of that conflict, they struggle to under- 
stand their place in the world. 

Most warforged soldiers still serve their former mas- 
ters, often guarding dragonmarked houses or merchant 
caravans. Many warforged find it difficult to separate 
themselves from the soldiers they were made to be, 
seeking work as bouncers, bailiffs, and bodyguards. 
Others put their tireless strength to work as laborers, 
committed to the reconstruction of the towns and cities 
they defended or destroyed in the war. 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


o 
Eh. 


320 


XR C IU PEE 


TARKANAN ASSASSIN: ALTERNATIVE SPELLS 


The power granted by an aberrant dragonmark is unpre- 
dictable. When running a Tarkanan assassin, you can 

roll on the Aberrant Dragonmark Innate Spells table to 
determine the spells gained from that NPC's aberrant 
mark, replacing the spells in the stat block's Innate Spell- 
casting trait. 


ABERRANT DRAGONMARK INNATE SPELLS 

d6 At Will 1/Day 
Fire bolt (2410) Burning hands (3d6) 
Shocking grasp (2d8) Chromatic orb (4d8) 

Ray of sickness (3d8) 

Charm person (two creatures) 

Thunderwave (248) 

Sleep (7d8) 


EN 


1 
2 

3 Poison spray (2412) 
4 Friends 

5 Minor illusion 

6 Dancing lights 


ccn 


TARKANAN ASSASSIN 
© Medium humanoid (any race), any non-good alignment 
Armor Class 15 (studded leather) 
Hit Points 45 (7d8 « 14) 
_ Speed 30 ft. 
|. STR рх CON INT WIS СНА 
| 12(+1) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 10(+0) 14 (+2) 1 (+0) 


|. Skills Athletics +3, Deception +2, Perception +4, Sleight of 
| Hand +5, Stealth +5 

| Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 

. Languages Common, thieves' cant 

. Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Innate Spellcasting. The assassin's spellcasting ability is Con- 
stitution (+4 to hit with spell attacks). It can innately cast the 
following spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: fire bolt (see "Actions" below) 
1/day: chromatic orb (see "Actions" below) 


Unstable Mark. When the assassin casts an innate spell, each 
creature within 10 feet of the assassin must make a DC 12 Con- 
stitution saving throw, taking 4 (1d8) force damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The assassin makes two shortsword attacks. 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (146 + 3) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) poi- 
son damage. 


Fire Bolt (Cantrip). Ranged Spell Attack: +4 to hit, range 120 ft., 
onetarget. Hit: 11 (2d10) fire damage. A flammable object hit 
by this spell ignites if it isn't being worn or carried. 


Chromatic Orb (1/Day). Ranged Spell Attack: +4 to hit, range 90 
ft., one creature. Hit: 18 (4d8) damage of a type chosen by the 
assassin: acid, cold, fire, lightning, poison, or thunder. 

Re PSB I SO a) 


CHAPTER 6 | FRIENDS AND FOES 


"WE Y 


WARFORGED SOLDIER 


Medium humanoid (warforged), any alignment 


Armor Class 16 (natural armor, shield) 
Hit Points 30 (448 + 12) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 12 (+1) 16(3) 10(+0) 14(42 T (+0) 


Skills Athletics +5, Perception +4, Survival +4 
Damage Resistances poison 

Senses passive Perception 14 

Languages Common 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Warforged Resilience. The warforged has advantage on saving 
throws against being poisoned and is immune to disease. 
Magic can't put itto sleep. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The warforged makes two armblade attacks. 


Armblade. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 6 (146 + 3) slashing damage. 


Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (146 + 3) piercing damage. 


REACTIONS 


Protection. When an attacker the warforged can see makes an 

attack roll against a creature within 5 feet of the warforged, the 

warforged can impose disadvantage on the attack roll. 
EEUU UU C DECORE CORE TENEUNEEUNI 


ICEGAUNT 
ISLAND 


ICEWHITE 
ISLAND 


THE CONTINENT OF 


HORVAIRE 


500 1000 


Mme es RUT Га Озы 0 
miles p a 
Ў: X 
а ~ ee 
a THREEISISTERS 
b 
k 
IR OFTHE E 7 
KEEPER b. p COORD NJ 
з» EET UT S д ^ E 
ИУ ж t 
P ee re D 5ТАЕКУУОО›Р 1 : 
Vostethatra у TUS. STARKCRAG Sy ЗЕ 
d S еч TA ve Desolate ў Коск _ ыным ; 
€. 225 Ma A —_— 7 Verge b GoenmA * 
m 20 29 ^ ISINARA 
à & ix É "m 
ГАШ. Fil E © 
б @ о fein « , a 
? AS тә, 3 " > 1 
xe M S С FORSAKEN пае 3. 
Ф Fe 4 T FOREST Eel pa 8 
Bay Ам. 
ТИ E ! Gulf a Ф окҥлэног» CON, 
Mame ^ Ingjaldy, Se 4 — Ч) 
Вау P^, © " | = cm 


Fa RWATCH & 


Те 


@ я Pp Tür d Karrn К "m GREENTARN 
i бо м НЕ — E ra TE " 
[ : N) А, Чч 2 . r GRAY Г Вау IGENEEDLE р 
| oe у, x " [ TRAY yg ж y — А TTE " (С 
да i “М ҷ bo. i Wasp я a FOREST ee м 
S » 4 E Merylsward Q — 4 X d | Madstone — Е: ~ BA SPEARTIP 
! i i X — j S Г Sae y > - 
E к \ E. : Коса | S f. ICEWOOD pring А w 
4 a © М ; WHISPER b. „й Harbor — D 
D 4 av Woops n бы Р 
р | \ & 39 дзн = KARRNWOOD J =. , 
po Я м WO Otharaunt Р? — B / г 906 = n ) 
p^ ‘Kashakantag n ; . у, N SE e ASTA RPEAXK d | ы 2. YcETOP "T ar. Ишан Я REINWATC 
A EE TAE ARI ined. ew. OwlSPerch „д be =» $ П rd E Mot 3: NTAL PONE. 75 ^ 1 EDWATCH 
Е z Grovelofy паз (lois Askelios a Y Tug Á бф . Neto BS MOUNE INS Nets m. 
Ме тк MOSSWOOD Nu 5 5 ye A SILVER | 7. z а 077, Cw ghe 7-4 SEVENTH 
К Mossmantle коор С SN. YS Ace) Woop | ok m Lakeside m rl Harbor A 
xen її ТУТТА T. i Wir , Arcu a 5 EN ‘Thaliost i Z N Ч р 22 БР WHITEPINE p M ot 
SpadowlloTA ` | àl | | || j N THE Riverwee pa gaan Daskaran OWN; о =O А i - E FOREST - Ding 
Е З EA SUA | 715N iWolf's Paw. RIVERWOOD f H ; AN 7 п Á [ y REKKENWOOD (e) : ү j 
P ў 54713 6 B® THE АХ Fairhaven YY Wrogar „МӨ у | я Ай, гоп D . na. 
Shaejl'oralyndaryfs ) DJ m A 4 3 еа | ER uo Кеаіеа 73 кее NG b L 7 A | Dore SSN 
e $ REACH EO IWOLEWOOD / S Z P. AuxylgardD ni MA Cas wy | те e рЫ Ns 
The Twilight THE ў 4 У DUE 1 T Danthaven e ин |^ «3 NIGHTWOOD 4 \, 5 эе s f us LHAZAAR 
T RD z ага J ET IO GP Ө Lm ERN , S SHADOWMOUNT. \ Z Fort ; dre 4 ~ 
а ‘TOWERING T їл A Р a rihronchol N DOWMC E RE Е 12а 
W ia Шил ^ | sm Na caso Жош + Eo PRINGIPALITIE 
(07070) e f Ge 2 iy уске DN. 2 а  Frostifiar | | 
ч n I т Athadra | зч | LA 1 
, D 29 * 


ELDRITCH® 
GROVES 


THES DEEP WOOD 
"due 


» 


<n Noldrunthron 


Traelyn {2 
j BURNT: 
Woop 


Cliff's End 


SIRAAGUORN 
Meus 


x ^ ~ 
мо 


~~ Bonardé «2 Ж 
E- NEN УГ, 


ЕМРЕ; 
ISLE. 


И 


» Кге 


тт” 
2m “wage A ex OPLAINS wee A 
= 6 2 = ЦЬ? NC Мв ЕМІ АМО a | 2 разв < " 
2. ~ Д Ae Light л, 5 Naher уйсу U dNLI : ; ese 
SIC CET ЙИН: сул 2 | э, j j à AX WOMIT 57 § HARROW- MN CT ings Pe com . Н ы p 
Si Glumtown: A ; tid dia 775 \ : +1 A N x 
ARATE WSN АЛУ Г N 3) CROWNS о у, 
DROALZ 
PIN L VAA 


THE l 


у 
WATCHING 
Woop 


WHITEHORN 
Woop 


e 


2 fitt (GREENHA 
| 


BALINORS 
SORROW 


E ж” 


> 


Manta п Kol” a E THE Adder Duskwin i 
З Galethspyre © BEAR'S i p on Bay lanholdy 
Bay g ‘ ГЕ WOOD g euis, coo а 
г ЧЕ SKYRAKER 7 Kr re 28 Sterngate ate] vA "* 
| k FOREST. > = v. — Pm -= Е, “уа К l ms DraconwWarcu 
Keep GS А Gha, Те Gathering & Shaelas 3 du f f А 
( “2, Stone 8 tarhaunt Reconsider, T 


S ў, ; Eo A > а, : Rug e 
° í Revi ARGC 
К 


KING'S 
EOREST. 


Firstslower 


Hilt 
Кер 


латах) O Oskilor; 


DAGGER 


Woop 
оге 
Keep 


Zilspary 
;Irolanport 


c gihurimbar. 


ө 
4 


pan 


THE SHIMMERWOOD,FOREST. 


' 


Draal 


| Thurim 
Bay 


Glamer 
Bay 


Straits of Shargon 


s; N М ДУ 


[Р | 


Zolanberg. 
riston 


») атм GET Nur ай A ». 
Dye ү - | «2 CLASTPOINT 
0 sens. are T LORGHALANSO® ane 
PACD R A Зр mold " 
\ TA p^ N | 
— Ao а OR 57—506 BAS wb EX 4 ins ` 


Zephyr Keep @lanhold 


NS) Hakaitorvhak 


Taer Elladorn 


г ;  DREADWOOD 4 T ) 
COSE) MERE j ey HE | 
BLADE DESERT [ ISLE HAMMER 7 


У Making ү 


B Grass 
JPLATEAU 


BARRAN 
JUNGLE 


D ‹ Taer Shantara * , 
О Taer Valior cA S 


е A Pitchwalll Р 


—Shivairn s 


Tiraleth 
[с] 


mt 


Tyrentore QWhitehearth — 
m uM pm 
M 23. 


Kasserine 
Jal Paeridorf) 


ФУ Tacr Valaestas 


Seaside 


Barren 
Warden Ё Кеер 
4 О 


j al'tash 
25. 


< Tey 
Site 


THE 
KHRAAL) 


The 


oe Dragonreach 


GUUN 
O Wyxernskull | 


R'AVAR'ORIOTH 
(DHE JUNGLE 
OF SCIMITARS) 


Bay of 


THAL 
ELEDAR 


ÉEBERRON 


House Sivis presents | "M Ў 


A True and Accurate 


Map of its Seas and 


E» ^ М\ Continents 
Bitter Sea ^N NN S J 2 


RA : $ 
» х 2 


Darren 5ea nd _ | бй. / KXEIORVATRIEC. 


ti 


WESS - LT EBERT tile 


p Кя А 
GNI КАА 
7, ` 
PR We c S 
DI NE ge ` 
4 т 
> PATS 
M SN 


| 
| 
E / i 2 wD ч Еа | y | y | 
3 ; 7, , * os Ууу 

SAS X 3 | | 
| s "ES | | 
| . | 
Dt | А | 

| | e 
| | + AEQ уой ЧЫ A vl 1 (s d ^ | 

: 9 is ) | 

2 ‚ | 
{ 
і 


| uc TN ee p с Í > Ы | 
i ! ji 3 Е vd i à ` 
n IAL f \ Note Sea of Rage 
M ae €: «COL iA i у { ; а Ve СК TN Уф Ў á | 
| Se T Le Y | х | s Me | 


{ 
} 
{ 


у Cm . 4 
с 1 ^ d ` 
M ^ у. ү «| 
SANTEE N X Us 
М bi: lait 
Y MN АА 


b WE ON AR % CON 


АУА V 
" 


А 
му 


=, 


: A ect 
Ў 


x 


ме 


Dak Sea | : N x . | Sea of Lost Souls 


Ісепїауу Sea.» 
=o? 


3 


SEVIER GE 


630C7254000001 ТМ & ©2019 Wizards of the Coast LLC. Cartography by Lee Moyer DUNGEONS GG DRAGONS® 


Whether aboard an airship or a train car, embark 
on thrilling adventures shrouded in intrigue! 
Discover secrets buried by years of devastating 
war, in which magic-fueled weapons threatened an 


entire continent. 


In the post-war world, magic pervades everyday 
life, and people of all sorts flock to Sharn, a city of 
wonders where skyscrapers pierce the clouds. 
Will you find your fortune on mean city streets or 
scouring haunted battlefields? Will you throw in 
your lot with the mighty dragonmarked houses? 
Will you seek truth as a newspaper reporter, a 
university researcher, or a government spy? Or will 
you forge a destiny that defies the scars of war? 


This book provides tools that both players and 
Dungeon Masters need to explore the world of 
Eberron, including the artificer character class—a 
master of magical invention—and monsters birthed 
by ancient warmongering forces. Will Eberron 
enter a prosperous new age or will the shadow of 
war descend once again? 


For use with the fifth edition 
Player's Handbook", Monster Manual", 
and Dungeon Master's Guide® 


Q 
ӧс 


DuncEonsanDDRAGONS.COM 


[5 S 


ISBN 978-0-7869-6689-9 


9 780786 966899 


Sug. Retail: US $49.95 CAN $69.95 
Printed in USA C72540000 


5 4 9 9 5» 


| 


EAN 


