Bes) 
ICEWIND DALE 


RIME OF THE FROSTMAIDEN™ 


m 


a 
IFeelithe\colditouch of death inthis adventure saf 4 
ferrin 


worldis greatest roleplayingigame 


ICEWIND DALE 


RIME OF THE FROSTMAIDEN’ 


CREDITS 


Story Creator & Lead Writer: Christopher Perkins 

Writing Team: Stacey Allan, Bill Benham, H.H. Carlan, Celeste 
Conowitch, Dan Dillon, Will Doyle, Mikayla Ebel, Anne 
Gregersen, Chad Quandt, Morrigan Robbins, Ashley Warren 


Rules Development: Jeremy Crawford, Dan Dillon, Ben Petrisor, 


Taymoor Rehman 

World Building: John Francis Daley, Crystal Frasier, Jonathan 
Goldstein, Ed Greenwood, Amanda Hamon, Adam Lee, 
Ari Levitch, Mike Mearls, Christopher Perkins, Jessica Price, 
R.A. Salvatore, Kate Welch, Shawn Wood 

Editor: Kim Mohan 


Art Director: Kate Irwin 

Senior Graphic Designer: Trish Yochum 

Graphic Designer: Trystan Falcone 

Cover Illustrator lydro74, Tyler Jacobson 

Interior Illustrators: Mark Behm, Eric Belisle, Zoltan Boros, 
Christopher Burdett, Paul Scott Canavan, Sidharth 
Chaturvedi, Jedd Chevrier, David René Christensen, 
CoupleOfkooks, Nikki Dawes, Axel Defois, Olga Drebas, 
Jesper Ejsing, Jason A. Engle, Caroline Gariba, Lars Grant- 


West, Leesha Hannigan, Sam Keiser, Julian Kok, Olly Lawson, 


Titus Lunter, Andrew Mar, Marcela Medeiros, Robson 
Michel, Scott Murphy, Irina Nordsol, Stephen Oakley, Robin 
Olausson, Claudio Pozas, Livia Prima, April Prime, David 
Sladek, Craig J Spearing, Brian Valeza, Svetlin Velinov, 
Richard Whitters, Shawn Wood, Zuzanna Wuzyk 

Cartographers: Stacey Allan, Will Doyle, Mike Schley 

Concept Art Director: Shawn Wood 

Concept Illustrators: Olga Drebas, Titus Lunter, April Prime, 
Chris Rahn, Jenn Ravenna, Richard Whitters, Shawn Wood, 
Kieran Yanner 


ON THE COVER 


Auril the Frostmaiden claims her latest victim in Tyler 
Jacobson’s chillingly macabre cover illustration. On the back, 
an elemental spirit called a chwinga comes out to play. 


620C7867000001 EN 
ISBN: 978-0-7869-6698-1 
First Printing: August 2020 


987654321 


Senior Producer: Dan Tovar 

Producers: Bill Benham, Robert Hawkey, Lea Heleotis 

Project Engineer: Cynda Callaway 

Imaging Technicians: Sven Bolen, Carmen Cheung, Kevin Yee 

Art Administrator: David Gershman 

Prepress Specialist: Jefferson Dunlap 

Franchise & Global Brand Strategy: Nathan Stewart 

Executive Producer: Ray Winninger 

Director of Licensing & Publishing: Liz Schuh 

Licensing Manager: Hilary Ross 

Marketing & Communications: Bart Carroll, Pelham Greene, 
Shauna Narciso, Emi Tanji, Greg Tito, Anna Vo 

Product Marketing Manager: Chris Lindsay 

Brand Manager: Shelly Mazzanoble 

Editorial Assistance: Orion D. Black 


Special Thanks: Holly Barbacovi, Jason Barbacovi, Bianca 
Bickford, Cassidy Borger, Chris Cocks, Tony Craven, Jonathan 
Cruz, Soren Danielson, Jonathan Doran, Eugene Evans, Jay 
Gellerman, Chad Gokey, Andrew Harasymiw, Emily Johnson, 
Omega “Critical Bard” Jones, Ty Koebernick, Erin Kramer, 
Dan LaValby, Randy Lenius, Joshua Mendenhall, Connor 
Miller, Glen Miller, Nick Mitchell, Tim O'Hara, Michele 
Picard, Bob Pursley, Jeff Rebbeck, Bill Rose, David Schwartz, 
Rebecca A. Smith, Jayson Thiry, and the hundreds of play- 
testers who helped make this adventure more fun 


Disclaimer: The windswept tundra of Icewind Dale is the true test of one’s mettle. Here, it's 
survival of the fittest! Don't be fooled by the reindeer with glow-in-the-dark antlers and the 
tasty knucklehead trout (including the friendlier, more northerly Canucklehead variety). 
Icewind Dale is the frostbitten end of the world. You can't spell dice without ice, my friend, 
and the Frostmaiden is not some demon prince, vampire, lich, beholder crime lord, or arch: 
devil. She's a god—and a cold-hearted one at that. 


ICEWIND DALI 


ON THE ALT-COVER 


Hydro74 shows the doom of Ten-Towns: Auril the Frostmaiden, 
the god of winter's wrath. Adorning the back cover is the Frost- 
maiden’s holy symbol. 


Ge 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, the dragon ampersand, Player's Handbook, Monster Manuol, Dungeon Master's Guide, all other Wizards of the Coast product 
names, and their respective logos are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast in the USA and other countries. All characters and their distinctive likenesses are property of Wizards of the 
Coast. The materials described in this statement are protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America and around the world under international intellectual prop- 
erty treaties. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the materials contained herein or artwork contained herein is prohibited without the express written permission of Wizards of 
the Coast 


WA 98057-0707, USA. Manufactured by Hasbro SA, Rue Emile-Boéchat 31, 2800 Delémont, CH. 


Printed in the USA. ©2020 Wizards of th LLC, PO Box 707, Rente 
H K 


T r Jey Park, 


CONTENTS 


Welcome to the Far North 
‘About This Book... 
‘Adventure Summar, 
Running the Adventure. 
Character Creation. 


Chapter 5: Auril’s Abode 
Running This Chanter. 
Sea of Moving Ice 
Island of Solstice... 
Grimskalle. 
Tests of the Frostmaiden Scorecard . 208 
‘Wrapping Up.. 


Race to.the Glacier, 
Opening the Way 
Into the Caves of Hunge: 
Wrapping Up. 


‘Chapter 7: Doom of Ythryn 
Running This Chante 
Necropolis of Ythry 
Dealing with the Arcane 


Lake Monster, 
Bryn Shande: 

Foaming Mugs.. 
Caer-Dineval 
Black Swords 


Caer-Konig Brotherhood. 
The Unseen lAuril’s Wrath... 

Dougan’s Hole .. Summoning the Tarrasau 
Holed Up... 


Epilogue 
What Secrets Remain 
= |Summerts Coming, 
7 (Winter Everlasting. 


Fasthaven. 
Toil and Trouble 
Town Hall Capers 

Good Mead... 
The Mead Must Flow 

Lonelywood .. 


The White Moose. 
argos. OG 
Mountain Climt "gy (App. C: Creatures. 
i 3 [Arcane Brotherhood. 
Termalaine 3 
Avarice. 


A Beautiful Mine 
era Dzaan's Simulacrum. 


Nass Lantomir's Ghost.. 
Vellynne Harnell, 
Auribthe Erostmaiden 
First Form. 


[Chanter 2: Icewind Dale 
Running This Chante; 
Wilderness Encounters. 
[Places of Interest 
Angaiuk’s Bell. 
Black Cabin... 
(Cackling Chasm... 
Cave of the Berserkers .. 
Dark Duchess... 


Brain ina Jar, 
Chardalvn Berserker 
‘Chardalvn Dragon... 
iChwinga. 
Coldlight Walker. 


Karkolohle 
Lost Spire of Nether! 
Reghed Tribe Camp 
Revel's End... 
ISkytower Shelter 
iWyrmdoom Crag... 


(Chapter 3: Sunblight 
Running This Chaptes 
Finding the Fortress.. 
Xardorok's Fortres: 
Fortress Fallout... 
Chanter 4: Destructio: 
[Running This Chapter.. 
Return to Ten-Towns 


Duergar Hammeres 
Dycsrgar Mind Master 
Xardorok Sunbligh: 

Fox... 

Frost Druid. 

Erost Giant Skeleton, 

Gnoll Vampire, 


Dragan Scourge aq Knucklehead Trou 
Showdow: 190 Kohl me 
Vellynne's Quest. Taq [cewind Kobold.. 


Icewind Kobold Zombie 
Kobold Vampire Spawn.. 


Living Bigby’s Hand 
Living Blade of Disaster 
Living Demiplane... 


Galvan Magen. 
Hypnos Magen... 
Mimi 
Snitting Mimic. 
Mind Flayers. 
(Gnome Ceremorph.. 
Gnome Squidling 
Mountain Goat... 
Reshed Nomads... 
Gunvald Halraggso: 
Jarund Elkhardt... 
Biornhild Solvigsdotti 
Isarn Kronenstrom .. 
Reindeer... 
Seal 
Snow Golem. 
‘Snowy Owlbeai 
Sperm Whale... 
‘Tomb Tapper, 
\Verbeeg . 
Verbees Longstrider 
Verheeg Marauder. 


The following D&D books provided text 

and inspiration: 

Earroll, Bart and others. Lost Laboratory oj} 
Kwalish. 2018. 

Greenwood, Ed and lim Beach. Pages frorn 
the Mages, 1995, 

James, Brian R. and Ed Greenwood, The 
Grand History of the Realms. 2007. 

Perkins, Christopher. Storm King’s 
Thunder, 2016. 

Perkins, Christopher, Will Doyle, and Steva 
Winter. Tomb of Annihilation, 2017. 

Perkins, Christopher and others. Water- 
deep: Dungeon of the Mad Mage. 2018, 

Salvatore, R.A., JeHtrey Ludwig, James Wy] 
att, and Matthew Sernett. Legacy of the 
Crystal Shard. 2013. 

Slade with Jim Butler. Netheril: Empire of 
Magic, 1996, 


WELCOME TO THE FAR NORTH 


ORTH OF THE SPINE OF THE WORLD AND 

west of the towering Reghed Glacier is a 

frigid expanse few dare to explore, let alone 

inhabit. This icy land of windswept tundra 

recently became locked in a perpetual, dark 
winter without reprieve. Auril the Frostmaiden, the di- 
vine embodiment of winter's fury, has withdrawn to this 
cold corner of the world to live among mortals. Further, 
she has cast a terrible spell over Icewind Dale, to the 
detriment of most of its denizens. 

Each night before midnight, Auril takes to the sky 
on the back of a white roc and weaves her spell, which 
manifests as a shimmering curtain of light—a beautiful 
aurora that illuminates the night sky and fades before 
dawn. This powerful magic prevents the next day's 
sun from rising above the horizon, turning midday into 
twilight and trapping Icewind Dale in winter's dark em- 
brace, with no sunlight or warmth to melt the snow and 
ice. Each casting of the spell leaves the Frostmaiden 
weakened, with just enough divine power left to barri- 
cade the mountain pass with blizzards and churn the 
Sea of Moving Ice with blistering winds. Such measures 
discourage travelers from approaching or leaving Ice- 
wind Dale, further isolating the region. Icewind Dale 
has thus been trapped in a different reality from the 
rest of the world, for though the sun never rises over the 
dale, it continues to rise everywhere else. 

The people of Icewind Dale know Auril’s wrath when 
they feel it, and they have a name for the unending win- 
ter she has inflicted on them. They call it the Everlasting 
Rime. No one understands why the Frostmaiden has im- 
posed her will in this way or why the other gods refuse 
to challenge her. This prolonged winter, which has gone 
on for more than two years, threatens to doom not just 
the flickering lights of civilization known as Ten-Towns 
but also the indigenous flora and fauna that need sun- 
light and the change of seasons to survive. 

Not all creatures are discouraged by what has trans- 
pired north of the Spine of the World, The long nights 
and sunless days are a blessing to Xardorok Sunblight, 
a duergar who longs to carve out a domain for himself 
on the surface and enslave the people of Ten-Towns in 
the process. Already, he has taken advantage of Auril's 
magic and raised a fortress amid the dark shadows of 
the mountains. From here, his underlings strike out 
across the tundra in search of chardalyn—a crystalline 
substance known to exist only in Icewind Dale. Once he 


gathers enough of it, Xardorok plans to construct a char- 
dalyn dragon and unleash it upon Ten-Towns, 

Despite Auril’s blizzards and other deterrents, visitors 
still come and go. Among the recent arrivals are four 
wizards of the Arcane Brotherhood, a powerful society 
of spellcasters based in Luskan. They've come chasing 
rumors of a lost city buried under the Reghed Glacier—a 
fragment of the long-gone Empire of Netheril, whose 
wizards wielded magic that terrified the gods. Netherese 
magic has a way of attracting power-hungry wizards, as 
members of the Arcane Brotherhood often are. The cit- 
ies of Netheril floated among the clouds, making them 
almost impervious to assault for centuries. Then, nearly 
two thousand years ago, this floating city crashed during 
the fall of the empire, and no one has found or explored 
it since. It is, arguably, Icewind Dale's greatest secret—a 
necropolis of Netherese wizards and the magic they left 
behind. What survived the crash is anyone's guess, but 
we're about to find out! 


ABOUT THIS BOOK 


Icewind Dale: Rime of the Frostmaiden is a DUNGEONS 
& DRAGONS adventure optimized for four to six charac- 
ters. The player characters are the heroes of the story; 
this book describes the villains and monsters the heroes 
must overcome and the locations they must explore to 
bring the adventure to a successful conclusion, 

This book presents Icewind Dale as a self-contained 
campaign setting in which you can base adventures 
of your own. All pertinent details about the setting are 
covered here, with room left to add new locations and 
villains of your own design. 


WELCOME TO THE FAR NORTH 


ADVENTURE SUMMARY 


A duergar despot forging a dragon out of chardalyn. A 
lost city of magic entombed in a glacier. A frozen wilder- 
ness trapped in Auril’s grip. These three plot elements, 
woven together, form this adventure. 


DuERGAR DESPOT 

The Reghed nomads who stalk the tundra and the 
Ten-Towners who keep civilization alive are so con- 
cerned with day-to-day survival that they typically pay 
little heed to the evil forces gathering on the fringes of 
Icewind Dale. Adventurers are much better equipped to 
deal with such threats, particularly in the dead of winter. 

One recent arrival in the area is Xardorok Sunblight, a 
duergar warlock formerly of the Underdark. His patron, 
Deep Duerra, has urged Xardorok to fulfill his destiny 
and become the first duergar to rule a kingdom on the 
surface. Icewind Dale is cold, dark, and heartlessly 
cruel—the perfect realm for Xardorok to claim as des- 
pot. Unbeknownst to Xardorok, however, it is not Deep 
Duerra guiding his actions but the archdevil Asmodeus 
in the guise of Deep Duerra. In Xardorok, the Lord of 
the Nine Hells has found an eager and petty tyrant. 

To achieve his goal, Xardorok is scouring the land for 
chardalyn, which he is forging into a dragon that he will 
send to destroy Ten-Towns. His sons, Durth and Nildar, 
lead teams of duergar on quests to retrieve more of this 
dark-colored crystal for their grasping, despotic father. 


NETHERESE NECROPOLIS 
The wizards of bygone Netheril wielded magic that 
could reshape the world. They used such magic to raise 
their cities into the sky. The city of Ythryn was one such 
_ = 
CHARDALYN 
More than a hundred years prior to this adventure, a 
wizard named Akar Kessel found an artifact suffused with 
demonic magic called Crenshinibon (better known as the 
Crystal Shard) and used it to erect a great black tower in 
Icewind Dale. When this tower was destroyed, the magic 
used to create it fused with the surrounding ice to form 
what is now known as chardalyn: a nonmagical, crystalline 
substance as strong as metal, though considerably easier 
to work with than steel. In the years since, more deposits 
of chardalyn have been found across Icewind Dale. Like 
the Crystal Shard, these deposits tend to be suffused with 
demonic magic. Prolonged contact with chardalyn that 
has become suffused with demonic magic can warp a 
creature's mind, causing madness that usually fades away 
once the contact is broken. 

Chardalyn is cold to the touch and readily accepts magi- 
cal enchantment, making it an ideal substance for wands, 
staffs, and other magic items. A chardalyn object suffused 
with the magic of the Upper Planes is considered a conse- 
crated object, while a chardalyn object suffused with the 
magic of the Lower Planes is considered a desecrated ob- 
ject; both can be identified as such using a detect evil and 
good spell or similar magic. 

Long before Akar Kessel left his mark on Icewind Dale, 
Netherese wizards created their own chardalyn. Many 
items made from this dark-colored crystal can be found in 
the ruins of ancient Netherese enclaves. 


Å  S 


WELCOME TO THE FAR NORTH 


wonder. It crashed long ago but still exists, buried under 
the Reghed Glacier on the eastern edge of Icewind Dale. 

This frozen necropolis holds the remnants of some 
of the most powerful spellcasters in the history of the 
Realms, including a Netherese demilich. It also contains 
a mythallar (described in appendix D), a magic item that 
can raise an entire city into the air and alter the weather 
in a fifty-mile radius. The characters can use this device 
to counteract Auril’s spell and free Icewind Dale from 
her Everlasting Rime. 

Four members of the Arcane Brotherhood (a cabal of 
wizards who act like Wild West gunslingers) have come 
to Icewind Dale in search of the lost Netherese enclave, 
hoping to unearth its secrets. Whether the characters 
choose to aid or oppose these wizards is up to them, but 
one thing is certain: the Arcane Brotherhood won't let a 
band of adventurers stand between them and the magic 
that waits to be found in the doomed, sepulchral ruin. 


AURIL’S EVERLASTING RIME 

Auril's decision to live among mortals is explained in 
appendix C. What the characters discover in the course 
of the adventure is that she's unhappy and craves isola- 
tion. Her nightly quest to hold the sun at bay stems from 
a need to preserve the beauty of things by freezing them. 
There is no way to reason with a being so bereft of com- 
passion as Auril, but in her weakened state, she can be 
defeated or forced to reckon with her cruel indifference 
toward life. 

Anyone who hopes to reach the Netherese city buried 
in the ice must first visit Auril's island and obtain The 
Codicil of White, a book compiled by the Frostmaiden’s 
most ardent followers. The tome contains a magical 
incantation written as a poem. This poem has the power 
to crack the Reghed Glacier, opening a path from the 
surface to the buried Netherese city of Ythryn. 


OTHER QUESTS 

Chapters 1 and 2 are structured around quests, some 
of which touch on the major story arcs of the adven- 
ture while others merely show off other cool aspects of 
the setting. 

In chapter 1, the adventurers undertake quests that 
lead them from one Ten-Towns settlement to another. 
Each town has a problem, and the adventurers get re- 
wards for helping. 

In chapter 2, rumors spur the adventurers to leave the 
cold comfort of Ten-Towns and explore the fringes of 
Icewind Dale, where dangers dwell. 


RUNNING THE ADVENTURE 


To run the adventure, you need the fifth edition core 
rulebooks (Player's Handbook, Dungeon Master's 
Guide, and Monster Manual). 


Text that appears in a box like this is meant to be read 
aloud or paraphrased for the players when their charac- 
ters first arrive at a location or under a specific circum- 
stance, as described in the text. 


The Monster Manual contains stat blocks for most of the 
creatures encountered in this adventure. The rest can 
be found in appendix C. 

When a creature’s name appears in bold type, that’s 
a visual cue pointing you to its stat block as a way of 
saying, “Hey, DM, you better get this creature's stat 
block ready. You're going to need it.” If the stat block 
appears in appendix C of this adventure, the text tells 
you so; otherwise, you can find the stat block in the Mon- 
ster Manual. 

Spells and equipment mentioned in the adventure are 
described in the Player's Handbook. Magic items are 
described in the Dungeon Master's Guide, unless the 
adventure’s text direct you to an item's description in 
appendix D. 


USING THE MAPS 


This book contains a number of interior maps and a 
fold-out, double-sided poster map. These elements are 
further described below. 


INTERIOR MAPS 

Maps that appear in this book are for the DM’s eyes 
only. As the characters explore locations on a given map, 
you can redraw portions of the map on graph paper, a 
wet-erase mat, or other surface to help your players vi- 
sualize locations that might have unusual shapes or fea- 
tures. Your hand-drawn maps need not be faithful to the 
originals, and you can alter a map’s features as you see 
fit. Nor do your maps need to be painstakingly rendered. 


FRAG 
ARTIFACT AR 


You can omit details that are not readily visible (such as 
secret doors and other hidden features) until the charac- 
ters are able to detect and interact with them. 

Slopes and Staircases. On all interior maps, an ar- 
row on a slope or staircase always points in the ascend- 
ing direction. 


PosTER MAP 

The double-sided poster map is meant to be shared with 
the players. One side of the poster map shows Icewind 
Dale, including Ten-Towns and other sites and features 
in the region that are common knowledge. The reverse 
side has player-friendly maps of the ten settlements that 
comprise Ten-Towns, with prominent locations called 
out in each town for the players’ benefit. 


THE FORGOTTEN REALMS 


The world of the Forgotten Realms is one of high fan- 
tasy, populated by elves, dwarves, halflings, humans, 
and other folk. In the Realms, knights dare to seek out 
the crypts of the fallen dwarf kings of Delzoun, looking 
for glory and treasure. Rogues prowl the dark alleyways 
of teeming cities such as Neverwinter and Baldur's Gate. 
Clerics wield mace and spell in the service of their gods, 
questing against the terrifying powers that threaten the 
land. Wizards plunder the ruins of the fallen Netherese 
empire, delving into secrets too dark for the light of day. 
Bards sing of kings, queens, tyrants, and heroes who 
died long ago. 


WELCOME TO THE FAR NORTH 


On the roads and rivers of the Realms travel minstrels 
and peddlers, merchants and guards, soldiers and sail- 
ors. Steel-hearted adventurers from backcountry farm- 
steads and sleepy villages follow tales that take them 
to strange, glorious, faraway places. Good maps and 
clear trails can carry even an inexperienced youth with 
dreams of glory far across the world, but these paths are 
never safe. Fell magic and deadly monsters are among 
the perils one faces when traveling in the Realms. Even 
farms and freeholds within a day's walk of a city can fall 
prey to monsters, and no place is safe from the sudden 
wrath of a dragon. 

Icewind Dale, featured in this adventure, is located 
in a region called the Far North, which is dominated 
by the Spine of the World, a range of skyscraping, 
snow-covered peaks. These extend toward the Sword 
Coast, which forms the western edge of the great conti- 
nent of Faerûn and stretches southward for thousands 
of miles. Ships and roads lead southbound travelers to a 
number of bustling ports along the Sword Coast, includ- 
ing the following strongholds of civilization: 


Luskan, the City of Sails, is home to pirates as well as 
the Hosttower of the Arcane (headquarters of the Ar- 
cane Brotherhood, which is described in appendix C). 
Neverwinter, the City of Skilled Hands, is slowly being 
rebuilt after it was nearly destroyed by the eruption of 
Mount Hotenow. 

Waterdeep, the City of Splendors, is a seaside metrop- 
olis where people from all walks of life gather behind 
high walls. 


ADVENTURE FLOW 


The accompanying adventure flowchart visualizes the 
narrative flow of the adventure, which includes chapters 
that focus on places of interest (chapters 1 and 2) and 
chapters that focus on plot (chapters 3 through 7). 

Chapter 1 introduces quests that prompt the char- 
acters to explore Ten-Towns, with an additional quest 
waiting for them in each town they visit. These quests 
take no more than one or two game sessions each 
to complete. 

Chapter 2 describes several interesting locations 
on the fringes of Icewind Dale, including some future 
threats to Ten-Towns. The characters are drawn to these 
locations by rumors or quests. These sites are ancillary 
to the main story but help bring the harsh land of Ice- 
wind Dale to life. 

The adventure kicks off in earnest with chapter 3, as 
the characters try to beard Xardorok Sunblight in his 
lair. Chapter 3 describes the duergar’s fortress. Unfor- 
tunately, the characters arrive too late to stop him from 
unleashing a dragon made of chardalyn. The characters 
face a difficult choice: continue storming Xardorok’s 
stronghold or return to Ten-Towns to fight the dragon. 

The battle with Xardorok’s dragon forms the crux of 
chapter 4. Since the dragon is a mobile threat, the char- 
acters might have to face it more than once as it ravages 
one settlement after another. The Ten-Towners have no 
hope of defeating the dragon on their own, so here’s a 
chance for the characters to become true heroes of Ice- 
wind Dale. As they battle the dragon, the characters are 


WELCOME TO THE FAR NORTH 


aided by a necromancer named Vellynne Harpell, who. 
helps steer them toward the discovery of a lost Neth- 
erese enclave entombed in the Reghed Glacier. 

In chapter 5, Vellynne asks the characters to accom- 
pany her to Auril’s island in the Sea of Moving Ice to 
recover two items: an orb stolen by a rival and a book 
titled The Codicil of White. The orb has useful magical 
properties, while the book contains a magical poem that 
can create a passage through the Reghed Glacier. 

Chapter 6 describes the Caves of Hunger, a network 
of ice tunnels and caves within the Reghed Glacier 
itself. The characters must navigate these treacherous 
passageways to reach the frozen Netherese city, which 
is described in chapter 7. The party’s exploration is in- 
terrupted by an albino tiefling villain who wants all the 
city’s magical secrets for herself. 


DISSECTING THE ADVENTURE 


You can dissect this adventure and use pieces of it 
rather than the whole thing. Nothing in this adventure is 
too sacred to tamper with and repurpose to serve your 
own needs, 

Most of the locations described in this book can be 
used as stand-alone adventure sites. With a little effort 
and a few name changes, you can take these adventure 
locations out of Icewind Dale and transplant them into 
other campaign worlds, including your own. 

Take the duergar fortress in chapter 3, for example. 
You could set the fortress in the Yatil Mountains of 
Oerth, the Ironroot Mountains of Khorvaire, the Flotket 
Alps of Wildemount, or some other mountain range 
while preserving the plot elements. You can also strip 
out the story about an evil duergar building a dragon 
construct and have the duergar doing something else 
instead. Alternatively, you could jettison everything but 
the map of the fortress, populating it with new creatures 
that better suit your campaign. Sometimes a good map 
is all a DM needs! 


RUNNING NPC Party MEMBERS 


Nonplayer characters (NPCs) are normally controlled 
by the DM. However, there are times in this adventure 
when a friendly NPC might join the party for one or 
more game sessions. If roleplaying that NPC becomes a 
burden to you, see if one of your players is willing to run 
the NPC asa secondary character. 


ADVENTURE FLOWCHART 


CHAPTER l: TEN-TOWNS 
For Ist- to 4th-level characters 


Adventure quests prompt our intrepid heroes to visit the 
many settlements of Ten-Towns and lend a helping hand. 


CHAPTER 2: ICEWIND DALE 
For characters of 4th level and higher 


Tall tales lead the characters to adventure locations 
on the fringes of Icewind Dale. 


CHAPTER 3; SUNBLIGHT 
For characters of 4th or 5th level 
A duergar tyrant is building a chardalyn dragon to 
destroy Ten-Towns. The characters learn of 
this plot and try to thwart it. 


CHAPTER 4; DESTRUCTION’S LIGHT 
For 6th-level characters 
After Xardorok Sunblight unleashes his dragon, the 
characters must stop it before it destroys Ten-Towns. 


CHAPTER 5; AURIL'S ABODE 
For 7th-level characters 
Characters travel to the frigid island of 
Solstice in search of a lost orb, a book, and 
perhaps the Frostmaiden herself. 


CHAPTER 6; Caves OF HUNGER 
For 8th-level characters 
Armed with the “Rime of the Frostmaiden,” 
the characters crack open the Reghed Glacier, 
unsealing a dungeon of ice. 


WELCOME TO THE FAR NORTH 


THE veti oF Icewind DALE LIKE TO STALK 
J THEIR PREY IN RAGING BLIZZARDS. 


AS ° 


If a player agrees to take control of a friendly NPC, 
provide that player with a copy of the NPC's stat block, 
along with any roleplaying notes you deem important, 
and warn the player that you might retake custody of the 
NPC at some future point. As the adventure progresses, 
it might become apparent that the player is unable to 
manage the NPC effectively, or you might need more 
influence over the NPC's actions and behavior. Either 
scenario justifies you retaking control of the NPC. 


WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 


The following rules come into play as the characters 
explore Ten-Towns and embark on adventures to the icy, 
windy, hellishly cold reaches of Icewind Dale. 


AVALANCHES 
The following rules can be used for rockslides as well as 
avalanches. 

An avalanche is a mass of snow and debris falling 
rapidly down a mountainside. A typical avalanche is 300 
feet wide, 150 feet long, and 30 feet thick. Creatures 
in the path of an avalanche can avoid it or escape it if 
they're close to its edge, but outrunning one is almost 
impossible. 

When an avalanche occurs, all nearby creatures must 
roll initiative. Twice each round, on initiative counts 10 
and 0, the avalanche travels 300 feet until it can travel 
no more. When an avalanche moves, any creature in its 
space moves along with it and falls prone, and the crea- 
ture must make a DC 15 Strength saving throw, taking 


WELCOME TO THE FAR NORTH 


1d10 bludgeoning damage on a failed save, or half as 
much damage on a successful one. 

When an avalanche stops, the snow settles and buries 
creatures in it. A creature buried in this way is blinded 
and restrained and has total cover. The creature gains 
one level of exhaustion for every 5 minutes it spends 
buried in the snow. It can try to dig itself free as an ac- 
tion, breaking the surface and ending the blinded and 
restrained conditions on itself with a successful DC 
15 Strength (Athletics) check. A creature that fails this 
check three times can't attempt to dig itself out again. 

Acreature that is not restrained or incapacitated can 
spend 1 minute freeing another creature buried in the 
snow. Once free, that creature is no longer blinded or 
restrained by the avalanche. 


BLIZZARDS 

The blizzards that ravage Icewind Dale and harry trav- 
elers on the mountain pass are reflections of Auril’s 
self-imposed isolation. A blizzard in Icewind Dale typi- 
cally lasts 2d4 hours, and whenever the characters are 
caught in one, the following rules apply until it ends. 

A blizzard's howling wind limits hearing to a range of 
100 feet and imposes disadvantage on ranged weapon 
attack rolls. It also imposes disadvantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing. The wind ex- 
tinguishes open flames, disperses fog, erases tracks in 
the snow, and makes flying by nonmagical means nearly 
impossible. A creature falls at the end of its turn if it is 
flying by nonmagical means and can't hover. 


Visibility in a blizzard is reduced to 30 feet. Creatures 
without goggles or other eye protection have disadvan- 
tage on Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on sight 
due to blowing snow. 

Any creature that is concentrating on a spell in a 
blizzard must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving 
throw at the end of its turn or lose its concentration on 
the spell unless the creature is sheltered against the ele- 
ments (for example, in an igloo). 

Veering Off Course. It’s easy to veer off course while 
traveling through a blizzard, and it's also easy for party 
members to become separated from one another, which 
is why the wisest course of action is to stay put and wait 
for the blizzard to pass. 

If the characters travel during a blizzard, have the 
players designate one party member as the navigator. 
At the end of each hour of travel through the blizzard, 
the DM makes a DC 15 Wisdom (Survival) check on 
behalf of the navigator. On a successful check, the party 
stays on course. On a failed check, the party wanders 
off course, putting its members no closer to their des- 
tination than they were at the start of that hour. If the 
check fails by 5 or more and the party members aren't 
tied together, one randomly determined party member 
becomes lost in the blizzard and separated from the 
others. If the group tries to reunite with its missing 
member, have the party members (including the missing 
one) make a DC 15 Wisdom (Survival) group check at 
the end of each hour. If this group check succeeds, the 
missing party member is found, but no progress is made 
toward reaching the group's intended destination that 
hour. The group check can be repeated after each hour 
spent searching for the missing party member. 


EXTREME COLD 
Rules for extreme cold appear in the Dungeon Master's 
Guide but are repeated here for your convenience. 

A creature exposed to the cold must succeed on a DC 
10 Constitution saving throw at the end of each hour or 
gain one level of exhaustion, Creatures with resistance 
or immunity to cold damage automatically succeed on 
the saving throw, as do creatures wearing cold weather 
clothing (thick coats, gloves, and the like) and creatures 
naturally adapted to cold climates, such as reindeer and 
snowy owlbears, 

Temperatures. During Auril’s everlasting winter, the 
average temperature in Icewind Dale is -49 degrees 
Fahrenheit (-45 degrees Celsius). Wind chill can lower 
these temperatures by as much as 80 degrees. 


FISHING FOR KNUCKLEHEAD TROUT 
To fish for knucklehead trout on the lakes of Icewind 
Dale, a character needs fishing tackle and a rowboat. 
The former costs 4 gp (per the Player's Handbook), 
while the latter can be bought for 50 gp or rented for 2 
gp per day. A character can fish on the ice instead of a 
boat, in which case a saw or similar tool is needed to cut 
a fishing hole through the ice. 

At the end of each hour spent fishing on the lake, 
the character must make a DC 15 Wisdom (Survival) 
check. A failed check indicates no fish is caught during 
that hour. If the check succeeds, the character hooks a 
Knucklehead trout (see appendix C) and must make 


a Strength (Athletics) check contested by the fish's 
Strength check to pull it out of the water, The trout has 
advantage on its check. If the character fails the check, 
the trout escapes. A character who fails the check by 

5 or more must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity saving 
throw or be pulled into the frigid water (see “Frigid Wa- 
ter” below). A character who is pulled out of the water 
is dripping wet and continues to suffer the effects of the 
frigid water until the wet clothes are taken off and re- 
placed with dry ones. 


FriciD WATER 
Rules for frigid water appear in the Dungeon Master's 
Guide but are repeated here for your convenience. 

A creature can be immersed in frigid water for a num- 
ber of minutes equal to its Constitution score before 
suffering any ill effects. Each additional minute spent in 
frigid water requires the creature to succeed on a DC 
10 Constitution saving throw or gain one level of ex- 
haustion. Creatures with resistance or immunity to cold 
damage automatically succeed on the saving throw, as 
do creatures that are naturally adapted to living in ice- 
cold water, 


ILLUMINATION 

So long as the Everlasting Rime lasts, natural light 

in Icewind Dale is never brighter than dim. In normal 
(non-blizzard) conditions, twilight extends from 10 a.m. 
to 2 p.m. Icewind Dale is otherwise dark until Auril’s au- 
rora or the full moon appears in the night sky. 


OVERLAND TRAVEL 

The fastest way to travel across the tundra is by dogsled 
(see “Getting Around Ten-Towns,” page 20). But 

dogs are expensive and require food, water, and shelter. 
Unless they have more equipment than they can carry, 
adventurers are better off traveling on foot. 

The speed that characters can travel across Icewind 
Dale’s rough, snowy tundra is given in the Overland 
Travel table. Travel is less time-consuming on the snowy 
roads and trails that connect the settlements of Ten- 
Towns, as discussed in chapter 1. 


OVERLAND TRAVEL 


Method of Travel Distance per Hour 
Dogsled 1 mile 

On foot, with snowshoes 1/2 mile 

On foot, without snowshoes 1/4 mile - 


MOUNTAIN TRAVEL 

Navigating the Spine of the World or the slopes of 
Kelvin’s Cairn is particularly arduous because of the 
unforgiving mountain terrain, At the end of each hour, 
the character or NPC leading the expedition must make 
a DC 15 Wisdom (Survival) check. On a successful 
check, the hour's journey was not hindered by weather 
or terrain. On a failed check, the party comes to an im- 
passe and must backtrack, which costs an extra hour 
of travel. If the check fails by 5 or more, the party is 
caught in an avalanche as it backtracks. The avalanche 
starts 2d6 x 100 feet above the characters (see “Ava- 
lanches,” page 10). 


WELCOME TO THE FAR NORTH 


PRONUNCIATIONS 


Name 

Aerix Vokototh 
Angajuk 

Arn Akannathi 
Arveiaturace 

Auril 

Bjornhild Solvigsdottir 
Caer-Dineval 
Caer-Konig 
Chardalyn 

Chwinga 

Chyzka 

Crannoc Siever 
Dorbulgruf Shalescar 
Dredavex Sinfiz 
Drizzt Do'Urden 
Duergar 

Dzaan 

Grandolpha Muzgardt 
Grimskalle 

Grynsk Berylbore 
Gunvald Halraggson 
Hengar Aesnvaard 
Hethyl Arkorran 
Imdra Arlaggath 
lriolarthas 

Isarr Kronenstrom 
Jarund Elkhardt 
Kapanuk Thuunlakalaga 
Karkolohk 

Krintaas 

Lac Dinneshere 
Macreadus 

Maer Dualdon 
Mjenir 

Naerth Maxildanarr 
Nass Lantomir 
Netheril 

Ogolai Thuunlakalaga 
Oyaminartok 
Reggaryarva 
Scrivensery 

Scython 

Sephek Kaltro 

Söpo 

Tekeli-li 

Vaelish Gant 
Vellynne Harpell 
Vorryn Q'uuol 
Xardorok Sunblight 
Yilsebek Dalambra 
Yselm Bloodfang 
Ythryn 


Pronunciation 

AIR-ix VOH-kuh-toth 
AWN-gah-jook 

ARN ah-kah-NAH-thee 
ar-vay-AH-chur-us 
oh-REEL 

bee-YORN-hild SOAL-vigs-daw-ter 
kair-DIN-eh-vawl 
kair-KOH-nig 
CHAR-dah-lin 
chuh-WING-gah 

CHIZ-kah 

CRAN-ock SEE-ver 
DOR-bull-gruff SHAYL-scar 
DRED-ah-vex SIN-fizz 
DRIZT doh-UR-den 
DEW-ur-gar or DWAIR-gar 
duh-ZAWN 

gran-DOLL-fah MUZZ-gart 
grim-SKAW-lah 

GRINSK BEAR-ilI-bor 
GOON-vald hawl-ROG-sun 
HEN-gar ACE-en-vard 
HETH-ill AR-kor-ann 
IM-draw AR-lah-gath 
ear-ee-oh-LAR-thas 
EYE-sar CROW-nen-strom 
yah-ROOND ELK-hart 
KAH-pah-nook THOON-lock-ah-law-gah 
KAR-koh-loak 

KRIN-tass 

lack DIN-eh-sheer 
mah-KREE-dus 

mair dew-AWL-dun 
meh-YEN-eer 

NAIRTH max-ill-DAN-ar 
NASS LAN-tuh-meer 
NETH-eh-ril 

OH-guh-lye THOON-lock-ah-law-gah 
oh-yaw-meh-NAR-tock 
reh-gar-YAR-vah 
SKRIV-in-scry 

SIGH-thawn 

SEH-fek KAWL+troh 
SAW-poh 

teck-ah-LEE-lee 

VAY-lish GANT 

vuh-LIN har-PELL 

VOR-inn KEW-awl 
ZAR-dor-rock SUN-blight 
Yil-suh-beck duh-LAHM-bruh 
YEE-selm BLUD-fang 
EETH-rin 


WELCOME TO THE FAR NORTH 


Description 
Chieftain’s son and member of the Reghed Tribe of the Wolf 
Awakened sperm whale with a boat strapped to its back 
Chief of the Akannathi goliath tribe of Skytower Shelter 
Ancient white dragon known as the White Wyrm 

Lesser god that embodies winter's endurance and cruelty 
Queen of the Reghed Tribe of the Tiger 

‘Small fishing town on the shore of Lac Dinneshere 
Small fishing town on the shore of Lac Dinneshere 

A dark crystalline substance that can be forged 

Tiny, sometimes helpful elemental spirit 

Gnoll fang of Yeenoghu that lairs in the Cackling Chasm 
Human town speaker of Caer-Dineval 

Dwarf town speaker of Bremen 

Gnome ceremorph (illithid) aboard the Id Ascendant 
Legendary drow hero known throughout Icewind Dale 
Evil, gray-skinned dwarves that dwell in the Underdark 
Red Wizard of Thay and member of the Arcane Brotherhood 
Duergar matron of the Muzgardt clan 

Frost giant fortress inhabited by Auril the Frostmaiden 
Grizzled dwarf and boat owner in Bremen 

King of the Reghed Tribe of the Bear 

Human champion of the Reghed Tribe of the Elk 
Venerable dwarf seer and cultist of Levistus 

Half-elf captain of the town militia in Easthaven 
Demilich of Ythryn 

Psychotic would-be king of the Reghed Tribe of the Wolf 
King of the Reghed Tribe of the Elk 

Goliath imprisoned in the duergar fortress of Sunblight 
Goblin fortress 

Dzaan’s wight bodyguard 

The shallowest of three large lakes in Icewind Dale 
Human cleric of Lathander living in the Black Cabin 
One of the three large lakes in Icewind Dale 

Human shaman of the Reghed Tribe of the Elk 

Human town speaker of Targos 

Ghost and former member of the Arcane Brotherhood 
Bygone human empire ruled by powerful archmages 
Chief of the Akannathi goliath tribe of Wyrmdoom Crag 
Legendary goliath polar werebear 

Deceased frost giant jarl whose spirit haunts Jarlmoot 
Arcanaloth in Ythryn 

Tiefling owner of the Easthaven ferry 

Cold-blooded killer and Torrga Icevein’s bodyguard 

Ice mephit 

Gnoll vampire that haunts the Caves of Hunger 

Human mage serving a life sentence in Revel’s End 
Human mage and member of the Arcane Brotherhood 
Gnome ceremorph (illithid) aboard the Id Ascendant 
Duergar tyrant who aims to conquer Icewind Dale 

Drow mage in the Caves of Hunger 

Human frost druid guide 

Netherese necropolis buried under the Reghed Glacier 


The Mountain Travel table shows how fast the charac- 


Beas imi ee oo og CHARACTER CREATION 


sled, Even in the best of cases, a journey in the moun- Before starting the adventure, consider spending your 
tains takes twice as long as one of the same distance first game session helping your players create charac- 
across the tundra. ters. Were the characters born and raised in Icewind 
Dale, or do they hail from distant lands? How long have 
MOUNTAIN TRAVEL they known each other? What secrets are they hiding? s 
Method of Travel Distarieatpes Hoir The following sections can help you answer these 
Dogsled 1/2 mile augauans: 
On foot, with snowshoes 1/4 mile CHARACTER BACKGROUNDS 


a snonshoer aaisiale The Player's Handbook contains character backgrounds 


that are well suited for this adventure. If your players 


PRONUNCIATION GUIDE are having trouble fleshing out their characters’ back- 


The Pronunciations table on the facing page shows how grounds with details about Icewind Dale, share the sug- 
to pronounce many of the non-English names that ap- gestions from the Character Hooks Tied to Backgrounds 
pear in this adventure. table with them. 


CHARACTER HOOKS TIED TO BACKGROUNDS 


Background Character Hook 

Acolyte Auril the Frostmaiden, the god of winter's fury, has cast an evil spell over Icewind Dale. You can bring hope and 
faith to the people of Ten-Towns or, even better, free them from winter's cold embrace in the name of your god. 

Charlatan Your cons and deceptions nearly got the better of you, You needed to disappear for a while, and Icewind Dale 


was the perfect place to do so. Nothing could prepare you for the cold and the dark desolation, but at least 
there's money to be made. 


Criminal You are wanted for crimes in the cities of Luskan and Mirabar, but no one will think to look for you in Ten-Towns, 
the cold heart of Icewind Dale. Thankfully, nobody in Ten-Towns cares who you are—or what you've done. 
Entertainer You came to Icewind Dale three years ago seeking inspiration for a new song or poem, drawn by tales of the 


land's harsh beauty and the legendary exploits of Drizzt Do'Urden. Since then, Auril the Frostmaiden has cast an 
evil spell over the dale, preventing you from returning home. 


Folk Hero Your name is synonymous with heroism throughout Ten-Towns. Did you save a fisher who fell into the ice, scare 
away a yeti armed with only a fishing pole and a basket, or beat a drunk goliath at arm wrestling? 
Guild Artisan You came to Icewind Dale to start a business. Your shop was doing well until Auril the Frostmaiden cast her evil 


spell to banish the sun. Now, businesses throughout Ten-Towns are suffering, yours included. To avoid hardship, 
you might need to supplement your income. 

Hermit You've never felt at ease in civilized society, and there's no place farther from the trappings of civilization than 
Icewind Dale. This is a land without pretense, and the people of Ten-Towns pay you little mind, To them, you're 
just another silly old fool. 


Noble Your wealthy grandfather or grandmother sent you to Icewind Dale to learn a hard lesson, Perhaps the cruel in- 
difference of this frozen land will prepare you for the cruel indifference of Waterdeep’s politics. 

Outlander You're a child of the icy wilderness, born and raised in one of the Reghed tribes. Imagine, after following herds of 
migrating reindeer your whole life, getting a taste of what life in Ten-Towns has to offer. 

Sage You came to Icewind Dale in search of ruins and artifacts left behind by the giants who ruled the ancient empire 
of Ostoria. To find even one Ostorian relic would fulfill a lifelong dream and make your rivals back home green 
with envy. 

Sailor You've sailed ships up and down the Sword Coast, but a shipwreck made you reevaluate your life choices. Two 


years ago, you headed north, bought a house and a fishing boat in Ten-Towns, and became a fisher. You were 
told that the summers here are beautiful, but you have yet to see one, 

Soldier You are a soldier of Ten-Towns, trained to fight orcs and other threats lurking in the Spine of the World moun- 
tains, Auril the Frostmaiden has cast an evil spell over Icewind Dale, and you struggle to see how your soldier's 
training can save this land from so terrible a doom. Still, you are not about to give up on the people of Ten- 
Towns. 

Urchin Because you grew up in Ten-Towns, your familiarity with the residents makes you useful to Harper spies and 
Zhentarim bounty hunters who are looking for criminals and other ne’er-do-wells hiding in your midst. Rating 
out these newcomers keeps coin in your pockets. 


WELCOME TO THE FAR NORTH 


GOLIATH PLAYER CHARACTERS 


All the character races presented in the Player's Hand- 
book are well suited for this adventure, as are goliaths— 
tall, strong folk who live in the mountains. Appendix C 
includes a description of goliaths and their traits, if you 
want to allow them in your game. 


STARTING EQUIPMENT 


All characters begin the adventure with a free set of cold 
weather clothing in addition to the starting equipment 
they receive from their class and background choices. 
See “Winter Survival Gear,” page 20, for more infor- 
mation about cold weather clothing. 


TRINKETS 

Appendix A provides a table of trinkets appropriate 

for characters who start their adventuring careers in 
Icewind Dale. A player whose character has a trinket 
can roll on this table instead of the Trinkets table in the 
Player's Handbook. 


CHARACTER SECRETS 


Appendix B contains secrets that you can photocopy, cut 
out, and share with players in your home game. While 
the players are creating their characters, decide whether 
you want each party member to have a secret or not. 
The secrets are designed to foment mistrust among 
party members, creating an atmosphere of suspicion 
and paranoia that is appropriate for the setting. 

Determine each character's secret by having that 
character's player draw a random card from the deck. If 
a player doesn't like the secret they've drawn, or if the 
secret is a bad fit for the character, let the player discard 
the first draw and pick another card. Each character 
gets one secret to start with. Some of the secrets are 
benign, others not so much. 

If you're running the adventure for a group that loves 
the idea of characters who have secrets, you can allow 
each player to draw twice instead of once, creating a 
party with a disturbing number of skeletons in their 
closets. If you want to make it possible for more than 
one character to have the same secret, replace each card 
in the deck before the next player draws. 

Some players will guard their characters’ secrets for 
the entire campaign, never sharing them. Other players 
will wait for the perfect occasion to reveal their charac- 
ters’ secrets. Don't be surprised if a player decides to 
reveal their character's secret right away. 


USING SECRETS 
The following suggestions are offered to help you make 
the most out of the secrets in appendix B. 

Alagondar Scion. At some point, Lord Dagult Never- 
ember might send a lone assassin—a nameless, mid- 
dle-aged woman with a shaved head and a hook for a 
right hand—to kill the character who has this secret. 

Doppelganger. This character can imitate specific 
NPCs and even other player characters. If this charac- 
ter's secret becomes widely known, the people of Ten- 
Towns will almost certainly try to kill or drive away the 
character out of fear. 


WELCOME TO THE FAR NORTH 


Drizzt Fan. This harmless secret comes with no 
strings attached and is a nod to R.A. Salvatore’s Drizzt 
novels, which were among the first works to bring Ice- 
wind Dale to life. 

Elusive Paramour. This secret is another nod to the 
Drizzt novels, setting up a situation like the one faced 
by Regis the halfling. At a time of your choosing, you 
can have the disgruntled pasha’s assassin, an invisible 
stalker, show up to menace the character. 

Escaped Prisoner. The character with this secret 
knows the location of the crashed nautiloid in chapter 2 
(see page 132) and can lead the party to it. The trauma 
of being held captive by the illithids prevents the char- 
acter from remembering events prior to the crash. A 
Sreater restoration spell removes this trauma, allowing 
the character to remember details about the illithids as 
well as the other prisoners aboard the nautiloid when it 
crashed (a bulette and two carrion crawlers). 

Littlest Yeti. If the party happens upon one or more 
yetis in the course of the adventure, this secret might 
reveal itself. You can also rule that yeti tykes (see appen- 
dix C) are friendly toward this character by default. 

Midwinter Child. This is one of the more useful se- 
crets, since the character possessing it is immune to the 
effects of extreme cold. Also, the player might decide 
that their character is sympathetic toward Auril because 
of the gift she has bestowed. If the party succeeds in 
killing Auril, the benefits of this secret are lost. 

Old Flame. This secret comes to light when the player 
chooses the character's secret lover. Since the onus falls 
on the player to choose this NPC, the lover can change 
each time you run this adventure with a different group 
of characters. This secret can also be used to turn an 
NPC foe into a potential ally, at your discretion. 

Orc Stone. The spirit summoned by the stone belongs 
to a fierce ore war chief named Vokarr the Eyebiter, 
who was killed by dwarves. This spirit looks like a liv- 
ing, breathing orc. It speaks Common and Orc. 

Owlbear Whisperer. If the character uses this secret 
to change an owlbear's attitude to friendly, the owlbear 
can become the character’s companion and protector, 
and you can run the owlbear as an NPC. 

Pirate Cannibal. The character with this secret 
knows the location of the Dark Duchess in chapter 2 
(see page 127) and can lead the party to it. The charac- 
ter would also know the ship's layout. 

Reghed Heir. More information about Queen Bjorn- 
hild Solvigsdottir and the Tiger Tribe can be found in 
appendix C. Bjornhild would hardly recognize her dis- 
carded offspring, but any character who presents them- 
selves as such will be attacked at once, Bjornhild has no 
love for her would-be heir, seeing that character only as 
a rival and a sacrifice to Auril. 

Reincarnation. Allow the player to flesh out the de- 
tails of the character's life prior to being reincarnated, 
and try to imagine how that back story might tie into 
some part of the adventure. Some of the races listed in 
the reincarnate spell’s table go by different names in 
the Realms, as noted in the Forgotten Realms Races 
table. If the player wants to randomly determine the 
character's cause of death, let them roll on the How I 
Died table. 


DETRIMENTAL TO ONE'S HEALTH, 


FORGOTTEN REALMS RACES 


Race Realms Version 
Dwarf, hill Dwarf, gold 
Dwarf, mountain Dwarf, shield 
Elf, high EIf, moon or sun 


Elf, wild or wood 
Halfling, strongheart 


Elf, wood 
Halfling, stout 


How | Diep 
d20 How! Died 
1-3 Iwas killed in an avalanche. 
4-5 | was murdered by goblins in the mountains after 


they ambushed my caravan 

6-8 | got mauled to death by a yeti. 

9-10 A white dragon attacked my caravan, and | was 
slain by its freezing breath weapon 

11-13 Iwas pulled into a freezing lake by a knucklehead 
trout and drowned before | could be rescued. 

14-16 A lottery was recently held in Targos to see who 
would be sacrificed to the Frostmaiden. | was the 
unlucky one. I died of exposure after being stripped 
down and cast into a snowstorm. 

17-18 | was killed in Ten-Towns by a lookalike—a doppel- 
ganger, | presume. 

19-20 | was killed by a white moose outside Ten-Towns. 


Ring Hunter. You might decide that the lost ring 
sought by this character is lodged inside OY Bitey (see 
page 33). Otherwise, the character can try to fish 
it out of Maer Dualdon (see “Fishing for Knucklehead 
Trout,” page 11). Each time a party member cuts 
open a trout pulled from this lake, there's a 1 percent 
chance that the fish has the signet ring lodged inside it. 

Runaway Author. Worshipers of Asmodeus send 
three bearded devils (whose fiendish features are 
cloaked by cold weather clothing) to kill the character 
who has this secret. If the characters visit Caer-Dineval, 
the Knights of the Black Sword (see page 38), as fol- 
lowers of Levistus rather than Asmodeus, might warn 
the characters that an attack on one of them is imminent 
and even offer sanctuary in Caer-Dineval's keep. 

Slaad Host. The exact timing of the slaad tadpole’s 
birth is deliberately left vague, although there are a few 
places in the adventure where the text suggests that the 
emergence might occur then and there. See the slaadi 
entry in the Monster Manual for more information about 
red slaad eggs and slaad tadpoles. Any magic that can 
cure a disease can end this threat, provided the cure is 
administered before the slaad tadpole bursts from the 
character's chest. 

Spy. Harpers assigned to Icewind Dale can't rely 
on much support from the organization, so they are 
expected to look after themselves. Beldora, the charac- 
ter's Harper contact in Bryn Shander, is a chaotic good 
human spy who can help steer the adventure by sharing 
rumors and providing helpful advice. 


WELCOME TO THE FAR NORTH 


TEN-TOWNS 


IKE THE FAMOUS DROW DRIZZT Do’URDEN, 

many people who come to Ten-Towns are 

outcasts, fugitives, or pariahs in search of 

a place where they can be tolerated, if not 

accepted. Some came here determined to 
make their fortunes. Others come for the solitude, or 
to escape notice and stay out of the reach of the law of 
the southern cities. Today, four hundred years after the 
formation of Ten-Towns, most folk are here because they 
were born here, grew up here, and expect to die here. 
They're fishers, loggers, miners, hunters, trappers, fur- 
riers, and traders accustomed to the harsh climate, the 
slow pace, and the isolation. Like the hardy lichens and 
determined reindeer of the tundra, residents endure and 
do what's needed to survive. 

Icewind Dale has few trees, so lumber is cut from the 
slopes of the Spine of the World or the depths of the 
Lonelywood Forest. Stone from the hills and valleys sur- 
rounding Kelvin’s Cairn supplements wood as a build- 
ing material in Ten-Towns. Homes have sharply pitched 
roofs to prevent snow from accumulating on them. 

The people of Ten-Towns wear layers of woolen cloth- 
ing often topped off with fur cloaks. Under these heavy 
clothes and cloaks, one resident looks very much the 
same as another. Outdoors, it's hard to tell the people of 
Ten-Towns apart—and easy for clever monsters to hide 
in their midst. 


STARTING TOWN 


d10 Town Town’s Starting Quest 
l Bremen 
2 Bryn Shander 
3 Caer-Dineval 
4 Caer-Konig 
5 


missing youngsters. 
6  Easthaven 
7 Good Mead 


RUNNING THIS CHAPTER 


Getting off on the right foot is important. If you follow 
these steps, you should be all right: 


Before starting the adventure, read the rest of this 
section and the “Ten-Towns Overview” that follows it. 
A description of each town appears later in this chap- 
ter, but you don’t need to commit all ten settlements to 
memory before running this part of the adventure. 
Determine the town in which the adventure begins 
(see “Starting Town” below) and read the description 
of that town. 

Once the players have their characters, backgrounds, 
and secrets sorted out, kick off the adventure by read- 
ing the boxed text in the “Cold Open” section. 

Give the players a starting quest (either “Cold-Hearted 
Killer” or “Nature Spirits”), or use the quest that’s 
tied to the adventure’s starting town (as shown in the 
Starting Town table). 

Whenever the characters arrive at another town for 
the first time, review the nutshell description of that 
town and give the characters the quest tied to that set- 
tlement (as shown in the Starting Town table). 


STARTING TOWN 


Choose one of the ten towns as the starting point for 
the adventure. It doesn’t matter which one, so pick your 
favorite or roll randomly using the Starting Town table. 
If you can't decide and don't want to leave it to chance, 


“Lake Monster” (page 28), in which the characters hunt for a monster terrorizing Bremen’s fishers. 
“Foaming Mugs” (page 34), in which the characters search for a missing supply of iron ingots. 

“Black Swords” (page 38), in which the characters confront devil-worshiping cultists in a clifftop castle. 
“The Unseen” (page 47), in which the characters solve the mystery behind a number of petty thefts. 
Dougan’s Hole “Holed Up” (page 53), in which the characters cross paths with a pair of winter wolves and rescue two 


“Toil and Trouble” (page 62), in which the characters search for missing fishers in a hag's lair. 


“The Mead Must Flow” (page 73), in which the characters retrieve several stolen casks of honey mead. 
8  Lonelywood “The White Moose” (page 80), in which the characters hunt an evil white moose that is terrorizing local 
hunters and loggers. 

“Mountain Climb” (page 87), in which the characters search for an expedition that went missing on the 
slopes of Kelvin’s Cairn. 


“A Beautiful Mine” (page 94), in which the characters go looking for trouble in a nearby gem mine. 


9 Targos 


10 Termalaine 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


choose Bryn Shander; it's the most cosmopolitan set- 
tlement in Icewind Dale, and it has all the amenities a 
fledgling party of adventurers could hope for. 


TEN-TOWNS QUESTS 


This chapter presents two starting quests (“Cold- 
Hearted Killer” and “Nature Spirits”) that the charac- 
ters can get at the start of the adventure, regardless of 
which town serves as their starting point. Every town 
has its own quest as well, as noted in the Starting Town 
table. Once you choose a starting quest, the other start- 
ing quests go unused. “Cold-Hearted Killer” has the po- 
tential for combat, while “Nature Spirits” presents a fun 
quest without the danger. 


Ten-Towns RUMORS 
di0 Rumor 

1 in Bremen, fishers are being terrorized by a monster 
that lives in Maer Dualdon. Strange that none of the 
other towns on that lake have been harangued by the 
monster, 

2 InBryn Shander, some dwarves will pay good money 
to anyone who can find a lost shipment for them. 

3 In Caer-Dineval, no one has seen the town speaker 
for a long time. Locals say Speaker Crannoc has 
fallen ill, but sinister figures have been seen entering 
and leaving the castle at odd hours. 

4 InCaer-Konig, local establishments are beset by van- 
dals and thieves that skulk about unseen. The town 
speaker, a dragonborn named Trovus, could really 
use some help catching the interlopers. 

5 In Dougan’s Hole, people live in fear of winter 
wolves that haunt the outskirts of the town. As big 
as horses they are, and smarter than normal wolves. 

6 In Easthaven, they caught an evil wizard who killed 
some adventurers. The town militia plans to burn 
the wizard at the stake. | hear the captain of the 
guard is looking for adventurers to help with another 
task that may or may not be related. 

7 In Good Mead, the town speaker was recently killed 
by a nine-foot-tall giant. Rumor has it the giant stole 
a shipment of honey mead, without which a handful 
of taverns in Ten-Towns might go dry! 

8 In Lonelywood, beware the dreaded white moose! 

It attacks loggers and trappers on sight, and the 
town's best hunters can't seem to catch or kill the 
beast. They could probably use some help. 

9 In Targos, a band of adventurers is planning an 
expedition up the side of Kelvin's Cairn, hoping to 
find Oyaminartok, a goliath lycanthrope who can 
transform into a polar bear. If you hurry, you might 
be able to join the expedition! 

10 In Termalaine, Speaker Masthew has closed one of 
the town’s lucrative gem mines. Apparently, a gang 
of kobolds crept into the mine and endangered some 
miners, Anyone who clears out the mine can expect 
to be well compensated. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


The quests in this chapter are designed to get the 
characters exploring Ten-Towns and the nearby wil- 
derness, while quests that take them into the farthest 
reaches of Icewind Dale are saved for chapter 2. It's up 
to the players whether to complete a particular quest or 
not; the adventure doesn't assume that they'll complete 
them all, but completing at least five of this chapter's 
quests advances characters to 4th level (see “Character 
Advancement” below). 


Ten-Towns Rumors 

If the characters complete a town's quest and aren't sure 
where to go next, inform the players that their charac- 
ters have heard rumors of trouble in a neighboring town, 
then roll on the Ten-Towns Rumors table to determine 
what they've heard. Roll again if the characters have al- 
ready completed the quest associated with that town. 


CHARACTER ADVANCEMENT 


In this chapter, level advancement is handled as follows: 


The characters advance to 2nd level after completing 
their first quest in this chapter. 

They advance to 3rd level after completing three 
quests in this chapter and advance to 4th level after 
completing five quests in this chapter. 


Once the characters reach 4th level, they no long gain 
levels by completing the quests in this chapter. Even so, 
completing more than the required number of quests 
can improve their standing in Ten-Towns (see “Reputa- 
tion in Ten-Towns” below), and they still collect the other 
rewards for completing those quests. 


REPUTATION IN TEN-TOWNS 
As the characters complete the quests in this chapter, 
their reputation in Ten-Towns begins to spread. For bet- 
ter or worse, they become known to the people of Ten- 
Towns—some of whom regard them as saviors, while 
others fear their boldness, envy their power, or covet the 
wealth they've amassed. Fame in Icewind Dale is always 
a double-edged sword. 

The adventuring party's reputation in Ten-Towns 
improves as the characters gain levels, with the follow- 
ing results: 


When the characters reach 3rd level, they begin to 
earn a healthy measure of respect from Ten-Towners 
who know of their exploits. 

When the characters reach 4th level, they are given 

a hero's welcome in the towns they've helped but are 
given the cold shoulder in towns they've ignored. They 
also learn about new adventure opportunities outside 
Ten-Towns, as described in chapter 2. 


TEN-TOWNS OVERVIEW 


Ten-Towns didn't spring up overnight. It started from 
humble beginnings four centuries ago. Immigrants from 
all over Faerfin came here in search of escape or adven- 
ture and built a modest trade post atop the hill where 
Bryn Shander now stands. One by one, settlements 
sprung up on the shores of Maer Dualdon, Lac Dinne- 
shere, and Redwaters. The ever-present threat of orcs 


THe FROSTMAIDEN'S AURORA SWEEPS ACROSS 
THE NIGHT SKY OVER EASTHAVEN. 


and other monsters compelled the poorly defended lake- 
side towns to turn Bryn Shander from a modest hilltop 
trading post into a walled town capable of defending all 
Ten-Towners if and when the worst come: 
Most of the towns contain trace evidence 
migrant cultures that birthed them. This evidence is 
rved into houses, statues, and other fixtures. For ex- 
ample, the dinosaur carvin, n the older buildings of 
od Mead remind folk that many of its original s 
were Chultan. 
nts of Ten-Towns tend to remain indoors when 
not workin; ince it's so frightfully cold outside, 
which gives each si spect. 
ple who venture outdoors are bundled up in so much 
ther clothing as to be barely recognizable, and 


of them. 

‘Auril’s winter spell has caused the population of Ten- 
Towns to dwindle and has heightened rivalries that have 
simmered for years, turning neighboring towns against 
one another as competition for resources becomes 

reasingly intense. The alliance of Ten 
hold if the mounting tribalism continues to threaten the 
nmon good. 


LIFE OFF THE LAKES 


Most of the ten towns except Bryn Shander are built 
on the shores of three big lakes. The largest population 
of knucklehead trout is in Maer Dualdon, the deepest 


the shallowest lake, almc 
reezes in winter, making the fishing theri 
shere catches the worst of the winds 
the Reghed Glacier to the east and thus has 
the roughest water: all thermal vents at the bottom 
of these lakes keep them from freezing completely, even 
in the coldest winters. 
wns fishing boa imple affairs. The small- 
est are rowboats and single-masted skiffs that require 
careful handling to avoid capsizing. Larger, twin-masted 
cogs and keelboats with single decks handle the wind 
and waves better. These ships fly the flags of their towns 
and provide fish for the whole community, not for any 
individual fish 
When thick i overs the lakes, many fishers stay to 
the shelters of their homes and hearths, but the most 
dedicated or desperate cut holes in the ice and dangle 
their lines down in hopes of tempting hungry trout. 
—EEEE———E————E= 
Fuet Sources 
The folk of Ten-Towns don’t have a lot of options when it 
comes to keeping warm. People from Good Mead, Lone- 
lywood, and Termalaine burn wood salvaged from nearby 
forests to heat their houses. In the other towns of Icewind 
Dale, wood is too precious a commodity to burn, so whale 
oil is used in lamps and small stoves around which towns- 
folk huddle for warmth. 

Ten-Towners buy their whale oil from whalers who live on 
the shores of the Sea of Moving Ice. Whaling is thus a lu- 
crative (if inherently dangerous) business in Icewind Dale. 

——— 


APTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


20 


Axe Beak 


WINTER SURVIVAL GEAR 


Any item listed in the equipment chapter of the Play- 
er's Handbook can be bought in Ten-Towns, including 
fishing tackle and sleds. The larger the town, the more 
likely it is to have the item. 

The Winter Survival Gear table provides costs for cold 
weather clothing, crampons, and snowshoes, which can 
be added to the list of things that characters can buy in 
Ten-Towns. 


WINTER SURVIVAL GEAR 


Item Cost Weight 
Clothing, cold weather 10gp 51b. 
Crampons (2) 2gp 1/4 Ib. 
Snowshoes 2gp 4ib. 


COLD WEATHER CLOTHING 

This outfit consists of a heavy fur coat or cloak over lay- 
ers of wool clothing, as well as a fur-lined hat or hood, 
goggles, and fur-lined leather boots and gloves. 

As long as cold weather clothing remains dry, its 
wearer automatically succeeds on saving throws 
against the effects of extreme cold (see “Extreme 
Cold,” page 11). 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


CRAMPONS 

Acrampon is a metal plate with spikes that is strapped 
to the sole of a boot. A creature wearing crampons can't 
fall prone while moving across slippery ice. 


SNOWSHOES 
Snowshoes reduce the likelihood of their wearer getting 
stuck in the deep snow. 


GETTING AROUND TEN-TOWNS 


Most Ten-Towners travel from town to town on foot. 
Those who need to transport more goods than they can 
carry use wooden sleds pulled by dogs or domesticated 
axe beaks as pack animals. Such things can be bought 
and sold in every Ten-Towns settlement. 


DocsLeps 
An empty sled costs 20 gp, weighs 300 pounds, and has 
room at the back for one driver. A sled dog (use the wolf 
stat block in appendix A of the Monster Manual) costs 
50 gp and can pull 360 pounds. 

Sled dogs must take a short rest after pulling a sled 
for 1 hour; otherwise, they gain one level of exhaustion. 


AXE BEAKS 

An axe beak’s splayed toes allow it to run across snow, 
and it can carry as much weight as a mule. A domesti- 

cated axe beak can be purchased in Ten-Towns for 50 

gp. See appendix A of the Monster Manual for the axe 

beak’s stat block. 


MAGIC IN TEN-TOwNs 


Characters hoping to procure powerful magic items or 
the services of a high-level spellcaster in Ten-Towns are 
out of luck. At best, they might be able to find common 
magic items for sale, or a friendly druid, priest, or mage 
who can cast spells on their behalf. For every hundred 
people in a town, there's one such individual living 
among them. 

Magic items and magical services available in Ten- 
Towns are summarized below. If an item or spell is not 
covered here, assume there is no friendly NPC who can 
sell or cast it. 

Common magic items cost 100 gp each where they're 
available, except for common potions (such as potions of 
healing), which can be had for 50 gp. 

A friendly spellcaster will charge 25 gp for a Ist-level 
spell, 50 gp for one that uses a 2nd-level spell slot, or 
150 gp for one that uses a 3rd-level spell slot, plus the 
cost of any expensive material components. 


SNOWFLAKE RATINGS 


This chapter uses a three-snowflake rating system to 
help you quickly differentiate the settlements of Ten- 
Towns. Each town is rated in terms of its friendliness, 
the services it offers, and its comfort. The more snow- 
flakes, the better the rating. 

Friendliness. Residents in a three-snowflake town 
are friendly and helpful, by and large. Conversely, a 
one-snowflake town is full of unhelpful, unfriendly folk. 
A two-snowflake town has both, 


A caAG CAT CLAIMS AN OFFERING OF FOOD MADE 
sy TEN-TOWNERS TO APPEASE THE FRosTMAIDEN.. 


Services. A three-snowflake town is where charac- 
ters are most likely to find the services they need. A 
two-snowflake town has a much narrower selection. 
Characters will have trouble getting any sort of service 
a one-snowflake town. 

Comfort. Characters can find decent food and drink, 
as well as warm beds, in a three-snowflake town. A 
two-snowflake town might have a small tavern plus an 
inn with drafty rooms to rent. A one-snowflake town 
might have a cold shed or attic where characters can 
crash for the night, and that’s about it. 


SACRIFICES TO AURIL 


The desperate people of Ten-Towns, hoping to appease 
Auril so that summer can return to Icewind Dale, make 
sacrifices to the Frostmaiden on nights of the new 
moon. This is a new practice that started a little over 
a year ago, when it became clear that Auril was angry 
and summer would not be returning anytime soon. The 
town speakers (see the “Council of Speakers” sidebar) 
have unanimously agreed to honor these practices, 
which they consider necessary evils, but would end 
them in a heartbeat if Auril were to be appeased or dealt 
with in some other way. 
The nature of the sacrifices varies from town to town, 
but usually takes one of three forms: 


COUNCIL OF SPEAKERS 
Each town is an independent settlement that elects a 
leader, or speaker, to represent its interests at meetings 
of the Council of Speakers, which are infrequent and take 
place at the Council Hall in Bryn Shander. These meetings 
are called to discuss matters of shared interest and to set- 
tle disputes between towns. 
——— 


Humanoid. Bryn Shander, Easthaven, and Targos hold 
lotteries the afternoon before the new moon. The 
unlucky person whose name is drawn is sacrificed at 
nightfall. The ill-fated soul is stripped bare and either 
tied to a post or sent into the tundra to die. Accusa- 
tions of rigged lotteries are common but usually not 
acted upon. 

Food. Smaller towns that can't afford to give up people 
give up their food instead. A day's catch of knuckle 
head trout is strung up on wooden racks a mile out- 
side town, to be claimed by yeti and other creatures 
that embody Auril’s wrath. 

Warmth. Towns that can’t bring themselves to give up 
their people or their food forsake warmth for a night. 
No fires are lit between dusk and dawn, forcing locals 
to share body heat for warmth. Anyone who dares to 
light a fire is savagely beaten. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


19 
N 


COLD OPEN 


Before beginning the adventure, give your players a 


chance to decide how their characters wound up in Ice- 


wind Dale, what their relationships are to one another, 
and what circumstances brought them together. Once 


the players are ready to get under way, use the following 


boxed text to summarize the situation: 


Icewind Dale has become trapped in a perpetual winter. 
Ferocious blizzards make the mountain pass through 
the Spine of the World exceedingly treacherous, and this 
land has not felt the warmth of the sun in over two years. 
In fact, the sun no longer appears above the mountains, 
not even in what should be the height of summer. In this 
frozen tundra, darkness and bitter cold reign as king and 
queen, Most dale residents blame Auril the Frostmaiden, 
the god of winter’s wrath. The shimmering aurora 
that weaves across the sky each night is said to be her 
doing—a potent spell that keeps the sun at bay. 

Dalefolk live in a scattering of settlements known 
as Ten-Towns. The drop-off in caravans coming from 
the south and travel between settlements in this 
never-ending winter has left everyone feeling isolated. 
Although each town has resolved to appease the Frost- 
maiden with sacrifices of one kind or another, no respite 
from winter's fury seems forthcoming. For adventurers 
such as yourselves, Ten-Towns is a place to test one’s 
mettle and, in the spirit of heroes who have come before, 
leave one's mark on this frigid, blighted land. 


Having set the stage, you can now describe the adven- 
ture's starting town using the information presented 


later in this chapter, and the poster map includes a map 
of the starting town that you can share with the players. 


The characters would be aware of the town’s general 
layout and key features. 


ICEWIND DALE KNOWLEDGE 


Assume that your party of adventurers is familiar with 
Icewind Dale's geography and landmarks, as shown on 
the poster map, as well as the names and locations of 
the settlements that comprise Ten-Towns. Characters 
from Icewind Dale know the following additional infor- 
mation, depending on where they grew up: 


Ten-Towners. Characters who have spent some time in 


Ten-Towns know the names of important residents, 
such as the speaker of each town, as well as the 
information in each town’s nutshell description (as 
presented later in this chapter). They also know the 


names of the four tribes of Reghed nomads described 


in appendix C. 

Reghed Nomads. Any characters raised among the 
Reghed nomads recognize members of their own 
tribe, as well as the names and reputations of promi- 
nent members of other tribes (see appendix C). 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


Mountain Goliaths. Goliaths who hail from the Spine of 
the World know of two rival goliath settlements in the 
mountains, Skytower Shelter and Wyrmdoom Crag 
(both described in chapter 2). A goliath character who 
hails from one of these settlements would be familiar 
with its inhabitants, as well as their longstanding feud 
with goliaths from the rival settlement. 

Valley Dwarves. Shield dwarves and other charac- 
ters who hail from the Dwarven Valley at the foot of 
Kelvin’s Cairn would know that this valley contains 
sprawling iron mines and cave complexes inhabited 
by shield dwarves of the Battlehammer clan and 
their allies. 


STARTING QUEST: 
CoLD-HEARTED KILLER 


“Cold-Hearted Killer” is one of two quests designed 
to kick off the adventure. The characters can get this 
quest regardless of which town is the adventure’s 
starting point. 

The characters receive this quest from Hlin Trollbane, 
aretired bounty hunter who has been stalking a serial 
killer ever since she found a connection between three 
murders and a small trading company called Torg's. 
Hlin hires the characters to apprehend her suspect and 
dole out some cold, swift justice by quietly disposing of 
him if they believe he’s guilty. This quest is no murder 
mystery; it's a hunt. 


GETTING THE QUEST 


To begin this quest, read the following boxed text to 
the players: 


Just another gruesome day in Ten-Towns: howling wind, 
bitter cold, foul tempers, and snowdrifts big enough to 
bury a herd of moose. But today the local tavern is abuzz 
with news about a series of recent killings. Before the 
murders, the only question on everyone's mind was, 
“Will summer ever return to Icewind Dale?” Now the 
question is, “Will | be the killer’s next victim?” Nothing 
breeds fear and paranoia like a murderer with no face. 

Three cold-blooded murders have been committed in 
the past month: a halfling trapper in Easthaven, a human 
shipbuilder in Targos, and, three days ago, a dwarf glass- 
blower in Bryn Shander. Each victim was found with a 
dagger of ice through the heart. 

What's the connection? The drunken lot huddled in 
the tavern offers no credible ideas, but sitting apart from 
them is an elderly shield dwarf with a nasty scar across 
her nose who looks like she has something worth know- 
ing. She's been smoking her pipe and eyeing you ever 
since you walked in. 


Hlin Trolibane, a neutral good shield dwarf, is a retired 
bounty hunter with finely honed survival instincts. She 
is an unarmored veteran who wields a battleaxe and 


handaxe instead of a longsword and shortsword. Plying 
her profession earned her a few too many enemies up 
and down the Sword Coast, which is why she wound up 
in Icewind Dale. 

Out of boredom and a sense of moral decency, Hlin 
has taken it upon herself to investigate the recent 
murders because no one else—not even the Council of 
Speakers—can be bothered. Hlin is studying the char- 
acters closely, trying to decide if they're worth her time. 
Ultimately, she takes the chance and draws them into 
conversation, asking them to help her take down her 
only suspect: a man named Sephek Kaltro, Here’s what 
she knows about Sephek and the victims: 


“Sephek Kaltro works for a small traveling merchant 
company called Torg’s, owned and operated by a shady 
dwarf named Torrga Icevein. In other words, Sephek 
gets around. He's charming. Makes friends easily. He's 
also Torrga’s bodyguard, so I'm guessing he's good 
with a blade. 

“His victims come from the only three towns that 
sacrifice people to the Frostmaiden on nights of the new 
‘moon. This is what passes for civilized behavior in Ice- 
wind Dale. Maybe the victims found a way to keep their 
names out of the drawings and Sephek found out they 
were cheating, so he killed them. Maybe, just maybe, 
Sephek is doing the Frostmaiden's work. 

| followed Torg’s for a tenday as it moved from town 
to town. Quite the devious little enterprise, but that’s not 
my concern. What struck me is how comfortable Sephek 
Kaltro looked in this weather. No coat, no scarf, no 
gloves. It was like the cold couldn't touch him. Kiss of the 
Frostmaiden, indeed. 

“| will pay you a hundred gold pieces to apprehend 
Sephek Kaltro, ascertain his guilt, and deal with him, 
preferably without involving the authorities. When the 
job is done, return to me to collect your money.” 


For the benefit of characters who are new to Ten- 
Towns, Hlin can explain that certain settlements (Bryn 
Shander, Easthaven, and Targos) are making humanoid 
sacrifices to Auril, holding lotteries to determine who 
gets sacrificed on nights of the new moon (see “Sacri- 
fices to Auril,” page 21). 

If Hlin’s theory is true and Sephek Kaltro is killing 
Ten-Towners who cheat their way out of becoming sacri- 
fices to Auril, it's likely the Frostmaiden will use him to 
kill again. Hlin is too old and frail to apprehend Sephek 
herself, but she has more gold than she needs, so she 
hires the characters to do her work. 

The challenge begins with finding Sephek Kaltro, 
since Torg’s moves around a lot. Hlin doesn't know if 
Sephek is acting alone or has the support of Torrga 
leevein, so she advises the characters to isolate Sephek 
and dispose of him quietly, if such action is called for. 


SEPHEK KALTRO 


Medium undead, neutral evil 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 75 (10d8 + 30) 
Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 


1663) 1462 1663) 110) 1663) 18 (+4) 


Skills Perception +5, Survival +5 

Damage Immunities cold 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened 

Senses passive Perception 15 

Languages Common 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 
ee 
Innate Spellcasting. Sephek can innately cast misty step up to 
three times per day, requiring no components. His innate spell- 
casting ability is Charisma. 


Cold Regeneration. If the temperature around him is 0 degrees 
Fahrenheit or lower, Sephek regains 5 hit points at the start of 
his turn. If he takes fire damage, this trait doesn’t function at 
the start of Sephek’s next turn. Sephek dies only if he starts his 
turn with 0 hit points and doesn’t regenerate. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. Sephek attacks twice with a weapon. 


Ice Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage, or 8 (1410 + 3) slash- 
ing damage if Sephek uses the weapon with two hands, plus 5 
(24) cold damage. 


Ice Dagger. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage 
plus 5 (2d4) cold damage. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


23 


= 24 


FINDING Torc’s 


You can randomly determine the location of the mer- 
chant company by rolling a d10 and consulting the 
Starting Town table (page 17). Roll again if the result 
is the adventure’s starting town. Conversely, you can 
forgo the roll and pick a town you like. Bremen (page 
27) and Dougan’s Hole (page 53) are good choices 
because they're small and isolated. 

The characters can either visit towns one by one until 
they find Torg’s, or they can try to get a solid lead before 
setting out. Any character who spends an hour talking 
to townsfolk can make a DC 17 Charisma (Investigation) 
check at the end of that hour. On a successful check, the 
character finds someone who knows Torrga Icevein's 
travel plans and is willing to share that information for 
a small bribe (at least 5 gp or nonperishable goods of 
equal value). Armed with that information, the charac- 
ters can travel to the town by the most expeditious route. 


TorRGA ICEVEIN AND HER CARAVAN 

The Torg’s caravan consists of three heavily laden dog- 
sleds, each one pulled by six friendly sled dogs. One sled 
carries provisions and supplies for Torrga, her team, 
and her dogs. It flies a flag bearing the company’s em- 
blem, a gold wolf's paw on a black field. The other two 
sleds transport goods for sale, including cut wood, flint 
and tinder, flasks of whale oil, blankets, furs, rations, 
bottles of wine, casks of cheap ale, fake medicines, and 
vials of poison (used primarily for killing vermin). 

Torg’s is an outdoor shop. Goods are unpacked and 
displayed in crates, with small canopies to keep the 
snow off them. Most of Torrga’s goods are stolen or 
fenced, and she sells them for double the normal price. 
She has a protection racket that earns her a little coin 
on the side, and she also commits murders for profit on 
the sly. One of the larger sacks on Torrga's sled contains 
the frozen corpse of a male half-elf in his thirties with 
a stab wound in his chest. The half-elf had a bounty on 
his head and came to Icewind Dale to disappear. Torrga 
found him and killed him with Sephek's help. Once she’s 
sold off her goods in Ten-Towns, she plans to deliver the 
corpse to Luskan and collect the 125 gp bounty. 

Torrga is a neutral evil shield dwarf bandit captain 
with darkvision out to a range of 60 feet, resistance to 
poison damage, and advantage on saving throws against 
being poisoned. While Torg’s is open for business, she 
keeps her employees close to her. She employs Sephek 
Kaltro as a bodyguard and pays four others (neutral evil 
human bandits) to drive and protect the other two sleds. 
Torrga is interested only in profits, turns a blind eye to 
Sephek’s murderous escapades, and tries to help him as 
best she can without endangering her own life. 

Treasure. Torrga keeps her proceeds in a small, 
locked iron strongbox, which she hides in a satchel. She 
wears the key to the strongbox around her neck, A char- 
acter with thieves’ tools can use an action to try to pick 
the strongbox’s lock, doing so with a successful DC 20 
Dexterity check. The box contains 92 gp, 76 sp, 125 cp, 
and seven gemstones worth 10 gp each. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


SEPHEK KALTRO 

Sephek Kaltro (see the accompanying stat block) is a 
well-built man in his thirties. He has an olive complex- 
ion, dark hair pulled back in a ponytail, and no facial 

or body hair. He is dressed in a stylish vest with match- 
ing pants and boots, similar in style to those worn by 
mariners of the southern Sword Coast, but wears no 
armor or cold weather clothing and doesn't appear to be 
armed. His most striking feature is his eyes, which are 
as blue as a frozen lake. 

The best way to deal with Sephek is to confront him 
while he's separated from Torrga and her other cronies. 
Sephek stays close to Torrga during business hours. 
Once activity drops off, Torrga shuts down her operation 
for the rest of the day, puts the dogs in a kennel and the 
sleds in a secure shed, and pays for the team's lodgings. 
After Torrga retires for the night, Sephek is free to do 
as he pleases until the following morning. If he happens 
to be in Bryn Shander, Easthaven, or Targos, he stalks 
his next murder victim. If he’s elsewhere, he spends the 
night drinking and carousing, then falls asleep for a few 
hours, preferably in an unheated place such as a barn or 
an abandoned cottage. 

When asked about his odd style of dress, Sephek 
Kaltro claims that he was born on the holiday of Mid- 
winter and that the Frostmaiden’s blessing protects him 
from the cold. In truth, Sephek was not born during 
Midwinter. He was a mariner whose ship sank off the 
coast of Auril’s island a few months ago. He swam to the 
island but nearly froze to death. As his life was fading, 
the spirit of a frost druid beholden to Auril possessed 
him. The winter spirit cannibalized Sephek's spirit and 
is using him as a living vessel to do the Frostmaiden's 
work. The spirit can't leave Sephek’s body; if Sephek 
dies, the winter spirit is destroyed along with him. 

Auril inspired Sephek to travel to Ten-Towns and of- 
fer his services to Torrga Icevein. As Hlin suspects, he 
has been killing Ten-Towners who pay off low-ranking 
town officials to exclude their names from the lotteries 
in Bryn Shander, Easthaven, and Targos. Because he’s 
doing the Frostmaiden’s work, the spirit inside Sephek 
doesn't care about getting caught, and he isn't shy about 
admitting his guilt. He considers surrendering only be- 
cause it buys time for him to escape and commit more 
murders. In combat, he wields a magical sword and 
magical daggers made of ice that he can conjure at will. 
These weapons melt and break like icicles in the hands 
of other creatures. 


CONCLUDING THE QUEST 


After finding and slaying Sephek, the characters can re- 
turn to Hlin and collect their 100 gp reward. If they don't 
have evidence to prove that Sephek is dead, Hlin is will- 
ing to take them at their word. If the ice-dagger murders 
stop, she'll know her trust was not misplaced, Failure to 
stop Sephek allows him to continue slaying Ten-Town- 
ers who cheat Auril the Frostmaiden. These murders 
occur irregularly, and only in towns visited by Torg’s. 

If the characters capture Sephek and deliver him 
to the authorities, they stop the murders but lose 


the reward offered by Hlin, who isn’t satisfied with 
that outcome. 

If Torrga Icevein survives but has reason to believe the 
characters slew her bodyguard, she pressures certain 
Ten-Towners not to do business with them. At some 
later point, the characters might find themselves unable 
to buy something they need or denied lodging at a local 
inn because the merchant or proprietor doesn't want to 
earn Torrga’s everlasting enmity. 


STARTING QUEST: 
NATURE SPIRITS 


This is the second of two quests designed to kick off 
the adventure. It prompts the characters to explore the 
various locales in Ten-Towns, where they can pick up 
other quests. 

At the start of this quest, the characters are ap- 
proached by a young spellcaster named Dannika 
Graysteel. A new resident of Ten-Towns, she’s trying to 
find a way to alter the climate in Icewind Dale. She hires 
them to locate and capture a chwinga, several of which 
she believes are located in and around Ten-Towns. 
Although she provides the characters with a magical 
means to locate chwingas, it’s up to them to figure out a 
way to capture one or convince it to help Dannika with 
her experiments. 


SING A STOLEN PLATE ANO CUTLERY, THREE 


GETTING THE QUEST 


Begin this quest by reading the following boxed text to 
the players: 


| A bundled-up figure walks briskly up to you. “Well met! 
You lot seem like you're looking for work. Or trouble. You 


wouldn't be standing around in this cold otherwise." 


The speaker is Dannika Graysteel (lawful neutral half- 
elf acolyte), a scholar who thinks that wee elemental 
spirits known as chwingas might be the key to improv- 
ing Icewind Dale's climate. Since chwingas are known 
to inhabit Ten-Towns and have some ability to alter 

their natural surroundings, Dannika thinks she can 
learn a lot by studying one up close. For the characters’ 
services, Dannika is offering the group 25 gp as well as 
a lantern of tracking (elementals) that can help locate 
chwingas. She says she'll be at the local tavern each eve- 
ning, so the characters should have no trouble finding 
her once the job is completed. If the characters accept 
her quest, Dannika gives them her lantern (see appendix 
D) and explains how it works. She then tells them she’s 
been looking all over town and hasn't found any chwin- 
gas. She suggests the characters might have better luck 
in one of the other settlements. She could continue the 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


search herself, but she’s nervous about venturing out 
into the extreme cold and has other research-related 
chores to attend to. 


ELUSIVE ELEMENTALS 

There are no chwingas in the adventurers’ starting 
town, but each time they visit another town in Icewind 
Dale, there's a cumulative 25 percent chance of chwin- 
gas being present. Searching a town for chwingas 
doesn't take long if the characters use the Jantern of 
tracking, since the towns are small and compact. 

If the characters ask the residents of a town about 
chwinga sightings, people seem dismissive of the notion 
of elementals living among them. The occasional fisher 
reeking of dwarven ale might recall seeing “a tiny figure 
riding a fox through town” but can't remember where or 
when the sighting occurred. 


THIEVES IN THE WIND 


When the characters find a town that has chwingas liv- 
ing in or near it, the flame in the Jantern of tracking (ele- 
mentals) turns green as they approach the edge of town, 
whereupon they spot a bundled-up figure—a human 
commoner named Elva—stomping out of a snow-cov- 
ered cottage. Upon seeing the adventurers, she starts 
yelling at the wind and warning the characters to watch 
out for the curses it brings. According to Elva, trickster 
spirits have been opening her windows, sending horri- 
ble chills through her home, and knocking over her cups 
and plates. Some of her cutlery has even gone missing. 
Characters who inspect the windows of Elva's cottage 
can make a DC 10 Intelligence (Investigation) check, 
On a success, they find wee tracks leading away from 
a snowy windowsill of the cottage toward a nearby 
thicket. A character who succeeds on a DC 14 Wisdom 
(Survival) check can discern three individual sets of tiny 
footprints. Some of the footprints have a thin furrow 
in the snow alongside them, as if something was being 
dragged behind the creatures. 


PLAYING HOUSE 
By following the tracks, a character with a passive Wis- 
dom (Perception) score of 13 or higher can pick up the 
sound of movement from behind the conifers, where 
three chwingas (see appendix C) are playing atop the 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


snow in a clearing. A dinner plate with branches and 
pinecones arrayed on it is placed between them, and 
one chwinga is sitting at the edge of the plate while the 
two others are moving a fork and a knife as if to cut and 
eat the “food.” 

When the characters enter the clearing, the chwin- 
gas look up at them with interest. The one not holding 
apiece of cutlery starts moving its hands, mimicking 
eating while looking up at the characters and making 
welcoming gestures. 

Ifa character indulges in the game of pretend that is 
being played out, such as by sitting down and joining the 
dinner, the chwingas become excited and start inspect- 
ing the character in detail. After this, the chwinga that 
wasn't holding any cutlery begins following the char- 
acter, remaining with that individual for up to a tenday, 
leaving the other chwingas behind. When the chwinga fi- 
nally parts company with the character, assuming it has 
been well treated, it bestows a supernatural charm upon 
the character (see “Supernatural Gifts” in the Dungeon 
Master's Guide for more information), The charm can be 
any one of the following: 


+ Acharm of animal conjuring, a charm of heroism, or 
acharm of vitality, all of which are described in the 
Dungeon Master's Guide. 

+ One of the charms described in the “New Chwinga 
Charms” section in appendix C (see page 283). 


The chwingas remain docile unless a character acts 
aggressively toward them, whereupon they try to hide in 
nearby rocks, plants, or snowdrifts. They won't come out 
until they no longer feel threatened by the humanoids 
in their presence. Clever players might devise creative 
ways to lure the chwingas out of hiding, perhaps by 
doing something odd to gain their attention (such as 
engaging in a snowball fight or dancing in the snow). As 
the DM, you determine the success of such efforts. 


CONCLUDING THE QUEST 


If the characters return with a live chwinga, Dannika 
pays their promised reward of 25 gp, and they get to 
keep the /antern of tracking. If the characters brought 
a chwinga back without having to restrain or harm it, 
Dannika provides them with an additional 25 gp for 
their outstanding service. 


BREMEN 


Founded by dwarf prospectors, the sleepy town of 
Bremen sits on the west bank of Maer Dualdon, at the 
mouth of the Shaengarne River. Bremen’s harbor has 
frozen, requiring local fishers to haul their boats across 
the ice to put them in the lake. Visitors who lack a boat 
ean reach Bremen only by crossing the river, which is 
mostly frozen over. Targos, Termalaine, and Lonely- 
wood are all visible from the docks on clear days. 

If Auril's everlasting winter has one benefit, it’s that 
the hardy folk of Bremen are spared the seasonal floods 
that normally threaten the town in early summer. That's 
not to say that the long nights, frigid air, and howling 
blizzards provide any comfort. They don't. 

Twice in the past two months, residents of Bremen 
have had to mount search parties for their town speaker 
and oldest living resident, Dorbulgruf Shalescar, and 
twice they've found him wandering the frozen shores of 
the Shaengarne in heavy furs, with no memory of how 
he got there. Dorbulgruf, old even by dwarf standards, 
isn't long for this world. Many locals fear the same 
is true of the town itself, if Auril's brutal winter does 
not abate. 


BREMEN IN A NUTSHELL 
Friendliness ##% Services Comfort +ë 


Available Quest. “Lake Monster,” page 28. 

Population. 150. 

Leader. Speaker Dorbulgruf Shalescar (lawful good 
shield dwarf commoner) speaks for the townsfolk. 
Age has addled his mind, and his vacant-eyed stare is 
often mistaken for unflappable calmness. 

Militia. Bremen can muster up to 25 soldiers (use the 
tribal warrior stat block) and 2 veterans. 

Heraldry. A gold circle on a white field, with a horizon- 
tal blue band extending to the left under the circle, 
and a flaring blue triangle opening away from the 
circle on the right. The gold circle represents treasure 
found in the wake of local floods, the blue band is the 
Shaengarne River, the blue triangle is Maer Dualdon, 
and the white field represents snow. 

Sacrifice to Auril. Warmth (see page 21). 

Rivals. Lonelywood, Targos, Termalaine. 


OVERLAND TRAVEL 


Heavy snow has obliterated a trail that once guided 
travelers to Targos. Adventurers determined to make 
the journey on foot can reach Targos in 2 hours. Using 
mounts or dogsleds can reduce this travel time by as 
much as 50 percent. 


LOCATIONS IN BREMEN 


Bremen doesn’t have much to seduce or comfort the 
weary traveler, but the following locations marked on 
map 1.1 are likely to attract adventurers. 


BURIED TREASURES 
Inn 


This inn caters to treasure-seekers, specifically ones 
who pan for treasure along the riverbank in warmer 
weather. During the winter, this establishment has 
few, if any, visitors. The middle-aged innkeeper, Cora 
Mulphoon (neutral good human commoner), treats her 
guests like royalty while trying to conceal the fact that 
she is barely making ends meet. 

Cora’s Loss. Cora is eager to please and apologizes at 
the slightest provocation if she thinks the characters are 
not pleased with her service. She explains briefly that 
her adult son and only child, Huarwar, used to help with 
the chores until two months ago. If the characters ask 
Cora for more information, she says that her son had 
joined a search party to find Speaker Shalescar after 
he went missing during a blizzard one afternoon. The 
speaker was brought back safe and sound, but Huarwar 
got separated from the others and didn’t find his way 
home until the following morning. He had frostbite and 
could barely walk. 

Over the next few days, Huarwar displayed a mean- 
ness toward his mother that was uncharacteristic. The 
change in his demeanor started after Cora found what 
looked like a shard of black ice in her son's room. Huar- 
war snatched it away and threatened his mother with 
bodily harm if she touched it again. 

The next day, two tieflings (a male and a female) ar- 
rived at the inn and offered Huarwar sanctuary in their 
castle. He left with them willingly, taking the shard with 
him and telling his mother that he would never return. 
The tieflings wore amulets that looked much like the 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS oe 


Map 1.1: BREMEN 


shard in Huarwar’s possession. Cora misses her son 
terribly and she hopes he is still alive. She recalls that 
one of the tieflings mentioned a castle, and she knows 
that there are only two castles in Ten-Towns: an intact 
one in Caer-Dineval and a ruined one in Caer-Konig, 
The characters might encounter Huarwar in the keep at 
Caer-Dineval (see “Black Swords,” page 38). 


Five-TAVERN CENTER 
Five unaffiliated taverns 


Five taverns stand in a semicircle around a central yard 
in the heart of Bremen. As the story goes, five brothers 
originally intended to build a tavern together, but each 
had assumed he would be the one to run the business. 
Since none of the brothers would work for the others, 
each built his own tavern, and they all compete for 
customers. 

The five taverns are called Stones, Even Keel, the Riv- 
er’s Mouth, the Grumpy Moose, and the Black-Bearded 
Brother. The taverns are old and poorly maintained. 

Characters who hang out in the taverns are likely to 
hear a rumor or two, which you can determine by rolling 
on the Ten-Towns Rumors table (page 18). 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


LAKE MONSTER 


The characters can gain this quest shortly after they 
arrive in Bremen or if they start the adventure there. 
The quest starts near the docks, where the characters 
come upon a shield dwarf who mistakes them for fish- 
ers looking for work. Any interaction with the dwarf 
is interrupted by a half-elf who claims that a monster 
living in Maer Dualdon has been attacking and sinking 
fishing boats. The half-elf is a local researcher who has 
collected accounts from witnesses of these attacks and 
concluded that it’s some kind of unusual beast. 
Characters who search for the lake monster discover 
that it’s an awakened plesiosaurus. A frost druid (see ap- 
pendix C) recently cast an awaken spell on the creature, 
granting it an Intelligence of 10 and the ability to com- 
municate in the Common tongue. In return, the druid 
expects the plesiosaurus to attack fishing boats from 
Bremen, thus depriving the fishers of their livelihood 
and ultimately forcing the villagers to leave. The plesio- 
saurus feels obliged to heed the druid’s wishes, for fear 
of losing this magical gift of sentience. Consequently, it 
attacks anyone from Bremen who fishes in its domain, 


GETTING THE QUEST 


The lake around the creaky docks is frozen, forcing fish- 
ers to pull their rowboats up onto the ice. Standing be- 
tween a pair of boats is a stout humanoid in cold weather 
clothing, A gray hood hides most of the humanoid’s face, 
but you can make out a wide nose and a long, frosty 
beard. The stout figure stamps their feet, spots you, and 
waves you over. 

“Good, you're here. Get to it, ingrates! Those fish ain't 
gonna catch themselves!” 


The speaker is Grynsk Berylbore, a shield dwarf (com- 
moner) who owns the pair of rowboats tied to the docks. 
The gunwale of one of the boats has what looks like a 
large bite taken out of it, but both vessels are seaworthy. 

Grynsk has been waiting an hour for some fishers he 
hired the night before to arrive. In fact, those fishers 
have decided not to bother showing up, having weighed 
what Grynsk offered to pay them against the danger of 
the lake monster. Grynsk was drunk when he hired the 
fishers and doesn't remember their faces; he assumes 
the characters are his new employees, and he’s quick 
about setting them to work. If the characters ignore him 
or walk away, he yells profanities after them but doesn't 
pursue them. 

Characters who approach Grynsk can see that his 
boats bear the names Burly Ram and Pronged Goat. 
The latter one sports the curious bite mark. Grynsk re- 
minds the characters of what he calls “the agreed-upon 
price” of 5 cp for each trout they catch and scolds them 
for having already wasted precious trout-catching time. 

If the characters explain that they aren't his employ- 
ees, Grynsk frowns and repeats that the salary he’s of- 
fering is 5 cp per caught trout, and “time is better spent 


lin’ than yappin’.” He also grumbles in Dwarvish 

the characters being stupid and needlessly rude. 
If the characters ask about the damage to the Pronged 
‘Goat, Grynsk gives them a dismissive wave of the hand. 


“Don't you see? Bloody ice everywhere. Last crew were 
pparently born with pits for eyes, because they sailed 
tight into a damned ice floe! | ain't gotten around to re- 
pairin’ the gunwale yet, but she floats just fine.” 


Acharacter who succeeds on a DC 11 Wisdom (Insight) 
check can tell that Grynsk is lying. If he is pressured 
about the validity of his story, Grynsk becomes annoyed 
and tells the characters to get off his docks if all they 
want to do is ask stupid questions. 

In truth, the lake monster took a bite out of the 
Pronged Goat and caused its crew to fall into the icy wa- 
ter, where they drowned. The damaged boat was found 
by fishers the next day, drifting crewless in the near 
frozen water. 


TALI COMES ON THE SCENE 

Regardless of how the characters’ dealings with Grynsk 
play out, they are joined by another figure before they 
and the dwarf part company. 


You hear footsteps approaching on the creaky dock. An- 
other figure covered head to toe in cold weather clothing 
has joined you. The figure wags a gloved finger at the 
frosty-bearded dwarf. “You have no honor, Berylbore!” 
the newcomer yells, pulling down a woolen muffler to 
reveal a pale, half-elven face. “You're sending these inno- 
cent people to their deaths. And for what, a few fish?” 

“Pay no mind to this rambling fool!” says Grynsk.. 

“Did you tell them about the monster?” retorts the 
half-elf. 


Grynsk curses the half-elf in Dwarvish before turning 
to the characters and yelling, “Get to work!” He then 
stomps away out of earshot, not eager to hear what the 
half-elf might have to say but still interested in keeping 
an eye on his boats. 

After Grynsk leaves the area, the half-elf approaches 
the characters sheepishly. 


“I'm getting the feeling Grynsk doesn't like me very 
much. Or anyone who steps between him and the gold 
swimming in this lake. I'm Tali. I'm studying the local 
animal life here in Icewind Dale. | just couldn't stay silent 
and watch another crew fall victim to the monster of 
Maer Dualdon.” 


Tali is a neutral good half-elf researcher (scout) who 
is in Icewind Dale to study how changes in climate 
alter the nature of the animal wildlife. Tali presents as 


neither male nor female and requests to be referred to 
as “they” or by name in conversation. Tali speaks with a 
soft voice and tends to go on longwinded tangents about 
the fauna that live in Icewind Dale. 

When Tali heard reports of a creature in Maer Dual- 
don that was attacking the Bremen fishing parties, the 
half-elf decided to investigate and found that boats from 
Bremen were the only vessels to suffer these attacks. 
After deducing this, Tali began frequenting the docks to 
warn any uninformed people looking to venture out onto 
the lake about the danger waiting there. 

Descriptions of the monster vary wildly; some wit- 
nesses say it's the size of an ox, while others say it's 
closer to the size of a house. Some say the monster 
might be a whale or a large fish, and others describe it 
as more lizard-like in appearance, with scaly skin and 
a long neck. If the characters ask about Grynsk’s dam- 
aged boat, Tali explains that it was actually found adrift, 
its crew presumably lost to the lake monster. 

Being a researcher, Tali would like to better under- 
stand the monster, which has only recently become a 
threat. “Perhaps this unending winter has affected its 
eating habits or demeanor in some way,” speculates 
the half-elf. 


“Tali hands you a notebook. “I can't offer you much other 
than my gratitude, but if you're going out on the lake, 
please write down any information you learn about the 
nature of this monster. If we know what's out there, the 
people of Bremen would be much safer for it. And, well, 
it bears the potential to be awfully interesting.” 


Tali asks the characters to record everything they can 
perceive about the creature if they spot it, including its 
size, physical attributes, and general nature. Tali also 
makes it clear that few people have survived an encoun- 
ter with the monster and encourages the characters to 
be careful. 


UNSAFE WATERS 


The characters have the use of Grynsk’s two rowboats 
(see the “Rowboat Statistics” sidebar). The damaged 
one has 36 hit points instead of 50. Three sets of fishing 
tackle are stashed in the center of each boat. 

The lake is covered in ice floes, which make travel 
dangerous. As the characters row out from Bremen, 
their boats must steer around 1d4 + 1 ice floes. Any 
character who tries to steer a boat around an ice floe 
must succeed on a DC 14 Wisdom check, adding their 
proficiency bonus to the roll if they're proficient with wa- 
ter vehicles. On a failed check, the boat hits the ice floe 
and takes 1d6 bludgeoning damage. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS of 


FALLING IN THE WATER 

Any character who falls into the lake is subject to the 
effects of frigid water (see “Frigid Water,” page 11). 
Even after the character gets out of the frigid water, the 
effects persist until the wet clothing is dried out or re- 
placed with warm, dry clothing. 


WATER DEPTH 

Once the characters are away from the shore, you can 
randomly determine the lake's depth in any given loca- 
tion by rolling a d20 and multiplying the die roll by 10 
feet. Conversely, you can just assume the lake is 100 feet 
deep where the characters are. 


SCOUTING THE LAKE 


The characters can use fishing tackle to try to catch 
some fish while they're searching for the lake monster 
(see “Fishing for Knucklehead Trout,” page 11). 

If the characters are out on the lake in a boat, roll on 
the Lake Events table at the end of each hour to deter- 
mine what occurs next. 


Lake Events 


d20 Lake Event 
1-10 The lake is still and quiet for the next hour. A fine 
time for some fishing. 


11-12 The characters spot a rowboat from Lonelywood or 
Termalaine. It has 1d4 fishers (commoners) aboard 
and keeps its distance. The fishers are antisocial 
but nonthreatening. They fish in the vicinity for the 
better part of an hour, then head back toward Lone- 
lywood with their catch. 

13 The characters encounter a keelboat flying the 
Targos flag. It has 1d6 fishers (commoners) and a 
captain (scout) aboard. They don't believe the lake 
monster is real and try to badger the characters into 
fishing elsewhere, They use trawling nets to fish in 
the vicinity for the better part of an hour, then head 
back toward Targos with their catch. 

14 Acold wind blows across the lake for the next hour. 
The lake’s normally still waters become choppy. Un- 
til the wind abates, ability checks made to steer the 
boat and fish for trout have disadvantage, as do sav- 
ing throws against the effects of extreme cold. 

15 Aknucklehead trout (see appendix C) leaps out of 
the lake, makes a tail attack against one random 
character in the boat, and dives back into the frigid 
water. A character with a passive Wisdom (Percep- 
tion) score of 13 or higher is not surprised by the 
fish and can use its reaction to make an opportunity 
attack against it or try to grapple the fish as it dives 
back into the water. 

16-20 The awakened plesiosaurus makes its presence 
known. Run the “Clever Beast” encounter. 


CLEVER BEAST 


When a roll on the Lake Events table indicates that the 
lake monster takes an interest in the characters, read: 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


Ripples disrupt the surface of the lake, causing your boat 
to bob from side to side. A large mass glides through the 
dark water below you. 


Acharacter who succeeds on a DC 13 Intelligence (Na- 
ture) check can identify the creature as a plesiosaurus, 
The creature recognizes boats from Bremen but does 
not attack indiscriminately, trying to gauge the strength 
and determination of the crew before deciding what to 
do. Roll on the Plesiosaurus Behavior table to determine 
how it acts. After behaving as described in the table, the 
plesiosaurus departs unless the characters do some- 
thing that holds its attention. Once it departs, it doesn’t 
return until a roll on the Lake Events table indicates 
another encounter with the creature. 

The plesiosaurus prefers to dine on fish, not people. 
Characters knocked into the lake are more likely to 
freeze to death or sink to the bottom than be eaten. If a 
character harms the plesiosaurus, it reacts in kind. 


PLEsIOSAURUS BEHAVIOR 

d6 Behavior 

1 The plesiosaurus breaches the water with its fins and 
splashes water into nearby boats. It swims to the 
bottom of the lake if attacked. 

2 The plesiosaurus rams a boat from beneath. (If 
the characters have more than one boat, randomly 
determine which one the monster rams.) The boat 
takes 3d6 + 4 bludgeoning damage, and any char- 
acter standing in the boat must succeed on a DC 12 
Dexterity saving throw or fall prone. A character who 
fails this check by 5 or more is knocked overboard 
and falls into the frigid water. 

3 The plesiosaurus surfaces 10 feet away from a boat 
and takes a bite out of it, using its 10-foot reach. (If 
the characters have multiple boats, randomly deter- 
mine which boat the monster bites.) The boat takes 
3d6 + 4 piercing damage. 

4 The plesiosaurus tries to capsize a boat. (If the 
characters have multiple boats, randomly determine 
which boat the monster tries to capsize.) Have the 
characters in the boat make a DC 12 Strength (Ath- 
letics) group check. If the group check succeeds, the 
boat doesn’t capsize. If the group check fails, the 
boat capsizes, and every creature in it falls into the 
frigid water. 

5-6 The plesiosaurus leaves without so much as a hello. 


TALKING TO THE PLESIOSAURUS 

Although the plesiosaurus gives no indication that it's 
intelligent and can speak, the characters might try to 
talk to it regardless. While the monster is underwater, 
it can hear the characters only if they scream at the top 
of their lungs and it’s close by. Conversely, a message 
cantrip or similar magic can be used to get the plesio- 
saurus’s attention. The creature is curious to hear what 
the characters have to say: 


A reptilian head at the end of a long, slender neck rises 
out of the cold, dark water. The creature gazes at you in- 


tently and says, in Common, “I'm listening.” 


A character who converses with the plesiosaurus and 
succeeds on a DC 15 Intelligence (Arcana) check can 
safely conclude that it’s the beneficiary of a druid’s 
awaken spell, and that the effect is permanent. 

The plesiosaurus answers s 


raightforward questions 
and knows the following information: 


+ “Lused to just swim around the lake and eat fish.” 
+ “The human who gave me this gift is named Ravisin 
and claimed to serve the Frostmaiden. Ravisin said I 
must do my part to help the Frostmaiden, who wants 


the people of Bremen to suffer 

« “I don't want to be a stupid beast again.” (The plesio 
saurus doesn't know enough about druidic magic to 
know that its awakening is permanent.) 


A character must succeed on a DC 14 Charisma 
Persuasion) check to convince the plesiosaurus to talk 
more about the purpose of its attacks. The plesiosaurus 

reveals that Ravisin instructed it to spread fear among 
the town’s fishers. The plesiosaurus doesn’t know where 
Ravisin came from or where she is now. Characters 
who undertake “The White Moose” (see page 80), the 
quest associated with Lonelywood, might encounter her 
later. If one or more characters mock or threaten it, the 
plesiosaurus grows angry and tries to capsize their boat 


2 


ADVENTURERS ENCOUNTER THE MONSTER OF Maer DuALOON. 


The plesiosaurus is afraid to stop what it's doing 
because it fears the druid might take away the gift that 
has been bestowed upon it. A character can convince 
the plesiosaurus that its awakening is permanent with a 
successful DC 18 Charisma (Persuasion) check. If this 
check succeeds, the plesiosaurus promises not to attack 
any fishers from the villages anymore. 


ATTACKING THE PLESIOSAURUS 

If the characters attack the plesiosaurus, it dives below 
the surface of the water and remains submerged as it 
attacks the characters’ boats from below. If it ever drops 
below half its hit points, it disengages from the battle 


and dives deeper, leaving the combat. 


BACK TO BREMEN! 


When the characters make it back to Bremen's docks, 
Grynsk shows up soon thereafter, eager to see how 
many knucklehead trout they caught. He honors his 
agreement, paying 5 cp per fish. 

Tali is also eager to see the characters. If any of the 
characters took notes about the lake monster and hand 


their research over, Tali gives the party a spell scroll 
of animal friendship and a pouch containing 5 gp as 
thanks, then heads toward Buried Treasures to pore 
over the characters’ notes. The characters can hear Tali 
mumble the words “interesting,” “fascinating,” and “re- 
markable” in Elvish as they walk away. 
If the characters didn't take any notes, Tali’s hopes are 
dashed, and no reward is forthcoming. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


31 


BRYN SHANDER 


The first stop for most visitors to Icewind Dale is Bryn 
Shander, a walled town perched atop a cold, lonely, 
wind-lashed hill. Bright lanterns suspended over narrow 
streets twist in the wind and add flecks of color to the 
town’s otherwise drab surroundings. 

The friendliness in this settlement has dwindled of 
late. Auril's unyielding winter has greatly reduced the 
number of visitors to Bryn Shander, and local trade is 
suffering for it, eating away at the locals’ sense of humor 
and goodwill. Still, there is no safer place in Icewind 
Dale to spend coin or spend the night. 

The walls of the town stand some 30 feet high and are 
defined by two concentric rings of upright wooden poles, 
the gap between them filled with dirt and rubble. The 
outer ring of poles rises above the top of the wall, pro- 
viding a rampart for defenders stationed on the wood- 
planked walkway. The wall’s hinged gates are 15 feet 
tall and can be barred from the inside with iron-banded 
wood beams. These gates are closed when it’s dark out- 
side—which is to say more often than not. 


BRYN SHANDER IN A NUTSHELL 
Friendliness #2 Services $% Comfort #22 


Available Quest. “Foaming Mugs,” page 34. 

Population. 1,200. 

Leaders. Speaker Duvessa Shane (lawful good human 
noble) speaks for the townsfolk. Though relatively 
young, Duvessa is the head of the Council of Speak- 
ers. Sheriff Markham Southwell (lawful good human 
veteran) commands the militia. 

Militia. Bryn Shander can muster up to 250 soldiers 
(use the tribal warrior stat block) and 20 veterans. 
Heraldry. Black antlers above a vertical shaft of golden 
wheat on a white field, signifying the town’s strength 

and prosperity on the vast, snowy tundra. 

Sacrifice to Auril. Humanoid (see page 21). 

Rivalries. None. 


OVERLAND TRAVEL 


Bryn Shander is connected to Easthaven by the East- 
way, a snow-covered road. In addition, there are snowy 
paths to Caer-Dineval, Good Mead, Targos, and Terma- 
laine. Travel times in the Overland Travel from Bryn 
Shander table assume that characters are on foot; 
mounts and dogsleds can shorten these times by as 
much as 50 percent. 


OVERLAND TRAVEL FROM BRYN SHANDER 


To Travel Time 
Caer-Dineval 10% hours 
Easthaven 72 hours 
Good Mead 6 hours 
Targos 2hours 
Termalaine 6 hours 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


LOCATIONS IN BRYN SHANDER 


The following locations marked on map 1.2 are just a 
few of the places the characters might visit during their 
stay in Bryn Shander. 


BLACKIRON BLADES 
Smithy and outfitter 


This combination shop and smithy stands just north of 
the main square. Garn the Hammer (lawful good shield 
dwarf commoner) manufactures the cheapest blades 

in Ten-Towns, while his sister Elza (lawful good shield 
dwarf commoner) sells adventuring supplies—including 
rations, cold weather gear, ice picks, and snowshoes—to 
fortune-seekers. Most of the veteran sellswords in Ten- 
Towns disdain Garn’s smithcraft, due to the uninspiring 
quality of his work. Jokes told about hapless newcomers 
to Icewind Dale often end with the line “an’ 'e was carry- 
ing a Blackiron blade, to boot!” 


HOUSE OF THE MORNINGLORD 
Shrine of Amaunator (god of the sun) 


Located near Bryn Shander's northeast market square, 
this modest converted house serves as a gathering place 
for worshipers of Amaunator, a god of the sun known 
to take both male and female forms. A retired human 
adventurer named Mishann (neutral good priest of Am- 
aunator) runs the shrine and aspires to see the sun re- 
gain its rightful place in the sky over Icewind Dale. She 
calls Amaunator “the Morninglord,” a name that south- 
erners use to describe Lathander, a god of the dawn and 
rebirth. Mishann views Lathander as a usurper of Am- 
aunator’s light and doesn't like it when people confuse 
the two deities. 

Copper Knobberknocker. Mishann rents her attic 
to a pessimistic rock gnome tinkerer named Copper 
Knobberknocker (chaotic good rock gnome acolyte 
of Lathander), who begrudgingly helps with services 


>EAKER DUVESSA SHANE 


and chores. The two argue incessantly. Copper walks 
‘ound in a fuzzy suit and hood that he made himself; 
though it’s quite warm, it makes him look like a 
teddy bear. 
If the characters talk to Copper, he tells them he’s 
worried about a friend named Macreadus, who is 
onducting research at an old cabin in the wilderness 
see “Black Cabin,” page 116). He says that if the 
haracters find themselves nearby, he would appreciate 
they looked in on Macreadus, who's trying to build a 
vice that could end the Frostmaiden's eternal winter 
and return summer to Icewind Dale. 


THE NORTHLOOK 
n and tavern 


The Northlook is the establishment most frequented by 
mercenaries and adventurers, and as such it's the row- 
iest and most dangerous place to stay in Bryn Shander. 
At the same time, its taproom is the best spot in all of 


Ten-Towns to get leads on profitable ventures, along 


with the latest news and rumors. 
Characters who hang out in the tavern are likely to 


hear a rumor or two, which you can determine by rolling 


»n the Ten-Towns Rumors table (page 18). 

The inn’s proprietor, a retired sellsword named 
Scramsax (neutral human veteran), knows full well 
the cycles of an adventurer's life. He often cuts a break 
for customers who are between jobs, allowing them to 
y here on credit and then presenting them with a bill 
inflated by interest charges to be reckoned with as soon 
as they make their next payday. Those who don't settle 
their accounts discover that the old mercenary still 
ws how to handle a blade, and that he doesn't take 
later” for an answer. 


MERIFF MARKHAM SOUTHWELL 


Of Bitey. Stuffed and mounted on a plaque above the 
hearth in the common room is a battle-scarred knuckle- 
head trout named OY Bitey, who pulled many a fisher 
into the icy depths of Maer Dualdon before it was finally 
caught by a human rogue named Kintyre and her com- 
panion, a human druid who called himself the Maverick. 
They hauled OI Bitey to the Northlook in the hope of 
having it cooked for them, but Scramsax bought it from 
them and had it stuffed instead. Years later, some prank- 


ster wizard cast a spell on the stuffed fish so that it turns 


and snaps at any creature that comes within 5 feet of it. 
Occasionally, seemingly at random, O!' Bitey sings the 
following verse instead: 

There's a place I like to go 

Farther up the river's flow; 


Where it is, I do not know; 
Must be under all that snow. 


Ifa character has the Ring Hunter secret (see appen: 
dix B), the signet ring that the character seeks might be 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


34 


Map 1.2: Bryn SHaNoeR 


in OI Bitey’s gullet, though Scramsax won't let anyone 
even handle the fish unless he’s well compensated, and 
unless the deed can be done without ruining his trophy. 
(The ring, if you decide it's here, is stuck in the fish's 
throat and can be retrieved without surgery.) 


FOAMING Mucs 


The characters can pick up this quest if they start the 
adventure in Bryn Shander or shortly after they arrive in 
town. It begins when the characters learn about a group 
of shield dwarves who were forced to abandon a sled 
loaded with iron ingots, which they were transporting 
from the mines at the base of Kelvin’s Cairn. The ingots 
belong to the Battlehammer clan and are stamped with 
the clan's iconic symbol, a foaming mug. The dwarves 
ask the characters to retrieve the sled and deliver the 
ingots safely to Blackiron Blades, for which each char- 
acter will receive a gemstone as payment. Characters 
who complete this quest also earn a 10 percent discount 
on goods bought at Blackiron Blades—a little thank-you 
from the establishment's grateful owner. 

Complications arise when goblins find the sled before 
the characters do. The characters must either fight the 
goblins or finagle the ingots from them using guile or 
stealth. To further complicate matters, the goblins have 
a wagon pulled by hungry polar bears. The bears aren't 
fussy about what they eat, so clever characters might 
think to turn them against the goblins. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


GETTING THE QUEST 


Three frostbitten shield dwarves approach the charac- 
ters at the Northlook or in the.snow-covered street: 


Three stocky figures bundled in cold weather garb stum- 
ble toward you. They have snowshoes slung over their 
backs and ice picks fastened to their belts, and two of 
them have thick beards. The third holds up a gloved hand 
and says, through a thick wool scarf in a raspy voice, 
“Well met! I'm Hruna, and these are my friends, Korux 
and Storn. We need help, and you look capable.” 


The three dwarves work in a mine located in the valley 
at the base of Kelvin's Cairn. This mine is owned and 
operated by Clan Battlehammer, and it provides most of 
the iron for the smithies in Ten-Towns. 

The dwarves wear cold weather clothing. Only their 
eyes are visible. Treat them as commoners who speak 
Common and Dwarvish; being dwarves, they have dark- 
vision out to a range of 60 feet and resistance to poison 
damage. They carry ice picks (1d4 piercing damage) 
instead of clubs. Each dwarf is briefly described below: 
+ Hruna speaks for the group in a voice made raspy by 


years of smoking. She has lost her right ear and two 
fingers to frostbite. 


e Korux stares in silence and doesn't talk much. He has 

Jost three fingers, two toes, and his nose to frostbite. 

+ Storn has a terrible fear of white dragons and glances 
nervously up at the sky as though he’s expecting one 
to swoop down at any minute. 

Ifthe characters are interested in hearing what Hruna 
has to say, she presents the quest: 


“We're the survivors of a group of dwarves tasked with 
"delivering a sled of iron ingots to Bryn Shander. A yeti 
"surprised us and killed a member of our group. The rest 
"of us fled as the yeti tore Oobok limb from limb. Now 
| we need someone to go back and get the sled for us. As 
_ payment, we offer each of you a gemstone worth fifty 
_ gold pieces. The friendship of the dwarves of Icewind 
Dale can also be a boon in these harsh times. You'll need 
snowshoes to make the trip in good time,” 


Jf the characters slay the dwarves and take the pouch 
of gemstones that Hruna carries on her person (see 
“Treasure” below), witnesses report them to the town 
militia, leading|to their arrest unless they flee Bryn 
Shander at once. 

Korux can cover the expense of equipping the party 
with snowshoes if the characters are too cheap to pay 
for the snowshoes themselves. 

If the characters refuse the quest, the dwarves leave 
in a huff and do not trouble the party again. They spend 
a couple days searching in vain for others to help them 
before returning home. 


TREASURE 

Hruna carries a sealskin pouch that holds six blood- 
stones (50 gp each). Korux carries 15 gp in a yeti fur- 
lined leather pouch. Storn carries a rusty iron lock (3 
gp) as a good luck charm; he lost the key that opens it. 


SEARCH FOR THE SLED 


If the characters agree to complete this quest, Hruna 
points them in the direction they must travel—straight 
toward Kelvin’s Cairn, The sled lies halfway between 
Bryn Shander and Kelvin’s Cairn, in the middle of 

the tundra. 


BLIZZARD 
When the characters get within a couple miles of the 
sled, a blizzard sweeps down from the north and en- 
gulfs them: 


A blizzard descends on you, reducing visibility to twenty 
feet. Kelvin's Cairn vanishes from view as the blowing 
snow and howling wind engulf you. 


Ask the players what their characters do during the 
blizzard, which lasts for 244 hours. They can stop and 
wait for the blizzard to pass, or they can press on. If they 
don't stop and wait, they could lose their bearings and 


veer off course—or worse, they could become separated 
(see “Blizzards,” page 10). 


OOBOK’S REMAINS 
When the characters arrive at the location where the 
dwarves were forced to abandon their sled, read: 


You crest a snow-covered ridge and see a frozen, dis- 
membered corpse in the gully in front of you. Snow 
covers some of the gory bits, but the headless torso and 
severed limbs are visible. You see tracks in the snow all 
around the corpse, and the telltale grooves in the snow 
left behind by a sled that has been hauled away. 


The corpse belongs to Oobok the dwarf. The yeti that 
killed him ate his arms and most of his internal organs 
before leaving with poor Oobok's severed head. Both 
Oobok’s tracks and the yeti’s tracks were erased by the 
wind. The tracks that are present were left by goblins. 

Characters who inspect the tracks around the corpse 
can, with a successful DC 10 Survival (Wisdom) check, 
determine that they are fresh (made in the past hour) 
and belong to a half-dozen Small humanoids wearing 
snowshoes. The tracks lead south. Characters who fol- 
low them for a half-hour catch up to the goblins, who are 
hindered by the sled they're hauling. 


GOBLINS 
When the characters find the goblins, read: 


The creatures you've been following appear to be goblins, 
based on their stature. All six of them groan, grunt, and 
curse loudly as they haul the bulky sled toward what ap- 
pears to be a twenty-foot-tall wagon parked in the snow. 
Harnessed to this conveyance are two roaring polar bears 
that don't look happy. 


These goblins were rolling across the tundra when their 
advance scout, a trained hawk, spotted the abandoned 
sled. The one-eared goblin boss, Izobai, sent six gob- 
lins forth to seize the sled and its cargo, while she and 
two goblins stayed behind to guard the wagon and keep 
an eye on the two polar bears that pull it. 

At the start of the encounter, the characters are 120 
feet behind the sled, and the goblins’ wagon is 120 feet 
farther still. The goblins hauling the sled are too dis- 
tracted to notice they're being followed, so the charac- 
ters have surprise. 

The sled weighs 300 pounds, and the iron ingots add 
another 600 pounds of weight to it. A single goblin can 
push or drag 240 pounds, so it takes at least four of 
them to move the sled. If they come under attack, the 
goblins take cover behind the sled and retaliate with 
ranged attacks. On the goblins’ first turn in combat, 
one of them blows a horn to alert Izobai, who climbs 
to the roof of the wagon with a lit torch in one hand 
and her hooded hawk perched on her other arm. From 
this perch, she watches the battle unfold. If she spots 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS a 


nemies within 60 feet of the wagon, she orders the 
two goblins inside the wagon to shoot arrows at these 
enemies through gaps in the wagon’s walls. These two 
goblins have three-quarters cover. 

If or more goblins are killed, or if Izobai is killed 
or captured, the remaining goblins are willing to nego 
tiate a truce, though it’s up to the characters to initiate 
the negotiations. The goblins are prepared to give up the 

‘on ingots in exchange for their lives and freedom. 

The prolonged winter has made the goblins as miser- 
able as everyone else in Icewind Dale. If the characters 
act kindly toward the goblins, by offering them a blanket 
or some other gift, the goblins give up the sled and the 
ingots and allow the characters to be on their way. The 
goblins hail from the fortre: rkolohk (see page 


140). Their job is to scour the tundra for food and trea- 


sure, as well as creatures to enslave, but they are cold 
and eager to return home. 

Izobai fights only in self-defense. If defeat seems in- 
evitable, she uses her torch to set fire to the wagon and 
flees into the tundra with her hawk, her treasure (see be- 
low), and any goblins in the vehicle. The wagon contains 
goblin beds made of straw; they ignite quickly, turning 
the vehicle into a raging inferno by the start of Izoba’ 
next turn, 


Freeing the Bears. A character who succeeds on a 
12 Wisdom (Animal Handling) check can approach 

the polar bears without aggravating them and use an 
action to free one of them from its harness. On a failed 
check, both bears are hostile toward that character for 
the rest of the encounter. A freed polar bear does not 
attack the character who released it, but all other crea- 
tur n the battlefield are fair game. It would sooner 
eat a goblin than anything else, given how badly the gob- 
lins have treated the bears. The goblins run away from a 
freed polar bear as fast as they can. 

Treasure. Izobai carries two potions of animal friend- 
ship and a sealskin pouch containing 13 sp, 25 cp, and a 
bone whistle (1 sp). The other goblins each carry 1d6 cp 
in sealskin pouches 


CONCLUDING THE QUEST 


Three hundred iron ingots are wrapped in thick burlap 
and tightly secured to the sled with leather straps. Each 
ingot weighs 2 pounds and is stamped with the foaming 
mug symbol of the 
worth 5 sp to a blacksmith. 

Once the ingots are returned to Hruna and then 
delivered to Blackiron Blades in Bryn Shander, the 
characters receive their promised rewards, including 


Battlehammer clan. Each ingot is 


the 10 percent discount on goods they buy at the shop 
afterward. 


Ae: er E 
‘Two SURLY POLAR BEARS PULL 


i BS gk 
en N 


CAER-DINEVAL 


In generations past, travelers to Caer-Dineval had to 
follow the rocky shore of Lac Dinneshere until after 
several hours they spied a small fortress (the “caer” 

for which the town is named) jutting up from the 
prominence where it overlooks the lake. A ferry out 

of Easthaven made the arduous trek unnecessary for 
merchants and other travelers, but the ferry was dis- 
continued two months ago, cutting off Caer-Dineval 

{and its eastward neighbor, Caer-Konig) from the rest of 
Ten-Towns except by the overland route. Town residents 
are furious that the ferry service has stopped, mainly be- 
cause they have not received deliveries of mead from the 
town of Good Mead, and the taverns have run dry. 

As if things weren't bad enough, the town’s harbor has 
frozen over, and the town’s speaker, Crannoc Siever, has 
taken to his bed and is apparently too sick to make pub- 
lic appearances or press the Council of Speakers to get 
the ferry from Easthaven running again. 


CAER-DINEVAL IN A NUTSHELL 
Friendliness #%# Services # Comfort # 


Available Quest. “Black Swords,” page 38. 

Population. 100. 

Leader. Speaker Crannoc Siever (lawful neutral hu- 
man commoner) speaks for the townsfolk. Known 
as a bully who shouts and uses theatrics to make his 
point, he has reportedly been ill for months and rarely 
makes public appearances nowadays. 

Militia. Caer-Dineval can muster up to 25 soldiers (use 
the tribal warrior stat block) and 2 veterans. 

Heraldry. A crenellated stone watchtower (three mer- 
lons, two crenellations) on a dark blue field, with a 
horizontal red fish facing right beneath the tower, 
representing the town's vigilance, harbor, and proud 
fishing tradition. 

Sacrifice to Auril. Food (see page 21). 

Rivals. Caer-Konig, Easthaven. 


OVERLAND TRAVEL 


Asnow-covered path leads from Caer-Dineval to the 
Eastway. Other paths lead to Caer-Konig and Good 
Mead. Travel times in the Overland Travel from 
Caer-Dineval table assume that characters are on foot; 
mounts and dogsleds can shorten these times by as 
much as 50 percent. 


OVERLAND TRAVEL FROM CAER-DINEVAL 


To Travel Time 
Bryn Shander 10% hours 
Caer-Konig 2hours 
Easthaven 9 hours 
Good Mead 8 hours 


LOCATIONS IN CAER-DINEVAL 


Whether arriving “by land or by lac,” visitors are im- 
mediately confronted by the fortifications for which the 
town is famous: its clifftop fortress, known as the Caer, 


and the ruined watchtower at the mouth of the frozen 
harbor. Most of the town’s buildings, which date back 

to the town’s Cormyrean founders, line the path that 
winds down the steep slope from the Caer to the harbor, 
whose docks are perched on the rocky shore. Notewor- 
thy places in town are marked on map 1.3, and map 1.4 
shows the floor plan of the Caer. 


THE CAER 
Castle residence of the town speaker 


This small castle was built over four hundred years ago 
by the Dinev family from Cormyr, before Ten-Towns 
existed as anything more than a few scattered camps 
of explorers living off the land. The Dinevs hoped to 
claim sovereignty over the unsettled lands of Icewind 
Dale. When the castle, dubbed Caer-Dineval, was com- 
pleted, the workers and their families settled in the 
outbuildings they had constructed farther down the 
cliff, along with the families of the retainers the Dinevs 
had brought with them. Over the next few years, many 
explorers in the region came to see the Caer for them- 
selves, and some built cottages in the shadow of its 
walls, No sooner had the small town taken hold than 
marauding orcs swept down from the tundra to put it 
to the torch. The town's residents tried to take refuge in 
the castle, but the Dinevs, alarmed by the size of the orc 
horde, barred the gates and refused to open them. The 
orcs fell upon the stranded people and slaughtered them 
to the last one. The Dinevs survived the initial assault, 
but not the siege that followed. After three weeks of be- 
ing confined in the Caer, the Dinevs were so weakened 
by hunger that they were unable to resist when the orcs 
scaled the castle walls. Thus, the Dinev family’s brief 
rule in Icewind Dale came to a bloody end. 

The Caer remained in the orcs’ possession for several 
years, until they were driven out by a small army of 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS ™ 


38 


(Ruined 
‘Watchtower 


Map 13: Caer-Dinevat 


human settlers from other parts of the dale who banded 
together. The victors claimed the castle and its lands, 
and those with families brought them here to settle. 
Their descendants live here to this day and keep alive 
the memory of their ancestors’ deeds. 

Today, the keep is the residence of the town speaker, 
Crannoc Siever, who recently made the mistake of open- 
ing his doors to the Knights of the Black Sword. This 
group consists of people from all walks of life who owe 
their lives to the archdevil Levistus (see “Black Swords” 
below for detailed descriptions of the castle and the cult 
of Levistus). 


DineEv's REST 
Closed inn 


At the south end of town is Caer-Dinevat's inn, a drafty 
old building with boarded-up windows and a crooked 
weathervane shaped like a rearing dragon. The place 
has been out of business for almost a year. 

Six duergar hide inside the ramshackle inn and re- 
main out of sight until Xardorok’s chardalyn dragon 
attacks the town (see chapter 4). 


THE UPHILL CLIMB 
Tavern 


This tavern is situated northwest of the Caer, where it of- 
fers a spectacular view of the lake and the frozen docks. 
The Climb serves hot chowder but is all out of beer and 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


spirits, which might explain why locals don't frequent 
the place as much as they used to. The proprietor, a rug- 
ged middle-aged man named Roark (lawful good human 
commoner), blames the cursed winter and the closing 
of the Easthaven ferry for his business woes. Although 
he has spare rooms with empty beds, he claims to have 
no available guest accommodations. If adventurers are 
looking for a place to rest, he suggests that they try 

the Caer. Roark can’t guarantee that Speaker Crannoc 
Siever's attendants will welcome them with open arms, 
given how sick the speaker has been of late. 

Roark and some of his patrons know something is 
amiss in the castle, but they refrain from talking about 
it. Roark figures that if he steers adventurers toward the 
castle, they'll figure out what's going on by themselves. 


BLACK SWORDS 


The characters don't get this quest in the customary 
way, which is to say that the residents of Caer-Dineval 
aren't counting on adventurers to help them. The quest 
falls into the party's lap if the characters decide to visit 
the Caer. Here are a couple reasons why the characters 
might go there: 


Looking for a good night's rest in Caer-Dineval, the 
characters are directed to the castle by Roark or some 
other NPC. 

Asad story told by Cora Mulphoon, the proprietor of 
the Buried Treasures inn in Bremen (see page 27), 
might spur the characters into searching the castle for 
her missing son, Huarwar. 


Crannoc Siever, the town speaker, resides in the 
castle and is also a prisoner. Devil-worshiping cultists 
calling themselves the Knights of the Black Sword have 
taken over and confined Crannoc to his quarters while 
spreading stories about the speaker's ill health to con- 
ceal their presence and restrict access to the castle, The 
cultists keep the speaker alive in case they need him to 
make a public appearance. They can also use him as a 
hostage if the Ten-Towners take up arms against them. 
These devil worshipers keep a low profile while seeking 
out new members to join their ranks. 


KNIGHTS OF THE BLACK SWORD 


The Knights of the Black Sword are a secret society of 
cultists devoted to Levistus, the archdevil who rules Sty- 
gia, the sixth layer of the Nine Hells, from the confines 
of an ice prison from which he cannot escape. 

Most of the cultists are Icewind Dale natives who 
would have perished in the wilderness had Levistus 
not intervened on their behalf. The cultists’ stories are 
all the same: the archdevil reached out to them in their 
minds as they were freezing to death, offering a second 
chance at life in exchange for their absolute devotion. 
After they agreed to follow Levistus, a pale glow caught 
their eye in the snow nearby, leading to the discovery of 
a sword-shaped amulet of chardalyn. Each of these am- 
ulets has an inner radiance that provides warmth and 
aid, protecting its wearer against the cold while guiding 
them safely back to civilization. Once its wearer reaches 
Ten-Towns, the talisman loses its inner radiance, yet 
the cultists keep their amulets as signs of their devotion 


Carr-DINEVAL IS BUILT ON THE ROCKY SHORE OF LAC 


DWNNESHERE, WITH KELVIN'S CAIRN LOOMING BEHIND IT. 


© the archduke of Stygia (see the “Chardalyn Amu- 
lets” sidebar). 

The Knights of the Black Sword have members 
seattered throughout Ten-Towns. They welcome new 
members and answer to Levistus, who speaks to them 
infrequently using a powerful form of cross-planar te- 
lepathy, Levistus has recently called upon them to help 
another of their master's disciples—an albino tiefling 
wizard named Avarice—achieve her goals. Even though 
they find her demanding and difficult to live with, they 
dare not defy her. 

Levistus has warned the Knights of the Black Sword 
that duergar are plotting the destruction of Ten-Towns. 
He believes the duergar are acting on behalf of Asmo- 
s, the Lord of the Hells and his infernal jailer, but 
as not shared this information with the cult. The cult’s 
oldest living member, Hethy! (a peg-legged shield dwarf 
who has lost her right foot to frostbite), hates duergar 
as most dwarves do. She has convinced the other cult 
members to forge alliances with anyone willing to op- 
pose the duergar, including stray bands of adventurers. 

The Caer serves as the cult’s headquarters. The 
cult’s presence is the worst-kept secret in Caer-Dineval, 
though few locals ever speak of it. 


GAME STATISTICS 

The Knights of the Black Sword are lawful evil cultists 
and cult fanatics who speak Common and Infernal. 
They have the following additional trait: 


Icy Doom. When the cultist dies, its corpse freezes for 9 days, 
during which time it can’t be thawed, harmed by fire, animated, 
or raised from the dead 


CULT BEHAVIOR 

The Knights of the Black Sword take orders from Le- 
vistus, who speaks to them telepathically. The contact 
is one-way only, although a vainglorious tiefling cult 
fanatic named Kadroth falsely claims to have the arch- 
devil's ear. 

The cultists shun contact with outsiders and, posing 
as members of Speaker Crannoc's staff, turn away all 
visitors to the castle. If the time is right, however, they 
welcome the characters with open arms. That time 
= m 

CHARDALYN AMULETS 

The chardalyn amulets worn by the Knights of the Black 

Sword have been corrupted by the magic of Levistus. A 

detect evil and good spell or similar magic reveals that the 

amulets are desecrated objects. 
Each day at dawn, roll a d6 for each chardalyn amulet in 

a character's possession. On a roll of 1, the character must 

succeed on a DC 10 Charisma saving throw or become 

lawful evil, unless the character has that alignment already. 

Take the character's player aside to describe how the player 

should roleplay the new alignment. A lawful evil character 

craves power and tries to exert control over others, by 
being either cruel or manipulative. 

The alignment change can be undone by any magic that 
ends a curse, but after nine days, it can be reversed only by 

a wish spell or divine intervention. 
~ — 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


40 


comes when Levistus instructs the cultists, in no uncer- 
tain terms, to form an alliance with the party. For that to 
happen, one of the following statements must be true: 


+ One of the characters has the Runaway Author secret 
(see appendix B). 

+ The characters found and killed the group of duergar 
hiding in Dinev's Rest (see page 38). 

+ The characters meddled in the affairs of Nildar Sun- 
blight (see “The Unseen,” page 47) or his older 
brother, Durth (see chapter 2). 


Once the cultists are told that the characters’ goals 
align with theirs, they will do everything in their power 
to make the characters feel safe and happy, short of 
giving up their stronghold and their leverage over 
Speaker Crannoc, 

Levistus tells the cultists to terminate the alliance if 
one of the following events comes to pass: 


The characters attack any member of the cult other 
than Kadroth, whom Levistus secretly despises. 

The characters harm Avarice, the albino tiefling 
wizard, or inhibit her efforts to plunder the lost city 
of Ythryn. 

The characters give up their fight against the duergar 
menace threatening Ten-Towns. 


GETTING INTO THE CASTLE 

The characters need not wait for an invitation to enter 
the castle. They can make their way inside using any 
number of stratagems, including the following: 


The characters can ambush one or more cultists as 
they leave the castle on cult business, then use the 
cultists’ amulets and garb to fashion disguises for 
themselves. 

With the aid of climbing gear or magic, the characters 
can scale the castle walls seen or unseen. 

The characters can use a charm person spell or simi- 
lar magic to convince a cultist to let them inside. 


APPROACHING THE CAER 
When the characters first approach the castle, read: 


A sturdy, stone castle devoid of warmth and ostenta- 
tion squats atop the cliffs overlooking the town and the 
frozen harbor. Warding the castle entrance are thick, 
battle-hardened wooden doors. Four cylindrical guard 
towers have wind-worn flags bearing the town’s heraldry 
fluttering above their tiled, conical roofs. These towers 
are connected by icy battlements and parapets. Atop the 
castle walls and within the guard towers, torches flicker. 


GENERAL FEATURES 

The snow-covered ground outside the castle is 10 feet 
lower than the castle’s courtyard. Thus, the battlements 
and parapets that top the outer walls appear 20 feet 
high from the outside and are 10 feet high on the inside. 
Icy stone steps at either end of the courtyard climb to 
the tops of these walls, which are unmanned. Arrow 
slits in the outer walls of the guard towers and central 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


keep provide three-quarters cover to those standing 
behind them. 

Most of the castle is lit by torches regardless of the 
time of day. Doors inside the castle aren't locked unless 
the text states otherwise. 


CASTLE DEFENDERS 

The castle's relatively small size makes it possible for 
one cult member to sound the alarm simply by yelling. 
Ifan alarm is raised, the following cult members are 
tasked with defending the castle: 


+ Twelve cultists of various races and genders, who nor- 
mally reside on the ground floors of the guard towers 
(area C4). 

+ Two cult fanatics (a human named Huarwar Mul- 
phoon and a tiefling named Fel Suparra), who nor- 
mally guard the gatehouse (area C6). 


CAER LOCATIONS 
The following locations are keyed to map 1.4. 


Cl. MAIN GATE 

Two lowered iron portcullises and two sets of closed 
wooden doors seal off the castle. The gatehouse (area 
C6) holds the mechanisms that raise and lower the 
portcullises as well as open and close both sets of 
doors. Knock spells and similar magic can bypass these 
barriers, which otherwise require siege engines to 
force open. 

Gate Guards. Characters who stand outside the main 
gate and announce their arrival can speak to the guards 
in the gatehouse. Unless Levistus has told them to do 
otherwise, they deny the characters entry, declaring 
that “Speaker Crannoc Siever is too sick to entertain 
guests!” If the characters claim to have one or more 
healers among them, the guards respond, “Speaker 
Crannoc Siever has no need for your heathen rituals!” 


C2. Snowy COURTYARD 


Footprints in the snow lead to various doors along this 
courtyard’s perimeter, including a tall double door to 
the keep, with its unwelcoming row of arrow slits and 
barred windows on the upper floor. To the east of the 
double door is a small, single-story building with a 
slanted, snow-covered roof. West of the double door are 
two unused merchant stalls with torn canopies. Tucked 
under some icy stairs in the northwest corner is a slen- 
der wooden hut with a crescent moon carved into its 
flimsy door. 


The hut is an outhouse, currently empty. Many tracks 
lead to and from it. 


C3. KENNEL AND SLED STORAGE 

Six friendly sled dogs (use the wolf statistics) are 
housed inside this kennel. They bark loudly whenever 
someone approaches within 10 feet of the door. The 
cultists can hear the barking but choose to ignore it. 


Map 1.4; Keep at Caer-Dine 


A dogsled is stored here, along with the dogs’ har- 
nesses and reins. 

Kennel Boy. Sleeping among the dogs is an eight- 
year-old Calishite youth named Alassar Sulmander 
{neutral human noncombatant). He was found stowing 
away inside a crate of supplies that was delivered to the 
castle over a month ago and now does menial chores 
for the cultists. Alassar knows the layout of the castle 
(levels 1 and 2), and he can be coerced or bribed into 
helping the characters. He can move about the castle 
without drawing suspicion. 


C4. GUARD TOWERS 

The lower level of each tower contains three cultists at 
rest. The furnishings on this level include six wooden 
cots with furs and matching footlockers (where the cult- 
ists keep their cold weather clothing). A copper brazier 
full of hot coals is situated in the middle of the room. 
Protruding from the brazier’s base is a bellows that can 
be pumped to reheat the dying coals. 

A wooden staircase hugs the outer wall as it climbs to 
the second level, which is unfurnished. Gusts of wind 
enter through the arrow slits on this level. 

Northwest Tower. This tower has two additional fea- 
tures on its ground level: a stone trapdoor in the floor, 
beneath which is a ladder that descends to area C16, 
and a secret passage to the speaker's office (area C9). 
The secret door is spotted automatically by any charac- 
ter who examines that section of wall. 


C5. ARMORY 

In the middle of this small room is a rack of twenty 
spears, and resting against the back wall is an unlocked 
wooden chest containing six flasks of alchemist's fire. 
Hanging from hooks on the walls are eight longbows 
and eight quivers. Each quiver holds fifty arrows. 


C6. GATEHOUSE 

This chamber is equipped with a system of wheels that 
raises the portcullises and opens the outer sets of doors. 
In the middle of the floor are murder holes through 
which arrows can be shot or alchemist's fire can be 
poured. The south wall has a row of five arrow slits 
built into it. 

Two wooden cots covered with furs are in the north- 
east corner of the room. Of the two cult fanatics sta- 
tioned here, one stands guard while the other sleeps. 
These individuals are briefly described below: 


+ Huarwar Mulphoon is a brooding, pessimistic human 
in his late twenties, the son of Cora Mulphoon (see 
“Buried Treasures,” page 27). 

Fel Suparra is a tiefling. She has darkvision out to 

a range of 60 feet and resistance to fire damage. As 
Huarwar's friend and mentor, she’s the one most 
responsible for tearing him away from his mother and 
pushing him up through the ranks of the cult. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


KaororH 


C7. Great HALL 

The double door leading to the courtyard (area C2) can 
be sealed shut with a huge crossbar. It takes an action to 
slide the crossbar into place or retract it. 


This once-grand hall is dimly lit by chandeliers that are 
missing most of their candles. Three long tables in the 
center of the hall are littered with dirty dishes, which a 
young tiefling servant is slowly collecting. 

A stone staircase ascends to a pair of twenty-foot- 
high balconies that hug the walls, On the north landing, 
directly across from the main entrance, hangs a banner 
depicting the town's heraldry: a stone watchtower on a 
dark blue field, with a horizontal red fish facing to the 
right under the tower. 


The servant is a fourteen-year-old tiefling noncombatant 
named Mere, whom Kadroth found begging for food in 
Bryn Shander. Mere is frightened of Kadroth and would 
like to get out from under his thumb but can't figure out 
how. The servant knows the layout of all levels of the 
castle but can't be coerced or bribed into helping the 
characters until Kadroth is no longer a concern, Mere 
can move about the castle without drawing too much 
suspicion but trembles in Kadroth’s presence. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


Mere knows about the cult’s allegiance to Levistus 
and its animus toward the duergar. Mere has also met 
the albino tiefling wizard who has made a lair for herself 
in the cistern (area C22). 


C8. SPEAKER'S DEN 

This well-appointed sitting room is where Crannoc 
Siever used to meet with visitors, whether distinguished 
guests or concerned townsfolk. Comfortable furnish- 
ings abound, and the cultists keep a fire burning in 

the hearth. 

Standing outside the door to the speaker's office 
(area C9) is a sadistic little klutz (human cultist) named 
Thoob, whose job is to serve at Kadroth’s beck and call. 
It's a mostly thankless role that comes with a mountain 
of verbal abuse. The only time Thoob feels rewarded 
is when Kadroth orders him to relay instructions to 
another cultist, in effect empowering Thoob to boss 
around others in Kadroth’s name. 


C9. SPEAKER'S OFFICE 

Kadroth is a paunchy, lawful evil tiefling cult fanatic 
who has darkvision out to a range of 60 feet and re- 
sistance to fire damage. From this usurped office, he 
coordinates all cult activities in Ten-Towns. It's a role he 
carved out for himself by asserting that he’s tight with 
Levistus. He rules the roost by sheer force of personal- 
ity, though it chafes him that Hethyl Arkorran (see area 
C13) has more respect and influence within the cult. 
Kadroth doesn't involve Avarice (see area C21) in cult 
affairs because he fears her spellcasting ability and her 
connection to the Arcane Brotherhood. She could take 
over the cult anytime she wanted, and Kadroth doesn't 
want to give her any reason to do so. 

For all his political machinations, Kadroth is a vision- 
ary who has so far made the cult stronger through his 
actions and decisions. He spends hours behind his desk, 
staring into the burning fireplace and drawing inspira- 
tion from its crackling flames. The slightest disturbance 
upsets him. 

Kadroth appreciates the wisdom of maintaining the 
illusion that Speaker Crannoc Siever is still in charge, 
if only to keep Caer-Dineval’s townsfolk from becoming 
restless. Thus, when necessary, Kadroth has the town 
speaker brought to his office to sign official documents. 

Ring of Keys. In addition to his weapons and cult 
regalia, Kadroth carries a ring of keys that can lock or 
unlock every interior door in the castle. 


C10. SERVANTS’ QUARTERS 
This room is for servants to rest, bathe, and clean their 
uniforms, and the furnishings reflect as much. After tak- 
ing over the castle, the cultists imprisoned most of the 
speaker's servants (in area C24) because they couldn't 
be trusted, retaining only the cook (see area C11), 
Mere, the cult’s tiefling servant (see area C7), sleeps 
here as well. 

Supplies. Against the west wall are three crates of 
torches next to a large, stacked pile of cut wood. 


Cll. KITCHEN 


This kitchen reeks of fish. It is furnished with stone ov- 
ens, a fireplace for roasting skewers of meat and boiling 
soups, and wood-block countertops. A portly cook busies 
himself at a table while a kettle belches steam over a fire 
in the hearth. A kennel by the door holds a pair of goats. 


The two goats are harmless and will eat just about any- 
thing. The cook, a human named Karou Salafan (neu- 
tral good human commoner), was not replaced by the 
cultists because he knows fifty different ways to cook 
and prepare knucklehead trout. Although he has some 
knowledge about the affairs of the keep, he doesn’t want 
to know about any shady business, so he keeps his head 
down and his lips shut tightly. 


C12. KADROTH’S BEDCHAMBER 

A large, gilded mirror covering most of the east wall is 
what made Kadroth want this room for himself. Other 
furnishings include an ornately carved wooden table 
and chair, where Kadroth takes his meals. Kadroth’s 
black cat, Touche, is the chamber’s sole occupant, 
although Mere (see area C7) routinely checks on the fire 
to make sure the room stays warm. 


C13. SOOTHSAYER’S ROOM 


A chilly draft wafts through this bedroom despite a 
roaring fire in the hearth. Bundled under a thick quilt 
and seated in a squat rocking chair in front of the fire is 
a venerable dwarf with a wooden peg where her right 
foot should be. Next to her, on a small table, is a plate of 
food. “I've been dreading this moment,” she says. 


The shield dwarf in the rocking chair is Hethyl Arkor- 
ran, a noncombatant. She is the cult's soothsayer and 
oldest member—too old, in fact, to harm anyone. On the 
plate next to her is a knucklehead trout fillet topped with 
goat's milk. Hethyl won't touch it, because she’s sick to 
death of trout. 

Hethyl is a heartless creature—not cruel out of spite, 
just blunt in a mean, uncaring way. She doesn't hide the 
truth or mince words, and she knows her soul is going 
to the Nine Hells when she dies. She also sees glimpses 
of the future, which means she's rarely shocked by 
what happens around her. These revelations have kept 
the cultists one step ahead of their enemies for a long 
time, but Hethyl’s health is failing, and there’s nothing 
that can be done for her given her age. She considers 
Kadroth a worthy leader but lost his respect when she 
told him that Levistus hates his guts. Kadroth has tried 
hard to forget that conversation and looks forward to the 
day when Hethyl drops dead. 

Hethyl has foreseen her doom. She dies of natural 
causes immediately after sharing the following informa- 
tion with the characters: 


HeTHyL ARKORRAN 


Xardorok Sunblight, a duergar warlord, will conquer 
Icewind Dale unless the characters defeat him. 
Xardorok has a fortress on the surface, hidden in 

the Spine of the World. It contains, among other 
things, a forge powered by the still-beating heart of a 
red dragon. 

Xardorok has a plan for the systematic destruction of 
Ten-Towns, which the characters can discover if they 
search his fortress. 

The characters will die if they face Xardorok too soon, 
They must test their mettle against the horrors that 
haunt the farthest reaches of Icewind Dale before they 
can hope to survive the perils of Xardorok's fortress. 


C14. SPEAKER'S BEDCHAMBER 


This room is immaculately furnished. It has all the trap- 
pings of a royal bedchamber, including a soft bed, warm 
quilts, elegant tapestries, and a gilded chamber pot. Bars 
over the windows dispel the air of luxury somewhat, as 
does the guard standing just inside the door. 


A human cultist named Yajath has the unenviable task 
of guarding Speaker Siever and making sure he doesn't 
leave this room. Once the characters deal with Yajath, 
they can reckon with the town speaker: 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS “a 


44 


Squatting in the far corner of the room is a pale man 
wearing a nightgown. He has an unkempt beard and 
seems hard at work filling a chamber pot. “Perfect tim- 
ing,” he says, his voice dripping with sarcasm. 


Speaker Crannoc Siever (lawful neutral human com- 
moner), a 49-year-old unmarried man, has been under 
house arrest for the past two weeks. Although he’s not 
the picture of good health, he's not deathly ill, as the 
cult’s propaganda would have others believe. The only 
time Crannoc is permitted to leave this room is when 
Kadroth needs him to sign paperwork in area C9. 

The cultists slew the speaker's guards but are keeping 
his servants alive. Crannoc has been warned to behave 
himself, lest his servants pay the ultimate price. He 
doesn’t know where the servants are being held, but he 
knows the cook is still making meals. He suspects the 
rest are being kept in the cistern under the castle. 

Crannoc won't be happy until he regains control of the 
castle and his captors are punished for their crimes. He 
has little to say about his captors, since they don't share 
information with him: 


His captors arrived under false pretenses, claiming to 
be neutral arbiters employed by the Council of Speak- 
ers to help Caer-Dineval resolve its fishing disputes 
with Easthaven and Caer-Konig. 

The one calling the shots is a tiefling named Kadroth, 
who answers to someone named Levistus. 


C15. OLD LIBRARY 


This room was set on fire years ago and never repaired. 
Evidence remains of floor-to-ceiling shelves along the 
walls. A draft issues from a darkened fireplace, stirring 
the cobwebs around it. 


Caer-Dineval’s founders, the Dinev family, brought with 
them an extensive collection of rare books. That collec- 
tion, stored here, was burned by orcs when the castle 
was sacked many years ago. The room has not been 
used since, 


C16. UNDER THE CASTLE 
If characters peer down through the open trapdoor in 
the northwest guard tower, read: 


Awooden ladder clings to the west wall, held in place 
with iron brackets. The ladder descends twelve feet to a 
hall made of mortared stone lit and heated by four sput- 
tering torches. Extending from the east end of the hall is 
a water-filled cistern. A small rowboat is tied off near the 
water's edge. 


A 5-foot-wide, 8-foot-high passage in the north wall 
leads to area C17. For more information about the cis- 
tern and the rowboat, see area C18. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


C17. COLD STORAGE 


This room is empty except for four sheet-wrapped bodies 
lying side by side on the floor. 


The bodies are the remains of four cultists (three hu- 
mans and a halfling) who were killed by the speaker's 
guards during the hostile takeover of the castle. The 
ground is too frozen to bury them, so they're being kept 
here in cold storage. 

Old furniture used to be kept here, but it has long 
since been smashed to kindling and burned for heat. 


C18. WEST CISTERN 


Stone steps descend into the icy water that partially 
floods this twenty-foot-wide, arched tunnel, which con- 
tinues eastward into darkness. The roof arches twelve 
feet above the water, which is eight feet deep. The row- 
boat tethered at the water's edge looks safe to use, 


Any character who gives the frigid water more than a 
passing glance can see swollen, half-frozen bodies near 
the bottom, weighed down by their chain shirts. There 
are six human corpses and six dwarf corpses in all—the 
remains of the castle guards killed by the cultists. 

A 5-foot-wide, 8-foot-high passage cuts into the north 
wall 20 feet beyond the rowboat, leading to area C19. A 
similar passage farther east leads south to area C20. 

Eastern Door. At the eastern end of the cistern is a 
10-foot-square, 2-foot-thick, half-submerged slab of blue 
marble that blocks access to area C23. This slab is far 
enough away that characters won't see it with torches 
or darkvision unless they move farther into the cistern. 
The lever that lowers and raises this gate is in area C22. 
The gate can also be opened with a knock spell or sim- 
ilar magic. 

Rowboat. This boat comes with two oars and can 
hold two Medium characters plus their gear. 


C19. STORAGE 

Characters can use the rowboat to reach this area, the 
floor of which is above the water level in the cistern 
(area C18). A harmless rat chews through the corner 
of a sack of grain lying on the floor. This room is other- 
wise empty. 


C20. SHRINE TO LEVISTUS 


Frost covers the floor of this dark, fifteen-foot-square 
room. To your left and right are narrow tunnels, and 
across from the entrance stands an eight-foot-tall pillar of 
ice with a horned, pale-skinned, humanoid figure trapped 
inside it. The pillar is wrapped in black chains, and the 
wall behind it is covered with brown fungus. 


figure in the pillar is a wooden mannequin painted 
d dressed to resemble the archdevil Levistus. The 
sanequin was encased in ice, which was chiseled into 
pillar shape and wrapped in chains. The ice is kept 
ezen at all times by the 10-foot-square patch of brown 
oid growing on the wall behind it (see “Brown Mold” 
the Dungeon Master's Guide). Any creature that 
Buches the pillar of ice is close enough to the brown 
sold to be harmed by it. 
Any character who succeeds on a DC 10 Intelligence 
Religion) check can guess, correctly, that the cultists 
this frozen, chain-wrapped effigy as an altar. 


l. AVARICE’S QUARTERS 


This room is the private quarters of an albino tiefling who 
sits at a small desk in the dark, writing in a book with 
white leather covers. An ink-black crow perches on one of 
er horns and seems to read along with her scrivening. 
lithout taking her eyes off the page, she says to you, 
out.” 


Other furnishings in this former storeroom include a 
ped rug, a narrow bed, and a freestanding mirror in a 
poden frame, none of which are remarkable. 

The albino tiefling is a member of the Arcane Brother- 
‘hood named Avarice (see appendix C). The raven is her 
familiar, Skelm. Levistus sent a telepathic message to 
Avarice, urging her not to antagonize a certain party of 
adventurers until they've helped her reach her goal: the 
‘est Netherese city of Ythryn. Realizing that the charac- 
ters are the ones Levistus warned her about, she tries to 
be as hospitable as possible but won't discuss why she’s 
Bere or what she's after. 

Tf she no longer feels safe in the castle, Avarice leaves 
without a fight. (There are plenty of other places in Ten- 
Towns where she can make herself comfortable.) 

Avarice’s two gargoyles, Gargle and Gurgle, are not 
present. She recently sent them to spy on her wizardly 
rivals. Avarice can speak to her gargoyles telepathically, 
thanks to her Rary’s telepathic bond spell, and orders 
them back to the castle as soon as the characters con- 
front her. If the characters slay or capture Avarice, the 
gargoyles attack them as they leave the keep. 

Treasure. Avarice keeps her staff of frost within easy 
reach. When she’s not writing in her spellbook, she 
Sticks it in a fur-lined satchel. See Avarice’s description 
in appendix C for more information about the spellbook. 


C22. IRON LEVER 

This unlit room is empty except for an iron lever that 
protrudes from an iron plate embedded in the north 
wall. This lever raises and lowers the blue marble slab 
that seals off area C23. 


C23. East CISTERN 

The dark cistern continues for another 40 feet beyond 
the blue marble slab. The water in this part of the cis- 
tern is thankfully free of half-frozen corpses. A narrow 
tunnel carved into the north wall leads to area C24. 


C24. PRISONERS 
After the cultists took over the castle, they trapped most 
of the servants in this area. 


A five-foot-wide, eight-foot-high tunnel leads to a dark, 
cold room that reeks of filth. 


Five of the speaker's servants (unarmed human com- 
moners) have been trapped here by the cult for the past 
two weeks. All of them are malnourished, since the cult- 
ists feed them only once every few days. The servants 
are briefly described below: 


Lanthis Alderdusk is Speaker Crannoc’s 64-year-old 
assistant, notary, and scribe. He's feisty and spry 
for his age. 

Elprekt Norbrav is the effete, tall, skeletally thin, 
55-year-old butler. 

Mylbara Norbrav is Elprekt’s stout, 45-year-old wife 
and the speaker's Dwarvish translator. 

Tam Sharf, a mute, 30-year-old petty thief wanted for a 
murder in Luskan, is the speaker's housemaid. 

Dassir Ravenscar is the speaker's shy, 25-year-old 
dogkeeper. 


These servants have decided to mount a prison break. 
When they hear the blue stone slab open in area C23, 
they hide. If the characters make their identities known 
before entering the room, the servants come forward 
and plead with the characters to free them. Otherwise, 
the servants try to ambush the first character to enter 
the room. They roll initiative as a group and make one 
grapple attempt only, with advantage on the d20 roll. 
(Apply no modifiers to the roll.) If they fail to grapple the 
character, they scurry to the far corners of the room and 
huddle in defeat. 


OUTCOME: DARK ALLIANCE 


Characters who forge a friendly relationship with the 
Knights of the Black Sword can use the Caer as a base 
of operations, coming and going for as long as this dark 
alliance lasts. The northeast guard tower is set aside for 
them to stay in. Avarice tries to minimize her contact 
with the party during this time; meanwhile, her gar- 
goyles take shifts atop the southwest guard tower, from 
where they can watch the characters come and go. 


OUTCOME: ROUTING THE CULTISTS 


If the characters rout the cultists and release Speaker 
Crannoc Siever, the speaker asks them to call out the 
town militia so that the castle can be refortified. Hence- 
forth, the speaker lets the characters rest at the castle 
whenever they need to. His home is their home, so to 
speak. Characters will quickly learn that the speaker is 
a blowhard and firebrand who enjoys living like a king 
behind his castle walls. 

Without their leaders, Kadroth and Hethyl, the 
Knights of the Black Sword are rudderless until Avarice 
finally steps up to fill the power vacuum. The characters 
are doomed to cross paths with the cultists again in 
chapter 8. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


CAER-KONIG 


The white, snow-covered slopes of Kelvin's Cairn loom 
large behind this quiet lakeside town. Caer-Konig 
started as a camp for a group of mountaineers from the 
northern Moonsea region. As the camp grew, a wooden 
palisade was added to discourage raiders. Later came 
the stone castle of Caer-Konig. Alas, neither the palisade 
nor the castle fared well; both fell to orcs before falling 
into ruin. 

Caer-Konig as it is known today consists of terraced 
rows of houses that recede from the shore of Lac Din- 
neshere like the tiers of an amphitheater. The harbor is 
frozen, its docks skewed and broken by the shifting ice. 
Buried under the snow on the slopes above the last row 
of houses are the ruins of the Caer that gave the town 
its name—a reminder to the people of Caer-Konig that 
nothing lasts in this corner of the world. 

Travel to and from this remote town was expedited by 
the ferry that ran out of Easthaven, but with the ferry 
shut down, Caer-Konig is completely cut off by moun- 
tains, lake, and snow. Forced to live on what they can 
haul out of the iced-over lake, the people of Caer-Konig 
are bitter and angry. They believe that the rest of Ten- 
Towns has abandoned them. The only thing that keeps 
the townsfolk from leaving is the beer at the local tav- 
ern, which never seems to run out. 

As if things weren't bad enough, the town has suffered 
several mysterious break-ins recently, with no evidence 
of the intruders except dwarven boot tracks in the snow 
leading north. Since there are no known settlements 
in that direction, the townsfolk assume that Auril’s 
everlasting winter has taken its toll on the dwarves of 
Kelvin’s Cairn, forcing them to come down from the 
mountain in search of food or beer. In truth, the town is 
beset by invisible duergar searching for chardalyn. 

The town speaker, a heavy-drinking dragonborn 
named Trovus, patrols at night to keep an eye out for 
trouble, In his inebriated state, however, Trovus is prone 
to wandering out onto the icy lake or passing out on the 
ramshackle docks, and he almost never remembers his 
nightly patrols once his head clears. 


CAER-KONIG IN A NUTSHELL 
Friendliness #% Services $$ Comfort $$$ 


Available Quest. “The Unseen,” page 47. 

Population. 150. 

Leader. Speaker Trovus (neutral good silver dragon- 
born veteran), a retired adventurer, represents the 
town. Trovus won over his fellow townsfolk with his 
brawn and good humor, though he’s too blunt to be a 
good politician and drinks too much. 

Militia. Caer-Konig can muster up to 25 soldiers (use 
the tribal warrior stat block) and 2 veterans. 

Heraldry. A white fish silhouette rising from the center 
bottom of a dark blue field, which has a white border 
on all sides but its bottom. The fish signifies the local 
fishing trade, and the broken border represents the 
snow and the harbor surrounding the town. 

Sacrifice to Auril. Food (see page 21). 

Rivals. Caer-Dineval, Easthaven. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


= f 


aA 


OVERLAND TRAVEL 


A three-mile-long, snow-covered path links Caer-Konig 

to the neighboring town of Caer-Dineval. Characters on 
foot can walk this path in 2 hours; mounts and dogsleds 
can shorten this time by as much as 50 percent. 


LOCATIONS IN CAER-KONIG 
The following locations are marked on map 1.5. 


Hook, LINE, AND SINKER 
Tavern 


This tavern owes its popularity to the free half-pints of 
ale that the proprietor, Eglendar “Glen” Korr (neutral 
good half-elf commoner), keeps on the table by the front 
door. He presses one into the hand of every person who 
stops by (the hook), which compels most of them to stay 
to order seconds and thirds (the line). The “sinker” part 
of the tavern’s name refers both to the last drink call of 
the night and—when locals challenge visitors to a drink- 
ing contest—to the last drink that sends a losing contes- 
tant under the table. 

Glen gets his ale from the dwarves who live in the 
valley at the foot of Kelvin’s Cairn, and he pays Jarthra 
the dwarf (see “Frozenfar Expeditions” below) to fetch 
it for him. 


FROZENFAR EXPEDITIONS 
Adventuring outfitter 


Run by a seasoned ranger named Atenas Swift (neutral 
good human scout), this shop sells adventuring gear. 
Attached to the shop is a locked wooden shed where 
Atenas stores a pair of dogsleds and a kennel where he 
keeps a dozen healthy sled dogs (use the wolf stat block 
to represent them). Six dogs are enough to pull each 


sled. Helping Atenas run the shop is an experienced 
“mountain guide named Jarthra Farzassh (lawful good 
shield dwarf scout), The two have an excellent rapport, 
mixed with some competitive ribbing. 

Age has caught up with Atenas. He can feel the cold in 
his joints and ventures out less frequently than he once 
did. Nowadays, he prefers to stay indoors while offering 
Jarthra’s services as a wilderness guide. 


‘Tue NORTHERN LIGHT 
Inn 


The inn gets its name from a magic lantern that once 
bung above the front door, An invisible duergar stole 
it recently, depriving the establishment of some of 
its charm. 

The inn is kept by the Shorard sisters (neutral good 
human commoners). The younger, Allie, is lithe and 
charming; she greets guests and does all the cleaning. 
‘The older, Cori, is stout and scowling; she sees to the 
tnn's provisioning and handles all the cooking. The 
sisters cast baleful glances at one another and bicker 
behind closed doors, but nothing ever comes of their 
feuds, as evidenced by the fact that they've been running 
the inn together for more than a decade. 


THE UNSEEN 


The characters can pick up this quest if they start the 
adventure in Caer-Konig or when they arrive in town. It 
begins as the characters enter the quiet village, which is 
Being tormented by invisible thieves. 

Led by Xardorok Sunblight’s younger son, Nildar, in- 
visible duergar are searching Caer-Konig for chardalyn, 
bringing whatever interesting things they find back to Map 1.5: Cacr-Konic 


their outpost on the side of Kelvin’s Cairn. It’s up to the 

characters whether they help the people of Caer-Konig He has no recollection of how he ended up in the snow 

restore their stolen valuables, or confront the duergar pile or why he was outside drinking in the first place. 

for their own personal gain. If he’s asked about the thieves, Trovus takes a deep 
breath, trying to suppress his hiccups, before explaining 

GETTING THE QUEST the situation: 


“The town has had some thievery troubles. No one’s 
seen anything, really. Just the other night, the lantern 
over at the Northern Light was stolen. Cori won't let me 
hear the end of it because | haven't been able to find 
those responsible. Not yet, anyway. But | have a knack for 


The town sits quietly at the foot of Kelvin's Cairn. A 
few bundled-up people shuffle between snow-battered 
houses, keeping their heads down, barely bothering to 
give you a look as you walk past them. 

A pile of snow stirs as you pass it, and someone hid- 


den beneath it suddenly stands, The figure looks around this stuff.” 

and yells, “Who goes there? Is it thieves? Have | found 

those creeping bastards?” If he’s not stopped, Trovus starts a long speech about 
When he pulls down the scarf covering his face, you the adventures he went on in his younger days. His sto- 


ries include one where he kicked a half-ogre into a river 
and watched it float away while it yelled profanities at 
him. Another tells of the time he tricked a group of ko- 


see it is a silver dragonborn holding onto an empty wine 
bottle as if it was a weapon. He belches, grins at you, and 


Says, “Pardon my manners. Bit jittery with all the thieving bolds into believing he was a dragon in humanoid form. 
going on. l'm Trovus, the town speaker.” If the characters ask about the missing lantern, he 
£ offers to take them to the local inn so they can talk to 


the Shorard sisters, who run the establishment. He 
seems less bothered by the cold than anyone else in the 
settlement, due to his silver dragon heritage. As they 
walk, Trovus talks about what has been taken from 
Caer-Konig over the past three nights: 


Trovus (neutral good silver dragonborn veteran) spends 
most of his days drinking and reminiscing about his 
bygone adventuring days. He's been patrolling at night 
looking for thieves, but after yet another night of heavy 
drinking, he passed out in the snow after a few hours. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS F 


48 


Trov. E ORAGONBORN TOWN SPEAKER OF ÇAER-KONIG; 


PARTAKES OF 


+ Acolor-switching magic lantern, taken from 
the local inn 

« A pair of goats, stolen from the local tavern 

+ A small sack of pearls carved into decorative beads, 
gone missing from the stores of Frozenfar Expeditions 


If the characters inquire about a reward for dealing 
with the thieves, Trovus explains that the town doesn't 
have the coin to pay someone to investigate the matter. 
Most of the valuables in the village have disappeared 
already, so there's little left to use as compensation. 


HELPFUL SISTERS E 


Trovus leads the characters through Caer-Konig to 
the Northern Light on the eastern edge of town. An 
empty hook, meant to carry a lantern, hangs above the 
inn’s entrance. 


The inn appears to be mostly empty. A young woman 
looks up as you enter, gives Trovus a chastising smile, 
and says, “Did you fall asleep outside again? I'm telling 
you, Trovus, one day you're going to have to stop relying 
on the kindness of strangers.” 

The woman then opens a door into what looks like a 
kitchen and calls out, “Heat up something for Trovus. 


He's been out ‘patrolling’ again.” 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


The woman, Allie, is one of the Shorard sisters (neutral 
good human commoners), who own the inn. The other 
owner, Cori, is working in the kitchen. Allie settles Tro- 
vus into a chair before approaching the characters. 
She confirms that the town has been experiencing 
break-ins and robberies lately, but no one has witnessed 
a potential culprit. The only clue is a set of tracks lead- 
ing in the direction of Kelvin's Cairn. Allie thinks the 
tracks were made by dwarves who live in the valley 
at the base of Kelvin's Cairn. She suspects that the 
endless winter has made the dwarves desperate for 
food and ale, though she can't explain why the dwarves 
would steal the inn’s lantern and other valuables. Allie 
is also surprised that no one in Caer-Konig has seen or 
heard the dwarves, remarking that “A quiet dwarf is an 
oxymoron.” 

Any interaction with Allie is interrupted when Cori 
exits the kitchen: 


The door to the kitchen swings open as a stern-looking 
woman enters holding a steaming bowl of soup. She 
places the bowl down in front of Trovus and says, “No 
dwarf did this. Someone would have spotted ‘em. Caught 
"em. No, there's something more going on. Besides, 


what use do hungry dwarves have for a lantern?” 


If the characters ask Cori for details, she explains that 
the magic lantern that used to decorate the outside of 


inn doesn’t do anything useful other than light up 
area with different colors. 
asked about a reward for dealing with the thieves, 
sisters say they have little coin, but they can provide 
and comfortable beds in exchange for the party's 
They'll even throw in a few flagons of beer if the 
ters can bring their magic lantern back to the inn. 
"Ifthe characters accept the quest, Allie takes them to 
back of the inn, where faint footprints lead toward 
's Cairn. If they refuse the quest, Caer-Konig 
ues to be tormented by invisible thieves until the 
r stop searching the town for chardalyn. 


ING A DOGSLED 
‘the characters are interested in following the sus- 
jous tracks, the Shorard sisters suggest they visit 
nfar Expeditions and secure a dogsled before set- 
out on their adventure. If the characters do so, they 
er that Jarthra, the mountain guide at Frozenfar 
itions, is willing to accompany the characters for 
small fee of 10 gp per day of travel. Jarthra has advan- 
on Wisdom (Survival) checks made in the vicinity 
Kelvin's Cairn. 


OLLOWING THE TRACKS 


tracks leading away from the inn have been partly 
Gilled with blowing snow, making them appear as small 
depressions. Once the characters get about 50 feet away 
from the inn and its outbuildings, they discover that the 
tracks have been completely obscured. 

Ifthe characters wait until morning to set out, they 
Šnd a set of fresh footprints left behind by a lone duer- 
gar scout. This duergar didn’t enter any buildings, but 
simply looked around the village before leaving close to 
morning. Following the footprints leads to a different set 
‘of tracks, which were made by an ogre zombie pulling 
a dogsled. These new tracks begin where the duergar 
tracks end, a quarter-mile outside of town. (The ogre 
zombie waited all night for the duergar to return. The 
duergar hopped onto the dogsled before ordering the 
‘ogre zombie to march.) Any character who examines 
these tracks and succeeds on a DC 15 Wisdom (Sur- 
vival) check identifies the creature tracks as belonging 
to an ogre. The characters can follow these fresh tracks, 
which head toward the mountain and then veer toward 
the duergar outpost hidden in the northeastern foothills 
of Kelvin’s Cairn. 

Once the characters get within a mile of the outpost, 
they discover that the wind has erased the tracks they've 
been following, making it difficult for them to find the 
exact destination. For every hour the characters spend 
searching the foothills, have them make a DC 15 Wis- 
dom (Survival) group check. Jarthra contributes to this 
group check, if she’s present, and has advantage on her 
roll, If the group check succeeds, the characters find 
the outpost. If the group check fails, they didn’t find the 
outpost during that hour but can try again. If they fail 
two of these group checks in a row, the characters have 
a random encounter in the wilderness, possibly during a 
blizzard (see “Wilderness Encounters,” page 105). 


APPROACHING THE OUTPOST 


The duergar outpost, a recent addition to the foothills 
north of Kelvin’s Cairn, was carved out of a hillside. 
Although the duergar are based mainly in Xardorok’s 
mountain fortress (described in chapter 3), they come 
to this outpost to resupply and rest before searching 
nearby settlements for chardalyn. 

When the characters find the duergar outpost, read: 


A blocky stronghold bereft of warmth or charm juts out 
of a hillside in a rough crescent shape. Only part of its 
construction is visible; the rest is buried in the stone. 

A large double door of stone serves as the 
main entrance, The terrain leading to it is a gently 
upward-sloping plain covered with fresh snow. A stream 
used to flow out of a barred culvert northeast of the main 
entrance, but the waterway has frozen. Two other barred 
openings can be seen along the stronghold’s northern 
wall. Anyone positioned behind these openings would 
have an unobstructed view of the hillside. 

Closer to you, separated from the rest of the strong- 
hold, is a snow-covered stone bunker perforated by ar- 
row slits. | 


Two duergar watch for approaching intruders. One is 
stationed in the bunker (area O1), the other in the over- 
look (area 03). These duergar are tired and bored, but 
they notice characters who are so incautious as to carry 
light sources or otherwise announce their presence. 

If the overlook duergar sees what she perceives to 
be a threat, she sounds the alarm as she runs down to 
the main entrance (area 02) to pull up the drawbridge, 
taking 2 rounds to do so. The duergar in the bunker is 
armed with a heavy crossbow (1d10 piercing damage) 
and takes pot shots at visible threats. 


pours THE DUERGAR 
the characters arrive, the outpost contains five duer- 

ae Nildar), who behave as described here. 

recone: ing combat, these duergar use their Enlarge 
taints reS testes ifad is caught alone by 
AE KA IEEE A. 
Peren ae , it uses its Enlarge and rejoins 
Treen durjat won t pepsin tand ey UNE ta Si 
render. If the characters capture and interrogate a duergar, 
a successful DC 14 Charisma (Intimidation) check can 
convince the prisoner to divulge the following information: 


+ Nildar Sunblight commands the outpost. 
+ Nildar is searching Ten-Towns for chardalyn on behalf of 
la aes a Sone ahs ems a 
fortress in the mountains. Xardorok is obsessed 
chardalyn and is forging a dragon out of it. 

. wi kia hae aL 
‘son. Once Ten-Towns is destroyed, the duergar plan to 
use this outpost as a staging area for a raid against the 
mines in the Dwarven Valley. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS a 


Characters who succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity 
(Stealth) check can approach the stronghold undetected 
by hugging the north cliff and moving behind the bunker 
and below the openings of the overlook. Once they reach 
the mouth of the frozen river, they can crawl through the 
culvert (which leads under area O2) or quietly approach 
the main entrance without being detected. 


OUTPOST LOCATIONS 


The duergar outpost was not built with the intention of 
being aesthetically pleasing or welcoming to strangers. 
There is no interior lighting, since the duergar rely on 
darkvision to see. The walls and entryways are all 10 
feet high, allowing duergar that have grown to Large 
size to move around easily. 

The following locations are keyed to map 1.6. 


Ol. BUNKER 


This stone bunker stands fifteen feet tall. The rough 
edges of its construction indicate that it was cut from a 
single piece of stone. 


A duergar named Brojk stands guard in the bunker and 
shoots his heavy crossbow through the arrow slits at 
any creatures he sees. He carries this crossbow in addi- 
tion to his regular weapons. 

Underground Tunnel. This 5-foot-high tunnel is 20 
feet underground and has a 20-foot-long ladder at each 
end. The ladder at the north end leads up to area 04, 


02. MAIN KEEP 

The outer doors aren't locked, but they are heavy. 

As an action, a character can pull the doors open by 
succeeding on a DC 12 Strength (Athletics) check. A 
30-foot-deep pit just inside these doors is spanned by a 
20-foot-square wooden drawbridge that can be raised by 
a simple pull-chain mechanism in times of danger. 


This hall is devoid of decoration. A frozen well stands 
hear a hallway to the east, and three iron cages are 
pushed against one wall. One contains a malodorous 
ogre with rotting, half-frozen skin and an empty right eye 
socket. It howls in despair at the sight of you. Another 
cage holds a pair of nervous goats. The third cage is 
empty. Leaning against a wall near the cages is a wooden 
dogsled with ice clinging to it. 


The two goats were stolen from Caer-Konig, and the 
duergar plan to eat them. The duergar use the ogre 
zombie to pull their dogsled. The zombie has been en- 
slaved and browbeaten by the duergar and does as they 
command. Inside its cage, it can do no harm to anyone. 
If they haven't already done so, the duergar from the 
bunker (area O1) and the overlook (area 03) run down 
to release the ogre zombie from its cage and attack in- 
truders who breach this hall. The zombie sides with the 
duergar in any fight. Duergar that fall below half their 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


hit points move behind the chokepoint (area 05), leaving 
the ogre zombie to cover their retreat if it comes to that. 

Well. The well descends 10 feet to an underground 
cistern. The sides of the well are icy and require climb- 
ing gear or magic to scale. 


03. OVERLOOK 


The door opens into a large, nearly empty room. Snow 
has drifted into the corners, and frost covers the stone 
walls, Three barred openings overlook the snow-covered 
grounds outside the stronghold. 


Unless she has cause to leave the overlook and raise 

the drawbridge in area O2, a duergar named Urthhild 

stands guard here, stamping her feet to fight off the cold. 
Barred Openings. Vertical iron bars spaced 6 inches 

apart are embedded in the stone frames of three 5-foot- l 

tall rectangular openings. As an action, a character can 

try to bend the bars to create an opening big enough for 

a Small creature to squeeze through, doing so with a 

successful DC 20 Strength (Athletics) check. 


O4. ARMORY 


Piles of equipment are pushed against the walls of this 
room. In the southern end of the chamber, an open hatch 
reveals a route leading underground. 


The armory holds equipment used by the duergar, in- 
cluding two suits of scale mail sized for dwarves, two 
steel shields, three war picks, nine javelins, two climb- 
er's kits, and four mess kits. 

Underground Tunnel. This 5-foot-high tunnel is 20 
feet underground and has a 20-foot-long ladder at each 
end. The ladder at the south end climbs to area O1. 


O5. CHOKEPOINT 


Along room, divided in the middle by two open door- 
ways, stands empty. In the far southwest corner, an iron 
lever sticks out of the wall. 


Nildar (see area 06) investigates any loud noises in this 
area. Once summoned, he stands next to the lever and 
waits for one or more intruders to move into the choke- 
point, whereupon he moves the lever to trigger a trap. 

Trap. When the lever is pulled, iron spikes spring out 
from the floor and ceiling to form barriers across each 
doorway. A creature in either opening must succeed on 
a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw or take 7 (2d6) pierc- 
ing damage from the spikes and be restrained until 
the spikes are retracted or the barrier is destroyed. 
The spikes can be retracted only by pulling the lever a 
second time. 

This trap is designed to isolate a single enemy in the 
western part of the room, blocking it from its allies 


DUERGAR OUTPOST 


Jempi 


Mas 16: Duercar Outpost 


with the spikes. Creatures can see through the gaps 
between the spikes, but the gaps aren't big enough for 

* character to slip through. The barriers of spikes grant 
three-quarters cover to creatures behind them. Each 
Barrier has AC 15, 18 hit points, and immunity to poison 
and psychic damage. 


06. COMMANDER'S QUARTERS 


A stone-carved bed and desk occupy this drab room. 
Atop the desk are several shards of dark crystal, as 

well as a crumpled-up piece of paper and a burlap sack 
draped over a glowing object that emits colored light that 
shifts from blue to green to red. 


Ifthe characters made it through area 05 without get- 
ting into a fight, they catch Nildar Sunblight, a duergar, 
seated at the desk, studying his collection of glassy 
shards. He attacks the characters when they enter. 

The glowing object on the desk is a magic lantern, 
which Nildar has covered with a burlap sack to dull its 
fight. The lantern is the one that was stolen from the 
Northern Light in Caer-Konig. It shifts in color from 
blue to green to red but has no other magical properties. 

The crumpled-up piece of paper on the desk bears a 
message from Nildar’s older brother, Durth, written in 
charcoal and in Dwarvish. The letter reads as follows: 


Brother, 

You will find me on the frozen ferry in Easthaven. From 
this new base, the search for chardalyn continues. Long 
may our father reign over this dark land! 

Durth 


The characters can visit the ferry or give Durth’s letter 
to the authorities in Easthaven and let them deal with 
him (see “Easthaven,” page 58, for more information). 

Roleplaying Nildar. Nildar's main goal is to please 
his father, whose obsession with chardalyn he shares. 
When he's not leading raids, Nildar spends most of his 
time examining goods stolen from Caer-Konig and else- 
where. The shards on the table include several pieces of 
ordinary tinted glass and three dagger-sized pieces of 
chardalyn (see the sidebar on page 6). With a suc- 
cessful DC 16 Intelligence (Arcana) check, a character 
can determine that the chardalyn, despite its crystalline 
composition, is malleable, making it an ideal raw mate- 
rial for those who can fashion items from the substance. 
No other properties can be discerned with an ability 
check. These chardalyn fragments contain no magic and 
are safe to handle. 

Defeating Nildar, lf the characters capture Nildar and 
try to talk to him, he snarls and threatens the characters 
in Dwarvish: 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


TE 


Nivoar SunsLisHT 


“My father is more powerful than any of you filthy crea- 
tures could imagine. You don't understand the glory of it, 
the power found in the ice. None of you do. But you will 
learn soon enough when my father unleashes his terror 
upon Ten-Towns! Your doom soars on dragon's wings!" 


If the characters let Nildar go or if he escapes, he leaves 
the outpost using the ogre zombie and dogsled in area 
02; if that’s no longer an option, he flees on foot. He re- 
turns to his father’s fortress in the mountains (see chap- 
ter 3), swearing revenge on the characters and vowing to 
inflict great pain on them if their paths cross again. 

Treasure. Characters who toss the room find a small 
coin purse stuffed into Nildar's bedroll. The purse con- 
tains 24 gp and 17 sp. 


O7. SPORE SERVANTS 


This chamber appears to be a cellblock lined with stone 
doors that have small, barred windows set into them 

at dwarf's-eye height. Snow and wind enter the room 
through a barred window in the northeast corner that 
looks out toward the snow-covered bunker that guards 


the main entrance. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


The barred opening in the northeast corner is similar to 
the ones in area O3. 

The three cells along the west wall are empty at pres- 
ent. Each of the five cells along the south wall holds one 
prisoner, formerly a Ten-Towner or a Reghed nomad 
who was abducted and killed by the duergar. Using the 
animating spores of a myconid sovereign, the duergar 
have turned these dead humans into five spore servants 
(as described in the “Myconids” entry in the Monster 
Manual) covered with fungal growths. The spore ser- 
vants emerge from their cells to attack intruders who 
enter the room. They use the tribal warrior stat block, 
with these chang 


The spore servants are unaligned plants with a walk- 
ing speed of 20 feet. They have blindsight out to a 
range of 30 feet and are blind beyond this radius. They 
can't be blinded, charmed, frightened, or paralyzed. 
They have an Intelligence of 2 (4), a Wisdom of 6 
(-2), and a Charisma of 1 (-5). 

They lose the Pack Tactics trait and all languages they 
once knew. 


O8. DUERGAR QUARTERS 


Small rooms flank a central common area where crates 
and sacks are stashed against the west wall. The doors 
of the two southern rooms are open, and each room is 
empty except for a tattered bedroll and a chair. From 
behind the closed doors of the northern rooms, you hear 


the faint sound of snoring. 


Each of the northern rooms has one duergar sleeping 
in it. The two duergar are brothers named Ruvik and 
Skorn. If the characters move around without making 
any loud noises, the duergar stay asleep. If awakened, 
they attack the intruders. The duergar sleep in their ar- 
mor, keeping their shields and weapons within reach. 

Treasure. The crates and most of the sacks contain 
basic supplies, including blankets, rations, hempen 
rope, and other equipment. One small sack holds the 
stolen valuables from Caer-Konig: twenty-five pearls 
carved into decorative beads (5 gp each). Another sack 
contains three daggers, a set of woodcarver's tools, a set 
of navigator’s tools, fishing tackle, and a potion of heal- 
ing hidden in a leather pouch along with 73 sp. 


CONCLUDING THE QUEST 


When the characters return to the Northern Light, they 
find Trovus passed out in a padded armchair while Allie 
and Cori go about their work. If the characters tell Allie 
about the duergar outpost, she admits to knowing noth- 
ing about duergar and is disturbed to learn that they can 
turn invisible and grow themselves to ogre size! 

If the characters retrieved the inn’s lantern, Allie of- 
fers them a few flagons of ale as a reward. She has pre- 
pared rooms for them, even if they didn't bring back the 
lantern. Allie can also help the characters return other 
stolen goods to their proper owners in Caer-Konig. 


OUGAN’S HOLE 


Dougan’s Hole is the smallest and most insular of the 
‘ten towns. Its residents aren't fond of visitors, and in- 
breeding has caused the population to dwindle in recent 
years. It also has given rise to often-seen physical de- 
fermities, including but not limited to small, misshapen 
ears and slightly pointed teeth. 

The town is a small cluster of dwellings perched on 
the edge of Redwaters that is too small to support any 
industry—not even scrimshaw. Ice has buckled the 
shorter of its two piers, rendering the dock unsafe. The 
Tonger pier has two icebound keelboats tethered to it, 
though they're immobile because Auril’s winter has 
frozen the surface of the lake for hundreds of yards 
‘ground them. Local fishers have hauled their smaller 
Boats onto the shore and resorted to cutting holes in the 
tee to catch knucklehead trout, which they depend on for 
survival. Visitors to Dougan’s Hole are often struck by 
the eeriness of dark, humanoid shapes out on the ice, re- 
‘maining silent and still as the wind howls around them. 


Doucan’s HOLE IN A NUTSHELL 
Friendliness # Services Comfort * 


Available Quest. “Holed Up,” page 53. 

Population. 50. 

Leader. Speaker Edgra Durmoot (neutral human 
scout), a plainspoken trapper getting on in years, 
speaks for the townsfolk. She seldom attends meet- 
ings of the Council of Speakers. 

Militia. Dougan’s Hole can muster up to 12 soldiers (use 

the tribal warrior stat block) and 1 veteran. 

Heraldry. A gray, pillar-like monolith set against a sky- 

blue field above two crossed silver fish, their scaly 

bodies forming an X, with their heads at upper left 
and upper right. The monolith signifies local mystery, 
while the fish represent the bounty of Redwaters. 

Sacrifice to Auril. Warmth (see page 21). 

Rival. Good Mead. 


OVERLAND TRAVEL 


‘A six-mile-long, snow-covered path connects Dougan's 
Hole to the neighboring town of Good Mead. Characters 
‘en foot can walk this path in 4 hours; mounts and dog- 
sleds can shorten this time by as much as 50 percent. 


LOCATION IN Doucan’s HOLE 


‘The following location marked on map 1.7 can't help but 
attract the attention of new arrivals. 


TWENTY STONES OF THRUUN 
Triangle of megaliths 


‘The only truly interesting feature in Dougan’s Hole is 
‘the ring of megaliths known as the Twenty Stones of 
‘Thruun. Standing at the southern edge of town, nine- 
‘seen of these crudely fashioned granite menhirs are 

ed in a rough triangle, with a single stone at the 
‘ermation’s center. No one knows who built this struc- 
‘ere or why; the townsfolk maintain that the stones were 
when the town’s founder, a Chondathan named 


Dougan Dubrace, first happened upon this fishing spot. 
Scholars have tried to research the origin of the struc- 
ture’s name, but all they have found are allusions to a 
creature named Thruun in the oldest legends of the 
northern folk. Some speculate that Thruun was a god, 
while others believe it's a destructive elemental spirit 
bound to this location by ancient druidic magic. 


HOLED UP 


Two winter wolves are extorting the people of Dou- 
gan’s Hole for food and treasure on behalf of a woolly 
mammoth named Norsu. Years ago, a frost druid cast 
an awaken spell on the mammoth. Last year, a group of 
adventurers killed Garagai, the mammoth's frost giant 
master. Norsu has never recovered from the loss and, 
to this day, watches over its master’s frozen corpse, un- 
willing to leave its side. The winter wolves, who served 
Garagai as faithful friends, look after the mammoth. 
Although Norsu feeds on plants, not meat, it delights in 
killing humanoids to avenge Garagai’s death. Slaying 
the mammoth is a tall order, so characters would be 
wise to flee from Norsu or try to reason with it. 

Norsu and the winter wolves reside in an ice lodge 
built by Garagai. The wolves try to entice the characters 
into the lodge, knowing that Norsu will enjoy the exer- 
cise of killing them. Held captive in the lodge are Silja 
and Finn Dejarr, two teenaged siblings from Dougan's 
Hole who have been missing for the past four days and 
are presumed dead. The wolves are holding the siblings 
in a cage and feeding them raw meat to keep them alive 
until Dougan’s Hole pays a ransom for their safe return. 
Characters lured to the ice lodge by the wolves or hired 
by Speaker Durmoot to find the missing teenagers can 
try to rescue Silja and Finn from the frost giant's lodge 
and see them safely back to town. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


a 


Map 1.7: Doucan’s Hore 


GETTING THE QUEST 


If Dougan’s Hole is the starting town for this adven- 
ture, the characters already know some of what's go- 
ing on. Read: 

t 

Dougan’s Hole is beset by winter wolves that stalk the 
outskirts of town. 

“Don’t know how many, but them wolves are big as 
horses!” says a local with small, misshapen ears. 

“They know words an’ got a mighty vocab'lary!” says 
another with pointed teeth. 

“By Thruun’s Stones, they caught fair Sil and her lovely 
brother Finn th’ other day,” says a third, who bears more 
than a passing resemblance to the other two. 

A fourth who looks like their sister chimes in. “Dang 
winter wolves say they ain't givin’ 'em back till the town 
coughs up a king's ransom in food and gold. This town 
barely got enough to feed its own, and there ain't no 
gold. Ain't no one allowed to leave town. Dem wolves 
vow to kill anyone who tries!” 


The townsfolk urge characters to meet with Speaker 
Edgra Durmoot before trying to help the town with 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


its wolf problem. Speaker Durmoot is stubborn to a 
fault. She firmly believes that the missing teenagers 

are dead, and she's not about to give food to the winter 
wolves when her own people barely have enough to feed 
themselves. She lets the characters deal with the winter 
wolves as they see fit but offers no assistance, 


Goop Wo tr, BAD WOLF 


When the characters first approach the outskirts of 
Dougan's Hole or shortly after they first leave town, they 
encounter two winter wolves named Koran and Kanan, 
Here's how the encounter plays out: 


+ Koran acts as the “good” wolf while his brother plays 
the “bad” wolf. This act has worked before on the 
dim-witted locals; the wolves assume the characters 
will be fooled just as easily, 

Koran approaches the characters, limping on one 
back leg and whimpering like a pitiful dog, making 
himself as unthreatening as possible. Kanan remains 
nearby but out of sight. Any character who succeeds 
on a DC 15 Wisdom (Insight) check sees through Ko- 
ran’s ruse, noticing how the wolf sometimes forgets 
which leg he’s supposedly limping on. 

Koran claims that he was routinely kicked by his 
master, a mean old frost giant named Garagai. Koran 
also says that Garagai kidnapped two townsfolk and 
is holding them prisoner in his lodge more than half a 
day's walk west of town. Koran wants to help the char- 
acters free the prisoners, to get back at Garagai for his 
abuse. If the characters believe this story, Koran leads 
them to the lodge while Kanan follows their tracks 
and their scent, remaining out of sight. 

If Koran is unable to convince the characters to follow 
it back to the frost giant's lodge, Kanan steps in and 
plays the “bad” wolf, baring his fangs and threatening 
to eat the characters unless they change their minds. 
Kanan pretends to be upset about the abuse Garagai 
inflicted on Koran. “He'll think twice before he hurts 
one of us again,” Kanan says with a growl. As earlier, 
a successful DC 15 Wisdom (Insight) check allows a 
character to ascertain that the wolf is lying. 


If the wolves can't trick or scare the characters into 
accompanying them to the frost giant’s lodge thirteen 
miles west of Dougan's Hole, they drop their act and try 
to appeal to the characters’ consciences. “It’s awfully 
cold in that lodge,” says Koran, to which his brother 
adds, “They won't suffer much longer. It's only a matter 
of time before Garagai skins and eats them.” The wolves 
then bolt away, heading toward the lodge and leaving 
tracks that the characters can follow, if they choose not 
to accompany the wolves. 


CROSSING THE TUNDRA 


The wilderness around Dougan's Hole is a frozen tun- 
dra. Snow falls frequently, adding to the snowpack and 
erasing tracks. There is a 50 percent chance that the 
characters get caught in a blizzard on the way to the 
lodge (see “Blizzards,” page 10). If Kanan and Koran 
are with the party, they protect the characters from the 
worst of the storm, using their bodies to shield the char- 


jo a) 


acters until it passes. The wolves’ presence also pre- 
vents the characters from getting lost or separated. 

Also crossing the tundra are a pack of 1d6 + 1 wolves, 
prowling the white in search of food. Characters who 
make a successful DC 13 Intelligence (Nature) check 
note that the wolves are gaunt from starvation. If the 
winter wolves are with the party, Kanan and Koran 
growl and bare their teeth, which deters the pack from 
approaching closer. 


APPROACHING THE LODGE 


When the characters approach the lodge, read: 


Jutting up out of the vast tundra is a towering edifice 
built entirely of ice. The domed structure is easily three 
times the height and width of any building found in 
Ten-Towns. 


The lodge has three tall openings on the east side. On 
the southern side of the building is a tunnel left behind 
by a remorhaz that raided the lodge’s food stores. Char- 
acters spot this tunnel if they circle the lodge looking for 
other entrances. 

If Koran and Kanan are with the characters or have 
arrived ahead of them, the two winter wolves sniff the 
air and inform the characters that Garagai isn’t home. 
The wolves offer to stand guard outside while the 


characters enter the lodge and free the prisoners. Char- 
acters who suspect treachery can, with a successful DC 
15 Wisdom (Insight) check, tell that the wolves are lying 
about Garagai—the frost giant is in fact inside the lodge. 
Are they afraid to face their master, perhaps, or is there 
another reason why the wolves won't enter the lodge? 
No ability check can answer this question; the charac- 
ters must find out for themselves! In truth, the winter 
wolves expect Norsu to slaughter the characters, but in 
case that doesn’t happen, they remain outside to attack 
any characters who try to flee. (Specifically, the wolves 
wait in area L1, east of the lodge’s main entrance.) If one 
wolf is slain, the other flees to avoid a similar fate. 


LODGE LOCATIONS 


The ice lodge was where Garagai lived and entertained 
other frost giants. Although not a jarl, Garagai held a 
respected position among the frost giants of the Far 
North. Everything in the lodge is built for giants and 
therefore quite large. The ceilings inside soar to a height 
of 30 feet. 

The following locations are keyed to map 1.8. 


L1. EXTERIOR 

The characters approach the lodge from the east and 
have three entrances to choose from. These entrances 
lead to areas L2, L3, and L4, respectively. If the winter 
wolves are present, they gently nudge the characters to- 
ward the tunnel leading to area L4. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


#7 spjgpsTPRROR LURKS IN THE Icy DEPTHS OF THIS FROST GIANT LODGE 


oe 


L2. FLENSING CHAMBER 


A sour stench of decay fills your nostrils. Lying on the ice- 
packed ground is the frozen corpse of a whale, crudely 
butchered, Beside it is a blade in the shape of a paring 
knife the size of a longsword 


Garagai used this room to carve up whales and harvest 
their oil. 

Treasure. An alcove west of the carcass contains a 
6-foot-long, 5-foot-wide, 5-foot-tall stone chest half bur- 
ied under ice. A character must spend 1 hour chipping 
away the ice before the chest can be opened. It contains 
more giant-sized tools used for flensing, as well as a 
scrimshaw goat small enough to fit in a character's 
hand. The scrimshaw goat is worth 25 gp. 


L3. CAGED TOWNSFOLK 


A huge, slatted animal cage, with a locked gate attached 
to it by rusty hinges, stands against the west wall of this 
chamber. Trapped inside the cage are two shivering hu- 
mans in cold weather clothing. They look fearfully at you. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


Garagai built the cage to hold Norsu when the mam 


moth was younger. Now it holds Silja and Finn Dejarr 
(neutral good human commoners), who are de- 
scribed below: 


+ Silja is a spindly girl with pointy teeth. Snow clings to 
the ends of her long braids. She is ready to do what 
ever it takes to get back to her mother in Dou, 
Hole. Of the two siblings, she is the more proactive. 

+ Finn has a piebald face flanked by small, malformed 
ears. He is examining the brackets that hold together 
the slats of the cage to find a way to break them. His 
hands are frostbitten, and his teeth chatter uncon 
trollably 


n's 


The cage'’s metal slats are widely spaced, but not 
enough for the teenagers to slip between them. The slats 
are made of metal, and the cold makes them hard to ma. 
nipulate. Applying heat to the slats makes them pliable, 
whereupon a character can use an action to try to pull 
two of the slats farther apart so that the slender Silja 
and Finn can slip through, accomplishing this feat with 
a successful DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check. 

The lock on the cage’s gate can be picked by a charac- 
ter using thieves’ tools. An attempt takes 1 minute and 
succeeds on a DC 15 Dexterity check. Opening the gate 
causes its large, rusty hinges to squeal loudly unless a 
flask of oil is used to lubricate them first. If Norsu is still 
alive, the mammoth hears the squealing and makes its 
way from area L5 to this area, determined to kill inter- 
lopers on sight. 


Mae 1.8: Frost Giant Ice Loose 


TL4. ENTRANCE CORRIDOR 


This passageway is choked with ice. Above you, icicles 
are densely clustered, their points sharp as daggers. 


A character can move through the ice-choked tunnel 
quietly by succeeding on a DC 15 Dexterity (Stealth) 
Sheck. On a failed check, the noise alerts the mammoth 
narea L5. 


L5. GARAGAT’s Icy TOMB 


This oval chamber with high walls of glittering ice resem- 
bles a sepulcher. The frozen, hacked-up corpse of a frost 
gant lies on the floor, entombed in translucent ice, and 
Tooming next to it is a woolly mammoth. 

Not far from the mammoth, carved from a single block 
fice, is a giant-sized throne atop a circular dais. Chis- 
led into the throne’s backrest is a large rune. 


Whe awakened mammoth is aware of the characters’ 
presence, add: 


The mammoth stares down at you with hate in its eyes. 


” It then lowers its head 
and assumes a threatening posture. 


“You are to blame for all of thi 


This chamber is where Garagai would lounge with 
Norsu at his side and greet visiting frost giants. Cursed 
with sentience, the awakened neutral evil mammoth 
grieves for its dead master. It has an Intelligence of 10 
and speaks Common. 

To Norsu, the characters’ mere presence desecrates 
Garagai’s tomb, and the mammoth reacts by trying to 
gore them with its tusks and crush them underfoot. 
Any character who can act before Norsu takes its first 
turn in combat can use an action to attempt to calm the 
mammoth before it attacks. A character who claims 
to be Garagai’s friend can calm the mammoth with a 
successful DC 12 Charisma (Deception) check, while 
a character who vows to avenge Garagai’s death can 
calm the mammoth with a successful DC 12 Charisma 
(Persuasion) check. If calmed, Norsu allows characters 
to honor Garagai by performing a prayer over his frozen 
corpse or leaving a gift, but otherwise expects the char- 
acters to withdraw from its presence so it can mourn 
in private. If the characters fail to calm Norsu or flee 
from it, the mammoth charges after them. Overcome by 
inconsolable rage, it pursues prey beyond the confines 
of the lodge but doesn't go farther than 100 feet before 
turning back and rejoining its dead master. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


5 


7 


The adventurers who slew Garagai took his greataxe 
as a trophy as well as his other personal possessions, 
leaving nothing of value on the hacked-up corpse. 

Ice Throne. The symbol carved into the throne is the 
Giant rune for “ice,” as any character who succeeds on 
a DC 15 Intelligence (Arcana) check can ascertain, A 
detect magic spell reveals an aura of conjuration magic 
around the rune, which empowers the throne. A crea- 
ture that sits in the throne becomes aware of its magical 
nature and can use an action while seated in the throne 
to summon a blizzard, which takes 1 minute to form. 
The blizzard engulfs the lodge, extends 1 mile from it in 
all directions, and lasts for 8 hours. This property of the 
throne recharges after a tenday. 

If the ice throne is destroyed, it ceases to be magical. 
The throne has AC 13; 80 hit points; resistance to pierc- 
ing and slashing damage; immunity to cold, poison, and 
psychic damage; and vulnerability to fire damage, 


L6. War Room 


A massive table hewn from a single block of ice stands 
in the middle of this cold chamber, surrounded by 
chairs also made ofice. Many of the chairs are chipped 
and cracked. 


Garagai and other frost giants once gathered around 

the table to discuss various matters, Lying on the floor 
under the table is a 1-foot-tall stone statuette of a spindly 
creature that the characters recognize as the image of 

a chwinga (see appendix C) if they've seen one before. 

In fact, the statuette is an actual chwinga that turned to 
stone when it died. Its killers are still in the room, hid- 
ing behind chairs: three Icewind kobolds (see appendix 
C) named Holgi, Snorp, and Zilbo. They assumed the 
lodge was unoccupied and did not expect to find Norsu 
and the winter wolves dwelling inside. The chwinga 
startled them, so they killed it, When the characters 
enter this area, the kobolds cower behind chairs and pe- 
tition the characters for help in escaping the lodge. If the 
characters oblige, the kobolds stay with the characters 
until they're outdoors, whereupon the kobolds either 
part company with their saviors or remain with the char- 
acters for food and protection (at your discretion). 


L7. GARAGAT’S BEDROLL 


The only furniture in this cavernous chamber is a big fur 
bedroll. The fur is matted and musty. 


Garagai used to sleep here. The room is now 
unoccupied. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


L8. WHALE OIL STORAGE 

A remorhaz has burrowed a tunnel into this room. The 
tunnel runs underneath the southern wall, providing an 
alternate entrance into the lodge. 

A foul scent pervades the room, which contains five 
barrels of whale oil. An intact barrel of whale oil weighs 
500 pounds and can be sold in Ten-Towns for 50 gp. 

Treasure. The remorhaz is long gone, but characters 
who explore its tunnel find a strange, frosted white res- 
idue smeared across a 5-foot section of wall—enough 
to fill a small bottle. This rare secretion is called thrym; 
remorhazes are known to exude small quantities of it 
shortly before they give birth. Alchemists use thrym 
to craft potions of resistance (cold) and other useful 
concoctions. A bottle of thrym sells for 250 gp. Any 
character who is proficient with alchemist's supplies can 
examine this residue and determine its true nature with 
a successful DC 11 Intelligence (Arcana) check. 


SNEAKING OUT 


With Silja and Finn in tow, the characters can try to 
sneak out of the lodge. As long as they keep quiet and 
avoid the central chamber (area L5), they won't incur the 
wrath of the awakened mammoth. However, they must 
also deal with the two winter wolves lurking outside. 
The remorhaz tunnel in area L8 provides an alternate 
escape route, since the wolves aren't watching that exit. 
The trip back to Dougan’s Hole can be uneventful, or 
you can roll for a random encounter using the Wilder- 
ness Encounters rules (see page 105). If the winter 
wolves are still alive, they attack the party as soon 
as the random encounter ends, before the characters 
have a chance to rest. Killing one wolf triggers the 
self-preservation instinct in its brother, causing it to flee. 


CONCLUDING THE QUEST 


If they escape the lodge and survive the journey home, 
Silja and Finn are reunited with their mother, Hilda, 
who has been sick with worry but is overjoyed to see 
them alive. 


TREASURE 

Hilda married her older brother, who was a hunter. He 
passed away a few years ago but left behind some magic 
boots he won from a wayward adventurer he bested in 

a drinking contest. If one or both of her children are re- 
turned safely, Hilda gives the characters her husband's 
boots of the winterlands as a thank-you, 


ae 


Vk 


EASTHAVEN 


Walking into Easthaven is like stepping into Icewind 
Dale's past—the place is a living example of the boom- 
town way of life that gripped all of Ten-Towns centuries 
‘ago. In the generations since, as other towns have set- 
ted into a predictable pattern of existence, Easthaven 
has continued to grow and reinvent itself, After the East- 
way was paved, Easthaven evolved into a frontier trad- 
ers’ paradise, fueling the jealousy of its neighbors. 

Easthaven's founders were thieves from the Duchy 
‘ef Cape Velen, on a peninsula far to the south. They 
refused to kowtow to a powerful thieves’ guild and were 
driven out. To this day, Easthaven honors its shady 
founders by declaring pickpocketing legal within the 
town limits—which explains the “Watch thy pouch!" 
signs posted in various local establishments. 

Duergar have infiltrated the town of late, scouring 
Easthaven and the surrounding tundra for chardalyn 
fragments to bring back to their hidden mountain 
‘stronghold. The leader of these duergar is Durth Sun- 
Hight, the oldest living son of Xardorok Sunblight. 
Durth and his gang have turned the frozen Easthaven 
_ erry into a temporary base. Using their innate invisibil- 
“© to move about unseen, the duergar betray their pres- 
“ence only by the footprints they leave in the snow. 
Another occurrence of note is the recent capture of a 
Red Wizard of Thay who has been found guilty of killing 
a handful of dale-folk he had hired for an expedition. 
‘Speaker Danneth Waylen has issued a decree that the 
wizard be tied to a stake and burned alive—an event that 
a lot of Easthaven residents are looking forward to. 


EASTHAVEN IN A NUTSHELL _ 
Friendliness #* Services #% Comfort ##% 


Available Quest. “Toil and Trouble,” page 62. 
Population. 750. 
Leaders. Speaker Danneth Waylen (chaotic good 
human commoner), respected for his humility and 
forthrightness. Captain Imdra Arlaggath (lawful good 
half-elf veteran) commands the town's militia. 
Militia. Easthaven can muster up to 150 soldiers (use 
‘the tribal warrior stat block) and 12 veterans. 
‘Heraldry. A snowflake at the top center of a steel-gray 
Geld, above a horizontal brown field that forms the left- 
Band base, and a dark blue field that forms the right- 
Band base; where they meet is a thin white tower, The 
brown field represents the Eastway, the tower rep- 
‘resents the town, and the blue field is Lac Dinneshere. 
ifice to Auril. Humanoid (see page 21). 
Caer-Dineval, Caer-Konig. 


OVERLAND TRAVEL _ 


Eastway stretches between Easthaven and Bryn 

ler. Snow-covered paths branching off this road 

to Caer-Dineval and Good Mead. Travel times in 
Overland Travel from Easthaven table assume that 
ers are on foot; mounts and dogsleds can shorten 
times by as much as 50 percent. 


OVERLAND TRAVEL FROM EASTHAVEN 


To ‘Travel Time 
Bryn Shander Ta hours 
Caer-Dineval 9 hours 
Good Mead 4a hours 


LOCATIONS IN EASTHAVEN 


The following locations, marked on map 1.9, are a few 
of the places the characters might visit during their time 
in Easthaven, Another important location—Easthaven's 
Town Hall—is described later, in the “Town Hall Ca- 
pers” section (page 67). 


EASTHAVEN FERRY 
Ferry service (halted) 
A letter found in a secret duergar outpost (see “The Un- 
seen,” page 47) might lead the characters to this loca- 
tion. Delivering the letter to Speaker Waylen or Captain 
Arlaggath prompts these NPCs to meet and determine 
an appropriate course of action. Together, they ask the 
characters to search the ferry and slay any duergar they 
encounter aboard it. If the characters request backup, 
Captain Arlaggath accompanies them. 

Use the following boxed text to describe the ferry to 
the players: 


Easthaven’s ferry, a keelboat, is trapped in the ice at the 


end of a wooden dock. A small cabin is situated toward 
the aft end of the hull. 


When the lake isn’t frozen, this keelboat transports 
people and cargo to the towns of Caer-Dineval and 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


60 


Caer-Konig for a modest fee. But the boat and much 

of Easthaven’s harbor is trapped in ice, and Speaker 
Waylen has declared that ferry service must cease until 
the ice thaws—which, given Auril’s temperament, seems 
unlikely to happen soon. The ferry's tiefling owner and 
operator, Scython, spends his idle time at the Wet Trout 
(described below). In Scython’s absence, the ferry has 
become a base of operations for a duergar mind mas- 
ter (see appendix C) named Durth Sunblight. He and 
three other duergar named Klaska, Ossyl, and Zublorr 
are using the ferry's aft cabin as a lair, but only Durth is 
present when the characters first arrive at the ferry. The 
other duergar are searching Easthaven for chardalyn. 

The duergar are cautious enough to turn invisible 
while moving through town and on the docks, but not 
smart enough to cover the tracks they make in the snow. 
Characters who search for tracks on the snow-covered 
dock and succeed on a DC 10 Wisdom (Survival) check 
can discern 1d4 distinct sets of dwarven boot prints 
leading to and from the ferry. These tracks were made 
within the past 24 hours. 

Aft Cabin. The ice covering the cabin door has been 
chipped away, and the door is not locked. The space is 
roughly 10 feet square and contains four sleeping bags, 
packs of stolen rations, and a rolled-up map of Icewind 
Dale that marks the location of every Ten-Towns set- 
tlement, as well as the locations of the duergar outpost 
near Kelvin’s Cairn (see page 49) and Sunblight, the 
fortress hidden in the mountains (described in chap- 
ter 3). All of the place names on the map are written 
in Dwarvish. 

Lurking in the cabin is Durth Sunblight. He knows 
when someone else boards the ship by the creaking of 
the deck. As a precaution, he turns invisible and stands 
in an empty corner at the back of the cabin. If an in- 
truder detects him or tries to steal his map, he attacks. 
If he’s reduced to 20 hit points or fewer, he shrinks to 
Tiny size and flees through a 4-inch-diameter rathole, 
exiting outside the ship 5 feet above the frozen harbor 
and 5 feet away from the dock. If he escapes, Durth re- 
turns to his father’s fortress in the mountains (see chap- 
ter 3), abandoning his duergar companions. 

Development. Durth's companions have been scour- 
ing Easthaven for chardalyn. Their latest search has 
borne no fruit, and they return to the ferry 30 minutes 
after the characters board it. These three duergar attack 
any non-duergar they encounter onboard the vessel. 

If they find Durth’s dead body or no signs of him at all 
aboard the ferry, they abandon the ship and don't re- 
turn to it, 

If the characters capture Durth, he warns his captors 
that he's the son of Xardorok Sunblight, who will soon 
claim Icewind Dale as his kingdom, and it would be un- 
wise for them to earn the wrath of so powerful a fig- 
ure. Durth doesn't give up any other information, 
His companions are similarly tight-lipped; how- 
ever, threats to Durth’s life or the clever use 
of a suggestion spell or similar magic can 
persuade one or more them to reveal 
the following additional information: 


+ Xardorok has a fortress hidden 
in the mountains. (The route 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


to this fortress is marked on Durth’s map aboard 

the ferry.) 

Xardorok's fortress has a forge powered by the 
still-beating heart of a red dragon. In this forge, Xar- 
dorok is crafting a dragon made of chardalyn, with 
which he plans to destroy Ten-Towns. The chardalyn 
dragon is close to being finished. 

Xardorok has another son, Nildar, who commands a 
secret outpost on the northeast side of Kelvin's Cairn 
(see “The Unseen,” page 47). 


THE Wet TROUT 
Popular tavern 


The Wet Trout, located near the docks, is the largest and 
loudest tavern in Easthaven, known for its ribald atmo- 
sphere and rumor-mongering. A great chimney squarely 
in the building's center has hearths on either side to 
warm the tavern’s two common rooms. The tavern’s cur- 
rent owner and proprietor is Nymetra Myskyn, a chaotic 
neutral dragonborn berserker of white dragon ances- 
try. Although she can be crusty and full of complaints, 
Nymetra is not discouraged by the Everlasting Rime, 
which she regards as a test of Ten-Towns’ mettle. An un- 
apologetic worshiper of Auril, she supports Easthaven’s 
attempts to appease the Frostmaiden with sacrifices 
(see “Sacrifices to Auril,” page 21). 

Scython. One of the Wet Trout’s regular patrons is 
Scython, a neutral good tiefling bandit captain who 
owns a small house a few blocks away. Scython is also 
the owner and operator of Easthaven’s ferry. A talkative, 
happy-go-lucky fellow, he knows rumors that might 
interest the characters. Roll three times on the Ten- 
Towns Rumors table (page 18) to determine what 
Scython knows. z 

Although he’s well informed, Scython doesn’t know 
about the duergar stowing away aboard his ship (see 
“Easthaven Ferry” above). 


Durt SUNBLIGHT 


Town Hall 


Easthaven Ferry” “ 


Mar 19: EastHaven 


THE WHITE LADY INN 
fan 


This musty old inn is named after a local legend known 
as the White Lady—a ghost rumored to walk on Lac 
Dinneshere, haunting the spot where her rich husband 
drowned. Rinaldo (lawful good strongheart halfling 
commoner), a self-styled bard kept around to entertain 
‘guests, is fond of plucking his fiddle while recounting 
bis tale: that the White Lady's husband was a miser who 
Sept his treasure in a heavy, locked chest that never 
Teit his side. Perhaps it was this heavy chest, suggests 
Rinaldo, that capsized his boat and sent the man to 

is sunken grave, or perhaps it was the fright of seeing 
Bis dead wife that caused him to capsize the boat and 
down. Either way, Rinaldo is certain that the man’s 
treasure lies at the bottom of the lake, waiting for some 
Strepid explorer to find it. The inn’s sullen, elderly 
proprietor, Bartaban (neutral good human commoner), 
Šas heard the halfling’s rambling far too often to be hu- 
mored by it. 

Séance. Rinaldo is planning to conduct a séance ina 
Back room of the inn and has invited half a dozen other 
vests (commoners) to join him. Characters who spend 
‘ome or more nights at the inn are invited by Rinaldo to 
pin his séance. If the characters decline, Rinaldo is dis- 
appointed and tries to get them to change their minds by 
Saying, “We live in dark times. Perhaps the spirit of the 


White Lady can help. Aren't you curious to hear what 
she has to say?” 

If one or more characters are present when the séance 
begins, read: 


Smoke from burning incense clouds the room. Multicol- 
cored lamps and silks are hung from the rafters, and the 
light from several candles illuminates a circle of uncom- 
fortable-looking guests sitting cross-legged on the floor. 

Rinaldo pushes back the sleeves of his robe, raises his 
hands, closes his eyes, and intones, “Lady who watches 
from the lake, come to us in our darkest hour! Tell us 
what you've seen!” After a moment of silence, thick frost 
forms on the inside of the room's windows, turning them 
opaque, and the candles go out one by one. 


Rinaldo senses that the White Lady’s spirit is close and 
urges the characters to reach out to it. Ask the players 
in turn what their characters say or do. The characters 
who try to help Rinaldo must make a DC 12 Charisma 
(Persuasion) group check. If the group check fails, the 
White Lady's spirit manifests as a poltergeist and at- 
tacks the party, frightening away the other participants. 
This poltergeist uses the specter stat block, with the 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


61 


ihe 


changes outlined in the “Variant: Poltergeist” sidebar 
that appears with it in the Monster Manual. 

If the group check succeeds, Rinaldo can sense that 
the spirit is receptive and urges the characters to ask it 
questions. The spirit replies truthfully by tracing short, 
two- to five-word answers on the room's frosted win- 
dows. If doing that becomes too cumbersome, the spirit 
uses Rinaldo as a vessel to whisper the answers. If the 
spirit doesn't know an answer or thinks a question is 
foolish, it shatters a window instead. Once it answers 
three questions, the spirit departs, and Rinaldo can't try 
to summon it again until he finishes a long rest. 

Here's what the White Lady knows about the recent 
happenings around Lac Dinneshere: 


+ The castle in Caer-Dineval has become a base for a 
devil-worshiping cult 

+ Gray-skinned dwarves have been stalking the 
streets of Easthaven, Caer-Dineval, and Caer-Konig 
while invisible. Their intentions aren't good. They 
hide aboard the town ferry (see “Easthaven Ferry 
above) and in the ruins of Dinev's Rest (see “Dinev's 
Rest,” page 38). 

+ Amagic cauldron is hidden in some frozen, lakeside 

. The cauldron is guarded by an evil hag named 

Maud Chiselbone and can conjure enough stew to 

feed a starving town indefinitely (see “Toil and Trou 

ble” below) 


caves 


The White Lady doesn’t remember the details of her 
own death or the fate of her lost love. Once her spirit de 
parts, the frost on the windows dissipates. 


TOIL AND TROUBLE 


The quest in Easthaven begins at the same time as the 
burning of the Red Wizard, Dzaan, who is described 
in the “Arcane Brotherhood” section of appendix C. 
Whether the characters are starting the adventure in 
Easthaven or have just arrived, they are present during 
Dzaan’s fiery execution. They're too late to save Dzaan, 
but they might encounter a magical copy of him again in 
chapter 2 (see “Lost Spire of Netheril,” page 145). 

The captain of Easthaven's militia, Imdra Arlaggath, 
takes notice of the characters during the burning and 
offers them a quest. Some fishers have gone missing on 
Lac Dinneshere, and she wants the characters to take a 
boat and search for them. She knows where the fishers 
like to fish and urges the characters to search that part 
of the lake first. If they heed Imdra’s advice, they find the 
fishers’ boats pulled up on the ice within short walking 
distance from a frozen cave previously hidden under 


snow and ice. This cave, the characters soon discover, is 
the lair of a hag named Maud Chiselbone. 

Characters who explore the cave complex find the 
bodies of the fishers, as well as Maud's cauldron of 
plenty (see appendix D). The cauldron is a stunning dis 
covery and a welcome one for the people of Ten-Towns, 
if the characters choose to part with it. If news of the 
cauldron spreads, the characters will quickly find them 
selves the center of attention as various towns strive to 
auldron 
last thing standing between one town's sur- 


obtain it. With no end to winter in sight, the 
might be the 
vival and another's extinction 


DINNesHeRe 


PuBLic EXECUTION 


Events begin to unfold when the characters find them- 
selves in the vicinity as Dzaan’s execution takes place: 


A crowd has gathered in front of the Town Hall to watch 
the public execution of Dzaan, a human wizard who, 

despite efforts to disguise himself, was recognized and 
arrested for the crimes he has inflicted upon dale-folk. 
He has been bound to a stake and gagged. Members of 
the militia use torches to light the straw tucked around 
his feet. Fanned by the wind, the fire catches quickly. 
Dzaan does not struggle or scream as he is quickly en- 
gulfed in flames. Bundled-up spectators move closer to 
the human bonfire, eager to feel its warmth. 


A woman bedecked in a tailored coat and a fur hat ap- 
proaches the characters as people huddle around the 
burning wizard. She introduces herself as Imdra Arlag- 
gath, captain of Easthaven's militia. Captain Arlaggath 
lawful good half-elf veteran) speaks curtly but is not 
unfriendly. If any of the characters ask about Dzaan, she 
s them that he coldly murdered some adventurers 
who had aided the people of Icewind Dale in the past; 
his public execution isn’t an act of vengeance but is 
meant to deter others from engaging in similar behavior. 


EASTHAVEN RESIDENTS BASK IN THE WARMTH OF AN 


EVIL WIZARD BEING BURNED AT THE STAKE 


GETTING THE QUEST 


Captain Arlaggath asks about the characters’ home- 
towns and reasons for being in Easthaven before asking 
if they can assist in an investigation. If they express in- 
terest, she shares the following information: 


“Four fishers went missing on Lac Dinneshere a tenday 
ago. The coastline is hard to sail along because of the ice 
floes, but savvy anglers prefer it—there are fewer com- 
peting fishers from the other lake towns there. We need 


someone to scout the coastline and search for them.” 


If the characters need a boat, they can borrow one from 
the angler docks and drag it across the ice to the open 
water. A rowboat can hold up to four Medium charac- 
ters, while a single-masted skiff can hold up to eight. A 
skiff requires at least one crew member who has profi- 
ciency with water vehicles. 

If the characters request a reward for their services, 
Captain Arlaggath says she's not authorized to give one. 
But she did confiscate two items from Dzaan that might 
interest the characters: a spell scroll of fireball in a cop- 
per tube and a gray bag of tricks. They can have one or 
the other if they find the missing fishers. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


64 


THE SEARCH BEGINS 


Much of Lac Dinneshere is covered with ice. Only the 
hardiest anglers venture out to fish for knucklehead 
trout. To wrangle such a catch, fishers must drag their 
boats across the ice to open water and wait patiently out 
on the lake in the freezing cold for hours at a time. To 
fend off the chill, they often bring bottles of ale to keep 
warm. Imbibing too much is dangerous, for it makes 
the anglers more susceptible to being pulled overboard 
by stubborn knuckleheads. Too much ale also leads to 
foolhardy decisions. Such was the fate of four old an- 
glers from Easthaven, who abandoned their trusty boat, 
Bunch o' Knuckleheads, to follow a tantalizing scent 
emanating from the mouth of a lakeside cave. Inside, 
they encountered a hag named Maud Chiselbone and 

a spicy concoction she prepared using her cauldron of 
plenty. Maud took the opportunity to season her stew 
with the ale-soaked anglers before adding their bones to 
her growing collection. 


ABANDONED RowBoaT 
The characters find the Bunch o’ Knuckleheads along 
the coast: 


A rowboat bobs untethered in the water amid some small 
ice floes, not far from the elghty-foot-high cliffs that abut 
the shoreline. The mouths of four caves dot the snowy 
cliffside. One of these caves is at water level, and the 
others are elevated twenty to thirty feet above the frozen 
lake. The wind tearing through these icy caves sounds 
like moaning. 


Characters who search the abandoned rowboat find four 
oars, four sets of fishing tackle, and a dozen empty bot- 
tles lying in it. Characters can also see faint tracks on 
the ice leading from the boat to the southernmost cave, 
which is where the four missing anglers went. The spicy 
scent that lured the fishers into the cave is not present 
when the characters arrive. 

As the characters conclude their search of the rowboat 
and make their way toward the caves, two harpies fly 
over the coastline. Like many creatures in this region, 
the harpies are starving and eager for anything they can 
eat. If one is killed, the other flees. 


THE CAULDRON CAVES 


A cave network extends into the snow-swept cliffs along 
the shore of Lac Dinneshere. This complex once con- 
tained a sacred hot spring where elderly frost giants 
came to end their lives in a drowning ritual. Now, the 
waters have frozen over. 

The caves have long been home to a lake hag named 
Maud Chiselbone. Maud has amassed a collection of 
bones and trinkets taken from wayward explorers who 
blundered into her lair. Maud once shared her caves 
with two sisters, but the coven had a falling out. The 
bones of Maud’s dead sisters are among those on dis- 
play in her home. Maud is always hungry and likes to 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


lick clean the bones of her “guests.” The four fishers 
from Easthaven are her latest victims. 


FEATURES OF THE CAVES 
The caves have the following recurring features: 


Moaning Wind. The howling wind that blows through 
the caves sounds like a moaning crone, which is 
bone-chilling enough to deter most would-be explor- 
ers. The wind blows out candles and other small 
flames but is otherwise harmless. 

Ice Everywhere. Slippery ice covers every wall, ceiling, 
and floor (see “Slippery Ice” in the Dungeon Master's 
Guide). Characters with crampons strapped to their 
boots can traverse the ice without impediment. 

High Ceilings. The caves have 50-foot-high ceilings. 
The tunnels connecting the caves are 30 feet high. 

Moonlight. Infrequent, naturally occurring breaks in 
the ceiling allow moonlight into the caves, causing ar- 
eas of the complex to be dimly lit on clear nights. 


AREAS OF THE CAULDRON CAVES 
The following locations are keyed to map 1.10. 


Ul. Cave MOUTHS 

The characters must climb icy cliffs to reach the three 
northernmost caves, which are above water level. No 
ability check is required to do so, given the abundant 
handholds and footholds on the cliffs. 

Water used to flow out of the southernmost tunnel and 
feed into the lake. That water is now frozen solid, creat- 
ing a floor of ice several feet thick. The fishers entered 
the cave complex by this route, as evidenced by tracks 
in the snow that clings to the ice. With a successful DC 
10 Wisdom (Survival) check, the characters can follow 
these four sets of human tracks as far as area U7, where 
they disappear. The fishers made it all the way to area 
U9, where they met their doom. 


U2. Dire WoLF DEN 

A hungry dire wolf haunts this dark cave, the uneven 
floor of which is strewn with animal and humanoid 
bones. Unless the characters offer it fresh meat, the 
dire wolf attacks them. It’s too mean-tempered to be 
befriended. The wolf has no trouble scrambling up or 
down the 20-foot-high wall at the mouth of its den. 


U3. Cave DRAWINGS 


This cave has ancient, stick-figure drawings carved into 
its northern wall. 


Acharacter who makes a successful DC 15 Intelligence 
(History) check can correctly interpret the carvings, 
which show frost giants wading up a river to a cav- 

ern that contains a hot spring, in which they drown 
themselves. 


U4. MOANING CAVERN 
The cave is empty except for three ice-covered pillars 
composed of mineral deposits. 


ay “CAULDRON NULDRONICAVES, igi 


fi/Square|=10 feet 


Map 1.10: Cauoron Caves 


U5. Icy BRIDGE 

A natural stone bridge spans the frozen river 20 feet 
below. The top of the bridge is covered with a slippery, 
icy glaze. Crossing the bridge safely requires a success- 
ful DC 10 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check. A creature that 
fails the check falls off the bridge and lands prone on the 
frozen river below, taking 7 (246) bludgeoning damage 
from the fall. 


U6, OLD CAMP 


This cave contains an abandoned campsite. 


Characters who search the charred remains of the 
campfire can find three torn-out pages, only partially 
burned, from a journal written in Dwarvish. 

Written on the loose pages are an anonymous dwar!'s 
musings about the cave complex. Characters who exam- 
ine the pages find a couple of noteworthy passages: 


“These caves are sacred to the frost giants. The carv- 
ings on the wall suggest that the giants came here to 
drown themselves. Did they use the hot spring as a 
sacrificial pool?” 

“The wind truly sounds like a wailing woman. One 
could easily go mad in this place.” 

“I think there's someone living in these caves. Shortly 
after discovering the hot spring, I heard what sounded 
like a granny singing. When the song ended with a 


shrill laugh, dread sunk its teeth in me. Ye gods, that 
horrible cackle! I shall leave these caves in the morn- 
ing and never return.” 


U7. WATERFALL 
The river used to tumble over a small waterfall in this 
area, following the current west toward Lac Dinneshere. 
The waterfall now takes the form of a 10-foot-tall sheet 
of ice that can be climbed with a successful DC 10 
Strength (Athletics) check. The ice is thin, however, and 
easily broken: the first creature of Medium size or larger 
to fail the check causes the ice to crack and fall, releas- 
ing a dormant water weird. After the ice breaks, enough 
ice remains that characters can still climb it, but the DC 
of the check increases to 15. 

Lodged in the rocks behind the waterfall are items 
that were caught in the river, including an explor- 
er's pack and a miner's pick. After the water weird 
is released and dealt with, these items can be safely 
recovered. 


U8. SACRED SPRING 
An underground river once spilled into a pool in this 
area, filling it with steaming mineral water and over- 
flowing to the west. The river and the pool are now fro- 
zen and will remain so until the Everlasting Rime ends. 
On clear nights, moonlight shines through an opening 
in the ceiling and illuminates the pool. The minerals in 
the ice have turned it a cloudy, bright blue. Entombed in 
the ice are the remains of four frost giants, the faint out- 
lines of their forms barely visible. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


U9. OSSUARY 
This cave is higher in elevation than the tunnels leading 
to it, but it's easily reached by climbing one of two flights 
of crudely carved stairs. 

On clear nights, moonlight enters the cave through 
natural fissures in the ceiling. Fresh blood paints the 
icy floor, indicating that one or more creatures were 
butchered here recently. (This is where the fishers from 
Easthaven met their end.) More obvious than the blood 
are all the bones: knucklehead trout spines, humanoid 
skeletons in pieces, and bones of small animals and 
birds, along with scraps of clothing and armor and a few 
rusty weapons. 

Sitting among the bones in the middle of the cave is a 
frost giant skeleton (see appendix C) partially en 
in ice. It remains inanim 
until an intruder ente 


sed 


te until it takes damage or 


s the ossuary. Instead of rolling 
initiative for it, have it act on initiative count 1. The skel 
eton spends its first two turns in combat doing nothing 
other than breaking out of the ice and getting to its feet, 
which gives the characters time to flee or get in a few 
hits before the skeleton attacks. 

This creature killed the fishers from Easthaven, and 
Maud is the only one who can control it. The skeleton 
tries to kill anyone else who enters this cave and pur- 
sues fleeing prey as far as it can without leaving the 
cave complex. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


Mauo CHISELBONE USES HER MAGIC CAULORON 


TO WHIP UP A TASTY HUMAN STEW. 


U10. CAULDRON OF PLENTY 
The lake hag, Maud Chiselbone (use the sea hag stat 
block), and her will-o’-wisp companion await charac- 
ters in the middle of this cave. Maud stands between 
her cauldron of plenty (see appendix D) and a stone 
block atop which she butchers whatever meat is des- 
tined for her stew. Heaped around this block are rusty 
hatchets and the flayed corpses of the four fishers from 
sthaven. The will-o'-wisp is normally invisible when 
its light is extinguished, but it brightens when it wants 
intruders to behold Maud's true, hideous form 

Maud disguises herself as a decrepit old woman. In 
this form, she wears tattered furs to stave off the cold. In 
her natural form, Maud has sickly grayish-purple flesh, 
bulging eyes that seldom blink, and stringy black hair 
interwoven with fingerbones. If her disguise is pierced 
or the characters threaten her, Maud summons the frost 
giant skeleton in area U9 to fight on her behalf, but it 
takes two rounds to arrive. If the skeleton is destroyed, 
Maud assumes her true form and takes on the charac 
ters herself. She won't give up her lair or the magic caul 
dron without a fight 

If she is reduced to 9 hit points or fewer, Maud tries to 
make a deal. She agrees to surrender the cauldron and 
promises to deliver a chest filled with gold coins that lies 
in the muck at the bottom of Lac Dinneshere. If the deal 
is struck and the characters release her as promised, 
Maud returns to the lake to make good on her end of the 
bargain. As she departs, she tells the characters to wait 
in the caves until midnight, then head north along the 
shore for a mile. If they follow her instructions, they find 


a waterlogged wooden chest on the icy shore, its lock 
broken off. See “Treasure” below for information on the 
chest's contents. 

Treasure. The piping-hot stew created by the caul- 
dron of plenty is too bland for Maud’s tastes, so she has 
added skinned meat and fresh human organs to the lat- 
est batch. Characters who examine the stew see lumps 
of flesh and organs floating in the spicy broth. Charac- 
ters will need to dump the stew before trying to move 
the cauldron. Even empty, the cauldron requires some 
effort to transport, given its awkward size. 

If the cauldron is hauled back to Ten-Towns and its 
magical properties become known, the characters won't 
have trouble finding an interested buyer for it (see “Con- 
cluding the Quest” and “Town Hall Capers” below). 

The chest that Maud pulls from the depths of Lac Din- 
neshere contains 600 gp. Buried under the gold coins 
are four crawling claws that leap out and attack if the 
gold is removed, dumped, or otherwise disturbed. 


CONCLUDING THE QUEST 


Captain Arlaggath is saddened by the news that the 
missing fishers are dead, yet eager to hear a full account 
of the characters’ visit to the Cauldron Caves. 


CLAIMING THE REWARD 

Having completed their quest, the characters are en: 
titled to either the spell scroll of fireball or the gray 
bag of tricks, both of which Captain Arlaggath has in 
her custody. 


SELLING THE CAULDRON 

Characters who try to sell the cauldron of plenty in 
Easthaven get more than they bargained for (see “Town 
Hall Capers” below). 


Town HALL CAPERS 


Easthaven's Town Hall is the setting for two possible 
capers, one involving the theft of the cauldron of plenty 
and the other involving the theft of a ship's figurehead 
made of chardalyn. These capers occur under the fol- 
lowing conditions: 


« If the characters try to sell the cauldron of plenty in 
Easthaven, run “The Cauldron Caper.” 

+ Ifthe characters haven't dealt with the duergar threat 
aboard Easthaven’s ferry and aren't likely to do so, run 
“The Chardalyn Caper.” 


You can run one caper or the other, or use both of 
them at different times in the adventure. 


THE CAULDRON CAPER 


Ifthe characters bring the cauldron of plenty to 
Easthaven and its properties become known to Captain 
Arlaggath or other townsfolk, word gets around that the 
characters possess a magic item that could help feed 

the hungry in Ten-Towns. This news quickly reaches 
Speaker Danneth Waylen, who invites the characters to 
a private meeting at the Town Hall. During this meeting, 
Danneth tries to buy the cauldron, offering five 500 gp 
gemstones for it. No one else in Easthaven will pay more 
for it or bid against him 


Speaker DANNETH WAYLEN 


Any character who barters with Danneth and suc- 
ceeds on a DC 12 Charisma (Persuasion) check can 
convince him to sweeten the deal, in which case he of- 
fers up to ten 500 gp gemstones. If the characters accept 
his offer, Danneth needs 48 hours to call in some debts 
and acquire the gems, during which time he insists that 
the cauldron remain in Easthaven’s Town Hall, under 
guard in area T17. The characters can either let four 
members of town militia (tribal warriors) watch over 
the cauldron, or they can protect it themselves. Danneth 
is satisfied either w 


ZHENTARIM THIEVES 

News of the cauldron reaches Speaker Naerth Max 
ildanarr of Targos within a day, thanks to a Zhentarim 
spy named Prudence Tarkwold, who works as a clerk 
in Easthaven’s Town Hall and owns a small cottage 
nearby (where she keeps a flying snake that serves 
her as a messenger). After Prudence notifies him of the 
cauldron, Naerth sets into motion a plan to steal it. He 
dispatches three human thugs in cold weather clothing 
to meet with Prudence at the Town Hall as night falls. 
These thugs bring with them a domesticated axe beak, 
which they tie to a wooden post outside the Town Hall's 
north entrance. 

Barring the characters’ intervention, the Zhents cor- 
ner Speaker Waylen in his office (area T3) and use him 
as a hostage to force the guards watching the cauldron 
to drop their weapons and surrender without a fight. 
After locking Speaker Waylen and the guards in the 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


67 


jail (area T18), the Zhents remove the cauldron from 
the Town Hall, lash it to the axe beak with rope, and 
toss the keys to the jail cells into a snowbank. The axe 
beak is strong enough to drag the cauldron through 
the snow behind it as the Zhents lead it back to Targos. 
The Zhents don't stop until the cauldron is delivered to 
Speaker Naerth Maxildanarr at the Luskan Arms (see 
page 86). Any tracks they make in the snow are oblit- 
erated after 1d4 hours by blowing wind. Although they 
are lawful evil, the Zhents have strict orders not to kill 
anyone. Enemies they reduce to 0 hit points are knocked 
unconscious rather than slain. 


DEVELOPMENT 
Characters at the Town Hall can attempt to thwart the 
robbery. If no characters are present during the robbery, 
the theft becomes apparent when the characters return 
to the Town Hall to close the deal with Speaker Waylen. 
If they arrive in the early hours of the morning, they 
hear loud banging coming from the dungeon, where the 
speaker and his guards are locked up. Otherwise, they 
arrive to find Captain Arlaggath and a small retinue of 
town guards trying to break open the cell doors. 
Speaker Waylen is stung by Prudence's betrayal, as 
she worked closely with him for nearly three years. He 
had no idea she worked for the Zhentarim. If the char- 
acters don't know where the Zhents took the cauldron, 
Waylen recalls that Prudence offhandedly mentioned 
having family in Targos. (Her “family” is the Zhentarim.) 
He suggests they search for the cauldron there. Charac- 
ters can find Prudence Tarkwold at the Luskan Arms, 
where she has a private room to herself. As for the caul- 
dron, Speaker Maxildanarr has it and won't give it up 
without a fight. 


THE CHARDALYN CAPER 


The duergar hiding aboard the Easthaven ferry attack 
the Town Hall in the dead of night, determined to steal 
pieces of a ship's figurehead made of chardalyn. This 
theft occurs while most townsfolk, including Speaker 
Waylen, are asleep in their homes. For more informa- 
tion about the duergar and what they know, see the 
“Easthaven Ferry” section (page 59). 


DUERGAR THIEVES 
If he’s still alive, Durth Sunblight, a duergar mind 
master (see appendix C), leads three duergar named 
Klaska, Ossyl, and Zublorr to the Town Hall under the 
cover of night, making their way inside through the 
north entrance. Barring the characters’ intervention, 
the duergar use their weapons to shatter the chardalyn 
figurehead in area T6. The guards in area T17 interrupt 
the duergar but are no match for them. After killing the 
guards with their war picks, the duergar finish breaking 
apart the figurehead. 

Each duergar carries one sack that can hold up to 
five 20-pound fragments of chardalyn. After filling their 
sacks, the duergar exit the Town Hall and travel to their 
hidden fortress in the mountains (described in chapter 
3). Any tracks left by the duergar are obliterated after 
1d4 hours by blowing wind. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


If too much time has passed to track the duergar, the 
characters have no way to know where they went—just 
as well, given the perils of the duergar fortress. A search 
of the Easthaven ferry yields no clues, as the duer- 
gar took all their belongings (including Durth’s map) 
with them. 


DEVELOPMENT 

Unless they happen to be inside or near the Town Hall 
when the duergar arrive, the characters won't know 
about the theft until word reaches their ears the follow- 
ing day, when Speaker Waylen asks them to find the 
thieves and return the missing fragments of chardalyn, 
so that he can lock them up with the other pieces that 
the thieves left behind. Waylen is willing to pay 50 gp for 
each stolen fragment that is returned to him. If the char- 
acters aren't already aware of the properties of charda- 
lyn, Waylen warns them about the demonic magic suf- 
fusing the crystal and urges them not to come in direct 
contact with any of the fragments. 

Characters who are determined to find the stolen char- 
dalyn fragments can question Easthaven's townsfolk to 
see if anyone saw suspicious activity on the night of the 
robbery, Any character who spends an hour knocking 
on doors and inquiring about town can make a DC 14 
Charisma (Investigation) check at the end of that hour. 
On a failed check, no useful information is obtained. 

If the check succeeds, the character is urged to speak 
with Scython, the tiefling ferryman, who spends most 
of his free time in a tavern called the Wet Trout. Scy- 
thon is widely regarded as a font of useful information. 
Although he doesn’t know anything about the duergar 
or the stolen chardalyn, he knows several rumors that 
might steer the characters in new directions (see “The 
Wet Trout,” page 60). Once the characters are 4th 

level, the adventure steers them toward the duergar for- 
tress in chapter 3, where the stolen chardalyn fragments 
can be found (see area X26 on page 180). 


EASTHAVEN TOWN HALL 


Information about Easthaven’s Town Hall is provided 
here, along with a map. You can use map 1.11 to repre- 
sent other town halls in Ten-Towns, as needed. 
Easthaven's Town Hall is a two-story, wattle-and-daub 
building where townsfolk come to renew licenses, pay 
fines, settle petty claims, file complaints, and gather to 
discuss important issues. The flag of Easthaven flutters 
atop a cupola on the Town Hall's steeply pitched rooftop. 
All above-ground levels have wooden floors, with 
framed oil paintings by local artists mounted above 
the wainscoting. The doors on these levels are made of 
sturdy wood and have no locks, though the outermost 
doors can be barred from within. The dungeon level 
is hewn out of solid rock and has sturdy iron doors 
throughout. Low-burning lanterns hang from iron brack- 
ets or the rafters, dimly lighting all interior locations. 
The following locations are keyed to map 1.11. 


EASTHAVENSIOWN 


sl 'square\=5 feet! 


aS 


Map 1.11: EastHAvEN Town Hart 
Tl. RECEPTION HALL 


This chamber is decorated with oil paintings depicting 
life in Easthaven, including a large painting of the town 
itself on the north wall. Mounted on the south wall is 
a five-foot-long, stuffed knucklehead trout. Its wooden 
plaque bears an engraved copper plate that reads, in 
Common, “Big Knuck, caught by Easthaven fishers 
during the summer of 1479 DR.” 


Asecret door in the northeast corner is partially con- 
cealed behind a tall, slender oil painting of fishing boats 
on Lac Dinneshere. It pulls open to reveal the speaker's 
office (area T3) beyond. Any character who searches the 
wall for secret doors finds it automatically, 


T2. ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE 
This room contains rows of desks and filing cabinets. A 
few overstuffed lounge chairs are set aside for visitors. 


T3. SPEAKER'S OFFICE 


Tapestries and painted landscapes decorate this room, in 
the middle of which is a large table surrounded by high- 
backed wooden chairs. 


oath 


The speaker's chair has Easthaven's heraldry worked 
into its backrest, whereas the other chairs don't. 

A secret door in the northwest corner is concealed 
behind a tapestry depicting a snow-capped mountain. It 
swings open into area T1. Any character who searches 
the wall for secret doors finds it automatically. 


T4. COAT CLOSET 
This is the speaker’s personal coat closet. A full set of 
cold weather clothing is stored in the wooden trunk. 


T5. Privy 
This room contains a toilet, a bucket and mop, a simple 
wash basin, and a towel rack. 


T6. CHARDALYN FIGUREHEAD 
Provided the duergar haven't destroyed it, a startling 
discovery awaits characters in this room: 


Low-burning lanterns cast a gentle glow upon a tall, 
black object in the center of this room. Although one 
could easily mistake it for a statue, this object is actually 
the figurehead of a ship and is carved in the likeness of 
a winged demon. The demon-shaped figurehead stands 
eight feet tall. Shards of wood jut out of the demon's 
back at the points where the figurehead once attached to 
the hull of a ship. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 69 


If the figurehead is intact and the characters partici- 
pated in Rinaldo’s séance (see page 61), they see 
something else as well: 


Lashed to the figurehead with rope is a scrawny woman 
who is dripping wet. Her long, white hair hangs over her 
face, obscuring it. 


Other features of the room include a wooden staircase 
that climbs to a balcony, mounted atop which is a small 
crane with a manual winch, and a staircase that leads 
down to the dungeon (see area T16). 

Demonic Figurehead. Characters familiar with 
chardalyn can tell that the figurehead is made of the 
substance. Those who succeed on a DC 20 Intelligence 
(History) check realize that the figurehead depicts Errtu, 
a balor demon that terrorized Icewind Dale over a cen- 
tury ago. Characters who grew up in Icewind Dale have 
advantage on this check. The figurehead is a Large ob- 
ject with AC 13, a damage threshold of 5, 50 hit points, 
and immunity to poison and psychic damage. It weighs 
1,000 pounds. 

A band of adventurers used a telekinesis spell to raise 
the figurehead from the depths of Lac Dinneshere a few 
months ago and hauled it to Easthaven, hoping for a 
reward. What they got was hardly worth the effort, and 
Speaker Waylen doesn't know what else to do with the 
figurehead except store it here, out of the public eye. He 
fears the figurehead is tainted by demonic magic and 
has warned his staff not to touch it. A detect evil and 
Sood spell or similar magic reveals that it’s a desecrated 
object. Any creature that comes into contact with it must 
succeed on a DC 13 Charisma saving throw or gain the 
following flaw, which supersedes any conflicting person- 
ality trait: “I suspect most Ten-Towners are members of 
a secret cult devoted to the Frostmaiden.” This paranoia 
can be ended on a creature by any spell that removes a 
curse. Prolonged contact with the figurehead might have 
other ill effects, at your discretion. 

White Lady of Lac Dinneshere. What looks like a 
woman tied to the figurehead is actually the White Lady 
of Lac Dinneshere, which manifests here as a chaotic 
evil ghost. If the characters keep their distance, the 
woman begins sobbing. If the characters leave without 
confronting the woman and return later, the ghost is 
gone (along with the ropes that seemed to bind it). 

The White Lady rarely manifests on land, and her 
ghost can be seen only by those who dared to summon 
it (as the characters did when they participated in Rinal- 
do's séance). If one or more characters come within 5 
feet of the ghost, it throws back its head to reveal a bare 
skull with a rictus grin, catching characters by surprise 
with its Horrifying Visage. Once the ghost's true nature 
is revealed, the ropes binding it to the figurehead fade 
away as it attacks the nearest character. If the ghost is 
reduced to 20 hit points or fewer, it tries to possess a 
character on its next turn. A possessed host will attempt 
to leave the Town Hall by the northern exit and drown 
itself in Lac Dinneshere by walking out onto the ice until 
it breaks, attacking anyone who gets in its way. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


If the ghost is reduced to 0 hit points, it fades away 
with a scream as the White Lady’s spirit is forced back 
to the lake, where it remains thereafter. 


T7. CHAIR STORAGE 
Stacked neatly against the walls of this room are dozens 
of wooden chairs used for town meetings. 


T8. RECORDS Room 
This room contains records for the town, stored in 
boxes that lean haphazardly against the walls. 


T9. EVENT VENUE 

This room is used for parties and other special events. It 
contains wooden tables and chairs, and colorful stream- 
ers hang from the rafters. A curtained window looks 
down on area T6. 


T10. SMALL CLAIMS COURT 

Residents of Easthaven come here to settle claims 

for petty crimes. Rows of wooden chairs face a large, 
cloth-covered table, behind which the speaker sits while 
presiding over small claims court cases. Next to this ta- 
ble is a small writing desk for the court clerk. 


TIl. FISHING PERMITS 


Three desks stand side-by-side in the room, the backs 
of their chairs facing the outside wall. Pinned to the east 
wall is a large, hand-drawn map framed with old fishing 
poles. One of the poles is rigged with a lime green fish- 
ing lure carved to resemble a tiny flumph. 


Easthaven fishers come here to apply for and renew 
their fishing permits. The map on the east wall shows 
Lac Dinneshere, with boundaries to mark the fishing 
territories of Easthaven, Caer-Dineval, and Caer-Konig. 


T12. EMPLOYEE BREAKROOM 
This room contains several cozy chairs, a snack cabinet, 
and a wooden staircase leading up to area T14. 


T13. SUPPLY CLOSET 
Supplies and provisions are stored on wooden shelves 
that line the walls of this room. 


T14. TOWN LIBRARY 
Easthaven’s meager library contains a mostly unre- 
markable collection of books stored in dusty bookcases. 
Other furnishings include padded chairs and footstools. 
Wooden stairs lead down to area T12. 

Treasure. Characters who spend at least 10 minutes 
searching the bookshelves discover a worn book with 
a red leather cover and yellow pages. The edges of the 
pages are stained with dry blood. The writing inside 
suggests the book is nothing more than a poetry anthol- 
ogy. However, it's actually the spellbook of a Red Wizard 
of Thay named Dzaan. The book's true contents are 
hidden by an illusory script spell that ends 5 days after 
Dzaan’s execution (see “Public Execution,” page 63). 


4 
s 
a 
BOUND TO A DEMONIC FIGUREHEAD I$ A HAUNTING 
FIGURE, BUT NOT ALL IS WHAT IT SEEMS, 
oe 


After the book was confiscated by a member of the 
town militia, it was brought to the Town Hall, where 

Jerk saw fit to place it in this library for safe keeping. 
Casting dispel magic on the book ends the illusory script 
spell placed upon it. When the illusory script spell ends, 
the book’s true contents are revealed. It contains the fol 
lowing spells: animate objects, arcane eye, arcane lock, 
blur, confusion, conjure elemental, detect magic, dis 

jise self, fireball, hallucinatory terrain, illusory script, 
avisibility, knock, levitate, magic missile, major image, 
mirror image, misk 
killer, se 


ad, phantasmal force, phantasmal 


ming, sending, silent image, and slow 


T15. OFFICE 
Residents of E 
for personal storage or office use. Of the six available 


AND STORAGE SPACE 
sthaven can rent out these small rooms 


rooms, only two are currently in use; the rest are empty 


The first room in use contains several storage crates 
If the characters investigate further, they 
discover all these containers are empty 


and barrels. 


The second room in use has been converted into a 
tuffed chairs and a wooden desk 
are crammed into the space. Inside the desk’s unlocked 


ozy office. Two ov 


rawer is a half-finished romance novel titled Lost in 
Lavender Orbs. 


T16. STAIRS TO THE DUNGEON 
Stone stairs covered with wooden planks lead down to 


on, which is hewn out of solid rock. 


æA 


T17. JAILERS’ ROOM 

Unless they have been called away by a disturbance 
elsewhere, four guards (tribal warriors) sit around a 
circular wooden table, playing Three-Dragon Ante with 
a well-worn deck of cards. Characters who listen at the 
door before entering can hear these soldiers complain. 
ing about the cold and wondering when the next lottery 
will be held (see “Sacrifices to Auril,” page 21). One 

of the guards carries a ring of eight iron keys; these keys 
unlock the cell doors in area T18 


T18. JAIL 

Individuals arrested for crimes in Easthaven are de 
tained here. Each cell sports a locked iron door with 

a 5-inch-square, iron-shuttered window built into it so 
that guards can peer into the cell without opening the 
door. One of the guards in area T17 carries the keys that 
unlock all the cell doors. The doors are too sturdy for 
the characters to force open using brute strength alone, 
but a character with thieves’ tools can use an action to 
attempt to pick a door’s lock from the outside, doing so 


with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check. 


T19. INTERROGATION ROOM 
Prisoners are brought here when Speaker Waylen has 
a mind to question them. The room contains a sturdy 

oak chair fitted with iron manacl 


wooden bucke 


a mop, anda 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOW 


Goop MEAD 


Founded by immigrants from Chult and the Vilhon 
Reach, Good Mead is nestled between Redwaters and 
a nearby evergreen forest. The town’s squat dwellings, 
adorned with carvings of dinosaurs and serpents, are 
overshadowed by the two-story structure of the mead 
hall, its eaves carved and painted to resemble wyverns. 


As honey is the key ingredient in mead, the town literally 


buzzes with the droning of bees. 

Every tavern in Icewind Dale is accustomed to re- 
ceiving regular mead deliveries, and the town can't 
produce or deliver its mead fast enough. All deliveries 
have halted temporarily, though—because a verbeeg 
marauder (see appendix C) emerged from the forest 
three days ago and stole three casks of mead that 
were being loaded onto a dogsled for transport to Bryn 
Shander. Kendrick Rielsbarrow, the town speaker and a 


giant of a man in his own right, stood his ground against 


the verbeeg and didn't fare well. After skewering Ken- 
drick with its spear, the verbeeg grabbed the casks and 
disappeared whence he came. The other residents of 
Good Mead tried to save Kendrick, to no avail; his body 
lies in a local shrine. Five members of the militia went 
after the verbeeg but haven't returned. 


Goop MEAD IN A NUTSHELL 


Friendliness ## Services Comfort +% 


Available Quest. “The Mead Must Flow,” page 73. 

Population. 100. 

Leader. None. Speaker Kendrick Rielsbarrow was 
killed by a verbeeg, leaving the town leaderless. 

Militia. Good Mead can muster up to 20 soldiers (use 
the tribal warrior stat block) and 2 veterans. 

Heraldry. A dark brown drinking mug made of a cut-off 
section of horn, with an antler handle added, upright 
and centered on a white field, representing the town's 
mead exports and its cold, snowy climate. 

Sacrifice to Auril. Warmth (see page 21). 

Rivals. Caer-Dineval, Caer-Konig. 


OVERLAND TRAVEL 


A path connects Good Mead to the Eastway, crosses the 
snow-covered road, and continues to Caer-Dineval. An- 
other snowy path leads to Dougan's Hole. Travel times 
in the Overland Travel from Good Mead table assume 
that characters are on foot; mounts and dogsleds can 
shorten these times by as much as 50 percent. 


OVERLAND TRAVEL FROM Goop MEAD 


To Travel Time 
Bryn Shander 6 hours 
Caer-Dineval 8 hours 
Dougan's Hole 4 hours 
Easthaven 42 miles 


LOCATIONS IN GOOD MEAD 


The following prominent locations are marked 
on map 1.12. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


Meran HALL 
Purveyor of Good Mead’s honey wine 


Four decades ago, this mead hall put an end to the 
town’s dependence on knucklehead trout fishing with 
its famous honey wine, which quickly became popular 
throughout Ten-Towns. 

The mead hall has a large, fire-heated space dedicated 
to bee husbandry and the nurturing of beehives. The 
droning bees can be heard throughout the town, though 
most residents are so accustomed to the buzzing that 
they pay it no mind. 


$e 
ELECTING A New TOWN SPEAKER 
Good Mead also needs a new leader, and two locals have 
‘emerged as contenders to replace Kendrick Rielsbarrow 
as town speaker. It will take a week or two for the town to 
plan an election, One candidate is a red-bearded shield 
dwarf logger named Shandar Froth, and the other is 
Olivessa Untapoor, a middle-aged woman who descends 
from the town's Chultan founders and who makes casks to 
hold Good Mead's famous brew. 

Shandar is wanted by the authorities in Mirabar for the 
murder of another dwarf. Zhentarim agents located Shan- 
dar a few years back and are blackmailing him into serving 
as their eyes and ears in town. Once a month, Shandar 
travels to Targos to brief Naerth Maxildanarr, its speaker, 
‘on everything that has transpired of late in Good Mead. 

Olivessa doesn't want to be town speaker, but her 
friends are pushing her to assume the role for the good 
of the town. She would be delighted to see someone else 
step up to challenge Shandar for the speakership. 

For more ion on Olivessa and Shandar, see the 
“New Town Speaker” section on page 78. 

—_—_—_ 


SHRINE OF THE FLAMING SWORD 
Shrine of Tempus (god of war) 


This vacant building stands on the lakeshore and has 
acrow-haunted steeple protruding from its peak. Un- 
like the mead hall, which is well cared for, the shrine’s 
painted icons of the god of war wielding a flaming 
sword are chipped and faded, and its spacious interior 
stands mostly empty except for a long table on which 
rests a body covered with a blanket. The body is that of 
Speaker Kendrick Rielsbarrow, a giant of a man in his 
forties. He died from three stab wounds to the chest. 
The shrine was built over a century ago, when the 
town’s rivalry with Dougan’s Hole raged so fiercely 
that the lake, a frequent battlefield, became known as 
Redwaters. For a time thereafter, nearly all residents of 
Good Mead paid homage to Tempus. Today, the shrine’s 
relevance has dwindled to the point where it's mainly 
used just for town gatherings. 


THE MEAD Must FLOW 


Taverns throughout Ten-Towns depend on deliveries of 
honey mead to satisfy their customers, and Good Mead 
needs the coin. Two days ago, a verbeeg (see appendix 
C) stole three casks of mead as they were being loaded 
onto a dogsled. When the town speaker tried to prevent 
the theft, the verbeeg killed him. The townsfolk want re- 
venge, but more important, they want their mead back! 
If the characters undertake this quest, they must track 
the verbeeg to his lair, which he shares with a dopey 
ogre, some stolen livestock, and a sleepy brown bear. To 
complicate matters, the verbeeg’s romantic interest— 
another verbeeg—arrives as the characters are leaving. 
How the characters learn of the town’s travails de- 
pends on whether the adventure began in Good Mead 
or not. If Good Mead is the starting town for the ad- 
venture, the characters know all the information in the 
“Good Mead” section (page 72), which you can read 
to the players. If Good Mead is not the starting town for 
the adventure, characters become aware of the town’s 
misfortunes when one or more locals put them up for 
the night. 


GETTING THE QUEST 


If the characters offer to retrieve the stolen casks, the 
locals can’t reward them with much more than free 
lodging and drink for a tenday. If the characters accept 
these terms, various townsfolk can point in the direction 
the verbeeg went after stealing the casks. 

As the characters make their way to the edge of the 
forest, read: 


A figure in cold weather clothing lurches out of the 
woods into plain view, running as fast as he can through 
the deep snow. Slung over his back are a pair of animal 
traps, one of which appears to contain a panicked fox. 


The figure is Fef Moryn (chaotic good human scout), 
a trapper. He was out in the woods checking his traps 
when he came upon a grisly scene: five members of 


Map 1.12: Gooo Meao 


Good Mead's militia, their skulls and chests stove in. He 
came straight home to alert the town. 

The characters can’t convince Fef to return to the 
bodies, but they can follow his tracks through the snow 
easily enough. 

The fox (see appendix C) in Fef's trap is rattled but un- 
injured. If the characters want to buy it, Fef will sell it to 
them for no less than 1 gp. Although it’s a wild animal, it 
remains docile while held. If the characters keep the fox 
with them, they will find it helpful in the next scene. 


CARNAGE IN THE WOODS 


Characters who follow Fef Moryn’s trail eventually come 
to the grisly scene the trapper spoke of: 


Deep in the woods, amid the snow-covered pines, you 
discover the remains of the five militia members, who 
look like they were clubbed to death. New-fallen snow 
has already begun to settle on their corpses. 


These five people pursued the verbeeg for a while and 
then fell prey to the verbeeg’s ogre buddy, who stayed 
behind in the woods rather than trying to keep up with 
the verbeeg. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


Shrine of the 
Flaming Sword 


73 


THE SNOW-COVERED TUSKS OF A MAMMOTH 


MARK THE ENTRANCE TO THE VERBEEG LAIR 


The ogre killed all five humans with its greatclub 
and then headed for home. Characters can follow its 
tracks in the snow without a check. A successful DC 
12 Wisdom (Survival) check identifies these tracks as 
belonging to a Large giant. Following these tracks leads 
the characters on a path through the woods until, after 8 
hours, they come upon the verbeeg’s lair. 


THE Fox AND THE CHWINGA 

The characters have one encounter while they follow the 
ogre's trail. A chwinga (see appendix C) pops out of the 
snow and hurls a wee snowball at the lead character in 
the party's marching order. Once it has the party's atten- 
tion, it capers atop the snow. 

If the characters rescued the fox from Fef Moryn, the 
animal bolts toward the chwinga if it's allowed to do so. 
The chwinga bows before the fox and offers it a frozen 
berry, which the fox gobbles up. After that, the chwinga 
and the fox become fast friends. The chwinga mounts 
the fox, bestows a charm of animal conjuring or one 
of the new charms described in appendix C (see “New 
Chwinga Charms,” page 283) upon the character it 
hit with the snowball, and rides off on the fox’s back. 
(For more information on charms, see “Supernatural 
Gifts” in the Dungeon Master's Guide.) The characters 
can interrupt this scene if they want; the chwinga won't 
bestow its supernatural charm, however, if events unfold 
any differently. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


If the characters don’t have the fox or choose not to 
let it go, the chwinga follows them all the way to the ver- 
beeg lair, if permitted to do so, but won't venture inside. 


VERBEEG LAIR 


The lair’s caves and tunnels have rough, 20-foot-high 
ceilings covered with large icicles. The floors are some 
what uneven but not rough enough to be difficult terrain. 
The verbeeg, named Duhg, needs light to see, which is 
why he keeps a bonfire lit in area V3 and carries a torch 
when he visits the darker corners of his lair. 
The following locations are keyed to map 1.13. 


V1. THREE ENTRANCES 
The ogre's tracks lead characters to a frozen stream, 
then along it to the verbeeg’s lair: 


The trail culminates at a rocky hillside with pines growing 
around its base. Set into the hill are three caves. 

The frozen creek emerges from the west cave, which 
has a low-hanging mouth. 

The center cave—an eight-foot-high passage hewn 
from the rock—is moderately blocked by a tight stand of 
conifers and two massive fallen logs. 

The northeast cave has a big, yawning mouth, and 
flickers of light emanate from within. The tracks of your 
quarry head through this entrance. 


VERBEEGIIAIR 


Square o feet 


Map 1.13: Versecc Lair 


Characters can enter the verbeeg lair through any of 


these paths. If they take the time to examine the hillside 


to the east more thoroughly, they find a fourth cave en: 
trance (area V2) 


V2. MAIN ENTRANCE 


Half-submerged in the icy mire are the bones, skull, and 
tusks of a long-dead mammoth. Beyond these remains is 
a yawning cave mouth. 


This route leads to the firelit cave (area V3) and the re 
fuse pit (area V4). 


V3. FIRELIT CAVE 
This cavern is slightly sunken, as all tunnels leading to 
it slope down gradually 


A bonfire in the middle of this cave keeps it lit and rela- 
tively warm. The scent of roasting meat fills the air as a 
hunk of meat on a spit drips juices into the fire. Goats 
and sheep are held in a spacious animal pen enclosed by 
a crude wooden fence. Other features of the cave include 
a wooden cart with a broken wheel, two old crates, and 


two barrels 


If the characters make a lot of noise, the ogre comes 
running from area V5 and the verbeeg marauder (sce 
appendix C) approaches from area V9, both arriving 

at the same time. They try to kill intruders on sight. 

If more than two intruders are visible, the verbeeg 
whistles for the cave bear, which arrives 3 rounds later 
from area V7. 

If it's close enough to the bonfire, the verbeeg can 
use his action to try to shove a creature into the flames 
(see “Shoving a Creature” in the combat chapter of the 
Player's Handbook), Any creature that enters the bonfire 
for the first time on a turn or starts its turn there takes 
10 (3d6) fire damage. It also catches fire as it leaves the 
bonfire’s space, taking 3 (1d6) fire damage at the starts 
of each of its turns until an action is used to put out the 
flames engulfing it. 

Characters in a position to harm the verbeeg’s goats 
and sheep (see “Animals” below) can use an action to 
threaten one or more of these animals and, with a suc 
cessful DC 10 Charisma (Intimidation) check, cause the 
verbeeg to cease hostilities and call off the ogre and the 
cave bear. Under such pressure, the verbeeg is willing to 
let intruders leave the lair without further incident, pro. 
vided the animals in the pen are not harmed or taken. 

One crate is packed with straw, which the verbeeg 
feeds to the goats and sheep. The other contains ten 
large torches, which the verbeeg made out of wood and 
pitch. The barrels are half-filled with salt and pepper, 
which the verbeeg uses to season his meat. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


Animals. The livestock pen holds seven goats and six 
sheep, all in healthy condition. Use the goat stat block 
for each sheep, with these changes: 

+ A sheep is a Small beast with 3 (1d6) hit points and a 
walking speed of 30 feet. 

+ It lacks the Charge feature and any effective attacks, 
giving it a challenge rating of 0 (0 XP). 

The verbeeg acquired his livestock by robbing travel- 
ers on the Eastway. He considers these beasts his trea- 
sured pets and has given names to all of them. He has 
trained the ogre and the cave bear not to attack them. 

What’s Cooking? The meat roasting on the spit is a 
piece of what used to be Artin Glanhig, a shield dwarf 
lumberjack from Bryn Shander who crossed paths with 
the verbeeg. A small bundle near a log by the fire con- 
tains Artin’s battleaxe and his thick leather boots. The 
verbeeg is fashioning a small knife he can use to care- 
fully unstitch the boots and reuse the leather. 


V4. REFUSE PIT 


This dead-end cavern has a crudely excavated, ten-foot- 
wide pit in the middle of the floor. 


The verbeeg and the ogre dug this refuse pit, which is 
20 feet deep and filled to a depth of 5 feet with bones, 
trash, and filth. 


V5. STOLEN MEAD Casks 

If the ogre has been drawn to area V3 by activity there, 
omit the opening paragraph of the following boxed text: 
A heavy snore comes from a fat, battle-scarred ogre 

sitting with its back against the west wall, its chin on its 
chest. A thin stream of drool trails from its mouth onto 

its bloodstained leather loincloth. On the floor at its feet 

is a bloody greatclub with tufts of hair and bits of metal 
stuck in it. 

Suspended from the ceiling of this chamber by a series 
of ropes and pulleys are six baskets. Clustered near the 
south wall are three wooden casks carved with Good 
Mead’s heraldic symbol: a drinking mug made of a cut- 
off section of horn, with an antler handle added, upright 
and centered. 


The ogre can never remember its name, so the verbeeg 
calls it “Friend.” It has fully recovered from its fight with 
the town militia. Any character who succeeds on a DC 8 
Dexterity (Stealth) check can creep around in the cave 
without waking the ogre. The character must repeat the 
check after disturbing an object in the cave, such as a 
hanging basket or a cask of mead. 

If awakened, the ogre grabs its greatclub and attacks, 
shouting, “ME FRIEND!” 

The verbeeg rigged the system that supports the bas- 
kets to keep the ogre from tripping over them and to 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


76 


discourage the cave bear from rooting through them. 
Lowering a basket by using its mechanism requires an 
action. The baskets contain sheep shears, milk pails, 
bristle brushes, and several bags of grain and oats sto- 
len from caravans on the Eastway. One of the baskets, 
determined randomly, contains the verbeeg’s treasure 
(see “Treasure” below). 

Casks of Honey Mead. One of the three casks is 
empty, the verbeeg and ogre having shared its contents; 
each of the other two holds 20 gallons of honey mead. 
Each full cask weighs 200 pounds. 

Treasure. The verbeeg’s treasure basket holds 72 sp, 
344 cp, a translucent pink moss agate gemstone (10 gp), 
a healer’s kit, a hunting trap, and a small rabbit-skin bag 
containing ten silvered sling stones. 


V6. FROZEN STREAM 


To the north along the frozen stream, the tunnel splits, 
with one way continuing north and the other veering 
east. The stream follows the dark northward tunnel. Light 
from a distant fire is visible in the eastern tunnel. 


Characters who follow the frozen stream to the north 
arrive at area V7. Those who venture eastward come 
to area V9. 


V7. Cave BEAR'S LAIR 


The frozen stream ends at a seven-foot-deep frozen pool 
at the back of a dark cave. Trapped beneath the pool's 
ice is a stone statue of a smiling young man, naked 
except for a well-placed oak leaf, with his face turned 
toward the sky. 


If the cave bear has not been summoned elsewhere 
by the verbeeg, it sleeps in the western niche of this 
chamber until it detects intruders. It has brown fur and 
darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. It otherwise uses 
the polar bear stat block. A character who succeeds on 
a DC 14 Dexterity (Stealth) check can sneak around in 
the cave without waking the bear, but only in the dark. 
A light source bright enough to illuminate the bear also 
wakes it. The bear, whose name is Yogobor, is hungry 
and hostile. But if it is reduced to 20 hit points or fewer 
and the verbeeg is nowhere in sight, the bear tries to flee 
for its life. 

The bear's niche contains the gnawed skull and bones 
of a shield dwarf named Artin Glanhig (see area V3). 

Statue of Silvanus. The statue in the frozen pool, 
crafted using stone shape spells, is an outcrop extend- 
ing from the pool's rocky bottom. Any character who 
succeeds on a DC 12 Intelligence (Religion) check rec- 
ognizes it as a depiction of Silvanus, a god of nature; 
the oak leaf is his holy symbol. The statue radiates an 
aura of abjuration magic when scrutinized with a detect 
magic spell. An identify spell can reveal its magical na- 
ture, but only if the caster is touching the statue when 


THEIVERBEE@ WAS A BASKET OF GOODIES FORIMER BELOVED Dunc 


pee” 


Ris 


the spell is cast. Before the statue can be touched, the 
characters must dig through a foot of ice to reach it. 

The statue blesses the pool, such that any creature 
that drinks from it gains the benefit of a greater resto- 
ration spell. This magic is suppressed while the pool 
is frozen. A given creature can gain the pool's benefit 
only once. 


V8. BURIAL NICHES 


This eight-foot-high, five-foot-wide passage has a dozen 


burial niches carved into its walls. 


An ancient human tribe carved a tomb out of the hillside 
to house the bones of their chieftain, whose remains are 
housed in area V10. Each burial niche in this tunnel is 2 
feet wide, 2 feet tall, and 5 feet deep. The bones of war- 
riors were placed here to guard the way to the chieftain's 
tomb. Animals have savaged the bones, leaving nothing 
but a couple of skulls and carved stone knives behind. 


V9. Dunc Is HERE 
Anatural tunnel bisects a ring-shaped excavation in 
this area, which was once an additional burial chamber. 
Niches cut in the north end of the outer ring hold noth- 
ing of interest. 

Duhg the verbeeg marauder (see appendix C) is here 
if he hasn't been encountered somewhere else. Duhg 


is sitting cross-legged in the tunnel, a lit torch on the 
floor nearby. The verbeeg is sharpening a stone knife 
he found in the old tomb. Duhg plans to use this knife to 
unstitch the dwarven boots in area V3. Leaning against 
a wall, within easy reach, is Duhg's spear. 


V10. ANCIENT TOMB 


Carved steps on the south side climb five feet to this ten- 
foot-high, fifteen-foot-square room, which has narrow, 
natural exits in the east and west walls. In the middle of 
the room is a rectangular stone block seven feet long, 
four feet wide, and three feet tall. Pictographs on the 
walls of the chamber tell a tale of one tribe's journey 
through mighty mountains and across a perilous tundra 


A tribal chieftain was laid to rest here in ancient times. 
The pictographs illustrate how the chieftain led her tribe 
to settle in Icewind Dale, how they fought off terrible 
monsters to claim their land, and how they found peace 
in their new home. Characters who study the artwork 
can pick out an image of the chieftain wielding a wand 
and casting a destructive spell. 

It takes a combined Strength of 50 to move the block. 
Revealed beneath it is a shallow niche in the floor that 
holds the bones of a female human, her tribal garb re- 
duced to dust and tatters. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


78 


Treasure. Clutched in the chieftain’s left hand is a 
pearl of power. In her right hand is a +1 wand of the war 
mage. A curse befalls any creature that removes either 
magic item or any of the chieftain’s remains from the 
burial niche. Until the curse ends on it, the creature is 
haunted by phantasmal nightmares whenever it takes a 
long rest and gains no benefit from that rest. Replacing 
the stolen object ends the curse, as does a remove curse 
spell or similar magic. 


AFFAIRS OF THE HEART 
As the characters exit the verbeeg lair, read: 


A verbeeg strides through the snow, approaching the 
mouth of the cave. Her misshapen face bears a too- 
wide smile, She clutches a spear in one hand while 
using her other arm to cradle a wicker basket filled with 
bits of shiny metal. “Duhg?” she shouts in Common. 
“You home?” 


Gahg, a verbeeg marauder (see appendix C), has ar- 
rived for a romantic encounter with Duhg. Gahg has 
brought along some fragments of metal that she hopes 
will impress Duhg, who had been planning to give Gahg 
a cask of honey mead. 

If the characters try to stop Gahg from entering 
Duhg’s lair, Gahg becomes alarmed, then enraged. She 
drops the wicker basket and attacks the characters, 
afraid that something terrible has happened to Duhg. 

If the characters run away, Gahg checks on Duhg to 
make sure he is unharmed, allowing the party a head 
start back to Good Mead. If the characters run back into 
the verbeeg lair and try to hide, Gahg searches for them 
after locating Duhg. 

If only one verbeeg survives contact with the char- 
acters, it won't rest until it has revenge for the death 
of its potential mate. A verbeeg is smart enough not to 
act rashly against the party, but it might vent its fury by 
launching more hit-and-run attacks on Good Mead. 


Gauc's BASKET OF BITS 

The metal fragments gathered by Gahg are pieces of 

a futuristic weapon that was jettisoned from the cargo 

hold of an illithid nautiloid before the spaceship crashed 

(see page 132). Gahg witnessed the crash, which 

looked like a comet streaking across the sky, then found 

the weapon's wreckage and took some of it. A character 

who examines the fragments and succeeds on a DC 20 

Intelligence (Arcana) check realizes that the metal is not 

something one could expect to find on this world. 
Treasure. The metal bits are worth a total of 75 gp to 

a tinkerer or blacksmith. 


CONCLUDING THE QUEST 


Once the characters find the two remaining casks of 
honey mead, they'll need to figure out a way to haul 
them back to Good Mead. After they solve that prob- 
lem, they have a safe trip back to town. The townsfolk 
are happy to see the stolen mead returned but express 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


concern if the characters left one or both of the verbeeg 
alive. After all, what's to stop them from terrorizing the 
town again? 


New Town SPEAKER 

As the characters are recuperating from their adventure 
or planning their next excursion, a local cask maker 
named Olivessa Untapoor (neutral good human com- 
moner) approaches the party leader, if there is one. If no 
character has assumed that role, Olivessa approaches 
the character with highest Charisma score: 


A middle-aged woman approaches you and removes her 
thick wool scarf so that she can speak clearly, “My name 
is Olivessa, and | make the casks for the mead. Some 
friends of mine don't want Shandar Froth to become our 
next town speaker, They say he’s untrustworthy. | don't 
know him that well, but I've been urged to run against 
him. | have no interest in the speakership, but you seem 
to be a good leader, and this town could use one. What 
do you say?” 


Olivessa is ready and willing to throw her support 
behind any character who runs in the election for the 
speakership, and since she’s a leading candidate herself, 
her support carries weight. Her opponent, Shandar 
Froth (neutral shield dwarf commoner), doesn't like this 
turn of events. After accusing the characters of having 
no stake in Good Mead’s future, he leaves town for a day 
to get help (see “Zhentarim Intervention” below). 

A character who spends at least 1 hour making 
inquiries throughout town can learn the following 
information about the two leading candidates for the 
speakership: 


Olivessa has deep roots in Good Mead. Her family 
has lived in the town since its founding. She's quite 
reserved and doesn't have any family of her own, She 
lives alone in the house closest to the Shrine of the 
Flaming Sword. 

Shandar has lived in Good Mead for a few years and 
is popular among the town's loggers. He can be a bully 
and a blowhard, but there's nothing he wouldn't do for 
his friends. He lives with five other loggers in a small 
house on the west side of town. 


Zhentarim Intervention. Shandar is under the thumb 
of Naerth Maxildanarr, the speaker of Targos. Faced 
with the possibility of losing the election, Shandar 
makes the 8-hour hike to Targos to warn Naerth and 
then promptly returns home. A day later, eight human 
thugs storm the mead hall in cold weather clothing. 
Before the characters can intervene, Shandar and his 
fellow loggers confront the thugs and kick them out of 
town with their tails between their legs. The whole inci- 
dent is orchestrated to make Shandar into a local hero, 
Characters who capture and interrogate one or more of 
the thugs learn that Naerth Maxildanarr hired them. 

If the characters fail to expose the deception, Shandar 
is elected town speaker, giving the Zhentarim a political 
foothold in Good Mead. 


LONELYWOOD 


Founded by a Sembian family from Urmlaspyr, Lone- 
Sywood is a quiet town of loggers, fishers, and scrim- 
shanders scratching out a living on the edge of the 
world. The town’s oldest buildings and docks bear carv- 
ings of dragons, lions, and goats that pay deference to 
the family’s crest, which featured a chimera. 

Roughly half of Lonelywood's able-bodied residents 
trawl the lake for knucklehead trout, while most of the 
others spend their days in the forest felling and hewing 
the trees that are used to construct boats and buildings. 
Lonelywood's timber is taken by cart to be sold in other 
settlements, Termalaine and Targos in particular, 

For as long as Ten-Towns has existed, Lonelywood 
has attracted the region's shadiest element, from unre- 
pentant thieves to cold-hearted killers, The thick forest 
Tooming behind it conceals the dark and sordid dealings 
that sometimes transpire there. Despite its attraction 
to criminals and miscreants, Lonelywood is not a place 
where folk murder each other in the streets. The reali- 
ties of survival demand that the residents live and work 
together, and not dwell on history. A visitor can make 
many friends here but would be wise not to drudge up 
the dark deeds of anyone's past in this small town. 


LONELYWOOD IN A NUTSHELL 
Friendliness ##% Services * Comfort S 


Available Quest. “The White Moose,” page 80. 

Population. 100. 

Leader. Speaker Nimsy Huddle (lawful good strong- 
heart halfling commoner) speaks for the townsfolk. 
Ever since the local inn closed its doors, Nimsy has 
opened her heated attic to visitors looking for a place 
to crash for the night. She bakes halfling-shaped 
cookies and brings them to meetings of the Council 
of Speakers. 

Militia. Lonelywood can muster up to 50 soldiers (use 
the tribal warrior stat block) and 4 veterans. 

Heraldry. Two narrow white triangles, one descend- 
ing from the center top, the other rising from center 
bottom, almost meet on a forest-green field. The top 
triangle represents an icicle, denoting Lonelywood's 
northerly location; the bottom triangle is an ivory 
horn, representing the town’s scrimshaw trade. 

Sacrifice to Auril. Food (see page 21). 

Rivals. Bremen, Targos, Termalaine. 


OVERLAND TRAVEL 


A three-mile-long snow-covered path connects Lonely: 
wood to Termalaine, Characters on foot can walk this 
path in 2 hours; mounts and dogsleds can shorten this 
time by as much as 50 percent. 


LOCATIONS IN LONELYWOOD 


Lonelywood has no inns or other places for visitors to 
rest, except for the town speaker's house, which has a 

spacious, heated attic that can accommodate characters 
looking for a night's rest. Other residents of Lonelywood 


value their privacy and are much less inclined to wel- 
come strangers into their meager dwellings. 
The following locations are marked on map 1.14. 


THE Happy SCRIMSHANDER 
Shop 


This little shop facing the docks sells the tools of the 
scrimshander's trade: needles and knives in a wide 
array of shapes and sizes, inks in a rainbow of colors, 
and wax used to seal an engraving when it’s done. The 
shop's owner is a doughy spinster of few words named 
Iriskree Harrowhill (retired neutral human assassin). 
She doesn't talk about her shady past except to speak 
fondly of people she once knew who have since died. 


THE LUCKY LIAR 
Tavern 


Fishers and woodcutters gather here in the evenings to 
weave tall tales—the more outrageous and embellished, 
the better. From time to time, patrons whose tongues 
have been loosened by drink let slip valuable or dan- 
gerous secrets. Characters who loiter in the tavern are 
likely to hear a rumor or two, which you can determine 
by rolling on the Ten-Towns Rumors table (page 18). 
The tavern’s raven-haired barkeep, Danae Xotal (law- 
ful evil human spy), files away these secrets as she goes 
about her serving work with quiet circumspection. Her 
secret is that she’s a Thayan agent working for Szass 
Tam, the most powerful lich in Thay. Danae was planted 
in Icewind Dale years ago to watch for enemies of Szass 
Tam who might seek refuge in Ten-Towns. No one else 
in Ten-Towns knows her secret, and those she has 
marked as enemies in the past have quietly vanished. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


79 


8o 


er ae 
Dp - The Lucky Liar 
4 Fite 
PE S 
Ri 


„The Happy 
Scrimshander, 


Map 1.14: Lonetywooo 


RAMSHACKLE 
Closed inn 


This aptly named building—which used to be the only 
inn in town—closed after its last owner, a retired sawyer 
named DeGrootz, hanged himself in the common room 
two years ago. Some locals believe that DeGrootz’s 
hanging was staged to conceal his murder at the hands 
of some old “friends” of his. Townsfolk are currently 
using the vacant building for lumber storage, but anyone 
interested in refurbishing and reopening the old inn is 
welcome to try. 


THE WHITE MOOSE 


A white moose is attacking loggers in the forest near 
Lonelywood. The town’s logging industry is essential 
to the growth and survival of Ten-Towns, and Speaker 
Nimsy Huddle has assured the other speakers that 
Lonelywood’s “moose problem” will be dealt with in 
short order. Hunters have been dispatched to kill the 
moose, but it has eluded them so far. From what the 
hunters have seen, their prey is smarter than the aver- 
age moose, and its white hide makes it hard to spot in 
the snow. What they don’t know is that the moose is us- 
ing a magic mirror as a scrying device to show it where 
its enemies are. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


Speaker Huddle tries to seduce the characters with 
a basket of halfling-shaped cookies, hoping they'll join 
the hunt for the white moose. If the characters turn her 
down, Speaker Huddle sweetens the deal with coin. 

The white moose is an awakened beast that serves 
Ravisin, the same evil frost druid who awakened the ple- 
siosaurus in Maer Dualdon (see “Lake Monster,” page 
28). This druid has cast awaken spells on several 
beasts, gifting them with human-level intelligence and 
the ability to speak, and uses them to spy on settlements 
and terrorize their inhabitants. Ravisin has taken refuge 
in an elven tomb in the woods and won't rest until the 
forest is free of loggers. Simply killing the white moose 
will not solve Lonelywood’s problem; to end the threat to 
Lonelywood and other towns, the characters must stop 
the druid from awakening more beasts and using them 
to harm Ten-Towners. 


GETTING THE QUEST 


If the characters aren't staying in Nimsy Huddle's attic, 
they are summoned to the town speaker's home by one 
of her children—a cheery little halfling named Scoop. 

When the characters pay Speaker Huddle a visit, read: 


Nimsy Huddle, the town speaker, tempts you with freshly 
baked, halfling-shaped cookies. Her house was clearly 
built for humans, but most of the furniture is sized for 
halflings, with a few big chairs for visitors of taller stock. 
Four halfling children scamper from room to room and 
climb a ladder up to the loft, chasing one another with 
wooden swords, while a fire crackles in the hearth in 
Speaker Huddle’s cluttered kitchen. 

“Our loggers are being terrorized by a white moose,” 
says Speaker Huddle, “and the beast has eluded the 
hunters we've sent to kill it. We depend on the forest for 
‘our survival. | wouldn't be a very good town speaker if | 
let a dumb moose get the better of us. Will you help?” 


If the characters demand more than tasty treats as an 
incentive, Speaker Huddle is willing to pay them 100 
gp for the moose’s head, though she can be talked up to 
125 gp with a successful DC 15 Charisma (Persuasion) 
check. She suggests that the characters can sell the 
moose’s carcass to a local butcher for 10 gp. If the char- 
acters want the pot sweetened further, Speaker Huddle 
says she can offer them Ramshackle (the closed inn) as 
an investment property, to do with what they will. “Of 
course,” she adds with a smile, “if our hunters get the 
moose first, the rewards will be theirs!" 


TRACKING THE MOOSE 


To find the white moose, the characters must venture 
into the forest and search for the beast's tracks in the 
snow. Any character who spends an hour searching 
for moose tracks and succeeds on a DC 15 Wisdom 
(Survival) check finds a set of them. If the characters 
follow these tracks, roll a d6. On a 6, the tracks lead to 
the elven tomb, where the white moose can be found. 


On any other roll, the tracks lead to an ordinary moose 
(use the giant goat stat block) that's encountered after 
1d4 hours. This moose poses no threat if the characters 
leave it alone. After each encounter with an ordinary 
moose, the characters can repeat their search for 
moose tracks and, upon finding some, make another 
d6 roll to determine if the tracks belong to the elusive 
white moose. 

After every three hours the characters spend in the 
check for a random encounter using the Lonely 
wood Forest Encounters table. 


LONELYWOOD FOREST ENCOUNTERS 
d20 Encounter 
1-10 No encounter 
11-12 Banshee 
13-14 Brown bear(s) 
15-16 Chwingas 
17-18 Fox and hare 
19-20 Wolf pack 


BANSHEE 

This banshee is the spectral remnant of a female elf 
warrior who was banished for a selfish, evil act. It wields 
a spectral longbow that shoots phantom arrows. This 
weapon has the range of a standard longbow and is used 
to make ranged spell attacks; it otherwise functions like 
the banshee’s Corrupting Touch 


There is only one banshee haunting the forest. If it's 
destroyed, it re-forms after 24 hours in a random loca- 
tion in the forest, damned to its eternal exile. 


Brown BEar(s) 

A hungry brown bear is pulling some low branches off 
a tree and gnawing on them when it sees the party and 
moves toward the group in search of tastier food. A char- 
acter can use an action to try to frighten away the bear, 
doing so with a successful DC 15 Charisma (Intimi 
dation) check. If the characters kill this bear, the next 
brown bear encounter (if this result comes up again) is 
with the bear’s mate and 1d4 cubs (noncombatants). 


CHWINGAS 
As the characters navigate the woods or stop to rest, 1d4 
chwingas (see appendix C) take an interest in them. 


Fox AND HARE 

The characters spot an arctic fox patiently stalking a 
snowshoe hare (see appendix C for both creatures’ stat 
blocks). If the characters leave the animals alone, roll 

a d6 to determine what happens next. On an odd roll, 
the hare escapes from the fox; on an even roll, the fox 
catches the hare and takes it back to its lair. 

Characters can interrupt the fox’s hunt and speak to 
either animal using magic or an ability that facilitates 
communication with small beasts. Speaking to the fox 
prompts the hare to flee, and vice versa. A friendly ani- 
mal can lead the characters to the white moose's tracks 
in the snow after 1d4 hours. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


Wo Lr Pack 

A pack of 1d4 + 4 wolves descends upon the party. 
If three or more wolves are killed, the surviving 
wolves flee. 


FINDING THE ELVEN TOMB 


The elven tomb lies on a lightly wooded slope. An an- 
cient moon dial is its centerpiece. Characters can find 
the tomb if they follow the tracks of a beast such as the 
white moose. Ancient elven magic tricks all aberrations, 
fiends, giants, humanoids, and undead into veering away 
from the site without the slightest inkling that they've 
been magically misdirected. 

When the characters come within sight of the elven 
tomb, read: 


The tracks lead to a large, circular indentation in a snowy 
hillside. Rising from the middle of this circle is a trian- 
gular gnomon of beautifully carved crystal that stands 
twenty feet tall, A ten-foot-high berm hugging the circle’s 
eastern edge has evergreens growing around and atop 

it, sheltering what looks like a sarcophagus buried under 
snow and enclosed by a half-circle of pale blue crystal 
pillars. North of the berm is a delicately carved gazebo 
made of marble, and south of the berm is a row of out- 
ward-facing, white marble statues atop granite pillars. 


AWAKENED WHITE MOOSE 
| oe i Large beast, neutral evil 
\ 1 


hir Armor Class 11 (natural armor) 
< | Hit Points 68 (8d10 + 24) 
Speed 40 ft. 
a Í STR DEX CON INT wS CHA 
TA 1964) NEO 1663) 1060) 120) 6 (-2) 
i A Senses passive Perception 11 
Languages Druidic 


Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Charge. If the moose moves at least 20 feet straight toward a 
| target and then hits it with an antlers attack on the same turn, 
E the target takes an extra 9 (2d8) bludgeoning damage. If the 
"I target is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 14 Strength saving 
___ throw or be knocked prone. 


| Sure-Footed. The moose has advantage on Strength and 
Dexterity saving throws made against effects that would 
| knock it prone. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack, The moose makes two attacks: one with its ant- 
lers and one with its hooves. 


Antlers. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage. 


Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 9 (2d4 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 
—S ee E 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


If the characters watch the location for an hour or more 
from a safe distance away, they see the awakened white 
moose (see the accompanying stat block) emerge from 
under the hillside, stand in the moon dial, and sniff the 
air for a few minutes before ambling back toward Lone- 
lywood to continue its reign of terror. If the characters 
explore the elven tomb without delay, they encounter the 
moose in area E6. 


ELVEN TOMB LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to map 1.15. Areas 
E1 through E5 are outside; areas E6 through E9 are 
underground. 


El. ELF STATUES 


Six elevated, white marble statues arranged in a line de- 
pict slender, robed figures facing northward. The engrav- 
ing on their faces has been worn away by the wind, but 
pointed ears make the statues identifiable as elves. 


Each statue is life-sized, depicting an elf standing rigidly 
atop a 7-foot-high cylindrical base of wind-worn granite. 
(A seventh statue stands alone atop the northern tip of 
area E4, facing south. Three more statues, unseen from 
this vantage point, are located under the hill in area E6.) 
A detect magic spell or similar magic reveals an aura of 
abjuration magic around each statue. 

If all ten statues are toppled, the magical effect that di- 
rects the intruders away from the tomb ends (see “Find. 
ing the Elven Tomb” above). Toppling a statue requires a 
combined Strength of 25. 


E2. BARROW ENTRANCE 


Embedded in the hillside south of the circular indenta- 
tion is a stone door with no visible handles or hinges. 


The door is snug and airtight. It can be opened only 
from the inside (by a creature in area E6) or by using a 
knock spell or similar magic 


E3. MARBLE GAZEBO 


In the middle of the gazebo sits an unlit stone brazier, 
its bowl twenty inches in diameter, The brazier is full of 
snow and pine needles that the winds have swept away 
from the gazebo's polished marble floor. 


The brazier is adhered to the marble floor and can't 
be budged. 

When a pinecone, a twig, a feather, and a severed 
humanoid hand are placed in the brazier and set on fire 
(see area E4), a silver flame quickly consumes the bra- 
zier's contents and continues to burn for a tenday. This 
fire generates heat and light equivalent to that of a camp- 
fire and can't be extinguished. 


Map 1.15: Elven Toms 


E4. SARCOPHAGUS AND CRYSTAL PILLARS 


Atop the eastern berm, a granite sarcophagus rests in 


| ahalf-circle defined by five crystal pillars. Clearing the 
snow off the lid reveals an engraving of a brazier. You 
also notice a carving near the top of each pillar; from 
north to south, these images depict a twig, a pinecone, a 
flame, a feather, and a humanoid hand. 


The sarcophagus can't be opened until a twig, a pine 
cone, a feather, and a severed humanoid hand are 
placed in the brazier in the gazebo (area E3) and set 
ablaze. The lid of the sarcophagus can be opened as 
jong as that fire burns; otherwise, no spell and no 
amount of force can open it. Characters who don't have 
a pinecone, a twig, or a feather can find these items in 
the nearby woods. The severed hand is a trickier get but 
needn't come from a living humanoid (a dead crawling 
claw would do). 

Once the brazier is functioning, the heavy lid can be 
lifted or pushed aside. It weighs 500 pounds 

The sarcophagus holds Sahnar, a moon elf mummy 
that animates as soon as the lid no longer prevents it 
from sitting up. This mummy is chaotic good and accli- 
mated to cold weather. It follows the commands of its 
liberators until it is reduced to 0 hit points, whereupon it 
crumbles to dust. 


If the mummy receives conflicting orders, it follows 
whichever command it deems the most sensible, al 
though its Intelligence score of 6 means that it can 
make bad choices. Sahnar speaks Common and Elvish 
The mummy knows how the moon dial functions (see 
area E5) but knows nothing about the tomb’s current 
inhabitants, Ten-Towns, or the present state of affairs in 
Icewind Dale, since it has been sealed up for hundreds 
of years. If the characters return to Ten-Towns with 
Sahnar in tow, they will need to disguise the elf mummy 
to keep it from frightening the townsfolk 

The magic and materials used to preserve the mummy 
have the effect of making it smell like pumpkin spice 


E5. Moon DIAL 


Rising from the center of the circular depression is a tall, 
triangular, crystal gnomon—a device one typically finds 
in the middle of a sundial. It is thick near the base and 
narrows to a sharp point at the top. The snow around the 


gnomon has melted away, revealing a circle of symbols 
carved into the stone around it. The symbols depict 
phases of the moon, suggesting that the circular depres- 
sion is not a sundial, but a moon dial 

Something has punched a rough hole in the wall in the 
northwest edge of the depression, creating a dark open- 
ing that leads under the hill 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


84 


Characters who peer through the western hole can see a 
dark, sunken chamber (area E6) beyond. 

A persistent magical effect heats the face of the moon 
dial, ensuring that the lunar symbols remain clear of 
snow, The symbols depict a full moon to the north, a 
new moon to the south, and various waxing and waning 
phases of the moon in between. 

Whenever the moon is in the sky over Icewind Dale, 
the crystal gnomon projects a triangle of moonlight 
onto the moon dial's face, its tip lighting the symbol that 
matches the moon's current phase. This occurs even if 
the moon is not visible in the sky. 

Any character who studies the lunar symbols sees tiny 
inscriptions in Elvish around the full moon symbol (the 
white circle to the north) and the two half-moon symbols 
located on the west and east sides of the dial, but not 
the other partial moon symbols or new moon symbol 
(the black circle to the south). The inscriptions translate 
as follows: 


Full Moon Inscription. “Gaze upon your own face and 
have seven questions answered.” The magic mirror in 
area E7 is activated for as long as the light of the gno- 
mon or a moonbeam spell illuminates this symbol. 

Half-Moon Inscription. “Unlock the tombs of the half 
moon.” While the light of the gnomon or a moonbeam 
spell illuminates either of the half-moon symbols on 
the moon dial’s face, the doors to areas E8 and E9 can 
be opened. 


E6. BARROW 
The spacious chamber tucked under the hill is strewn 
with bones and holds the sleeping forms of several 
harmless animals (foxes, hares, goats, owls, wolf pups, 
and young bears) that share the space peacefully. The 
white moose makes its lair among these creatures as 
well when it's not out terrorizing Ten-Towners. If the 
characters didn’t wait outside to encounter the awak- 
ened white moose (see the stat block on page 82), 
it fights them here, which startles and scares away the 
other animals. If the frost druid in area E9 hears sounds 
of battle in this room, she remains where she is, prefer- 
ring to make a final stand there. 

Statues. In addition to the animals, this area contains 
three white marble statues of elves that are identical 
to the ones outside, except that the wind has not worn 
away the detail in their faces and they don't stand on pil- 
lars. All three are facing east, toward the nearest wall. 


E7. MIRROR OF THE FULL MOON 
The underground passage narrows before ending at a 


wall upon which is mounted an oval mirror seven feet tall 
and half as wide, encircled by a decorative stone frame. 


The mirror’s stone frame glows with silvery, scintillating 
light as long as the moon dial’s light or a moonbeam 
spell is illuminating the symbol of the full moon in area 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


E5. While its frame is lit, the mirror functions like an 
ordinary crystal ball. Currently, the mirror is attuned 
to the white moose, which uses it to locate hunters and 
loggers it is familiar with. After clearing the snow cov- 
ering the moon dial, the frost druid uses a moonbeam 
spell to light the full moon symbol on the moon dial's 
face, activating the mirror so the moose can use it. If the 
moose dies or another creature attunes to the mirror, 
the moose’s attunement ends. 

The mirror is held to the wall with sovereign glue and 
can't be removed without shattering it. Once broken, the 
mirror’s magic is gone forever. 


E8. First TOMB OF THE HALF-MOON 

The stone door to this tomb is engraved with a white 
semicircle (the symbol of a half-moon), with its rounded 
edge facing toward the right. The door is locked from 
the outside unless the light of the gnomon or a moon- 
beam spell illuminates one of the half-moon symbols 
on the moon dial in area E5. A knock spell or similar 
magic also opens the door. It pushes open easily from 
the inside. 


This circular chamber has an intricately carved, domed 
ceiling twenty feet high. A beam of light shines down 
from the top of the dome, illuminating a rectangular 
stone sarcophagus. 


The light that shines down upon the sarcophagus is a 
minor magical effect that can be dispelled. 

The sarcophagus’s 350-pound lid can be lifted or 
pushed aside. Inside the sarcophagus is the withered 


corpse of an elf in tattered robes. As the sarcophagus 
is opened, the rush of air disturbs the cadaver'’s robes, 
which have mostly crumbled to dust. The sarcophagus 
also contains the following items: 


+ Anunstrung bow 
+ Six silvered arrowheads 
= A wooden cup with a winged fish etched into the side 


E9. SECOND TOMB OF THE HALF-MOON 
The stone door to this tomb is engraved with a white 
semicircle (the symbol of a half-moon), with its rounded 
edge facing toward the left. 

The door is locked from the outside unless the light 
‘of the gnomon or a moonbeam spell illuminates one 
‘of the half-moon symbols on the moon dial in area E5. 
A knock spell or similar magic also opens the door. It 
pushes open easily from the inside. 


This circular chamber has an intricately carved domed 
ceiling twenty feet high. A beam of light shines down 
from the top of the dome, illuminating a rectangular 
stone sarcophagus. Someone has turned this tomb into 
living quarters, as evidenced by a rack of drying herbs 
and an unfurled bedroll behind the sarcophagus. 


The light that shines down on the sarcophagus is a mi- 
aor magical effect that can be dispelled. 

When she hears the door open, Ravisin the frost 
druid (see appendix C) ducks behind the sarcophagus. 
Hidden alongside her is an awakened shrub (a berry 
bush) that follows Ravisin everywhere, in case the druid 
gets hungry and wants some berries to munch on. Eat- 
ing the berries has stained the druid’s teeth blue. 

The druid climbs onto the sarcophagus when charac- 
ters enter the tomb and shouts, in Common, “Ten-Towns 
will be destroyed—if not by my hand, then by the Frost- 
maiden’s!” The druid then attacks, fighting to the death. 
Wa character who has the Doppelganger secret (see 
appendix B) fails their saving throw against the druid’s 
moonbeam spell, remember that the spell reveals the 
eharacter’s true (doppelganger) form. 

When she is reduced to 0 hit points, Ravisin uses her 
test. gasping breath to say, “My beasts will avenge us!” 

Awakened Shrub. The awakened shrub is terrified 
ef Ravisin and doubly frightened of fire. It fights only in 
self-defense. Growing on its branches are 2420 tasty 
berries, which it allows characters to pick if they let it 
re. The shrub speaks Common and can share the fol 
Sewing information once the frost druid is dealt with: 


= Rayisin blamed Ten-Towners for the death of her twin 
sister, also a frost druid. (The shrub doesn't know how 
or when Ravisin’s sister died.) Ravisin hides her sis- 
ter's corpse in the sarcophagus. 
+ Ravisin awakened many beasts and plants through- 
out Icewind Dale. Some of them, such as the white 
moose, are of an evil bent. Others aren't. Ravisin often 
complained about the scruples of the plesiosaurus 
she awakened in Maer Dualdon (see “Lake Mon- 
ster,” page 28). 


RAVISIN AND AN AWAKENEO SHRUB 


+ Ravisin used moonbeam spells to trigger the moon 
dial, enabling the white moose to scry on loggers and 
hunters by using the magic mirror in area E7, 


Sarcophagus. The contents of an herbalism kit are 
spread across the top of the sarcophagus, which the 
druid uses as a worktable. The sarcophagus lid weighs 
350 pounds, and moving it aside causes the tomb to fill 
with a horrible stench of decay. 

The sarcophagus contains the rotting corpse of Ravi- 
sin's twin sister, Vurnis. Any character who examines 
the corpse and succeeds on a DC 10 Wisdom (Medicine) 
check determines that her death occurred months ago, 
but the cold has slowed the decomposition of the body. 
A speak with dead spell cast on the corpse reveals that 
Vurnis was killed by hunters near Lonelywood. 

Treasure. Tucked under Vurnis’s corpse is a shark- 
skin pouch that contains two potions in crystal vials: a 
potion of resistance (radiant) and a potion of vitality. 


COMPLETING THE QUEST 


Once they slay the awakened white moose, the charac- 
ters can return to Lonelywood with proof of the moose’s 
demise. After every three hours the characters spend in 
the forest, check for a random encounter using the Lone- 
lywood Forest Encounters table (page 81). 

If Ravisin the frost druid is not dealt with, Lonely- 
wood is doomed to experience more of the same harass- 
ment from newly awakened beasts such as polar bears, 
woolly rhinoceroses, and saber-toothed tigers. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


85 


86 


TARGOS 


Like Bryn Shander, Targos is encircled by a wooden 
wall, which helps to protect the town against ores and 
other threats from the wilderness. The wall extends out 
into the lake, creating a safe harbor for the town’s boats. 
But now Auril’s long winter has frozen the water in the 
harbor, and many of Targos's boats are trapped in the 
ice. Fishers must drag their smaller vessels across the 
ice to get to the unfrozen lake beyond the harbor walls. 

Almost all the towns in Icewind Dale make their living 
off the lakes, but nowhere is that fact more evident than 
in Targos. The town has always had the biggest fishing 
fleet and the biggest fishing industry, and everything 
that goes on here revolves around hauling the knuckle 
head trout out of Maer Dualdon. Auril’s endless winter 
makes the work harder, but it gets done nonetheless. 

Naerth Maxildanarr, a former rogue of Luskan, moved 
to Targos a couple of years ago, took up residence in the 
Luskan Arms, and spread around a lot of gold, earning 
the loyalty of many local fishers. His cordial, down-to 
earth demeanor contributed to his swift rise to power, 
enabling him to replace a town speaker who was well 
liked but didn’t want the job anymore. As the most 
senior representative of the Zhentarim in Ten-Towns. 
Naerth is determined to turn Icewind Dale into a trade 
hub for the Black Network. He has a dozen or more 
Zhentarim spies throughout Ten-Towns that he uses to 
good effect, disposing of suspected Harper spies and 
convincing business owners to buy fish from Targos in- 
stead of from other sources. 


TARGOS IN A NUTSHELL 


Friendliness #% Services ##% Comfort = 


Available Quest. “Mountain Climb.” page 87. 

Population. 1,000. 

Leaders. Speaker Naerth Maxildanarr (lawful evil hu- 
man spy) is secretly a Zhentarim agent, who won the 
speakership because of his popularity with the fishers. 
Naerth is eager to secure a Zhentarim stranglehold 
on trade in Icewind Dale. A Zhent mercenary named 
Skath (lawful evil tiefling veteran) who is loyal to 
Naerth leads the town's militia 

Militia. Targos can muster up to 200 soldiers (use the 
tribal warrior stat block) and 16 veterans. 

Heraldry. A single-sailed, black ship (facing to the right) 
on a light blue field, representing the town’s pride in 
its fishing fleet 

Sacrifice to Auril. Humanoid (see page 21). 

Rivals. Bremen, Lonelywood, Termalaine. 


OVERLAND TRAVEL 


A snow-covered path connects Targos to Bryn Shander 
A similar path sweeps around the east side of Maer 
Dualdon and leads to Termalaine. Travel times in the 
Overland Travel from Targos table assume that charac 
ters are on foot; mounts and dogsleds can shorten these 
times by as much as 50 percent 

There is no easy way to reach Bremen by land, since 
heavy snow has wiped out the trail that once led to it. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


OVERLAND TRAVEL FROM TARGOS 


To Travel Time 
Bremen (no trail) 3 hours 
Bryn Shander 2hours 
Termalaine 4hours 


LOCATIONS IN TARGOS 


The following locations marked on map 1.16 are likely 
to attract characters during their stay in Targos. 


THE LUSKAN ARMS 
Inn (and the town speaker’s residence) 


The Luskan Arms is the oldest public house in Ten 
Towns, established back when Bryn Shander was still 
just “the camp on the hill” and Luskan was a thriving 
city. Many of the traders who came to Targos in those 
days hailed from Luskan, so the Luskan Arms was 

built to look like an inn that might be found in the City 
of Sails. As a result, much of the decor is nearly two 
hundred years old, reflecting Luskan as it was in the 
years before its decline. The inn has sturdy walls but 
rotten floorboards, and drafts come up into the common 
room from the cellar. The place is also infested with 
rats, which scurry between the walls at all hours of the 
night. The proprietor, Owenn Tarsenel (neutral human 
commoner), is a quiet, balding man who has sunk into a 
deep depression, fearing that summer will never return 
to Icewind Dale. 

The largest guest suite in the Luskan Arms is occu- 
pied by the town speaker, Naerth Maxildanarr, who 
likes the inn because it reminds him of home and is 
a great place to meet visitors. Caged in his room are 
three flying snakes that he uses to deliver messages to 
his spies. 


4 


Speaker NAERTH MAXILOANARR FEEDS HIS FLYING 


SNAKES WHILE CAPTAIN SKATH LOOKS ON, 


THREE FLAGS SAILING 
Tavern 
Fishers come here after a long day for a bowl of stew 
and a quick pint before heading to bed. The atmosphere 
is subdued; the fishers are cold and tired and unsure 
about Icewind Dale’s future. The tavern is run by a 
plump, gray-haired widow named Ethen Yarbroul (neu 
tral good human commoner), better known as “Ma.” 
She fusses over the fishers as if they were her children. 
Characters who hang out in the tavern are likely to 
hear a rumor or two, which you can determine by rolling 
on the Ten-Towns Rumors table (page 18). 


TRIGLIO 
General store 


Triglio takes its name from one of the chanteys that 
the fishers of Targos sing when they are hard at work 
“Trig-lee-oh, lads, an’ oist upon the line/Trig-lee-oh, 
lads, an’ bring yon fishers in.” The store's proprietor 

is Jestin Hunrae (neutral good human commoner), a 
scarecrow-like fellow who fished the lake until his left 
hand was crushed in a collision with a boat from Ter 
malaine. The only items he doesn't sell are fishing and 
sailing supplies; in Targos, such goods are supplied by 
specialty crafters and merchants. All other common 
gear, including fishing poles and snowshoes, can be 
bought here 


MOUNTAIN CLIMB 


The characters can pick up this quest if they start the 
adventure in Targos or shortly after they arrive in town 
It begins when they see a sled dog running through the 
street. The dog belonged to Garret Velryn, a wilderness 
guide who led a small expedition up Kelvin's Cairn, The 
dog is agitated and tries to lead the characters to Gar 
ret’s house. Garret’s husband, Keegan, is alarmed to see 
the dog without its master and fears for Garret’s life. He 
asks the characters to head toward Kelvin’s Cairn, find 
Garret, and see him safely back to Targos. 


GETTING THE QUEST 


As you trudge through town, snow crunching underneath 
your feet, you hear the bark of a dog over the whistle of 
the wind. A wolf-sized sled dog with light gray fur runs 
toward you, dragging a broken leather harness behind it. 


The dog (use the wolf stat block), whose name is Boy 
has clearly broken free of its sled and is friendly. It tack: 
les the nearest character and whimpers as it licks that 
character's face. Then, using every communication tac 
tic at its disposal, it tries to lead the party to its master’s 
house a few blocks away, grabbing a character by the 
bootstrap and tugging the character in the direction it 
wants the party to go. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


Town Hall 


Map 1.16: Tarcos. 


If the characters follow the dog, it leads them to the 
front door of a modest dwelling. The dog barks and 
scratches at the door. Keegan Velryn (neutral good hu- 
man commoner), a handsome man in his thirties, opens 
the door, and the dog races inside. When Keegan sees 
the characters instead of his husband, his smile fades as 
he urges the characters to come inside, where he gives 
each of them a cup of warm cider and shares the follow- 
ing information: 


“Iwas born in Ten-Towns, but my husband came from 

a wealthy family in Neverwinter. Garret didn’t care for 
city life. When I met him, he was working as a guide. He 
loves the outdoors, and he lives to climb mountains. 

“A few days ago, Garret was hired by some adventurers 
to lead them up the slopes of Kelvin's Cairn. Garret’s 
plan was to take the adventurers to Caer-Konig, the town 
at the foot of Kelvin’s Cairn. After they acquired some 
climbing gear from the outfitter there, he was to lead 
them up the mountain. Garret took six dogs and a sled 
with him. Boy, here, was Garret’s favorite. Raised him 
from a pup. Boy would never leave Garret’s side unless 
something terrible had happened.” 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


Keegan didn't meet the adventurers who hired Garret, 
so he doesn't know how many there are. At this point in 
the conversation, Keegan asks the characters to find his 
missing husband: 


“It's a lot to ask, but could | persuade you to go up there 
and find Garret and his companions? | don’t have money, 
but the proprietor of the Luskan Arms is a friend of mine. 
| could get you some free rooms at the inn. I'm also a 
scrimshander by trade and can give you some of my art- 
work. It's not worth much, | confess.” 


Keegan has a lot of faith in Garret’s survival skills, 
which is why he honestly believes Garret might still be 
alive. If the characters accept this quest, Keegan sug- 
gests they visit Frozenfar Expeditions in Caer-Konig 
(see page 46), which is likely the last place anyone 
would have seen Garret before he went up the moun- 
tain. If the characters want to take Boy with them, Kee- 
gan won't protest. 


JOURNEY TO KELVIN’s CAIRN 


The characters can either travel to Caer-Konig first, then 
go west toward Kelvin’s Cairn, or they can head straight 
to the mountain by cutting across the open tundra and 
passing through the Dwarven Valley. Both options are 
discussed below. 


TarGos TO CAER-KONIG 

Sticking to trails and roads, the characters can safely 
reach Caer-Konig in 14% hours on foot. The trip be- 
gins with a 3-mile jaunt to Bryn Shander, continues 
with an exhausting 23-mile journey to Caer-Dineval, 
and ends with a 3-mile hike around Lac Dinneshere to 
Caer-Konig. Characters can reduce the total travel time 
to 7 hours if they use dogsleds. 

As the characters pass through Bryn Shander, 
Caer-Dineval, and Caer-Konig, they can pick up each 
town’s starting quest if they haven't gotten them already. 

Atenas Swift, the owner of Frozenfar Expeditions in 
Caer-Konig, tells the characters that Garret showed up 
with three well-armed companions (a male goliath, a 
female lightfoot halfling, and a female tiefling), helped 
them buy climbing gear and camping supplies, and then 
headed to the Hook, Line, and Sinker (the local tavern) 
for drinks, with plans to get a good night's rest at the 
Northern Light (the local inn). The proprietors of these 
establishments have no complaints about Garrett and 
his retinue, who looked tired and didn’t talk much. 

If the party doesn’t have anyone who's good at track- 
ing, the characters can hire Jarthra Farzassh (see “Fro- 
zenfar Expeditions,” page 46) as a guide. 


TARGOS TO KELVIN’s CAIRN 
By crossing open tundra, the characters can travel di- 
rectly from Targos to Kelvin’s Cairn, covering 12 miles 
in 24 hours on foot. They can halve the travel time if 
they use dogsleds. 

When the characters reach the halfway point in their 
journey, they come across a potential obstacle. Use the 


gl 


hel oe 


KELVIN'S CAIRN 


Mae 1.17: KeLvin's Cairn 


“Random Wilderness Encounters” section in chapter 2 
to determine the nature of the encounter and if it occurs 
during a blizzard. 

As the characters pass through the Dwarven Valley, 
they might (if the weather is clear) see evidence of dwarf 
activity, such as tracks that lead up to tunnels carved 
into the valley’s slopes. Several hundred shield dwarves 
live in subterranean halls that connect to these mines, 
but they rarely venture to the surface nowadays except 
to forage and hunt. Characters can find refuge among 
the dwarves, who are civil if not friendly, but must leave 
within a day or two, since the dwarves have little food to 
‘spare and are too busy to entertain guests for any longer 
than that, Characters who have completed the “Foaming 
Mugs” quest (see page 34), however, have earned 
the dwarves’ favor and are welcome to stay as long as 


they like. 


CLIMBING KELVIN’s CAIRN 


Map 1.17 shows the route that Garret’s expedition took 
‘up Kelvin's Cairn, It leads not to the topmost peak of the 
mountain, but to the summit of one of its spurs. 

Before they can follow their quarry up Kelvin's Cairn, 
‘the characters must locate Garret’s base camp at the 
‘Sot of the mountain. Jarthra Farzassh can lead them 
there, since she recommended the location to Garret 
‘before his expedition left Caer-Konig, Garret’s sled dog 
ean also lead characters straight to the base camp. With- 
help of any sort, the characters can spend 8 hours 
sarching for the camp on their own, finding it with a 


successful DC 15 Wisdom (Survival) group check. If 
the group check fails, they can repeat it after another 8 
hours of looking. 


BASE CAMP 


You see two tents pitched in the snow near an icy out- 
cropping that acts as a natural windbreaker. Between the 
tents is an overturned sled. Still harnessed to the sled are 
five howling dogs. 


Garret's dog, Boy, tore free of its harness and ran 
back to Targos to get help, leaving the other five sled 
dogs (use the wolf stat block) behind. The dogs are 
friendly, cold, hungry, and miserable. If the characters 
release them, the dogs run back to the nearest town to 
seek shelter. 

Under the sled are two small crates. One is empty, 
and it appears that the dogs broke into it and ate the 
provisions that were contained within; the other is not in 
the dogs’ reach and contains enough rations to feed four 
people for three days. 

Starting the Ascent. The wind has obliterated the 
tracks made by Garret’s expedition, but characters can 
discern the likeliest route the climbers took. This route 
is marked on map 1.17, and characters who follow it ex- 
perience the following sequence of encounters. 

If Boy is with the party, the dog can lead the charac- 
ters to Garret (see “Fallen Climber,” page 90). 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


89 


go 


MOUNTAIN Goats 


The howling wind, blowing snow, and slippery ice make 
the climb treacherous. Ahead, you see four mountain 
goats perched on a large rock formation around which 
you must navigate. 


The four mountain goats (see appendix C) are indiffer- 
ent toward the characters and bleat loudly as the party 
draws near. The goats turn hostile if the characters 
attack them. 


AVALANCHE 


Hundreds of feet up the mountain, you come to a glisten- 
ing white expanse of packed snow. As you get about half- 
way across it, you hear a loud crack from higher up the 
mountain, followed by a rumbling noise as the ground 
starts to shake, It's an avalanche! 


The party finds itself in the path of an avalanche (see 
“Avalanches,” page 10). The avalanche is 200 feet 
wide, 100 feet long, and 30 feet deep. 

To run this event, first determine the marching order 
of the party and how far apart the characters are. As- 
sume that the rearmost party member is directly below 
the avalanche, which means that character must move at 
least 100 feet to get clear of the avalanche’s path. Next, 
have all party members roll initiative 

The avalanche starts 500 feet above the party and 
sweeps down to the base of the mountain 1,000 feet be- 
low. The avalanche moves 300 feet on initiative count 10 
and another 300 feet on initiative count 0. 


FALLEN CLIMBER 


You reach a steep, snow-covered incline dotted with jag- 
ged rocks. Lying facedown in the snow, barely conscious, 
is a humanoid in bloodstained cold weather clothing. 


The figure in the snow is Garret Velryn (neutral good 
human scout), a rugged, bearded man in his prime. He 
has one level of exhaustion and 6 hit points remaining. 
In addition to his weapons, he carries a climber's kit. 
His other equipment is lost. If the char: rs have Boy 
with them, the dog and Garret become inseparable. 

If the characters tend to his wounds, Garret comes 
around and tells them that a yeti surprised him and 
his companions higher up the mountain. He lured the 
yeti away from the others and got it to chase him down 
the mountain. The yeti wounded him seriously, but he 
escaped with his life when the monster stopped fol- 
lowing him. 

Hunters of Men. As the characters tend to Garret, 
two crag cats (see appendix C) move to within 20 feet of 
the party and attack, each one pouncing on a randomly 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


determined party member. Known to Ten-Towners as 
“Hunters of Men,” the crag cats caught Garret's scent 
but failed to reach him before the characters showed up. 
Characters with passive Wisdom (Perception) scores of 
17 or higher are not surprised by the crag cats. If one 
crag cat dies, the other one disengages from melee com- 
bat and tries to flee down the mountain on its next turn, 
Development. Assuming he survives the encoun. 
ter with the crag cats, Garret makes it known that he 
wants to find the other members of the expedition and 
assumes (correctly) that they're still up the mountain. 
He aims to find them but can be persuaded to return to 
Targos if the characters restore all his lost hit points and 
vow to search for the three missing members on his be. 
half. Garret describes the missing explorers as follows; 


Mokingo Growling Bear Akannathi, a male goliath 
warrior determined to find Oyaminartok and test his 
mettle against her 

Perilou Fishfinger, a female lightfoot halfling follower 
of Yondalla (halfling god of fertility and protection) 
and Mokingo’s stalwart companion 

Astrix, a female tiefling who mumbles and swears a 
lot (Garret doesn't know what her story is) 


PERILOUS CLIMB 

At this point, the characters must zigzag their way up 
the mountain, clinging to narrow ledges and scaling 

icy cliffs. To pass all these obstacles, the party must 
make three successful DC 10 Strength (Athletics) group 
checks. If a group check fails, the party wastes 1 hour 
making no progress, and each party member who failed 
the check gains one level of exhaustion. 


FROZEN CAVE 
A character with the Littlest Yeti secret (see appendix B) 
can really shine in this encounter, 


Up ahead on your left is a fifteen-foot-high, ten-foot-wide 
cave mouth. There's blood on the snow some distance 
from the cave entrance, 


The blood marks the area where Garret’s expedition 
was ambushed by a male yeti that was hidden under a 
snowdrift near the cave entrance. It lunged at Garret, 
raking him with its claws and biting into his shoulder. 
Mokingo the goliath came to Garret's defense but didn’t 
last long. Perilou hid in the cave as Astrix fled up the 
mountain. The yeti pursued Garret some distance down 
the mountain before abandoning the chase and return 
ing to the cave 

The cave is home to a mated pair of yetis and their 
child, a yeti tyke (see appendix C). Mother and child 
are both inside; the father is out hunting but returns 
shortly with a fresh kill. The cave's interior is shown 
on map 1.17. 

F1. Chasm. This cave has a 20-foot-high, concave 
roof. Most of the floor has fallen away, forming a chasm 
80 feet deep. All that's left of the floor is a rocky ledge 
connected to area F2 by a natural stone bridge that’s 
safe to cross. A 1-foot-thick sheet of ice spans the south- 


ern part of the chasm. Characters can walk across this 
ice to avoid area F2 and go directly to area F3. 

A character can also try to collapse the ice sheet by 
dealing damage to it. The ice sheet has AC 13, 30 hit 
points, and immunity to cold, psychic, and poison dam 
age; if reduced to 0 hit points, the ice sheet fracture 
and falls into the chasm. Any creature standing on the 
sce sheet when it begins to collapse must make a DC 
16 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed check, the crea 
ture falls into the chasm, taking 28 (8d6) bludgeoning 
damage and landing prone. On a success, the creature 
lunges and leaps to land on one side of the chasm or t 

ther (its choice) and doesn't fall. 

F2. Trophies. The floor of this 10-foot-high tunnel 
is strewn with the bones of Mokingo Growling Bear, 
whose dead body was dragged here. Bits of flesh still 
ding to the bon The head has been ripped from its 

houlders, gnawed, and stuffed in a niche dug out of 
the wall. Amid the goliath’s bones are torn bits of hide 


armor, a greataxe, and the skulls and bones of three 


mountain goats. Seven other crude niches in the walls 
hold the frozen heads of humanoids previously decapi 
tated by the yetis. One belongs to a dwarf named Oobok 
see “Foaming Mugs,” page 34). Another belongs to a 
dwarf named Barthoom, who was killed farther up the 
mountain a month ago (see “Ruined Camp,” page 92). 
F3. Yeti Den. The floor of this cave is 5 feet higher 
than in area F2, and it has an uneven ceiling that ranges 
in height from 10 to 20 feet. The floor drops off sharply 
se the south, forming a 10-foothigh ledge that overlooks 


A MOUNTAIN CLIMBER MEETS HIS DOOM 


ON THE SLOPES oF KeLvin’s Cairn. 


the entrance to a tunnel, In the passageway is a short 
flight of steps that ascend to the south. 

This cave contains a strange sight: a female adult yeti 
watching her child, a yeti tyke (see appendix C), as it 
plays with a lightfoot halfling dressed in cold weather 
clothing and curled up in the fetal position. The halfling 
is Perilou Fishfinger (neutral good lightfoot halfling ac- 
olyte of Yondalla). The yeti tyke is knocking her around 
like a ball, and it’s clear from her cries that Perilou is 
still alive. She has three levels of exhaustion but is oth 
erwise unharmed. 

The appearance of intruders terrifies the yeti tyke, 
which crawls up onto its mother’s back to get away from 
them. The mother lets out a roar, hoping to scare off the 
intruders without a fight. She won't endanger herself or 
her child by attacking the characters if they also refrain 
from combat and get it across to her that they've come to 
rescue the halfling. 

Perilou thanks her rescuers but is sad to have wit- 
nessed the death of her goliath friend, Mokingo. She 
doesn’t know what became of her other companion, 
Astrix (see “Ruined Camp” below), and would love to 
answer that question before returning to Ten-Towns. 
Perilou stays with the characters until they return to 
Ten-Towns, then parts ways with them after deciding 
that her adventuring days are over. 

Against one wall, hidden under the shattered remains 
of a dogsled, is a mess kit, an explorer's pack, and 
enough blood-spattered heavy clothing to make two cold 
weather outfits 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN~TOWNS 


Here Lic THE BODIES OF ASTRIX THE TIEFLING AND AN itt- 


FATED MOUNTAINEER KNOWN ONLY AS BLue Boos. 


Development. As the characters leave the yeti cave, 
the male adult yeti returns home with a dead mountain 
goat tucked under one arm. Under normal circum- 
stances, the male yeti is hostile, but a character with 
the Littlest Yeti secret (see appendix B) can improve the 
yeti’s attitude. If no one has this secret but the charac- 
ters have the yeti tyke with them, they can trade the tyke 
for safe passage up or down the mountain. 


RUINED CAMP 


You come to the edge of a vast and deep crevasse, with 
nowhere to go but down. A collapsed tent lies half-buried 
in the snow near the precipice. Jutting out of a nearby 
snowbank is a pair of blue leather boots, Next to this 


grim display, a figure in cold weather clothing sits in the 
snow, her knees pulled in tight to her chest. Horns pro- 


trude from underneath the figure’s fur-lined hood. 


The figure seated in the snow is Astrix, a tiefling wizard. 


She is dead—frozen solid with her teeth clenched and 
her eyes staring at the blue boots sticking out of the 
snow. She escaped immediate death at the hands of the 
yeti but, in her panic, fled up the mountain rather than 
down it. Unwilling to approach the yeti cave again too 
soon, Astrix took refuge here. The sight of the boots 
made her sink into utter despair, until the elements fi- 
nally claimed her. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


/ 
PEZ- 
iA 
F 
m 
d X 
Abo 
7) \ 
A} j 
= TA - 


Blue Boots. A shield dwarf explorer named Barthoom 
Hammerhome climbed to this great height and made 
camp here a month ago, only to be killed and deca 
tated by a yeti. The half-buried tent is his. Characters 
who tug on his blue leather boots can pull Barthoom's 
headless body from the snowbank. Characters who 
search the dwarf’s body find an empty wineskin, a half- 
eaten block of goat’s cheese, and a miner's pick. 

Treasure. Characters who search Astrix’s body find 
a potion of invisibility and a leather-bound spellbook, 
which contains the following wizard spells: alter self 
cloud of daggers, comprehend languages, detect magi 
expeditious retreat, scorching ray, shield, suggestion, 
and Tenser's floating dis 


CONCLUDING THE QUEST 


The trip back to Targos can be as fraught or as unevent- 
ful as you wish. If the characters take the more direct 
but dangerous route across the open tundra, they have 
at least one random encounter in the 
“Wilderness Encounters,” page 105). 

Keegan and Garret are happy to be reunited. The 
characters still receive their promised reward if 
ret dies, but only if they deliver his body to Keegan for 
a proper burial. Part of their reward is a wooden box 
containing four scrimshaw figurines worth 10 gp each: 
a spouting whale, a smiling fox, a pair of dancing hares, 
and a walrus with the words “BIG LOVE” carved into it. 


TERMALAINE 


Founded by Calishite settlers who appreciated beauty, 
Termalaine is widely regarded as the most picturesque 
town in Icewind Dale, spreading out from the shore of 
Maer Dualdon and bordered on the north and west by 
tall pines. Its buildings incorporate carvings of wizards, 
homunculi, tigers, and smiling djinn. 

For most visitors, the enchantment of the town is 
dispelled as soon as they feel the icy claws and teeth of 
the cold wind sweeping down from the north, shearing 
through their layers of clothing. Termalaine was built 
in the path of this dreadful gale, which continues well 
past the town to harry fishers on the southern half 
of the lake. 

In addition to fishers, shipbuilders, and scrim- 
shanders, Termalaine is home to miners who harvest 
gemstones from a cavern complex set into a low hill 
north and east of the settlement. Their efforts are 
hampered by creatures from the Underdark that occa- 
sionally find their way up into the mine. Whenever such 
creatures are discovered, the mine is sealed off and the 
townsfolk wait until a band of sellswords or adventurers 
can be hired to clear it out. 


TERMALAINE IN A NUTSHELL 
Friendliness $$% Services ## Comfort $$% 


Available Quest. “A Beautiful Mine,” page 94. 

Population. 600. 

Leader. Oarus Masthew (lawful good half-ore scout) 
was declared speaker after a close and contentious 
election. The child of half-ore adventurers, he was ad- 
opted by Shaelen Masthew, the previous speaker, who 
retired from her leadership role but still lives in Ter- 
malaine. Oarus is bright, with a sharp sense of humor, 
but he has political enemies in town and lacks the full 
support of the town militia. 

Militia. Termalaine can muster up to 50 soldiers (use 
the tribal warrior stat block) and 4 veterans. 

Heraldry. The open-mouthed head of a fish at the bot- 
tom of a sky-blue field, its jaws parted as it swallows 
a large rose-pink oval. The oval is a tourmaline, sym- 
bolic of the town’s gem mining. 

Sacrifice to Auril. Warmth (see page 21). 

Rivals. Bremen, Lonelywood, Targos. 


OVERLAND TRAVEL 


Snow-covered paths connect Termalaine to Lonelywood 
and Targos, its closest neighbors. Travel times in the 
Overland Travel from Termalaine table assume that 
characters are on foot; mounts and dogsleds can shorten 
these times by as much as 50 percent. 


OVERLAND TRAVEL FROM TERMALAINE 


To Travel Time 
Lonelywood 2 hours 
Targos 4 hours 


LOCATIONS IN TERMALAINE 
The following locations are marked on map 1.18. 


Tue BLUE CLAM 
Dockside tavern 


The fishers of Termalaine typically finish their days 
here, seated on benches near one of the building’s long 
hearths to warm their feet while they fill their bellies 
with spiced chowder. Beautiful works of scrimshaw are 
hung on the walls. 

Vernon Braig (neutral good half-orc commoner), the 
Blue Clam’s owner and chef, knows some of the hunters 
and trappers in Lonelywood, and occasionally a sled 
comes down the north trail with a sack of hares or a 
haunch of moose, courtesy of one of Vernon’s friends. 
On those nights, the Blue Clam’s hearths are full of 
roasting meat, and the patrons stay later and sing 
louder, enjoying the good times while they last. 

Characters who loiter in the tavern are likely to hear a 
rumor or two, which you can determine by rolling on the 
Ten-Towns Rumors table (page 18). 


THE EASTSIDE 
Inn 


The Eastside is where most visitors in town stay. What 
looks from the outside like separate houses turns out to 
be a single structure with rooms connected by under- 
ground passages, with cozy guest accommodations in 
the cellar. 

The innkeeper is Marta Peskryk (lawful good human 
commoner), a willowy teenager who spends much of 
her time tending to her bedridden father, Clyde, a retired 
fisherman and noncombatant. As she performs her daily 
chores, Marta sings the following song to herself: 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


g 
pdb Dew 1000 
feet 


Map 1.18: Termataine 


Ahead of winter's wind she came 
The lovely woman with no name; 
Draped in a fur-lined cloak of red, 
To the icy lake she fled; 

The wind pursued her all the same 
As sure as night she's dead. 


If asked about the song, Marta recounts the following 
tale. Fifty years ago, a mysterious woman in a fur-lined 
red cloak stopped at the Eastside on her way to Lone 
lywood. Because the woman was alone and frightened, 
the innkeepers—a pair of retired adventurers who 
happened to be Marta’s grandparents—tried to console 
her. The woman gave them a ring as payment for their 
hospitality. Not long afterward, a howling wind burst 
into the inn and tossed the woman about like a rag doll. 
The innkeepers intervened, giving the woman time to 
escape. The evil wind battered Marta’s grandparents 
unconscious before resuming its hunt, That was the last 
anyone saw of the woman. 

Treasure. Marta wears the mysterious woman's ring 
(which she has inherited) around her neck on a chain. 
It is a ring of warmth, and Marta will part with it only if 


she can be convinced that it can help bring an end to the 


wintry curse that besets Icewind Dale. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


A BEAUTIFUL MINE 


The characters can pick up this quest if they start the 
adventure in Termalaine or shortly after they arrive 

in town. As they trudge through the streets, they see a 
young boy standing on a box, yelling about various local 
happenings, including the recent evacuation of workers 
from a nearby mine that has been overrun by kobolds. 

A reward of 50 gp is offered to anyone who can rid the 
mine of the pesky dragonlings. 

When the characters investigate, they discover that all 
is not what it seems. The kobold leader has been pos: 
sessed by a ghost, and a grell has infiltrated the mine, 
setting the kobolds on edge. The characters can either 
try to parley with the kobolds and get them to leave 
the mine peacefully, or they can rid Ten-Towns of their 
presence permanently and try to deal with the grell on 
their own. 


A MINOR Issue 


Darmo Mazlu, a human boy, stands on a box and 
yells out the latest news to passersby, most of whom 
ignore him: 


A boy wrapped in heavy winter clothes shouts the news 
of the day as people pass by. When you approach, the 
boy cries, “The gemstone mine is closed because of 
monsters! Speaker Masthew is offering fifty gold to any- 
‘one who clears it out!” 


If the characters express interest. Darmo tells them 
they can find the town speaker, Oarus Masthew, at the 


Blue Clam. The boy also has some information about 
the mine, including its location. He doesn’t know much 
about the history or the particulars of the mine, but 

he knows it's important for Termalaine and its closing 
means a significant loss of income- 

The characters can make the half-hour trek to the 
mine without visiting Oarus, or they can go to the tavern 
to see the speaker. If the characters decide to ignore the 
quest, the mine remains closed for several weeks before 
the kobolds mysteriously vanish, enabling the miners to 
return. After the mine reopens, it isn't long before work- 
ers start disappearing one by one—victims of the grell. 


GETTING THE QUEST 


When the characters arrive at the Blue Clam, read: 


Outside the tavern, you see two bundled-up humanoids 
talking to one another. When they see you, one waves to 
you in a friendly manner, then says, “You seem entirely 

too prepared for trouble. Are you here about the mine?” 


The town speaker, Oarus Masthew (lawful good half-ore 
an), explains that a group of kobolds crept into the 
ine a few days ago, entering from the surface and forc- 
g the miners to abandon their jobs. No one was killed, 
the kobolds are too dangerous for the miners to deal 
ith. He also reveals that a human miner went missing 
few days before the kobolds showed up, prompting 
‘ether miners to fear that a monster must have crawled 
from the Underdark. Oarus thinks it’s possible that 
miner fell down the central shaft. which is deep 
gh that his body would never be found 
One piece of information that Oarus fails to mention 
that he ordered the town militia to clear out the mine 
ree days ago. The militia refused to deal with the 
blem for what amounts to political reasons. Senior 
officers in cahoots with Speaker Naerth Maxildanarr 
Targos are determined to oust Masthew as town 
aker and replace him with one of their own in a 
jal election. They're convinced that the closing of 
mine and the resulting economic woes will turn 
lasthew’s political supporters against him. 


PROACHING THE MINE 


entrance to the mine is in the woods northeast of 

_ The characters can follow a trail from Termalaine 
be there in 30 minutes. When they arrive, the area 
ind the opening appears devoid of life 


entrance to the gem mine is an open tunnel in a hill- 
Empty carts are parked near the entrance, next to 
a crude wooden sign has been propped up. Writ- 
‘on the sign in charcoal are the words “Kobolds only!” 
Common. 


words are written in more elaborate calligraphy 
would be expected from a kobold. 


MINE FEATURES 
The mine’s meandering tunnels have 7-foot-high ceil- 
ings. Wider areas tend to have higher ceilings, the aver- 
age being 12 feet. The mine has no light sources. 

The most prominent feature of the mine is a wide 
yertical shaft that descends thousands of feet into the 
Underdark. This shaft predates the mine, and efforts to 
seal it off have been unsuccessful. It was by this route 
that the grell invaded the mine in search of food. 


CAPTURED KOBOLDS 

Characters who capture a kobold in the mine can, with- 
out an ability check, learn some or all of the following 
information in the course of an interrogation: 


+ “Trex led us here. He has wings like dragon!” 

“Trex smart! He speaks like human who knows a lot. 
He don't speak Dragon no more.” 

“Trex says miners want their mine back. Trex wants 
something better in return.” 

“Trex says we be safer in town. There's food in town!” 


MINE LOCATIONS 

The following locations are keyed to map 1.19. The mine 
is made up of three levels, the deepest of which is level 
3. The boxed text in these locations assumes the charac 
ters can see what's around them. 


M1. Toot Room 
Rough-hewn steps descend 60 feet before ending just 
north of this chamber. 


Racks holding picks and hammers are nailed to the walls 
of this small cavern. The floor is covered with rock dust 
and tracks. 


Any character who examines the tracks and succeeds 
on a DC 13 Wisdom (Survival) check identifies reptilian 
footprints mingled with human tracks, as well as a set 
of tracks that look like they belong to a pair of giant ro- 
dents. The reptilian (kobold) tracks fan out, leading to 
areas M2, M3, and M4, The rodent (giant rat) tracks lead 
to area M2, and from there to area M3. 


M2. Gem DEPOSITS 


The floor in the east end of this dusty cave is five feet 
higher than in the west end, with a rocky ridge separating 
the two areas except for slopes on either side. Picks and 
shovels lean against the ridge. Small gem deposits in the 
ridge and the walls of the cave gleam seductively. 


Treasure. If a character using a miner's pick spends 
an hour chipping away at the walls, roll percentile dice 
and consult the Mining Discoveries table to determine 
what, if anything, the character unearths. The tourma- 
lines found in the mine are translucent gemstones that 
come in different colors, including pale green, blue, 
pink, red, brown, and black. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


MINING Discoveries 


4100 Discovery 
01-80 Nothing 
81-95 Pebble-sized tourmaline (1 gp) 
96-99 Acorn-sized tourmaline, flawed (10 gp) 
00 —Acorn-sized tourmaline, unflawed (100 gp) 


i M3. RIVER CAVERN 
Characters hear the sound of rushing water as they 
approach this cav 


An underground river flows through the far side of this 
iS cavern, which is supported by a natural stone pillar near 

the water's edge. Between you and the river are two hal 

fling-sized gray rodents with long tails and beady eyes 


They rush to attack as soon as you notice them. 


The two giant rats are aggressive, giving chase if the 
characters run away. 

Underground River. Thermal vents keep this river 
of fresh water from freezing. The river exits the cave 
through a 2'2-foot-wide fissure in the south wall, gaining 
speed as it moves through the narrow passage toward 
area M5. Any Medium or smaller creature that wades 
into this fissure or star turn there must eed on 
a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or be swept away by the 
current and dropped into the shaft that plunges thou- 
sands of feet into the Underdark. Such a fall is fatal. 


M4. PROCESSING ROOM 

The floor of the western tunnel from area M1 is 7 feet 

higher than the floor of the cavern it leads to. The ledge 
limbed in either direction. U: d 


Benches and tables are set up as workspaces where min- 


ers clean any gemstones they find. Gravel and pebbles 


are strewn on the ground. Scattered across the floor are a 


few hammers, picks, and broken lanterns 


The miners were forced to leave this area in a hurr. 
when the kobolds showed up and drove them out. 
Treasure. If the characters search the cave, they find 
a small figurine of a dog carved out of rock, with two 
pebble-sized tourmalines for eyes. It was made by a 
miner while on break. The figurine is worth 10 gp. 


M5. UNDERDARK SHAFT, LEVEL | 


Wooden planks and struts form a walkway along the wall 
of a seemingly bottomless vertical shaft. A narrow water. 
fall cascades down the northeast wall, and the sound of 


rushing water is loud in the confined space 


N Characters using darkvision or a light source brighter 
"4 than a candle can see more walkways attached to the 


THE TRUE MONSTER OF THE MINE REVEALS ITSELF 


© banio 


Underdark 


Map 1.19: Gem Mine 


northwest side of the shaft 30 feet farther down. Be- 
cause of the loud waterfall, characters must yell if they 
want to communicate with each other while in this area. 

Kobold Saboteurs. The cascading water drowns out 
the noise made by two Icewind kobolds (see appendix 
C) that are clinging to the underside of the walkway. 
These kobolds, named Scorp and Thwip, are using saws 
to weaken the wooden struts so that the walkway will 
collapse if a creature weighing more than two kobolds 
tries to stand on it. These kobolds need another day to 
complete their sabotage; until then, the walkway is safe. 

The characters can’t hear the kobolds, but if they look 
enderneath the planks, they can see the kobolds work- 
Seg away cheerily. If a kobold takes damage while cling- 
Tag to the underside of the walkway, it loses its grip and 
Gills down the shaft to its death. 


M6. BUCKET LIFT 


A wooden pulley system has been constructed around 
2 large hole in the floor. A bucket big enough to hold a 
humanoid is held up by thick rope. Three alcoves next to 
the lift contain wooden boards and mining equipment 


The bucket lift is used for hoisting miners and ore be- 
Seeen levels 1 and 2. It’s controlled by using a crank 
Seside the bucket or the crank on the side of the pulley 
este. The bucket can hold one Medium creature or 
Seo Small creatures at a time. It runs from here to area 


Down to 
Underdark 


M7, 15 feet farther down, and back again. It takes 1 min- 
ute for the bucket to be lowered or raised. 


M7. BUCKET LIFT LANDING 


The mechanism creaks as the bucket lift descends to the 
floor of a small cave where two dusty tunnels lead in op- 


posite directions. 


Characters who search for tracks in the dust and suc- 
ceed on a DC 10 Wisdom (Survival) check can deter- 
mine that a lot of kobold foot traffic leads to and comes 
from the west, and a single set of kobold footprints leads 
to the east. (The kobold who wandered in that direction 
never returned.) 


M8. GRELL LAIR 


A hole in the west side of this chamber opens into the 
central shaft, letting in the sound of the waterfall, The 
floor in the north end of the cave is five feet higher than 
in the south end, with a rocky ridge separating them and 
a slope on either side leading to the top of the ridge. The 
walls above the ridge gleam with gem deposits. 


Floating near the 15-foot-high ceiling is a grell. A char- 
acter who has a passive Wisdom (Perception) score of 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


98 


16 or higher notices the grell. If more than one charac- 
ter enters the cavern, the grell won't attack and tries to 
stay hidden. If the characters leave the cave, it follows 
them, always staying at least 30 feet away. When an op- 
portunity to attack a lone party member presents itself, 
the grell swoops in and tries to paralyze its prey, then 
hauls its catch back here to be devoured. After it feeds, it 
drops the remains of its victim down the central shaft. 
Treasure. If a character using a miner's pick spends 
an hour chipping away at the walls above the ridge, roll 
percentile dice and consult the Mining Discoveries table 
(see area M2) to determine what, if anything, is found. 


M9. Huncry KOBOLDS 


Atable and chairs are set up in this area to create a 
space for the miners to take breaks. On top of the table, 
two kobolds are poking a giant rat with their javelins to 
make sure it's dead. The kobolds screech loudly as they 
notice you. 


Two Icewind kobolds (see appendix C) named Grek 
and Smol rush to attack when the characters enter the 
cave, If either one is injured, they immediately have a 
change of heart and flee through the tunnel to the north 
that leads to level 3. 


M10. UNDERDARK SHAFT, LEVEL 3 


The tunnel's downward slope ends where it opens onto 
the center shaft. A wooden walkway extends from this 
‘opening and then runs westward to another tunnel in the 
rock, In front of you, a large bucket like the one you saw 
earlier dangles from a taut rope that stretches southward 
across the shaft and is connected to another wooden 
platform 15 feet away. 


Looking down, the characters see nothing but darkness. 
Characters using darkvision or a light source brighter 
than a candle can see, if they look up, the underside of 
the walkway in area M5 (on level 1). If the characters 
failed to notice the two kobolds clinging to the underside 
of the upper structure earlier, they spot the little sabo- 
teurs from this 30-foot-lower vantage point 

Bucket Shuttle. This rope-and-pulley mechanism 
is used to transport miners and ore between the two 
platforms. A crank mounted to each platform allows 
the bucket to be shuttled from one side to the other. A 
person inside the bucket can forgo the cranks and pull 
themselves across by tugging on the suspension rope. 
The bucket is large enough to hold one Medium creature 
or two Small creatures. It takes 1 round for the bucket 
to cross the gap between the platforms. 

Dealing 5 acid, fire, or slashing damage to the rope 
causes it to snap. If the rope is cut, the bucket and its 
contents fall down the shaft, likely gone forever. A char- 
acter in the bucket when the rope breaks can grab one 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


end of the severed rope with a successful DC 15 Dexter- 
ity saving throw, thus averting certain death. 


MII. KOBOLD TUNNELS 


Lurking in this dusty tunnel are three skittish kobolds. 
One of them carries a threadbare satchel and wears a 
fake pair of dragon wings made of thin wood and tattered 
white cloth. This kobold immediately raises its hands in 
surrender, saying in Common, “We mean you no harm. 
Please don't hurt us.” 


Two of these three Icewind kobolds (see appendix C) 
are nervous bodyguards named Vott and Zurk. The one 
wearing the fake wings and doing the talking is Trex, 
the leader of the group. If one or both of the kobolds 
from area M9 fled from there, they lurk deeper inside 
the tunnel behind Trex and his bodyguards. 

Trex is possessed by a ghost, though the characters 
won't know this until the ghost shows itself (see “Janth's 
Ghost” below). Speaking in fluent Common, Trex ex: 
plains that he and his fellow kobolds sought refuge 
in the mine after being chased out of the foothills of 
Kelvin’s Cairn by a yeti. The miners got scared and ran 
off before Trex could explain that the kobolds meant no 
harm. As long as Trex is possessed by the ghost, he has 
an impressive vocabulary and speaks only Common. 

If the characters engage Trex in conversation, he 
makes a proposition: 


“The everlasting winter has made the wilderness unsafe 
for my kind, and the preternatural cold dulls our wits. 
Please, we only want a place to stay so we can keep out of 
this horrible weather. We can work, and we won't cause 
trouble. Termalaine would be richer for having us.” 


Any character who succeeds on a DC 13 Wisdom (In 
sight) check can tell that Trex is lying. The ghost con 
trolling Trex wants safe access to Termalaine so that 
it can possess someone more powerful and influential 
than a kobold. 

If the characters agree to take the kobolds in the mine 
back to Termalaine, the kobolds act as their allies. 

Janth’s Ghost. In life, Janth Alowar was a neutral 
human sage who devoted himself by cataloguing the 
flora of Icewind Dale. He and his guide were killed and 
decapitated by a yeti in the foothills of Kelvin’s Cairn 
two years ago, and his restless spirit has lingered. The 
kobolds happened upon the ghost while searching for 
shelter during a blizzard, allowing it to possess Trex 
without the other kobolds’ knowledge. 

The threadbare satchel carried by Trex once belonged 
to Janth. It contains clumps of moss, lichen, and shrub- 
bery gathered from the foothills of Kelvin's Cairn and 
the surrounding tundra. None of the samples are valu- 
able, but the ghost is very possessive of the collection 
and won't give up its satchel without a fight. 


Janth’s ghost can be laid to rest by destroying the 
satchel—its last connection to the Material Plane. The 
ghost otherwise remains as close to the satchel as pos- 
sible. If the satchel is taken from Trex and discarded, 
the ghost forsakes its current host and remains near the 
satchel, hoping to possess someone else. 

If Trex is killed, the ghost appears in an unoccupied 


space within 5 feet of the kobold’s body. On its next turn, 


the ghost tries to possess one of the characters—prefer- 
ably one who can take up its satchel. 


M12. FOSSILIZED SKULL AND Ps1 CRYSTAL 


A fossilized skull partially juts out of the east wall of this 
small cave, five feet off the ground. The skull has larger 
than normal eye sockets, a curious ridge between the 
eyes, nothing that would pass for a nose, and four small 
holes where one would expect to see teeth. 


The skull embedded in the wall is that of a mind fi 
that came up from the Underdark thousands of ye 
ago. How it became lodged in the stone is anyone’s 
guess. Any character who examines the skull and suc 
ceeds on a DC 16 Intelligence (Arcana) check concludes 
that it came from a mind flayer. Any attempt to pry the 
skull from the stone causes it to shatter and fall away, 
revealing a crystal shard where the illithid’s brain would 
have been. 

Treasure. The crystal shard lodged inside the fossil 
ized mind flayer skull is a psi crystal (see appendix D) 
The psychic trauma that the mind flayer endured when 
it died caused the crystal to form in its mind. A charac 
ter can use a miner's pick to pry loose the psi crystal. 

A character who attunes to this psi crystal gains a 
form of indefinite madness (see the Indefinite Madness 
table in the Dungeon Master's Guide). Determine the 
result secretly, then convey this information only to the 
character's player. The madness does not end until the 
character is no longer attuned to the psi crystal. While 
the madness lasts, the cha r can hear a repeating 
telepathic distress signal put out by an illithid ship that 
crashed in the mountains and track the signal to its 
source (see “Id Ascendant,” page 132). The only way to 
block the signal is by ending the character's attunement 
to the psi crystal, 


ars 


M13. GEODE WORKFACE 


Sparkling geodes greet you as you enter this cavern. The 
gems are partially exposed in places, sticking out from 
the walls like glassy shards, The floor rises near the east- 
ern wall, leaving a natural ridge with stone ramps leading 
upward on either end. 


Treasure. A character using a miner's pick who 
spends an hour chipping away at the walls can remove 
an intact geode worth 10 gp. Up to fifty intact geodes 
can be acquired in this way. 


RETURNING TO TERMALAINE 


If the characters return to Speaker Masthew and tell 
him the mine is cleared of monsters, he thanks them 
profusely and explains that he must inspect the mine to 
verify its safety before they can be paid. He encourages 
the characters to spend a few days in Termalaine while 
he conducts the investigation. 

If there are no more kobolds in the mine and the grell 
has likewise been dealt with, Oarus returns to the char- 
acters the next day and pays them 50 gp for their ser- 
vices. If Trex is still in the mine and Janth’s ghost wasn't 
laid to rest, Oarus returns to Termalaine possessed by 
the ghost. If the kobolds are gone but the grell remains, 
Oarus is killed by the grell and doesn't return, leaving 
the town without a speaker. If the grell is still in the 
mine when it reopens, a handful of local miners disap 
pear over the next few days before the decision is made 
to close the mine for good. 

If the characters bring the kobolds to Termalaine, 
Oarus is initially hesitant to let them stay in the town. 
After hearing about their willingness to work, he de- 
cides to give them a chance and offers them menial jobs. 
The kobolds, eager to prove themselves, turn out to be 
good workers. The townsfolk tease them at first, but 
eventually the kobolds win them over. Janth's ghost, if it 
hasn't been laid to rest, finds someone else to possess, 
causing Trex to revert to his skittish, much less intelli- 
gent self. 


CHAPTER 1 | TEN-TOWNS 


99 


ICEWIND DALE 


ATABATIC WINDS SWEEP DOWN FROM THE 
Reghed Glacier, ceaselessly battering any- 
thing that dares to grow or breathe in Icewind 
Dale. Without fail, these winds find their way 
through every chink and crack, every open- 
ing in the warmest furs, every tent flap, every roof and 
board of the strongest homes, draining away any hint 
of warmth. 

The sun, held down below the horizon by the Frost- 
maiden’s magic, offers no respite from winter's fury. 
The days are twilit, the nights dark. As Auril casts her 
nightly spell, a curtain of light weaves across the starry 
sky to keep the dawn at bay—an aurora that portends an 
everlasting winter. Storms bring driving hail and sleet 
that leaves everything coated in a sheath of ice. Snow 
piles in deep drifts and blocks all trails leading south 
to warmer lands. The ice cliffs of the Reghed Glacier 
rise in the east like prison walls, while the snow-capped 
peaks of the Spine of the World loom to the south. North 
and west, the Sea of Moving Ice churns icebergs and 
floes in a deadly tumult, like winter grinding its teeth in 
anticipation of its next freezing assault. 

Trapped in winter's cold embrace, nomadic humans 
follow herds of reindeer through their migrations, while 
others dare the treacherous waters of the Sea of Mov- 
ing Ice in search of fish, seals, walruses, and whales to 
sustain them. Dwarves dig into the earth to seek shelter 
and mine for iron. Meanwhile, folk descended from 
foolhardy and treasure-mad immigrants eke out meager 
lives in Ten-Towns, which can barely hold back the wind, 
Jet alone marauding orcs, giants, and fierce tundra yeti. 

Despite the unnatural cold and other dangers, people 
still brave the journey to reach this harsh winterscape, 
searching for opportunity and adventure. 


RUNNING THIS CHAPTER 


This chapter takes the adventure beyond Ten-Towns into 
the far reaches of Icewind Dale, to places the adventur- 
ers might visit as they investigate tall tales or undertake 
quests. These adventure locations are scattered across 
Icewind Dale, as shown on map 2.1 (page 113). Also 
marked on this map are the remote locations featured in 
chapters 3, 6, and 7. 


CHARACTER ADVANCEMENT 


Although this chapter is designed for characters of 4th 
level or higher, some of its random encounters and 
locations are more dangerous than others, The char- 
acters might need to run away and regroup, or take 
short or long rests between encounters, if they're going 
to survive. 

In this chapter, you decide how quickly the charac- 
ters advance in level. Treat the following as recom- 
mendations: 


The characters gain a level after spending two or 
three game sessions exploring Icewind Dale. 

The characters gain a level for neutralizing the threats 
in two or three of the dangerous locations described 
in this chapter. 

The characters gain a level if they accomplish an 
extraordinary feat, such as ending the feud between 
the goliath clans of Skytower Shelter and Wyrmdoom 
Crag, or surviving a close encounter with Arveiatu- 
race the White Wyrm. 


Once the characters reach 7th level, they should no 
long gain levels by exploring locations or surviving ran- 
dom encounters in this chapter. Instead, direct them to 
the locations described in chapters 5 through 7. 


TALL TALES IN TEN-TOWNS 


By the time the characters reach 3rd level, they have 
garnered enough of a reputation that NPCs in Ten- 
Towns will share tall tales with them, When the player 
characters are ready to explore more of Icewind Dale, 
use the Tall Tales in Ten-Towns table to entice them. 

You can either choose which tales to share with the 
players, or you can ask each player to roll once on the ta- 
ble. Let the players decide which tales (if any) they want 
to investigate. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 
5 A 
as i 


TALL TALES IN TEN-TOWNS 


20 
1-2 


5-6 


11-12 


13-14 


15-16 


rd 


19-20 


Tale 

“They say the Frostmaiden lives on a misty isle hidden among the bergs in the Sea of Moving Ice. There's a mighty 
strange whale with a boat on its back that swims in those frigid waters. | bet it knows where the island is! You can catch 
the whale at Angajuk'’s Bell, an old anchorage, but you must ring the bell hanging by the pier to call it." (See “Angajuk’s 
Bell,” page 114.) 

“There's this old black cabin that's been around forever. No one knows who built it, and lots of folks got a bad feeling 
about it. Some say it's haunted, but there's a gnome in Bryn Shander who claims that magical experiments are being 
performed there, The gnome's name is Copper, and you'll find him at the House of the Morninglord.” (See “House of the 
Morninglord,” page 32, and “Black Cabin," page 116.) 

“Nabira Moarskull, an Easthaven fisher, owned an enchanted fishhook that could catch magical fish. While she and her 
friends were out on the ice one day, a pair of filthy gnolls attacked them. They killed Nabira and stole her fishing pole 

and hook. Hunters from Easthaven tracked the gnolls to an icy rift in the ground but were too scared to go farther.” (See 
“Cackling Chasm,” page 121.) 

“Head northwest out of Bremen, an’ you'll see a pirate ship frozen in the ice less than a quarter mile from shore. No one's 
sure where it came from, but it’s not goin’ anywhere so long as this dark winter lasts. | bet its hold is full o' treasure!” (See 
“Dark Duchess,” page 127.) 

“Did you see the weird comet that fell out of the sky a week ago? It went down in the mountains south of Ten-Towns, not 
too far away. Since then, some folk have been receiving mental messages in a language they can’t make out. | think the 
comet might have something to do with that, and | bet you could find it easily enough, even in this weather.” (See “Id As- 
cendant,” page 132.) 

“Frost giants ruled this land long ago. Their leaders, the jarls, would meet atop a hill to the west to settle disputes, Their 
thrones still rest on that hill.” (See “Jarlmoot,” page 137.) 

“Goblin scavengers prowl the tundra on the backs of wolves or in wagons. They also like to ambush travelers on the Ten 
Trail on this side of the mountain pass. Well, a group of trappers found the goblins’ fortress in the mountains. Someone 
should go there and wreck it.” (See “Karkolohk," page 140.) 

“Did you hear what happened to that evil wizard in Easthaven? They tied him to a stake and lit him on fire! Why? ‘Cause he 
hired some Ten-Towners to help him find a buried tower, then killed ‘em to keep its location secret. Well, one of ‘em told 
me where the tower's at! | wouldn't go myself, but maybe it’s somethin’ you'd like to explore.” (See “Lost Spire of Neth- 
eril,” page 145.) 

“If you're looking for something hidden in Icewind Dale, the people you should talk to are the Reghed nomads. They know 
every inch of this land and all its secrets. The tricky part is finding them. They tend to follow the reindeer herds.” (See 
“Reghed Tribe Camp,” page 152.) 

“I keep telling everyone the Everlasting Rime isn’t the Frostmaiden's doing. It's actually the Arcane Brotherhood, plotting 
another takeover of Ten-Towns! A wizard who was burned at the stake in Easthaven admitted to being one of them, and he 
said there are other Arcane Brotherhood wizards lurking among us. Vaelish Gant is behind it all, no doubt. The scoundrel 
is locked away in Revel’s End, but that doesn't make him any less dangerous, Someone should find out what he knows!” 


(See “Revels End,” page 154.) 
“We don't see goliaths much around here, but there are two feuding clans in the Spine of the World. | bet if someone 
from Ten-Towns were to help them put aside their differences, all the goliaths would benefit. I'd sure like to meet a goliath 
someday!” (See “Skytower Shelter,” page 161, and “Wyrmdoom Crag,” page 166.) 


ICEWIND DALE 


UESTS 


Instead of enticing players with the tall tales in the 
previous section, you can use any or all of the following 
quests to entice characters into exploring the locations 
described in this chapter. 


WHALE OIL ACQUISITION 

Angajuk’s Bell quest (see page 114) 

Ten-Towners need whale oil to keep their stoves and 
lamps lit, and most of that oil comes from whale hunt- 
ers on the Sea of Moving Ice, which has grown more 
tempestuous and difficult to navigate in recent months. 
Helka Jaggerath (half-elf commoner), a whale oil mer- 
‘chant in Bryn Shander, hires the characters to serve as 
ber bodyguards as she travel to Angajuk’s Bell and rings 
the bell to summon the whale. There, they must help her 
persuade the awakened sperm whale to ferry them to 
the whalers camped on the ice floes of the Sea of Mov- 
ing Ice so that Helka can buy as many casks of whale oil 
as she can. 

Each cask of whale oil weighs 50 pounds and costs 25 
gp. Helka has 300 gp, which is enough to buy six casks 
‘of whale oil and to pay the characters 150 gp for their 
help getting the casks safely back to Bryn Shander. She 
‘expects the entire expedition to last a tenday, assuming 
Angajuk cooperates. Helka cautions the characters not 
to tell Angajuk what's in the casks, since the truth might 
upset the whale. Her plan is to tell Angajuk that the 
‘easks contain fish oil, not whale oil. 


PROVISIONS FOR MACREADUS 
Black Cabin quest (see page 116) 


Copper Knobberknocker, a gnome acolyte of Lathander 
staying at the House of the Morninglord in Bryn 
Shander (see page 32), is worried about his friend, 
Macreadus, who's trying to build a device that can end 
the Everlasting Rime and return summer to Icewind 
Dale. Copper asks the characters to bring provisions to 
Macreadus at the Black Cabin and make sure he’s all 
right. Because the gnome has paid for the provisions, he 
can't offer a reward; however, Mishann, the priest who 
runs the House of the Morninglord, offers free healing 
to those who complete Copper’s quest and return. 


GNoLL HEADS 

Cackling Chasm quest (see page 121) 

Trovus, the dragonborn speaker of Caer-Konig, consid- 
‘ers gnolls to be a clear and present danger to his town. 
He knows that a group of these savage predators has 
taken refuge in the Cackling Chasm and offers the char- 
acters 10 gp for each gnoll head they bring back to him. 


Zero RUM 
Dark Duchess quest (see page 127) 


The tavernkeepers of Five Tavern Center in Bremen are 
bemoaning their dwindling supplies of ale and spirits, 
but they've heard rumors of a pirate ship stuck in the 
ice off the coast—and where there’s a pirate ship, there 
might be rum! The tavernkeepers hire the characters to 
search the ship's hold and bring back any alcoholic bev- 
erages they find, offering to pay a fair price plus a 150 


gp incentive. Although this quest cannot be completed, 
because the ship's crew left behind no rum or other 
alcoholic beverages for the characters to purloin, other 
treasures aboard the ship far surpass what the tavern- 
keepers of Bremen could offer as a reward, so the quest 
is not without merit. 


DISTRESS SIGNAL 
Id Ascendant quest (see page 132) 


The characters are approached by four psychically sen- 
sitive Ten-Towners (human commoners) who have been 
kept awake by a telepathic distress signal that it seems 
only they can hear. They were drawn together by this 
common experience. They don't understand the mes- 
sage (which is in Deep Speech) but know the direction 
it's coming from. They offer the characters 250 gp to 
investigate the source of the signal and silence it, if only 
so they can get a good night's sleep. These Ten-Towners 
are briefly described below: 


Vedda Starsprit, a stocky, paranoid, 30-year-old trap- 
per with exotropia 

Nars Beldrun, a tall, heavyset, 33-year-old shipwright 
from Targos who complains about everything 
Telvaster Hangingbell, a 25-year-old man from a well 
off merchant family in Neverwinter, looking to escape 
his responsibilities 

Kaska Lang, a 30-year-old author writing a mystery 
novel about a series of fictional murders in Ten-Towns 


YSELM’S WAY 

Jarlmoot quest (see page 137) 

Yselm Bloodfang, a human frost druid (see appendix 
C), is a former Reghed nomad of the Tiger Tribe who 
gave up the nomadic lifestyle and settled in Ten-Towns 
three years ago, before Auril’s everlasting winter beset 
Icewind Dale. A secret Auril worshiper, Yselm is known 
throughout Ten-Towns as a skilled wilderness guide. 
She recently encountered an avatar of the Frostmaid- 
en—a female figure made of snow— that commanded her 
to find the characters and lead them to their doom. To 
that end, Yselm approaches the characters and claims 
to be looking for work. She tells them about Jarlmoot 
(“a circle of giant thrones on a haunted hilltop”) and 
offers to lead them there for 25 gp. “On nights of the full 
moon,” she adds, “the spirit of Reggaryarva, jarl of jarls, 
will open his treasure vault to anyone who defeats his 
champion.” 

Yselm knows the way to Jarlmoot but doesn't help the 
characters fight any threats they encounter on the way, 
nor will she enter the circle of thrones or assist in the 
battle against Reggaryarva’s champion. If the characters 
overcome the challenges posed by Reggaryarva, Yselm 
betrays and attacks them. A winter wolf sent by the 
Frostmaiden joins the fray on Yselm's side. Both villains 
fight to the death. 


PEACE OUT 
Karkolohk quest (see page 140) 


A goblin messenger from Karkolohk was recently 
captured in Bryn Shander and found to be carrying a 
declaration of peace from Chief Yarb-Gnock, addressed 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


103 


104 


to Speaker Duvessa Shane. Yarb-Gnock would like 
Speaker Shane to send delegates to Karkolohk to con- 
duct “treaty negotiations.” Sherriff Markham Southwell 
doesn't believe a word of Yarb-Gnock’s message and of- 
fers a reward of 300 gp for the goblin chieftain's head. 

Upon arriving at Karkolohk, the characters discover 
that the declaration of peace is either a genuine attempt 
to end hostilities with Ten-Towns, or a desperate ploy 
by Yarb-Gnock to lure adventurers to Karkolohk to that 
they can help him escape. As the DM, you get to deter- 
mine Yarb-Gnock’s true intentions (see “Gnome Diplo- 
macy,” page 141, for more information). 


HUNT FOR THE RED YETI 
Lost Spire of Netheril quest (see page 145) 


Yeti are growing bold and striking closer to Ten-Towns 
than ever before, going so far as to venture onto frozen 
lakes to attack ice fishers. Local merchants who earn a 
living selling yeti hides and meat are offering up to 100 
gp for every dead yeti brought back to Ten-Towns. 

A hunter named Mylbor Tafferac (neutral evil human 
gladiator with Survival +7) has been scouring the 
tundra for the Red Yeti—a yeti so terrifying and cruel 
that its fur is stained red with the blood of its kills. One 
night at a tavern, Mylbor bets the characters 300 gp that 
he'll find and kill the Red Yeti before they can. If the 
characters take the bet, the contest sparks excitement 
in taverns across Ten-Towns, leading to all sorts of 
side-betting. 

The characters’ search for the Red Yeti leads to the 
accidental discovery of the Lost Spire of Netheril. Only 
after the characters explore the lost spire and return to 
Ten-Towns do they discover the Red Yeti is dead—found 
and killed by the incomparable Mylbor Tafferac. 


WOLF TRIBE CANNIBALS 
Reghed Tribe Camp quest (see page 152) 


After several furriers and trappers disappear without a 
trace, a representative of the Wolf Tribe named Aluka 
(chaotic good werewolf in human form) comes to Ten- 
Towns with a warning: a Wolf Tribe camp under the 
command of an evil chieftain named Sangra Grisgir is 
resorting to cannibalism to survive. The furriers and 
trappers are merely the camp's latest victims, and more 
disappearances are likely to occur unless the cannibals 
are dealt with. Aluka gives directions to the camp, but 
she can't risk an all-out war within her tribe, hence her 
decision to let Ten-Towns and the characters deal with 
the problem. 

The Wolf Tribe cannibals have eaten all their sled 
dogs and their elderly. Even the children have been 
forced to resort to cannibalism to survive. If the char- 
acters act quickly, they can save the life of a lightfoot 
halfling trapper (commoner) named Honeybee Little- 
bucket, who has managed to stay alive by convincing 
the Wolf tribesfolk that she can catch snowshoe hares 
for them to eat. So far, Honeybee’s traps have caught 
nothing, and her time (and Chief Grisgir’s patience) is 
quickly running out. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


BEHIND Bars 

Revel's End quest (see page 154) 

Duvessa Shane, the speaker of Bryn Shander, is wor- 
ried about rumors that the Arcane Brotherhood has 
sent operatives to Ten-Towns. She suspects that Vaelish 
Gant, an Arcane Brotherhood wizard incarcerated at 
Revel’s End, might have information to share. Duvessa 
asks the characters to question Gant and find out what 
he knows about Arcane Brotherhood activity in Ten- 
Towns, offering a reward of 250 gp if they obtain useful 
information. She also gives the party a signed letter 
notifying Gant that, in exchange for his cooperation, 
Duvessa will petition the Lords’ Alliance for a reduction 
in Gant's sentence. If the characters get nothing out of 
the prisoner, Duvessa asks them to inform the prison 
warden that the Arcane Brotherhood might be plotting 
a jailbreak to free Gant. While there are no indications 
that a jailbreak is imminent, Duvessa avails herself of 
this opportunity to make Gant's life worse. 


A GOLIATH PROBLEM 
Skytower Shelter quest (see page 161) 


Kwan the Monolith Akannathi, a goliath warrior (see 
appendix C), left Skytower Shelter on a quest to find 
Oyaminartok but ended up in Ten-Towns, where she 
indulged her addiction to games of chance. She recently 
dishonored herself by resorting to thievery to cover her 
gambling debts. Now she wants to atone. She asks the 
characters to help her return to Skytower Shelter and 
convince Arn, chieftain of the Akannathi clan, to put 
aside grievances and unite the goliaths of Skytower 
Shelter and Wyrmdoom Crag toward a common pur- 
pose: bringing an end to the Frostmaiden’s everlasting 
winter. Kwan has a stolen figurine of wondrous power 
(silver raven) that she offers the characters as a reward 
for their help. 


DraGon Bone STEW 
Wyrmdoom Crag quest (see page 166) 


Dannika Graysteel, a scholar whom the characters 
might know from an earlier quest (see “Starting Quest: 
Nature Spirits,” page 25), asks the characters to 

bring her some white dragon bones. Dannika has ac- 
quired a recipe for a magical stew that imparts the same 
benefit as a potion of resistance (cold). She thinks she 
can make a good supply of the stew if she gets enough 
bones, which are the last ingredients she needs. Dan- 
nika has heard rumors that the bones of a white dragon 
can be found on a mountainside near Wyrmdoom Crag, 
and she suggests the characters travel there and be- 
seech the goliaths of the crag to part with a few of the 
bones. Dannika will give her first batch of stew to the 
characters for free (the equivalent of one potion each) if 
they help her. 

Although the recipe is genuine, Dannika doesn't 
realize that consuming dragon bone stew also causes 
madness, inflicting upon those who drink it the greed 
and paranoia of a dragon, which can be cured only by a 
greater restoration spell or similar magic. 


WILDERNESS ENCOUNTERS 


As the adventurers explore Icewind Dale, they might 
come upon friendly, indifferent, or hostile creatures in 
the wild. Such encounters can create suspense, rein- 
force the perilous nature of the setting, or create fun 
roleplaying opportunities. 

You decide if and when random encounters occur. Use 
them judiciously. One or two per game session is usu- 
ally enough. 

If you're not sure how often to schedule random en- 
counters in a 24-hour period, you can leave it to chance 
by rolling a d8 and consulting the Number of Wilder- 
ness Encounters table. 


NUMBER OF WILDERNESS ENCOUNTERS 

d8 Number of Encounters 
1 One encounter in the morning (dawn to noon) 
2 One encounter in the afternoon (noon to dusk) 
3 One encounter in the evening (dusk to midnight) 
4 One encounter at night (midnight to dawn) 

5-6 Two encounters; roll a d4 on this table to determine 

when each encounter occurs 
7-8 No random encounter 


RUNNING WILDERNESS ENCOUNTERS 


When you're ready to stage an encounter in the wilder- 
ness, roll two 20-sided dice of different colors. The first 
20 is the encounter die; the second d20 is the blizzard 
die. Use them as follows: 


Roll the encounter die and consult the Random Wil- 
derness Encounters table to determine what the char- 
acters come across. 

Roll the blizzard die and add 1. If this total is higher 
than the encounter die roll, the encounter takes place 
during a blizzard (see “Blizzards,” page 10). The 
blizzard starts 1d4 hours before the encounter is trig- 
gered and ends 1d4 hours after it is resolved. 


The Random Wilderness Encounters table is struc- 
tured so that certain monsters are more likely to be 
encountered in a blizzard than others. For example, at 
the two extremes, yetis are always encountered in a bliz- 
zard, whereas perytons almost never are. 

Some the random encounters are designed to test the 
characters in battle, while others encourage roleplaying. 
All of them paint a picture of Icewind Dale as a harsh 
realm full of a wide variety of creatures struggling to 
survive. An encounter’s difficulty—noted as Easy, Me- 
dium, Hard, or Deadly in the Difficulty column of the 
Random Wilderness Encounters table—assumes the 
characters are 4th, 5th, or 6th level. It's okay for some 
encounters to be easy and others to be hard or deadly. 
Easy encounters build players’ confidence; hard and 
deadly encounters force players to weigh their charac- 
ters’ options and think outside the box. If the characters 
find themselves in a tough spot, give the players time to 
try to find a way out of it, encourage them to be creative, 
and award inspiration when appropriate. 


RANDOM WILDERNESS ENCOUNTERS 


d20 Encounter Difficulty 
1 Yeti Varies 
2 Goliath werebear Easy 
3 Crag cats Easy l 
4 Coldlight walker Medium 
5 Ice troll Hard 
6 Frost druid and friends Medium 
7 Chardalyn berserkers Hard 
8 Frost giant riding a mammoth Deadly 
9 Battlehammer dwarves Easy 
10 Arveiaturace (ancient white dragon) Deadly 
11 Snowy owlbear Easy 
12 Gnolls Medium 
13 Orcs of the Many-Arrows tribe Hard 
14 Goliath party Medium 
15 Chwinga Easy 
16 Awakened beast Easy 
17 Icewind kobolds Easy 
18 Humans Easy 
19 Herd of beasts Easy 
20 Perytons Medium 

ARVEIATURACE 


Known to Ten-Towners as the White Wyrm, Arveia- 
turace is an ancient white dragon that lairs atop the 
Reghed Glacier. She remains the most fearsome preda- 
tor in Icewind Dale, although age has clouded her eyes 
with cataracts, limiting the range of her vision to 60 feet. 
Her blindsight, hearing, and sense of smell are undimin- 
ished, however. Fortunately for the residents of the dale, 
she prefers the taste of reindeer, walrus, and polar bear 
flesh to that of humanoids. The dragon has'a healthy 
respect for humanoids and has never threatened Ten- 
Towns directly, though it wouldn't take much to provoke 
her into doing so. 

At one time, Arveiaturace served a wizard named 
Meltharond, whose frozen corpse remains strapped to 
a saddle on the dragon's back. Arveiaturace has never 
acknowledged his death and still speaks to his body as 
if he were alive. He was, while he lived, her only friend 
and confidant. 

Running the Encounter. If this encounter takes 
place during a blizzard, the dragon is buried under 
heavy snow, waiting out the storm with her outstretched 
wings lying flat at her sides. Her rider is visible above 
the surface, looking like a frozen, desiccated corpse 
sitting in the snow. If the characters are close enough to 
touch the corpse, they're already on the dragon's back. 
If they attack or otherwise disturb Meltharond’s corpse, 
the dragon tries to shake them off. Each creature on 
the dragon's back when she rises out of the snow must 
succeed on a DC 22 Dexterity saving throw or fall prone 
in an unoccupied space on the ground within 5 feet of 
her. The blizzard’s wind keeps her from flying, so the 
characters’ best hope of survival is to run away and lose 
themselves in the storm. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 
105 


THE White Wyam ano Her Mysterious River 


ARVEIATURACE 


If this encounter doesn’t occur during a blizzard, 
the characters see Arveiaturace in the sky or on the 
ground. If she’s on the ground, she’s eating a polar bear 
or a herd of reindeer that she has killed with her breath 
weapon. If this encounter occurs on the Sea of Moving 
Ice, the characters see the dragon erupt from the water 
nearby with a dead walrus in her mouth; then she flies 
back to the Reghed Glacier to devour her meal. As long 
as the characters keep their distance, the White Wyrm 
ignores them. 


AWAKENED BEAST 

The frost druids of Icewind Dale use awaken spells to 
imbue native beasts with an Intelligence score of 10 and 
the ability to speak Common or Druidic. The druids use 
these awakened beasts as spies and messengers. Roll a 
d8 and consult the Awakened Beast Encounter table to 
determine what kind of awakened beast the characters 
encounter, 

Running the Encounter. An awakened beast looks 
the same as its normal counterpart, except for a hint or 
gleam of intelligence in its eyes. It can be neutral or evil, 
at your discretion. An awakened beast’s task is to spy 
on the characters and ascertain where they might be 
headed, then report back to its master—the frost druid 
who awakened it. This druid might be nearby or many 
miles away (your choice), For more information about 
frost druids, see appendix C. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


The awakened beast that the characters encounter 
is smart enough to stay out of harm's way. If the beast 
is a dangerous predator such as a bear, tiger, or wolf, 
it keeps its distance from the adventuring party so as 
not to provoke the characters into attacking it. If it is 
harmed, the awakened beast retreats to a safe distance. 
If it’s cornered and doesn't like its chances of survival, it 
bargains or pleads for its life. An awakened beast knows 
its territory well and can point characters to nearby lo- 
cations of interest, food sources, or safe places to rest in 
exchange for its safety. 

An awakened bea: n be persuaded to help the 
characters, and perhaps even join the party for a time 
Convincing a neutral awakened beast to travel with 
the party requires an offering of food or shelter accom 
panied by a successful DC 10 Charisma (Persuasion) 
group check. If the group check succeeds, the beast re- 
mains with the party for 24 hours, after which the char 
acters can repeat the group check to extend the duration 
another 24 hours. An evil awakened beast accepts any 
offer to join the party (no check required), hoping to 
gather more information about the characters or lead 
them into a trap. 

If asked to give its name, the awakened beast either 
comes up with a name on the fly or adopts a suggested 
name that it likes. If you're having trouble coming up 
with a voice for the awakened beast, try mimicking the 
speech of a cartoon character or a famous actor. 


AWAKENED BEAST ENCOUNTER 
d8 Awakened Beast 
Polar bear 
Arctic fox (see appendix C) 
Snowshoe hare (see appendix C) 
Snowy owl 
Reindeer (use the elk stat block) with glow-in-the- 
dark antlers that emit dim light in a 10-foot radius 
6 Woolly rhinoceros 
7 Saber-toothed tiger 
8 Wolf 


ween a 


BATTLEHAMMER DWARVES 
The shield dwarves of Clan Battlehammer have iron 
mines throughout the valley that extends from the base 
of Kelvin’s Cairn. The characters cross paths with a 
group of 1d6 + 2 shield dwarf prospectors or fishers 
wearing cold weather clothing, goggles, and snowshoes. 
The dwarves also have backpacks to hold their bedrolls, 
mess kits, and rations. They carry fishing tackle or 
miner's picks, as appropriate. The dwarves are head- 
ing home with a sleigh loaded with rock samples (if 
they're prospectors) or a rack of knucklehead trout (if 
they're fishers). 

Running the Encounter. The dwarves are eager 
to get back to the valley and indifferent toward adven- 
turers. A character can shift the dwarves’ attitude to 
friendly by speaking to them in Dwarvish. Although the 
dwarves are grim, which is understandable given the 
inclement weather, they're neither violent nor spoiling 
for a fight. 

If a stat block becomes necessary, the dwarves are 
lawful good scouts, with these changes: 


Dwarf Traits: They have a walking speed of 25 feet 
and darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. They speak 
Common and Dwarvish. They have advantage on 
saving throws against poison and resistance against 
poison damage. 

They wield handaxes and light crossbows instead of 
shortswords and longbows. 


Here are some dwarf names, in case you need them: 
Bevris, Bolhild, Darrak, Dworic, Fallthra, Gardain, 
Harbek, Holst, Jarana, Kalanor, Morgrail, Nora, Nordak, 
Olunt, and Ulf. 


CHARDALYN BERSERKERS 

The characters encounter 1d4 + 1 chardalyn berserk- 
ers (see appendix C), their flesh ravaged by frostbite. 
Obsession with chardalyn has made these humans 
psychotic, They go wherever Auril’s cruel winds guide 
them, crave violence, and fight to the bitter end. 

The berserkers retain vestiges of their former lives, in- 
cluding the thick clothing they wore as Reghed nomads, 
but their garments are torn and in need of repair. 

Frostmaiden’s Ring. One berserker wears a magic 
ring made of ice on one finger. The characters notice 
this ring if they search the dead berserker for treasure. 
Inscribed on it is a tiny, six-pointed snowflake—the 
Frostmaiden’s symbol. If the ring is taken from the 
dead berserker, the ring disappears and all creatures 


within 100 feet of it are engulfed in swirling snow and 
teleported to the icy path that leads to the Cave of the 
Berserkers (see page 124). There is no saving throw to 
resist this teleportation effect. 


CHWINGA 

Chwingas are elemental spirits that mean no harm. 
They adapt quickly to almost any natural setting and 
occasionally offer supernatural gifts to those they glom 
onto. But a blizzard can drive a chwinga insane, causing 
it to behave unpredictably until the blizzard passes. 

The characters encounter a chwinga (see appendix 
C) that makes its presence known by springing out of 
a snowdrift or appearing from behind a frozen bush. It 
looks like a spindly, snow-white doll wearing a decora- 
tive mask. In its tiny hands it holds a frozen berry, which 
it offers to the characters. 

Running the Encounter. If the chwinga is sane, the 
frozen berry is a harmless gift—a friendly offering with 
a sweet taste. If the chwinga is insane, the frozen berry 
is bitter, and a character who eats it takes 1 poison dam- 
age and must succeed on a DC 8 Constitution saving 
throw or be poisoned for the next hour. 

If this isn't the characters’ first random encounter with 
a chwinga in Icewind Dale, you can substitute another 
gift for the frozen berry, such as a handful of snowflakes 
that won't melt for 24 hours or a beautifully carved 
icicle that melts like normal ice. If the chwinga is mad, 
it might blow the snowflakes into a character's eyes to 
cause temporary blindness or stab a character with the 
icicle for 1 piercing damage. 

After imparting its gift, a sane chwinga behaves as 
described in appendix C. An insane chwinga disappears 
into the snow, then follows the characters and tries to 
steal little objects weighing 1 pound or less from them. 
(Stolen items are then hidden in the snow and probably 
lost.) Whenever it tries to steal something from a charac- 
ter, a chwinga must make a Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) 
check. If the check result exceeds the character's pas- 
sive Wisdom (Perception) score, the chwinga snatches 
the item and disappears without the theft being noticed. 
On a failed check, the character catches the chwinga in 
the act, foiling the theft, whereupon the chwinga tries to 
hide or flee. If it escapes, it keeps coming back to hurl 
tiny snowballs at the character who thwarted it. 


COLDLIGHT WALKER 
In the dark gloom of winter, this coldlight walker (see 
appendix C) stands out like a beacon, Characters can 
see its light long before they can discern its form. The 
walker doesn't care that its light betrays its presence. As 
soon as it detects the characters, it closes in for the kill. 
Running the Encounter. The coldlight walker is the 
undead remnant of a Reghed nomad or the shambling 
corpse of an unfortunate Ten-Towner who was cast na- 
ked into the tundra as a sacrifice to Auril and perished 
from exposure (see “Sacrifices to Auril,” page 21). 
If this encounter takes place during a blizzard, 
the characters experience the added terror of the 
Frostmaiden’s whisper on the wind, telling them, “This 
is the doom that awaits you all. This is the fate of any 
who dare to claim what is mine. Behold the final light.” 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 
107 


108 


Frost Giant RIDING A MAMMOTH 


CRAG CATS 

Roll a d4 to determine how many crag cats (see appen- 
dix C) the characters encounter. During a blizzard, the 
crag cats rely on their hearing and sense of smell to 
track the characters while staying outside their prey's 
range of visibility. 

Running the Encounter. Make one Dexterity (Stealth) 
check for all the crag cats involved in the encounter and 
compare the result to the passive (Wisdom) Perception 
scores of the party. Any character whose score equals 
or exceeds the crag cats’ check result is not surprised 
when the cats attack. 

If one or two crag cats are encountered, they stalk 
the characters but keep their distance, hoping to pick off 
individuals who becomes separated from the rest of the 
party. These crag cats aren't brave or foolish enough to 
attack a group that outnumbers them. 

If three or four crag cats are encountered, their num- 
bers embolden them. They attack the adventuring party 
like a well-coordinated pack, focusing their attacks on 
the party member who looks the weakest and least ar- 
mored. If two or more crag cats die, the others retreat. 


FROST DRUID AND FRIENDS 

A frost druid (see appendix C) approaches the charac- 
ters in the form of a mountain goat or a snowy owl. The 
frost druid, who is human and can be of any gender, is 

joined by three creatures that are beneficiaries of the 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


druid’s awaken spell. These awakened beasts and plants 
serve as the druid’s companions and spies, and they 
share the druid’s evil disposition. Roll a d4 and consult 
the Frost Druid Friends table to determine each crea- 
ture, or just roll once and assume all the creatures are 
the same kind of beast or plant. (It’s okay if multiples of 
the same kind of creature are present, since the druid 
might favor a certain kind of beast or plant.) 

Running the Encounter, The frost druid aims to 
kill the characters or send them scurrying back to Ten- 
Towns. If the druid is killed or captured, its awakened 
companions behave as intelligent humans would when 
faced with the loss of their leader: either their morale 
breaks and they flee, or they become enraged and fight 
to the bitter end. 

One of the frost druid’s prepared spells is moonbeam, 
which can reveal the true form of any character who has 
the Doppelganger secret (see appendix B). 


Frost DRUID FRIENDS 
d4 Encounter 

1 Awakened tree (coniferous only) 

2 Awakened mountain goat (see appendix C) 

3 Awakened reindeer (use the elk stat block) with glow- 
in-the-dark antlers that emit dim light in a 10-foot 
radius 

4 Awakened walrus (see appendix C) 


Frost GIANT RIDING A MAMMOTH 

Even a raging blizzard can't conceal the presence of a 
frost giant riding a mammoth, as the earth rumbles 
and trembles with every one of the mammoth’s heavy 
footfalls. 

Running the Encounter. The frost giant has come 
down from the Spine of the World mountains to hunt for 
wild game on the tundra or on the shores of the Sea of 
Moving Ice. If the characters hide in the snow and keep 
their distance, the giant and its mount continue unim- 
peded, and the encounter ends without bloodshed. 

Characters who confront the giant and the mammoth 
are in for the fight of their lives, for the evil giant is 
happy to claim their heads as trophies as well as their 
treasures. In addition to its greataxe, the giant carries 
a large net that it uses to catch walruses and seals, as 
well as an enormous lance made from a sharpened 
mast that it uses to spear creatures while it is mounted. 
This lance deals 25 (3d12 + 6) piercing damage in the 
giant's hands. 

A character who speaks Giant can use an action to try 
to change the frost giant’s attitude from hostile to indif- 
ferent, either by offering it treasure worth at least 1,000 
gp or by convincing it that the party is on a quest that 
would benefit frost giants in some way. For example, 
the frost giant considers Arveiaturace (see page 105) a 
natural enemy and might spare adventurers who claim 
to be hunting the great white dragon. The giant might 
also allow characters to pass unmolested if they claim to 
be on a quest for the spirits of Jarlmoot (see page 137). 
Changing the giant's attitude in this way requires a 
successful DC 17 Charisma (Deception or Persuasion) 
check in addition to a sufficient bribe or a convincing 
story. If the check fails, subsequent checks made by the 
characters to change its attitude have disadvantage. 


GNOLLS 

Ravenous and horrifying are the gnolls that prowl Ice- 
wind Dale. Only their small numbers keep them from 
ravaging Ten-Towns, gutting its residents, and wearing 
their torn-out ribeages as hats. The characters encoun- 
ter a hungry pack of 1d4 + 3 gnolls. They cackle with 
glee as they move in for the kill. 

These gnolls come from the Cackling Chasm (see 
page 121), which provides them with shelter. Gnolls 
that are captured can lead the characters back to their 
Jair, where they hope to gang up on the characters after 
juring them there. 

Running the Encounter. The gnolls are forced to 
range far and wide in search of food. Their hunger over- 
rides their reason, such that they fight until being cap- 
tured or killed. Any element of surprise the gnolls might 
gain by attacking the characters during a blizzard is lost 
because the creatures can't contain their excitement. 
Their anticipatory cackling betrays them. 


GOLIATH PARTY 

The characters come across four goliath warriors (see 
appendix C). They stride through the snow in single file, 
spaced about 10 feet apart. 


Running the Encounter. These goliaths are either 
members of the Akannathi clan from Skytower Shelter 
(Gee page 161) or members of the Thuunlakalaga clan 
from Wyrmdoom Crag (see page 166). The Skytower 
goliaths are indifferent toward the characters, but the 
Wyrmdoom goliaths are friendly. 

The goliaths might be involved in a quest, a scavenger 
hunt, or an elaborate dare. They might also be looking 
for Oyaminartok (see the “Goliaths” entry in appendix 
C) or searching for a friend who got separated from 
them in a blizzard. They won't attack characters out of 
hand, but Wyrmdoom goliaths might challenge one or 
more characters to an athletic contest. If the characters 
accept this challenge, roll on the Athletic Contests ta- 
ble to determine what game the goliaths propose. The 
goliaths are mostly interested in bragging rights, but 
they're open to other possible rewards. For example, the 
characters might propose that the losing team carry the 
winning team’s gear for a day. 


ATHLETIC CONTESTS 
d4 Contest 

1 Tugo’ War. Two teams grip opposite ends of a 
'50-foot-long rope: the goliaths on one side, the ad- 
venturing party on the other. The teams need not 
have the same number of members, and the goliaths 
have no objection to being outnumbered. Ifthe 
sum of the characters’ combined Strength scores 
is higher than the sum of the goliaths’ combined 
Strength scores, the characters win the tug o' war. If 
the sums are the same, the contest ends in a draw. 
Otherwise, the goliaths win. 

2 Hand Standing. Each participant must do a hand- 
stand and hold that position for as long as possible. 
The contest ends when the majority of one team 
can't hold their handstands and either give up or fall 
over. Resolve the contest using DC 10 Strength (Ath- 
letics) group checks: each team repeats the group 
check until one team fails it. 

3 Shrub Pulling. Two frozen shrubs of roughly equal 
size are located nearby, and each team picks a cham- 
pion. Whichever champion uproots their shrub first 
wins the contest for their team. The champions make 
‘one or more simultaneous DC 20 Strength (Athlet- 
ics) checks; the first one to succeed wins. If both 
succeed at the same time, the one who rolled the 
highest uproots their shrub first. If both succeed and 
their rolls are the same, the contest ends in a draw. 

4 Boulder Roll. Two 10-foot-diameter boulders are dug 
up, and a finish line is drawn in the snow 50 feet 
away from them. The first team to roll its boulder 
across the finish line wins. Resolve the contest with 
a series of simultaneous DC 15 Strength (Athletics) 
group checks. With each successful check, a team 
rolls its boulder 10 feet closer to the finish line. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


109 


Reinocer Hero 


GOLIATH WEREBEAR 
The characters encounter a goliath werebear (see 
appendix C) in polar bear form, galumphing through 
the snow, belly-surfing down a snowy hill, or breaking 
through the ice on a frozen pond to catch a fish. If this 
encounter occurs during a blizzard, the characters 
might come upon the bear in a cave or other shelter. The 
werebear is either Oyaminartok herself (see the “Goli. 
aths” entry in appendix C) or one of her kin. 

Running the Encounter. If the characters look like 
they need help, the werebear assumes hybrid form and 
greets them in a friendly manner. It has no clothing or 
manufactured weapons nearby, so it prefers its hybrid 
form over its true goliath form. 

The werebear is happy to render assistance with no 
strings attached, serving as a wilderness guide until it 
feels like the characters can get by on their own. If the 
characters insist on repaying its kindness, the werebear 
urges them to seek out and destroy the chardalyn ber 
serkers in their lair (see “Cave of the Berserkers,” page 
124). The werebear understands how chardalyn can 
become corrupted by demonic magic and sees the ber 
serkers as irredeemable victims of this corruption. Put 
ting the berserkers out of their misery will help make 
Icewind Dale a safer place. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


HERD OF BEASTS 
The characters come across a herd of beasts that 

is struggling to survive the endless winter. In clear 
weather, the characters can spot a herd from hundreds 
of feet away, even in the dark. If encountered in a bliz- 
zard, the beasts are hunkered down in the snow and 
harder to see. To determine what kind of herd is encoun- 
tered, roll a d6 and consult either the Sea of Moving Ice 
Herds table or the Tundra Herds table, as appropriate 

Running the Encounter. At the start of the encounter, 
the herd is indifferent toward the characters and poses 
no threat to them. If the characters threaten the herd, 

a single bull might attack them while the rest of the 
herd flees. 

Ten-Towners and Reghed nomads oppose the mass 
slaughter of beast herds, since healthy herds are critical 
to the survival of other species. If the characters are of a 
mind to slaughter beasts indiscriminately, NPCs travel 
ing with them might remind them of this fact. 

Wherever large herds are encountered, characters can 
expect to find humans as well. Hunters in canoes pur- 
sue herds of killer whales, seals, and walruses on the 
ea of Moving Ice, while trappers, furriers, and Reghed 
nomads follow herds on land. After the characters en 
counter a herd, you can stage a subsequent encounter 
with a group of these humans (see “Humans” in the next 
section) 


Sea OF MovinG Ice HERDS 
d6 Herd 
1 3d6 killer whales 
2-4 6d6 seals (see appendix C) 
5-6 4d6 walruses (see appendix C) 


TuNpRA HERDS 
dé Herd 
1-2 4d6elk 
3-4 3d6 mammoths 
5-6 5d6 reindeer (use the elk stat block); one out of every 
six has glow-in-the-dark antlers that emit dim light in 
a 10-foot radius. 


HUMANS 

To withstand the extremely cold temperatures and 
vicious winds, humans of the Far North must wrap 
themselves in cold weather clothing, exposing as little 
of their flesh to the elements as possible. They must also 
contend with monstrous threats unique to this realm. 

If this encounter takes place in the tundra, the char- 
acters come across a scouting party of 1d6 + 4 Reghed 
nomads (tribal warriors of the Bear, Elk, Tiger, or Wolf 
tribe) or a similarly sized group of trappers and furriers 
(scouts) out of Ten-Towns. If the characters are on the 
Sea of Moving Ice, they encounter a party of 1d6 + 4 
hunters (tribal warriors) on an ice floe or in canoes, 
hunting seals, walruses, or whales. 

If you need impromptu names for these NPCs, pull 
from the following list: Affra, Alif, Amina, Brynjar, Chen, 
Eremon, Hekili, Hishi, lona, Kamakani, Koamalu, 

Ling, Margrath, Marrak, Nawra, Noboru, Omolara, 
Otilia, Quan, Saladin, Shatha, Sigurd, Stalvin, Udo, 
and Yngvild. 

Running the Encounter. Friendly trappers and 
furriers from Ten-Towns are happy to share the follow- 
ing tidbits: 


+ “Perytons swoop down from the mountains to hunt. If 
you catch sight of one, hide under the snow and hope 
it didn’t see you.” 

“If you eat the heart of an ice troll, you'll gain 

the troll’s power for a day. But you must eat the 
whole heart.” 

“Wanna know the safest way to explore the Sea of 
Moving Ice? Visit Angajuk’s Bell on the coast and 
catch the ride of a lifetime!” 

“If you see a cloaked elf with charcoal-colored skin, 
purple eyes, and a pair of gleaming scimitars, for the 
love of Sune, don't attack ‘im!” 


Hunters, though territorial, tend to be indifferent to- 
ward strangers. They trade with folk from the mainland 
on occasion but prefer to be left alone otherwise. 

If the characters encounter Reghed nomads, deter- 
mine which tribe the nomads belong to and their initial 
attitude toward the characters by rolling on the Reghed 
Tribes table. You can make a hostile encounter with 
Reghed nomads tougher by adding more powerful tribe 
members to the group (see the “Reghed Nomads” sec- 
tion in appendix C). 


Characters with the Outlander background have 
advantage on ability checks to improve the attitudes of 
hunters or Reghed nomads. Before any such check can 
be made, however, a character must give the hunters or 
nomads something of use (provisions or pipeweed, for 
example) or honor them or their chieftain with a gift. 

If the characters change the attitude of a group of 
Reghed nomads from indifferent to friendly, the nomads 
invite the party to their nearest campsite (see “Reghed 
Tribe Camp,” page 152), where the nomads provide 
food, drink, and shelter. 


REGHED TRIBES 


d20 ‘Tribe Starting Attitude 
1-5 Bear Indifferent 
6-13 Elk Indifferent 
14-17 Tiger Hostile 
18-20 Wolf Hostile 
Ice TROLL 


A hostile ice troll (see appendix C) wanders the dark 
tundra in search of prey. 

Running the Encounter. The troll lacks guile and 
takes no precautions as it lumbers toward what it 
assumes will be an easy kill, undaunted by blizzard 
conditions and hungry enough to risk whatever fire the 
characters hurl in its direction. 


ICEWIND KOBOLDS 

This encounter is with 2d4 Icewind kobolds (see ap- 
pendix C). They are either looking for a white dragon to 
worship or marching toward Ten-Towns, hoping to find 
food and shelter. 

Running the Encounter, If this encounter takes place 
during a blizzard, the kobolds are huddled around a 
small, sputtering campfire inside a hastily built igloo, 
Otherwise, the kobolds are trudging through the snow, 
bundled in shoddy cloaks made from stitched-together 
weasel pelts and using their javelins to help them negoti- 
ate the frozen ground ahead of them. 

If they're lost, the kobolds might ask the characters 
for directions. If outnumbered and threatened, they 
offer payment in exchange for safe passage. Other- 
wise, they try to rob the characters of their provisions 
and treasure. 

Treasure. Each kobold carries a pouch containing 
5 sp and 5 cp. The kobolds hope these coins will be 
enough to appease the dragon they seek to serve or to 
pay for food and shelter in Ten-Towns. At your discre 
tion, one of the kobolds might also be holding a potion of 
healing or some other common magic item. 


Orcs OF THE MANY-ARROWS TRIBE 

Of the orc tribes living in the mountains, the most pow- 
erful by far is the Many-Arrows tribe. At various times 
in recent history, the great chieftains of this tribe have 
grown powerful enough to unite the orcs under the 
Many-Arrows banner. Some of these leaders have led 
the orcs through times of great peace, while others have 
used their power to conquer and destroy in the name of 
Gruumsh, the orc god of slaughter. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


Snowy Ow. sear 


This encounter is with an ore war chief, who leads a 
hunting party that includes an ore eye of Gruumsh, six 
ores, and a half-ogre. Painted in dry blood on the eye 
of Gruumsh's shield is the symbol of the Many-Arrows 
tribe: a crude skull impaled by three arrows. 

Running the Encounter. These orcs have come down 
from the mountains in search of food to feed themselves 
and other members of their tribe. Given the scarcity 
of food sources, they regard wayward travelers as fair 
game. Those they kill or capture are hauled back to the 
mountains as meat to feed the tribe. 

Despite their hunger and desperation, these orcs 
can be reasoned with. Their initial attitude toward the 
characters is hostile, but any character can try to come 
to terms with them by offering the orcs something they 
can't get by simply killing the characters and taking 
their stuff. This includes, but isn’t limited to, a song 
written to honor the chieftain of the Many-Arrows tribe, 
a drawing of Gruumsh (the orc god of slaughter) killing 
Corellon (the head of the elven pantheon), or directions 
to an alternative food source, Characters who speak Ore 
while conducting the negotiation have advantage on abil- 
ity checks made to improve the orcs’ attitude toward the 
party, as does a character with the Orc Stone secret who 
uses the stone to summon an orc spirit. Characters who 
speak Elvish or Dwarvish during the negotiation have 
disadvantage on such checks. If a worthy offering is 
made as part of the negotiation, the DC of ability checks 
made to improve the orcs’ attitude is 15; otherwise, 
the DC is 20. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


PERYTONS 

Two perytons—a mated pair—have come down from the 
Spine of the World mountains to hunt. They're looking 
to rip out the heart of a humanoid and take it back to 
their nest, where the female peryton must consume the 
heart to reproduce. 

Running the Encounter. The perytons’ keen eyesight 
enables them to spot prey from great heights, while the 
dark sky makes them harder to see, Characters who 
have a passive Wisdom (Perception) score of 13 or lower 
are surprised when the perytons attack. 

As an action, a peryton can rip out the heart of a dead 
humanoid within 5 feet of it. Once they obtain such a 
prize, the perytons disengage from battle and return to 
their nest. The perytons won't break off their attack until 
they get a heart. 


SNOWY OWLBEAR 
A snowy owlbear combines the features of a snowy owl 
and a polar bear (see appendix C), This specimen is a 
ferocious, full-grown adult. Blizzards and cold weather 
don't concern it. Only a character who has the Owlbear 
Whisperer secret (see appendix B) can befriend it. 
Running the Encounter. The snowy owlbear is hun- 
gry enough to kill and eat humanoids, though it prefers 
fish and the flesh of hares, foxes, walruses, seals, and 
pack animals such as mules and axe beaks. If the char- 
acters toss food at it, the owlbear eats that food before 
chasing after more elusive prey. 


Map 2.1; Icewino DALE Locations 


Ifa character coaxes the owlbear into becoming the 
party mascot, you can tax the characters in gold to 
keep their pet fed and happy. The cost of feeding the 
owlbear is 9 gp per day, which is based on it eating the 
equivalent of three pigs (the Player's Handbook values a 
pig at 3 gp). 


YETI 

This encounter always occurs during a blizzard. Roll 

a d6 and consult the Yeti Encounter table to determine 
what the characters encounter, or choose an encounter 
that you like. 


YETI ENCOUNTER 


d6 Encounter Difficulty 
1-3 1d4 yeti Medium 
4-5 1 abominable yeti Hard 

6 1 yeti tyke (see appendix C) Easy 


Yetis and abominable yetis like to hide under the snow 
with only their pale blue eyes visible. They have advan- 
tage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks made to hide because 
of their Snow Camouflage ability, and their keen sense 
of smell lets them detect prey they can’t see through the 
blowing snow. 

If the characters encounter a yeti tyke, assume it ei- 
ther ran away from home or got separated from its par- 
ents and is lost in the blizzard. See appendix C for more 
information to help you roleplay this monster. 


À 
‘aves of Hunge! 
SEURS 


Running the Encounter. To determine which party 
members are surprised, have each character make a 
Wisdom (Perception) check contested by the yetis’ Dex- 
terity (Stealth) check. Characters can use their passive 
Wisdom (Perception) scores instead of making the 
check. If multiple yetis are present, make one check— 
with advantage—for all of them. 

After gorging themselves on the humanoids they kill, 
adult yetis and abominable yetis like to bite off the vic- 
tims’ heads and keep them as trophies. 


PLACES OF INTEREST 


The remainder of this chapter describes places of in- 
terest throughout Icewind Dale. Map 2.1 notes their 
locations, although you can move them elsewhere to 
suit the needs of your campaign. Although characters 
can stumble upon a location accidentally while traveling 
overland, they are more likely to be guided to a location 
by a tall tale (see the Tall Tales in Ten-Towns table on 
page 102) or a quest. 

The adventure locations that follow are balanced for 
characters of at least 4th level. Lower-level characters 
can survive the encounters in these locations if they're 
cautious and manage their resources well, although 
they should be prepared to flee or hide when they find 
themselves out of their depth. Characters of 6th level or 
higher will face few real challenges, but you can soften 
them up and deplete their resources by staging random 
encounters as they travel to and from a given location. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


u3 


114. 


Map 2.2: ANGasux's Bert 


ANGAJUK’S BELL 


Swimming in the frigid waters is the legendary Angajuk, 
an old awakened sperm whale with a boat on its back. 
Most sperm whales live to be seventy years old, but 
Angajuk has been plying the waters of the Sea of Mov- 
ing Ice for two hundred years. Throughout its life, the 
whale has faced its share of trouble, including near-fatal 
encounters with Auril’s roc, which left scars along the 
whale’s pectoral fins and body. 

Angajuk is famous among Ten-Towners. Most people 
leave it alone, knowing that the whale is the benefi- 
ciary of powerful magic, but uncaring hunters see the 
whale as a source of ambergris, which is a valuable 
commodity. 

Angajuk was once the companion of a druid named 
Anga, who cast an awaken spell on Angajuk to give the 
whale sentience and intelligence. Not much is known 
about Anga, but those who befriend Angajuk can learn 
about its beloved companion. 

Characters might learn about Angajuk by overhearing 
a rumor in Ten-Towns (see “Tall Tales in Ten-Towns,” 
page 101) or by agreeing to help a whale oil merchant 
(see “Whale Oil Acquisition,” page 103). Angajuk is 
one of the safest ways to get to Auril’s island, because 
the sperm whale can travel beneath the water's surface, 
avoiding Auril’s spies. When the whale is submerged, 

a magic bubble surrounds the boat to protect those 
riding in it. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


Angajuk periodically visits an anchorage off the 
coastline, a rocky arch formed by the action of tidal 
waters, and can be summoned there by ringing a bell 
attached to the pier. Thick ice covers this rock forma- 
tion, extending all the way to the shore. On the shore 
nearby is Anga's old stone cabin, which has weathered 
time's passage. 


ANGAJUK’s BELL LOCATIONS 
The following locations are keyed to map 2.2. 


Al. FROZEN PIER 

A rowboat is stuck in the ice, trapped against a 10-foot- 
long wooden pier. The pier is ice-glazed and slippery. 
The characters don't need the boat, since they can sim- 
ply walk across the ice to reach Angajuk's Bell (area A3). 


A2. STONE CABIN 


A small, domed cabin faces the bay. A bloated door cov- 
ered in ice and dormant barnacles hangs slightly ajar on 
rusted hinges. 


Anga once lived in this small stone cabin near the pier, 
which made it convenient for her to visit Angajuk. The 
place has been vacant for decades. 

Thick rime coats every surface and object inside the 
cabin, including a bed draped in a thick knit blanket. 
Beside the bed, a small hearth holds a precious store of 
firewood. The firewood is infested with worms that have 
eaten away at the tender parts of the wood, but it’s safe 
to burn. There is enough wood to fuel a nightly fire for 
three days, and it is stored in six bundles that weigh 30 
pounds each. 


A3. BELL 
A 1foot-diameter copper bell dangles from a 10-foot-tall 
wooden pole attached to this short wooden pier. The bell 
comes with a rope and clapper. Ringing the bell soon 
attracts three giant vultures, who think that the sound 
signals mealtime or the presence of prey. They attack 
unless the characters offer meat to satisfy them. 

Angajuk Arrives. It takes 30 minutes for Angajuk 
the sperm whale (see appendix C) to arrive after the 
bell is rung, accompanied by 1d4 harmless narwhals or 
dolphins. Angajuk has an Intelligence of 10 and speaks 
Common. Its deep, resonant voice carries a slight echo. 
Once the whale appears, characters must persuade it 
to be of service (see “Earning Angajuk’s Trust” below). 
Otherwise, it submerges and departs after a few min- 
utes. If the whale is befriended and the characters com- 
municate their desired destination to it, Angajuk takes 
them where they want to go provided the location is on 
or in the Sea of Moving Ice. The awakened whale knows 
the location of the Frostmaiden’s island and, despite 
some close encounters with Auril’s roc, is willing to 
travel there. 

Angajuk's boat can hold up to eight Medium creatures 
and their gear, and up to 1,000 pounds of cargo. 


Angajuk’s Bubble. To ensure safe transport and to 
partake in undersea research, Anga designed a boat 
and strapped it to Angajuk’s back. As the whale sub- 
merges, a bubble appears around the boat, enabling 
its passengers to breathe comfortably underwater. 
Creatures in the boat can exit the bubble whenever they 
want, but nothing can pass through the bubble from out- 
side it. The bubble is magical but can't be dispelled. 


A4, HOLE IN THE ICE 

When summoned, Angajuk surfaces through this hole in 
the ice, expels a gush of seawater from its blowhole, and 
settles itself at a height that enables people to climb up 
and into the boat attached to its back. 


EARNING ANGAJUK’S TRUST 


Earning passage on the whale’s back requires more 
than just ringing the bell. Characters must earn Anga- 
juk’s trust and can do so in any of the following ways: 


Offering an Octopus. Angajuk says it would be happy to 
provide transportation if the characters catch an octo- 
pus for it to eat. Octopi can be caught by fishing off the 
pier, but any hint of light deters them. Use the fishing 
rules (page 11), only replace the knucklehead trout 
with an octopus. 

Befriending Its Comrades. Angajuk lives alongside 
other sea creatures, including narwhals and dolphins. 
The characters can lure one of these creatures to the 
surface with an offering of food (such as a fish) and 

befriend it with a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Animal 

Handling) check, which pleases Angajuk. 


Fending Off Hunters. If the characters are having trou- 
ble finding another way to earn Angajuk’s trust, use 
the “Whale Hunt” encounter below. Defending the 
whale against these hunters earns its trust. 


WHALE HUNT 


This is an optional encounter you can use to help the 
characters earn Angajuk’s trust. 

Hunters from distant Waterdeep have come to the 
Sea of Moving Ice to harvest ambergris, a precious sub- 
stance formed in sperm whales’ stomachs and typically 
harvested from a dead whale’s remains. Although it 
smells foul when initially exposed to air, the scent grows 
sweet over time. As such, ambergris is popular among 
perfumers as well as mages who use the greasy sub- 
stance in various arcane rituals. The raw form of amber- 
gris is a waxy lump approximately 2 feet long. 


THE WHALE HUNTERS 
Five whale hunters (neutral evil human thugs) were 
staying at the Black-Bearded Brother, a tavern in Bre- 
men, when they learned about Angajuk’s Bell. The 
hunters arrive shortly after the characters but before the 
whale’s arrival. They wear cold weather clothing and 
have brought four casks of oil with them. They intend to 
pour the oil through the hole in the ice, contaminating 
the water around Angajuk’s Bell and poisoning the crea- 
tures in it. 

The leader of the hunters, an older gray-haired man 
named Jendren Uruth, tries to recruit the characters, of- 
fering each of them an equal share of “the take.” Jendren 


5 $ 
ANGAJUK TAKES ADVENTURERS ON AN UNGERSEA TOUR 


16 


is not an honest man, but his fight is against Angajuk, 
not a well-armed party of adventurers. If the characters 
stand between him and his prey, however, Jendren tries 
to intimidate them into leaving Angajuk’s Bell. Scaring 
him off requires a successful DC 17 Charisma (Intimi- 
dation) group check, since he’s dead set on getting his 
ambergris. If the party's group check succeeds, Jendren 
and his fellow hunters withdraw, only to return 24 
hours later. 

If the characters fail to keep the hunters from execut- 
ing their plan, the oil poisons and muddies the water 
for 4 days. After a day of contamination, several dead 
knucklehead trout float to the surface. However, much 
to the hunters’ dismay, the sperm whale avoids the area 
even after the bell is rung. (For as long as the water is 
poisoned, Angajuk realizes this and cannot be sum- 
moned.) While waiting for the whale, the hunters camp 
out on the pier or in Anga’s cabin. After three more days, 
they conclude that the poison didn’t work and that the 
whale needs to be lured to the surface with bait. The 
desperate hunters try to capture a character to use for 
this purpose and, if successful, bind and lower the char- 
acter into the water as a lure. Angajuk rises just long 
enough to fling the lure out of the water, sending the 
character sprawling across the ice, before submerging 
and leaving the area, denying the hunters their prize. 

Jendren’s death breaks the morale of the other hunt- 
ers, who head back to Bremen in defeat. 


BLACK CABIN 


Characters might be drawn to this location by a tale 

told in Ten-Towns (see the Tall Tales in Ten-Towns table 
on page 102) or by a desire to help a gnome in Bryn 
Shander (see “Provisions for Macreadus,” page 103), 

or they might happen upon the Black Cabin while cross- 
ing the open tundra. 


SECRET OF THE BLACK CABIN 


The Black Cabin was built by a ranger of the Far North 
long before the founding of Ten-Towns. When he 
moved on, the lodge became a refuge for others seek- 
ing sanctuary from the wind sweeping down from the 
Reghed Glacier. 

Six months ago, Macreadus, a sage and devout 
follower of Lathander (god of the dawn and rebirth), 
formed a plan to end Auril’s everlasting winter. He holed 
up in the Black Cabin, where he spent all his time as- 
sembling a weather-controlling magical device called 
the Summer Star, using knowledge he gleaned from 
a book about Netherese artifacts. Macreadus's device 
was similar in design to a mythallar (see appendix D), 
but much smaller. Unfortunately for him, it had a seri- 
ous design flaw. When Macreadus tried to use it three 
days ago, it malfunctioned, incinerating both him and 
his book. Characters who search the cabin can find the 
sage’s charred skeleton and his deadly creation. 

Since the mishap, Macreadus's restless spirit has 
lingered in the Border Ethereal, unwilling to depart 
until its work is complete. (For more information on the 
Border Ethereal, see the “Ethereal Plane” section in the 
Dungeon Master's Guide.) 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


SPIRIT OF MACREADUS 

From the Border Ethereal, the restless spirit of 
Macreadus can observe happenings in and around the 
cabin, but it can't manifest physically on the Material 
Plane. Characters can see the restless spirit of Macrea- 
dus and interact with it only if they cross over to the Bor- 
der Ethereal, which is what happens to someone who 
dies in the cabin (see “Dying in the Black Cabin” below). 

In the Border Ethereal, the spirit of Macreadus mani- 
fests as a giant, floating, spectral head with fire burning 
in its eyes. Arrogant in life, Macreadus remains so in 
death. He's snappy and egotistical, blaming everything 
but himself for his failure. He welcomes the company of 
others, but anyone who questions his motives or mocks 
his invention quickly loses his favor. He spent months 
locked away in the cabin, building the Summer Star 
so he could end the Everlasting Rime, becoming more 
and more desperate to see it through. He had hoped to 
make a name for himself and win Lathander's praise—is 
that so wrong? 

If the characters try to finish his work, Macreadus 
helps as much as his bodiless form allows. To lay his 
spirit to rest, the characters must fix his creation’s de- 
sign flaw and then activate it, all within the confines of 
the Black Cabin, where Macreadus can observe the re- 
sults. Once he sees the device working as intended, his 
spirit departs to the afterlife. 


DYING IN THE BLACK CABIN 

If a creature with an Intelligence of 3 or higher dies 
inside the Black Cabin, its spirit (if it has one) leaves its 
body and assumes a spectral form on the Border Ethe- 
real until the creature is brought back from the dead, 
This is what happened to Macreadus, and the same fate 
awaits characters who perish in the cabin. 

If a character dies in the cabin and its spirit manifests 
in the Border Ethereal, the player can choose the form 
the spirit takes. It might look like a spectral image of the 
dead character, or it might be something bizarre like a 
ghostly crow or a blob of ectoplasmic energy. 

Regardless of the form it takes, the spirit is not a crea- 
ture and can't be harmed or turned. It can’t make attack 
rolls and doesn’t make saving throws, and conditions 
don't apply to it. It can’t cast spells or attune to magic 
items. Creatures on the Material Plane can't see the 
spirit without some ability or magic that lets them gaze 
into the Border Ethereal. A spirit in the Border Ethe- 
real can’t speak to creatures on the Material Plane, or 
vice versa. 

The spirit can do the following and nothing else: 


The spirit can move through the Border Ethereal. It 
has a flying speed of 30 feet, and it can hover. It can 
pass through solid surfaces that are visible on the 
Material Plane to explore closed-off parts of the cabin; 
it is bound to the cabin, however, and can't move more 
than 30 feet away from it. 

The spirit can make ability checks based on Dexterity, 
Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma only. It applies no 
modifiers to these checks. 

As an action, the spirit can attempt to exert up to 5 
pounds of force on a creature or object no more than 5 
feet away from it in the Material Plane, doing so with 


a successful DC 10 Charisma check. The spirit might 
use this ability to move a tiny object, write a message 
on a frosty or sooty surface, operate a simple tool, or 
tap someone on the shoulder, but the force isn’t strong 
enough to cause harm to a creature. 

The spirit can see other spirits in the Border Ethereal 
(including the spirit of Macreadus) and speak to them. 
The spirit knows the languages it knew in life. 


APPROACHING THE CABIN 


Perched on the edge of a snowy ridge above a gorge is a 
black lodge on wooden stilts. Whatever path might have 
led to this ramshackle retreat lies buried under snow. 
Icy steps climb to a snow-covered walkway that 
clings to the south side of the structure, The building's 
slumped posture and sagging, snow-covered roof, 
coupled with the broken windows and loose, flapping 
shutters, suggest utter abandonment. Large snowdrifts 
huddle around the rotting stilts and engulf a nearby 
woodshed and outhouse. Only the wind visits this sinis- 
ter place. 


The Black Cabin has two stone chimneys that rise sev- 
eral feet above its sagging roofline. The rest of the lodge 
is made of rotting wood. The stilts that elevate the struc- 
ture are 20 feet tall, and characters who walk under- 
neath the old building can tell that its wooden floors are 
in poor condition, perhaps even in danger of collapse in 
one location (see area B4). 

It’s clear to anyone surveying the Black Cabin that 
part of the ridge it rests on fell away some time ago, 
leaving the westernmost section of the building hanging 
over the gorge. All of the cabin’s doors are closed and 
unlocked, and its windows are big enough for characters 
to climb through. 


BLACK CABIN LOCATIONS 
The following locations are keyed to map 2.3. 


Bl. OUTHOUSE 

This wooden outhouse is half-buried in snow. Charac- 
ters who clear a path to the door and peer inside find a 
stack of discarded notes and blueprints, which Macrea- 
dus used as toilet paper. 


B2. WOODEN WALKWAY 

Both entrances to the cabin are off this rickety, 
snow-covered walkway, the steps and boards of which 
crackle and creak underfoot. 

There's a 4-foot-wide gap in the walkway that char- 
acters can easily leap across without making an ability 
check. But the walkway west of the gap (outside the door 
to area B4) collapses if more than 150 pounds of weight 
are placed on any 5-foot section of it. Any creature on 
the section of walkway when it collapses must make 


Map 23: Brack Casin 


a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw. On a successful save, 
the creature drops 20 feet straight down into the snow, 
taking 1 bludgeoning damage from the cushioned fall 
and landing prone. On a failed save, the creature slides 
down the collapsing walkway to the west and plunges 
into the gorge, taking 49 (14d6) bludgeoning damage 
from the hard fall and landing prone. 


B3. WORKSHOP 


Frost covers every surface of this abandoned workshop. 


The workshop contains a set of smith’s tools and a set of 
tinker’s tools spread across a wooden table along with 
some twisted bits of metal. 

A bookcase against the north wall has a family of 
harmless squirrels living in it. (The squirrels come and 
go through a tiny hole in the floor near one of the cabin’s 
stilts.) Apart from some scraps of paper and other detri- 
tus that the squirrels have collected, the bookshelf holds 
nothing of interest. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE ay 


18 


Summer STAR 


B4. MAIN ROOM 


This room contains lingering smells of burnt wood and 
flesh. You also catch the faint odor of wine. Snow has 
fallen through holes in the roof, then been pushed into 
corners by stiff winds blowing through broken windows. 
The walls and furniture are scorched black, including 

a table with the charred remains of a book on it. Next 
to the table, on the floor amid several broken wine 
bottles, is a mostly incinerated skeleton and a round, 
frost-covered object about six inches in diameter. 


The important features of this room are the charred 
book, the partially incinerated skeleton on the floor, 
and the round object lying nearby (the Summer Star, 
described below). There's also a hidden hazard in this 
area: a weakened section of floor. 

Charred Book. Nothing remains of this tome except 
ashes and a badly burned spine, upon which characters 
can discern the letters ETHER. It's obvious that these 
letters were part of a much longer title, which happens 
to be: Magical Wonders of Netheril. Characters can find 
an intact copy of this book in the Lost Spire of Netheril 
(see page 145). 

Skeleton and Treasure. Enough of the charred 
skeleton remains to suggest (without needing an ability 
check) that it belongs to a male human (Macreadus, 
though the characters won't know this right away). 
Little remains of his clothing, but a character who sifts 
through the charred bones and ashes finds an amulet of 
health that Macreadus used as a holy symbol. It shows 
no signs of damage, hinting at its magical nature. The 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


amulet’s pendant and chain are made of gold, and the 
pendant bears the symbol of two hands cupping the sun. 

Summer Star. This magic item looks like a 
6-inch-diameter gyroscope featuring two scorched rings 
inlaid with runes and a dense chunk of coal at its core. 
The Summer Star has lost its luster but not its magic. 

A detect magic spell or similar magic reveals a weak, 
residual aura of transmutation magic surrounding it. 

The first time a creature picks up the Summer Star, 
its core glows with a golden radiance as bright as a 
candle flame. Unless the creature drops the device 
immediately, the light suddenly blossoms, becoming a 
10-foot-radius sphere of incinerating golden radiance 
centered on the device, Each creature in the sphere 
must make a DC 17 Constitution saving throw, taking 
90 (10d10 + 35) radiant damage on a failed save, or half 
as much damage on a successful one. If this effect re- 
duces a creature to 0 hit points and there is damage re- 
maining, the creature is turned to ashes if the remaining 
damage equals or exceeds its hit point maximum. Once 
the explosion is triggered, the Summer Star becomes 
inoperable and safe to handle. 

Acharacter killed by the Summer Star becomes an 
ethereal spirit bound to the Black Cabin (see “Dying in 
the Black Cabin,” page 116). Don't fret if this happens 
to one or more characters; as spirits, they can figure out 
a way back to the realm of the living. 

Once the Summer Star discharges its residual magic, 
the characters—both the material and the ethereal 
ones—can safely analyze and fix the device so that it 
functions as Macreadus intended. The steps to be fol- 
lowed are summarized below: 


Step 1: Identify the Item. Any creature or spirit that 
studies the runes on the device's rings and succeeds 
on a DC 18 Intelligence (Arcana) check ascertains that 
the device was designed to control the weather. An 
identify spell reveals the same, and Macreadus's spirit 
can freely divulge this information to other spirits. A 
character who has Macreadus's blueprints from the 
laboratory (area B6) can use them to gain advantage 
on the check. 

Step 2: Analyze the Problem. The device has a design 
flaw, obviously. Macreadus has concluded that the de- 
vice’s rings are unable to contain the magical energy 
that the core puts out. A third ring must be attached 
to the device, and this new ring must have runes like 
those that appear on the other two rings. A charac- 
ter who succeeds on a DC 15 Intelligence (Insight) 
check comes to this conclusion. The check is made 
with advantage if the character witnessed the device 
malfunction. 

Step 3: Fix the Design Flaw. To craft a third ring, a 
quarter-pound of metal must be melted down in a fire 
and recast using smith’s tools, then inscribed with 
runes by someone with a steady hand—that is, a char- 
acter who succeeds on a DC 15 Dexterity (Arcana) 
check. Using tinker’s tools provides advantage on the 
check. Finally, the device must be modified to accom- 
modate the third ring, using either smith's tools or 
tinker’s tools. The modification process can be com- 
pleted in a few hours. 


Step 4: Activate the Item. A character must attune to 
the modified Summer Star to use it. While holding the 
device, the attuned character can use an action to cast 
the control weather spell from it, without the need 
for the character or the Summer Star to be outdoors. 
After the spell is cast, the Summer Star ceases to be 
magical. The spell lasts for the duration or until the 
character's concentration ends. 


Macreadus knows what must be done to fix the device 
but can't activate the item because he’s dead. If no one 
can attune to the modified Summer Star because every- 
one in the party is dead and trapped as a spirit in the 
Border Ethereal, nothing more can be done with the de- 
vice until someone else comes along who can attune to 
it. Fortunately for the characters, they don’t have long to 
wait before someone arrives (see the “Werebear Visitor” 
sidebar). Characters in spirit form can convince the new 
arrival to do what they cannot, perhaps by writing mes- 
sages in the snow, or on a section of wall or floor using 
ash from a nearby fireplace. 

Macreadus's spirit can finally rest after it witnesses 
the activation of the new and improved Summer Star. 
As it departs, the party receives a special blessing from 
Lathander. Any party member who died within the 
past 24 hours is instantly restored to life at full health, 
regardless of how the character died. In addition, each 
character who helped lay Macreadus's spirit to rest 
gains a blessing of the Morninglord (described below). 
For rules on blessings, see “Supernatural Gifts” in the 
Dungeon Master's Guide. 


Blessing of the Morninglord. You gain 10 temporary hit points 
each day at dawn. 


Weak Floor. The section of floor shown on map 2.3 
has weakened over time and gives way if 150 pounds or 
more of weight crosses it. Any creature standing on the 
floor when it collapses must make a DC 15 Dexterity 
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature falls to the 
bottom of the gorge directly below this section of the 
cabin, taking 49 (14d6) bludgeoning damage and land- 
ing prone. On a successful save, the creature grabs hold 
of the edge of the remaining floor and is hanging from 
it. The creature can use an action to try to pull itself up, 
doing so with a successful DC 10 Strength (Athletics) 
check, while another creature within reach can use the 
Help action to assist. A hanging creature can repeat the 
check until it succeeds, but if a check fails by 5 or more, 
the creature lets go and falls. 


B5. SWEETBERRY SUMMER WINE 


The scent of wine fills this room, which contains four 
frost-covered barrels. 


Macreadus was a heavy drinker, and the barrels contain 
his supply of Sweetberry Summer Wine. Any character 
proficient with brewer's supplies knows that this wine 
comes from a vineyard in the Dessarin Valley, hundreds 
of miles to the south. The extreme cold has caused the 
wine to freeze. 


Despite its inability to partake of the libations, the 
spirit of Macreadus reacts poorly toward characters who 
thaw and drink this private stash. 


B6. LABORATORY 


This room contains a fireplace and two empty book- 
cases. Tacked to the walls and strewn across the floor are 
frost-covered blueprints. Facedown on the floor next to 
one of the blueprints is a tiny man made of clay. 


Any character who examines the clay figure and suc- 
ceeds on a DC 15 Intelligence (Arcana) check ascertains 
that it is a dead homunculus. This was Macreadus's 
magical assistant, Blare. It died when its master died. 

Any character proficient in Arcana can study the 
blueprints and conclude that they show different exper- 
imental designs for a weather-controlling magic device. 
One of these designs resembles a gyroscope and closely 
resembles the object found in area B4. 


B7. ABANDONED BEDROOM 


A stiff wind blows through the broken window in the east 
wall, causing the tattered gray curtains to billow and flap 
like angry ghosts. Snow covers a bed and much of the 
surrounding floor. 


This room is unfit for habitation and hasn't been used it 
in a long time. 


B8. MACREADUS'S BEDROOM 


Wooden planks have been nailed over the broken window 
of this room to hold out the wind. Furnishings include 


a saggy double bed and a bookcase containing some 
folded clothes, a few blank sheets of parchment, and a 
set of calligrapher’s supplies. Next to the bookcase is a 
soot-stained hearth, wherein a scroll lies amid the ashes. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


19 


Ws Siahdangh of hs aad rls d 4 
| f erep tito my banas my haad mg hoai Im pila 


t REW 


Í 
ree 
| 
| 


| ORE PORE E ga 
ba rA might Isuggait thal tree à “ 
| keller aritua. Peorsidared tolling you bafore, bal you 
S emea 


a a 
—4) < 
Pig 
E > 
CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE wk 
fA 


Macreadus had a rock gnome assistant named Copper, 
but the two had a falling out. One morning, after a bitter 
argument the night before, Copper decided to return 

to Ten-Towns. He snuck out while Macreadus was still 
asleep, leaving behind a letter that Macreadus angrily 
threw into the hearth after reading it. 

Copper’s Letter. The scroll is stained with soot but 
remains intact, since Macreadus never got around to 
burning it. Characters who retrieve it can read Copper’s 
message, which is written in Common: 


Macreadus, 

I've had enough of this damned, relentless cold. | feel 
it creep into my bones, my head, my heart. I'm heading 
back to Ten-Towns for a decent meal and a warm bed. | 
fear this endless winter has numbed your mind, and any 
tinkerer worth their chains can see the Summer Star is a 
fool's errand. Maybe without me here to incessantly com- 
plain to, you'll finally snap out of your obsession. 

If you truly insist on dedicating your remaining days to 
this doomed project, might | suggest that three is better 
than two. | considered telling you before, but you were 
particularly rude about the dinner | made last night. 

May the light of the Morninglord protect you, 

Copper 


When the characters find Copper’s letter, give your play- 
ers a copy of the handout on the facing page. 

Copper made it back to Ten-Towns, eventually find- 
ing his way to the House of the Morninglord in Bryn 
Shander (see page 32). 


FROSTMAIDEN’S REVENGE 


The Frostmaiden is aware when someone uses the 
Summer Star to cast the control weather spell. She re- 
sponds by sending a coldlight walker (see appendix C) 
and three ice mephits to kill the characters and anyone 
else at the Black Cabin. If the party is 6th level or higher, 
add another coldlight walker to the attacking force. If 
the characters have a goliath werebear on their side, add 
a third coldlight walker and two more ice mephits. 

The attacking force approaches the Black Cabin from 
the east. As the characters emerge from the cabin, read: 


Bright light shines from the east—a cold, hateful light— 
and seems to be getting closer. 


The coldlight walkers are made from the frozen corpses 
of Ten-Towners who were banished to the tundra as 
sacrifices to the Frostmaiden (see “Sacrifices to Auril,” 
page 21). The ice mephits descend from the darkened 
sky to provide aerial support, using their fog cloud spells 
to engulf enemy spellcasters or to obscure the approach- 
ing coldlight walkers. These monsters always do the 
Frostmaiden’s bidding and fight until destroyed. If the 
characters flee the cabin, the coldlight walkers and ice 
mephits pursue. 


CACKLING CHASM 


Achasm in the foothills of the Spine of the World moun- 
tains gets its name from the cackling gnolls that take 
shelter inside it. Most who hear the maniacal cackles 
know well enough to stay away. The gnolls of the Cack- 
ling Chasm are emaciated and hungry, their laughing 
brought on by crazed starvation. 

The characters might visit this location after hearing 
a tale about a murdered fisher and her magic fishing 
pole (see “Tall Tales in Ten-Towns,” page 101) or after 
agreeing to undertake a quest for the town speaker of 
Caer-Konig (see “Gnoll Heads,” page 103). A gnoll 
captured in the wilderness can also lead the characters 
here (see “Wilderness Encounters,” page 105). 


TALE OF GNOLL BETRAYAL 


After a gnoll fang of Yeenoghu murders its prey, any 
hyena that feasts on the kill is transformed into a full- 
grown gnoll. The gnolls of the Cackling Chasm, like all 
gnolls, were born in this fashion. But a rift has formed 
between the creator and its creations. The fang of Yee- 
noghu, Chyzka, is being blamed for the pack’s recent 
misfortunes. It led the gnolls to Icewind Dale, prom- 
ising abundant food. What the gnolls got instead was 
an unending winter and barely enough nourishment to 
sustain them. The gnolls are forced to resort to canni- 
balism to survive when food is scarce, and the pack has 
no hyenas to replenish its dwindling numbers. Because 
Chyzka lacks the ability to sustain the pack and create 
more gnolls, its usefulness has come to an end. 

The other gnolls are too afraid of Chyzka to challenge 
it directly (it is, after all, one of Yeenoghu's chosen). 
The gnolls are, however, willing to stand idly by while 
the characters take care of Chyzka for them. Once the 
fang of Yeenoghu is dead, the gnolls will allow Chyzka's 
slayers to leave the chasm unmolested while they dine 
on Chyzka’s remains. The characters’ actions give them 
a window of time to take what they want and flee the 
chasm before the remaining gnolls turn against them. 


APPROACHING THE CHASM 


A yawning chasm ahead of you threatens to devour you 
as if it were a giant, icy maw. The wind sweeping through 
the mountains can’t drown out the inhuman cackling that 
echoes in the chasm's depths. 


Characters who look over the edge of the icy chasm 
can see stony projections resembling teeth, as well as 
a ledge 30 feet down. (A wider ledge 100 feet down is 
probably initially beyond the range of the characters’ 
light sources and darkvision.) 

A search of the surrounding area reveals a cave mouth 
near the south end of the chasm (area Z1). Within the 
cave mouth are steps leading down to area Z2, which 
leads to the uppermost ledge of the chasm. Alternatively, 
characters can use magic or climbing gear to lower 
themselves down into the chasm. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE aot 


CuvzKa THE GNOLL FANG OF YEENOGHU 


CACKLING CHASM LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to map 2.4. 


Zl. CAvE MOUTH 


At the south end of the chasm, humanoid skulls are 
stacked on either side of a cave mouth that contains icy 
steps descending into the rock. Blood has been used to 
draw crude symbols on the skulls. 


The skulls belong to humans, dwarves, goblins, goliaths, 


and orcs. The symbol on each skull looks like a three- 
headed flail. Any character who succeeds on a DC 15 
Intelligence (Religion) check recognizes it as the symbol 
of Yeenoghu, the demon lord of gnolls. 


Z2. FEASTING CAVE 


Crude steps lead down to a frigid, ten-foot-high cave 
filled with a putrid stench. The mostly broken bones of 
humanoids and animals lay scattered on the icy floor 
amid bits of metal and torn strips of leather. 


The gnolls gather here to eat when there’s food 
to be had. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


Most of the bones have been broken to enable the 
gnolls to get to the marrow inside them. Past feasts 
include elk, reindeer, moose, foxes, wolves, and human- 
oids. Some of the bones belong to gnolls who fell prey to 
cannibalism. 

The four gnolls in area Z3 move here to investigate 
any loud noises. They don't attack intruders right away, 
however, except in self-defense (see “Tale of Gnoll Be- 
trayal,” page 121). 

Treasure. Characters who search the cave for trea- 
sure find a leather pouch beneath a pile of broken bones. 
The pouch belonged to a human furrier whom the gnolls 
murdered in the tundra and dragged back to the chasm 
to be eaten. The pouch contains 4 gp, 14 sp, 21 cp, anda 
random trinket. Roll on the Icewind Dale Trinkets table 
in appendix A to determine what trinket is found. 


Z3. SHRINE TO YEENOGHU 


A crude stone altar with a mountain goat's bloody head 
resting atop it dominates this eight-foot-high cave. 
The floor around the altar is littered with gnawed ani- 


mal bones. 


Unless they were drawn to area Z2, four gnolls are 
crouched before the altar, weighing the ramifications of 
licking the flesh off the goat's skull, which is meant to 
be an offering to the demon lord Yeenoghu. These hun- 
gry gnolls don't attack intruders right away, except in 
self-defense (see “Tale of Gnoll Betrayal,” page 121). 


Z4. FROZEN RIFT 


Thirty feet below the surface, a shelf of rock surrounds 
the chasm’s gaping maw, its cracked sides riddled with 
caves and festooned with sharp rocks. Farther down 
in the chasm, you see dead gnolls impaled on some of 
these fang-like protrusions. 

Manic laughter echoes through the chasm as you look 
around, the sound ricocheting off the walls that make its 


origin impossible to pinpoint. 


Chyzka, the fang of Yeenoghu, encourages internal 
fighting whenever it senses the pack might turn against 
it. The dead gnolls seen throughout the chasm were 
victims of either these squabbles or their own careless 
ness. Although the ledge that allows access to the vari- 
ous caves is slick with ice, cautious characters can move 
on it without falling. 

Every loud noise in the chasm can be heard in the sur- 
rounding caves, and vice versa. Characters who make 
enough noise to attract the attention of the gnolls can 
hear them coming by their manic laughter. The Cackling 
Chasm Roster provides a summary of these denizens 
and the areas they originate in. When Chyzka sees in- 
truders, it barks orders to the other gnolls, after which 
there's an awkward pause as the subordinate gnolls 
give the characters expectant looks. Any character who 


succeeds on a DC 13 Wisdom (Insight) check can ascer- 
tain that these gnolls have lost faith in their leader and 
would be delighted to see Chyzka fall. 


CACKLING CHASM ROSTER 
Area Occupants 
Z3 4 gnolls 
Z5 1 gnoll fang of Yeenoghu (Chyzka) 
26 12 gnolls during the day, 6 gnolls at night 


Z5. CHYZKA’S CAVE 


Painted in blood on the walls of this eight-foot-high cave 
are pictographs of a towering monster with sharp teeth 
that wields what looks like a three-headed flail, Packs of 
hyenas feed on the corpses in its wake. A small fire crack- 
les near the south wall, filling the cave with smoke. Cook- 
ing above the fire is a small green fish, while behind the 
fire, leaning against the south wall, is a blood-encrusted 
spear and a fishing pole. 


Chyzka, a gnoll fang of Yeenoghu, is resting here un- 
less a disturbance has summoned it elsewhere. The 
bloody paintings on the wall show the demon lord Yee- 
noghu and his brood. 

The cave is littered with pieces of dirty cloth and 
moldy hides, all taken from prey. The spear leaning 
against the south wall is nonmagical but has a silvered 
tip stained red with blood. Though the spear has its 
uses, Chyzka prefers to attack with its claws and teeth. 

Treasure. Next to the fire, a bloodstained bolt of cloth 
has been folded around a pile of coins the gnolls lifted 
from their victims, creating a makeshift bundle that 
holds 21 gp, 56 sp, and 117 cp. 

The fishing pole is unremarkable, but a hook of 
fisher’s delight (see appendix D) is tied to the end of it. 
Chyzka took the pole from an Easthaven fisher named 
Nabira Moarskull after slaying her. 


Z6. SLEEPING CAVE 


The strong scent of dirty fur fills this dark, ten-foot-high 
cave. The stone floor has deep ridges where hundreds of 
clawed feet have scratched it. 


If the gnolls in this cave have not been drawn out, add: 


Gaunt, shivering gnolls huddle around a sputtering fire, 
cackling incessantly. 


At night, this cave holds twelve gnolls. That number 
drops to six during the day as half the gnolls leave the 
chasm to hunt for food. The gnolls huddle together for 
warmth. All of them are hungry and emaciated. 


A 


-CACKLING CHASM“; 


“square =5 feet wae 


i 2B 


Map 2.4: Cackiine CHASM 


Z7. STOREROOM 


Rotten crates and torn sacks are strewn across the floor 
of this eight-foot-high, mostly empty chamber. 


The gnolls often take food supplies from slaughtered 
travelers headed to and from Ten-Towns. These supplies 
are brought here to be consumed. All that remains are 
the containers used to transport them. 


Z8. CAGED BERSERKER 


Situated atop the ledge is a cage made of thick timber 
beams with a bolted iron door and iron fittings. The cage 
is five feet on a side and seven feet tall. Inside it, a male 
human in hide armor paces back and forth. His mur- 
derous eyes lock onto any sort of movement he notices, 
and he clutches a javelin made of a black, crystalline 
substance. The skin on his hands and face is black from 
frostbite, and his lips are chapped and bleeding from 
the cold. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


123 


The man in the cage is a nameless chardalyn ber- 
serker (see appendix C) with 60 hit points remaining. 
The gnolls captured him almost by accident. He ven- 
tured into the chasm a few days ago and brutally at- 
tacked any gnoll he encountered. One gnoll climbed atop 
the cage to get away from him. As the berserker started 
to climb after it, he was pushed from behind by another 
gnoll and locked in the cage. The gnolls are keeping him 
confined until he grows weak enough that they dare to 
open the cage to kill and eat him. The bolt on the door 
can't be reached by someone trapped in the cage. 

During the skirmish, the berserker lost his chardalyn 
flail and two chardalyn javelins, all of which fell into the 
chasm. He still has one javelin left. The berserker tries 
to grapple any character he can reach through the bars; 
if he succeeds, he tries to stab the grappled character 
with his javelin on his next turn. If he is released, the 
berserker attacks the nearest creature without fear or 
remorse. Efforts to parlay with the berserker are met 
with hateful silence. 


LEAVING THE CHASM 


Once the characters get what they came for, there's little 
reason to stay. In fact, characters who stay too long run 
the risk of encountering six gnolls returning from a 
hunt. There's a 20 percent chance that the gnolls have 
brought food with them, such as a dead mountain goat 
or crag cat, in which case the gnolls gather in area Z2 
(along with any other gnolls left alive in the chasm) to 
feast on the fresh kill. 

If the characters turn the gnolls’ animus toward 
Chyzka to their advantage, they can come and go with- 
out having to kill every gnoll in the chasm. Even so, 
any gnolls they leave alive remain a potential threat to 
Ten-Towns. 


REAL ADVENTURE HOOK 

If the characters retrieve the hook of fisher's delight, 
they might decide to keep it, or they might try returning 
it to Nabira Moarskull’s family in Easthaven. Nabira 
left behind an adult son and daughter, both of whom 
have families of their own. One of Nabira’s grandchil- 
dren, Ahmi, is celebrating a birthday soon, but Nabira’s 
death has dampened the child's mood. Ahmi would 

be delighted to receive the fishing hook as a gift, if the 
characters are willing to part with it. Ahmi’s family can 
scrape together 50 gp to buy it, if the characters insist 
on a monetary reward. 


CAVE OF THE BERSERKERS 


A group of human berserkers that has splintered off 
from the Tribe of the Bear uses this cliffside cave as a 
refuge. Exposure to chardalyn tainted by demonic magic 
has deprived them of their humanity. 

Here are some ways in which the characters might 
learn about this place: 


+ A tale in Ten-Towns spurs the characters to visit the 
cave (see “Tall Tales in Ten-Towns,” page 101). 
Aring taken off a dead berserker (see “Chardalyn 
Berserkers,” page 107) teleports the characters 

to area Q1. 

A goliath werebear encountered in the wild (see “Go- 
liath Werebear,” page 110) or King Gunvald Hal- 
raggson of the Bear Tribe (see the “Reghed Nomads” 
section in appendix C) urges the characters to rid the 
cave of its evil inhabitants. 


STORY OF THE CAVE 


This cavern complex was hollowed out by dwarf pros- 
pectors and miners looking for precious gems and 
metals. That effort bore no fruit, and the cave was 
abandoned. The Tribe of the Bear later used it as a 
shelter until the chardalyn berserkers forced them to 
abandon it. 

The berserkers worship the Frostmaiden and no 
longer consider themselves members of the Bear tribe. 
They allow frostbite to ravage their faces and bodies to 
prove their devotion. As a reward for their fealty and 
their willingness to suffer the cold, the Frostmaiden 
gave these mad servants a stone brazier that emits a 
cold, blue flame. As long as the flame burns, the berserk- 
ers can't be killed inside their lair (see area Q5). 

The berserkers share their cave with two white 
dragon wyrmlings, which hatched from eggs that the 
berserkers stole from within a glacial rift. The berserk- 
ers share their food with the wyrmlings, which guard 
the cave while the berserkers are out hunting. 


Cave LOCATIONS 


The cave’s chambers and tunnels were hewn from solid 
rock by dwarves long ago. The berserkers carry torches 
to see where they're going. Characters without darkvi- 
sion must rely on their own light sources as well. 

The following locations are keyed to map 2.5. 


Ql. Icy PATH 

An elevated causeway covered with snow winds toward 
the mouth of the berserkers’ cave. Tracks in the snow 
clearly indicate that at least four humans have come and 
gone from the cave since the last blizzard. On either side 
of the causeway is a steep slope that plunges 20 feet into 
a snowy ravine. 

Waste Chute. Characters who examine the cliff face 
for other possible entrances can, with a successful DC 
10 Wisdom (Perception) check, spot an opening in the 
cliff near the bottom of the ravine east of the winding 
causeway. This hole is one end of a chute that, once it 
enters the rock, ascends steeply to area Q4. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


THE WHITE WYRMLINGS GELYM ano Tytan 


PERCH OUTSIDE THE BeaR’s|HEADs ii 


Q2. Bear's HEAD 


Built around the mouth of the cave is a ramshackle 
wooden portico crudely shaped like a bear’s head with its 
mouth agape. The tunnel beyond it is dark 


The portico is sturdier than it looks. It has AC 15, 75 hit 
points, and immunity to poison and psychic damage: 
Characters who damage the portico make enough noise 
to attract the two white dragon wyrmlings in area Q4 
One makes its way through area Q3 to confront intrud. 
ers head-on while the other descends the chute in area 
Q4 and attacks from behind 

The wyrmlings don't pursue prey that flees the cave. 
Instead, they roost atop snowy outcroppings above the 
veral hours before retir- 


entrance and keep watch for 
ing to their lair (area Q4) to rest 


Q3. EGGSHELLS IN CELLS 

Characters who pass through the bear's head portico 
step onto an icy ramp that ascends 5 feet to a 20-foot- 
high chamber festooned with icicles. A naturally formed 
pillar supports the chamber’s domed roof. 

Two alcoves set into the north wall are fitted with 
rusty iron gates. Their chains, padlocks, and keys lie 
discarded on the floor outside them. Inside each cell are 
fragments of the shell of a bluish-white egg that must've 
been as large as a halfling. Any character who examines 


these eggshells and succeeds on a DC 13 Intelligence 
(Nature) check concludes that they are white dragon 
eggs that hatched about three years ago. 

‘Any loud noise here, which could be from the opening 
of either gate or the rattling of chains, alerts the two 
white dragon wyrmlings in area Q4. One confronts 
intruders head-on while the other descends the chute in 
area Q4 and swoops in from behind. 


Q4. WASTE CHUTE 


This eight-foot-high cave is unfurnished and unlit. A hole 
in the southwest corner is the mouth of an open chute 
that reeks of blood and filth. 


If they have not been lured elsewhere, two white dragon 
wyrmlings named Gelym and Tyzar curl up together in 
the eastern part of the cave. They attack any creature 
that enters their de: 
The stone chute is 25 feet long, roughly hewn, and 
steeply angled. It empties into the ravine outside and 
requires a successful DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check 
to ascend or descend without magic or climbing gear; 
a character who fails this check by 5 or more slips and 
tumbles into the ravine, landing in soft snow. Gore from 
the slaughterhouse (area Q6), not to mention human 
waste, is routinely dumped down the chute, which is 
stained with blood and filth. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


VZ 


` de CAVE OF THE BERSERKERS 


4 square = 10 feet 


Map 2.5: Cave oF THE BerseRKeRs 


Treasure. The wyrmlings have begun collecting 
treasures and stashing them in a small pile against the 
east wall. Their paltry hoard consists of 96 sp, 331 cp, 
a stitched leather wallet containing a complete set of 
thieves’ tools, a cracked spyglass (250 gp), and a spell 
scroll of knock. 


Q5. FROSTMAIDEN’S FIRE 


Hundreds of icicles cling to the twelve-foot-high ceiling 
of this frost-rimed chamber, which is bathed in flickering 
blue light. The light’s source is a blue flame crackling in 
a stone brazier that stands against the far wall. The white 
smoke that rises above it coalesces every few seconds 
into the form of a woman, but the image is fleeting. 


A detect magic spell reveals a powerful aura of abjura- 
tion magic around the 3-foot-high stone brazier, which 
rises naturally from the floor and is therefore not a dis- 
crete object. It can’t be moved or damaged, and its mag- 
ical flame can’t be smothered or put out with water. Any 
creature that comes into direct contact with the fire for 
the first time on a turn takes 10 (3d6) cold damage. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


Casting dispel magic on the fire snuffs it out for 1 
hour, after which the fire reignites on its own. Using a 
stone shape spell to alter the brazier’s shape puts out the 
fire for good. 

As long as the brazier’s cold fire burns, chardalyn ber- 
serkers inside the cave (areas Q3 through Q8, and the 
tunnels and chutes that attach to them) can’t drop below 
1 hit point. No other creatures gain this benefit. Charac- 
ters who fight the berserkers inside their lair see them 
shake off damage that would normally kill them. 

The berserkers are aware of the fire’s benefit, as evi- 
denced by the rictus grins that cross their faces when in- 
truders realize the berserkers are seemingly unkillable. 
The berserkers don't automatically sense when the fire 
has been put out, however. 


Q6. SLAUGHTERHOUSE 


The ice in this cave is stained pink and red with the blood 
of numerous kills. In the center of the room, beside a 
stone tray of butcher's tools, is the flayed husk of an 
owlbear's skeleton that has been skinned, gutted, and 
stripped of meat. 

Along one wall, metal hooks pierce the ice. A large 
man in blood-drenched hide armor hangs carcasses from 
these hooks to bleed out. His face and limbs are black- 
ened by frostbite, and he seems to be absent a nose. 


Anameless chardalyn berserker (see appendix C) has 
just finished butchering a snowy owlbear that was lured 
into the cave and killed. The berserker grabs its weap- 
ons (which are always within easy reach) and attacks 
intruders on sight. If the flame in area Q5 is burning, the 
berserker can't drop below 1 hit point unless he’s lured 
outside the cave. 


Q7. MEAT STORAGE 


Shallow trenches carved into the stone floor are filled 
with snowpack. Clean haunches of meat are nestled in 
these trenches. 


Treasure. Eighty pounds of fresh meat are stored 
here. The meat, which comes from various beasts 
such as polar bears and elk, is safe to cook and eat. 
The characters can sell the meat in Ten-Towns for 5 sp 
per pound. 


Q8. LIVING QUARTERS 

This 10-foot-high, frost-rimed chamber lies beyond 

a 10-foot-deep fissure. A frost-covered wooden plank 
spans the gap in the more trafficked tunnel that leads to 
this area. Four sleeping pallets covered in furs lie on the 
floor near the northwest wall. A wooden pail is used as a 
chamber pot, and it is currently empty. 


RETURNING BERSERKERS 


After the characters have a chance to explore the cave 
and as they are preparing to leave it, three chardalyn 
berserkers (see appendix C) return to the cave with 
the carcass of a slain peryton. One berserker leads 

the way while the other two carry the dead peryton be- 
tween them. 

As the characters emerge from the cave, they see the 
berserkers on the causeway. More important, the ber- 
serkers see them unless the characters took precautions 
to leave the cave in a stealthy manner. The berserkers 
gain no benefit from the Frostmaiden's fire (see area Q5) 
while they're on the causeway, so they try to get inside 
the cave, attacking anyone in their way. If the fire has 
been put out, the berserkers won't know that until one of 
them is killed inside the cave. 


DARK DUCHESS 


The ancient white dragon Arveiaturace (see page 105) 
has placed some of her hoard in an abandoned ship 
called the Dark Duchess. This Luskan pirate vessel got 
stuck in the Sea of Moving Ice some months ago, near 
where the dragon likes to fish and hunt. 

Having remained aboard the icebound hulk after be- 
ing deserted by his crew, Captain Rudolph Bluemoon 
still watches over his riches even in death. A character 
who has the Pirate Cannibal secret (see appendix B) 
might want to return to this site to claim Captain Blue- 
moon's treasure. Characters might also be drawn to this 
site by a tall tale (see “Tall Tales in Ten-Towns,” page 
101) or a desire to help the tavernkeepers of Bremen 
(see “Zero Rum,” page 103). 


FROZEN SHIPWRECK 


The Dark Duchess is hundreds of yards from shore, 
trapped in thick ice. When the characters get close 
enough to see it, read: 


The Sea of Moving Ice stretches out before you, a fea- 
tureless, frozen desert. Ahead, the smooth white surface 
is interrupted by a towering ship, its exterior covered 

in frost. 


The hull, rigging, and masts of the ship are covered in 
a layer of ice. From the waterline of the vessel, it's a 10- 
foot climb to get to the main deck. The sides of the hull 
are slippery and can't be climbed without using magic 
or climbing gear. 

The ice around the Dark Duchess is thick, and there is 
no risk of the characters breaking through it. 


APPROACHING THE SHIP 
When the characters get within 15 feet of the ship, read: 


You hear loud thumping and creaking coming from in- 
side the hold, followed by the guttural snarls of some 
creature. The ship is not as abandoned as it appeared! 


An ice troll (see appendix C) was chasing a herd of seals 
when it spotted the abandoned ship and crept across the 
ice to explore it, hoping to find something tasty inside. It 
spooked some kobolds in the hold and chased them into 
a cabin. The kobolds were able to barricade the door, 
and the troll is trying to break through it to get at them. 

Characters can surprise the troll if they remain quiet 
as they make their way into the ship's hold (area D9). 
Climbing onto the ship and moving through it without 
alerting the troll requires a successful DC 12 Dexterity 
(Stealth) check. If a character fails this check, the troll 
hears the character's footsteps or the creaking of the 
deck and realizes there's an easier meal to be had. 


Dark DUCHESS LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to map 2.6. 
Ceilings of the lower decks are 10 feet high, and all 
doors are 7 feet tall and made of sturdy wood. 


D1. MAIN DECK 


The wooden boards on the main deck are cracked from 
frost. A large hole in the deck exposes a part of the hold 
to the sky. The planks around the hole are marred with 
deep grooves, as if heavy claws had dug into them. 


To reach the hold, Arveiaturace had to break apart 

a large portion of the deck, creating a gaping hole. A 
character who examines the marks around the hole 
and succeeds on a DC 12 Wisdom (Survival) check can 
correctly surmise that a single enormous creature did 
all the damage. If the check succeeds by 5 or more, the 
character can confirm that the marks were made by a 
dragon's claws. 

Entering the Captain’s Cabin. The door to area D8 is 
covered in a thick layer of ice, which the characters need 
to remove if they want to get inside. Using a miner's 
pick or similar tool, a character can chip away at the ice, 
breaking through it after 1 hour. (The more characters 
who help, the more quickly the ice is removed.) The 
noise is loud enough to attract the ice troll in area D9. 

If the characters melt away the ice using fire, doing so 
takes twice as much time but doesn't attract the troll. 


D2. FORECASTLE 


Deep grooves have been gouged into the deck on the 
forecastle. The railing on the port side of the vessel is 
broken and slightly bowed, as if an immense weight had 
been resting on top of it. 


When Arveiaturace climbs onto the Dark Duchess, 
she does so from the forecastle. Examination of the 
deck reveals that the dragon's weight has pushed 
down and cracked the wooden planks and gunwales in 
many places. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


127 


Open to 
hold below, 


Map 2.6: Dark Duchess 


D3. AFT CASTLE 


Ice coats the captain's wheel. There’s nothing else of 
interest here. 


D4. SuRGEON’s CABIN 


In this narrow cabin, shelves and containers are scat- 
tered on the floor amid piles of dirty bandages. Small 
clusters of dried leaves have frozen to the floor in places. 
A disheveled, frost-covered bed is tucked in an alcove 


under a wooden staircase. 


The surgeon's cabin has been searched by the kobolds 
living in the Dark Duchess, but they overlooked some 
items that might interest the characters. Under the bed 
are three vials of antitoxin, a healer’s kit, and a vial of 
holy water. 


D5. First MATE'S CABIN 
A frost-covered bed is shoved into one corner under a 
wooden staircase. The rest of the cabin is empty. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


D6. CHART ROOM 


As the door comes open, a light breeze emerges from 
this room. Pieces of parchment and paper flutter on the 
floor. A large, detailed map of the Sword Coast takes up 
most of one wall. 


This room contains two useful maps: the 6-foot-wide, 
6-foot tall map of the Sword Coast hanging on the wall 
and a map of Icewind Dale stored in a map case that lies 
on the floor. A thorough search of the room also yields a 
set of navigator’s tools. 


D7. STORAGE 


The foremost cabin holds two rime-covered barrels, lying 
next to which is a rat that obviously perished from the 
cold. Mooring ropes and fishing nets hang from hooks 
along the back wall. 


Nonperishable goods were stored in this cabin. The 
crew took a lot of supplies when they abandoned ship, 
but some equipment remains. The ropes and nets are 
salvageable, as are the contents of the barrels. 
Barrels. The characters must use a crowbar or sim- 
ilar tool to pry open a frozen barrel. The first barrel 


contains a hooded lantern, three flasks of oil, five bars of 
lime soap, and three sets of manacles. The second bar- 
rel holds ten torches. 


D8. Caprain's CABIN 


The aft castle is taken up by one spacious cabin. Frost 
covers every surface and furnishing. 

A human corpse is slumped against the port-side wall, 
its left arm draped across part of a heavy chest that's 
tucked in an alcove under a staircase. The skeleton wears 
a jacket and a wide-brimmed hat that hides most of its 
skull. Under its right arm is a captain's journal. The floor 
is strewn with empty wine bottles. 


The kobolds have not set foot inside this cabin; in fact, 
no one has been here since the crew abandoned ship. 
The corpse is all that remains of Captain Rudolph Blue- 
moon, who stayed behind to watch over the ship and his 
ill-gotten booty. He ran out of provisions and starved 
before freezing to death. Affixed to the captain's hat is 

a badge that forms a curious symbol: a red eel wrapped 
around a gold trident. Characters who succeed on a DC 
15 Intelligence (History) check recognize this as one 

of the symbols of Ship Suljack, a powerful faction in 
Luskan that engages in piracy. Captain Bluemoon was a 
member of this faction. 

In the captain's inside jacket pocket, the characters 
find a key with its head fashioned in the form of a rat's 
skull. This key unlocks the captain's chest (see “Trea- 
sure” below). 

The wine bottles have labels that read “Sweetberry 
Summer Wine.” The bottles’ corks are not to be seen 
(though the characters can find them inside the captain's 
treasure chest). 

Captain’s Journal. Bluemoon’s journal chronicles the 
exploits of the Dark Duchess but says little about the 
man in charge. A character who succeeds on a DC 15 
Intelligence (History) check knows a story or two about 
Captain Bluemoon. This is a great opportunity to allow 
the player of that character to make up a credible story; 
if the player accepts the challenge, award inspiration to 
that player's character. The character also recalls that 
Captain Bluemoon was a cruel, cunning individual who 
ruled his ship through fear instead of respect. He had 
many enemies and few friends. 

The captain's final journal entry reads: 


“That damned white dragon is back, circling above me 
like a vulture. | reckon she could carry this ship back to 
Luskan were she of a mind to. To die from starvation, bit- 
ter cold, or a dragon? Choices, choices.” 


Treasure. The chest is frozen shut. Before the key can 
be used to unlock it, the characters must scrape off the 
ice and frost, which takes about 10 minutes. They can 
also use a torch or other source of heat to melt the frost 
in the same amount of time. 


Inside the chest is a wooden partition that divides the 
interior into two halves. One side is empty except for a 
dozen wine-stained corks. (This is where the captain 
kept his bottles of wine.) The other side contains 150 gp, 
520 sp, a small gold bracelet (25 gp), a large gold brace- 
let (250 gp), and a gray bag of tricks. 


D9. HoLp 

Unless the characters lure it elsewhere, a frustrated 
ice troll (see appendix C) stands at the bottom of the 
wooden stairs leading down from the main deck. It is 
trying to claw through the door that leads to area D12. 
The troll can't be reasoned with. After disposing of it, 
the characters can survey the contents of the hold: 


The ship's hold contains heaps of snow and four tied- 
down jolly boats covered with rime. In the forward star- 
board corner rests a large pile of treasure covered with 
Standing next to the hoard, frozen with its maw open 
in a roar, is a white feline creature sheathed in ice. 


The creature frozen next to the treasure pile is a crag 
cat (see appendix C) that was killed by Arveiaturace’s 
breath weapon and placed here as a trophy. 

Treasure. Arveiaturace's treasure pile is buried un- 
der four thick, translucent layers of ice produced by the 
dragon's cold breath. It doesn’t represent Arveiaturace’s 
entire hoard, merely the small portion she chose to 
bring aboard the Dark Duchess. Characters can see the 
treasure under the topmost layer of ice, and each layer 
of ice takes 1 hour to get through using a miner's pick 
or similar tool and twice as long using fire. Chipping or 
melting away each ice layer frees up the treasure under 
that layer: 


First Layer. Under the first layer of ice are 72 gp, 181 
sp, 352 cp, and two pearls (100 gp each). 

Second Layer. Small art objects and gems lie under the 
second layer of ice. The characters find nine tattered 
pieces of indigo fabric lined with gold thread (25 gp 
each), three pieces of quartz (50 gp each), a single 
aquamarine cracked down the center (250 gp), and a 
scrimshaw figurine of an archer etched with magical 
script. This figurine functions like a spell scroll of re- 
move curse, then turns to dust after its magic is spent. 

Third Layer. The third layer of ice covers 221 gp, a 
1-foot-tall marble statuette of a griffon with gold inlay 
(250 gp), a black pearl (500 gp), a peridot carved in 
the shape of a leaf (300 gp), a driftglobe, and a quiver 
of Ehlonna. 

Fourth Layer. The fourth layer of ice shields the big- 
gest, heaviest items and the treasure the dragon 

: a 3-foot-diameter ceremonial bronze 

carnelians (1,000 gp), seven garnets 

(100 gp each), a suit of mithral armor (chain mail), and 

a near-perfect replica of the Wand of Orcus that emits 

green light from the skull at its tip. Any character who 

tries to attune to this Wand of Orcus realizes it’s a 

fake, though it does emit magical light comparable to 

that created by a continual flame spell. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


129 


Tue Dark DUCHESS IS TRAPPED IN THE }CE—ANOTHER 
I VICTIM OF THE FROSTMAIDEN'S EVERLASTING WINTEI 


D10. GALLEY 


This cabin has been thoroughly ransacked. Dishes are 
strewn across the floor, and a galley table in the middle 
of the room has pots and ladles hanging above it. Tied to 
a low cupboard against the starboard wall is a thin goat. 
It lifts its head and bleats at you, shuffling toward you 
until its rope grows taut, stopping its advance. 


The crew took most of the food from this galley before 
abandoning ship, and the kobolds found and ate what- 
ever scraps were left behind, sharing their meager 
findings with the goat, which the kobolds use as a pack 
animal. The ice troll hasn't yet detected the goat. The 
kobolds keep it here so the dragon doesn't eat it. 


D11. Rum STORAGE 

A key is jammed into the lock of this door—left there in 
haste by the crew members who plundered the ship's 
rum supply before abandoning ship. 


This cabin is empty except for a smashed wooden crate 
lying on the frost-covered floor. 


Someone who takes the time to study this detritus no- 
tices that some of the planks display parts of a painted 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


symbol. The characters can reassemble the symbol by 
putting the planks together properly. The image is a cir- 
cle, contained within which is the smiling face of a drow 
who wears an eye patch and a purple, wide-brimmed 
hat accented with a colorful feather plume. Elvish script 
around the circumference reads, “The Best Rum from 
Your Friends at One-Eyed Jax!” 


D12. WATER STORAGE 

The door to this cabin has been weakened by the ice 
troll’s claws and sits loosely in its frame. The kobolds 
have slid a heavy wooden bar across the inside of the 
door to keep it shut for now. The characters must break 
down the door to enter the cabin, since the kobolds have 
no intention of letting them in. The door has AC 15, 5 hit 
points remaining, and immunity to poison and psychic 
damage. As an action, a character can shoulder or kick 
open the door with a successful DC 20 Strength check. 


The floor of this cabin is icy. Lying on their sides are two 
empty, open barrels, Hides and furs have been pushed 
into these barrels to create makeshift sleeping quarters. 
Two similar but upright barrels appear untouched. 


Four Icewind kobolds (see appendix C) hide behind the 
barrels and hurl their javelins at the first creature to en- 
ter the room. After they throw their javelins, the kobolds 
are weaponless. They worship Arveiaturace and do the 


dragon's bidding. They don't know when she'll return 
next, but she always does. 

The upright barrels hold frozen, fresh water. The ko- 
bolds turned the empty barrels into sleeping hovels. 


ARVEIATURAGE ARRIVES 


Arveiaturace, an ancient white dragon whose vision is 
hampered by cataracts, carries the body of her former 
master, the wizard Meltharond, in a saddle on her back 
(see “Arveiaturace,” page 105, for more information). 

The dragon is out hunting when the characters first 
arrive at the Dark Duchess, but she checks on the ship 
regularly to make sure her hoard is undisturbed. At 
the end of each hour the characters spend in the Dark 
Duchess, there is a 20 percent chance that Arveiaturace 
returns to the ship. Because she can see only out to a 
range of 60 feet, the dragon must get close to the ship to 
examine it. 

If the characters are below decks when the White 
Wyrm arrives, use the following boxed text to describe 
her arrival: 


‘Over the howling wind, you hear the flapping of titanic 
wings followed by the cracking of ice under the weight 
of something immense. A loud snort accompanies the 
sound of claws scraping against ice-glazed timbers. 

The voice of what could only be a truly immense 
dragon fills the bowels of the ship. “I smell warm flesh 
and hear the panic of beating hearts. Ready your spells, 
Meltharond! We have uninvited guests.” 


If one or more characters are topside, use the following 
boxed text instead: 


A great white dragon descends from the sky, beating its 
wings furiously to slow its descent. A dark, humanoid 
figure is mounted on the dragon's back. 


If the characters hide and don't make a lot of noise, 
Arveiaturace climbs aboard the vessel from the fore- 
castle and begins to make her way toward the hold. 

No matter where the characters are on the ship, they 
hear Arveiaturace board it, as her massive form makes 
the entire vessel shake and the ice around it crack. If 
Arveiaturace notices the characters, she immediately 
says to the rider on her back, “We know how to deal 
with thieves, don’t we Meltharond?” She then attacks. 
If she doesn't notice the characters, she makes her way 
to her hoard, inspects the hold to make sure nothing is 
out of place, and leaves the ship to find and eat a tasty 
walrus. If she sees that the hoard has been disturbed, 
the dragon looks around the ship to see if the thieves 
left tracks and follows any she finds, calling out to 
Meltharond to ready his spells. If she suspects that in- 
truders are still aboard the vessel but hiding in places 


she can't reach, she breaks through walls to get at them. 


The characters are no match for the dragon. If 
they need a distraction to facilitate their escape, 
Meltharond’s corpse could fall out of its saddle. This 
causes the dragon to break off her attack at once and 
check to make sure the dead wizard is undamaged. The 
dragon can’t put Meltharond’s corpse back in its saddle 
without help. If there any kobolds are nearby, they can 
assist; otherwise, Arveiaturace promises to spare the 
characters’ lives if they lend a helping hand. Someone 
who makes a successful Wisdom (Insight) check con- 
tested by the dragon's Charisma (Deception) check 
discerns that she has no intention of keeping her prom- 
ise. If the characters simply bolt, Arveiaturace does not 
pursue them, afraid to leave Meltharond’s side. Once the 
characters are beyond her field of vision, the somewhat 
dim dragon remembers that she’s big enough to scoop 
up Meltharond with one claw; she does so—gently—and 
flies back to her lair atop the Reghed Glacier. 


TINJONG THE VERBEEG 

If the characters are unable to stand against or escape 
from Arveiaturace, help arrives in the form of a verbeeg 
longstrider (see appendix C) named Tinjong, who lives 
in a seaside cave about a mile away. 


Anine-foot-tall giant in thick walrus hide armor bounds 
across the ice with surprising speed and grace despite 
her gangly, misshapen limbs. Although her narrow face is 
hard to see under the fur-lined hood of her frost-covered 
cloak, it's clear that the left side of her face sags much 
lower than the right. As the giant draws near, she skids 
to a stop, rests her greatclub on one broad shoulder, and 
says, “Need any help?” 


Tinjong avoids the Dark Duchess because she knows 
the White Wyrm frequents it. If the characters accept 
her offer, Tinjong uses her fog cloud spell to obscure 
them, then tries to lead everyone beyond Arveiaturace’s 
range of sight, which is 60 feet. 

Tinjong worships Silvanus (god of nature) and has no 
agenda. She tries to be helpful while asking for nothing 
in return, and she carries nothing of value. Although she 
has no interest in becoming a permanent member of the 
party, Tinjong is willing to accompany the characters to 
Auril’s island if their aim is to confront the Frostmaiden 
and end her everlasting winter, claiming that’s what Sil- 
vanus would want her to do. 

Tinjong’s Cave. If the characters need a place to rest 
and recuperate, Tinjong leads them to her cave over- 
looking the sea. It contains no furnishings, but there are 
plenty of furs for warmth and enough wood and oil to 
start a fire. A chwinga shares the cave with Tinjong but 
spends most of its time hiding in a rock. It emerges to 
greet Tinjong when she returns, however. The chwinga 
likes music and bestows a supernatural charm (see 
“New Chwinga Charms.” page 283) upon the first char- 
acter who spends at least 1 hour playing music for it. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


131 


Ip ASCENDANT 


Stories about a comet crashing in the mountains (st 
“Tall Tales in Ten-Towns,” page 101) or a quest con- 
cerning a telepathic message (see “Distress Signal,” 
page 103) might bring adventurers to this location, as 
might a character who has the Escaped Prisoner secret 
(see appendix B). 


NAUTILOID DOWN 
ven days ago, spacefaring mind flayers hoping to 
capture some interesting species for study crashed their 
ship—a nautiloid called the Id Ascendant—while trying 
to fly it through a blizzard. The ship's cocaptains, Vorryn 
Q'uuol and Dredavex Sinfiz, are chaotic neutral gnome 
ceremorphs, which are smaller-than-normal mind flay 
ers spawned from gnome hosts. Their crew consists of 
three gnome squidlings named Rin, Rix, and Zglarrd. 
e the “Mind Flayers” entry in appendix C for more in- 

formation about gnome ceremorphs and squidlings. 

The illithids are stuck unless they can find a psi crys 
tal (see appendix D) to jump-start the ship's propulsion 
system. Vorryn and Dredavex are expending consider- 

ble effort to keep their ship functional and thus cannot 
conduct the search themselves. They also can't trust the 
moronic squidlings to accomplish such a delicate task. 
For these reasons, the gnome ceremorphs need help. 

hey have built a device that can detect the presence 
of psi crystals in a 5-mile radius but haven't found any 
The characters might have harvested a psi crystal from 


OTMERWORLDY CREATURES ISSUE FORTH 


FROM A CRASHED ILLITHIO NAUTILOID 


the gem mine near Termalaine (see “A Beautiful Mine,” 
page 94), in which case the gnome ceremorphs would 
be very interested in acquiring it. 
Complicating matters is the damage done by the crash 

he nautiloid’s life support system, for once this 
tem shuts down, the illithids are at risk of freezing to 
death. If the shutdown occurs before they acquire a psi 
crystal, the gnome ceremorphs’ back-up plan is to acti- 
vate the nautiloid’s self-destruct system (see area N7) 
before abandoning ship and making their way tow: 
Ten-Towns with the gnome squidlings in tow. 


ROLEPLAYING THE GNOME CEREMORPHS 
Vorryn and Dredavex want to leave Icewind Dale and 
return to the stars they call home with their squidling 
brood mates and a couple of interesting new creations 
or dis . They retain their gnomish curiosity and 
love of tinkering, now blended with the illithids’ drive 
for control and experimentation. They are delighted 

to meet visitors who are willing to help them acquire 

a psi crystal or, failing that, help them and the gnome 
squidlings infiltrate Ten-Towns. In exchange, the gnome 
ceremorphs are willing to part with their laser pistols 
and the magic items in area N9. 

If the characters want to search for a psi crystal, Dre- 
davex gives them a handheld box that emits a clicking 
noise while a psi crystal is within 5 miles of it (see area 
N5). The ceremorphs tell the characters that psi crys 
tals are most often found in places where mind flayers 
have lived. 


Unlike most mind flayers, who prefer to communicate 
using telepathy, Vorryn and Dredavex prefer to speak 
aloud in Gnomish or Undercommon, with an accent best 
described as “gooey.” Vorryn is persnickety and exasper- 
ated most of the time but also has a dry sense of humor, 
Dredavex is industrious and likes to ease tension by tell- 
ing crude jokes it has learned from eating goblin brains. 
If they or any of the gnome squidlings are threatened, 
the ceremorphs react with deadly intent; otherwise, they 
shun combat. 


ROLEPLAYING THE GNOME SQUIDLINGS 

The gnome squidlings have a blind hunger for brains 
that often overrides their common sense. Beyond such 
base hunger, the gnome squidlings don't know what they 
want. They have the reasoning and emotional control of 
toddlers blended with the guile of bored housecats, 

Rin, Rix, and Zglarrd make squelching and keening 
noises when excited or upset; otherwise, they communi- 
cate in bursts of emotion punctuated with short, simple 
words conveyed telepathically. The squidlings trust Vor- 
ryn and Dredavex and would be lost without the gnome 
ceremorphs to watch over them. 


TELEPATHIC DISTRESS SIGNAL 

After the Id Ascendant crashed, the gnome ceremorphs 
activated a distress signal meant to be heard only by 
creatures that have telepathy, including any character 
who is attuned to the psi crystal found in the gem mine 
outside Termalaine (see “A Beautiful Mine,” page 94). 
The signal's technology hasn't been perfected yet, such 
that nontelepathic creatures have been known to pick up 
the signal as well. You get to decide whether a nontele- 
pathic creature can sense the signal or not. 

The psionic transmitter broadcasts on an endless loop 
until Vorryn or Dredavex decides to shut it off, or until 
the transmitter is disabled or destroyed (see area N7). 

The signal has a range of 50 miles. Those lucky few 
who can detect it and set out for the source can feel it 
guiding them toward the downed nautiloid. The signal 
is a sequence of words in Deep Speech with a buzzing 
undertone. Any creature that understands Deep Speech 
and is sensitive to the signal can translate the message: 


“Nautiloid down. Emergency protocols enabled. Crew 
safe, but vessel imperiled. Psi crystal needed. Come 
at once.” 


THE CRASH SITE 

As the ship came down, it dug a furrow through the 
snowy valley before skidding to a stop. Its construction 
is partly organic, and the tentacles protruding from the 
ship's bow are coated in mucus that remains sticky even 
in the extreme cold. 

The ship's interior is a mess. The walls are crusted 
with patches of flaky plaque, and the floor is splattered 
with sticky blots of an inky-black substance that courses 
through the ship's veins. Equipment is scattered every- 
where, both from the impact of the crash and because of 
subsequent repair work. 


APPROACHING THE NAUTILOID 


As you trudge deeper into a mountain valley, an eerie 
glow betrays the monstrous outline of something stupen- 
dous and ominous. It looks like a cephalopod with slimy, 
ropey tentacles as thick as tree trunks that has tried and 
failed to bury its immense bulk in the snow. 


Two carrion crawlers, Vorryn’s trained pets, scuttle 
through the snow near the ship. Characters who have 
passive Wisdom (Perception) scores of 1 1 or higher are 
not surprised when the creatures attack. 

Characters paralyzed by the crawlers’ tentacles are 
dragged toward the nautiloid. The crawlers’ intent is not 
to eat the characters, but to deliver them to Vorryn for 
questioning. 


NAUTILOID FEATURES 
The nautiloid has the following features: 


Biological Construction. The ship is built of organic 
matter in addition to wood and iron. Walls, floors, and 
ceilings are reinforced with tough chitin. 

Canted Deck. The ship tilts to the south at a slight an- 
gle—not enough to hinder movement aboard the ves- 
sel, but enough to cause certain objects and liquids on 
the floor to roll toward the port side of the ship. 

Ceilings. Ceilings are 20 feet high unless other- 
wise noted. 

Illumination. All areas in the ship are dimly lit by 
fleshy, flickering, bioluminescent orbs mounted to the 
walls or hanging from the ceiling. 

Interior Doors. Each interior door aboard the ship is a 
fleshy sphincter that opens when a creature that has 
telepathy approaches within 5 feet of it, then quickly 
closes behind the creature and its companions to keep 
the heat in. A door must otherwise be pried or tickled 
open, which requires an action. 

Life Support. The failing life support system is keep- 
ing the ship's interior temperature at 50 degrees 
Fahrenheit (10 degrees Celsius). The system gives 
out completely 24 hours after the characters arrive 
(unless they do something about it), at which point the 
temperature begins falling 10 degrees Fahrenheit per 
hour until it matches the temperature outside. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


133 


134 


NAUTILOID LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to map 2.7. 


N1. FORWARD DECK 


This deck is five feet above the valley floor and covered 
with fresh snow. Mounted to the deck is a ballista cov- 
ered in ice. At the back of the deck, a double door made 
of chitin and iron is tucked under two higher decks, the 
lower of which has another ballista mounted atop it. 


The double door is iced shut but not locked. A charac- 
ter can use an action to try to wrench open the doors, 
doing so with a successful DC 14 Strength (Athletics) 
check. The noise is loud enough to alert the creatures 
in area N2. 

Ballista. This weapon is inoperable since the crash. 


N2. Carco HoLD 


Attached to the walls in this chamber are three sets of 
chains and manacles designed to hold large creatures, A 
staircase rises to the next deck amid crates, barrels, and 
broken bits of equipment. 

Moving among the detritus are four creatures. Three of 
them are small, repulsive, purple things that float above 
the ground and pull themselves across the floor using 
oversized face-tentacles. The fourth is a lumbering mon- 
strosity made of stitched-together parts from goblins, 
dwarves, and reindeer. 


The three gnome squidlings (Rin, Rix, and Zglarrd) 
are supposed to be cleaning up the cargo hold but are 
just pushing junk around and annoying Dredavex’s 
flesh golem. 

Unless one of the gnome ceremorphs is leading the 
party through the cargo hold, the flesh golem tries to 
beat the characters unconscious. The squidlings are 
compelled to try to devour the brains of unconscious 
characters, avoiding combat otherwise. 

The heavy chains and manacles once held a pair of 
carrion crawlers and a bulette, all of which the gnome 
ceremorphs released after the crash. The characters 
met the carrion crawlers on the way to the ship; they 
meet the bulette shortly after they leave (see “Bulette 
Proof,” page 137). 

The stairway leads up to the battle deck (area N4). 
Characters who examine the cargo containers find two 
barrels of lubricant, two barrels of a pink slurry made 
from humanoid brains, a crate of machine parts, a crate 
of weapons (see “Treasure” below), and three crates that 
the gnome squidlings live in. 

Development. Sounds of combat here attract Dre- 
davex, who arrives in 2 rounds. If any squidlings have 
died, Dredavex telepathically summons Vorryn and tries 
to kill the party. Otherwise, Dredavex calls off the golem 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


and attempts to defuse the situation and clear up any 
“misunderstanding.” 

Treasure. One of the crates contains six laser rifles in 
weapon racks (see “Alien Technology” in the Dungeon 
Master's Guide for more information about laser rifles). 
Three of the rifles have been partially dismantled and 
are nonfunctional. The other three are intact, and each 
one contains an energy cell that allows the rifle to be 
fired 30 times. An energy cell cannot be recharged. Fig- 
uring out how to fire and reload a laser rifle requires two 
successful Intelligence checks (one to figure out how to 
fire it, another to figure out how to load it). Each time a 
character makes a check, compare the check result to 
the Figuring Out Alien Technology table in the Dungeon 
Master's Guide. 


N3. CRYOGENIC Stasis Pops 
Each of these four rooms contains a 5-foot-diameter, 
crimson, semitranslucent crystal sphere in a low stand. 
A door in the side of each sphere opens when a crea- 
ture that has telepathy approaches within 5 feet of it; 
half the door swings upward and half swings down 
to form a ramp. Each sphere is a cryogenic stasis pod 
designed to keep a gnome ceremorph or a gnome 
squidling alive and healthy on a long voyage. The pods 
are nonfunctional unless the power core is fixed, which 
is beyond the ceremorphs’ capability. 


N4. BATTLE DECK 


This middle deck has an open cowl. Mounted to the deck 
is a forward-facing ballista. The walls are lined with bal- 
lista bolts waiting to be used. 


Stairs lead down to area N2 and up to area N7, and a 
flesh door leads to area N5. 

Ballista. This marvel of gnomish over-engineering 
is still operational. Dials, knobs, and levers festoon the 
gunner’s station, which comes with firing instructions 
written in Qualith (a braille-like script that illithids read 
with their tentacles). A character who hasn't read the 
instructions or had them translated must succeed on a 
DC 15 Intelligence (Arcana) check to fire the weapon. If 
the check fails by 5 or more, the device misfires, dealing 
9 (2d8) slashing damage to one randomly determined 
creature within 10 feet of the ballista. 


N5. MAINTENANCE 


Crystals protrude from the chitinous ceiling of this oddly 
shaped room. Some of the crystals are lit, and others are 
flickering or burned out. Plates of chitin have been pried 
loose from the walls in places, exposing cavities filled 
with tangled masses of black tubes. Scattered across the 
floor are unusual-looking tools. 


Ifit hasn't been lured elsewhere, Dredavex is here, 
peering into a wall cavity and trying to figure out a way 
to keep the life support system from shutting down. The 


Map 2.7: 10 AsceNoaNT 


chaotic neutral gnome ceremorph (see appendix C) is 
equipped with two nonmagical items: 


Laser Pistol. Rules for laser pistols appear in the Dun- 
Seon Master's Guide. This weapon can fire 33 shots 
before its energy cell is drained. After its last shot is 
expended, the weapon becomes inoperable. The en- 
ergy cell can't be removed or recharged. 

Psi Crystal Detector. This black metal box is the size of 
a bar of soap. It emits an audible clicking noise when a 
psi crystal is within 5 miles of it. The closer the object 
gets to the psi crystal, the more rapid the clicks. 


A character who tries to help Dredavex with the life 
support system can make a DC 25 Intelligence (Arcana) 
check after studying the alien technology for at least 1 
hour. On a successful check, the character devises a 
solution that enables the life support fem to remain 
operational for an additional 24 hours. 


N6. PROPULSION ROOM 


This room contains a five-foot-diameter sphere of shiny 
black metal with small, transparent, hexagonal windows. 
Sharp metal tines resembling grasping claws protrude 
from the nearby walls and ceiling, stretching toward the 
sphere but stopping short of it. Along the walls are low- 
mounted control stations studded with knobs and dials. 


The black sphere contains the charred remains of a fist- 
sized crystal that could propel the nautiloid through the 
air and across space. The crystal cracked and imploded 
during the crash. Until a replacement is found, the ship 
is grounded. The gnome ceremorphs think they can 
use a psi crystal as a temporary fix, but they're not sure 
where to find one. 


N7. BRIDGE 


Suspended from the ceiling of this high-domed chamber 
is a complex lattice of bioluminescent jellyfish that use 
the glowing tips of their tendrils to form constellations. A 
high-backed chair with short armrests capped with spar- 
kly blue crystal orbs tilts up toward the display. 

A panel on the starboard wall lies open, exposing a 
pulsing tendril of flesh embedded with crystal shards. 


If it hasn't been lured elsewhere, Vorryn the gnome 
ceremorph (see appendix C) is here, using the orbs on 
the ship’s helm (the chair) to communicate telepathically 
with the nautiloid, which has the liquefied conscious- 
nesses of several other mind flayers flowing through 

its veins. The chaotic neutral gnome ceremorph is 
equipped with two nonmagical items: 


Laser Pistol. Rules for laser pistols appear in the Dun- 
geon Master's Guide. This weapon is fully charged 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


A THOUGHTFUL ADVENTURER TRA 


GNOME SQUIDLING BACK To TEN-Town: 


and can fire 50 shots before its energy cell is drained. 
After its last shot is expended, the weapon becomes 
inoperable. The energy cell can’t be removed or 
recharged, 

Pacifier Rod. This 6-inch-long black metal rod has a 
button at the top. Using an action to press the button 
causes the rod to emit a chirp. Any creature within 30 
feet of the rod that isn't deafened and has an Intelli- 
gence of 3 or lower must succeed on a DC 13 Consti- 
tution saving throw or be incapacitated for 1 minute. 
After each activation, there's a 25 percent chance that 
the rod breaks and becomes inoperable. 


Helm. This chair is securely attached to the deck and 
can't be used by creatures that are not mind flayers. Any 
non-illithid that sits in the chair and touches both blue 
orbs at once must succeed on a DC 17 Constitution sav 
ing throw or be stunned for 10 minutes. 

Self-Destruct. If Vorryn touches one of the helm’s 
blue orbs while Dredavex touches the other, they can 
jointly activate the nautiloid’s self-destruct system. The 
gnome ceremorphs take this desperate action only if 
there's a good chance the ship's technology will fall into 
the wrong hands or if they're forced to abandon ship. 
Once the self-destruct’s countdown timer has begun, it 
can't be stopped. A voice in Deep Speech counts down 
the seconds from 60. When the timer reaches 0, the ship 
disintegrates in an explosion bright enough to see from 
Ten-Towns. Any creature inside the ship or within 60 
feet of it when this occurs takes 70 (20d6) force damage. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


Telepathic Distress Beacon. The “pulsing tendril of 
flesh” extruding from the open wall is the ship's tele- 
pathic distress beacon. It can be deactivated in the fol- 
lowing ways: 


+ Amind flayer can use the helm to shut it off. 
Any creature can use an action to try to rip the ten- 
dril out of the wall, doing so with a successful DC 16 
Strength check. 

The tendril can be destroyed or hacked off with a 
slashing weapon. It has AC 10, 15 hit points, and resis 
tance to psychic damage. 


Exits. Fleshy doorways lead to areas N8 and N9, 
while stairs lead down to area N4. 


N8. OBSERVATION DECK 
The deck is covered in frost. A pintle mount for a tele- 
scope is fastened near the exterior railing. 


N9. CAPTAINS’ QUARTERS 


This domed chamber is full of clutter, a lot of it piled 
atop a table with one-foot-high legs. Behind the table 
is a five-foot-diameter crystal sphere mounted atop a 
low stand, 

Five strange, glowing gizmos are attached to the chi- 
tinous walls seven feet above the floor. These devices 
look like the tips of metal wands held in pincer-claws. 


The five gizmos on the walls fire beams of radiant en- 
ergy whenever a non-illithid is in the room. At the start 
of each turn, each gizmo targets a random creature 

in the room (including mind flayers). The target must 
succeed on a DC 16 Dexterity saving throw or be struck 
by the gizmo’s beam, taking 4 (1d8) radiant damage. 
Each gizmo is a Tiny object with AC 16, 3 hit points, and 
immunity to poison and psychic damage. A character 
can use an action to try to tear a gizmo from the wall, 
doing so with a successful DC 10 Strength check. Re- 
ducing a gizmo to 0 hit points or tearing it from the wall 
destroys it. 

Crystal Sphere. The crystal sphere is a cryogenic 
stasis pod, identical to the ones in area N3 and similarly 
nonfunctional. 

Worktable. Amid the clutter on the table are two 
magic items (see “Treasure” below), which a character 
can find only by rooting through the junk. Any creature 
that does so has a 50 percent chance of knocking two 
things together and triggering an electrical discharge. 
When such a discharge occurs, every creature within 
5 feet of the table must make a DC 17 Dexterity saving 
throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 4 (1d8) light- 
ning damage. 

Treasure. The two magic items on the worktable were 
fashioned on distant worlds. 

The first is a sticky, metal monocle with a kaleido- 
scopic lens that functions like eyes of minute seeing. 

The second is a slimy coif made from a living space 
slug, that functions like a helm of telepathy. A creature 
that attunes to this headgear can pick up the nautiloid’s 
telepathic distress beacon. 


BULETTE PROOF 


One last danger confronts the heroes as they leave the 
ship and head out of the mountain valley: 


Something big is plowing through the deep snow, head- 
ing in your direction. Only its shiny dorsal ridge breaks 
the snow's surface. 


Vorryn and Dredavex released a hostile bulette into the 
wild after the crash because they didn't want to feed it. 
They have no control over the creature, and they have all 
but forgotten about it. They fail to warn the characters 
that it poses a threat to anyone approaching or leav- 

ing the ship. 

The characters first notice the bulette when it’s 120 
feet away from them, and it has three-quarters cover 
under the snow. When it gets within 30 feet of the 
party, the bulette springs out of the snow and uses its 
Deadly Leap. 

If the characters don't kill it, the bulette gradually mi- 
grates toward Ten-Towns. 


JARLMOOT 


The characters might come here after hearing a tale 
about a circle of giant thrones (see “Tall Tales in Ten- 
Towns,” page 101), or they might be led here by Yselm 
Bloodfang (see “Yselm’s Way,” page 103). 

Seven empty, ice-glazed thrones form a ring atop a 
snow-covered hillock. Under the light of a full moon, 
the apparitions of dead frost giant jarls appear in the 
thrones, clutching the ends of their armrests with icy 
fingers as they reminisce about the glorious past. 

The ancient thrones are carved out of blocks of stone. 
When the apparitions of the frost giants manifest, their 
eyes glow white in the darkness. Three of the giants 
have on fur vests and leather trousers; three others wear 
chainmail from head to toe. The seventh giant, Reggar- 
yarva, is slightly larger than the others and wears a coat 
of white dragon scales and a magnificent horned helm. 
Reggaryarva was once called the “jarl of jarls” and often 
had the final say—or axe blow—in any heated discus- 
sion. He sits in the throne that faces north, as he should. 
Beneath Reggaryarva's throne is a vault dedicated to 
Thrym, the god of the frost giants. 


[ARLMOOT LOCATIONS 
The following area descriptions are keyed to map 2.8. 


Ji. RING OF THRONES 


Ice covers seven giant thrones arrayed in a ring atop 
a snow-covered hill. Scores of black ravens gather 
overhead. 


A detect magic spell or similar magic reveals an aura of 
necromancy around the ring of thrones and extending 
10 feet beyond the outer edge of the ring. While in this 
area, creatures that do not have resistance or immunity 
to cold damage gain vulnerability to cold damage. 

The characters can see the frost giant apparitions only 
if they step into the ring under the light of a full moon. 
Otherwise, the thrones are empty, and the characters 
have nothing else to interact with. The apparitions 
refuse to speak in the characters’ presence, and they 
can’t be harmed or turned. Barely lifting one finger, 
the apparition of Reggaryarva summons a frost giant 
skeleton (see appendix C) to challenge the party. If the 
skeleton is defeated, it disappears, and Reggaryarva 
summons two invisible stalkers to carry on the fight. 
Each creature summoned in this manner appears in an 
unoccupied space of Reggaryarva's choice within the 
circle of thrones. 

If the characters defeat the frost giant skeleton and 
the invisible stalkers, Reggaryarva is impressed and 
challenges them no more. Furthermore, the charac- 
ters’ triumph earns them a reward: access to the vault 
under the hill. The other six apparitions intone ancient 
words in Giant, causing Reggaryarva to fade away as his 
throne rises 30 feet into the air, revealing a hidden stair- 
case that descends to area J2. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


137 


THE GHOSTS OF ANCIENT FROST GIANTIJARLS SIT IN, 
JUDGMENT OVER ALL WHO WOULD Dis#URB THEIR REST. 


ae 


If she is present, Yselm Bloodfang betrays and at- 
tacks them as Reggaryarva's throne rises into the air. / 
winter wolf sent by the Frostmaiden joins the fray on 
Yselm’s side. Both villains fight to the death. 

When the full moon disappears below the horizon, 
Reggaryarva's throne slowly lowers back into place, 
sealing the vault entrance once more. 


J2. HALL OF BRAZIERS 

jarlmoot's underground vault is hewn out of rock and 
has flat, 25-foot-high ceilings throughout. As the charac- 
ters descend the stairs, read: 


To your left as you enter this dark hall is a closed, stone 
double door with no handles or hinges on this side. To 
your right is a curved tunnel blocked by an iron gate that 
has one-foot-square gaps between its horizontal and 
vertical bars. The iron hinges on the northern side of the 
gate indicate that it swings inward. 

Situated in shallow alcoves at the far end of this hall 
are six braziers, each one in the shape of a four-foot-tall, 
two-foot-wide stone urn held snugly atop a five-foot-high, 
clawed basalt pedestal. Carved into each urn is a rune. 
Above the alcoves looms a stone archway, into which 


some words are inscribed. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


The inscription carved inte the arch above the alcoves is 
a poem written in the Dwarvish alphabet: 


Snatch a scale from a sleeping wyrm; 
Against the blowing wind, stand firm. 
Climb a mountain with a stone in your shoe; 
On little feet, death comes for you. 

Be the arrow that starts the war; 

Let life's blood fall till it falls no more. 


Double Door. The double door to area J5 is unlocked. 
As an action, a character can push open either door with 
a successful DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check. 

Locked Gate. The iron gate that seals off area J3 won't 
open until all six braziers in the hall are lit. The gaps 
between the bars are too small for Small or Medium 
characters to squeeze through, 

Stone Braziers. Any character who understands 
Dwarvish or Giant can interpret the runes on the six 
braziers as follows: dod (death), fjell (mountain), krig 
(war), liv (life), vind (wind), and wyrm (dragon). When 
the proper ingredients are placed inside one, magical 
fire fills the brazier. This fire destroys the brazier's non- 
magical contents and burns for 1 hour. Only while all six 
braziers are lit can the gate to area J3 be opened. 

Characters can find most of the ingredients they need 
in area J5. The poem (see above) provides clues to help 
the characters figure out which of the ingredients be- 
longs in each brazier. For example, the first line of the 
poem contains the words “scale” and “wyrm,” suggest- 
ing that a dragon's scale is needed for the brazier that 
bears the wyrm rune. 


Wyrm (Dragon). Dropping a dragon's scale in this bra- 
zier summons forth its fire. The characters can sub- 
stitute some other dragon body part, such as a fang 
or a claw. 

Vind (Wind). Blowing air into this brazier lights its fire. 
No ingredient is required. 

Fjell (Mountain). Dropping a stone or a pebble from a 
mountain into this brazier summons forth its fire. 

Dod (Death). Dropping a Tiny, dead creature, or three 
drops of blood from any dead creature, into this bra- 
zier summons forth its fire. 

Krig (War). Dropping an arrow into this brazier sum- 
mons forth its fire. The characters can substitute 
some other piece of ammunition, such as a crossbow 
bolt or sling stone. 

Liv (Life). Three drops of blood from a living creature 
must fall into this brazier to make its fire appear. 


J3. CURVED TUNNEL 

There is nothing remarkable about this tunnel. It ends 
at a pair of heavy stone doors. A character can use an 
action to push open either door with a successful DC 15 
Strength (Athletics) check, allowing access to area J4. 


GIANT RUNES (AREA J2) 


Doo Foe 


(DeatH Rune) (Mountain Rune) 


Kris liv 

(War RUNE) (Lire Rune) 
Vino Wyrm 

(Wino Rune) (Deacon Rune) 


~~ JARLMOOT 


1square = 10 fegt 


Mar 2.8: Jarimoor 


J4. Turn THE GOLD KEY? 


A large oak chest with silver fittings stands against the 
wall directly opposite the double doors. A gold key sticks 
out of the chest’s built-in lock. 


The chest is 10 feet long, 5 feet wide, and 6 feet tall, with 
a half-barrel-shaped lid. It is stuck to the floor and can't 
be moved. The gold key in the lock is not the key that un. 
locks the chest, and it can be safely removed. (The real 
key is in area J5.) After the key is pulled out, a character 
can use thieves’ tools to try to pick the lock, doing so 
with a successful DC 20 Dexterity check. A knock spell 
or similar magic also opens the chest. 

Exit Portal. Turning the gold key in the lock doesn't 
unlock the chest but instead conjures a 10-foot-square 
doorway through which area J1 can be seen. The door- 
way appears on the north wall, above the chest. Any 
creature that passes through this doorway is teleported 
to an unoccupied space within Jarlmoot's circle of 
thrones. A swarm of ravens then descends upon that 
creature and attacks it. Enough ravens are circling 
Jarlmoot to create four such swarms. 

The portal is one-way only; it can't be seen or entered 
from area J1. The portal closes automatically after 10 
minutes, causing the gold key to turn back to its original 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


140 


position. The portal closes instantly if the gold key is re- 
moved from the chest’s lock. 

Treasure. The gold key is worth 25 gp. Inside the 
chest, held in a wooden brace, is a horn of blasting. 
Stacked around the horn are six flying battleaxes (use 
the flying sword stat block) that attack as soon as the 
lid opens. 


J5. CHAMBER OF CHESTS 


This chamber holds four large wooden chests with iron 
fittings and built-in locks. Hanging from a hook in the 
middle of the ceiling is a one-foot-diameter iron ring with 
four one-foot-long iron keys and a single, one-foot-long 
silver key dangling from it. 


The keys are sized appropriately for the locks on the 
oversized chests. To reach the ring of keys, the charac- 
ters must either use magic to climb the walls or stack 
the chests on end and climb them. Other solutions might 
present themselves; try to reward the players’ ingenuity. 
The ring of keys is too heavy to lift with a mage hand 
spell, but the spell can be used to unscrew the hook 
from which the ring hangs, causing the keys to fall. The 
iron keys unlock the chests in this room. The silver key 
(which is worth 2 gp) unlocks the chest in area J4. 

Chests. Each chest weighs 150 pounds and is 10 
feet long, 5 feet wide, and 6 feet tall, with a half-barrel- 
shaped lid. A character can use an action to try to pick 
a chest’s lock using thieves’ tools, doing so with a suc- 
cessful DC 15 Dexterity check. A knock spell or similar 
magic also opens a chest. 

Each chest contains a single item. The four items are 
as follows: 


+ An elven arrow 

+ Adead snowy owl, frozen stiff 

+ Agleaming scale from a young white dragon 
+ Afist-sized stone from Kelvin's Cairn 


LEAVING JARLMOOT 


As the characters leave Jatlmoot, read the following 
boxed text to the players: 


Through the blowing snow, you see a frost giant with 
Jong white hair stride toward you. In her hands, she 
grasps an icy chain with an anvil bolted to one end of it. 


The frost giant, Gromin’gorn, is hostile and has noble 
blood in her icy veins. She has come to Jarlmoot to be 
tested by the spirits of her ancestors. Only by passing 
this test can she hope to lead her tribe. If one of the 
characters is openly carrying the horn of blasting from 
area J4, Gromin’gorn tries to claim it for herself, believ- 
ing this is the test her ancestors have set before her. 

Instead of a greataxe, Gromin’gorn wields a 10-foot- 
long chain with an anvil bolted to the end of it. In her 
hands, it deals 25 (3d12 + 6) bludgeoning damage on a 
hit. She can make two attacks with it as an action. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


KARKOLOHK 


A goblin prison-fort clings to an icy crag in the rocky, 
wind-blasted western foothills of the Spine of the World. 
From this ramshackle mountain roost, the goblins 
launch raids against caravans traveling to and from 
Ten-Towns and mount hunting expeditions across 
the tundra. 

Any of the following hooks might lure characters to 
the gates of Karkolohk: 


+ The characters learn about the goblin fortress 
while they're in Ten-Towns (see “Tall Tales in Ten- 
Towns,” page 101). 

Sherriff Markham Southwell of Bryn Shander hires 
the characters to bring him the head of the goblin 
chief, Yarb-Gnock (see “Peace Out,” page 103, and 
“Gnome Diplomacy,” below). 

The characters follow a goblin wagon heading back to 
Karkolohk (see “Foaming Mugs,” page 34). 

The characters find a shield guardian's amulet in 
the Lost Spire of Netheril (see page 145) and use 

its tracking feature, which leads them to Karkolohk, 
where the shield guardian is found. 


SECRET OF CHIEF YARB-GNOCK 


Ruling a goblin horde is a thankless job. That's a hard 
lesson for a rock gnome sorcerer to learn. 

Five years ago, before Icewind Dale became the per- 
petually frozen hellscape it is today, Spellix Romwod 
was traveling through the mountain pass with a small 
caravan when it was caught in an avalanche. The gob- 
lins who triggered the avalanche captured Spellix’s 
mates and dragged them back to their caves in the 
mountains to be eaten. Spellix, whom the goblins over- 
looked, followed them and devised a cunning plan to 
free his companions. Using materials scavenged from 
the wrecked caravan, he engineered a costume for him- 
self. Disguised as a half-metal goblin, he infiltrated the 
goblins’ lair and did his best to fit in, cleverly using silent 
image spells to hide the imperfections in his disguise. 
When he was offered a bone to gnaw on, his mechanical 
goblin mouth malfunctioned and wouldn't stop grinding 
its teeth. Thus, Spellix Romwod came to be known as 
Yarb-Gnock, which means “Ever-Gnawing” in Goblin. 

Spellix was repulsed by the goblins’ squalor and took 
pity on them. Abandoning all concern for his former 
mates, whom he didn't particularly like anyway, Spellix 
adopted the name given to him by the goblins and spent 
the next several months engineering ways to improve 
their standard of living. Long after the other members 
of the caravan had been eaten, Yarb-Gnock became the 
new chief after the previous one choked to death on a 
mountain goat tongue. By then, Yarb-Gnock had already 
drawn up plans to build a fortress in the mountains. 
Karkolohk, the Gnomish word for “home,” became the 
goblin tribe's dream of a better future. 

As the goblins were finishing construction of their 
new home, everlasting winter descended upon Icewind 
Dale. Fewer caravans made their way through the 
mountain pass, forcing Chief Yarb-Gnock to send goblin 
wagons far and wide in search of food and resources. 


Despite his best efforts, the gnome-in-goblin’s-clothing 
could sense that the tribe was becoming increasingly 
frustrated. The goblins felt like they were working 
harder for less, and a few are beginning to suspect that 
Chief Yarb-Gnock is a fraud. 

Cooped up in the cold with creatures that would 
kill him if they learned the truth, Chief Yarb-Gnock is 
running out of ideas to keep the goblins motivated on 
other tasks and has begun to fear that the goblins are 
on to him. His costume is beginning to come apart, and 
paranoia has made him sleep-deprived. The number of 
“traitors” hurled from the mountaintop increases with 
every cycle of the moon, and the goblins don't know who 
among them are Yarb-Gnock’s loyal spies. Mistrust has 
infected every nook and cranny of Karkolohk. 

Spellix Romwod was beginning to think that the time 
had come to abandon his goblin kin and seek refuge in 
Ten-Towns when, two days ago, his fortunes improved 
suddenly. Goblins out scavenging in a wagon stumbled 
across a curious object in the tundra—a metallic, egg- 
shaped crate. (This object was jettisoned from an illithid 
nautiloid soon before it crashed in the mountains to the 
east, as described in “Id Ascendant,” page 132.) Chief 
Yarb-Gnock thinks the crate might hold something 
wondrous, and getting it open has become his new 
obsession. 


KARKOLOHK OVERVIEW 


The goblins of Karkolohk often haunt the trail that 
connects Ten-Towns to other settlements farther south, 
though it sees little traffic nowadays. Prisoners are kept 
in dangling cages until they freeze to death, whereupon 
the goblins cook and eat them. 

Deep tracks left by goblin wagons lead to and from 
Karkolohk, making it easy to find despite the heavy 
snowfall. Once the characters are within the foothills 
and travel high enough to breach the clouds, the fortress 
becomes visible about from a mile away. 

The fortress is worked into the spur of a mountain 
slope in a way that uses the natural environment to its 
advantage. Situated at the top of a hill, goblin lookouts 
have an excellent view of anyone approaching. 

The weather in the mountains is so violent that Kar- 
kolohk’s structures occasionally come loose and crash 
down the mountainside. Other times, chemistry experi- 
ments gone awry send wooden structures up in flames. 
Thus, the fort is always bustling with construction 
and repairs. 


GOBLIN MINDSET 
Chief Yarb-Gnock has taught the goblins to seize their 
destiny and stop at nothing to get what they want. Op- 
portunistic creatures that they are, they take any sign 
of weakness as an opening to gain an advantage. If bul- 
lying and intimidation don’t work, the goblins use more 
underhanded and passive-aggressive tactics. If they 
think that they are at a disadvantage or that they will 
come to an unavoidable loss, the goblins will do what- 
ever they can to backtrack out of such a situation, be it 
through bribery, wheedling, or treachery. 

Visitors are not welcome at Karkolohk. Moreover, 
the goblins who live here detest non-goblins, especially 


gnomes. Were the goblins just a little smarter, they 
would see through Chief Yarb-Gnock’s crude disguise 
and the magic he uses to hides its imperfections, and 
tear Spellix Romwod limb from limb. 


GNOME DIPLOMACY 

If you decide to use the “Peace Out” quest (see page 
103), the characters are treated as diplomats by the 
goblins and permitted to approach and enter the fortress 
unmolested, provided they do no harm to its inhabitants. 
Assuming they avoid a violent altercation, the characters 
are escorted by a goblin to Yarb-Gnock's dining hall 
(area K11) for a private feast with the chief. This feast 
consists of a cooked mountain goat. What happens next 
depends on Yarb-Gnock’s goal, which can be one of the 
following: 


If Yarb-Gnock’s goal is to make peace with Ten-Towns, 
he gives the party a rolled-up strip of rabbit hide at the 
end of the meal. On this strip of hide he has written 

a brief, formal notice in Common addressed to the 
Council of Speakers of Ten-Towns. It asserts that the 
goblins of Karkolohk will refrain from attacking trav- 
elers and caravans heading to and from Ten-Towns for 
as long as the peace treaty between Ten-Towns and 
Karkolohk lasts, and it bears Yarb-Gnock’s signature 
at the bottom. After handing them the message, Yarb- 
Gnock urges the characters to leave at once and de- 
liver it to the Council Hall in Bryn Shander. 

If Yarb-Gnock’s goal is to flee Karkolohk, the meal 
concludes with Yarb-Gnock requesting that the char- 
acters escort him to the Council Hall in Bryn Shander. 
Mistaking any attempt by Yarb-Gnock to leave Kar- 
kolohk as an abduction orchestrated by the characters, 
the goblins attack the characters as they try to flee the 
fortress with Yarb-Gnock in tow. During this escape 
attempt, Yarb-Gnock fights only in self-defense, count- 
ing on the characters to deal with any goblins that get 
in the way. 


KARKOLOHK LOCATIONS 
The following locations are keyed to map 2.9. 


K1. WATCHTOWERS 

The fortress has three of these squat structures, two 
overlooking the eastern approach and a third perched 
atop the cliffs to the west. Each watchtower stands 20 
feet tall and has a rickety wooden ladder leading to the 
top, where a thick column of smoke issues from a bra- 
zier that is kept lit at all times. 

Four goblins dressed in cold weather clothing stand 
guard atop each tower. The rampart battlements grant 
them half cover against attacks from outside the fort. 
They are supposed to be looking outward for signs of 
trouble, but the goblins prefer to stand around the bra- 
zier for warmth. One goblin has a horn that it can blow 
to sound an alarm, putting the entire fortress on alert. 

Since visitors aren't welcome at Karkolohk, the 
goblins shoot arrows at any they see. A character who 
wants to sneak past a watchtower or climb its ladder 
undetected must succeed on a DC 9 Dexterity (Stealth) 
check. If multiple party members are attempting the 
same task, have them make a group check instead. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


141 


142 


K2. MAIN GATE 


A fiery brazier casts its flickering light on the thirty-foot- 
high, spiked ramparts that frame the main gate. Four 
goblins peer down from these ramparts, two per side. 
The gate is twenty feet tall and fashioned out of cross- 
hatched pieces of wood that have been lashed together. 
A heavy chain and padlock seals the gate from the inside. 


Six goblins shiver and stamp their feet atop the ram- 
parts, trying to keep warm. They are a chatty bunch, 
making jokes at one another’s expense. Each rampart 
has a wooden ladder leading up to it. 

A character who wants to approach the gate unde- 
tected must succeed on a DC 9 Dexterity (Stealth) 
check. If multiple party members are attempting the 
same thing, have them make a group check instead. A 
character next to the gate can use an action to reach 
through it and try to pick the frozen padlock using 
thieves’ tools, doing so with a successful DC 20 Dexter- 
ity check. The courtyard warden (see area K3) carries 
the key to the lock. 

A Small character can try to squeeze under the gate or 
between its wooden bars, doing so with a successful DC 
20 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check. 


K3. COURTYARD 


Two rickety wooden bridges loom over this area at 
heights of thirty feet and fifty feet, respectively. The 
higher bridge is missing a large section of its middle, and 
what remains of that structure doesn’t look safe. 

Two iron cages hang from beams that extend south- 
east off the lower bridge. One of the cages twirls on its 
heavy iron chain as a flurry of black-feathered ravens 
tear into the flesh of the desolate creature caged within. 
Underneath the bridge is a worg with a rider on its back. 
The rider, swathed in cold weather clothing, appears 
to be a rather fat goblin. North and west of the higher 
bridge, resting in the snow, are three large, wooden 
cages, currently empty. 


The wooden cages were built to hold the polar bears 
that pull the goblins’ wagons. 

The goblin riding the worg is Snubsuk, the courtyard 
warden. His job is to lock and unlock the main gate at 
area K2. The worg charges toward intruders, causing 
Snubsuk to tumble off the worg's back and fall prone 
in the snow. Snubsuk is a coward and flees when sepa- 
rated from his mount, making his way to the top of area 
K5. Snubsuk carries the key to the main gate, dangling 
from a chain manacled to his left wrist. 

Bridges and Cages. The center of the 50-foot-high 
bridge collapsed a few days ago. The goblins used the 
debris to light fires and haven't fixed the bridge yet. The 
30-foot-high bridge is intact and unguarded. One of the 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


cages hanging from it contains a prisoner: a dead hu- 
man that the ravens are feasting on. 


K4. ARCHER PLATFORMS 

These wooden platforms creak and groan underfoot. 
Each of them has two goblins in cold weather clothing 
and two wolves stationed atop it. 

If an alarm sounds, the goblins begin looking for tar- 
gets on the ground to pick off with their shortbows. If 
the enemy moves to a location the goblins can't see, they 
mount the wolves and move to another archer platform. 


K5. MAIN BATTLE PLATFORM 


This thirty-foot-tall wooden watchtower is connected to 
the snowy ridges on either side of it by wooden bridges. 
Hanging off it are a pair of empty iron cages, and dan- 
gling underneath the tower's raised platform is a nine- 
foot-tall, golem-like construct with a helm-shaped head. 
This humanoid contraption is attached to an arrange- 
ment of ropes and pulleys that make it look like a giant 
marionette. 


When announcements or rallying cries need to be made, 
the top of this tower is where Chief Yarb-Gnock stands 
to address the goblin tribe. No goblins are on it cur- 
rently, although it sees a fair amount of traffic. A rickety 
wooden ladder runs from the platform to the ground. 
The underside of the platform is rigged with a system 
of ropes and pulleys that the goblins can use to hoist up 
anything heavier than a goblin, and the top of the plat- 
form has snow-covered hatches built into it that can be 
lifted away to get at the rigging underneath. 

Dangling Construct. The construct dangling be- 
neath the platform is a shield guardian that survived 
the fall of Ythryn, although its master did not. It was 
heavily damaged in the crash; consequently, its hit point 
maximum is reduced to 80. To activate and control the 
shield guardian, the characters need its amulet, which 
is inside an ancient tower that broke away when Ythryn 
came down and crashed in the tundra (see “Lost Spire 
of Netheril,” page 145). They also need to operate the 
goblins’ system of pulleys and ropes to lower it to the 
ground; figuring out how the system works requires a 
successful DC 15 Intelligence check. 

The shield guardian was built by a Netherese wizard 
and is nearly two thousand years old. Carved into its 
massive forearms is the wizard’s personal sigil. After 
the wizard’s tower crashed, the guardian left the spire 
to go find help but got buried in an avalanche. It eventu- 
ally shut down. Centuries later, a band of goblins dug it 
out and hauled it back to Karkolohk. Unfortunately for 
them, the guardian could not be reactivated. After some 
thought, Chief Yarb-Gnock decided to dangle it from this 
platform, using ropes and pulleys like puppet strings to 
make the guardian appear animate and terrifying. This 
construct must have been a lively sight to behold at one 
point, but the aura of menace surrounding it quickly 
faded, and the goblins lost all interest in it. 


Map 2.9: KarKoLonk 


K6. HEALERS’ Huts 


On a wide, snow-covered shelf, six conical tents fash- 
ioned from animal skins and bark draped over wood 
frames are arranged in a circle around a burning brazier. 


Each hut is home to a goblin healer in cold weather 
clothing. Each one owns a healer’s kit. In addition, each 
healer has a pet mountain goat (see appendix C), from 
which it draws milk and which it can use as a mount. 


Each goat is usually tied to a post inside the healer’s hut. 


Manafek. The goblin healer in the easternmost hut 
is named Manafek. She also tells fortunes by studying 
patterns of raven's blood spilled on the snow. She is 
wise enough to have seen through Chief Yarb-Gnock's 
disguise and is contemplating whether to blackmail the 
rock gnome or expose him. She's leaning toward the 
former, since she’s not sure the goblins will pick her as 
their new leader if Yarb-Gnock dies. 


K7. WALK OF DOOM 


A twenty-foot-long wooden walkway clings to the edge of 
a precipice, Its spiked railings are adorned with ribbons 
of shredded cloth and goblin skulls. 


Whenever Chief Yarb-Gnock wants to make an example 
of a goblin, the poor wretch is dragged screaming to this 
walkway. The goblin can either hurl itself off the cliff to 
its death or die by the swords of its kin, The skulls be- 
long to goblins who never made it to the end of the walk- 
way. Ravens have picked the skulls clean. 

The walkway was shoddily constructed and shows 
signs of having been repaired many times after being 
damaged by wind, If more than 200 pounds is placed on 
the outermost half of it, the whole thing snaps off and 
tumbles down the mountainside. Any creature on the 
walkway when it breaks off must make a DC 16 Dex- 
terity saving throw, On a successful save, the creature 
leaps off and falls prone on the ground near the slope. 
On a failed save, the creature falls 150 feet onto icy 
rocks with goblin bones scattered among them, taking 
52 (15d6) bludgeoning damage from the impact 


K8. GOBLIN Huts 


Ramshackle huts cling precariously to the rock face, their 
rope ladders swaying with every gust of wind. 


These huts are secured to the rock face with stilts. Each 
hut is 15 to 20 feet above the path of wooden planks 
that runs the length of the ledge below them. The huts’ 
interiors are lined with animal pelts and thick strips of 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


144 


SPELLIx ROMWOD 


Small humanoid (gnome), chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 14 (hide armor) 
Hit Points 33 (6d6 + 12) 


Speed 25 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
6(-2) 1563 4EY 1562 9) 1663 


——_—_—_—— SSS 
Skills Arcana +4, Deception +5, History +4 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 

Languages Common, Draconic, Elvish, Gnomish, Goblin 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 

= 
Gnome Cunning. Spellix has advantage on all Intelligence, Wis- 
dom, and Charisma saving throws against magic. 


Innate Spellcasting. Spellix's spelicasting ability is Charisma 
(spell save DC 13, +5 to hit with spell attacks). He can innately 
cast the following spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: fire bolt,* mage hand, shocking grasp* 
3/day: silent image 

1/day each: chromatic orb, crown of madness, shield 
*See “Actions” below. 


ACTIONS 


Shocking Grasp (Cantrip). Melee Spell Attack: +5 to hit (with 
advantage on the attack roll if the target is wearing armor 
made of metal), reach 5 ft., one creature. Hit: 4 (1d8) lightning 
damage, and the target can’t take reactions until the start of its 
next turn. 


Fire Bolt (Cantrip). Ranged Spell Attack: +5 to hit, range 120 ft., 

one target. Hit: 5 (1d10) fire damage. A flammable object hit by 

this spell ignites if it isn’t being worn or carried. 
—K<K<*—C—L_—__ SEE 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


bark. Each hut contains an adult goblin and 1d6 goblin 
children (noncombatants). 

When the fortress comes under attack, the goblins 
who live here pull up their rope ladders, which makes 
getting to the huts difficult. A creature can reach a hut by 
scaling the icy cliff, but doing this requires a successful 
DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check. 


K9. MAIN KEEP FOYER 

Four goblins in cold weather clothing guard this drafty 
hall. If an alarm sounds, the guards drop a heavy 
wooden crossbar across the double door to the south 
until Chief Yarb-Gnock gives the order to remove it. A 
ram or a similar siege weapon is needed to break down 
the barred door. 


K10. GUARD BARRACKS 

These rooms are furnished similarly with mangy furs 
heaped atop hammocks made from old fishing nets. No 
goblins are resting here when the characters arrive, 


K1l. Dininc Room 
A low banquet table dominates this room, and there are 
no chairs as goblins are expected to sit on the floor. The 
table and floor are strewn with fish bones, bits of rotting 
meat, and other refuse left over from previous meals. No 
one ever cleans this place. 

Characters who undertake the “Peace Out” quest 
(see page 103) are brought here to meet and dine with 
Chief Yarb-Gnock. The characters are expected to wait 
here until Spellix dons his Yarb-Gnock costume and 
emerges from his quarters (area K12). He engages in 
small talk until the food arrives about 10 minutes later. 

When the room is not in use, a lone goblin stands 
guard inside the room near the eastern door, which is 
sealed shut with a wooden crossbar and has a shuttered 
peephole at goblin eye level. If someone knocks on the 
other side of this door, the guard peers through the 
peephole to see who's there. If it sees a friendly face, it 
lifts the crossbar and opens the door. A character can 
use an action to try to force open this door from the 
other side, breaking the crossbar with a successful DC 
22 Strength (Athletics) check. When the dining room is 
in use, the guard retires to the barracks (area K10). 


K12. CHIEF'S QUARTERS 

The door to this room has three deadbolts. A character 
can use an action to try to force open the door, doing 
so with a successful DC 15 Strength check. Spellix 
Romwod (see the accompanying stat block) quickly 
dons his disguise if someone knocks on the door or 
tries to break it down, but it takes him 1 minute to do 
so. While putting on his goblin costume, Spellix makes 
light conversation (in Goblin) through the closed door 
to buy time. 

The following boxed text assumes that Spellix has had 
time to don his disguise before the characters open the 
door. If they catch him in the act, modify the description 
accordingly: 


This ten-foot-square room features two wooden shelves 
that hold half-dismantled objects and other junk. In 

the middle of the room, an odd-looking goblin in cold 
weather clothing stands next to a metallic, egg-shaped 
crate as big as he is. Nearby is a small, fur-lined cot and a 
brazier full of hot coals. 


Characters who search the junk on the shelves find a set 
of tinker’s tools and three trinkets (determined by roll- 
ing on the Icewind Dale Trinkets table in appendix A). 

If the characters clearly portray themselves as ene- 
mies of the goblins, Spellix removes his goblin mask 
so that the characters don't mistake him for an enemy. 
If asked how he ended up in his current predicament, 
Spellix tells them he's a method actor training for the 
role of a goblin warlord in a play. (He can’t help him- 
self—he lies about everything.) 

The characters can easily force Spellix to do what 
they say, since they are clearly mightier than his goblin 
horde. While in his Yarb-Gnock disguise, Spellix can be 
used as a hostage to facilitate the characters’ escape, or 
he can command the goblins to stand down and allow 
the characters to leave the fort unmolested. If Manafek 
(see area K6) is still alive, she might show up unex- 
pectedly with a goblin posse and expose the impostor, 
forcing Spellix to put his fate in the characters’ hands. 
If the characters surrender the gnome to the goblins, 
Spellix is hauled away to take the Walk of Doom (see 
area K7), and the characters are free to go without fur- 
ther incident. 

Egg-Shaped Crate. Made of magical metal, this in- 
destructible container is 3% feet tall and 3 feet wide, 
with a flat base that allows it to stand upright and seams 
at the top that suggest it opens like a flower. Though 
it looks smooth, its surface feels tacky. It weighs 250 
pounds and has a panel of flashing lights below its bulg- 
ing midsection. The panel is a nine-digit keypad locking 
mechanism, and each glowing button has braille-like 
bumps on it. Spellix was unable to remove the keypad 
or crack open the crate, so he has been trying different 
combinations on the lock. 

The characters won't be able to crack the eight-digit 
combination quickly, so the easiest way to open the 
crate is to cast a knock spell on it or pay someone 
in Ten-Towns to cast the spell (see “Magic in Ten- 
Towns,” page 20). 

Unlocking the crate causes the gibbering mouther 
contained inside it to spill out. It attacks all other crea- 
tures indiscriminately. 


K13. TREASURY 
This small room is empty. 


LOST SPIRE OF NETHERIL 


Buried in the tundra is the spire of a tower that broke 
away from the Netherese city of Ythryn when it fell from 
the sky nearly two thousand years ago. The spire shat- 
tered into pieces as it embedded itself in the earth, up- 
side down. There it has remained for centuries, buried 
under snow and ice. 

The Netherese wizard who lived inside the spire did 
not survive the crash. The wizard’s shield guardian not 
only survived but also dug its way out, creating a tunnel 
that others can use to reach the spire’s interior. Until 
recently, the mouth of this tunnel was buried under ice 
and snow. After exiting the spire, the shield guardian 
wandered into the Spine of the World, where it shut 
down and was lost for centuries until a band of goblins 
found it recently and brought it to their mountain fort 
(see “Karkolohk,” page 140). 

The characters can learn about the spire in Ten-Towns 
(see “Tall Tales in Ten-Towns,” page 101), or they 
might stumble upon it accidentally while hunting (see 
“Hunt for the Red Yeti,” page 104). The NPC who tells 
the tale is willing to guide the characters to the spire’s 
location for no less than 20 gp. After doing so, the guide 
wishes the party luck before heading back to Ten-Towns. 

Before the characters face the challenges of the 
spire, review the information about Dzaan in the “Ar- 
cane Brotherhood” section of appendix C. The details 
concerning Dzaan's simulacrum and bodyguard are 
especially pertinent, given what the characters are about 
to discover. 


Not-So-DEAD WIZARD OF THAY 


Dzaan instructed his simulacrum to remain in the spire 
and ordered Krintaas, his wight bodyguard, to watch 
over it. The simulacrum is keen to activate the rune 
chamber on the lowest level (area P16), because this 
room's magic can transform an illusory creature or 
object into a real one (within limits). The simulacrum 
thinks it can use the rune chamber to turn itself into a 
flesh-and-blood clone of Dzaan, but activating the cham- 
ber requires a life-spark, which the simulacrum does 
not possess. Krintaas, who also lacks a life-spark, is im- 
patiently waiting for Dzaan to return and quash the sim- 
ulacrum’s efforts to test the rune chamber, Neither the 
simulacrum nor Krintaas is aware that the real Dzaan is 
dead (see “Toil and Trouble,” page 62). 

When the characters show up, Dzaan’s simulacrum 
is ecstatic. Finally, some potentially helpful living 
creatures have arrived! The simulacrum will bargain, 
befriend, threaten, or do whatever else it thinks might 
work in order to get one or more of them to accompany 
it to the rune chamber. If the characters know that the 
real Dzaan is dead and convey that information to the 
simulacrum, it becomes even more determined. 

Once it learns that Dzaan is dead, Krintaas does what- 
ever it takes to make sure the simulacrum gets the life- 
spark it needs to activate the rune chamber. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


145 


146 


APPROACHING THE SPIRE 


When the characters come within sight of the section of 
the spire that’s visible on the surface, read: 


A twenty-foot-high, irregularly shaped spur of rock juts 
out of the tundra ahead of you. Its smooth and shiny sur- 
face cannot possibly have been worn down by the wind. 
No, this protrusion looks utterly out of place, as if it had 
been thrust into the ground, 


A character who examines the protrusion can make a 
DC 15 Intelligence (History) check to discern its nature. 
(The dwarves’ Stonecunning trait can prove useful 
here.) On a successful check, the character can confirm 
that the stone is neither naturally formed nor manually 
hewn, but rather shaped by magic. If the check succeeds 
by 5 or more, the character also discerns that that the 
protruding rock is of the top of a larger structure that 
continues underground. 


SLIPPERY ENTRANCE 

Characters who search the area around the protrusion 
find a slippery, 5-foot-diameter tunnel that enters the 
ground at a steep angle, then winds down into the fro- 
zen earth. A character moving through the tunnel with- 
out the aid of climbing gear or magic must succeed on a 
DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check or slide uncontrollably 
to the bottom, landing prone in area P1 but taking no 
damage. Characters can forgo climbing and simply slide 
down the tunnel, with a similar result. Getting back to 
the surface requires climbing gear or magic. 


Lost SPIRE OVERVIEW 


In addition to showing the four levels of the spire, map 
2.10 depicts a side view of the spire in its original state 
and a cross-section showing its current state: broken, 
mostly buried, and upside down. 

The spire’s constant features are summarized below: 


Everything Is Upside Down. Every traversable location 
shown on map 2.10 is upside down. To get around, the 
characters have to walk on ceilings and climb over the 
tops of doorways. Furnishings that weren't securely 


bolted to the walls or floor lie in disarray, or in shards, . 


on the ceiling. 

Illumination. All rooms, corridors, and staircases 
are lit by continual flame spells cast in sconces. The 
flames still point toward the ceiling, betraying their 
magical nature. They give off no heat. 

Room and Door Heights. All rooms and passageways 
are 12 feet high, with flat ceilings and floors unless 
the text says otherwise. All doorways are 8 feet high 
and arched; being upside down turns them into con- 
cave, 4-foot-high barriers that must be surmounted to 
get from one room to another). 

Tunnels. The shield guardian punched holes through 
the floor and gouged out tunnels in some places 
during its escape from the spire. Characters can use 
these openings to move between levels, but they'll 
need ropes or magic to ascend or descend safely. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


LOST SPIRE LOCATIONS 
The following locations are keyed to map 2.10. 


Pl. Upstpe-Down ENTRANCE 


The slippery tunnel opens into an upside-down room, 
the contents of which are coated in frost. Across from 
the tunnel is a wooden door that's flush with the ceiling, 
which used to be the floor. The door is ajar, and flanking 
it are two identical stone statues that hang down like 
stalactites. Across from the statues are sconces with 
upside-down flames burning in them. 


The statues, which merge seamlessly with the ceiling, 
depict a long-faced human dressed in wizard’s robes 
and clutching a staff. The statues used to have magical 
wards on them, but these protections faded long ago. 


P2. UPSIDE-DOWN CORRIDOR 

The upside-down stairs at the east end of this frost-filled 
corridor once connected to area P9, but the passage is 
so choked with rubble and ice that it can’t be used. 


P3. UPsIDE-DOWN LIBRARY 


Tall bookshelves affixed to the outer wall have spilled 
their contents onto the ceiling-turned-floor. A large table 
lies on its side, one leg broken. A five-foot-wide tunnel in 
the floor to the east leads down. 


Most of the books in this library have been destroyed by 
time and neglect. The group of adventurers Dzaan hired 
to help him search the spire removed all the books they 
considered valuable, including spellbooks. They left be- 
hind a few that might interest certain characters: 


Magical Wonders of Netheril. This book is a collection 
of interviews with Netherese archmages, who discuss 
their studies of ancient elven magic and the creation 
of mythallars (see appendix D). The book includes 
sketches of such devices. 

Mysteries of the Phaerimm. This book sheds light on 
the phaerimm—telepathic, funnel-shaped monsters of 
malevolent intellect that lurk in the Underdark—and 
includes disturbing sketches of them. 

Wizards in the Hollow. The birth of the Netherese 
empire is chronicled in this otherwise dull, plodding 
story about the lives of three Netherese wizards. 


Tunnel Down. A rough-hewn tunnel against the north 
wall leads down to area P6 on level 2. 


P4. UpsipE-Down WORKSHOP 
This room contains shattered and jumbled equipment, 


much of it near two heavy wooden worktables—one on 
its side, the other upside down. 


Map 2.10; Lost Spire oF NeTHERIL 


Characters who search through the wreckage find an 
iron key that unlocks the metal chest in area P5. 


P5. UPSIDE-DOWN POTION STORAGE 


The floor of this room is covered with shards of glass, 
frozen pools of spilled fluids, and the wreckage of two 
cabinets. In a niche in the far corner of the room, a metal 
chest is bolted to the ceiling. Its lid is locked. 


The key to the chest can be found in area P4. A charac- 
ter using thieves’ tools can pick the chest’s lock with a 
successful DC 15 Dexterity check. 

Treasure. Characters who open the upside-down 
chest must be careful not to let its contents fall out. The 
chest contains four potions of resistance (one each of 
acid, cold, fire, and force). If no precautions are taken, 
the potions tumble out of the opened chest and shatter 
on the floor, becoming useless. Any character under- 
neath the chest can try to catch a falling potion using a 
free hand, doing so with a successful DC 10 Dexterity 
saving throw. 


P6. UPSIDE-DOWN LABORATORY 


This room contains two metal cages, both badly dam- 
aged. Nearby, two roughly dug tunnels—one in the 
ceiling and one in the floor—lead to other areas. Narrow 
windows along the bowed outer wall afford you a glimpse 


ofthe earth into which this structure impaled itself. 


The metal cages got knocked around a lot during the 

crash and fall apart easily. One of them holds the cara 

pace of an insect-like person. A character who examines 

this object and succeeds on a DC 20 Intelligence (Na 

ture) check can identify it as coming from a thri-kreen 
Tunnels Up and Down. Rough-hewn tunnels in 

the middle of the room lead up to area P3 and down 

to area P11 


P7. UPSIDE-DOWN APPRENTICES’ STUDY 


An upside-down table sits in the middle of this room, 
and books are scattered around it. Clinging to the bowed 
outer wall is an upside-down fireplace. Along that same 
wall is a window with nothing but hard-packed earth 
beyond it. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


148 


The members of the previous expedition searched 
through the books and plucked the best ones. Charac- 
ters who thoroughly examine the remaining ones can 
find a couple of interest that are salvageable: 


Ajamar’s Guide to the Phantastic. This breezy, light- 
hearted treatise on illusion magic was required read- 
ing in many Netherese classrooms. It describes clever 
ways to use common illusion spells. 

The Unfettered Mind. This lunatic text discusses how 
one might exist solely as a disembodied brain, pre- 
served for eons in a magical suspension fluid. It in- 
cludes sketches of brains in jars. 


P8. UpsipE-DowNn READING ROOM 


This room contains the shattered remains of a desk 
and some chairs. You quickly discover that all sound is 
muted here. 


A permanent silence spell encompasses this room, 
which apprentices used for quiet study. The effect can 
be dispelled (DC 18). 


P9. COLLAPSED STAIRCASE 
This staircase once connected to area P2 on level 1, but 


the passage is too choked with rubble and ice to be used. 


Dead Apprentice. Partially buried under the rubble 
is a human skeleton in tattered robes—the remains of 
an apprentice who died in the crash. Characters who ex- 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


=a 


A DWARF ADVENTURER EXPLORES THE 


DE-DOWN SPIRE OF A LOST CITY. 


amine the skeleton notice that one of its bony fingers is 
missing. A previous explorer noticed a ring on the finger, 
couldn't remove it, and decided to break off the whole 
finger instead. 


P10. RUBBLE-FILLED SPIRAL STAIRWAY 
This spiral staircase used to connect levels 2 through 4 
but is choked with rubble, rendering it impassable. 


Pll. Upsip—E-Down LABORATORY 


This chamber appears to have been a wizard’s laboratory, 
as evidenced by the upside-down storage cupboards and 
empty shelves fastened to the walls, the shattered glass 
and alchemical equipment strewn across the floor, and 
the arcane symbols painted on what is now the ceiling. 

In the middle of this space, five-foot-wide passageways 
punched through the ceiling and floor lead to other lev- 
els. Near them, a partially collapsed wall exposes a room 
that lies beyond 


The gap in the west wall was made by members of a 
previous expedition, after they discovered a secret door 
that they couldn't get open. The secret door was reduced 
to rubble, creating a gap in the wall leading to area P13. 
Dzaan’s simulacrum (see appendix C) and its wight 
bodyguard, Krintaas, are in area P12 and move to inves- 
tigate any loud disturbances here. 


Treasure. Any character who spends a few minutes 
picking through the detritus finds a small brass key 
(which unlocks the invisible chest in area P15) and a 
sealed scroll tube made of chardalyn (see the sidebar 
on page 6). It contains a spell scroll of invisibility 
stamped into a rolled-up piece of golden foil. The char- 
dalyn tube is safe to handle. 


P12. SNOW AND SHADOW 

Unless they're drawn to area P11 by a disturbance, 
Dzaan’s simulacrum (see appendix C) and its wight 
bodyguard, Krintaas, are here. Omit the second para- 
graph from the following boxed text if these NPCs are 
not present: 


Some effort has been taken to arrange the contents of 
this upside-down room, creating a functional office. A 
table stands in the middle of the room, surrounded by 
small stacks of books. Lying on the table is a whirring 

amulet on a chain. 

‘Two figures stand behind the table. One is an undead 
warrior in studded leather armor, its dead-gray flesh 
drawn tightly over its bones and its face locked in a ter- 
rible scowl. The other is an attractive young man in cold 
weather clothing. His face, beneath a frayed witch’s hat, 
displays studious eyes and a warm smile. “Welcome to 
the lost spire of Netheril,” he says. “My name is Dzaan.” 


Characters who watched Dzaan’s fiery execution (see 
“Toil and Trouble,” page 62) recognize the young man 


as Dzaan—back from the dead, or so it seems. The sim- 


ulacrum, on the other hand, has never met the charac- 
ters before. To earn their trust, it tries to be honest and 
forthcoming. It is self-aware enough to know what it is, 
but it can’t grow or learn in its current form. It asks the 
characters to help it become a flesh-and-blood creature 
like the wizard who created it. It knows nothing about 
Dzaan's fate or the crimes for which the real Dzaan 
was executed. 

In the course of a conversation, the simulacrum 
shares the following information: 


“| am a simulacrum of my creator. This tower is but a 
fragment of a Netherese flying city that crashed nearly 
two thousand years ago and lies somewhere under 
the glacier. 

“On the lowest level of this inverted tower, my creator 
found a chamber that can turn illusions into reality. The 
life-spark of a living creature is needed to activate its 
power. As a creation of snow and shadow, | have no life- 
spark of my own, and Krintaas, my undead bodyguard, is 
of no help in this regard. | assure you, the chamber can in 
no way harm anyone.” 


SHIELD GUARDIAN AMULET 


Dzaan’s simulacrum lacks a spellbook. If attacked, its 
impulse is to turn invisible and flee, then use its /evi- 
tate spell to ascend the tower while Krintaas covers its 
escape. If it escapes the spire, it makes its way to Ten- 
Towns; as a thing made of ice and snow, the simulacrum 
can cross the tundra without fear of freezing to death. 

Amulet. The object on the table is the amulet for a 
shield guardian. Dzaan retrieved it from area P15 and 
brought it here for examination. Neither the simulacrum 
nor Krintaas know what the amulet does, nor do they 
care. The simulacrum will happily give it to the char- 
acters if one or more of them agrees to accompany it to 
the rune chamber on the lowest level. A detect magic 
spell reveals a magical aura of enchantment around 
the amulet. 

The amulet is a 4-inch-wide disk composed of sil- 
ver-framed wood, with a rune carved into its face. (This 
rune matches the one on the shield guardian's forearms 
and is the personal sigil of the wizard who created both.) 

This particular shield guardian amulet is a rare magic 
item that requires attunement, and only humanoids 
can attune to it. A humanoid that attunes to the amulet 
knows the distance and direction of the shield guardian, 
provided the amulet and the guardian are on the same 
plane of existence. As an action, the amulet’s attuned 
wearer can try to reactivate the shield guardian, doing 
so with a successful DC 20 Intelligence (Arcana) check. 
Reactivation can only be attempted while the amulet 
and guardian are within 10 feet of each other. The 
amulet otherwise functions as described in the shield 
guardian's entry in Monster Manual. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


Books. The simulacrum has been picking through 
the spire’s wreckage and gathering books that might 
be useful. Characters can find the following readable 
titles among the stacks of worthless, damaged books on 
the floor: 


Lost Scrolls of Sabreyl. Written in Elvish, this scholarly 
tome copies and analyzes fragments of eight ancient 
scrolls left behind by a sun elf wizard who taught 
magic to the cloud giants of Ostoria, a bygone empire 
that collapsed 40,000 years ago. 

From Shadow, Substance. This speculative work dis- 
cusses how one might harness the Weave to turn an il- 
lusory object or creature into its real counterpart, with 
commentary and criticism from noteworthy Netherese 
illusionists. 

Here Lies the King. This elaborately plotted novel fea- 
tures an illusionist who uses magic to impersonate a 
prince, supplant a king, rule a fictional kingdom for 
sixty-one years, and fake his own death. 

Ventatost. This book uses testimonials and conspiracy 
theories to piece together events leading up to the 
destruction of a Netherese city called Ventatost, which 
disintegrated as it flew over the forest of Corman- 
thor nearly two thousand years ago, before the fall 
of Ythryn. 


P13, UpstpE-DOwN SHRINE 

Characters who peer through the gap in the east wall 
see what looks like a shrine without much decora- 
tion or flair: 


A stone altar is attached to the ceiling of this other- 
wise empty, semicircular room. An eight-pointed star is 
carved into the eastern face of the altar. 


Characters who succeed on a DC 15 Intelligence (Reli- 
gion) check recognize the symbol on the altar as the holy 
symbol of Mystryl, the first incarnation of Mystra, the 
god of magic. If this check succeeds by 5 or more, the 
character also knows that holy shrines to Mystryl are 
rare places and often full of mystery. 

Altar. The altar hangs 9 feet above the “floor” and 
merges seamlessly with the “ceiling” to which it's at- 
tached, A detect magic spell or similar magic does not 
reveal the magical aura around the altar, which is pro- 
tected by a permanent version of the Nystul's magic aura 
spell that conceals its magical nature. If a successful 
dispel magic is cast on the altar (DC 18), followed by a 
detect magic spell or similar magic, it radiates an aura 
of illusion magic. 

The first time a character who can cast spells touches 
the symbol of Mystryl carved into the front of the altar, 
a stoppered flask filled with a luminous blue liquid 
appears in a shimmer of light “atop” the altar and im- 
mediately falls, shattering on the ceiling-turned-floor 
unless someone within reach catches it. Catching the 
falling flask requires a successful DC 10 Dexterity sav- 
ing throw. If more than one character succeeds on this 
save, the one who rolled highest is the one who catches 
it. If the flask shatters, its contents evaporate instantly. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


Only one such flask can be created, after which the altar 
becomes nonmagical. 

A character can use an identify spell or similar magic 
to determine the properties of the blue liquid in the 
flask. Any creature that drinks all of it gains the ability 
to cast the minor illusion cantrip at will, using Intel- 
ligence as its spellcasting ability. If the creature that 
drinks the liquid can already cast the minor illusion 
cantrip, or if the liquid is consumed by more than one 
creature, nothing happens and the gift is wasted. 


P14. Upsipe-Down REFECTORY 

This room is where the old tenants of the spire gathered 
for meals. Characters who befriended Dzaan’s simula- 
crum are warned about the creature in this room: 


Rusty tableware, shattered plates, and broken chairs lie 
scattered on the floor amid two tables, one overturned 
and one on its side, 

Crawling out from behind the tipped-over table is a 


hulking, eight-legged reptile with glowing eyes. 


A hostile basilisk is holed up in this room, having 
crawled down into the spire a few weeks ago. 


P15. UpsipE-DowN BEDCHAMBER 


The bed in this room is upside down on the floor, its 
rotted blankets peeking out from underneath the disin- 
tegrating mattress. Mounted to the north wall is a tall, 
cracked mirror in a stone frame that merges seamlessly 
with the surrounding wall. 

Lying underneath two dirt-clogged windows is a par- 
tially crumbled, rime-covered human skeleton in the tat- 
tered shreds of a nightgown. 


The crumbling skeleton is all that remains of the 
Netherese wizard to whom this tower once belonged. 
Disturbing the remains causes the wizard’s evil spirit, 
a will-o’-wisp, to appear and attack. If the will-o'-wisp 
loses more than half its hit points, it uses its next ac- 
tion to turn invisible and haunts the characters for the 
remainder of their time in the spire, attacking solitary 
targets or those who can't fight back easily. The will-o- 
wisp is bound to the spire and can't leave it, nor can it 
be appeased. 

The mirror mounted on the north wall can be broken 
or taken down. Characters who slipped past the basilisk 
can use the mirror to reflect the basilisk's gaze. 

Treasure. Characters who search the room thor- 
oughly find a chest behind the bed. The chest has 
been made invisible by a spell that can be ended with 
a successful dispel magic (DC 18). The chest has a 
built-in lock, the key to which can be found in area P11. 
A character using thieves’ tools can try to pick the lock 
as an action, doing so with a successful DC 17 Dexter- 
ity check (with disadvantage if the character can't see 
the lock). 


The chest weighs 25 pounds, It is airtight, watertight, 
and magical, such that its interior is a constant 68 de- 
grees Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius). It can be sold for 
as much as 100 gp. 

Inside the chest is what appears to be an ancient, 
leather-bound spellbook that bears a rune on its spine 
identical to the one that appears on the shield guardian's 
control amulet in area P12, The spellbook disintegrates 
a few seconds after the chest is opened, Whatever spells 
it once contained are forever lost. 


P16. Upsip—E-DoOWN RUNE CHAMBER 


The walls of this chamber are inscribed with intercon- 
nected runes and marred with cracks. What is now the 
ceiling bears similar inscriptions that swirl inward, con- 
verging around a golden crystal disk five feet in diameter. 


A detect magic spell or similar magic reveals an aura 
of transmutation magic encompassing the entire room. 
The first time someone enters the room, read: 


An illusory figure appears upside down in the far corner 
of the room, standing on the ceiling. It appears to be the 
same long-faced human wizard depicted in the statues 
just inside the spire’s entrance. It begins speaking in a 
strange, possibly forgotten, language. 


Casting dispel magic on the illusory figure causes it to 
vanish. Otherwise, it disappears after giving its little 
speech. Once it goes away, the figment can’t be sum- 
moned again for 24 hours. 

Any creature that can understand Loross, the lan- 
guage favored by the wizards of Netheril, can translate 
the illusory wizard’s words as follows: 


“Behold my masterpiece! Here can illusions be made 
real, shadows become substance! Create your illusion, let 
it stand atop the crystal disk, and watch my rune cham- 
ber do its work!” 


Dzaan’s simulacrum can't learn anything new by study- 
ing the runes and crystals. However, any character who 
spends at least 1 minute doing so can, with a successful 
DC 15 Intelligence (Arcana) check, verify their purpose: 
to transform illusory creatures and objects into real 
ones, If the check succeeds by 5 or more, the character 
also knows the following: 


+ The rune chamber can't produce magic items, ani- 
mated objects, constructs, or undead. 

+ Alife-spark is needed to turn an illusory creature 
into a physical one. Acting much like a spark of elec- 
tricity, it gives the room the jolt it needs to complete 
the transformation, (No such component is needed 
for objects.) 


The cracks in the walls have damaged enough of the 
runes to compromise the room's magic, which might 
give rise to unexpected results, (Warning Dzaan’s sim- 
ulacrum about this risk does not discourage it from 
using the rune chamber.) 


Illusory Objects. When one or more illusory objects 
are placed under the crystal disk, the disk gives off a 
soft golden light. Roll percentile dice and consult the 
Rune Chamber Effect table to determine what happens 
next, Treat multiple illusory objects (for example, an il- 
lusory pile of coins) as a single collective object and roll 
once on the table for all of them. 

Illusory Creature. When an illusory creature stands 
beneath the crystal disk, the disk gives off a soft golden 
light. However, nothing happens until a living creature 
touches the illusory one. When that happens, roll per- 
centile dice and consult the Rune Chamber Effect table 
to determine what happens next. 

If Dzaan’s simulacrum becomes real, see the “Dzaan 
Lives!” section below. 


RUNE CHAMBER EFFECT 

d100 Effect 

01-10 The illusory object or creature is destroyed. If this 
happens to Dzaan's simulacrum, it instantly drops 
to 0 hit points and collapses into a pile of ice and 
snow. 

11-50 The illusory object or creature is transformed into 
a hostile blob of corrosive, magical ectoplasm that 
uses the black pudding stat block. This blob of 
magical energy can be dispelled (DC 16). 

51-90 The object or creature ceases to be an illusion and 
becomes real for 2d12 hours. A creature brought 
into being in this way is under the DM's control 
and uses whichever stat block best matches its 
form. When it ceases to be real, it winks out of 
existence. 

91-00 The object or creature ceases to be an illusion and 
becomes real permanently. A creature brought 
into being in this way is under the DM's control 
and uses whichever stat block best matches its 
form. In addition, the damage to the runes causes 
the crystal disk to burn out, making the chamber 
no longer functional. 


Dzaan Lives! 


If the rune chamber works properly and the simulacrum 
becomes a true clone of Dzaan, the wizard thanks the 
characters for their help and asks them not to discuss 
what has happened with anyone in Ten-Towns. See 
Dzaan's description in appendix C for information about 
modifying the simulacrum's stat block to account for its 
transformation into a clone of Dzaan. Krintaas remains 
by Dzaan's side as his faithful, undead bodyguard. 
Dzaan’s ultimate goal is to plunder Ythryn. Without 
his spellbook, however, the wizard is woefully under- 
powered. Concealed under layers of cold weather cloth- 
ing, Dzaan and Krintaas must travel to Bryn Shander 
to obtain a blank spellbook, as well as writing supplies 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


and provisions. In the meantime, Dzaan urges the char- 
acters to seek out and destroy his rivals in the Arcane 
Brotherhood. Dzaan assumes his rivals are hiding 

out in Ten-Towns and paints an unflattering portrait 

of each one: 


“Avarice is a tiefling evoker who delights in destruc- 
tion. Her weakness is her paranoia. She can't bring 
herself to trust anyone except maybe her two gargoyle 
companions, and even they are suspect.” 

“Nass Lantomir is a human diviner. She likes to pry 
knowledge from others by reading their thoughts. Her 
weakness is that she's always looking ahead, never 
behind her.” 

“Vellynne Harpell is a human necromancer, as cold 
and uncaring as the corpses she animates. She's a 
withered old fool whose greatest asset—her family 
name—does her no good in Icewind Dale.” 


BUGBEAR INCURSION 


Before the characters leave the spire, six bugbears 
crossing the tundra stumble upon the protrusion in the 
snow and slide down to area P1. Once there, they begin 
searching the uppermost level for food and treasure. 
The bugbears are cold and shivering, and their growls 
and complaints can be heard throughout the spire as 
they get their bearings. 

The bugbear leader, Brekk, is a thug whose allegiance 
can easily be bought. Brekk and his gang serve anyone 
willing to feed them, and their loyalty can be bought 
with coin (2 gp per day per bugbear). Characters who 
have no interest in fighting the bugbears or hiring them 
as muscle can pay them 10 gp each to leave the spire at 
once and continue on their merry way. 


REGHED TRIBE CAMP 


Reghed tribe camps are scattered throughout Icewind 
Dale. None of them appear on maps because they don't 
stay in one place for long. 

Each Reghed tribe is made up of smaller clans, each 
with its own chieftain (the most powerful of whom often 
carries the title of king or queen). A clan might set up its 
camp for a tenday or two, then dismantle it and go back 
on the move, allowing the clan to stay close to a migrat- 
ing herd of reindeer as it travels across the tundra. 

The characters might be drawn to a Reghed camp by 
a tall tale or a quest (see “Tall Tales in Ten-Towns” on 
page 101 and “Wolf Tribe Cannibals” on page 104), 
or they might be led to a camp by Reghed scouts roam- 
ing the tundra (see “Wilderness Encounters,” page 
105). The characters might also visit Reghed camps in 
chapter 5, as they face tests set before them by Auril the 
Frostmaiden. 

Before the characters find one of these camps, review 
the information on the Reghed tribes and their leaders 
in appendix C. While it’s not unheard of for clans of 
the same tribe to commingle and build their camps 
close to one another, the four tribes avoid contact with 
one another. Members of one tribe are rarely found in 
another tribe’s camp unless some sort of diplomacy is 
taking place. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


APPROACHING A CAMP 
As the characters approach a Reghed tribe camp, read: 


Splayed across the tundra ahead of you is a campsite 
with more than a dozen tents arranged in two concentric 
rings, with the larger tents clustered near the middle. 
Between the tents burn several campfires, The air around 
the camp smells of cooked meat, and you can hear the 
barking and howling of dogs. Off to one side, outside 
the perimeter of tents, several empty sleds are clus- 
tered together. 

Hulking figures dressed in thick hides and holding 
‘spears patrol the camp perimeter, looking outward for 
signs of danger. Other figures are gathered around fires 
or moving among the tents. 


Six tribal warriors walk the perimeter. These guards 
tend to be younger warriors of the tribe. 

A lone character can sneak into the camp undetected 
with a successful DC 10 Dexterity (Stealth) check, If 
multiple characters try to sneak in together, have them 
make a DC 10 Dexterity (Stealth) group check instead. 
If either check fails, the guards shout loud enough to put 
the camp on alert (see “Camp Roster” below). 

Reghed nomads, regardless of clan or tribe, try to 
capture intruders rather than kill them, giving the chief- 
tain (or king or queen) the chance to question or punish 
them, as appropriate. 

Although most Reghed tribe members are human, you 
can include nonhumans as well. 


Camp ROSTER 
The following tribe members are usually in the camp: 


Chieftain. Roll a d6. On a 6, replace the chieftain with 
the tribe's king or queen (described in appendix C). 
Otherwise, the chieftain of this clan is a gladiator in 
hide armor who speaks Common and has Survival +5. 

Great Warrior. Serving the chieftain as a bodyguard 
and executioner is a gladiator in hide armor who 
speaks Common and has Survival +5. This great war- 
rior is often the chieftain’s spouse, sibling, offspring, 
or childhood friend—someone the chieftain trusts. 

Shaman. The shaman, who advises the chieftain and 
presides over spiritual matters, is a druid who speaks 
Common and Druidic, and has Survival +4. In pub- 
lic, the shaman dons a wooden mask carved in the 
likeness of a bear, an elk, a tiger, or a wolf, as befits 
the tribe. 

36 Hunters and Warriors. This number includes the 
perimeter guards. All are tribal warriors who speak 
Common and have Survival +4. Half of them are 
asleep in the camp at any given time. 

24 Noncombatants. These are children and elders who 
are too weak to fight. Half of them are asleep in the 
camp at any given time. 

36 Sled Dogs. Use the wolf stat block. The sled dogs 
usually sleep with the warriors in the outer cir- 
cle of tents. 


HUNTING PARTIES 

Between two and four hunting parties, each consisting 
of 1d6 + 4 tribal warriors, are away when the charac- 
ters arrive, Each one returns after 2d4 hours with fresh 
meat (such as a reindeer carcass). 


GENERAL LAYOUT 


Map 2.11 depicts a typical Reghed camp, which con- 
sists of an inner circle of large tents called the chief's 
circle and an outer ring of smaller tents called the 
warriors’ circle. Scattered among these tents are 
campfires around which members of the clan like to 
gather. The tents are crude yet sturdy structures with 
wooden frames and walls made of layered bark and 
animal hides. A large tent can accommodate up to eight 
adults, and a smaller tent can provide shelter for up to 
five adults. 

The tents in the inner circle house the clan's chieftain 
(or its king or queen), as well as other important tribe 
members such as its shaman, its most honored hunter, 
its greatest warrior, and the tribe’s children. 

The tents in the outer circle house the clan's remain- 
ing members, which include crafters, weaponsmiths, 
and sled drivers. Sled dogs also sleep in these tents. 

Many of the camp's hunters and warriors prefer to 
sleep under the open sky, protected from the cold by 
thick fur blankets and the heat of the campfires. 


CHIEFTAIN’S TENT 

One of the larger tents is set aside for the chieftain (or 
king or queen), with an extra bedroll near the entrance 
for the chieftain’s bodyguard. A low table is set up in this 
tent, which is heated by lamps burning whale oil and 
decorated with hunting trophies. 


SHAMAN’s TENT 
Another large tent is occupied by the shaman, who 
keeps a large collection of medicinal herbs. 

Treasure. In addition to the medicinal herbs, the 
shaman's tent contains 1d4 potions of healing in plain 
wooden vials sealed with corks made of animal fat, as 
well as a spell scroll of lesser restoration (or some other 
1st- or 2nd-level spell from the druid spell list). 


LIFE IN A REGHED CAMP 


The Reghed nomads eke out a meager existence on 
the desolate tundra of Icewind Dale, yet this is a life to 
which they are accustomed. Auril’s everlasting winter 
has made hunting and travel more challenging, to be 
sure, but the tribes are weathering these difficult times 
by rationing their food and letting nothing go to waste. 
If anything, the Frostmaiden’s cruelty has hardened the 
nomads’ determination to survive. By following herds 
for their food and occasionally restocking on wood, the 
Reghed can get by without relying on trade. They shun 
Ten-Towns and expect to prevail long after those feeble 
lights of civilization have been snuffed out. 

A Reghed camp is a somber and subdued place, 
except for the barking of sled dogs and the sounds of 
children playing in the snow. The warriors and hunters 
like to conserve their strength for when it’s needed, 


Map 2.11: Receo Trise Camp 


preferring to spend their idle hours doing as little as 
possible. Telling familiar stories and inventing new ones 
that glorify the nomads’ outlook on life are common 
pastimes (see the “Reghed Stories” sidebar), as is sharp- 
ening weapons. 

Food is critical, of course, and certain beasts of the 
tundra are staples among the Reghed tribes. Knuck- 
lehead trout and seals are often prepared for eating 
very near the scene of the kill, filleted or chopped and 
generally eaten raw. Reindeer meat, on the other hand, 
must be cooked before consumption. Reindeer also 
provide the Reghed tribes with sinew, bone, and hide, 
all of which are used in the manufacture of weapons 
and armor. 


REGHED STORIES 
Reghed nomads pass the time by sharing stories that rein- 
force their values, which are as follows: 
+ The tribe is one spirit, always on the move. As the tribe 
goes, so goes the spirit of the tribe. 
+ For the tribe to survive, its members must all work 
a irfoni mee Wena oreo 


« The land respects strength alone. The strong flourish, 
and the weak perish. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


153 


REVEL'’S END 


Revel's End is a panopticon, a prison configured in such 
a way that the activities of the prisoners can be closely 
monitored from a central location. Situated on the frigid, 
misty coast of the Sea of Moving Ice, the prison is a 
single-story structure topped with battlements. Rising 
from the core of the panopticon is a tower that holds 
the prison’s administrative offices and guard barracks. 
Both the prison and the tower are carved out of a tall, 
blade-shaped rock that rises high above the sea cliffs. 
This rock, called the Windbreak, shields the tower 
against the brutal winds that sweep down from the 
Reghed Glacier. 

One can approach Revel’s End by land, sea, or air. A 
pier allows prisoners to be taken from ships up an ele 
vator to the prison, and a mooring dock at the of the 
tower allows prisoners to be delivered by airship as well 

Revel's End is controlled by the Lords’ Alliance, 

a loose confederation of settlements whose current 
members include the cities of Baldur's Gate, Mirabar, 
Neverwinter, Silverymoon, Waterdeep, and Yartar; the 
towns of Amphail, Daggerford, and Longsaddle; and the 
dwarven stronghold of Mithral Hall. To be imprisoned in 
Revel's End, one must have committed a serious crime 
against one or more members of the alliance and been 
sentenced to a lengthy period of incarceration (typically 
a year or more). Moreover, the offender must have po- 
litical connections that make incarceration in another 


APTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


THE REMOTE PRISON OF REVEL's END CONTAINS MANY OF THE 


Sworo COAST'S MOST DANGEROUS CRIMINALS. 


VA A 


facility less dependable. Captured spies, for example, 
are often brought here to cool their heels. 

Each member of the Lords’ Alliance assigns one 
representative to Revel’s End, and together they form a 
parole committee called the Absolution Council. Rarely 
are all ten council members present, since Revel's End 
offers little in the way of comfort and amenities. If the 
council needs a tie-breaking vote to determine whether 
to commute a prisoner's sentence, the prison warden—a 
neutral arbiter with no ties to any Lords’ Alliance mem 
ber—casts the deciding vote. 


INVOLVING THE CHARACTERS 


The characters might be lured to Revel’s End by one of 
the tales or quests at the start of this chapter that have 
to do with Vaelish Gant (see “Tall Tales in Ten-Town 

on page 101 and “Behind Bars” on p: 104). This 
villain last appeared in Legacy of the Crystal Shard, a 
published adventure also set in Icewind Dale. Icewind 
Dale: Rime of the Frostmaiden presupposes that Vaelish 
Gant's plot to take over Ten-Towns was thwarted, and 
that he has been incarcerated at Revel’s End for a few 


years before the start of this story. 

The characters might al. ne to Revel’s End hoping 
to book ge on a ship, as such vessels are known to 
bring prisoners and supplies to the prison. A ship can 
take them to Auril’s island (see chapter 5) or allow them 
to flee the Fa altogether. 


PRISON FEATURES 


The prison, hewn from stone, has 20-foot-high outer 
walls and flat, 20-foot-high ceilings throughout. 
Additional information about the prison is summa- 
rized below: 


Doors and Hatches. Each door and rooftop hatch is 
made of reinforced iron held shut by an arcane lock 
spell. Prison personnel can open these doors and 
hatches normally, A locked door or hatch is too strong 
to be shouldered or kicked open, but it can be de- 
stroyed if it takes enough damage. A door or hatch has 
AC 19, a damage threshold of 10, 30 hit points, and 
immunity to poison and psychic damage. 

Heating. Interior spaces are magically heated. The 
temperature in these areas constant 68 degrees 
Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius 

Lighting. Unless the text for a location states other- 
wise, all courtyards, corridors, rooms, and staircases 
are brightly lit by continual flame spells cast on wall 
sconces. (The cells in area R17 are exceptions.) In 
some locations, the magical lights can be dimmed or 
suppressed, as noted in the text. 

Prison Guards. The prison has a garrison of 75 guards 
(use the veteran stat block) who work eight-hour 
shifts. Two-thirds of the garrison is off duty and rest- 
ing in area R19 at any given time. While on duty, each 
guard wears a tunic that bears the Lords’ Alliance 
emblem: a gold crown on a red field. 

Prisoners. All prisoners in Revel’s End are identified 
by a number. This simple protocol makes it harder for 
prisoners to identify one another and helps keep them 
on an equal footing. Prison personnel commit these 
numbers to memory, and the records of all prisoners— 
past and present—are stored in area R22. Each in- 
mate wears a uniform that consists of a hoodless robe 
without pockets, leather slippers without laces, and 
cloth undergarments. While outside their cells, they 
wear manacles on their wrists and ankles. 


APPROACHING THE PRISON 
U 


ters 


the following boxed text to describe what charac- 
e as they approach the prison by land, sea, or air: 


Perched on a high cliff overlooking the Sea of Moving Ice 
is a bleak stone fortress carved out of a gigantic, blade- 
shaped rock. A central tower looms above the rest of the 
fortress, and light leaks from its arrow slits, Four smaller 
towers rise from the outermost corners of the fortress, 
and guards can be seen atop them. 


Characters approaching from the north can also see the 
prison’s northern entrance at the top of a 160-foot-high 
cliff with a pier protruding from its base. A giant wooden 
crane stands nearby, and a wooden scaffold clings to the 
cliff face. 

Characters approaching from the south can also 
see the prison’s south entrance and the trail that 
leads up to it. 


GUARDS ON WATCH 

The prison has four guard towers (see area R9), and 
three guards (veterans) in cold weather clothing are 
stationed atop each one. If you need to make Wisdom 
(Perception) checks for the guards to determine if they 
notice something, there's no need to roll separately for 
each of them. Just make one roll with advantage. 

If the guards on a tower see or hear something out 
of the ordinary, such as an approaching ship or group 
of visitors or a monster flying overhead, one guard de 
scends into the tower to alert the rest of the prison while 
the others stay at their post. 


GETTING INSIDE 

Characters who bang on the prison’s north or south 
door are admitted into a 30-foot-long entry corridor, 
where they are greeted by the three guards (veterans) 
stationed in the nearby guard room (area R3). These 
guards insist on confiscating the characters’ weapons. 
In addition, one guard searches each character for con- 
cealed weapons. A character can conceal a dagger or 
similarly sized weapon from a guard’s notice with a suc- 
cessful DC 13 Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check. 

If the characters have sled dogs or pack animals, a 
guard grants the party access to the stables (area R5), 
where the animals can be kept safe. Animals aren't al- 
lowed in the prison otherwise. 

After relinquishing their weapons and securing their 
animals, the characters are escorted by one of the 
guards to the meeting room (area R12), where the war- 
den greets them soon thereafter. The warden (see area 
R21) tries to find out why the characters are at Revel’s 
End and decides whether to help them or not. If the 
characters fail to provide a satisfactory reason for their 
visit, the warden sees that their weapons and animals 
are returned to them before throwing them out. Legit- 
imate reasons for coming to Revel’s End include the 
following: 


The characters seek shelter. The warden will grant 
them temporary accommodations (in area R7) for up 
to two days and two nights, and the characters receive 
three meals a day during their stay. 

The characters wish to meet with a prisoner, The war- 
den can facilitate such a meeting by having the pris- 
oner brought to area R12 for questioning. The warden 
is always present for such meetings. 


HIGH ALERT 


When a matter of concern is brought to her attention, 
the warden (see area R21) decides whether to place the 
prison on high alert, Circumstances that warrant taking 
such action include a prisoner revolt, an escape, the 
approach of an unfamiliar ship, a dragon sighting, or 
an attack. 

By speaking the command word “maristo,” the war- 
den—and only the warden—can put the prison on high 
alert, with the following effects: 


+ For 1 minute, the sound of a klaxon blares throughout 
the prison, and all continual flame spells in the prison 
take on a reddish hue. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


a 
a 


156 


The guards in area R19 don their armor, arm them- 
selves, and move to area R18. The warden does the 
same and commands the garrison from there. Mem- 
bers of the Absolution Council retreat to area R20. 
The warden and all prison guards gain the benefit of a 
see invisibility spell. 


REVEL's END LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to map 2.12. 


RI. PIER 
Ships dock here to offload prisoners and supplies. 


R2. ELEVATOR 

A sturdy wooden scaffold clings to the 160-foot-high cliff 
separating the prison from the pier. Looming above the 
scaffolding is a wooden crane that is controlled from 
area R3. The crane raises and lowers an elevator car 
that has a retractable wooden gate on the side opposite 
the crane. The elevator car is a hollow wooden cube 
measuring 10 feet on a side. It takes 1 minute for the car 
to travel all the way up or down the scaffold. 


R3. Guarp Rooms 
Three guards (veterans) are stationed in each of these 
two rooms. The guards pass the time by playing cards, 
sharpening their weapons, and complaining about the 
interminable winter. 

Embedded in the north wall of the northern guard 
room is an iron lever that raises and lowers the elevator 
in area R2. 


R4. HOSPITAL 

This chamber contains a dozen beds. Cabinets along the 
north wall hold enough medical supplies to assemble 
twenty healer’s kits. 


R5. STABLES 

Visitors who brings mounts, sled dogs, pack animals, 
and pets to Revel’s End can keep their animals here. 
They must provide their own food, however. 


R6. Mess HALL 

Prison personnel dine here. Tables and benches fill 

the room, and dishes and cutlery are stored in cabinets 
along the south wall. Meals are served every four hours. 


R7. COUNCILORS’ QUARTERS 

These ten rooms are furnished identically. Each con- 
tains a bed, a desk with matching chair, a claw-footed 
chest, and wall hooks for hanging clothes. The continual 
flame spell that illuminates each room can be sup- 
pressed or returned to its normal light level by uttering a 
command word (“lights”). 

These rooms are set aside for the ten members of the 
Absolution Council, though only three rooms are cur- 
rently in use. The other seven members of the council 
are absent, so the warden is free to let visitors use the 
spare rooms. 

Council Members. These three members of the Abso- 
lution Council are at Revel’s End currently: 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


Councilor Voss Anderton. Voss represents the city of 
Neverwinter. He is a lawful neutral human noncom- 
batant who has a precise, lawyerly way of speaking. 
He takes his role seriously and never misses a council 
meeting or parole hearing. He votes with his head, not 
his heart, and always carefully weighs the ramifica- 
tions of commuting a prisoner's sentence. 

Councilor Jil Torbo. Jil represents the city of Baldur's 
Gate. She is a neutral halfling noncombatant who 
loathes her job. She has no sense of humor and a habit 
of sighing deeply when her patience is tested. She 
likes giving others the benefit of the doubt, however, 
perhaps as an act of dissent, and votes yes on commu- 
tations more often than not. 

Councilor Kriv Norixius. Kriv represents the town of 
Daggerford. He is a lawful good dragonborn noncom- 
batant of silver dragon ancestry. He hopes to impress 
the Duchess of Daggerford by doing a good job. He 
has no compassion for criminals and always votes no 
on commutations. 


R8. KITCHEN AND SIDE Rooms 

Six cooks (noncombatants) take shifts here, working in 
pairs to produce meals for the prisoners and staff. The 
kitchen contains everything one would expect to see, as 
well as an iron stove and a pump that draws water from 
a magically heated cistern on the roof. 

Off-duty cooks sleep in the largest of the three rooms 
west of the kitchen. This side room is lit by continual 
flame spells that can be suppressed or returned to nor- 
mal light levels by uttering a command word (“lights”). 

The middle side room—not heated, unlike the rest of 
the prison—is used for cold storage. 

The smallest side room is a well-stocked pantry. 


R9. GUARD TOWERS 

Each of these four triangular towers is two stories tall, 

A tower's interior chamber is empty except for a wooden 
ladder that climbs to an iron hatch held shut by an ar- 
cane lock spell (see “Prison Features,” page 155). This 
hatch leads to the tower's flat rooftop, which is lined 
with battlements. Three Lords’ Alliance guards (veter- 
ans) in cold weather clothing are stationed on the roof of 
each tower. 


R10. ARMORY 

This room contains wooden racks and chests filled with 
nonmagical weaponry. The inventory includes twenty 
halberds, fifteen longswords, fifteen shortswords, ten 
pikes, ten heavy crossbows, five light crossbows, and 
hundreds of crossbow bolts. 

The armory is guarded by a spectator that treats the 
weapons as treasure. It knows every member of the 
prison staff on sight. It won't leave the room and attacks 
anyone it doesn’t recognize. 

Hatch. A wooden ladder leads to an iron hatch in the 
ceiling. An arcane lock spell seals the hatch (see “Prison 
Features,” page 155), which opens onto the roof. 


R11. COURTYARDS 
The ground in each of the two courtyards is covered 
with flagstones and drifting snow. 


ay} 4 
SS 


& 

{ à 

AF PES y Z 
¢ 1 square Pp, 


When the weather allows, prisoners are brought 
here—individually or in small groups—for fresh air and 
exercise. They are watched closely by guards on the 
ground as well as the guards on the corner tower. 


R12, MEETING Room 
This room holds a large, rectangular table with a single 
chair on one long side and three similar chairs on the 
opposite side. The room is used for meetings with pris- 
oners or the warden. 

Hatch. A wooden ladder leads to an iron hatch in the 
ceiling. An arcane lock spell seals the hatch (see “Prison 
Features,” page 155), which opens onto the roof. 


R13. STOREROOM 

Supplies are stored here in crates and other containers. 
At present, the prison has stockpiled enough necessities 
to continue operations for six months. 


R14. Privy 

This room contains a dozen wooden waste buckets. 
Once per day, usually in the morning, guards order 
prisoners to carry the buckets outside and dispose of 
the waste. 


R15. HEXAGON 

This corridor allows guards and visitors to access the 
outermost rooms of the prison while avoiding the pan- 
opticon (area R16) and its prison cells (area R17). The 
guards refer to this corridor as the hexagon because of 
its shape. 


R16. PANOPTICON 

The continual flame spells that light this area can be 
dimmed from the surveillance hub (area R18). The hall 
is dimly lit at night. 


R17. CELLS 

The prisoners are kept in these unlit cells behind barred 
gates that can be opened only from area R18. The gates 
are too secure to be forced open using brute strength 

or weapons, and magical attempts to open or bypass 
them are thwarted by permanent antimagic fields. Each 
field encompasses one cell and its gate. Spells and other 
magical effects, except those created by an artifact or 

a deity, are suppressed in an antimagic field and can't 
protrude into it. While an effect is suppressed, it doesn't 
function, but the time it spends suppressed counts 
against its duration. 

Bolted to the back wall of each cell is an iron bunkbed 
with a thin mattress atop it and a waste bucket nearby. 
Prisoners take their meals in their cells. 

Prisoners. Each of the twenty-four cells can hold one 
or two prisoners. Roll 4d12 to determine the number 
of prisoners currently incarcerated at Revel’s End, give 
each one an identification number, and distribute them 
in the cells as you see fit. Numbers are assigned in 
the order in which the prisoners arrive and are never 
reused. The longest-serving prisoner currently incarcer- 
ated at Revel's End is Prisoner 6, and the newest one is 
Prisoner 299. Characters who want to speak with Vael- 
ish Gant must arrange a meeting with Prisoner 237 (see 
“Prisoner 237: Vaelish Gant,” page 160). 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


To add detail to some of the inmates, roll on the 
Prisoners table or choose entries that interest you. If a 
prisoner's game statistics become necessary, choose an 
appropriate stat block from appendix B of the Monster 
Manual and remove armor, weapons, and other gear. 


PRISONERS 
dé Prisoner 
1 Noble convicted of slave trading (has served 1d6 
years of a 10-year sentence) 


2 Spy convicted of espionage (has served 1d6 years of a 
10-year sentence) 

3 Assassin or noble convicted of conspiracy to murder 
members of a noble family (has served 1420 years of 
a life sentence) 

4 Famous adventurer convicted of reckless endanger- 
ment (has served 1d4 years of a 5-year sentence) 

5 Spellcaster convicted of using magic to influence oth- 
ers (has served 1d4 years of a 5-year sentence) 

6 Leader of a thieves’ guild convicted of multiple crimes 
(has served 1420 years of a life sentence) 


R18. SURVEILLANCE HUB 

This hexagonal room is the base of the prison’s central 
tower. A spiral staircase connects it to the tower's upper 
levels (areas R19 through R23). 

Seven guards (veterans) are stationed in this surveil- 
lance hub. One sits at a console south of the staircase. 
The other guards watch the prisoners, whom they can 
observe through 4-foot-tall, 1-foot-wide arrow slits in the 
walls. Hanging on the walls between the arrow slits are 
fifty sets of iron manacles that guards use to bind pris- 
oners’ wrists and ankles. 

Console. The console is a magic device bolted to the 
floor that resembles a small desk with a slanted top. It 
is a Large object with AC 15, 18 hit points, and immu- 
nity to poison and psychic damage. The console has the 
following magical properties, which are disabled if it is 
reduced to 0 hit points: 


Gate Control. Twenty-four switches on the console open 
and close the gates to the prison cells. A twenty-fifth 
master switch opens or closes all the gates at once. 
Flipping one or more switches on the console requires 
an action. 

Light Control. A brass dial on the console controls 
the light level in area R16, which can be dimmed or 
restored to its normal brightness. Turning the dial re- 
quires an action or a bonus action. 

Loudspeaker. Anyone who speaks into a flaring brass 
protrusion resembling the bell of a trumpet while 
pressing a button on the console can broadcast their 
voice throughout the prison. Using the loudspeaker 
requires an action. 


R19. GUARD BARRACKS 

Characters who climb the spiral staircase come to a 

door 100 feet above the prison roof. The staircase con- 

tinues beyond this door to the tower's higher levels. 
The door opens into a room filled with wooden 

bunkbeds. Areas to the north, west, and south can be 


scanned through 4-foot-tall, 1-foot-wide arrow slits. 
The continual flame spells that light the room can be 
dimmed or brightened by uttering a command word 
(“lights”). 

When the prison is not on high alert, fifty guards (vet- 
erans without armor or weapons) sleep in the bunks. 
The guards keep their armor and weapons within easy 
reach. Other belongings are kept in unlocked footlock- 
ers tucked under the bunkbeds. 

The guards need 10 minutes to don their armor. If 
the prison is put on high alert, the guards take the time 
to put on their armor before making their way down 
to area R18. 


R20. HALL OF ABSOLUTION 

The floor of this room is 120 feet above the prison roof. 
A spiral staircase connects the room to the other levels 
of the tower (area R18 is 140 feet down, area R19 is 20 
feet down, and area R23 is 20 feet up). Narrow windows 
line the outer walls. 

A long, slightly curved table takes up much of the 
room. Eleven chairs are situated behind the table. The 
middle chair has no special adornments, while the oth- 
ers have banners hanging over their high backs, each 
one emblazoned with the crest of a Lords’ Alliance 
member. Banners hanging on the walls display the alli- 
ance’s emblem, a golden crown on a red field. 

Absolution Council Meetings. Members of the Abso- 
lution Council gather here to weigh the merits of releas- 
ing prisoners whom one or more council members have 
recommended for parole. No prisoner can receive such 
consideration more than once a year. Prisoners up for 
parole are brought to this room in manacles and given 
achance to sway the council members before votes are 
cast. The warden (see area R21), who always attends 
such meetings, sits in the middle chair and casts the 
tie-breaking vote, if necessary. 


R21. WARDEN’S QUARTERS 

The arcane lock on this door can be opened only by the 
warden, Beyond the door is a comfortable bedchamber 
lit by a continual flame spell that can be dimmed or 
brightened by uttering a command word (“vaudra”). 

Prison Warden. The warden of Revel’s End is Marta 
Marthannis, a lawful good human mage who speaks 
Common, Draconic, Dwarvish, and Ore and has a calm, 
unflappable disposition. She wears a red robe with gold 
trim and keeps a ring with seven tiny keys hanging from 
it in one pocket. One key unlocks the warden's chest (see 
“Treasure” below); the others unlock the desk drawer 
and the cabinets in the warden’s office (area R22). 

Warden Marthannis is secretly a member of the 
Harpers, a faction that works behind the scenes to keep 
power out of the hands of evildoers. In her current posi- 
tion, she works to keep some of the Sword Coast's worst 
malefactors behind bars. 

So far, the warden has managed to conceal her 
Harper affiliation from everyone else in the prison. But 
she has an unusual problem that she can't hide as easily. 
Lodged inside her is the spirit of a deceased adven- 
turing companion—a lawful good shield dwarf fighter 
named Vlax Brawnanvil. The spirit of Vlax takes control 


of Warden Marthannis once or twice a day, each time 
for an hour or two. While under its control, the warden 
can't cast her prepared spells, speaks only Dwarvish, 
and occasionally indulges Vlax’s vice for ale and spirits. 
She also becomes moody and temperamental, though 
never resorts to violence without good cause. 

Warden Marthannis knows that to rid herself of Viax's 
spirit, she must visit the Brawnanvil crypts in Gauntl- 
grym, a dwarven fortress under Mount Hotenow (near 
Neverwinter). Only there can the spirits of Vlax's kin 
persuade Vlax to join them in the afterlife. The warden 
refuses to make the journey, however, because she can't 
bear to lose all contact with Vlax. The warden has made 
her affliction known to the prison guards and Absolution 
Council members, and they have grown accustomed to 
her personality changes and bouts of drunkenness. 

Treasure. Among the chamber's furnishings is a 
locked wooden chest, for which the warden carries the 
only key. A character using thieves’ tools can use an 
action to try to pick the lock, doing so with a successful 
DC 20 Dexterity check. 

The chest holds a set of calligrapher’s supplies, a sack 
containing 750 gp (money that's used mainly to pay ship 
captains who drop off prisoners and cargo), and a silver 
cloak pin (25 gp) bearing the symbol of the Harpers, a 
tiny harp nestled between the horns of a crescent moon. 

Any character who searches the chest for secret com- 
partments finds one in the lid. It holds a wand of binding 
that the warden keeps for emergencies. 


R22. WARDEN’S OFFICE 

Prison records are stored here in five locked wooden 
cabinets along the east wall. The cabinets contain ship 
cargo manifests and records of past deliveries, as well 
as prisoner transfer orders and files documenting the 
names, crimes, sentences, and commutations of every 
prisoner who has been incarcerated at Revels End. The 
records also include death certificates for prisoners who 
died while incarcerated. The cause of death is always 
given as “natural,” “accidental,” or “unnatural,” with 

no details. 

A desk in the middle of the room has ten financial led- 
gers packed into a locked side drawer. The keys for the 
desk and the cabinets are in the warden’s possession. A 
character with thieves’ tools can use an action to try to 
pick the lock on the desk drawer or one of the cabinets, 
doing so with a successful DC 10 Dexterity check. 


R23. Tower ROOF 

This flat rooftop is 140 feet above the prison roof and 
300 feet above sea level. Three 6-foot-high walls to the 
north, southwest, and southeast provide limited cover, 
but much of the rooftop is exposed to the elements. 

A wooden drawbridge can be lowered on one side to 
create an airship dock. An action is required to raise or 
lower the drawbridge. 

No guards are stationed here. If the guards in the 
prison watchtowers (area R9) see an airship or an air- 
borne threat approaching Revel’s End, they alert the 
rest of the prison. The warden then dons cold weather 
clothing and heads to the roof to greet the airship crew 
or deal with the airborne threat herself. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


159 


PRISONER 237 


Í Medium humanoid (human), lawful evil 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 32 (548 + 10) 
Speed 30 ft. (10 ft. while shackled) 


STR DEX 
91) BE) 


CON INT WIS CHA 
146) 763 1060) 1562) 


Skills Arcana +5, Deception +4, Persuasion +4 
Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages Common, Draconic, Infernal, Orc 


Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Spellcasting. Prisoner 237 is a Sth-level spelicaster. His spell- 
casting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 13; +5 to hit with 
spell attacks). He has the following wizard spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): light,* message,* prestidigitation, shocking 
grasp (see “Actions” below) 

Ist level (4 slots): mage armor;* shield, sleep 

2nd level (3 slots): arcane lock,* detect thoughts,* suggestion* 

3rd level (2 slots): counterspell, lightning bolt* 

*Prisoner 237 needs material components to cast these spells. 


ACTIONS 


Shocking Grasp (Cantrip). Melee Spell Attack: +5 to hit (with 
advantage on the attack if the target is wearing armor made 
of metal), reach 5 ft., one creature. Hit: 9 (2d8) lightning dam- 
age, and the target can’t take reactions until the start of its 
next turn. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


PRISONER 237: VAELISH GANT 


Vaelish Gant, Prisoner 237 within the walls of Revel's 
End, is a member of the Arcane Brotherhood who first 
engaged in criminal activity by insinuating himself into 
the trade network of Ten-Towns. He hoped that his work 
would help the Arcane Brotherhood gain control of the 
region. A few years ago, shortly after his arrival in Ten- 
Towns, Gant established a protection racket in Bryn 
Shander and tried to turn the town against its speaker, 
Duvessa Shane, the goal of supplanting her. He 
also tried to destabilize the economy of Ten-Towns. A 
party of adventurers thwarted his criminal ventures by 
capturing him. 

Rather than put Gant to death for his crimes in Ice- 
wind Dale, the Council of Speakers in Ten-Towns made 
a deal with representatives of the Lords’ Alliance to 
have Gant serve a life sentence in Revel’s End, so as not 
to incur the Arcane Brotherhood’s wrath. The Council 
of Speakers did this not realizing that Gant's scheme 
wasn't sanctioned by the Arcane Brotherhood but rather 
hatched by Gant himself, who intended to impress his 
superiors by pulling it off. 

For a long time, Gant held out hope that the Arcane 
Brotherhood would apply pressure to secure his re- 
lease, and that the Lords’ Alliance would acquiesce to 
the brotherhood’s demands rather than risk an all-out 
attack on Revel’s End. But by now, Gant has been incar- 
cerated long enough to reasonably conclude that no such 
rescue is forthcoming. His failed scheme was an embar- 
rassment to the Arcane Brotherhood, which has clearly 
forsaken him. 


ROLEPLAYING VAELISH GANT 

Vaelish Gant is a mage who specializes in the arcane 
tradition of abjuration. Pompous and conniving, he 
never doubts that he’s the smartest person in the 
room, and he makes sure everyone around him knows 
how he feels. 

Gant has neither a spellbook nor material components 
for spellcasting, and he can’t avail himself of his magic 
while locked in his cell due to the antimagic field that 
encompasses it. 

Gant spends his days and nights thinking about one 
thing: his freedom. If the characters meet with him, 
Gant tries to convince them to break him out of jail, 
promising wealth and magic items once delivered safely 
to the Hosttower of the Arcane in Luskan. Gant doesn't 
expect the characters to oblige, but he has nothing left to 
lose but his life. 

Although he’s unaware of any Areane Brotherhood 
activities in Icewind Dale, Gant suspects that something 
is afoot if the characters start asking him about the 
organization. The last time he was at the Hosttower, 
shortly before his arrival in Ten-Towns a few years ago, 
Gant overheard his superiors talking about mounting 
an expedition to Icewind Dale, to search for a lost Neth- 
erese city buried under the Reghed Glacier. Gant had 
different plans for Icewind Dale at the time, but now the 
characters’ visit gives him reason to believe an expedi- 
tion might finally be under way. Gant shares this infor- 
mation with the characters if they show him the letter 


from Duvessa Shane (see “Behind Bars.” page 104) or 
break him out of prison. 

Gant has no information that can help the characters 
find the lost Netherese city, but he's willing to share 
what he considers to be common knowledge about the 
Empire of Netheril: 


Netheril was a civilization ruled by powerful wizards. 
It fell more than a thousand years ago. 

The Netherese learned their magic first from the 
elves, and later from the fabled Nether Scrolls. 
Netherese magic was far more powerful than 
present-day magic—so much so that it made even the 
gods tremble. 

Evil, subterranean creatures known as phaerimm 
were instrumental in Netheril's fall, but it was hubris 
that ultimately spelled the empire's doom. Karsus, 

a Netherese archmage, tried to usurp the power of 
Mystryl, god of magic. He failed, destroying himself 
and tearing the Weave in the process. It would be 
years before anyone could use or control magic again. 


If the characters ask Gant about other members of 
the Arcane Brotherhood they've met in Icewind Dale 
(see appendix C), Gant can share what he knows about 
any of them: 


About Avarice, Gant says: “The tiefling albino? I think 
she has a promising future.” 

About Dzaan, Gant says: “He's a Red Wizard of Thay. 
Need I say more?” (If asked to elaborate, he adds: 
“Dzaan doesn't shave his head or wear red robes, but 
that doesn’t change the fact that he’s Thayan. The Red 
Wizards want the Weave all to themselves. If they get 
their way, no one else will be able to use magic.”) 
About Nass Lantomir, Gant says: “She's a nobody.” 
About Vellynne Harpell, Gant says: “Had powerful 
members of her family not pulled strings to get her 
into the Brotherhood, that old scarecrow would still 
be reanimating dead cats in Longsaddle.” 


SKYTOWER SHELTER 


Skytower Shelter is one of two goliath settlements 
described in this chapter, the other being Wyrmdoom 
Crag (see page 166). Read both entries before running 
encounters in either location. Also review the “Goliaths” 
entry in appendix C, in particular the “Spine of the 
World Goliaths” section. There is also a list of goliath 
names you can draw from, as needed. 

Characters might visit Skytower Shelter to resolve a 
long-standing dispute between the two goliath clans (see 
“Tall Tales in Ten-Towns” on page 101 and “A Goliath 
Problem” on page 104). Or a goliath player character 
who hails from Skytower Shelter might return home 
for some reason, perhaps to seek help with matters con- 
cerning Icewind Dale. 

All goliaths who dwell in Skytower Shelter are mem- 
bers of the Akannathi clan. In addition to their feud with 
the goliaths of Wyrmdoom Crag, Skytower goliaths are 
known for their fierce competitiveness, their dislike of 
strangers, and their mastery of griffon taming. 


INTO THE MOUNTAINS 


To get to either of the goliath outposts or to move be- 
tween them, the characters need to negotiate the Spine 
of the World, where travel is the most difficult of any 
region in Icewind Dale. Use the rules in the “Mountain 
Travel” section (on page 11) to simulate the perils of 
getting around in the peaks. 


SKYTOWER SHELTER LOCATIONS 


Skytower Shelter is a cave complex carved into the 
northwest face of a 15,000-foot-high mountain. Tun- 
nels are 10 feet high throughout, and the caves are lit 
by torches. 

The following locations are keyed to map 2.13. 


S1. STONE CAUSEWAY 

A 10-foot-wide stone causeway hugs the side of the 
mountain and ascends to Skytower Shelter. Six grif- 
fons circling the mountain's peak watch the causeway 
closely, and their eyesight is sharp enough to pierce 

the clouds that frequently shroud the mountaintop. If 
they see unfamiliar figures ascending the causeway, 
the griffons shriek warnings to the goliaths of Skytower 
Shelter. The goliaths quickly arm themselves, expecting 
trouble. If the shelter comes under attack, the griffons 
join the fray. 


S2. BARRICADE AND CHIEFTAIN 


Six griffons circle above you, shrieking at your approach. 
They descend until they're a few hundred feet away but 
come no closer. 

At the end of the entranceway is a ten-foot-tall bar- 
ricade made of wood and stone, set with a crude gate 
made of thick lumber and festooned with metal blades. 
Gaps in the gate allow you to see an unusually tall figure 
in hide armor standing ten feet behind it and clutching 
a greataxe. Beyond this figure is a higher ledge with five 
‘equally towering figures standing atop it. 


The figure beyond the gate is a goliath warrior (see ap- 
pendix C) named Arn Rockfist Akannathi, the chieftain 
of Skytower Shelter. The figures atop the overlook (area 
S3) are five more goliath warriors. 

If the party includes one or more goliath characters 
who hail from Skytower Shelter, Arn welcomes them 
home and allows them and their companions to pass 
through the gate unmolested. Otherwise, Arn tells the 
party in a deep and gravelly voice, “Turn back. You are 
not welcome here.” 

Two 500-pound wooden bars seal the gate. The blades 
affixed to the gate and the surrounding barricade make 
climbing impossible. The goliaths attack anyone who 
bypasses the gate without Arn’s consent. Nine goliath 
warriors from area S9 join the fray on the third round, 
and the six griffons circling above join the battle on the 
fifth round. Arn can also whistle to summon these rein- 
forcements at any time. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


161 


162 


Mae 2.13: Skyrower SHELTER 


Roleplaying Arn. Arn has no patience for attempts at 
diplomacy and meets aggression with aggression. If the 
characters don't have one or more Skytower goliaths 
among them, the only way they can get past Arn is to 
give him something he wants. If the characters ask him 
what he wants, he tells them: 


The goliath thinks for a moment, then points toward a 
neighboring mountain to the northeast. “Bring me the 
white cloak of Ogolai, the chieftain of Wyrmdoom Crag.” 


If Arn is asked why the Skytower and Wyrmdoom goli 
aths don't get along, he says: 


“Many summers ago, the children of Skytower chal- 
lenged the children of Wyrmdoom to a game of goat-ball. 
One of the children of Wyrmdoom, angered at being 
knocked off her perch, threw the ball at one of our grif- 
fons and struck it in the head. It wounded her in return. 
The game was called off. Days later, hunters from Wyrm- 
doom climbed our mountain and slew the griffon in its 
nest—a grave insult. We have been at war ever since.” 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


Characters who speak to Ogolai, the chieftain of 
Wyrmdoom Crag, get a different version of the story 
(see page 166). 

If the characters portray themselves as neutral arbi 
ters seeking to end the conflict between the clans, Arn 
suggests they end the conflict by bringing him the cloak 
of the Wyrmdoom chieftain, either by killing Ogolai and 
taking it from her or by forcing Ogolai to surrender it 
Arn aims to use the characters as tools to weaken his 
rival and doesn't care if they succeed or die 

Only by restoring Kaniaka’s sight (see area S4) can 
the characters convince Arn to meet with Ogolai and 
settle their differences—and only at Skytower Shelter or 
on neutral ground. 


S3. OVERLOOK 


Five stoic goliaths stand guard atop a ten-foot-high, 
rocky outcrop with stairs leading up to it. A large, empty 
nest occupies one corner of the ledge, and two rough- 
hewn tunnels at the back of the ledge lead deeper into 
the mountain. 


Five goliath warriors (see appendix C) stand guard atop 
this overlook. 

The griffon’s nest contains a few bones (the remains of 
mountain goats) but nothing of value. 


S4. CHIEFTAIN’S CAVE 


This twelve-foot-high cave has a crackling fire in its 
center and walls lined with hunting trophies, includ- 

ing the skulls and pelts of various mountain-dwelling 
creatures. Seated by the fire is a wizened goliath with 
Jong white hair. A yeti fur cloak is draped over her 
stooped shoulders, and a tiger-sized feline with white fur 
crouches beside her. 


This cave is where Arn spends time with his family, 
namely his husband, Harad Cloudstrider Akannathi (a 
goliath warrior), and Harad’s elderly mother, Kaniaka 
Stormcrow Akannathi (a blind noncombatant). Each of 
them has private quarters off the main cave, where they 
keep their bedrolls. 

If the characters fought their way to this cave by kill- 
ing other goliaths, Harad is awake and attacks them, 
since the fallen goliaths are his blood. Otherwise, Harad 
is asleep in his bedroll while Kaniaka sits by the fire, 
staring at it sightlessly, with a domesticated crag cat 
(see appendix C) by her side. The cat protects Kaniaka 
but otherwise takes no aggressive actions. 

Kaniaka’s hearing is sharp enough to distinguish the 
heavy footfalls of goliaths from those of smaller folk. 
She is suspicious of strangers just as other members of 
her clan are, but at her age, she feels compelled to listen 
to what they have to say. She would very much like to 
see an end to the conflict with the Wyrmdoom goliaths— 
if such a thing is possible. 


Magic can cure Kaniaka's blindness, and she becomes 
indebted to any character who restores her vision. Ka- 
niaka is the only member of the Akannathi clan who has 
as much influence in Skytower Shelter as Arn does, and 
once her sight is restored, she can gently persuade him 
to listen to reason. With her help, the characters can 
convince Arn to meet with the chieftain of the Wyrm- 
doom goliaths, though he insists that any such meeting 
take place at Skytower Shelter. 

Any conversation with Kaniaka awakens her son, who 
stumbles out of his bedchamber with greataxe in hand 
to confront intruders. If the characters have gotten off on 
the wrong foot with Kaniaka, Harad threatens to punish 
them for their intrusion, though his sense of honor dic- 
tates that he cannot draw first blood. Thus, he tries to 
goad characters into wounding him first. 


S5. SHRINE OF MIND AND SPIRIT 


An eight-foot-tall stone inscribed with runes stands in 
the middle of this ten-foot-high cave. Nearby, a chute 
with carved footholds leads down. 


The chute is 5 feet in diameter and leads to area S6. 

Runestone. This engraved stone is one of two sacred 
stones in Skytower Shelter (the other is in area S7). The 
goliaths pray next to it when they seek clarity of mind 
and spirit. The scripture on the runestone, written in 
Dwarvish, tells a story about the vision and leadership 
found among the great predator birds of Icewind Dale. 

A detect magic spell reveals an aura of transmutation 
magic around the runestone. Any humanoid creature 
that prays or meditates next to the runestone for at least 
1 hour gains a runestone die, a d6. Once within the next 
24 hours, it can roll the die and add the number rolled 
to one Wisdom check or Charisma check it makes. It 
can wait until after it rolls the d20 before deciding to use 
the runestone die, but must decide before the DM says 
whether the roll succeeds or fails. Once the runestone 
die is rolled, it is lost, and the humanoid can't gain an- 
other from this runestone for 10 days. 


S6. GRIFFONS’ CAVE 

The floor of this cave is 15 feet beneath the floor of area 
S5. A 5-foot-diameter, 5-footlong chute with carved foot- 
holds extends upward from the ceiling of this cave. 


This fifteen-foot-high cave contains four griffon nests: 
three clustered in the middle of the cave and one to the 
north. The northernmost nest contains a full-grown 
griffon that appears to be sound asleep. The wind stirs 
the sleeping griffon’s feathers as it enters through a wide 
opening in the north wall, beyond which you can see 
mountain peaks and storm clouds. Sitting on the edge of 
this opening is a goliath who is talking gently to a griffon 
youngling that leans against her. 

“Come no closer,” warns the goliath. “This youngling is 
afraid to fly, and his mother is trying to get some rest.” 


A smaller, 10-foot-high cave to the northeast contains 

a goliath-sized bedroll that belongs to the goliath. She 
is Rahi Skydreamer Akannathi, a goliath warrior with 
Animal Handling +4 and Medicine +4. Rahi serves 

as the clan's spiritual guide and chief caretaker of the 
griffons living in and around Skytower Shelter. The 
young griffon in her care is less than a year old and has 
yet to overcome its fear of flying. Its mother, a griffon, 
awakens and attacks if she, her offspring, or Rahi is 
threatened. If need be, Rahi can whistle to summon two 
more griffons perched on the nearby slopes; these rein- 
forcements arrive on the third round of combat. 

Like the other members of her clan, Rahi is distrust- 
ing of strangers and doesn't abide intrusions. A char- 
acter who offers to help Rahi overcome the youngling’s 
fear of flying can, with a successful DC 18 Charisma 
(Persuasion) check, get Rahi’s permission to approach 
the youngling. That character can then attempt a DC 15 
Wisdom (Animal Handling) check to calm it. On a failed 
check, the youngling tries to nip the character with its 
beak, and Rahi sends the character away. On a success- 
ful check, Rahi is impressed as the baby griffon warms 
to the character. 
= Se 

GRIFFON TAMING 

Goliaths of the Akannathi clan can learn to raise and tame 

griffons using secrets passed down through the genera- 

tions. The clan's griffon trainer, Rahi, shares these secrets 
with clan members who show great wisdom. The goliaths 
don't ride the griffons; rather, they train them to hunt like 
falcons. The griffons are taught to respond to goliath whis- 
tles and never stray too far from their masters. 

A goliath character who earns Rahi’s respect can be 

taught the secrets of griffon taming over a period of 1 

year, during which time the character is entrusted to watch 

over and protect a single griffon egg and, when it hatches, 

the emergent griffon youngling. At the end of the year, if 

the griffon is still alive, the character must make a DC 15 

Wisdom (Animal Handling) check, with advantage if the 

character accepts Rahi’s guidance. If the check fails, the 

character is unable to tame the griffon. If the check suc- 
ceeds, the character tames the griffon and bonds with it 

for life. Control of the griffon can be given to the goliath’s 

player at this time. 

Modify the griffon stat block as follows to account for 
the young griffon’s development: 


At birth, the griffon is Tiny and has 5 (1d4 + 3) hit 
points, a flying speed of 40 feet, and a Strength score 

of 2. It has a +0 bonus to hit on its attacks and deals 1 
piercing damage with its beak and 1 slashing damage 
with its claws. Its challenge rating is 0 (10 XP). 

+ After 1 year, the griffon is Small and has 13 (2d6 + 6) hit 
points and a Strength score of 8. It has a +1 bonus to hit 
on its attacks and deals 2 (1d4) piercing damage with 

its beak and 2 (1d4) slashing damage with its claws. Its 
challenge rating is 1/4 (50 XP). 

After 2 years, the griffon is Medium and has 32 (546 
+15) hit points and a Strength score of 12. It has a +3 
bonus to hit on its attacks and deals 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing 
damage with its beak and 6 (2d4 + 1) slashing damage 
with its claws. Its challenge rating is 1 (200 XP). 

After 3 years, the griffon is fully grown and tame enough 
to be ridden as a mount. 
aad 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


164 


ri +, ae 


[Rani THE GOLIATH HELBS A GRIFFON HATCHLING 


If the party earns Rahi's trust and friendship, she 
might approach a goliath member of the party and offer 
to teach that character how to tame a griffon. Given 
the time commitment necessary, this activity is most 
likely to occur after the adventure concludes or during 
a lengthy period of downtime (see the “Griffon Taming” 
sidebar on page 163). 


S7. SHRINE OF STRENGTH AND HONOR 


In the center of this twelve-foot-high cave stands an 
eight-foot-tall stone inscribed with runes, Behind it, a 
five-foot-diameter chute with carved footholds ascends 
to another cavern. 


The chute leads to area S9. If goliaths are in that area, 
characters can hear loud cheers coming from there. 

Runestone. The runestone is one of two sacred 
stones in Skytower Shelter (the other is in area S5). The 
goliaths pray next to it when they seek to gain physical 
strength and victory in combat and competition. The 
scripture on the runestone is written in Dwarvish and is 
concerned with the glory and honor found in battle and 
in competition. This honor is not always granted, how- 
ever, because glory comes only to those who challenge 
themselves through physical trials. (There is no glory 
for a goliath who is unchallenged in battle, athletics, and 
competition, just as there is no glory for the griffon that 
slays a mouse.) 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


A detect magic spell reveals an aura of transmutation 
magic around the runestone. Any humanoid creature 
that prays or meditates next to the runestone for at least 
1 hour gains a runestone die, a d6. Once within the next 
24 hours, it can roll the die and add the number rolled 
to one Strength check or weapon attack roll it makes. It 
can wait until after it rolls the d20 before deciding to use 
the runestone die, but must decide before the DM says 
whether the roll succeeds or fails. Once the runestone 
die is rolled, it is lost, and the humanoid can't gain an- 
other from this runestone for 10 days. 


S8. PASSAGE OF CARVINGS 


This rough-hewn passageway slopes gently upward to 
the south. Ensconced torches illuminate carvings on 
the walls. 


The carvings depict the history of the Akannathi clan. 
This saga begins at the north end of the passage and 
unfolds as one travels south toward area S9. A character 
who succeeds on a DC 15 Intelligence (History) check 
can determine that the oldest carvings are roughly 400 
years old and the newest ones are quite recent. 

The earliest carvings tell the story of how the Akan- 
nathi goliaths tamed the mountain—how they dug 
tunnels and caves to serve their needs, creating a home 
for their people, and how they tamed the griffons of 
the mountain, turning these ravenous monsters into 


stalwart hunting companions. Later carvings focus on 
wars against the orcs, when the Skytower and Wyrm- 
doom goliaths were united against a common foe. Carv- 
ings made within the past century chronicle the souring 
of the friendship between the two goliath clans, with 
scenes showing warriors of Wyrmdoom Crag slaying 
griffons followed by bloody skirmishes between the goli- 
ath clans on mountainsides. The newest carvings depict 
lone goliaths chasing a giant polar bear (a representa- 
tion of Oyaminartok, as described in appendix C) and a 
diminished population of Skytower goliaths contending 
with the seemingly endless winter. 


S9. FEASTING CAVE 

Nine goliath warriors (see appendix C) occupy this area 
when the characters arrive at Skytower Shelter. If they 
were drawn to area S2 by a disturbance, adjust the fol- 
lowing boxed text to account for their absence: 


A long, rectangular firepit heats this fifteen-foot-high 
cave and fills the area with the scent of meat cooking on 
a grate over the pit. The sound of cheering also fills the 
cave as two goliaths stand near the southern wall with 
their arms extended out from their sides, holding a large 
rock in each hand. Their arm muscles are quivering from 
exertion, and their jaws are clenched. Seven more goli- 
aths stand around them, cheering and waving haunches 
of cooked meat. 


When the goliaths become aware of the characters, add: 


When the goliaths spot you, they stop cheering. The 
competition ends as the two goliaths let their rocks tum- 
ble to the floor, and all nine goliaths glare at you. 


Two goliaths were competing in a test of strength to 

see who could hold their arms up the longest under the 
weight of the rocks. Unless the characters are accompa- 
nied by a member of the Akannathi clan, the goliaths try 
to frighten away the interlopers, attacking them if they 
refuse to leave. A clever character can win over the goli- 
aths by challenging and beating one or more of them in 
a rock-holding contest. The contest plays out as follows: 


Each participant is given a pair of heavy rocks and 
must hold one in each hand while keeping their arms 
parallel to the floor. 

At the end of each minute, each participant must 
succeed on a Strength (Athletics) check to keep their 
arms raised. The DC starts at 5 and increases by 5 at 
the end of each minute thereafter. On a failed check, 
the participant drops their arms and is out of the 
game. If the last two participants fail at the same time, 
the contest ends in a tie. 


Any character who wins a rock-holding contest earns 
the respect of the goliaths in this cave. That respect can 
grow into friendship, provided the characters have done 
nothing that would turn the goliaths against them. 


S10. COMMUNAL CAVE 


Blankets and bedrolls made from hides lie in a rough 
circle around a smoldering fire. In an alcove to the north, 
three young goliaths are playing amid a pile of coins and 
gemstones. 


The three young goliaths are noncombatants who stand 
4 to 5 feet tall. 

Treasure. The Akannathi clan stockpiles treasure in 
the northern end of this chamber. The goliaths have lit- 
tle use for valuables, except for clan members who want 
to visit Ten-Towns or other more distant settlements and 
need some form of currency to secure food or lodging. 
The treasure pile includes the following: 


+ 420 gp, 1,664 sp, and 2,260 cp in mixed coinage 

+ Thirteen gemstones: eight eye agates (10 gp each), five 
moonstones (50 gp each), and an amethyst (100 gp) 

+ A carved bone statuette of Gruumsh, the one-eyed ore 
god of slaughter (25 gp) 

+ A gold birdcage with electrum filigree (250 gp) 

+ A potion of gaseous form in a gray crystal vial 


ENDING THE GOLIATH FEUD 


The chieftains of the Akannathi and Thuunlakalaga 
clans will never come to terms on their own. Characters 
who want to end the feud between the goliaths of Sky- 
tower Shelter and Wyrmdoom Crag must convince the 
chieftains, Arn and Ogolai, to meet on neutral ground, 
away from their respective lairs, since neither chieftain 
wants to appear weak in the eyes of the other. 


SUMMIT OF THE CHIEFS 

Arn will agree to meet Ogolai on neutral ground, but 
only if Kaniaka (see area S4) urges him to do so. Ogolai 
will agree to meet Arn on neutral ground, but only if the 
characters heal the wounded aarakocra at Wyrmdoom 
Crag (see area W6 on page 169). Both chieftains in- 
tend to bring an entourage of goliath warriors with them 
to the meeting, and it takes some additional diplomacy— 
and perhaps a Charisma (Persuasion) check or two—to 
convince them to keep their delegations small. 


NEGOTIATIONS 

Characters who bring Arn and Ogolai together still have 
their work cut out for them; neither chieftain is ready to 
forgive and forget the events that created the division 
between them. If one or more characters don’t mediate 
the conversation, the meeting ends with each chieftain 
walking away in disgust at the other's unwillingness to 
accept blame. Allow the players time to devise a strategy 
for ending the impasse. Three possible solutions are 
presented below: 


+ The characters urge the chieftains, for the good of 
Icewind Dale, to unite against a common foe (such as 
Auril the Frostmaiden, Arveiaturace the White Wyrm, 
or Xardorok Sunblight). Goliath warriors from both 
clans, working as allies, might learn to forget the past 
and forge a brighter future for all goliaths. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


165 


+ A character who has earned the respect of one or both 
clans convinces either chieftain that being the first 

to accept responsibility for a misunderstanding, even 
when others should share the blame, is a sign of moral 
strength and good character. Once one chieftain ac- 
cepts blame, it’s easier for the other to do the same. 
The characters keep the chieftains talking—for days. if 
that's what it takes—by turning it into a contest of en- 
durance, The two chieftains waste hours airing their 
grievances, then spend longer hours glaring at each 
other in stubborn silence. (The characters’ patience 

is eventually rewarded when Ogolai has food and tea 
brought to her. She offers to share her repast with 
Arn, who begrudgingly accepts out of politeness. This 
moment marks a turning point as the chieftains agree 
that there can be no winner to this contest and, more 
important, that the contest is a metaphor for their 
pointless, long-standing feud.) 


WYRMDOOM CRAG 


Wyrmdoom Crag is one of two goliath settlements de 
scribed in this chapter, the other being Skytower Shel- 
ter (see page 161). Read both entries before running 
encounters in either location. Also review the “Goliaths” 
entry in appendix C, in particular the “Spine of the 
World Goliaths” section. There is also a list of goliath 
names you can draw from, as needed. 

Wyrmdoom Crag is home to the friendly Thuunlaka- 
laga goliath clan. Shortly after establishing this lair for 
themselves, the goliaths were challenged by an adult 
white dragon. The dragon underestimated the goliaths’ 
determination, and decades later, its skeletal remains 
still lie nearby as a testament to their triumph. 

There are three reasons why the characters might 
visit Wyrmdoom Crag: 


+ They're drawn to the location by a tall tale (see “Tall 
Tales in Ten-Towns,” page 101) or by a quest to help 
Dannika Graysteel acquire some white dragon bones 
(see “Dragon Bone Stew." page 104). 

+» One of the characters is a goliath from Wyrmdoom 
Crag who wants to return home. 

+ The characters seek to end the 


ud between the goli- 


aths of Skytower Shelter and Wyrmdoom Crag. (The 
characters will need to visit both locations to succeed 
in their mission.) 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


The Wyrmdoom goliaths are willing to share their 
dwelling with travelers and guests, but they hold a 
strong dislike for the goliaths of Skytower Shelter. The 
characters can learn the cause of that resentment by 
speaking to Ogolai, chieftain of the Thuunlakalaga clan. 


INTO THE MOUNTAINS 


To get to either of the goliath outposts or to move be- 
tween them, the characters need to negotiate the Spine 
of the World, where travel is the most difficult of any 
region in Icewind Dale. Use the rules in the “Mountain 
Travel” section (on page 11) to simulate the perils of 
getting around in the peaks, 


WyYRMDOOM CRAG OVERVIEW 


Wyrmdoom Crag faces north from atop a snowy moun- 
tain slope. The bones of an adult white dragon rest near 
the entrance to the lair. 

The goliaths of Wyrmdoom Crag enjoy company and 
will trade food and shelter for stories and news from Ice- 
wind Dale. The goliaths are rich in stories of their own 
and are not shy about sharing their history. 

Although these goliaths are friendly and welcoming, 
they bear a bitter grudge against the goliaths of Sky: 
tower Shelter and will treat any character hailing from 
that clan accordingly. Additionally, these goliaths have a 
strong distaste toward visitors who seek to stir up trou- 
ble beyond simple competitiveness. If such a situation 
occurs, they expel the offending visitor. 


WYRMDOOM CRAG LOCATIONS 


Wyrmdoom Crag is a cave complex carved into the 

north face of a 15,000-foot-high mountain. Tunnels are 

10 feet high throughout, and the caves are lit by torches, 
The following locations are keyed to map 2.14. 


WI. APPROACH 


Fresh tracks in the snow make it relatively easy to find the 
goliath settlement of Wyrmdoom Crag on the northern 
slope of a soaring mountain. Following these tracks leads 
you to a cave, outside which the bones of a dragon lie 
half-buried in the snow. Past these remains, torchlight 
flickers in a pair of tunnels that burrow into the mountain 
leading west and south, 

East of the dragon's bones, rough-hewn steps climb to 
a twenty-foot-high, open-air arena with stone bleachers 
carved into the eastern wall. Rising from the arena floor 
are more than a dozen pillars of rock, each five to eight 
feet tall and about a foot in diameter. 


The tracks in the snow were made by two goliath war- 
riors returning from a hunt, See area W2 for more about 
the stone platform and the bleachers. 

The bones are those of an adult white dragon named 
Stygiarus, which met its doom at the hands of the goli- 
aths of Wyrmdoom Crag. Four chwingas (see appendix 
C) lurk amid the bones and make their presence known 


GOAT-BALL IS: THE FAVORITE SPORT ANO 
ASTTIME OF THE WYRMOGOM CRAG GOLIATHS. 


by popping out as the characters approach. The chwin 
gas follow the characters around for as long as the party 
remains in the vicinity of Wyrmdoom Crag. The goliaths 
of Wyrmdoom Crag are aware of the chwingas and usu: 
ally ignore them 

Each chwinga has a fascination for something and is 
irresistibly drawn to any character who has or demon 
strates that certain something. If a character indulges a 
chwinga's fascination once a day for three consecutive 
with a super 
natural gift before it departs (see “Supernatural Gifts” 
in the Dungeon Master's Guide). See the “New Chwinga 
Charms” section in appendix C for more charms. Each 


days, the chwinga rewards that characte 


chwinga’s fascination is described below: 


Chwinga 1 has a white face with a dark triangle painted 
over one eye. It is fascinated by Small characters and 
tries to ride around on them 

Chwinga 2 has a white face with two concentric blue 
rings around one eye. It is fascinated by beards and 
likes to comb them with a pinecone. 

Chwinga 3 has curly black antennae growing out of 
its head. It is fascinated by whistling and by its own 
reflection. It capers enthusiastically whenever a 
character makes whistling noises or puts a mirror in 
front of it. 

Chwinga 4 wears a gown made of pine needles. It 
is fascinated by characters who chew with their 
mouths open and tries to look down their throats 
while they eat 


W2. Goat-BALL COURT 


Fifteen crude stone pillars stand on this raised arena 
The bleachers carved into the back wall are sheathed in 
ice, and at the top of the seating section are burnt torch 


stubs in sconces and a narrow tunnel. 


The goliaths of Wyrmdoom Crag gather here at least 
once a day to watch children or adults enjoying a game 
of goat-ball (see the “Goat-Ball” sidebar). If the charac 
ters endear themselves to the goliaths, four goliath war- 
riors (see appendix C) from area W7 challenge them to 
a friendly goat-ball match, Characters who turn down 
the challenge are free to ch a game instead. The goli 
aths don't mind a little betting on the side 

The narrow tunnel above and behind the bleachers 
leads down to area W6. 


W3. WEAPONSMITH 


The sound of metal hissing as it cools echoes through 
this warm, ten-foot-high chamber as a female goliath 
submerges a glowing javelin head into a barrel of water. 
The anvil in the center of the cave is illuminated by the 
light of a burning forge against the west wall. Against the 


wall nearby are several tools and weapons. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


= 168 


The weaponsmith of Wyrmdoom Crag is a goliath 
warrior (see appendix C) named Wayani Highhunter 
Thuunlakalaga. Her forging techniques emulate those 
of a dwarf smith from whom she learned her craft. She 
owns a complete set of smith’s tools, with which she is 
proficient, and is happy to talk about her work. If the 
characters seem friendly, she offers to take them to see 
Ogolai, the clan chieftain, in area W5. 

Among the items found in this forge are thirteen metal 
javelins and three hefty greataxes, all nonmagical. 


W4. THE CRAWL 


J 
The floor of this fifteen-foot-high cavern bulges in the 


middle, with a five-foot-diameter hole on either end of 
the upraised part, marking the ends of a tunnel. The 
exterior of the bulge has runes inscribed on every sur- 
face of it. 

At the back of the cave, an elderly male goliath sits 
with three adolescent goliaths around a campfire. The 
elderly goliath is dyeing scraps of cloth and leather in a 
bucket of greenish liquid and setting them to dry ona 
wooden rack while the adolescents stitch other scraps 
into garments for dolls they are fashioning, Scores of old 
| dolls rest in niches along the cave walls, staring outward. 


The elderly goliath is a noncombatant named Demelok 
Nightwalker Thuunlakalaga, and he's helping the goli- 
ath youths make ceremonial dolls. The three youths are 
unarmed and unarmored goliath warriors (see appen- 
dix C) named Jaagrik, Kaga, and Zuri. 

Rune-Carved Tunnel. If the characters ask about 
the rune-carved tunnel that burrows under the floor, 
Demelok tells them that it serves two purposes: to test 
young goliaths on the cusp of adulthood and to im- 
part the wisdom that comes from knowing one’s own 
character. 

After learning the lessons needed to become full- 
fledged adults, a young goliath offers up a symbol of 
their childhood—a doll—and crawls through the tunnel. 
Members of their family wait for them on the other 
side, ready to welcome them into adulthood. The vi- 
sions seen by those who crawl through the tunnel force 
them to face their fears, experience what it means to be 
truly alone, and recognize their own weaknesses. Not 
everyone has the fortitude to make it through the tunnel 
on the first attempt, but those who fail can try again. 

Visitors who want to experience this trial are warned 
that it is not for the faint of heart. A character who 
reaches the tunnel’s midpoint must succeed on a DC 
15 Constitution saving throw and a DC 15 Charisma 
saving throw. If either save fails, the character is unable 
to move forward and must withdraw the way they came. 
If both saves fail, the character is so overwhelmed by 
visions of terror that they fall into a coma, becoming 
unconscious for 4d6 hours. A character who succeeds 
on both saving throws can crawl through the tunnel and 
out the other side, having confronted the visions and 
overcome them. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


Any character who gets Chief Ogolai’s consent to 
crawl through the tunnel is considered an honorary 
member of the Thuunlakalaga clan if they pass the trial. 


W5. Main HALL 


This cavern has a domed roof thirty feet high and an 
open well in the middle of the floor. Two youthful goli- 
aths use ropes and a bucket to draw water from the well 
while six adults wrangle a handful of exuberant goli- 

ath toddlers. 

Rough-hewn stairs ascend to the southern part of the 
cave, where the floor is ten feet higher. Seated in this 
area next to a crackling fire is a female goliath with gray 
hair, many scars, and a white cloak made of mountain 
goat hide, Leaning against the wall behind her is a great- 
axe with a bone haft. She gnaws on a pipe as she tries to 
settle a dispute between two goliath children. 


This cave is where most members of the Thuunlakalaga 
clan sleep and socialize. Bedrolls of goatskins and furs 
are set out on the floor in a loose semicircle around a 
well in the center of the room. 

When the characters arrive, the cave contains eight 
goliath warriors (see appendix C), including six adults 
and two unarmed and unarmored goliath youths. There 
are also six goliath children (noncombatants), including 
the two speaking with the clan's chieftain, a goliath 
warrior named Ogolai Orcsplitter Thuunlakalaga, who 
is endearingly called “Old Goat” by other clan members. 
Her greataxe has a haft made from white dragon bone, 
and her white cloak is magical (see “Treasure” below). 
Ifa fight erupts here, nine more goliath warriors arrive 
from area W7 to help put an end to it. 

Ogolai greets new arrivals and invites them to join her 
by the fire. If she takes a shine to them, she walks them 
back to the feasting cave (area W7) for a hot meal. If 
she is asked why the Skytower and Wyrmdoom goliaths 
don't get along, Ogolai says: 


“Many summers ago, the children of Wyrmdoom chal- 
lenged the children of Skytower to a game of goat-ball, 
During the game, the ball tumbled near one of the grif- 
fons of Skytower. When one of our children tried to fetch 
the ball, the griffon went berserk and grievously wounded 
her. The game was called off. Hungry for more of the 
child's flesh, the griffon haunted Wyrmdoom for days. 
Our hunters were forced to kill it to protect the child. The 
two clans have been opposed ever since.” 


Although she doesn't say so, Ogolai is the child who was 
wounded by the griffon, as the scars on her face suggest. 
To this day, she fears griffons and blames the Skytower 
goliaths for not keeping theirs under control. 

If the characters claim to be neutral arbiters seeking 
to end the conflict between the clans, Ogolai says she’s 


prepared to meet with Arn Akannathi, the leader of the 
Skytower goliaths, but refuses to meet him at Skytower 
Shelter. Ogolai insists that the meeting occur on the 
goat-ball court at Wyrmdoom Crag, which she knows 
Arn will never agree to. Ogolai’s refusal to conduct 
negotiations at Skytower Shelter stems from her deep- 
seeded fear of griffons, though she would never admit to 
this fact lest she appear weak. Ogolai is not interested in 
offering any goodwill gesture to Arn, whom she bluntly 
calls a “walking stillborn.” 

Missing Goliath. If the characters establish a rap- 
port with Ogolai, she tells them that one of her clan's 
warriors, a young male named Kapanuk, got separated 
from his hunting party during a blizzard a few days ago. 
Ogolai asks only that the characters keep an eye out for 
him as they travel through the mountains. (The charac- 
ters might locate Kapanuk in area X28 of Xardorok's 
fortress in chapter 3.) 

Treasure. Ogolai’s cloak has the magical properties of 
a cloak of protection. 

Well. The main source of clean water for the clan is 
the well. A fire bucket is lowered down on a rope to keep 
the water in the well from freezing. 


W6. PRIVATE CAVES 

These 10-foot-high caves are the quarters of the chief- 
tain and the best warriors of the clan. Ogolai claims the 
southernmost cave, where the tribe’s valuables are kept 
(see “Treasure” below). 

The northernmost cave contains a wounded aara- 
kocra named Sikki-kree, who is being tended to by a 
goliath warrior (see appendix C) named Aruk Thunder- 
caller Thuunlakalaga, who has Insight +4 and Medicine 
+4. Sikki-kree crashed in the mountains when she was 
caught in a blizzard and was rescued by goliath hunters. 
Aruk has been nursing the aarakocra back to health, 
but he can do only so much. Although Sikki-kree’s mi- 
nor wounds have healed, she has a broken wing that 
requires at least 10 hit points of magical healing to 
be mended. The goliaths of Wyrmdoom Crag have no 
such magic at their disposal. Any character who helps 
Sikki-kree regain her ability to fly earns the aarakocra's 
gratitude and the respect of the Wyrmdoom goliaths. 

Once Sikki-kree can fly again, she thanks the charac- 
ters for their help before getting Ogolai’s permission to 
depart. Ogolai is indebted to the characters for helping 
the aarakocra, enough that she will agree to a meeting 
with the chieftain of the Skytower goliaths if the charac- 
ters request one. 

Treasure. Ogolai’s cave contains a pile of treasure 
that her clan has amassed. The Wyrmdoom goliaths 
have little use for valuables but keep this stockpile for 
clan members who visit Ten-Towns or other settlements 
and need some form of currency to secure food or lodg- 
ing. The stockpile includes the following: 


350 gp, 1,177 sp, and 1,850 cp in mixed coinage 
Sixteen gemstones: nine banded agates (10 gp each), 
four carnelians (50 gp each), two spinels (100 gp 
each), and a topaz (500 gp) 

A gold chain pendant (25 gp) inset with a yellow dia- 
mond elemental gem (the goliaths are unaware of its 
magical nature) 


Map 2.14: Wyamooom CRAG 


W7. FEASTING CAVE 


Three adult goliaths are cooking meat over a rectangular 
firepit in the middle of this fifteen-foot-high cave while a 
goliath youth distributes ceramic bowls of food to other 
goliaths sitting around the room on woolly rugs and furs. 
An elderly male taps a rhythmic beat on a large goat- 

skin drum held between his knees. While he plays, a cou- 
ple of goliaths wrestle on the floor in front of him. Those 
seated near them occasionally move out of the way when 
the wrestlers roll too close to them. 


Unless the warriors have been drawn elsewhere, this 
cave nine goliath warriors (see appendix C) plus eight 
goliath noncombatants (children and clan elders). 

The Wyrmdoom goliaths are overjoyed if one or more 
characters express an interest in wrestling. Although 
the goliaths don’t customarily take on smaller or weaker 
opponents, they never refuse a challenge. Winning a 
wrestling match requires a competitor to succeed on 
two consecutive contested Strength (Athletics) checks. 


CHAPTER 2 | ICEWIND DALE 


169 


SUNBLIGHT 


EQUESTERED AMONG THE CRAGS OF THE SPINE 

of the World is a grim fortress hewn out of 

rock. This fortress is home to Xardorok Sun- 

blight, his two living sons, and the rest of the 

Sunblight duergar clan. It is a heavily defended 
gateway between the clan's former home in the Un- 
derdark and its future home in Icewind Dale. From here, 
Xardorok plots the destruction of Ten-Towns. 

Xardorok has no imagination of his own. Instead, he 
receives inspiration from his patron, whom he believes 
is Deep Duerra (the duergar god of conquest). Unknown 
to Xardorok, his warlock powers come from Asmodeus, 
the Lord of the Nine Hells, who enjoys impersonating 
other gods. It is Asmodeus, not Deep Duerra, who in- 
spired Xardorok Sunblight to become the first duergar 
to leave the Underdark and carve out a kingdom for him- 
self on the surface. 


RUNNING THIS CHAPTER 


Characters who learn of Xardorok's plot to forge a 
dragon of chardalyn and unleash it upon Ten-Towns 
might decide to launch a preemptive strike on Xar- 
dorok's fortress. This chapter describes the fortress of 
Sunblight in detail, in the event the adventurers decide 
to attack it. But the characters are in for a surprise: by 
the time they arrive, Xardorok has already finished his 
construct and set it loose, leaving the characters with an 
agonizing decision: press the attack against the duergar 
fortress, or intercept the dragon in Ten-Towns. If they 
choose the latter course, skip over this chapter for now 
and proceed with chapter 4. 

The characters are more likely to survive an invasion 
of Xardorok’s fortress if they are at least 4th level. Char- 
acters of lower level can succeed if they take frequent 
rests or have an edge, such as plenty of healing magic or 
allies to back them up. 


SPEAKER'S QUEST 


If the characters lack incentive to confront Xardorok in 
his fortress, either because they didn’t encounter his 
sons in chapter 1 or because the duergar threat hasn't 
impacted them yet, you can have one of the speaker: 
Ten-Towns invite them to a private meeting. The speaker 
would know the characters by reputation, if nothing 
else. At this meeting, the speaker presents the following 
information: 


“Invisible enemies walk among us. We have seen their 
boot prints in the snow, and now we know what they are: 
duergar. These malevolent dwarves of the Underdark 
have infiltrated Ten-Towns in search of a rare crystal 
known as chardalyn, With it, they're building a mighty 
construct that will lay waste to Ten-Towns if nothing is 
done to stop it. 

“Qur militia captured one of the duergar and forced 
it to divulge the location of their mountain stronghold. 
Therein you will find a duergar warlord named Xardorok 
Sunblight. He aims to conquer Icewind Dale and destroy 


us all. For the good of Ten-Towns, will you penetrate the 
duergar fortress, slay this evil warlord, and destroy his 
terrible weapon?” 


If the characters accept this quest, the speaker pro- 
vides them with a map of Icewind Dale that marks the 
location of the duergar fortress, as shown on map 2.1 
(page 113). For the benefit of your players, you can 
point to the fortress’s location using the poster map of 
Icewind Dale. 

If the characters ask to speak with the captured 
duergar, the speaker informs them that the duergar was 
put to death following the interrogation, to keep him 
escaping and warning his kin. If the characters insist on 
seeing the duergar, the speaker takes them to a cellar 
where the body is being kept. Any character who casts a 
speak with dead spell on the dead duergar can validate 
the information that the speaker has already imparted. 

The speaker has little to offer the characters as 
recompense beyond hospitality and friendship. If the 
characters insist on a more tangible reward, the speaker 
scowls, apologizes for misjudging them, and lets them 
go about their business. Their reputation takes a blow 
if they decline to help. Regardless of the meeting's 
outcome, the speaker's next task is to prepare the set- 
tlement for what will surely be the fight of its life, in the 
event that Xardorok’s construct attacks Ten-Towns. 


CHAPTER 3 | SUNBLIGHT 


R 


TROUBLE IN THE FORTRESS 


The following sections describe what the characters are 
up against in this chapter. 


XARDOROK’S PARANOIA 
Xardorok's obsession with chardalyn is a form of mad- 
ness that has consumed the duergar warlock, to the 
extent that he will stop at nothing to obtain all of it. Xar- 
dorok prizes chardalyn more than he loves his sons and 
his clan, which has alienated his closest advisors and 
forced them to question their blind obedience to him. 
Prolonged contact with malevolent magic suffusing 
the chardalyn has made Xardorok extraordinarily para- 
noid. He keeps his two sons, Durth and Nildar, as far 
away from him as possible, sending them on dangerous 
missions to acquire more chardalyn in and around 
Ten-Towns, fearing that they might usurp his throne 
otherwise. Xardorok rewards his subjects for spying 
on one another and uncovering plots against him. The 
duergar closest to him are aware of the changes in his 
demeanor, but they lack the courage to stand up to him. 
A few have learned to capitalize on his paranoia, gaining 
Xardorok’s favor by fabricating evidence of coups or- 
chestrated by their rivals. 


THE MUZGARDT CONSPIRACY 

Grandolpha Muzgardt, the grand dame of the Muzgardt 
duergar clan, has recently arrived at the fortress after 
being invited here by Xardorok. The Muzgardts are 
based in Gracklstugh, a duergar city in the Underdark. 
They mass-produce and distribute a filthy duergar ale 
made from mushrooms. Xardorok has been eager to 
take a fourth wife and has had his eye on Grandolpha 
Muzgardt for many years. He asked Grandolpha to his 
fortress to give her a gift—a pseudodragon made of char- 
dalyn (a pseudo-pseudodragon, if you will)—and make 
her an offer she can’t refuse. Once he conquers Icewind 
Dale, he wants the Muzgardts to control the ale trade 
throughout his sunless surface kingdom. 

Grandolpha, for her part, is too canny and jaded to 
fall for Xardorok’s blunt attempt at seduction. She has 
begun plotting with disenfranchised advisors and war- 
riors in his ranks to overthrow him when the moment 
is right. Ironically, despite his paranoia, Xardorok is too 
blinded by his admiration for Grandolpha to foresee her 
treachery, In Grandolpha, the characters might find an 
unlikely (if temporary) ally. 


CHARACTER ADVANCEMENT 


In this chapter, characters can advance to 6th level and 
no farther. Level advancement is handled as follows: 


+ The characters gain a level if they defeat Xardorok 
Sunblight. 

+ The characters gain a level if they accomplish any 
two of the following feats: find the chardalyn dragon's 
flight plan in area X4, free the myconid sovereign 
in area X19, or destroy the heart of the red dragon 
in area X24. 


CHAPTER 3 | SUNBLIGHT 


FINDING THE FORTRESS 


The characters can find a map aboard the Easthaven 
ferry that shows the location of Xardorok’s fortress. 
They obtain a similar map if they accept the speaker's 
quest presented earlier in this chapter. If the characters 
fail to obtain the map, they can use magic to compel a 
captured duergar to divulge the location of the fortress. 


APPROACHING THE FORTRESS 


To get to Xardorok's fortress, the characters need to 
negotiate the Spine of the World. Use the rules in the 
“Mountain Travel” section (see page 11) to simulate 
the perils of getting around in the peaks. 


Beyond the snowy foothills, low-lying clouds obscure 
the icy peaks of the gargantuan mountains that form the 
Spine of the World. Eventually, you get above the clouds 
and behold a sheer mountain wall rising more than a 
hundred feet before you. Carved high on the wall are 
rows of arrow slits with lights burning behind them and 
clanking sounds issuing from them. A narrow staircase 
hewn from the rock leads up along one side of the wall. 


The steps leading up to it are barely 5 feet wide and 
climb 150 feet to a frost-covered shelf that adjoins the 
main entrance (area X1). 


DIFFICULT DECISION 
As the characters begin their ascent, read: 


From high above comes a loud grinding noise as large 
sheets of ice break off the fortress walls and tumble 
down the mountainside. Suddenly, great doors of ice pre- 
viously hidden under snow stand open more than three 
hundred feet above you, and from between them flies a 
huge dragon made of dark ice. Its eyes glow with a bright 
golden light as it lets out a terrible roar, hurls itself into 
the air, and glides away from the fortress, then turns and 
heads north toward Ten-Towns. 


The chardalyn dragon (see appendix C) exits the for- 
tress by climbing up a shaft that leads from the forge 
level to the fortress's summit. The doors at the top of 
the shaft remain open until the dragon returns or un- 

til someone closes them by using the levers in areas 
X13 and X15. 

The dragon stays at least 250 feet away from the party 
and does not pay any attention to the characters as it 
flies off on its mission to destroy Ten-Towns. Given the 
dragon's impressive flying speed, it’s unlikely that the 
characters will be able to catch up to it. 

The characters must now make a big decision: do they 
assault Xardorok’s fortress as planned or follow the 
dragon back to Ten-Towns? If they continue their climb 
to the fortress, continue with the next section; if they 
pursue the dragon, move on to chapter 4. 


XARDOROK’S FORTRESS 


The fortress, depicted on map 3.1, has the following 
noteworthy features: 


Bare Stone. Hewn from gray stone, the fortress is bereft 
of ornamentation or artistic flair. Doors are likewise 
made of bare stone, with iron handles and hinges. 

Smoky Haze. Smoke from the forge (area X24) perme- 
ates the interior of the fortress. Unless the text notes 
otherwise, all areas are lightly obscured by this smoky 
haze. Exposure to it is unhealthy; characters who take 
a long rest in a hazy location regain one fewer Hit Die 
than normal. A strong wind that lasts 1 minute or lon- 
ger clears an area of smoky haze for 1 hour thereafter. 

Heat. Duergar have darkvision and don't need light to 
see; even so, most rooms are heated by stone braziers 
filled with glowing-hot coals, and such areas are 
dimly lit. 

Ceilings. Tunnel ceilings are 10 feet high and flat. Room 
ceilings are 15 feet high and vaulted in most areas ex- 
cept for the larger spaces on the forge level, which are 
30 feet high. 

Elevators. The three levels of the fortress are connected 
by two mechanical elevators that are continually mov- 
ing up and down their shafts, except for a 1-minute 
stop each time it arrives at a floor. One elevator links 
areas X6, X13, and X22, and the other links areas 
X12, X15, and X30. An elevator can be disabled in any 
location where its wheel mechanisms are exposed (as 
shown on map 3.1). 


WHERE Is XARDOROK? 


To determine Xardorok’s whereabouts when the char- 
acters arrive at the fortress, roll a d20 and consult the 
Xardorok’s Location table or simply choose one of the 
suggested locations. 


XARDOROK’S LOCATION 
d20 Location 
1-5 Resting on his throne in area X19 
6-10 Barking orders in area X24 
11-15 Praying before the statue in area X29 
16-20 Torturing a duergar accused of treason in area X34 


COMMAND LEVEL 


The command level contains living quarters for Xar- 
dorok and his two sons, as well as halls for training 
and dining. 


X1. ENTRANCE 


Moving east from the top of the stairs leads you to the 
entrance of the fortress: a ten-foot-high double door of 
featureless stone. An arrow slit facing in your direction 
guards the approach. 


The entrance doors are barred shut from within and 
can't be opened from the outside, except with the use of 


a knock spell or similar magic. Pushing a lever in area 
X6 retracts the stone bars and causes the doors to swing 
inward on squealing iron hinges. 

Beyond the double door is a lowered iron portcullis. 
Area X6 contains the winch that raises and lowers the 
portcullis, which can also be forced open with a knock 
spell or similar magic. 

Arrow Slit. A duergar guard in area X6 watches 
the icy ledge through the arrow slit, which grants him 
three-quarters cover against attacks made from outside 
the fortress. If he sees the characters approaching on 
the ledge, the duergar turns invisible and watches them 
without announcing his presence. If the characters are 
having trouble getting through the double door or the 
portcullis, the duergar opens them from area X6 without 
alerting the characters to his presence. This duergar is 
loyal to Grandolpha Muzgardt (see “The Muzgardt Con- 
spiracy,” page 172) and hopes the characters will dis- 
pose of Xardorok, or at least create a situation in which 
Xardorok can be killed by his fellow duergar. 


X2. VESTIBULE 


Beyond the portcullis is an empty room with a 
narrow opening at the far end and an arrow slit in the 
western wall. 


Arrow Slit. A duergar guard in area X3 watches 
this room through the arrow slit, which grants her 
three-quarters cover. If she sees or hears intruders 
inside the fortress, she shouts, “To arms!” in Under- 
common. The nine duergar guards in area X3 spend 1 
round rallying before pouring out of the barracks to con- 
front the foes. 


X3. UPPER BARRACKS 


A low stone table flanked by stone benches dominates 
this room, which is heated and illuminated by braziers 
of glowing-hot coals. Through the hazy smoke, you see 
featureless stone doors lining the walls. 


A female duergar guard stands in front of an arrow 
slit that peers into area X2. Additionally, eight duergar 
guards rest in the smaller rooms attached to this one. 
Each of these 10-foot-square rooms has three stone 
bunkbeds protruding from its walls. 

Secret Door. A character who searches the walls 
for secret doors and succeeds on a DC 15 Wisdom 
(Perception) check finds such a door in the east wall. 
5-foot-wide, 10-foot-tall stone door swings into a 


Heese soneraesoucan oe ie 


ao Harmok, Jarjun, Eanes sag ens 
| 5 
Neu cates ole sande SEALT Throd, Ulkinn, 


_ Mi toni aes. 


CHAPTER 3 | SUNBLIGHT 


173 


174 


5-foot-diameter tunnel that leads to a similar door block- 
ing entry to area X4. No ability check is needed to find 
either secret door from inside the tunnel. 


X4. XARDOROK's WAR ROOM 


This rectangular room has two sets of double doors, one 
to the north and the other to the south. A brazier of glow- 
ing-hot coals stands in each corner. In the middle of the 
room is a low stone table, on the top of which is drawn 
an illustration that looks something like a map. 


Closer inspection of the drawing reveals that it’s an ac- 
curate depiction of Ten-Towns and its environs. Mounted 
to the top of a thin iron stand on the table is a 6-inch-tall 
dragon figurine carved out of chardalyn—a miniature 
version of Xardorok's chardalyn dragon, its wings out 
stretched. The figurine’s stand is attached by an iron rod 
to a groove carved into the table, allowing the figurine to 
move across the map from one settlement to another. If 
a lever on the west side of the table is pulled, the dragon 
figurine “flies” over Ten-Towns on its preset course. 

Any character who pays close attention can discern the 
flight path of Xardorok’s chardalyn dragon (see chapter 
4 for details). 

Dragon Figurine. The chardalyn figurine can be 
broken off its stand. As an art object, it is worth 50 gp. 
Anyone who keeps it on their person for more than 1 
hour gains a random form of indefinite madness (see 
“Madness” in the Dungeon Master's Guide). 

Secret Door, A character who searches the walls for 
secret doors and succeeds on a DC 15 Wisdom (Percep- 
tion) check finds such a door behind the brazier in the 
southwest corner. This 5-foot-wide, 10-foot-tall stone 
door swings into a 5-foot-diameter tunnel that leads 
to a similar door blocking entry to area X3. No ability 
check is needed to find either secret door from inside 
the tunnel. 


X5. XARDOROK'S QUARTERS 


Braziers heaped with glowing-hot coals heat this cham- 
ber, which contains a large stone bed covered with soot- 
stained furs, its head against the north wall. In a shallow 
niche above the bed is a bas relief of a giant, scowling du- 
ergar clenching its teeth. At the foot of the bed is a flat- 
topped iron trunk sealed with a bulky padlock. A stone 
door is set into the western wall. 


Closet. The western door opens into a closet that 
Xardorok has converted into a shrine. A shelf embedded 
in the south wall holds a 2-foot-tall statuette of Deep Du- 
erra made of chardalyn. It depicts a nude female duergar 
with no facial features and a spiked crown atop her bald 
head. Stacked on smaller shelves around the statuette 
are seven mind flayer skulls. A character can identify 
the depiction with a successful DC 20 Intelligence 


CHAPTER 3 | SUNBLIGHT 


(Religion) check. An indentation in the statuette’s base 
holds the key that unlocks the iron trunk in Xardorok’s 
bedchamber. The characters can find the key if someone 
lifts the statuette and looks underneath it. 

Anyone other than Xardorok who touches the statu- 
ette of Deep Duerra must make a DC 16 Wisdom saving 
throw, taking 18 (4d8) psychic damage on a failed save, 
or half as much damage on a successful one. Along 
with the psychic damage comes a terrible sensation of 
having one’s brain devoured by an illithid. Once this 
effect has occurred, the statuette can be handled safely. 
Anyone who keeps the chardalyn statuette on their 
person for more than 1 hour gains a random form of 
indefinite madness (see “Madness” in the Dungeon Mas- 
ter's Guide). 

Iron Trunk. The iron trunk is bolted to the floor. A 
character using thieves’ tools can use an action to try 
to pick the lock, doing so with a successful DC 20 Dex- 
terity check. A knock spell or similar magic also opens 
the trunk. 

The trunk contains Xardorok’s personal possessions 
(see “Treasure” below), and it is trapped. If all its con- 
tents are removed, hidden springs raise the trunk’s false 
bottom to rise slightly, at which point the stone visage 
above the bed opens its mouth and belches a cloud of 
poisonous gas large enough to fill the room. The gas 
hangs in the air for 10 minutes, then dissipates. Any 
creature that starts its turn in the cloud must make a 
DC 14 Constitution saving throw, taking 22 (4d10) poi- 
son damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on 
a successful one. 

Treasure. The iron trunk contains a pair of dwarven 
sandals carved out of obsidian (250 gp), a quilted smok- 
ing jacket sized for a dwarf and sewn with fifty gem- 
stones (500 gp), a malachite beard comb set with seven 
red garnets (750 gp), a hookah made of platinum and 
star sapphire (2,500 gp), and a rolled-up leather scroll 
with the following sequence of numbers written on it 
in Dwarvish: 


13-6 25-2 975 4-3-4 
827 563 714 29.9 


The numbers on the scroll are the combinations for 
the locked chests in the treasure vault (area X37), 


X6. Guarp Post 


This room is heated and illuminated by braziers of glow- 
ing-hot coals. Visible on the west wall are an arrow slit, 
an iron lever, and a heavy iron winch. 

A floor-to-ceiling iron cage in the middle of the room 
contains an elevator shaft with chains running up and 
down away from it. The chains are in constant motion, 
and you hear loud mechanical noises higher up the shaft 
and farther down as well. A double door is embedded in 
the middle of the east wall. Air enters the room through a 
row of four arrow slits in the south wall. 


| GRANDOLPHA MUZGARDT 


f Medium humanoid (dwarf), lawful evil 


Armor Class 9 
Hit Points 59 (748 + 28) 
Speed 25 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT = WIS CHA 
14(+2) 9 (-1) 1864) 136) 173) 16 (3 


Damage Resistances poison 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages Common, Dwarvish, Undercommon 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Duergar Resilience. Grandolpha has advantage on saving 
throws against poison, spells, and illusions, as well as to resist 
being charmed or paralyzed. 


Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). Grandolpha's innate spellcasting 
ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 13). She can innately cast the 
following spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: druidcraft, mending, poison spray (see “Actions” below) 
3/day each: detect magic, enlarge/reduce (self only), faerie fire, 
invisibility (self only), polymorph, stoneskin (self only) 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, Grandolpha has dis- 
advantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Poison Spray (Cantrip). Grandolpha extends her hand toward a 
creature she can see within 10 feet of her and projects a puff of 
noxious gas from her palm. The creature must succeed on a DC 
13 Constitution saving throw or take 13 (2d12) poison damage. 

————————————SeEEESe 


CHAPTER 3 | SUNBLIGHT 


An invisible duergar named Dreck huddles in the south- 
west corner, trying to avoid detection. Despite his effort, 
any character with a passive Wisdom (Perception) 

score of 14 or higher notices the duergar’s cold breath. 
Dreck has secretly pledged his allegiance to Grandolpha 
Muzgardt, for he longs to be rid of Xardorok Sunblight 
and now sees the characters as instruments of Xar- 
dorok’s demise. He fights only in self-defense. 

Elevator. A box-shaped iron elevator car constantly 
goes up and down the shaft, stopping for 1 minute on 
each floor and taking 1 minute to move from one level to 
the next. A collapsing iron gate on the west side of the 
cage slides open when the car arrives at this level from 
above or below. The 10-foot-wide stone shaft climbs 100 
feet to area X13 and descends 100 feet to area X22. 

Lever. Moving the iron lever on the west wall opens 
and closes the fortress’s outer doors (see area X1). 

Winch. Turning the iron winch on the west wall raises 
and lowers the portcullis between areas X1 and X2. 


X7. OFFICE OF THE CAPTAIN OF THE GUARD 


A stone desk and chair stand empty on the east side of 

the room. The braziers that normally heat and light the 

room have been extinguished. An arrow slit in the south 
wall lets in the frigid mountain air. 


Until recently, this room was the office of Xardorok’s 
captain of the guard, who has been accused of plotting a 
coup and is being tortured in area X34. 


X8. PRIVATE DINING HALL 


Three braziers heaped with glowing-hot coals illuminate 
and heat this long hall. At the eastern end is a hexagonal 
stone table surrounded by six stone chairs. Seated in the 
chair facing the door ìs a haggard old duergar with long 
black hair streaked with ribbons of white and fingernails 
like shards of iron. She is devouring a hearty buffet of 
cooked meats, mushrooms, and strange Underdark fare. 
Lurking next to her is a small mechanical dragon made of 
a shiny black substance. 

Hunched over a hot stove in the west side of the 
room are three duergar cooks. At the sight of you, they 


drop their utensils and reach for their weapons, but 
the old duergar says something in Dwarvish that keeps 
them at bay. 


Xardorok and his sons dine here, occasionally joined 
by guests. In attendance today is Xardorok’s paramour, 
Grandolpha Muzgardt (see the accompanying stat 
block). The three duergar cooks are Grandolpha’s 
loyal bodyguards. The chardalyn dragonet next to 
Grandolpha is a gift from Xardorok; it's a lawful evil 
construct that understands Draconic and Dwarvish 
but can’t speak. It otherwise has the statistics of a 
pseudodragon. 


After telling her bodyguards to stand down, Gran- 
dolpha invites the characters to join her for dinner. 

The main course is a cooked intellect devourer, its 
brain-body stewing in its own juices. The characters 
can partake of the feast that Grandolpha’s guards have 
prepared, but the food has a thin layer of ash covering it 
that spoils the taste. Grandolpha doesn't seem to mind, 
though. She also offers the characters a vile Muzgardt 
brew made from Underdark mushrooms, which she 
pours from a jug on the table before her. 

Grandolpha has no stake in Xardorok's plot to con- 
quer Icewind Dale and does nothing to help or hinder 
his efforts. If the characters threaten her, she laughs at 
their audacity and refuses to meet their demands. If the 
characters ask for her help, she shares the following in- 
formation with them: 


She doesn’t know Xardorok’s current whereabouts 
but assumes he’s in the forge (area X24) on the lowest 
level of the fortress. 

Xardorok has programmed his chardalyn dragon 

to follow a prearranged flight plan. The characters 
can view the dragon's route in Xardorok’s war room 
(area X4). 

Xardorok is capturing Underdark monsters, which he 
plans to unleash upon Icewind Dale. He has also cap- 
tured a myconid sovereign and is using its spores to 
reanimate corpses. 

Xardorok has proposed an alliance between his clan 
and the Muzgardt clan. Grandolpha is entertaining 
Xardorok's offer but hasn’t agreed to anything. The 
mechanical pseudodragon was a gift from Xardorok, 
designed to win Grandolpha’s affection. 

Given time, Grandolpha thinks she can turn most of 
the Sunblight duergar against Xardorok. Several of 
them have already pledged their loyalty to her. 


Before entering combat, Grandolpha casts stoneskin 
on herself, Once her guards come to her rescue, she 
withdraws from combat and uses her faerie fire spell to 
make enemies easier for her guards to hit. The charda- 
lyn pseudodragon defends Grandolpha to the death. 

Slaad Host. If a character has the Slaad Host secret 
(see appendix B) and has a slaad tadpole gestating 
inside them, having the tadpole burst out of the charac- 
ter's chest during dinner would be excellent timing for 
its shock value. Grandolpha suggests not killing the tad- 
pole and instead proposes that it be allowed to grow into 
a full-sized slaad. “Let Xardorok deal with it,” she says. 
If the characters allow this to happen, the tadpole slinks 
away and finds a quiet corner of the fortress in which to 
grow, becoming a full-grown slaad within 2d12 hours, 


X9, PORTCULLIS 
Across from the double doors to area X8 is a short hall- 
way with a lowered iron portcullis at its southernmost 
end. Moving an iron lever jutting out of the west wall 
raises and lowers the portcullis, beyond which is a wide 
shaft that descends 100 feet to area X26 and climbs 120 
feet to a pair of enormous doors carved out of ice. 

The characters need magic or climbing gear to scale 
the shaft's rough-hewn walls. 


X10. DuRTH’s QUARTERS 


This dark chamber contains a plain stone bed, a stone 
trunk, and four unlit braziers. 


This room belongs to Xardorok’s eldest son and heir, 
Durth Sunblight. Durth is here only if he was forced 

to abandon his hideout in chapter 1 (see “Easthaven 
Ferry,” page 59) or if he managed to steal a trove 

of chardalyn from the Easthaven town hall (see “The 
Chardalyn Caper,” page 68). Durth is a duergar mind 
master (see appendix C). If he hears suspicious activity 
outside his room, he shrinks to Tiny size and hides un- 
der the bed. 

The trunk is Durth’s longtime companion, an intelli- 
gent mimic that speaks Undercommon. It attacks any- 
one else who disturbs it. If he is present when the mimic 
attacks, Durth rolls initiative and joins the battle on the 
second round of combat. 


X11. NILDAR’S QUARTERS 


This dark room contains a plain stone bed, a stone trunk, 
and four unlit braziers. Mounted on the walls are the 
heads of various creatures that might be found in the 
mountains or the subterranean depths. 


This room belongs to Xardorok’s youngest son, Nildar. If 
the characters forced him to abandon his post in chapter 
1 (see “The Unseen,” page 47), Nildar is here, sulking 
in the dark and plotting his revenge. Nildar is a duergar. 
If his pet ogre zombie escaped with him, the rotting be- 
hemoth stands in the northeast corner of the room, 
Trophies. The mounted heads are those of a crag 
cat, a grick, a male drow, a kuo-toa, a troglodyte, a 
wolf, a peryton, and a female grimlock. Nildar didn't 
kill most of these creatures by himself, but he claimed 
the trophies. 
Trunk, Nildar’s stone trunk holds a ceramic jug 
of wine, a drinking horn, and a rolled-up piece of 
leather bearing a charcoal sketch of his late mother’s 
stern visage. 


X12, TRAINING ROOM 


Braziers of glowing-hot coals stand in the corners of this 
room, working to offset the cold air that flows through a 
row of arrow slits on the south wall. 

Scattered around the room are several training dum- 
mies made of wood and sackcloth, as well as four free- 
standing suits of plate armor. A floor-to-ceiling iron cage 
in the middle of the room contains an elevator shaft with 
chains running up and down away from it. The chains are 
in constant motion, and you hear loud mechanical noises 
high above and below. 


CHAPTER 3 | SUNBLIGHT tr 


The training dummies are harmless; they have been dis- 
membered and sewn back together numerous times. 

Touching one of the suits of armor or dealing damage 
to any of them causes all four to animate (use the ani- 
mated armor stat block to represent them). They attack 
all other creatures in the room, which they can't leave 
of their own volition. If there are no other creatures in 
the room that they can attack on their turn, the suits of 
armor deactivate and revert to their inanimate state. 

Elevator. A box-shaped iron elevator car constantly 
goes up and down the shaft, stopping for 1 minute on 
each floor and taking 1 minute to move from one level to 
the next. A collapsing iron gate on the west side of the 
cage slides open when the car arrives at this level from 
above or below. The 10-foot-wide stone shaft climbs 100 
feet to area X15 and descends 100 feet to area X30. 


ICE GATE LEVEL 


The uppermost level of the fortress contains the mech- 
anism that operates the ice gate—enormous doors 
through which Xardorok’s chardalyn dragon comes and 
goes. These doors are carved out of thick ice and have 
hinged iron clamps holding them in place. When the 
doors are open, they allow access to a 30-foot-wide verti- 
cal shaft that descends 220 feet to area X26. 


X13. WESTERN GEAR ROOM 

The following boxed text assumes the characters enter 
this area by coming up the elevator. If they enter by the 
north tunnel, adjust the boxed text accordingly: 


Ascending the elevator shaft deposits you in the middle 
of a large room with machinery filling the eastern half. 

A duergar stands in front of a double door in the north 
wall, and another is in the southeast corner next to a 
lever that juts out of the east wall. Braziers heaped with 
hot coals do little to offset the cold air that blows through 
the arrow slits in the south wall. 


The two duergar are hostile toward non-duergar. On 
their first turn in combat, the duergar grow to Large 
size; on subsequent turns, they attack intruders. Mean- 
while, two duergar hammerers (see appendix C) lurk 
in the small chambers to the west. After all other crea- 
tures in the room have taken an action, roll initiative 

for the hammerers; on their first turn, the hammerers 
emerge from their rooms and join the fray on the side of 
the duergar. 

Elevator Shaft. The 10-foot-wide stone shaft descends 
100 feet to area X6 and 200 feet to area X22. 

Ice Gate. The large stone wheel near the east wall is 
part of the mechanism that opens and closes the doors 
at the top of the fortress. Pulling the lever on the east 
wall causes the wheel to turn, opening the western half 
of the door; sliding the lever back to its original position 
closes it. 


CHAPTER 3 | SUNBLIGHT 


X14. WORKSHOP 


This messy workshop is heated and illuminated by bra- 
ziers of glowing-hot coals in the corners. The room is 
furnished with stone tables and cabinets. In the middle 
of the room, surrounded by twisted bits of metal, is a 
half-finished exoskeletal construct like the ones you en- 
countered in the room you came from. 


This room contains two duergar mechanics (one male, 
one female), both of whom turn invisible as soon as they 
hear sounds of combat in area X13. They try to remain 
hidden and fight only in self-defense. 

Treasure. Characters who search the workshop find 
two sets of smith's tools and a set of tinker’s tools. 


X15. EASTERN GEAR ROOM 

The following boxed text assumes the characters enter 
this area by coming up the elevator, If they enter by the 
north tunnel, adjust the boxed text accordingly: 


Ascending the elevator shaft deposits you in the middle 
of a large room with machinery filling the western half. 

A duergar stands in the southwest corner next to a 
lever that juts out of the west wall. Braziers heaped with 
hot coals do little to offset the cold air blowing into the 
room through arrow slits in the south wall. 


The duergar guard grows to Large size before enter- 
ing combat. 

Elevator Shaft. The 10-foot-wide stone shaft descends 
100 feet to area X12 and 200 feet to area X30. 

Ice Gate. The large stone wheel near the west wall is 
part of the mechanism that opens and closes the doors 
at the top of the fortress. Pulling the lever on the west 
wall causes the wheel to turn, opening the eastern half 
of the door; sliding the lever back to its original position 
closes it. 


ForGE LEVEL 


The lowest level of the fortress contains, among many 
other features, Xardorok’s forge, the iron mines, and a 
tunnel that connects to the Underdark. This level is also 
the warmest due to the heat generated in the forge. 


X16. NORTHWEST CAVERN 


This cavern is unlit and has a jagged, 30-foot-high ceiling. 

A strange sight confronts you as four duergar, two of 
them much larger than normal, use ropes to restrain a 
hulking biped with an insectoid body. A large sack has 
been pulled over the creature's bulbous head. 


A team of four duergar recently captured an umber 
hulk in the Underdark and brought it back here. If the 


SPORES BY TEARING OFF ITS ARMED ua 


characters challenge the duergar, the two enlarged ones 
remove the sack covering the umber hulk’s head and 
release the creature, after which all four duergar turn 
invisible. The infuriated umber hulk sees the characters 
and attacks them. If the characters slay the umber hulk, 
the duergar attack them 

To the Underdark. A 10-foot-wide, miles-long tunnel 
connects Xardorok’s fortress to vast caverns and subter- 
ranean lakes under the Spine of the World. Exploration 
of the Underdark is beyond the scope of this adventure. 


X17. DUERGAR MINES 


Rich veins of iron ore run through the walls of this cav- 


ern. Narrow tunnels are cut deep into the rock. Here and | 


there lie stacks of mining equipment. | 


These mines provide the duergar with all the iron ore 
they need to fashion tools, weapons, exoskeletons for 
hammerers, and other items. They use the excavated 
stone for furniture and other structures. Currently, there 
are no duergar working in the mines. 

Characters who explore the mines come across 
three rust monsters scrounging for iron ore. The rust 
monsters, which came up from the Underdark, attack 
anyone wearing metal armor or carrying metal shields 
or weapons. 


X18. GUARDED CORRIDOR 

Between two sets of double doors is a corridor with a 
dozen arrow slits along its walls. Four duergar guards 
are stationed in the hallways to either side (two per loca- 
tion). In addition to their normal weapons, these duergar 
carry heavy crossbows (+2 to hit) that deal 5 (1410) 
piercing damage on a hit 


X19. CHARDALYN THRONE 

If Xardorok Sunblight (see appendix C) is encountered 
here, he’s sitting on his throne. Describe him as a soot 
stained, gray-bearded duergar with a jagged black crown 
on his brow and a spiky black gauntlet on one hand. His 
crown and gauntlet are made of chardalyn. 


The ceiling of this hall arches to a height of thirty feet. 
Stone steps lead up to a semicircular dais against the 
south wall. Atop the dais is a misshapen throne crudely 
carved out of black crystal. Small, crackling flames burn 
in braziers that occupy the room's corners. 

Slumped near the east wall is a tall, bipedal fungus 
creature. Luminous spores float in the air around it. A 
savage, white-furred biped has torn off one of the crea- 
ture's arms and is holding it while four other white-furred 
bipeds covered with fungal growths try to capture the 
floating spores in jugs. 


CHAPTER 3 | SUNBLIGHT 


Xardorok’s garrison includes several quaggoth thralls. A 
little over a tenday ago, a quaggoth thonot named Krob 
helped the duergar capture a myconid sovereign in the 
Underdark. The sovereign’s name is Pleurota. With Xar- 
dorok’s consent, Krob is harvesting Pleurota’s animat- 
ing spores and using them to turn dead quaggoths into 
spore servants. When the myconid sovereign became 
uncooperative, Krob tore off one of its arms. 

Thonot Krob uses the quaggoth stat block with the 
modifications noted in the “Variant: Quaggoth Thonot” 
sidebar in the Monster Manual. He is joined in this room 
by four quaggoth spore servants. Krob and the spore 
servants fight to the death. If Krob dies, one of the spore 
servants uses its next action to pour its jug of spores 
over Krob’s corpse, turning it into a new spore servant. 

Sounds of combat here bring reinforcements from 
area X18 (four duergar) and area X20 (four quaggoths). 
All the duergar, including Xardorok if he’s present, use 
Enlarge before joining the fight. If defeat seems likely, 
Xardorok retreats to area X22 and uses the elevator to 
make his way toward area X8, where he hopes to enlist 
the aid of Grandolpha Muzgardt, unaware of her true 
intentions. Grandolpha goes along with Xardorok but 
won't aid him in a fight, allowing the characters to kill 
him. If Xardorok is gravely wounded and Grandolpha 
can kill him without putting herself in harm's way, she 
seizes the opportunity. 

Throne. Prolonged contact with Xardorok’s chardalyn 
throne can warp one's mind. A creature that remains in 
contact with the throne for 1 hour gains a random form 
of indefinite madness (see “Madness” in the Dungeon 
Master's Guide). If this madness isn't cured within 24 
hours, it becomes permanent. Only a wish spell or di- 
vine intervention can end the permanent madness. 

Treasure. Each quaggoth spore servant has a jug con- 
taining enough of Pleurota’s animating spores to turn 
one fresh corpse into a spore servant (as described in 
the “Myconids” entry in the Monster Manual). 


X20. QUAGGOTH DEN 


This dark, filthy room is strewn with bones, It contains 
ten crude beds made of moss and clumps of fur. Loud 
mechanical noises come from behind the west wall. 


Unless they are drawn to area X19 by sounds of combat 
there, four quaggoths gnaw on bones in this room and 
attack intruders on sight. The quaggoths follow Thonot 
Krob who, in turn, obeys Xardorok Sunblight. 

The noises heard coming from behind the west wall 
originate from the elevator located in area X22. 


X21. TREACHEROUS GUARDS 
This room contains braziers of glowing-hot coals in the 
northwest corner and the southwest corner. Loud me- 


chanical noises come from behind the double door in the 
middle of the east wall. 


CHAPTER 3 | SUNBLIGHT 


Unless they were drawn to area X19 by sounds of com- 
bat there, two duergar stand against the west wall, 
watching the doors to area X22. These duergar have 
secretly pledged their loyalty to Grandolpha Muzgardt 
(see “The Muzgardt Conspiracy,” page 172) and try to 
thwart Xardorok at every turn. They allow characters to 
pass through the room unmolested and are 50 percent 
likely to know Xardorok’s current whereabouts. 


X22. WESTERN ELEVATOR 


The elevator shaft terminates in this room. A large stone 
wheel next to the iron cage turns constantly. 


Elevator Shaft. The 10-foot-wide stone shaft ascends 
100 feet to area X6 and 200 feet to area X13, 


X23. OUTER GaTE 
A 15-foot-high, 10-foot-wide iron gate is set into a 
20-foot-high, 15-foot-wide wall that separates area X16 
from area X24. The gate has a bulky padlock on its east- 
ern side. The duergar forewoman (see area X25) carries 
the iron key to the padlock. A character with thieves’ 
tools can use an action to try to pick the lock, doing so 
with a successful DC 20 Dexterity check. The check 
is made with disadvantage if the character must reach 
through the gate from area X16 to get at the lock. A 
knock spell or similar magic also opens the padlock. 
Any attempt to breach the gate alerts the guards atop 
the watchtowers in the forge (areas X24-X26). 


X24—X26. FORGE 


‘Smoke fills this warm cavern, which has a ceiling that 
ranges from forty feet high down to twenty feet high 
along the south wall. The source of the smoke and heat 
is a ten-foot-tall stone forge shaped like a pyramid with 
its peak sheared off. Ripples of heat and flashes of fire- 
light spew from the top of the forge, which emits a deep, 
pulsating heartbeat. A five-foot-deep trough extends east 
from the forge, with rows of black anvils on either side of 
the depression. 

Overlooking the forge are four twenty-foot-tall guard 
towers with gray-skinned dwarves standing behind their 
low battlements. Stone stairs provide access to the tops 
of the two towers nearest the forge. 

South of the forge is an enormous, five-foot-tall iron 
platform fitted with cranes and clamps, with short 
flights of iron stairs leading to the top of the platform. 
Surrounding it is a clean-up crew consisting of a female 
duergar with a horn and six hulking bipeds, their white 
fur stained with soot. They are tossing scraps into a 
cylindrical container. In the twenty-foot-high ceiling 
above this bin is a wide, rectangular hole. 


This encounter area is made up of several smaller loca- 
tions within sight of one another. Area X24 is the forge 
itself. Area X25 is the iron platform where Xardorok’s 
chardalyn dragon was assembled. Area X26 is the bot- 
tom of the shaft that the dragon uses to move up and out 
of the fortress. In addition, four guard towers ringed by 
3-foot-high stone battlements look out over the area. 

If Xardorok Sunblight (see appendix C) is here, he is 
standing atop the assembly platform (area X25), barking 
orders at the clean-up crew. Describe Xardorok as a 
soot-stained, gray-bearded duergar with a jagged black 
crown on his brow and a spiky black gauntlet on one 
hand. His crown and gauntlet are made of chardalyn. 

The clean-up crew consists of the duergar fore- 
woman, Thontara, and six quaggoths, Thontara carries 
a horn that she uses as a loudspeaker; the iron key that 
unlocks the outer gate (area X23) is hidden inside a com- 
partment in the heel of her left boot. 

Three guards are stationed atop each tower—twelve 
duergar in total. One guard on each tower is secretly 
loyal to Grandolpha Muzgardt (see “The Muzgardt Con- 
spiracy,” page 172). If the characters engage in battle 
with Xardorok and appear to be winning, these duergar 
help by attacking the other duergar on their respective 
platforms; if Xardorok appears to be winning, these du- 
ergar stay out of the fight. The remaining duergar hurl 
javelins at foes from atop the towers, growing to Large 
size and switching to their war picks if forced into me- 
lee combat. 


ENLARGEOMTO OGRE SIZE, KARDOROK 
SUNBLIGHIBEFENDS His FORGE 


A fight here brings reinforcements from area X28: 
three duergar hammerers (see appendix C). 

If defeat seems likely, Xardorok retreats and makes 
his final stand in Deep Duerra’s temple (area X29). 

X24. Forge. Any creature that touches the forge for 
the first time on a turn or starts its turn in contact with 
the forge takes 10 (3d6) fire damage. 

Characters who get close enough to peer through the 
vents in the side of the forge can see that it contains a 
large, beating heart. A successful DC 15 Intelligence 
(Arcana) check reveals that the heart belongs to a red 
dragon and is clearly kept alive by magic. The forge 
grants the heart three-quarters cover. The heart is a 
Large object with AC 13, 27 hit points, vulnerability to 
cold damage, and immunity to fire and psychic damage. 
The heart stops beating when reduced to 0 hit points, 
rendering the forge inoperable. 

X25. Assembly Platform. Underneath the platform is 
a 5-foot-high crawlspace. 

X26. Vertical Shaft. The shaft ascends 200 feet to the 
doors that make up the ice gate, which are open unless 
the characters closed them in areas X13 and X15. The 
characters need magic or climbing gear to scale the 
shaft’s rough-hewn walls. Below the shaft is a 5-foot-tall, 
10-foot-diameter cylindrical bin. It contains dozens of 
fragments left over from the construction of the char- 
dalyn dragon. Any chardalyn fragments stolen from the 
Easthaven town hall are here as well (see “The Charda- 
lyn Caper,” page 68). 


CHAPTER 3 | SUNBLIGHT 


X27. GIANT LIZARD PENS 


This corridor is lined with six arched cells, each sealed 
off with a latched iron gate. Housed in each cell is a big 
lizard fitted with riding gear. 


The six giant lizards kept here are used by the duergar 
as mounts and pack animals. They are hostile toward 
non-duergar but can't attack through the closed gates. 
The gates are latched shut, but not locked. 


X28. DUNGEON 

Unless they are drawn to the forge by sounds of combat 
there, three duergar hammerers (see appendix C) are 
spaced equidistantly along this corridor. Their job is to 
prevent prisoners from escaping, but they attack anyone 
outside the cells whom they don’t recognize. 


This dark corridor has narrow iron doors along the north 
wall and two similar doors at each end. An iron crossbar 
seals each door. 


If the duergar hammerers have been defeated or lured 
elsewhere, add: 


Loud banging from one cell causes the bar on its door to 
tremble in its brackets. From another cell comes a gentle 
tapping sound. 


After its bar is removed, each iron door pulls open to 
reveal a cramped cell with no furnishings. 

The tapping comes from the cell of a doppelganger 
that was caught trying to infiltrate the fortress. This 
creature takes the form of a scrawny human in a dirty 
loincloth named Pekoe Quint. “Pekoe” claims to be a 
trapper from Dougan's Hole and has the small, mal- 
formed ears and pointy teeth typical of that town's 
inbred stock. Pekoe says that the duergar abducted 
him and asked him a lot of questions about his 
town’s defenses. 

The doppelganger knows the settlements of Ten- 
Towns well enough to pass for a Ten-Towner. Any char- 
acter who doubts Pekoe’s story can make a Wisdom 
(Insight) check; if the character's check result is higher 
than the doppelganger's Charisma (Deception) check 
result, the character senses that something is off about 


Pekoe but can't tell what. The doppelganger tries to 
acquire some cold weather clothing and remains with 
the party until it reaches Ten-Towns. Once there, it slips 
away and adopts a new disguise. The doppelganger 
won't harm the characters unless they give it reason to. 

The loud banging comes from an unarmed goliath 
warrior named Kapanuk Talltree Thuunlakalaga. Af- 
ter becoming separated from his hunting party during 
a blizzard, Kapanuk was ambushed by duergar and 
brought to the fortress for interrogation. Since he knows 
nothing about Ten-Towns, Kapanuk was of little use to 
his captors. 

If released, Kapanuk tries to acquire some weapons 
and armor. He also invites the characters to return 
with him to Wyrmdoom Crag, where his kin will give 
them the heroes’ feast they deserve. He shows no of- 
fense if the characters decline the invitation, but if they 
accept and are ready to leave, Kapanuk guides them 
through the mountains to his home (see “Wyrmdoom 
Crag,” page 166). 

You can add additional prisoners to the cellblock, 
at your discretion. The remaining cells are other- 
wise empty. 


X29. DEEP DUERRA’'S TEMPLE 
When one or more characters enter the room with the 
statue, read: 


Inside this room, you can hear loud mechanical noises 
that seem to come from behind the south wall. 

Standing in the middle of the room, facing the double 
door to the north, is a seven-foot-tall statue of a female 
duergar in a scale mail robe. The top of its head above 
the eyes has been sheared off, making a space for a stone 
brazier that gives off a flickering flame. Chained to the 
statue's pedestal is an emaciated, malformed creature 
with rubbery, purplish-gray flesh, a bulbous head with a 
metal plate bolted to it, and sinister eyes. 


If Xardorok Sunblight (see appendix C) is here, he 
is kneeling before the statue and calling on Deep Du- 
erra (speaking in Dwarvish) to grant him the power to 
conquer his foes. Describe him as a soot-stained, gray- 
bearded duergar with a jagged black crown on his brow 
and a spiky black gauntlet on one hand. His crown and 
gauntlet are made of chardalyn. 

While in this temple, Xardorok has the following addi- 
tional trait: 


Psychic Conquest. Xardorok deals an extra 5 (1d10) psychic 
damage to any creature he hits with a weapon attack, and he 
regains a number of hit points equal to the amount of psychic 
damage dealt. 


A character who succeeds on a DC 20 Intelligence 
(Religion) check recognizes the statue as a depiction of 
Deep Duerra (see the “Deep Duerra” sidebar). Dwarves 
have advantage on this check. The flame rising from 
the statue's head symbolizes Deep Duerra’s destructive, 
all-consuming mind. If a creature uses an action to 


Son: 


extinguish this fire, Xardorok loses his Psychic 
quest trait. 

The creature chained to the statue's base is a mind 
flayer with 9 hit points and no armor (AC 11). Klondorn, 
the duergar priest (see area X31), has amputated its 
face-tentacles and removed the part of its brain that 
enables the mind flayer to use its psionic powers. Con- 
sequently, it has no innate spelleasting abilities and no 
effective attacks. It retains its Magic Resistance and its 
telepathy, however. Its challenge rating is 0 (0 XP) 

The mind flayer doesn't expect sympathy from the 
characters and shies away from them. If the characters 
question it, the mind flayer shares the following informa 
lly 


tion with one of them telepathic: 


+ The mind flayer’s name is F'yorl. It was captured by 
the duergar in the Underdark. 

+ This room is a temple dedicated to Deep Duerra, 
a duergar god of conquest and psionics. Xardorok 


and draws strength from the stat 


comes here to pr: 
ue’s flame 

+ The temple's priest, Klondorn, resides in the room to 
the southeast (area X31). 


Northwest and Northeast Rooms. The temple 
is flanked by L-shaped rooms to the northwest and 
northeast. The northwest room contains heaps of cold 
weather clothing and a dozen pairs of snowshoes. The 
northeast room contains piles of weapons, including 
six war picks, nine warhammers, a dozen javelins, ten 
heavy crossbows, and a nicked greataxe that belongs to 
the goliath prisoner in area X28. 

Secret Door. A character who searches the temple's 
walls for secret doors and succeeds on a DC 15 Wisdom 
(Perception) check find such a door in the east wall. 

This 5-foot-wide, 10-foot-tall stone door swings into a 
5 foot-diameter tunnel that leads to a similar door block. 
ing entry to area X34. 


X30, EASTERN ELEVATOR 


The elevator shaft terminates in this room. A large stone 
wheel next to the iron cage turns constantly, West of the 
wheel is a duergar encased in a cruel-looking exoskeletal 
construct, his face a mask of pain. 


The construct is a duergar hammerer (see appendix C) 
It guards this room and attacks intruders on sight 

Elevator Shaft. The 10-foot-wide stone shaft ascends 
100 feet to area X6 and 200 feet to area X13 


X31. DEVIL IN DISGUISE 


This room is filled with stacks of granite tablets. Behind 
them lurks a long-bearded duergar wearing black robes 
and a tall black miter. 


Klondorn, the duergar priest of Deep Duerra and Xar 
dorok’s trusted advisor, is in fact a barbed devil. The 


devil's miter is a hat of disguise that it uses to conceal its 


true form. 

Klondorn is a fiendish emissary sent by Asmodeus 
to help Xardorok conquer Icewind Dale. Xardorok is 
unaware of Klondorn’s true nature. In the guise of a 
duergar, the devil earned Xardorok’s confidence and 
refuses to be intimidated by a stray band of adventurers, 
If the characters threaten Klondorn, it tosses aside the 
miter, revealing its true form, and attacks. If reduced 
to 0 hit points, the devil vanishes in a cloud of black 
smoke and returns to the Nine Hells, leaving its hat of 
disguise behind. 

Infernal Tablets. The barbed devil spends its time 
chiseling on granite tablets to inscribe them with Infer- 
nal runes. Characters who can read Infernal script can 
learn about the devil's manifesto, in which Klondorn 
reveals that Asmodeus, in the guise of Deep Duerra, is 
using the duergar to further his interests 

There are ninety-two granite tablets stacked about the 


room, Each tablet weighs 50 pounds and is 1 foot wide 
1 feet long, and 2% inches thick 

Treasure. Aside from the devil's hat of disguise, this 
room contains nothing of value 


X32. TRAPPED HALL 


Two sets of double doors frame a short corridor. Bolted 
to the walls are a dozen black boxes, each one measuring 
eight feet tall and one foot wide, that give off a low hum. 


CHAPTER 3 | SUNBLIGHT 


183 


= 184 


Operating a lever in area X36 deactivates the trap in 
this hall, which can't be disabled by any other means. 
Any creature that enters the hall for the first time on 

a turn or starts its turn in the hall is struck by bolts of 
lightning that leap from the boxes and must make a DC 
15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 18 (4d8) lightning 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. 


X33. LOWER BARRACKS 
The characters hear deep voices speaking Dwarvish 
and Undercommon as they approach this area. 


Six duergar sit on stools around three hexagonal tables in 
the middle of this hall, with a copper keg atop each one. 
Braziers heaped with glowing-hot coals provide light and 
heat. Through the smoky haze, you count nine doors em- 
bedded in the north, west, and east walls. 


Fifteen duergar guards occupy this area—six relaxing 
in the main hall and nine more resting in the smaller 
rooms attached to it. Ten of the duergar have secretly 
pledged their loyalty to Grandolpha Muzgardt (see “The 
Muzgardt Conspiracy,” page 172). If the characters 
claim to be on Grandolpha’s side, the duergar that sup- 
port her turn against their kin. If the characters let these 
duergar fight among themselves, five duergar survive 
the battle, all of them loyal to Grandolpha. They are 
willing to help the characters slay Xardorok, but any 
alliance they make with the characters ends with Xar- 
dorok's death. 

Copper Kegs. The three kegs contain Clan 
Muzgardt's finest mushroom brew, Darklake Stout, 
which only a duergar could find palatable. 

Quarters. Each of the smaller rooms has three stone 
bunkbeds protruding from its walls. 


X34. TORTURE CHAMBER 
Characters who approach this chamber hear screams of 
agony coming from inside. 


Braziers of glowing-hot coals heat and light this room, 
the walls of which are lined with closed iron sarcophagi 
standing on end. In the middle of the room, a duergar 
has been shackled to a chair. Her flesh is covered with 
blisters. A pair of hooded duergar prod her with hot 
iron rods, searing her flesh and causing her to bellow 
in agony. 


The unarmed and unarmored duergar shackled to the 
chair is Nefrun, the former captain of the guard. She has 
7 hit points remaining. Her torturers are two duergar 
mind masters (see appendix C) wearing black hoods. 

If Xardorok Sunblight (see appendix C) is encoun- 
tered here, he’s overseeing the torture of Nefrun, 
who has been implicated in a plot to assassinate him. 


CHAPTER 3 | SUNBLIGHT 


Describe Xardorok as a soot-stained, gray-bearded du- 
ergar with a jagged black crown on his brow and a spiky 
black gauntlet on one hand. His crown and gauntlet are 
made of chardalyn. 

The mind masters want their prisoner to identify 
others involved in the coup against Xardorok. Nefrun 
is refusing to cooperate and is not guilty of the crimes 
leveled against her. She suspects Klondorn, the high 
priest of Deep Duerra (see area X31), has turned Xar- 
dorok against her. If she is released, Nefrun intends to 
demonstrate her loyalty to Xardorok. If that means be- 
traying her liberators, Nefrun does so without question. 
Nefrun's gear, including her armors and weapons, is on 
the floor next to the chair. 

Xardorok won't fight to the death in this area. Instead, 
he uses the secret door (see below) to retreat to area 
X30 and uses the elevator there to make his way toward 
area X8, where he plans to join forces with Grandolpha 
Muzgardt. Grandolpha goes along with Xardorok but 
won't aid him in a fight, allowing the characters to kill 
him. If Xardorok is gravely wounded and Grandolpha 
can kill him without putting herself in harm's way, she 
seizes the opportunity. 

Iron Sarcophagi. The closed, upright sarcophagi 
are iron maidens. The room contains ten of these de- 
vices, each one with spikes lining the interior of its lid. 
A Small or Medium creature shackled inside an iron 
maiden takes 11 (2d10) piercing damage when the lid 
snaps shut. The creature takes this damage again at the 
start of each of its turns until it is released. A creature 
can use an action to try to break out of an iron maiden, 
doing so with a successful DC 20 Strength check. 

Secret Door. A character who searches the walls for 
secret doors and succeeds on a DC 15 Wisdom (Per- 
ception) check finds such a door in the west wall. This 
5-foot-wide, 10-foot-tall stone door swings into a 5-foot- 
wide tunnel that leads to a similar door blocking entry 
to area X29. 

Torture Closet. The small room to the south contains 
an array of torture devices, including whips, mallets, 
barbed scourges, spiked chains, branding irons, hooks, 
thumbscrews, pliers, and shears. 


X35. GUEST QUARTERS 


Two beds stand against the south wall of this room, one 
of them with a yeti hide draped across it. At the foot of 
each bed is a stone chest next to a stack of five sealed 
copper kegs. The room is heated and illuminated by 
glowing coals in stone braziers. 


This bedchamber is set aside for honored guests and is 
currently being used by Grandolpha Muzgardt, whom 
the characters encounter in area X8. The yeti hide on 
her bed is a gift from Xardorok. The kegs contain Dark- 
lake Stout, Clan Muzgardt’s finest mushroom ale, which 
Grandolpha brought with her from the Underdark. She 
keeps no valuables here, and both chests are empty. 


X36. DUERGAR HAMMERERS 


Two featureless stone pillars support the vaulted ceiling 
of this unlit chamber. East of the pillars, a duergar en- 
cased in an exoskeletal construct stands before a lowered 
iron portcullis. A similar creature stands in an alcove to 
the north, its squeaky pincers clenching and unclenching 
in nervous anticipation. 

A stone lever juts out of the back wall of an alcove to 
the south. 


The two duergar hammerers (appendix C) attack any- 
one they don’t recognize. 

Iron Portcullis. When the characters move close to 
the portcullis, they can see that embedded in the north 
wall next to it is a 1-foot-square chardalyn plaque with 
an oversized, hand-shaped indentation on its face. The 
plaque can't be removed from the wall. If the fingers and 
palm of Xardorok’s gauntlet are placed in the indenta- 
tion, the portcullis rises into the ceiling, allowing access 
to area X37. The portcullis can also be raised with a 
knock spell or similar magic. Brute force, in the form 
of a successful DC 25 Strength (Athletics) check, also 
works—but circumventing the locking mechanism in 
this way causes the portcullises in area X37 to fall, seal- 
ing off that room's eight alcoves. 

Stone Lever. Pulling down the lever in the south 
alcove deactivates the trap in area X32, making 
that tunnel safe to traverse. Raising the lever reacti- 
vates the trap. 


X37. TREASURE VAULT 
The characters can see into this room through the bars 
of the portcullis that blocks its entrance: 


This unlit room contains four alcoves on the north wall 
and four on the south wall. Inside each alcove is an 
iron chest. 


The pointed teeth of a raised iron portcullis jut from the 
ceiling of each alcove. These barriers fall and lock into 
place if the characters physically forced open the port- 
cullis that seals the vault’s entrance. Placing the fingers 
and palm of Xardorok’s gauntlet in the hand-shaped 
indentation in area X36 causes all the lowered portcul- 
lises in this room to rise. A portcullis can also be raised 
with a knock spell or similar magic. 

Iron Chests. Each chest has a built-in combination 
lock with three tumblers that bear tiny Dwarvish runes 
representing numerals from 1 to 9. Xardorok keeps the 
combinations for these chests in his quarters (area X5). 
A character using thieves’ tools can spend 1 minute 
trying to disable the lock, doing so with a successful DC 
20 Dexterity check. A knock spell or similar magic also 
opens a chest. Here are the chests’ descriptions: 


Chest 1 contains a dozen stoppered gourds, each hold- 
ing a pint of a fiercely hot liquor made from fire lichen, 


which grows in the Underdark. Each gourd can be 
sold to a tavernkeeper in Ten-Towns for 10 gp. 

Chest 2 holds a gold mask shaped like the visage of a 
male drow (750 gp), lying on a bed of 350 gp. 

Chest 3 contains a silver chalice shaped in the like- 
ness of a spider and inlaid with eight obsidian eyes 
(250 gp). 

Chest 4 holds a bundled-up gray spider-silk robe sewn 
with darkmantle eyes, wrapped inside which is a 
wand of web. 

Chest 5 contains a folded piwafwi—a dark spider-silk 
cloak made by drow. This item has the properties of a 
cloak of elvenkind but loses its magic if it's exposed to 
sunlight for 1 hour without interruption. 

Chest 6 holds an amber headdress set with three large 
purple pearls (2,500 gp). 

Chest 7 contains a 2-foot-tall stone statuette of De- 
mogorgon that weighs 50 pounds. Anyone who looks 
into the statue’s eyes must succeed on a DC 14 Cha- 
risma saving throw or contract a random form of 
short-term madness (see “Madness” in the Dungeon 
Master's Guide). A creature can be affected only once 
by the statue, after which it becomes immune to 
the effect. 

Chest 8 houses an inanimate svirfneblin skeleton en- 
crusted with yellow mold (see “Dungeon Hazards” in 
the Dungeon Master's Guide). The mold releases its 
spores as soon as the chest's lid is opened. Embedded 
in one of the skull’s eye sockets is a false eye made of 
moonstone (75 gp). 


FORTRESS FALLOUT 


The chardalyn dragon won't return to Xardorok’s for- 
tress until it has destroyed Ten-Towns (see the next 
chapter). If Xardorok is alive and his forge is intact when 
the dragon returns, Xardorok begins repairing it. The 
dragon regains 1d6 hit points at the end of each hour 

of repair work. If Xardorok is slain or the red dragon's 
heart in the forge is destroyed, the chardalyn dragon 
can't be repaired. 

After returning to the fortress, the dragon remains 
there until such time as Xardorok needs it to cause more 
devastation, and certainly not before Xardorok’s duergar 
scouts have assessed the damage to Ten-Towns. 

Xardorok’s demise spells the doom of the Sunblight 
clan if neither of his sons are alive to take command. If 
Grandolpha Muzgardt outlives Xardorok, she absorbs 
the remnants of the Sunblight clan into her own and has 
Xardorok’s surviving sons executed. The Muzgardt clan 
takes over Xardorok’s fortress but has no immediate 
designs against Ten-Towns or Icewind Dale. If the char- 
acters were instrumental in helping Grandolpha capture 
the fortress, she allows them to keep any treasures they 
found in the fortress but insists that they leave at once. 

If Xardorok and Grandolpha are both still alive when 
the characters depart the fortress, the division among 
the two duergar clans continues to deepen, but no im- 
mediate effort is made to unseat Xardorok. Grandolpha 
is content to bide her time, betraying Xardorok only af- 
ter some setback leaves him weak and vulnerable. 


CHAPTER 3 | SUNBLIGHT 


185 


DESTRUCTION’S LIGHT 


EN-TOWNS WON'T SURVIVE THE ATTACK OF 

Xardorok’s dragon without the characters’ 

intervention. This chapter describes the 

dragon's attacks on Ten-Towns and what the 

characters can do to minimize the destruc- 
tion and save as many Ten-Towners as possible. The 
extent to which they can help depends on their actions 
in the previous chapter: 


« Ifthe characters delayed their return to Ten-Towns to 
confront Xardorok in his lair, the amount of time they 
spent in Xardorok’s fortress determines how many 
Ten-Towns settlements are victimized before the char- 
acters can intervene, based on the dragon's timeline. 
If the characters forgo the attack on Xardorok's for- 
tress and waste no time chasing after the dragon, 
they have a good chance of catching up to it before too 
many Ten-Towns settlements are lost. 


The point of this chapter, beyond pitting the char- 
acters against a formidable draconic foe, is to make 
the players aware that their characters’ choices have 
consequences. If the characters do nothing to stop the 
dragon, Ten-Towns will be destroyed. Many lives hang in 
the balance. 


RUNNING THIS CHAPTER 


Review the chardalyn dragon's stat block and descrip- 
tion in appendix C before running this chapter of the 
adventure. Stopping the dragon will be a daunting 
task for the characters. Fortunately, they won't have to 
fight it alone. 

From the moment it leaves the fortress, the chardalyn 
dragon begins to carry out Xardorok’'s plan to level Ten- 
Towns one settlement after another. The characters can 
intervene by successfully predicting where the dragon 
will strike next and confronting it. The “Return to Ten- 
Towns” section provides characters with a much-needed 
ally and a swift dogsled ride back to Ten-Towns. The 
“Dragon Scourge” section (page 188) describes how 
long it takes for the dragon to reach each town, the de- 
fenses each settlement musters against it, and the likely 
outcome if no help from the characters is forthcoming. 
The “Showdown!” section (page 190) helps you run an 
encounter involving the characters and the dragon. Re- 
gardless of what happens to Ten-Towns, the “Vellynne’s 
Quest” section (page 194) sets up the final three chap- 
ters of the adventure. 


CHARACTER ADVANCEMENT 


The characters gain a level if they contribute to the drag- 
on's destruction. If they're not 7th level by the end of this 
chapter, lure them to some of the locations in chapter 2 
so that they can gain enough levels before continuing 
with the later chapters. 


RETURN TO TEN-ITOWNS 


As the characters start to make their way back to Ten- 
Towns, read: 


Over the sound of the wind, you can hear the barking of 
dogs getting louder. Through the blowing snow come 
three wooden sleds pulled by canines as big as wolves. 
The closest driver calls out, “Can we be of service?” 


The figure calling to the party is Vellynne Harpell (see 
appendix C), a wizard of the Arcane Brotherhood. She 
cold weather clothing, her face all but 
hidden behind a wool muffler. Her snowy owl familiar is 
perched on her shoulder. Her sled has two Icewind ko- 
bold zombies riding on it, their acid-eaten forms visible 
through gashes in their hide armor. Steering the other 
two sleds are four Icewind kobolds, two per sled. (See 
appendix C for the kobolds’ stat blocks.) Each sled is 
pulled by six strong dogs (use the wolf stat block). 

Vellynne was searching in Ten-Towns for a group of 
adventurers to help her complete a personal mission 
when she learned about the characters’ earlier acts of 
bravery (as displayed in chapters 1 and 2). She decided 
to try to catch up to them and earn their friendship. 
Although the fate of Ten-Towns doesn't concern her, 
Vellynne hopes the characters will help her obtain The 
Codicil of White once they learn to trust her. With this 
ulterior motive in mind, Vellynne offers the characters 
her sleds for traveling back to Ten-Towns and can easily 
be persuaded to help fight the dragon. (“A wizard worth 
her weight never passes up a chance to test her magic 
against the mightiest foes,” she says brazenly.) 

There's room in the kobolds'’ sleds to transport the 
characters and their gear. If the characters insist on 
steering these sleds, the kobolds fuss about handing 
over the reins but do so, piling into the cargo beds. If the 
characters refuse to travel with the kobolds, Vellynne 


CHAPTER 4 | DESTRUCTION’S LIGHT 


187 


= 188 


jettisons her little sidekicks without a second thought— 
the characters are much more valuable to her than 
the kobolds. 

If the characters aren't sure where to go next, Vellynne 
suggests that they travel to the place where Ten-Town- 
ers are most likely to make their final stand against the 
dragon: the town of Bryn Shander. (Characters who 
found and studied Xardorok’s attack plan in chapter 
3 might have a different idea.) If the characters take 
Vellynne’s advice and head to Bryn Shander, they will 
be playing into Xardorok's hands. The dragon is saving 
Bryn Shander for last, because Xardorok knows that 
refugees from the smaller towns have nowhere else to 
go but there. Bryn Shander's walls provide no defense 
against the dragon's attacks from the sky, and the closer 
Ten-Towners huddle together, the easier it becomes for 
the dragon to annihilate them. 


ROLEPLAYING VELLYNNE 


Vellynne is a pragmatist who tries to stay one step ahead 
of her competition, in particular her rivals in the Arcane 
Brotherhood (of whom she rarely speaks). To continue 
her mission in Icewind Dale, she needs the aid of stal- 
wart adventurers, and she knows that helping them 
battle the dragon is a golden opportunity to earn the 
characters’ respect if not their trust. 

Vellynne is open about her intentions if the characters 
are suspicious and confront her. She is willing to post- 
pone her mission until the threat of the dragon is no 
more, and tells the characters as much. 

For more information on Vellynne and her moti- 
vations, see the “Arcane Brotherhood” section in 
appendix C. 


DRAGON SCOURGE 


This section describes the dragon's flight path and the 
events it sets in motion. The section assumes no inter- 
ference on the part of the characters; when they and 
the dragon finally meet, skip ahead to the “Showdown!” 
section (page 190). 

The dragon can regain hit points only if Xardorok re- 
pairs it in his forge (see “Fortress Fallout,” page 185). 


DraGon’s FLIGHT PATH 


Map 4.1 shows the dragon's flight path, which should 
not be shared with your players unless the characters 
studied Xardorok’s attack plan in the previous chapter. 
The dragon is following the instructions of its creator 
precisely and will not deviate from this course under 
any circumstances. 

Each section describes the damage caused to each 
town, what (if any) damage the town deals to the dragon 
in return, and how much time the dragon spent at that 
town. Adjust the dragon's timeline and the extent of the 
damage as you see fit. 

The Dragon Flight Times table shows how long 
it takes for the dragon to get from one location the 
next one. 


CHAPTER 4 | DESTRUCTION’S LIGHT 


DRAGON FLIGHT TIMES 


From/To Flight Time 
‘Sunblight to Dougan’s Hole 2hours 
Dougan'’s Hole to Good Mead 30 minutes 
Good Mead to Easthaven Wa hours 
Easthaven to Caer-Dineval 1 hour 
Caer-Dineval to Caer-Konig 1 hour 
Caer-Konig to Termalaine 2hours 
Termalaine to Lonelywood 30 minutes 
Lonelywood to Bremen 1⁄2 hours 
Bremen to Targos 30 minutes 
Targos to Bryn Shander 30 minutes 
Bryn Shander to Sunblight 3V2 hours 


TARGET l: Doucan’s HOLE 

The dragon destroys every structure in town, including 
the docks, in 30 minutes. It leaves the Twenty Stones of 
Thruun untouched. (It was always Xardorok's intention 
to study this ancient site to see what power could be 
drawn from it.) 

Casualties. Twenty-five people (half of the population) 
are killed. The survivors, including Speaker Durmoot, 
flee to Bryn Shander with their most cherished posses- 
sions and some of their livestock. 

Dragon Damage. The dragon takes no damage. 


TARGET 2: GOOD MEAD 
The dragon spares the Mead Hall, but it destroys every 
other structure in town in 1 hour. 

Casualties. Twenty-five people (one-quarter of the 
population) are killed. The survivors flee into the woods 
before veering toward the Eastway and following the 
road to Bryn Shander, taking most of their livestock 
with them. 


Dragon Damage. The dragon takes no damage. 


TARGET 3: EASTHAVEN 

Here, the dragon faces its first real challenge. Although 
it catches the town by surprise, the militia reacts quickly 
and succeeds in wounding the creature. 

The dragon uses its radiant breath weapon to strafe 
the town from the air, never landing. It starts at the east 
end and slowly works its way westward, clearing streets 
and obliterating homes. It takes 8 hours, but the dragon 
destroys half the town's structures, including most of its 
docks. The White Lady Inn partially collapses when the 
dragon flies through it, and the Wet Trout is razed. The 
Town Hall and the Easthaven ferry are spared. 

Casualties. Two hundred fifty people (one-third of 
the population), including most of the town’s militia, are 
killed. Captain Arlaggath is slain by two invisible duer- 
gar who have been waiting impatiently for the dragon to 
strike. The five hundred survivors flee on foot to Bryn 
Shander, taking their most cherished possessions and 
livestock with them. 

If he’s alive and present when the dragon attacks, 
Speaker Waylen is killed when six duergar storm the 
Town Hall and confiscate any chardalyn they find there. 

Dragon Damage. The attack on Easthaven reduces 
the dragon's hit points by 10. 


Map 4.1: Dragon's Fright Pat 


TARGET 4: CAER-DINEVAL 

The dragon lands between the castle and the rest of the 
town. It then moves through town, leveling one structure 
after another. All buildings aside from the castle, includ- 
ing the Uphill Climb and Dinev’s Rest, are destroyed 

in 1 hour, The castle and its inhabitants are spared, for 
it was Xardorok's intention to trap the Knights of the 
Black Sword in their self-made prison (not unlike the 
fate of their dark master, Levistus). 

Casualties. If he’s still alive and confined to his castle, 
Speaker Siever survives. Everyone living outside the 
castle is killed, either by the dragon or by the six duer- 
gar lurking in Dinev’s Rest, When the dragon attacks, 
the duergar emerge from the dilapidated inn, enlarge 
themselves to ogre size, and join the battle. 

Dragon Damage. The dragon takes no damage. 


TARGET 5: CAER-KONIG 
The dragon destroys every structure in town in 11⁄4 
hours. Speaker Trovus, the town’s dragonborn defender, 
is passed out drunk in a snowbank throughout the en- 
tire ordeal and wakes to find his settlement wiped out. 
Casualties. Fifty people (one-third of the population) 
are killed, a few at the hands of an invisible duergar 
lurking about town. Among the dead are the Shorard 
sisters, whose inn collapses on top of them, and Atenas 
Swift, who dies helping several citizens escape on dog- 
sleds. Speaker Trovus survives but never conquers his 
guilt; he does, however, give up the bottle. Jarthra Far- 
zassh survives and leads most of the town’s evacuees to 


the ruins of Caer-Dineval, only to be denied entry into 
the castle. Before they can leave Caer-Dineval, Jarthra 
and several others are murdered by the duergar lurk- 
ing in town (see “Target 4: Caer-Dineval” above). Only 
fifty refugees from Caer-Konig make it all the way to 
Bryn Shander. 

Dragon Damage. Trovus was the town’s best hope for 
defense. Because he was unconscious during the attack, 
no organized resistance was mounted. Consequently, 
the dragon takes no damage. 


TARGET 6: TERMALAINE 
Termalaine's residents take refuge in the nearby mines 
while the militia defends the town. 

The dragon takes 6 hours to destroy the town, leaving 
no building unharmed. The Eastside is only partially 
damaged and remains open for business after the drag- 
on's attack. The Blue Clam is destroyed, as are most of 
Termalaine’s docks and boats. 

Casualties. The town militia is wiped out, and 
twenty of the town’s residents perish in their homes. 
Another thirty residents are killed in a mine collapse 
triggered by duergar saboteurs. Half of the remaining 
five hundred people flee to Targos and continue to Bryn 
Shander, while the rest (including Speaker Masthew) 
remain holed up in the mines. 

Dragon Damage. The attack on Termalaine reduces 
the dragon's hit points by 5. 


CHAPTER 4 | DESTRUCTION’S LIGHT 


189 


“190 


TARGET 7: LONELYWOOD 
Local fishers witness the dragon's attack on Termalaine 
and rush home to alert their families and neighbors. 
When the dragon reaches Lonelywood, the town is 
empty, its residents having retreated to the woods or 
sailed to Targos. The dragon takes 2 hours to lay waste 
to the empty town, leveling every building and destroy- 
ing every dock. 
Casualties. None as a direct result of the drag- 
on's attack. 
Dragon Damage. The dragon takes no damage. 


TARGET 8: BREMEN 

As the dragon flies over Maer Dualdon, it spots many 
of Bremen’s residents crossing the lake in boats and 
sinks them. When it reaches the town, the dragon 
takes 2 hours to lay waste to the docks and flatten ev- 
ery building. 

Casualties. One hundred people (two-thirds of the 
population) are killed, either in boats or in the town 
proper, including Speaker Shalescar, Cora Mulphoon, 
and the entire militia. The remaining fifty residents flee 
to Bryn Shander, leaving everything behind. 

Dragon Damage. Bremen’s m: puts up a good 
fight, reducing the dragon's hit points by 5. 


TARGET 9: TARGOS 

Speaker Maxildanarr’s network of spies throughout 
Ten-Towns alerted him to the dragon shortly after its 
attacks began, allowing Targos time to prepare. The 
local militia swells with furious residents eager to de- 
fend their town, and siege weapons are brought to bear. 
Unfortunately, many of the town’s prepared defenses are 
undermined by duergar saboteurs. 

It takes the dragon 8 hours to reduce Targos to a smol- 
dering ruin. The dragon ignores the town’s walls for 
the most part and focuses on the buildings, leveling one 
after another, 

Casualties. Five hundred people (half the population) 
are killed by the dragon or by duergar moving invisibly 
through town and indiscriminately murdering people. 
The survivors flee to Bryn Shander, taking their most 
prized possessions and livestock with them. 

The militia makes its final stand outside the Luskan 
Arms, by which time Speaker Maxildanarr has fled to 
a Zhentarim safe house in Bryn Shander. Skath, his 
faithful tiefling militia captain, is one of many sacrificial 
pawns left behind to cover his escape. 

Dragon Damage. The Targos militia, the toughest op- 
position the dragon has faced, reduces the dragon's hit 
points by 15. 


TARGET 10: BRYN SHANDER 
By the time the dragon shows up, Bryn Shander is 
bursting at the seams with refugees from other settle- 
ments. This is where Ten-Towns makes its final stand. 
Although the outer walls offer no defense against the fly- 
ing dragon, people can hide in the town’s root cellars. 
The dragon strafes the town for 6 hours, remaining 
airborne the whole time and eliminating anyone who 
tries to get away. It then lands inside the walls and 
spends another 6 hours going from one smoldering ruin 


CHAPTER 4 | DESTRUCTION’S LIGHT 


to the next, hunting down survivors. After 12 hours of 
attacks on Bryn Shander, the dragon returns to Xar- 
dorok'’s fortress for repairs. (If Xardorok is dead, no 
repairs are forthcoming, and the dragon remains at the 
duergar fortress.) 

The Northlook is damaged but not destroyed. Both 
Blackiron Blades and the House of the Morninglord are 
lost, along with almost every other establishment. 

While the dragon does its work, duergar prowl 
through town, murdering leaders, spellcasters, and 
other key figures. 

Casualties. Bryn Shander’s population balloons from 
1,200 to 2,700 when the refugees from other settle- 
ments are accounted for. The dragon and the duergar 
claim 200 lives each hour, leaving the devastated town 
with a population of 300 when all is said and done. 
Roughly half of these survivors are Bryn Shander na- 
tives; the rest are refugees from other settlements. 

Scramsax, the proprietor of the Northlook, falls to the 
dragon. Mishann, the priest of Amaunator, administers 
healing as best she can and survives without injury. 
Sheriff Markham Southwell personally thwarts a du- 
ergar assassination attempt against Speaker Duvessa 
Shane; both leaders are scarred but survive. 

Speaker Durmoot of Dougan’s Hole is killed by duer- 
gar, but Speaker Maxildanarr of Targos survives. 

Dragon Damage. Bryn Shander benefits from strong 
leadership, a tested militia, and helpful spellcasters. In 
the first 6 hours, the dragon’s hit points decrease by 10. 
Once the dragon lands and begins searching through 
wreckage, its hit points decrease at a rate of 5 per hour. 


SHOWDOWN! 


The dragon's flying speed is greater than the characters’ 
overland movement speed or the flying speed available 
to characters who can cast fly spells, so the party has 
little hope of catching up to the dragon before it reaches 
Ten-Towns. The characters’ best chance of destroy- 
ing the dragon is to pick a settlement and wait for the 
dragon there. If the characters saw Xardorok’s battle 
plan in the previous chapter, they know the order in 
which the settlements of Ten-Towns will be attacked. 

The dragon's preferred tactic is to strafe each settle- 
ment from the air, using its breath weapon to incinerate 
people and structures alike. It then soars out of missile 
range until its breath weapon recharges. After dealing 
as much damage as it can from the air, the dragon lands 
and begins searching through the smoldering ruins to 
eliminate any survivors. 

Whenever the characters engage the dragon, they buy 
time for Ten-Towners to flee. Reduce a town’s losses as 
you see fit to account for the characters’ interference. 


WHEN THE DRAGON TAKES DAMAGE 


If the characters deal 30 damage or more to the dragon 
and it's not destroyed, it flies to the next town. If this 
happens in Bryn Shander, the dragon flies back to 
Xardorok’s fortress and remains there, in the forge. If 
Xardorok is still alive in this fortress, he makes the nec- 
essary repairs. The dragon regains 1d6 hit points at the 
end of every hour of repair work. 


DESTROYING THE DRAGON 
When the dragon drops to 0 hit points, read: 


The dragon makes a horrific grinding noise as it begins 
to shudder and crumble to pieces. As its great bulk 
crashes into the snow, jagged shards of black crystal fly 
off in all directions. 


The dragon leaves behind hundreds of chardalyn frag: 
ments, some as big as a wagon wheel and others as 
small as a coffin nail. If the characters know the effects 
lyn tainted by evil magic, they'll want to warn 
Ten-Towners to avoid the fragments. 


WEATHER CONDITIONS 


The dragon begins its attacks under dark, clear skies. 
That changes shortly after it leaves Termalaine, its sixth 
target, for that’s when a winter storm sweeps down from 
the Reghed Glacier and engulfs Ten-Towns. The storm 
hangs over Ten-Towns for 24 hours before petering out. 
If the characters confront the dragon in Lonelywood, 
Bremen, Targos, or Bryn Shander, they must also con- 
tend with strong wind and heavy snowfall (for rules, see 
rong Wind” and “Heavy Precipitation” in the Dun- 
geon Master's Guide). The dragon ignores these effects, 
having been built by Xardorok to overcome such debili- 


tating weather. 


HEROES ARE ALL THAT STAND BETWEEN 


TEN-Towns ANO CERTAIN DESTRUCTION 


NPC SUPPORT 


Ten-Towners are happy to let adventurers fight the 
dragon while they flee for their lives. If the characters 
are the ones who need saving, you can have one or more 
courageous NPCs help them. 


HELPFUL TEN-TOWNERS 

Ifa character ends up in a tight spot, you can have a 
friendly NPC act immediately before the character in 
the initiative order, This NPC can help the imperiled 
character in one of the following ways: 


ssist the character, 
tabilizes them or 


+ The NPC uses the Help action to 
+ Ifthe character is dying, the NPC 
carries them to a safer location. 
Che NPC moves close enough to the dragon to provide 
a distraction, allowing the character to move to a safer 
class feature that relies on an ally be 

gon (such as Sneak Attack). 


loc: 
ing near the dra 


ion or use 


WHAT CAN VELLYNNE D 
Vellynne Harpell’s survival is important for the story 
to continue forward. She fights alongside the party but 
does not participate in any foolhardy acts of heroism. 

During encounters with the dragon, Vellynne can't 
drop below 1 hit point. If she is reduced to 1 hit point, 
she either retreats to somewhere safe or uses her next 
action to cast vampiric touch, draining the life force of 
her nearest kobold minion (or some other poor fool) to 
ensure her own survival 


CHAPTER 4 | DESTRUCTION’S LIGHT 


t, 


191 


Vellynne’s most potent spells are useless against the 
dragon construct, so she relies on her wand of magic 
missiles, using its charges sparingly. She can also focus 
her efforts on clearing the streets of innocent bystanders 
and coordinating the party’s actions with those of the lo- 
cal militia. (As she likes to say, “It's a weak wizard who 
relies on spells alone.”) 

After the dragon returns to Xardorok’s fortress or is 
destroyed, Vellynne asks the characters to forget about 
Ten-Towns for a while and help her find a lost city buried 
under the Reghed Glacier (see “Vellynne’s Quest” at the 
end of the chapter). 

If you're unable to save Vellynne for whatever reason, 
have the characters discover a journal in her belongings 
that contains all the information she knows, or have one 
of her kobold minions communicate the information 
necessary to keep the adventure on track. 


OTHER THINGS 
CHARACTERS CAN Do 


Characters who can't harm the dragon (or choose 

not to) can find plenty of other things to distract them 
during the dragon's attack. If a player is having trouble 
figuring out what their character can or should do, you 
can use the Town in Chaos table to introduce an urgent 
development for the character to deal with. Before the 
character moves or acts on its turn, roll on the table or 
choose a development you think might spur the charac- 
ter into action. 


Town IN CHAOS 


d20 Development 
1-3 Building collapse 
4-6 Enlarged duergar 
7-9 Invisible duergar 
10-14 Malevolent townsfolk 
15-16 Thieves 
17-18 Trapped beast 
19-20 Walking wounded 


BUILDING COLLAPSE 


A damaged building collapses twenty feet away from 
you. The noise of crashing walls and shattered timbers 
fades, replaced by the screams of people trapped in the 
wreckage. 


There are 1d4 + 1 people trapped in the collapsed build- 
ing. All of them are commoners suffering from broken 
bones, lacerations, and concussions, and half of them 
(rounded down) are at 0 hit points and dying; the rest 
have 1 hit point each. 

A character can rush to the building and use an action 
to try to pull a Ten-Towner out of the wreckage, doing 
so with a successful DC 14 Strength (Athletics) check, 
whereupon the character can try to stabilize a dying 
commoner or use healing magic to restore their hit 
points and remove their injuries. 


CHAPTER 4 | DESTRUCTION’S LIGHT 


ENLARGED DUERGAR 


Panicked Ten-Towners rush past you—not to escape the 
dragon but to get away from a heavily armored, gray- 
skinned dwarf as big as an ogre. It yells in Dwarvish as it 
stomps through the snow toward you. 


This enlarged duergar fights to the death, shouting, “No 
more winters for Ten-Towns!” in Dwarvish as it does so. 
The duergar has already used its Invisibility trait and 
can't use it again until it finishes a short or long rest. 


INVISIBLE DUERGAR 


Something unseen is making footprints in the snow, and 
those footprints are getting closer! 


A duergar is using its Invisibility trait to get close 
enough to the character to make an attack, but the snow 
betrays its presence, giving the character the chance to 
act first. 

When the duergar gets within striking distance, it 
attacks and becomes visible. Following its initial at- 
tack, it uses an action to increase its size, then presses 
its attack. 


MALEVOLENT TOWNSFOLK 


Unrecognizable figures in cold weather clothing advance 
until they form a line twenty feet away from you. Each 
‘one clutches a handaxe threateningly. One of them 
points a gloved finger at you and shouts, “Kill that 

one first!” 


The character is singled out by 1d4 + 2 commoners 
who have become corrupted by the chardalyn dragon's 
Malevolent Presence, Each one wields a handaxe that 
deals 3 (1d6) slashing damage on a hit. These townsfolk 
act on the same initiative count. 

Rather than make saving throws for the commoners 
to end the effect of the dragon's Malevolent Presence on 
them, roll a d6 at the end of each of their turns. On a 6, 
the townsfolk regain their senses and cease to be hostile 
as the dragon's hold over them ends. 


THIEVES 


The chaos has brought out the worst in some Ten-Town- 
ers. About twenty feet away, you see two thugs in cold 
weather clothing beating up an old woman and stealing 
her food. 


The two thugs are neutral evil humans, and the old 
woman is a commoner with 1 hit point remaining. A 
character can use an action to try to make the thugs 
drop the woman's food and run away, doing so with a 
successful DC 12 Charisma (Intimidation) check. A thug 
that takes any damage also runs away. 


TRAPPED BEAST 


A strange noise draws your attention to an axe beak 
loaded down with sacks and tied to a wooden post. The 
beast lets out a panicked cry as it struggles to free itself. 


Its owner is nowhere to be seen. 


You can replace the axe beak with a mule, a sled dog, 
or any other domesticated beast. A character can use 
an action to try to calm the beast until the end of its 
next turn, doing so with a successful DC 11 Wisdom 
(Animal Handling) check. While the beast is calm, the 
character can use an action to untie or cut the rope that 
tethers it to the wooden post. A character can also try to 
cut the rope with an edged weapon without first calm- 
ing the beast, doing so with a successful attack against 
AC 15, enabling the panicked beast to bolt away on its 
next turn, 


WALKING WOUNDED 


A Ten-Towner in torn cold weather clothing stumbles into 
view, falls in the snow, and gets back up. From twenty 
feet away, you can see that the person is leaving a trail of 
blood in the snow. 


On a roll of 19, the figure is a badly wounded member of 
the local militia (an unarmed tribal warrior with 1 hit 
point remaining). On a roll of 20, the figure is an unin- 
jured, opportunistic doppelganger posing as a wounded 
Ten-Towner. 

Militia Member. Having lost their spear fighting the 
dragon, this member of the town militia is searching for 
a replacement weapon. If given a weapon, the mi 
member heads back into battle. 

Doppelganger. The doppelganger (which has 
smeared itself with someone else's blood) asks to be 
taken to a safe location out of the dragon's sight. If a 
character obliges, the doppelganger tries to slay, rob, 
and replace its “savior” in a location where its treachery 
can’t be observed by anyone else. 


eo 


AN ADVENTURER CONFRONTS TOWNSFOLK CORRUPTED 
By THE DRAGON'S MALEVOLENT PRESENCE 


VELLYNNE’S QUEST 


Vellynne Harpell needs help reaching Ythryn, a quest 
that propels the characters through the final chapters of 
this adventure. However, she is reluctant to share details 
of her mission until the following conditions are met: 


+ The chardalyn dragon is no longer an immedi- 
ate concern. 

+ The characters have the experience needed to sur- 
vive the perils that await them in the first stage of 
the quest. (In other words, the characters are at least 
7th level.) 

These conditions don’t account for any unfinished 
business that the characters are determined to resolve. 
For example, if Xardorok Sunblight is still alive, the 
characters might want to finish him off before turning 
their attention elsewhere. 

Once she's confident that the characters are ready for 
the challenges that lie ahead, Vellynne makes her bold 
proposition: 


“I need your help to find an ancient city buried under the 
ice. This city, Ythryn, is a lost fragment of the Empire of 
Netheril, whose wizards created many of the magic items 
we find scattered across the world today. It holds magic 
beyond our wildest dreams. We might even find some- 
thing there to end this hateful winter. Intrigued?” 


If characters want to hear more or leave an opening for 
Vellynne to keep talking, she adds: 


“Using divination magic, the Arcane Brotherhood has 
learned that the city is buried deep inside the Reghed 
Glacier. But the glacier can be cracked open at a place 
where a waterfall once flowed down its side but has since 
frozen. We have already found the waterfall. All we need 


now is the magic to break open the glacier.” 
t 


Vellynne learned a few things from her professor orb 
(see appendix D) before it was stolen from her. She 
shares the following information with characters who 
want to know more about Netheril: 


+ Netheril was a vast human empire ruled by wizards, 
whose mastery of the Weave remains unsurpassed 
to this day. 

+ Some of what the Netherese wizards learned came 
from the elves. The rest came from the study of arti- 
facts called the Nether Scrolls. 

+ The Netherese created magic that was more powerful 
than a wish spell and used it to accomplish the impos- 
sible. Their magic could shear the tops of mountains 
and lift entire cities into the sky. 

+ To hold Ythryn aloft, the Netherese wizards would 
have needed a powerful magic item called a mythal- 
Jar. It likely survived the crash and might have other 
properties as well, including the ability to change the 
weather. (“Think of what that could mean for Icewind 
Dale!” Vellynne adds excitedly.) 


THE CODICIL AND THE ORB 


Before beginning their search for Ythryn, Vellynne 
and the characters need two objects: The Codicil of 
White and Vellynne’s professor orb, which she calls 
Professor Skant. Vellynne has every reason to believe 
that both items are currently on an island in the Sea of 
Moving Ice. 


THE CODICIL 
Vellynne describes this book as follows: 


“Written and guarded by Auril’s followers, The Codicil 

of White is rumored to contain a spell or ritual that can 
carve a passage through the Reghed Glacier, under which 
the lost city Ythryn is buried. Divination magic has re- 
vealed that the book is being held in a frost giant fortress 


on a mist-shrouded island in the Sea of Moving Ice.” 


Vellynne knows that any quest to retrieve The Codicil of 
White is likely to attract Auril’s attention. Members of 
the Arcane Brotherhood are notoriously brazen, which 
is why Vellynne does not balk at the thought of a con 
frontation with the Frostmaiden. If Auril's name comes 
up, Vellynne tries to allay concerns by pointing out the 
obvious: “Any god who chooses to live among mortals is 


hiding from something, and anyone who needs to hide 


can't be all-powerful.” 


PROFESSOR SKANT 
Vellynne’s family has a private collection of magic items 
The professor orb known as Professor Skant was part 
of that collection, and Vellynne wants it back for both 
practical and sentimental reasons: 


t 
“The orb is a family heirloom that was stolen from me 
by a former colleague named Nass Lantomir. The orb 
has the personality of a scholar and is named Professor 

| Skant. Its knowledge will help us once we descend into 

| Ythryn. Nass is after The Codicil of White, Find Nass, and | 
we find Professor Skant.” 


Vellynne describes the professor orb's properties 
(see appendix D) if the characters want to know 
more about it. 


NEXT STEPS 


The rest of the adventure depends 
agreeing to help Vellynne. She has a couple of cards that 
she plays to convince the characters to do so. She hopes 
they're motivated by the hope of finding something in 
Ythryn that can end Auril’s everlasting winter. Failing 
that, there's the promise of finding long-lost spells and 


on the characters 


magic items. 
Assuming the characters agree to undertake Vel 
lynne’s quest, their first challenge is getting to the 
island. Proceed with chapter 5, which begins with how 
the characters solve their transportation problem. 


AURIL'’S ABODE 


URIL THE FROSTMAIDEN HAS RETREATED TO 

a floating island of ice and snow and turned 

a skull-shaped fortress formerly occupied 

by frost giants into her abode. Her presence 

makes the island the most frigid place in 
the Far North. The cold is unbearable for many visitors, 
whose corpses become part of the island's frozen decor. 

Ideally, the characters should be 7th level when they 

visit the island, although there's nothing stopping them 
from exploring it at lower levels. They might visit the 
island for either of the following reasons: 


+ Vellynne Harpell, a member of the Arcane Brother- 
hood, invites the characters to join her on an expedi- 
tion to the island (see chapter 4 for more information). 

+ The characters come to the island on their own, hop- 
ing to put an end to Icewind Dale's everlasting winter. 


RUNNING THIS CHAPTER 


Be sure to review the “Auril the Frostmaiden” section in 
appendix C before running this chapter, since Auril is no 
ordinary villain. 

The characters can locate and obtain both The Codicil 
of White and Vellynne Harpell’s stolen professor orb 
without confronting the Frostmaiden. But if the charac- 
ters want to end the Everlasting Rime right here, right 
now, they can do so by slaying Iskra, the Frostmaiden’s 
roc (without which Auril can’t cast her nightly spell that 
keeps the sun at bay), or by facing Auril in battle and de- 
feating all three of the Frostmaiden’s forms sequentially. 


CHARACTER ADVANCEMENT 
In this chapter, level advancement is handled as follows: 


+ The characters gain a level if they destroy all three of 
Auril’s forms. 

The characters gain a level if they slay Iskra the roc. 
If they are 7th level or lower, the characters gain 

a level when they discover the “Rime of the Frost- 
maiden” poem in The Codicil of White. 


SEA OF MOVING ICE 


Titanic icebergs bob in a churning black sea of unknown 
depth, crashing into one another with destructive re- 
sults. Floating amid these mountains of ice, shrouded 
by mist, is Auril’s island. Using sheer force of will, the 
Frostmaiden can anchor the island or cause it to slowly 


drift about. For that reason, the island doesn't appear on 
maps of the Sea of Moving Ice. 


GETTING TO THE ISLAND 


The characters can reach Auril’s island in any of the 
following ways: 


Hitch a ride on Angajuk, the awakened sperm whale 
(see “Angajuk’s Bell,” page 114). 

Travel to Revel’s End (see page 154) and book 
passage on a ship bringing supplies or convicts to 
the prison. 

Ask the Akannathi goliaths (see “Skytower Shelter,” 
page 161) to loan them some trained griffons and 
then fly to the island on the griffons’ backs. 


VIA ANGAJUK THE SPERM WHALE 

The characters can get directions to the pier where 
Angajuk can be summoned and befriended, Vellynne 
Harpell knows the location of Angajuk’s pier; if she's 
with the party, she proposes that they spend a night 
in the town of Bremen and set out to Angajuk’s pier in 
the morning. 

Angajuk can travel up to 25 miles a day but takes a 
leisurely, meandering route to Auril’s island, resulting in 
a three-day journey. The whale is submerged for most of 
the trip, allowing the characters to see what life is like 
in the frigid depths. Like a tour guide, the whale takes 
its passengers within sight of spectacular underwater 
attractions, including shipwrecks, storm giant castles, 
and cyclopean ruins from the bygone empire of giants 
known as Ostoria. 

After delivering the characters safely to the island, An- 
gajuk is willing to circle the island until the characters 
are ready to leave, provided they don't make the whale 
wait for too long. Auril’s roc poses a threat to Angajuk, 
so the whale surfaces only when it must. 


Via SHIP FROM REVEL's END 
The prison of Revel's End has easy access to the Sea of 
Moving Ice. On the downside, captains who are brave 
enough to take their ships into the Sea of Moving Ice 
expect to be well compensated; characters can expect to 
pay 1,000 gp or more for a one-way trip to Auril’s island, 
or five times that amount if they expect the ship to wait 
for them and take them back to Revel’s End. 

One such captain is Sharlasta Stormsword, a re- 
tired pirate (lawful evil human bandit captain) who 
commands the Ravenous, a sailing ship with a crew of 


CHAPTER 5 | AURIL'S ABODE 


197 


= 198 


twenty well-trained scalawags (bandits). The ship's port 
of call is the city of Neverwinter. Despite her checkered 
past, Captain Stormsword is one of the most reliable 
privateers working for the Lords’ Alliance today, and 
she rarely turns down a chance to earn a little extra coin 
on the side. Each dawn, she tosses a barrel of fish and a 
cask of whiskey into the sea as offerings to Umberlee—a 
practice that keeps the evil sea god on her side. 

When the characters arrive at Revel’s End, there's a 
10 percent chance that the Ravenous is moored at the 
pier and is in the process of offloading crates of supplies 
as well as 1d4 convicts in shackles, Characters who ar- 
en't so lucky must wait 1d10 days for the ship to arrive, 

The Ravenous can travel 50 miles a day. But finding 
Auril’s island while avoiding close encounters with 
icebergs and ice floes takes five days. Under no circum- 
stances will Captain Stormsword or her crew leave their 
ship to explore the island, 

If you need a map of the Ravenous, use the ship map 
in appendix C of the Dungeon Master's Guide. 


VIA GRIFFONS 

The goliaths of Skytower Shelter agree to loan the 
party members one griffon apiece if one of these condi- 
tions is met: 


+ Agoliath character who is a member of the Akannathi 
clan convinces the Akannathi chieftain to help the 
party by succeeding on a DC 13 Charisma (Persua- 
sion) check. 

The characters help to end the longstanding feud 
between the goliaths of Skytower Shelter and the goli- 
aths of Wyrmdoom Crag. 


Skytower Shelter’s griffons are safe to ride, but they 
are trained to return home after delivering the charac- 
ters to their destination. Convincing a griffon to remain 
on Auril’s island while the characters explore the place 
requires a successful DC 13 Wisdom (Animal Handling) 
check, and even then, the griffon won't stay for more 
than 24 hours due to the unbearable cold. 

The goliaths don't have enough griffons to carry Vel- 
lynne Harpell's kobold entourage, which forces Vellynne 
to leave her charges behind. The kobolds are happy to 
stay with the goliaths, but the goliaths quickly dispose of 
the undead ones. 


ISLAND OF SOLSTICE 


The island of Solstice is shaped like a snowflake, with 
six jagged arms that protrude out into the sea, It’s a 
windswept place made primarily of snow and ice. 


PREPARING FOR ARRIVAL 


Regardless of the means by which the characters travel 
to the island, assume that they arrive near the ruined 
dock on the island's southeast arm. This puts them on 
the far side of the island from where the wizard Nass 
Lantomir met her doom. 

Read or paraphrase the following boxed text to the 
players, whether the characters approach the island by 
sea or air: 


CHAPTER 5 | AURIL'S ABODE 


The fog through which you've been traveling thins 
enough for you to see fifty-foot-high cliffs of solid ice 
ahead. Jutting out of the water off the coast are the bare, 
weather-beaten masts of sunken ships, 

Ahead, you can make out what appears to be a partially 
shattered dock carved out of ice, As you get closer, it be- 
comes obvious that the dock was made for giants. 


The ruined ice dock and the shipwrecks in the vicinity 
are the only features of the island immediately visible. 
Fog prevents the characters from seeing the island's 
other features at a distance. 

Characters flying on the backs of griffons can bypass 
the dock and find somewhere else on the island to land. 
But if one or more griffons come within 200 feet of 
the fortress of Grimskalle while Auril’s roc is atop the 
fortress, it takes to the air and tries to kill the griffons 
so that their riders fall. (See area G9 in this chapter for 
more information about the roc.) 


REGIONAL EFFECTS 


Auril's presence creates the following regional effects, 
which fade 1d10 days after all three of her forms are 
destroyed: 


The save DC to resist the effects of extreme cold is 15 
instead of 10. 

Whenever a creature that lacks resistance or immu- 
nity to cold damage spends a Hit Die to regain hit 
points within 1 mile of the island, it regains only a 
number of hit points equal to its Constitution modifier 
(minimum of 0). It doesn’t get to roll the die. 

The island, its surface features, and all creatures and 
objects out to a distance of 200 feet from the island 
are lightly obscured by fog. Thick fog fills the air 
beginning 200 feet from the island and extending out- 
ward for 1 mile in all directions; anything on the water 
or in the air within this thick fog is heavily obscured. 


IsLAND LOCATIONS 
The following locations are keyed to map 5.1. 


Il. Ruinep Dock 

Frost giants fashioned this dock out of ice and built it to 
endure, yet sections of it have broken away and fallen 
into the sea. Because the dock was scaled for frost giant 
longships, characters approaching by water must climb 
to reach the top of it. Those without magic or climbing 
gear can do so with a successful DC 15 Strength (Ath- 
letics) check. 

At the back of the dock, giant-sized steps climb to the 
top of the 50-foot-high cliffs. A 20-foot-wide path made 
from bricks of ice leads from the dock to the fortress of 
Grimskalle, as shown on map 5.1. 

An ice mephit named Sépo is perched at the top of 
the ice stairs and is willing to serve as a guide for new 
arrivals, not out of kindness but to alleviate its boredom. 
If the characters approach by air, Söpo intercepts them. 
Characters who speak Aquan or Auran can communi- 
cate with Söpo verbally; if there's no one in the party 


_ 1square = 200 feet 


ISLAND OF SOLSTICE 


CHAPTER 5 | AURIL'S ABODE BE 


who can understand it, the mephit communicates using 
gestures as best it can. 

Söpo enjoys watching other creatures suffer. Initially, 
however, it acts as a guide to earn the characters’ trust, 
pointing out areas where characters might slip on a 
patch of ice or get bonked on the head by a low-hang- 
ing icicle. Vellynne’s snowy owl familiar, if it’s present, 
senses the mephit's cruel intent. Sépo and the owl have 
an instant dislike for one another. 

Söpo tries to get the characters to explore every part 
of the island by sharing the following information with 
those who can understand its words: 


The shipwrecks that surround the island are full of 
loot waiting to be claimed. 

The last ship to visit the island crashed off the coast of 
the island's northwest arm. One survivor managed to 
pull herself out of the frigid water and climb to the top 
of the island, but she died before getting any farther. 
The Frostmaiden has created beautiful ice sculptures 
all over the island. One would weep at the very sight of 
them if it were not so cold as to make tears freeze in 
one's eyes. 


SHIPWRECK Discoveries 
d8 Discovery 

1 A frost giant skeleton (see appendix C) lurks in the 
ship's hold amid the inanimate skeletons of several 
other frost giants. 

2 Haunting the decks are twenty ghouls (the remains 
of the ship’s human crew) that have resistance to 
cold damage. All the ghouls act on the same initia- 
tive count. The characters encounter four ghouls 
initially, with another group of four ghouls appear- 
ing each round on the ghouls’ turn until all twenty 
show up. 

‘Two giant sharks swim in the ship's hold. 

4 Five merrow make their lair in the ship, stashed in 
the hold of which is a rotting sea chest that con- 
tains 400 gp, 800 sp, and four pieces of jewelry (25 
gp each). 

5 Three sea hags have turned the wreck into their 
lair. They have the Shared Spelicasting trait 
(see the “Hag Covens” sidebar in the Monster 
Manual). They keep their treasure in a rusty, 
barnacle-covered cauldron that’s covered with a 
lid. The treasure consists of 2,500 sp, 4,000 cp, a 
6-inch-tall merman figurine carved out of pale blue 
coral (250 gp), and a potion of water breathing. 

6 An awakened walrus (see appendix C) with a potion 
of resistance (cold) tied around its neck greets the 
characters; the walrus has an Intelligence of 10, 
speaks Common, and allows a character to take 
the potion vial from around its neck. It then waves 
goodbye and swims away. 

7 The ship's hold contains 1d6 giant oysters, each of 
which has a 10 percent chance of containing a crys- 
tal ball-sized white pearl (2,500 gp). 

8 Agiant-sized sea chest containing 2,500 gp, 5,000 
sp, and a +2 trident lies in the ship’s hold. 


CHAPTER 5 | AURIL'S ABODE 


+ There are yeti caves on the east side of the island. An 
abominable yeti called Korgrah lives among them. 


If shooed away, Söpo continues to follow the party but 
doesn't meddle. Whenever some misfortune befalls a 
character, however, the mephit lets slip a raspy cackle. 


12. SHIPWRECKS 

The ice that makes up the island fans out under the wa- 
ter, creating shelves ranging from 20 to 50 feet beneath 
the surface. Atop these shelves, lodged amid jagged 
spires of submerged ice, are the wrecks of several ill- 
fated sea galleons and ancient frost giant longships, as 
shown on map 5.1. 

Characters who can withstand the frigid water might 
want to explore these sunken wrecks. For each site 
searched, roll a d20 and consult the Shipwreck Discov- 
eries table to determine what the characters find. No 
discovery can occur more than once; if you get the same 
result twice, reroll or choose a different possibility. 


I3. Nass LANTOMIR’S GHOST 
Nass Lantomir outsmarted her rivals in the Arcane 
Brotherhood by partnering with a pirate captain before 
leaving Luskan for Icewind Dale. After stealing Vellynne 
Harpell's professor orb, Nass fled to the coast to make 
her rendezvous with the pirate captain's galleon, the 
Wicked Eddy. The ship found Auril’s island the hard 
way: by crashing into the ice shelf that runs beneath it. 
As the vessel took on water, Nass alone swam to shore, 
only to die of frostbite on a snow-covered bluff overlook- 
ing the Wicked Eddy’s sunken hulk. 

Characters who search the northwest arm of the is- 
land find Nass's frostbitten corpse and much more: 


Half-buried in snow near the edge of a bluff is a human- 
oid corpse clad in cold weather clothing. Clutched in one 
ofits hands is an orb made of smoky-gray quartz. 

Awhite weasel bursts from the snow near the corpse 
and stares at you with its beady eyes. A voice rings out. 
“Ye gods, | was afraid no one would find us!" The sound 
isn't coming from the weasel, but from the orb. 


If anyone tries to pry the orb from the dead wizard’s 
fingers or otherwise disturbs the remains, Nass Lan- 
tomir’s ghost (see appendix C) appears above the 
corpse and tries to possess someone on its first turn. If 
her ghost successfully possesses a party member, Nass 
tries to turn the characters against Vellynne (if she is 
present) and join them in their search for The Codicil of 
White. If the ghost gets what it wants, it shares the fol- 
lowing information, some of which Nass acquired when 
she was alive with the aid of spell scrolls of divination 
used before her death: 


+ The Arcane Brotherhood sent four wizards to find the 
lost Netherese city of Ythryn, which has lain under the 
Reghed Glacier for nearly two thousand years. (Nass 
is willing to divulge the identities of the other three 
wizards, if asked; see the “Arcane Brotherhood” sec- 
tion in appendix C for details.) 


The Codicil of White contains a spell or ritual that can 
open a passage through the Reghed Glacier to the lost 
Netherese city. 

Worshipers of Auril have hidden The Codicil of White 
in a frost giant fortress called Grimskalle, situated 
atop the small mountain in the middle of the island. 


The ghost can’t move more than 200 feet from the 
place where Nass died unless it takes possession of a 
host. If it’s forced out of a host’s body when the body is 
more than 200 feet from where Nass died, the ghost 
instantly returns to that spot, regardless of whether the 
wizard’s corpse is still there. 

If the ghost is reduced to 0 hit points, it fades away, 
only to reappear 24 hours later in the place where Nass 
died. The ghost is doomed to haunt the island until it 
acquires The Codicil of White, whereupon it achieves its 
final rest and ceases to exist. 

Weasel Familiar. The arctic weasel is Zelennor, 
Nass’s fey familiar. Vellynne Harpell would recognize 
it as such. Anyone who can cast the find familiar spell 
knows that a familiar typically vanishes when its cre- 
ator dies, but Zelennor has somehow formed a bond 
with Nass’s spectral undead form. If Nass's ghost is de- 
stroyed, even temporarily, the weasel ceases to exist. 

Treasure. Characters who dig Nass Lantomir's 
corpse out of the snow find a leather satchel containing 
the wizard’s spellbook, which is described in appendix 
C. Nass’s other gear went down with the Wicked Eddy. 

The professor orb, which calls itself Professor Skant, 
is happy to be found. See appendix D for a description 


of Professor Skant. If she is present, Vellynne tries 

to reclaim the orb but won't fight the characters for it. 

In addition to its areas of expertise, Professor Skant 
knows what must be done to reach the city of Ythryn, 
having discussed plans at length first with Vellynne Har- 
pell and then with Nass Lantomir. If they part company 
with the orb’s previous two owners, the characters can 
use Professor Skant to help them identify the steps they 
must take to reach Ythryn, if that’s their goal. 


I4. ICE STATUES 

There are several of these locations on the island, in- 
cluding one the characters will come across if they fol- 
low the brick path from the ruined dock: 


Through the blowing snow, you see a grand assembly 
of ice sculptures across a snowy field at the foot of the 
mountain in the center of the island. Closer examination 
reveals that the sculptures are completely faithful to 
their subjects: bears, elk, saber-toothed tigers, wolves, 
yeti, remorhazes, white dragons, and other creatures 

of the North. No mortal hand could create such won- 
drous works. 


The Frostmaiden creates these ice sculptures. If the 
characters damage any of them, two bad things happen. 
First, the Frostmaiden makes her presence known, 

manifesting nearby as a 7-foot-tall woman made of 


CHAPTER 5 | AURIL'S ABODE son 


snow. She cries out, “Defilers!” and points a finger at 
them. Each character who defiled a sculpture must suc- 
ceed on a DC 20 Constitution saving throw or gain vul- 
nerability to cold damage for the next 24 hours. A char- 
acter who has resistance or immunity to cold damage 
automatically succeeds on the saving throw. Because 
of her weakened state, the Frostmaiden can't create an 
other such manifestation until the next dawn. 

Second, Auril telepathically awakens Korgrah, an 
abominable yeti (see area 15), and commands it to hunt 
down and kill the party. This yeti’s sense of smell is so 
acute that it can track the characters by scent regardless 
of where they are on the island. 


15. YETI CAVES 
Dotting the eastern slope of the ice mountain atop 
which Grimskalle sits are seven shallow caves, each one 
occupied by a hostile yeti that feeds on seals, walruses, 
and other island visitors. The seven yetis attack all at 
once, though a chara 


ter with the Littlest Yeti secret 


(see appendix B) might attempt to communicate with 
them in hopes of improving their attitude 

If all seven yetis are slain, their angry spirits awaken 
Korgrah, an abominable yeti that slumbers under the 
ice and snow, unless Korgrah has already been killed 
The abominable yeti explodes from an ice-covered cyst 
lets out a howl that can be heard across the island, 
and hunts the characters until it or they are dead. This 
fearsome yeti can't be mollified by a character with the 
Littlest Yeti secret. 


THE FROSTMAIDEN SCULPTS ICE INTO FANTASTIC SHAPES 


Inside the Caves. Each yeti cave contains the bones of 
the yetis’ past meals, but no treasure. 


16. GARDEN OF DEATH 


A ten-foot-tall wall of ice has broken down in a few 
places, leaving gaps through which you can see what ap 
pears to be a huge garden of ice sculptures. 


This area is a graveyard where Auril displays creatures 
that have died on the island from the extreme cold. Each 
creature is encased in a thick coat of ice, preserving its 


remains. Amid scores of humanoid cadavers—pirates, 
hunters, adventurers, worshipers, and others who fell 
prey to Auril’s cold embrace—are the frozen forms of 

hares, foxes, and other small animals. 

An ice troll (see appendix C) found its way here and 
destroyed parts of the outer wall. It has also been gnaw- 
ing on some of the corpses. Auril isn't concerned about 
the intrusion, since this place is much less important to 
her than her ice statues are. If the characters loiter in 
the garden, the ice troll attacks and fights to the death. 

Vellynne Harpell and Nass Lantomir are both aware 
of the magical properties of ice troll hearts (as described 
in the “Ice Troll” entry in appendix C) and can share 
this information with the characters once the ice troll 
is killed. 


GRIMSKALLE 


When the characters are in a position to see this loca- 
tion from the south, describe it as follows: 


Rising before you is a six-hundred-foot-tall mountain of 
glacial ice, its peak carved to resemble a gigantic skull 
wearing a crown. Weaving up the mountain's southern 
slope are enormous stairs hewn from the ice. These 
steps, which extend from the base of the mountain to the 
base of the fortress, were clearly made for giants. 


Grimskalle was constructed for a frost giant queen 
named Vassavicken and is filled with the remnants of 
her reign, including her corpse. Auril has claimed the 
stronghold to serve her own worldly needs. 

The Frostmaiden has sequestered herself inside, 
though she does vacate the place once a day, Shortly 
before midnight, she mounts the roc that sleeps on 
the rooftop (area G9) and takes to the sky to weave 
her nightly spell. She is gone for several hours, during 
which time the characters can explore Grimskalle with- 
out fear of running into her. 

Ice Steps. Each step is 4 feet higher than the one 
below it, making the staircase difficult terrain for crea- 
tures that aren't Huge giants. The snow and rime cover- 
ing the steps make them less slippery than they would 
be otherwise. 


FORTRESS FEATURES 


The following features are common throughout 
the fortress: 


Giant-Sized. Furnishings, passageways, and the di- 
mensions of the rooms inside are all sized for frost 
giants and other Huge creatures. The same is true of 
some accessory items, including treasure, as noted 
in the text. 

Ice and Mist. All surfaces (floors, ceilings, walls, and so 
forth) are made of smooth, opaque, chiseled ice with a 
bluish tinge. A 2-foot-deep blanket of cold mist creeps 
across the floors, which aren't slippery unless the text 
states otherwise. 

Darkness. The fortress is not illuminated. Frost giants 
lit their way with torches, the ancient stubs of which 
litter the floors. The current occupants rely on darkvi- 
sion to see. Area descriptions assume that the charac- 
ters have a light source or some other means of seeing 
in the dark, 

Doors. A door is a 25-foot-high, 8-foot-wide, 2/-foot- 
thick slab of chiseled ice with crude handles. In place 
of hinges, a door has thick, cylindrical pins of ice that 
rest in holes at the top and bottom edges of the door's 
frame. A creature can use an action to try to push 
open one of these doors, doing so with a successful 
DC 20 Strength (Athletics) check. A door is a Huge ob- 
ject with AC 13, hp 60, and immunity to cold, poison, 
and psychic damage. 

Ceilings. Ceilings throughout are 30 feet high. 


GRIMSKALLE LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to map 5.2. 


Gl. ENTRANCE 


The steps end in front of a double door made from 
slabs of ice with dragon skulls and bones embedded in 
them. Carved into the lintel is a single word in the Dwar- 
vish script. 


The skulls and bones embedded in the doors belong to 
several young white dragons. Giants use the Dwarvish 
script as their written language, and the Dwarvish word 
carved above the doors translates to “Grimskalle.” 


G2. Guarp ROOM 


This long, rectangular room is strewn with pieces of 
rotting wood and rusted metal—the remnants of giant 
weapons and weapon racks. A rusted-out helmet sized 
for a giant lies near the back wall. 


Nothing in this room is salvageable. 


G3. Frost GIANT WARDEN 


A withered old frost giant leaning heavily on a great- 

axe sits in front of a tall door in the far wall. The giant 
wooden stool upon which he sits creaks under his weight 
as he stares at you with cloudy eyes. 


The frost giant is named Ertgard. Because of old age, 
his walking speed is 20 feet. He is also deaf, can't see 
farther than 20 feet, and can't take reactions. The char- l 
acters must move at least 10 feet into the room before 
Ertgard notices them, whereupon he grips his weapon l 
tightly, stumbles to his feet, and says (in Giant), “Death, 
we meet at last!” 

Ertgard is the last surviving member of Vassavicken's 
clan and is eager to die honorably. Although he has 
sworn fealty to Auril, he isn't of much use to her and 
doesn't have any responsibilities other than to guard the 
fortress as best he can. If he’s knocked unconscious, 
revived, and interrogated, Ertgard offers the following 
information (in Giant) if the characters promise him an 
honorable, swift, and merciful death: 


+ Every night, the Frostmaiden leaves Grimskalle on 
the back of Iskra, her roc, to cast a spell that holds the 
next day's sun at bay. Otherwise, she resides upstairs 
(on the palace level). 

+ Auril is sometimes attended by frost druids, although 
no druids are present at this time. The frost druids 
who last visited her left behind an intelligent giant 
walrus named Ukuma. It dwells downstairs (on the 
dungeon level), 


CHAPTER 5 | AURIL'S ABODE zi 


204 


+ The Codicil of White is sealed in a vault downstairs 
(on the dungeon level). Only one who passes Auril’s 
four tests—the Tests of Cruelty, Endurance, Isolation, 
and Preservation—can open the vault (see area G15). 


Treasure. The small room behind Ertgard contains 
all the treasure he was able to gather from inside the 
fortress, heaped in a pile on the floor: 


1,350 gp, 4,400 sp, and 7,800 cp 

Four gold rings sized for giants (150 gp each) 

A giant-sized shield made of white dragon scales (im- 
pressive but worthless) 

A 2-foot-tall, 50-pound, chipped statuette of Thrym 
(the evil frost giant god) made of ice that doesn't 

melt (50 gp) 

An alchemy jug 


G4. RUINED KITCHEN 


Frost covers a bloated trestle table that stands amid rot- 
ting barrels and casks in the middle of what used to be a 
kitchen. Storage racks along the walls have collapsed into 
piles of rotted timber along with the jugs, tankards, and 
drinking horns that once rested on them. A roasting spit 
lined with icicles is mounted above a ten-foot-diameter 
iron brazier coated with rime and situated near the 

back wall. 


The barrels and casks are empty and fall apart easily. 
The jugs, tankards, and drinking horns are all cracked 
or otherwise damaged. Nothing of value remains here. 


G5. Feast HALL 

Shattered chunks of ice, the remains of a door, lie 
strewn on the floor around the opening, allowing char- 
acters to see into the room beyond without obstruction. 


In the middle of this immense hall stands a thirty-foot- 
long, ten-foot-wide, ten-foot-high dining table carved 
from ice and surrounded by a dozen blocks of ice that 
once served as chairs. Wooden braces against the west 
wall hold a pair of fourteen-foot-long bugles made from 
hollowed-out mammoth tusks. An ascending staircase of 
ice in the southwest corner has mist rolling down it. 


One of the mammoth tusk bugles is intact, but the 
other one is cracked and no longer works. These bu- 
gles were used to summon frost giants for dinner or to 
sound an alarm. 

Stairs Up. The stairs climb 90 feet to area G7. 


G6. PERCHED MEPHITS 

As in area G5, shattered chunks of ice, the remains of a 

door, lie on the floor around the opening where the door 
once stood, allowing characters to see into the room be- 
yond without obstruction. 


CHAPTER 5 | AURIL'S ABODE 


Six slender, gargoyle-like creatures made of ice squat on 
ledges twenty feet above the ground that protrude from 
the wall of this semicircular chamber. Near the back wall, 
the mist that blankets the floor flows down a staircase 
made of polished ice. 


The creatures perched on the ledges are six ice mephits 
created by Auril. They observe intruders quietly. If any 
of them are threatened or harmed, they all attack. Oth- 
erwise, the mephits take no aggressive action without a 
command from their creator. 

Stairs Down. The stairs, which descend 90 feet to 
area G10, are slippery. The slippery ice is difficult ter- 
rain. When a creature moves on these stairs for the first 
time on a turn, it must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity 
(Acrobatics) check or fall prone. If the check fails by 5 or 
more, the creature also tumbles 10 feet down the stairs 
and takes 3 (1d6) bludgeoning damage. 


G7. THRONE Room 


This semicircular room has a forest of icicles hanging 
from its ceiling, some of them as much as eight feet 
long. Against the curved wall to the south stands an 
enormous throne of ice decorated with carved images of 
winter wolves and mastodons. Across from the throne on 
the north wall is an open doorway. 


The throne belonged to Vassavicken, the frost giant 
queen who originally occupied Grimskalle. 

Auril has transformed seven of the icicles that cling to 
the ceiling into creatures that resemble piercers. They 
use the piercer stat block, have immunity to cold dam- 
age, and deal 10 (3d6) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) 
cold damage on a hit. 

Stairs Down. The stairs in the northwest corner of 
this room descend 90 feet to area G5. 


G8. QuEEN’s BEDCHAMBER 

Auril uses this space as her personal sanctuary. De- 
pending on how this encounter plays out, you might 
need to reference one or more of Auril’s stat blocks in 
appendix C. 


This room contains wrecked furnishings that suggest it 
was once used as a frost giant's bedchamber. A bitterly 
cold wind blows down a staircase to the east, at the bot- 
tom of which snow has accumulated. 


Unless she has left the fortress to cast her nightly spell 
over Icewind Dale, the Frostmaiden lurks here in her 
first form, living in fear that her divine enemies will 
find and destroy her. She normally occupies the room 
to the west but lurches toward the larger room to greet 
the characters as they arrive. The characters have no 
chance of surprising her. 


GRIMSKALLE 


1 square = 10 feet 


CHAPTER 5 | AURIL'S ABODE 


It takes almost all of the Frostmaiden’s divine power 
to keep the sun from rising over Icewind Dale, and she 
doesn't abide the presence of mortals other than her 
most ardent worshipers. Consequently, Auril does her 
utmost to slay intruders or, at least, terrify them into 
fleeing her island and never returning. In addition to the 
powers given in her three stat blocks, she can use the 
lair actions described in appendix C. 

Destroying one of Auril’s forms is challenging enough. 
Destroying all three of her forms in sequence should 
be a severe test for even the most determined and well- 
equipped party of adventurers. You can make Auril even 
tougher by having her use a lair action to teleport to the 
rooftop (area G9), where her roc can fight alongside her. 

A fight against Auril continues until the characters de- 
feat her or retreat. Both options are discussed below: 


If the characters destroy all three of Auril's forms, any 
character who has the Midwinter Child secret (see 
appendix B) loses the benefit of that secret until the 
Frostmaiden is reborn at the next winter solstice. In 
addition, Auril’s demise causes the uppermost levels 
of the fortress to collapse, as described in the “Fall of 
Grimskalle” section at the end of this chapter. 

If the characters flee, Auril lets them go so that they 
can spread horrific tales of their encounter with her, 
thus discouraging others from visiting her island. Af- 
ter finishing a long rest, Auril gets back all her forms. 


The Frostmaiden has no need for worldly possessions 
and keeps nothing of value in this room. 

Stairs Up. The curved staircase climbs 90 feet 
to area G9. 


G9. CRowNED ROOFTOP 


The icy crown encircling the fortress doubles as a battle- 
mented rooftop. Each prong of the crown extends forty 
feet above the roofline, and the prongs have 10-foot-wide 
gaps between them. Situated in the middle of the roof is 
a nest almost thirty feet in diameter. 


If Auril is home, so is her white roe, Iskra. During the 
day, the roc sleeps in its nest. Shortly before midnight, 
the roc takes to the sky with the Frostmaiden on its 
back and doesn't return to the fortress until a few hours 
before sunrise. Without the roc to carry her around Ice- 
wind Dale, Auril can't cast her nightly spell, thus bring- 
ing an end to the everlasting winter. 

The roc is too big to enter the fortress. If it takes dam- 
age from foes it can’t reach, it gets clear of the fortress 
and climbs to a height that puts it outside the range of its 
enemies. If the roc grapples a foe, it heads toward open 
water with its prize; once there, it drops the grappled 
creature into the water from a height of at least 200 feet. 
In addition to taking 20d6 bludgeoning damage from 
the fall, the victim must also contend with the frigid wa- 
ter (see “Frigid Water,” page 11). 

Treasure. A thorough search of the roc’s nest yields 
the following treasures: 


CHAPTER 5 | AURIL'S ABODE 


+ A5-foot-tall, 150-pound silvery dragon egg that 

will hatch in 3d10 days, giving birth to a silver 
dragon wyrmling 

A carved harp of exotic wood with ivory inlay and zir- 
con gemstones (750 gp) 

An electrum chain with a bloodstone pendant (250 gp) 
A wooden sea chest covered with bird droppings and 
sealed with a heavy padlock that a character using 
thieves’ tools can pick with a successful DC 15 Dexter- 
ity check; inside the chest are 320 gp, a gold ring with 
a black pearl set into a fixture shaped like a whirlpool 
(750 gp). and a spell scroll of mass cure wounds 


G10. Ick RINK 


The staircase descends into a vaulted chamber. A nine- 
foot-high railing of sculpted ice hugs the staircase as it 
descends to the chamber floor, which, like the stairs, is 
smooth and gleaming. A walrus as big as an elephant 
is having a grand old time rolling and sliding on the ice, 
paying you little heed. 


The giant walrus (see appendix C), named Ukuma, 
is supposed to be guarding this room. A frost druid’s 
awaken spell has given it an Intelligence of 10 and the 
ability to speak Common. Although it's grateful for the 
magical gift, the giant walrus is not interested in serving 
anyone or attending to guard duty. It would rather roll 
around on the ice and engage in light conversation with 
new arrivals. Characters can befriend Ukuma by tossing 
it a fish or some other tasty morsel. 

Ukuma knows the following information, which it's 
happy to share with characters who befriend it: 


The tunnel to the north ends before the tomb of a frost 
giant queen, who died before the Frostmaiden took 
control of the island. 

The tunnel to the south leads to a vault where servants 
of the Frostmaiden store the treasures of their faith. 
To enter the vault, one must pass four tests. Each test 
reflects an aspect of the Frostmaiden: cruelty, endur- 
ance, isolation, and preservation. The tests lie beyond 
the four doors that lead away from the room. 


Narrow archways to the west and east lead to a pair of 
small chambers. Frost druids and other worshipers of 
Auril use these rooms as sleeping quarters, though no 
one is present when the characters arrive. 

Rink. The floor in this area is as smooth as an ice 
rink. When a creature moves on the floor for the first 
time on a turn, it must succeed on a DC 10 Dexter- 
ity (Acrobatics) check or fall prone. The giant walrus 
doesn’t need to make this check. 

Stairs Up. From the ceiling to the floor, the stairs that 
lead up to area G6 are enclosed by thick, 9-foot-high rail- 
ings of sculpted ice. The stairs, like the floor, are difficult 
terrain. When a creature moves on these stairs for the 
first time on a turn, it must succeed on a DC 10 Dexter- 
ity (Acrobatics) check or fall prone. If the check fails by 
5 or more, the creature also tumbles 10 feet down the 
stairs and takes 3 (1d6) bludgeoning damage. 


G11. TOMB ENTRANCE 


The passageway leads to an anvil-shaped room with 
a door set into the far wall. Flanking the door are 
bas-reliefs of two female frost giants holding greataxes. 


Runes are carved into the door's surface. 


The runes on the door, written in the Dwarvish script, 
read as follows: 

In ice and blood, our folk are born. 

To our great queen, we raise our horn. 

We'll fight and plunder in the morn. 

To Vassavicken, we are sworn. 


G12. SKELETAL GUARDS 


This chamber has another door set into the far wall 
Standing on either side of the door is a frost giant skele- 
ton wielding a rusty anchor. The pinpricks of light in their 
eye sockets brighten as they register your presence. 


The weapons of these two frost giant skeletons deal 
bludgeoning damage instead of slashing damage. They 
otherwise use the stat block in appendix C. They attack 
any creatures they see and pursue fleeing prey into G11 
but no farther. 


= 4 ou. aN 
© FROST GIANT SKELETONS GUARD THE WAY TO 


QUEEN VASSAVICKEN'S FROTEN TOMB, | 


G13. VASSAVICKEN’S TOMB 


This chamber contains a dead female frost giant encased 
in a solid block of ice carved to resemble a standing sar- 
cophagus. The block of ice is twenty-five feet tall, twelve 
feet wide, and ten feet thick. Behind the entombed giant, 
embedded in the north wall, is a door made of ice, 

The ceiling is carved in the scowling visage of a male 
frost giant with an icy beard, 


The frost giant entombed in the block of ice is Queen 
Vassavicken. Characters who succeed on a DC 15 Intel- 
ligence (Religion) guess correctly that the visage looking 
down on the queen is a representation of Thrym, the evil 
god of frost giants. 

Trap. A character can reach Vassavicken's corpse 
by chipping away the ice that encases her, but Thrym 
will not stand for such an act of defilement. If enough 
ice is chipped away or melted to expose any portion of 
Vassavicken’s corpse to the air, Thrym's visage opens 
its mouth and breathes a cloud of magical cold energy 
that fills the entire room, sealing Vassavicken’s corpse 
in ice once more. Any creature in the room when Thrym 
breathes must succeed on a DC 16 Constitution saving 
throw, taking 44 (8d10) cold damage on a failed save, or 
half as much damage on a successful one. Thrym’s vis- 
age is impervious to damage from spells and weapons. 


CHAPTER 5 | AURIL'S ABODE 


Door to Area G14. This door is stuck. A creature can 
use an action to try to pull open the door, doing so with 
a successful DC 25 Strength (Athletics) check. 


G14. VASSAVICKEN’S AXE 


Leaning against the back wall of this room is a formida- 
ble weapon: a giant-sized greataxe, its steel head resting 
on the icy floor. 


Treasure. The greataxe is Vassavicken’s berserker 
axe, which adjusts in size to match whoever attunes to it. 
When found, it's 15 feet tall and weighs 650 pounds. If a 
character attunes to the axe, it shrinks to a size befitting 
its new wielder. 


G15. TESTS OF THE FROSTMAIDEN 
The first time the characters enter one of these cham- 
bers, read: 


The walls of this oddly shaped room are etched with elab- 
orate panoramas of winter scenes. Set into the back wall 
is a door inscribed with a large snowflake. A single word 
is carved into the lintel above it. 


Characters who succeed on a DC 10 Intelligence (Re- 
ligion) check correctly surmise that the snowflake 
inscribed on the door is the Frostmaiden’s holy symbol. 
The word carved above the door depends on which area 
lies on the other side: 


Door to Area G16. Carved into the lintel above this door 
is the word “Cruelty” in Common. 

Door to Area G17. Part of the lintel has broken off, but 
characters can still make out the word “Endurance” 
carved into it in Common. 


ae & Y 
TESTS OF THE FROS 


‘Parry MEMBER 


Door to Area G18. Carved into the lintel above this door 
is the word “Isolation” in Common. 

Door to Area G19. The lintel above this door has 
partially broken off, destroying some of the inscrip- 
tion carved into it. What’s left reads “-—ervation” 
in Common. 


There are four Tests of the Frostmaiden: the Test of 
Cruelty in area G16, the Test of Endurance in area G17, 
the Test of Isolation in area G18, and the Test of Preser- 
vation in area G19. 

Each test begins by opening a door marked with the 
symbol of Auril. When that happens, all the participants 
in the test are teleported to the location where the test 
takes place. If Vellynne Harpell is with the party, she is 
willing to participate in the tests and counts as a party 
member if the characters allow her to accompany them. 

When a test ends, use the Tests of the Frostmaiden 
Scorecard to keep track of which party members passed 
the test by putting a checkmark to the right of each of 
their names in the appropriate column. This scorecard 
will help you determine whether the vault door in area 
G20 can be opened or not. It is strictly a tool for DM 
record-keeping and not meant to be shared with the 
players. Permission is granted to photocopy this score- 
card for home game use. 

The tests can be taken in any order. Each party mem- 
ber can take a particular test only once; a party member 
who tries to take a test a second time is not teleported. 


G16. TEST OF CRUELTY 

Opening the door to this empty room causes everyone 
in the nearest room marked G15 on the map to disap- 
pear. These creatures find themselves whisked away to 
a Reghed camp in the frozen tundra of Icewind Dale. 
When one or more of the characters are transported 
here, read: 


CHAPTER 5 | AURIL’S ABODE 


Your surroundings vanish in a flurry of snow and ice. 
When your vision clears, you find yourself standing at the 
edge of a camp, its tents holding fast against a raging 
blizzard. 


The blizzard rages for the duration of the test and is 
inescapable. 

This camp is home to the King of the Bear Tribe, 
Gunvald Halraggson (see appendix C). If Gunvald died 
earlier in the adventure, replace him with another Bear 
Tribe chieftain named Svilbrekhild Forennal (a female 
human gladiator in hide armor who speaks Common 
and has Survival +5). See “Reghed Tribe Camp” (page 
152) for a map and a general description of the camp- 
site. There are no sled dogs at this camp. 

The characters are not dreaming; the Frostmaiden’s 
magic has teleported them from Grimskalle to this 
camp. Each party member has a tiny, glowing, snow- 
flake floating a few inches above them—the symbol of 
the Frostmaiden, which most Reghed nomads recognize 
and fear. Members of the Bear Tribe won't attack any- 
one bearing this symbol except in self-defense. 

The Test Begins. The camp has run out of food, and 
the tribe's hunters have failed to return because of the 
unyielding blizzard. The nomads have already eaten 
their sled dogs. Now, Gunvald has decided that desper- 
ate times require desperate measures. He plans to kill 
four of the tribe’s eldest members and cook them to feed 
the rest of the camp. His evil shaman has convinced him 
to take this drastic course of action. 

Once the characters’ presence becomes known, they 
are brought before King Gunvald. He treats them with 
respect and caution, as befits emissaries of the Frost- 
maiden. He has the four elders lined up outside his tent 
and entreats the characters to kill them or leave the 
camp at once. 

To pass the Test of Cruelty, a character must perform 
acruel act, such as slaying the defenseless elders as 
King Gunvald commands. The characters can also pass 
the test by walking away from the camp and leaving the 
starving nomads at the mercy of their mad king—a cruel 
act in the eyes of the Frostmaiden. If the characters defy 
King Gunvald, he kills the defenseless elders himself. 

Characters can fail the test by not engaging in acts of 
cruelty, such as by refusing to kill the elders, defending 
them, or doing nothing whatsoever. 

The Test Ends. After 1 hour, everyone with a symbol 
of Auril hovering above their head is teleported back 
to Grimskalle, appearing in the room marked G16 
on the map. 


G17. TEST OF ENDURANCE 

Opening the door to this empty room causes everyone 
in the nearest room marked G15 on the map to disap- 
pear. These creatures find themselves whisked away to 
a Reghed camp in the frozen tundra of Icewind Dale. 
When one or more of the characters are transported 
here, read: 


Your surroundings vanish in a flurry of snow and ice. | 
When your vision clears, you find yourself in a raging 
snowstorm, standing at the edge of a Reghed tribe's | 
camp in the process of being dismantled. The nomads 
work feverishly to tear down their tents and pack them 
onto dogsleds. A few of them spot you and brandish their 
weapons. A tall figure standing among them calls out, 
“We shall not lie down and die for your pleasure, emis- 
saries of Auril! Begone, vultures!” 


This camp is home to the King of the Elk Tribe, Jarund 
Etkhardt (see appendix C). If Jarund died earlier in 

the adventure, replace him with Hengar Aesnvaard, 

a Common-speaking gladiator with Survival +5. See 
“Reghed Tribe Camp” (page 152) for a map and a gen- 
eral description of the campsite. 

The characters are not dreaming; the Frostmaiden's 
magic has teleported them from Grimskalle to this 
camp. Each party member has a tiny, glowing snowflake 
floating a few inches above them—the symbol of the 
Frostmaiden, which most Reghed nomads recognize 
and fear. Members of the Elk Tribe won't attack anyone 
bearing this symbol except in self-defense. 

The Test Begins. The figure calling out to the charac- 
ters is King Jarund, who has ordered that the camp be 
torn down so that the nomads can stay close to the rein- 
deer herd they've been following. The herd is migrating 
eastward, and where go the reindeer, so goes the Elk 
Tribe. If the characters assure Jarund that they mean no 
harm, he gives them a choice: help or leave. Either way, 
he doesn’t want to provoke Auril's wrath. 

The party members don't need to help the nomads 
tear down the camp or set up a new one, but they must 
accompany the nomads on their journey and endure 
the same hardship. The trip is a grueling march across 
the tundra with the wind against them the whole time. 
There's no chance of a party member becoming lost 
in this blizzard, which has an unusual property: magic 
does not function within it, as though the area encom- 
passed by the blizzard is within an antimagic field (as 
described in the antimagic field spell description in the 
Player's Handbook). 

The march lasts 14 hours. Party members can 
weather the first 8 hours. At the end of every hour after 
that, each must make a Constitution saving throw. The 
DC is 10 plus 1 for each additional hour that passes (DC 
11 at the end of the ninth hour, DC 12 at the end of the 
tenth hour, and so on). On a failed saving throw, a char- 
acter gains one level of exhaustion. Any party member 
who completes the journey with four or fewer levels of 
exhaustion passes the Test of Endurance. 

At the end of the forced march, King Jarund orders the 
tribe to pitch tents and start campfires. 

The Test Ends. Once the Elk Tribe camp is set up 
in its new location, everyone with a glowing symbol 
of Auril hovering above their head is teleported back 
to Grimskalle, appearing in the room marked G17 
on the map. 


CHAPTER 5 | AURIL'S ABODE 
209 


G18. TEST OF ISOLATION 

Opening the door to this empty room causes everyone 
in the nearest room marked G15 on the map to disap- 
pear. These creatures find themselves whisked away to 
a Reghed camp in the frozen tundra of Icewind Dale. 
When one or more of the characters are transported 
here, read: 


Your surroundings vanish in a flurry of snow and ice. 
When your vision clears, you find yourself standing at 
the edge of a camp under a clear sky. All the warriors in 
camp appear to be sharpening their weapons. 


This camp is home to the Queen of the Tiger Tribe, 
Bjornhild Solvigsdottir (see appendix C). If Bjornhild 
died earlier in the adventure, replace her with another 
Tiger Tribe chieftain named Valtus D’karna (a male 
human gladiator in hide armor who speaks Com- 
mon and has Survival +5). See “Reghed Tribe Camp” 
(page 152) for a map and a general description of 

the campsite. 

The characters are not dreaming; the Frostmaiden’s 
magic has teleported them from Grimskalle to this 
camp. Each party member has a tiny, glowing snowflake 
floating a few inches above them—the symbol of the 
Frostmaiden, which most Reghed nomads recognize 
and fear. Members of the Tiger Tribe won't attack any- 
one bearing this symbol except in self-defense. 

The Test Begins. If the characters enter the camp, Ti- 
ger Tribe warriors escort them to Queen Bjornhild, who 
is using a stone to sharpen the edges of her greataxe 
while her saber-toothed tiger, Grava, keeps a steady 
eye on the new arrivals. Bjornhild’s reaction to the char- 
acters is one of exultation, which is not surprising given 
her devotion to the Frostmaiden: 


“Auril has blessed us!” she shouts to every other warrior 
in earshot. “The Frostmaiden has sent emissaries to 
watch our camp while we complete our mission!” 


If the characters ask Bjornhild to elaborate, she tells 
them that she's planning to attack a nearby Elk Tribe 
camp and steal their food. She's taking every member 
of her camp with her, hoping that overwhelming num- 
bers will make the unsuspecting Elk tribesfolk give up 
without a fight. She asks the characters to stay behind 
and watch over her camp until she returns. Bjornhild 
expects to be back in a day or two, although fate has 
other plans. 

If one of the characters has the Reghed Heir secret 
(see appendix B), now is a good time to deal with that. It 
could certainly complicate matters, depending on how 
the character chooses to interact with Bjornhild. 

The obvious course of action the characters can take 
is to wait until Bjornhild returns from her raid. As it 
turns out, the raid is more successful than anticipated; 


CHAPTER 5 | AURIL'S ABODE 


after overwhelming and routing the enemy, Bjornhild 
decides to take over their camp and wait for Elk hunting 
parties to return so she can slaughter them and take 
their food as well. As a result, the characters are alone 
at Bjornhild’s camp for six days and nights. 

Allow the players to describe what their characters do 
during this period of time. After every 24 hours spent 
guarding the camp and ensuring their own survival, 
all party members in the camp must make a Wisdom 
(Survival) group check. The DC of the group check is 
10 + 2 for each day after the first. Each time the group 
check fails, the party member who rolled the lowest 
goes missing. 

When you explain what has just happened, tell the 
player of the missing character that they have been 
transported elsewhere and have no awareness of their 
surroundings. Tell the other players that none of the re- 
maining party members have any idea where the miss- 
ing party member went, and their memories of the past 
24 hours are cloudy at best. Even if the party members 
take precautions on later days to avoid being separated, 
such as tying themselves together with rope, they dis- 
cover that (if their group check fails) another one of their 
number goes absent. The disappearances continue until 
the Tiger nomads come back or until there is only one 
character left in the camp. 

After six days and nights, Bjornhild and the surviving 
members of her camp return with several haunches of 
reindeer meat loaded on dogsleds. Accompanying them 
are all the party members who went missing from the 
camp; the Tiger nomads found them, one by one, wan- 
dering in a daze. Each of these party members must 
succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or return to 
camp with a form of indefinite madness determined by 
rolling on the Indefinite Madness table in the Dungeon 
Master's Guide. 

All party members who vanished from the camp 
during the Tiger nomads’ absence pass the Test of Iso- 
lation, as do party members who are still at the camp 
when the nomads return. Characters fail the Test of Iso- 
lation by dying or by preventing Bjornhild from launch- 
ing her raid. 

Slaad Host. lf a character has the Slaad Host secret 
(see appendix B) and hasn't already gotten rid of the 
slaad tadpole gestating inside them, having the tadpole 
burst out of the character's chest at some point during 
this test would be a surprising development. 

The Test Ends. After the Tiger nomads return to 
their camp triumphant, everyone with a glowing symbol 
of Auril hovering above their head is teleported back 
to Grimskalle, appearing in the room marked G18 
on the map. 


G19. TEST OF PRESERVATION 

Opening the door to this empty room causes everyone in 
the rooms marked G15 on the map to disappear. These 
creatures find themselves whisked away to a Reghed 
camp in the frozen tundra of Icewind Dale. When one or 
more of the characters are transported here, read: 


Your surroundings vanish in a flurry of snow and ice. 
When your vision clears, you find yourself at the edge of a 
camp under clear skies. All the fires in the camp are out, 
and the only sound you hear is the flapping of the tents 
as the wind hits them. 

Closer examination reveals dozens of corpses 
half-buried in snowdrifts, It becomes clear that a massa- 
cre took place here recently. You hear the squawking of 
buzzards coming from the middle of the camp and see a 
half dozen vultures picking at two bodies outside one of 
the larger tents. 


This camp was home to the chieftain of a clan who 
stood in the way of Isarr Kronenstrom's rise to becom- 
ing king of the Wolf Tribe. See “Reghed Tribe Camp” 
(page 152) for a map and a general description of the 
campsite. There are no dogs or dogsleds at this camp, 
since they were stolen by the camp's attackers. 

The characters are not dreaming; the Frostmaiden's 
magic has teleported them from Grimskalle to this 
camp. Each party member has a tiny, glowing snowflake 
floating a few inches above them—the symbol of the 
Frostmaiden., 

The Test Begins. All but one of the Reghed nomads 
in the camp have been killed by Wolf Tribe members 
loyal to Isarr Kronenstrom, The sole survivor is the 
nine-year-old son of the clan's chieftain, a noncomba- 
tant named Aerix Vokototh who stayed alive by hiding 
in the snow. Aerix has AC 10 and 3 hit points. He was 
born on the Midwinter holiday and as such is blessed by 
Auril with resistance to cold damage. He wears only a 
light woolen poncho, as extremely cold weather doesn't 
bother him. When the characters arrive, Aerix is cower- 
ing in the chieftain’s tent while six giant vultures feast 
on the corpses of his mother (the chieftain) and father 
(the camp's shaman). If the characters kill two or more 
vultures, the others take to the sky and circle above the 
camp for the remainder of the test. 

After dealing with the vultures, the characters hear 
low sobs coming from one of the big tents and find Aerix 
inside. The boy is in a terrible state of shock and refuses 
to speak, although a calm emotions spell or similar 
magic enables him to describe the massacre to which 
he bore witness. As Aerix begins to recount what hap- 
pened, Isarr Kronenstrom (see appendix C) appears 
at the edge of the camp, having found out that the ma- 
rauders he sent to kill the camp's chieftain failed to find 
and kill her son as well. Isarr is determined to slay the 
child himself. 

Isarr circles the camp, letting out a terrible howl every 
minute or two. Aerix urges the characters to hide from 
the Wolf King, lest he flay them to pieces. 

If he is not confronted, Isarr starts searching the 
camp's outer circle of tents, taking about 1 minute to 
examine each one. In the course of this task, Isarr might 
stumble upon tracks left by the characters but continues 
his search of the outer tents, then does the same thing 
with the inner ring of tents, saving the chieftain’s tent 


Aeris VokototH 


for last. By this time, if the characters haven't already 
engaged him, Isarr knows they're around and is looking 
forward to killing them as well and leaving their corpses 
as tribute to Malar the Beast Lord. If the characters at- 
tack Isarr, any giant vultures circling overhead join the 
fight as Isarr’s allies. 

To pass the Test of Preservation, the party members 
must keep Aerix alive so that his family’s bloodline is 
preserved. Killing Isarr before he kills Aerix is the only 
way to accomplish this goal. If the characters try to 
sneak Aerix out of the camp, Isarr follows their tracks 
and pursues the boy relentlessly. 

The Test Ends. If Aerix dies, no one passes the test, 
and everyone with a glowing symbol of Auril hovering 
above their head is teleported back to Grimskalle, ap- 
pearing in the room marked G19 on the map. 

If Aerix is saved, an awakened wolf lopes toward him 
in a nonthreatening manner. This wolf has an Intelli- 
gence of 10 and speaks Common. It offers to bear Aerix 
safely to another Wolf Tribe camp. Aerix is inclined to 
trust the wolf and accompany it. Whether the characters 
surrender Aerix to the wolf or not is up to them, but once 
their decision is made, everyone with a glowing symbol 
of Auril hovering above their head is teleported back to 
Grimskalle, appearing in the room marked G19 on the 
map. Aerix and the wolf are left behind. 


CHAPTER 5 | AURIL'S ABODE 


2u 


212 


G20. ENTRANCE TO THE VAULT 


The passage leads to an anvil-shaped room with a door 
set into the far wall. Flanking the door are bas-reliefs 

of two male frost giants that have been defaced, their 
features chipped away. Newer carvings above the door 
depict the glowering heads of an owl, a wolf, and a goat. 


The heads carved above the door represent Auril’s first 
form (see appendix C). If anyone enters the room, add: 


A disembodied voice says, “This way is shut to all but 
those who pass the tests of cruelty, endurance, isolation, 
and preservation.” 


Whenever one or more characters enter this area, use 
the Tests of the Frostmaiden scorecard on page 208 

to help you remember who among them passed the 
Frostmaiden’s tests (areas G16 through G19). The door 
to area G21 swings open on its own if each of the four 
tests was passed by at least one individual in the room. 
For example, an individual that passed all four tests 
can open the door by entering the room, as can four 
individuals that each passed a different test. The door is 
otherwise unopenable, indestructible, and impassable. 
Any spell cast with the intent of bypassing the door fails 
and is wasted. 

Worshipers of Auril. If the characters failed enough 
of the Frostmaiden’s tests to make it impossible for 
them to open the door, all hope of breaching the vault 
is not lost. You can have fate smile upon them with the 
arrival of three frost druids (see appendix C) who have 
visited the island previously and have already passed 
their own variations of the Frostmaiden’s tests. These 
druids have the darkvision spell prepared instead of 
animal messenger. They flew to Grimskalle in owl form 
and entered the fortress in human form, using their 
darkvision spells to see in the dark. The druids’ names 
are Faash, Gildreban, and Siovakis. 

The druids have returned to the island because they 
intend to read The Codicil of White (see area G22) and 
draw inspiration from it. If one or more of them are al- 
lowed into area G20, the door to area G21 swings open 
on its own. If the druids reach area G22 and are aware 
of the characters’ presence, the druids seize The Codicil 
of White and try to escape with it, to keep it from falling 
into the hands of Auril’s enemies. 

In combat, the druids like to pelt enemies with ice 
storm spells or use their conjure animals spells to sum- 
mon polar bears (one bear per casting of the spell). The 
polar bears act on their own initiative count and fight 
alongside their summoners. 


CHAPTER 5 | AURIL'S ABODE 


G21. HALL OF THE Four WINDS 


Arranged about this room are three tablets of ice, each 
ten feet tall, seven feet wide, and one foot thick. They sit 
upright in stands that are also carved from ice. Script has 
been chiseled into the surface of each tablet. Another 
door stands in the middle of the far wall. 


The inscriptions on the four ice tablets, in Common, 
spell out the tenets of Auril’s faith: 


Cruelty. “Compassion makes you vulnerable. Let cru- 
elty be the knife that keeps your enemies at bay.” 

Endurance. “Exist as long as you can, by whatever 
means you can. Only by enduring can you outlast your 
enemies.” 

Isolation. “In solitude you can understand and har- 
ness your full potential. Depending on others makes 
you weak.” 

Preservation. “Every flake of snow is unique, and that 
which is unique must be preserved.” 


Each tablet is a Large object with AC 13, 25 hit points, 
and immunity to cold, poison, and psychic damage. With 
asuccessful DC 15 Strength check, a character can 
knock a tablet off its stand, causing it to shatter on the 
floor. Reducing a tablet to 0 hit points also shatters it. 
Shattering a tablet releases a hostile spirit of elemental 
air (use the invisible stalker stat block) bound inside 
it. This spirit tries to kill whoever released it. The spirit 
disappears if it succeeds or if it's reduced to 0 hit points. 


G22, CHAMBER OF THE CODICIL 


This chamber has a domed ceiling engraved with a giant 
snowflake. Two caryatids depicting a towering woman 
stand on either side of a door in the south wall. In the 
middle of the room is a five-foot-tall, claw-shaped lectern 
with a white-covered book resting on it. 


The caryatids flanking the south doorway depict Auril 
in her second form (see appendix C). Both are harmless 
carvings but noticeably cold to the touch. 

Treasure. The book on the lectern is The Codicil 
of White (see appendix D). No wards or creatures are 
guarding it. If she’s still with the party, Vellynne Harpell 
is eager to claim the book, if only to add the frost fingers 
spell (see appendix D) to her spellbook. If it's present in 
a host body, Nass Lantomir's ghost is laid to rest as soon 
as its host picks up or grasps the book. 

Acharacter who spends at least 10 minutes poring 
over The Codicil of White learns that the poem in its 
pages, “Rime of the Frostmaiden” (see appendix E), is 
an incantation that can be used to unlock Auril’s secrets, 
including ones buried deep under the glacial ice. This, 
Vellynne says, is exactly what the characters need to 
reach the lost city of Ythryn under the Reghed Glacier. 
Once the characters have the poem or a transcription of 
it, they don't need the rest of the book. 


MOUNTED ON HER ROC, THE FROSTMAIDEN TAKES TO THE 


SKY TO CAST HER NIGHTLY SPELL 


G23. AurRIL’s BLESSING 


Beyond the door is a small room filled with mist. Chunks 


of broken ice cover the floor. 


haracters who examine the broken ice on the floor 
can see that they are fragments of three lifelike human 
ice sculptures—the remains of unworthy devotees w ho 
failed to receive Auril’s blessing (see below} 

Auril’s Blessing. lf she’s alive, Auril becomes aware 
of any creature that enters this room. If a character 
who has the Midwinter Child secret (see appendix B) 
or a character who passed all four of Auril’s tests en- 


nd asks, “Will you court death to receive 
my blessing?” She makes this offer to a character once 
Acharacter who agre 


a failed s the character is petrified, becoming an i 
statue instead of a stone one. On a successful save, the 
character gains the blessing of the Frostmaiden, which 
Auril can rescind at any time while she’s alive. This 
blessing otherwise adheres to the rules for bl 
described in the Dungeon Master's Guide: 


ings as 


Blessing of the Frostmaiden. Your eyes become as cold as ice. 
You gain immunity to cold damage. In addition, you can cast 
the cone of cold spell (save DC 15) once. You regain the ability 
to cast this spell when you finish a long rest 


WRAPPING UP 


The following sections describe what 
if the characters defeat Auril. 


re to happen 


FALL OF GRIMSKALLE 


When her final form is reduced to 0 hit points, Auril 
emits a death-howl that causes the two uppermost floors 
of Grimskalle (the battlement level and the palace level, 
as shown on map 5.2) to crack and begin to collapse. 
Creatures have 1 minute to e: 

fortress before they are crushed to death by icy rubble. 
Grimskalle’s entry leve s G1 through G6) and dun- 
geon level (areas G10 through G23) remain intact and 
accessible after the collapse. 


ENDING THE EVERLASTING RIME 


Destroying all three of Auril's forms or slaying the rc 
allows the sun to once more climb above the mountains. 
It takes a while for Icewind Dale to return to its natural 
climate, but life becomes a bit e; s the frigid tem- 
peratures rise to a bearable cold. 

If she survives but her roc is killed, Auril broods in 
her fortress, unaccustomed to being thwarted by mor- 
tals. Since she is ageless and time is on her side, she 
sets about finding another roc that she can raise from 
a hatchling to serve her. Years, decades, or centuries 
might pass before she’s ready to cast her spell over Ice 
wind Dale again. 


CHAPTER 5 | AURIL’S ABODE 


CAVES OF HUNGER 


QUIPPED WITH THE “RIME OF THE FROST- 

maiden,” the characters can begin their 

search for the lost Netherese city buried deep 

in the Reghed Glacier. Ideally, the characters 

should be at least 8th level when they embark 
on this journey. Lower-level characters can survive the 
Caves of Hunger if they're cautious and rest often to re- 
gain their spent hit points and magic. 

The characters must use the “Rime of the Frost- 
maiden” to open a crack in the glacial wall at a place 
where a waterfall once tumbled down the glacier. The 
newly formed passage leads to the Caves of Hunger, a 
dungeon that was sealed off by the Frostmaiden long 
ago—a network of sepulchral ice caves haunted by rav- 
enous beings. These chambers must be successfully 
navigated to reach the Netherese city of Ythryn. 


RUNNING THIS CHAPTER 


This chapter focuses on the characters’ exploration 
of the ice caves. There's a good chance that Vellynne 
Harpell is present as well, serving as an NPC guide. If 
she died earlier in the adventure, the characters can use 
Professor Skant as a substitute guide, assuming they 
retrieved Vellynne’s professor orb from Auril’s island in 
chapter 5. If neither Vellynne nor Professor Skant are 
around, you can furnish another NPC with the informa- 
tion needed to reach the Caves of Hunger. Likely candi- 
dates include Hengar Aesnvaard (see “Elk Tribe Escort” 
below) and Dzaan’s simulacrum (see appendix C). 


CHARACTER ADVANCEMENT 


The characters should gain a level when they reach area 
H39 for the first time, regardless of the route by which 
they get there. Thus, if they were 8th level at the start of 
this chapter, they will be 9th level when they enter Yth- 
ryn for the first time. 


RACE TO THE GLACIER 


If Vellynne Harpell survived the perils of Auril's island 
and returned to Icewind Dale with the characters, she 
urges them to accompany her to the glacier without 
delay, lest one of her rivals in the Arcane Brotherhood 
catch up to them. Vellynne can be persuaded to delay 
the journey, but with each passing day, she becomes 
more agitated. 


RANDOM ENCOUNTERS 


You can use the “Wilderness Encounters” section in 
chapter 2 to make the characters’ journey to the Reghed 
Glacier more challenging, to level up the characters, or 
both. If the characters are 8th level already, it's probably 
best to skip over the random encounters and proceed 
with the “Elk and Tiger” section below. 


ELK AND TIGER 


With grand events having been set in motion, those 
sensitive to prophecy have begun to experience dreams 
and visions. One such person is Mjenir, a fifty-year-old 
shaman of the Reghed Elk Tribe, who received a vision 
about the characters’ journey to the Reghed Glacier. 


ELK TRIBE ESCORT 
Several hours before the party reaches the glacier, read: 


As you crest another ridge, you spot a dozen humanoids 
approaching, their cloaks flapping in the wind sweeping 
down from the eastern glacier. 


The approaching figures are ten tribal warriors of the 
Elk Tribe, led by Mjenir (neutral human druid with 
Survival +4) and Hengar Aesnvaard (neutral good 
human gladiator with Survival +5). Mjenir waves at 
the characters to signal his peaceful intentions. If they 
are willing to speak, he directs them to a rocky alcove 
where both parties can enjoy a reprieve from the wind. 

Mjenir proceeds to explain his vision and warns of 
grave danger ahead: 


“Tigers with ice in their veins come to spill your blood 
upon the snow. They will do everything in their power 
to keep you from finding what the Frostmaiden has pre- 
served under the ice.” 


Mienir and his fellow Elk tribesfolk volunteer to escort 
the party to the foot of the Reghed Glacier. If the charac- 
ters refuse that offer, the Elk tribesfolk return whence 
they came. Mjenir wishes them well and says, “The fate 
of the dale rests upon your shoulders.” 


CHAPTER 6 | CAVES OF HUNGER 


215 


216 


TIGER TRIBE AMBUSH 
When the characters reach the glacial wall, read: 


The Reghed Glacier rises hundreds of feet into the sky. 
The foot of the glacier is still a half-mile away. 

Suddenly, nearly two dozen figures burst out of the 
snow sixty feet away from you. They are spaced roughly 
ten feet apart and begin advancing in a line. 


Characters who have a passive Wisdom (Perception) 
score of 15 or higher are not surprised by the ambush, 
nor are members of the Elk Tribe who are traveling with 
the party. 

Ambushers. Mjenir was not the only one who fore- 
saw the characters’ path. The queen of the Tiger Tribe, 
Bjornhild Solvigsdottir (see appendix C), has also 
been stirred to action. Bjornhild worships Auril and 
is furious that the party has decided to meddle in the 
Frostmaiden’s affairs. If Bjornhild died earlier in the ad- 
venture, replace her with a frost druid (see appendix C) 
named Ajka. 

If Bjornhild leads the ambush, she is joined by her pet 
saber-toothed tiger, Grava. If Ajka leads the ambush, 
give her a woolly rhinoceros companion. Twenty tribal 
warriors make up the rest of the ambushing force. 
Before closing to melee range, they hurl spears at the 
characters, 

Elk Tribe Reaction. If the characters allowed Mje- 
nir, Hengar, and the other Elk tribesfolk to accompany 
them, the two leaders are confident in their ability to 
fight off the attackers while the characters race toward 
the glacier. If the characters let the Elk Tribe members 
fend off the Tigers, the outcome of the battle depends on 
whether Bjornhild leads the ambush: 


If Bjornhild leads the ambush, both she and Grava 
survive, as does Hengar. All three are reduced to 

half their hit points (rounded down). Everyone else is 
slain. Bjornhild takes Hengar prisoner and interprets 
the characters’ escape as a sign that Auril intends 

to slay them herself; consequently, Bjornhild doesn't 
pursue them. 

If Ajka leads the ambush, she and Hengar are the sole 
survivors with half their hit points remaining. After a 
brief standoff, Ajka polymorphs into a snowy owl and 
flees, leaving the wounded Hengar alone. 


Characters who refuse to let the Elk Tribe fight this 
battle without them are attacked by Bjornhild and her 
saber-toothed tiger (or Ajka and her rhinoceros) while 
Hengar and his fellow Elk Tribe warriors clash with the 
rest of the attacking force. You can forgo making attack 
rolls for the tribal warriors; assume that they all act on 
the same initiative count and that one warrior from each 
tribe dies each round on that tribe’s turn. Hengar kills 
an additional Tiger Tribe warrior on each of his turns. 
Mjenir stays out of melee and uses his produce fame 
cantrip to hurl fire at enemies. 


CHAPTER 6 | CAVES OF HUNGER 


OPENING THE WAY 


When the characters reach the wall of the Reghed Gla- 
cier at the spot specified by Vellynne Harpell or Profes- 
sor Skant, read: 


An immense, glistening wall of blue ice stands before 
you. It seems impenetrable, but then you notice that a 
lighter-colored stripe nearly bisects the wall at one point. 
This must be the frozen waterfall Vellynne spoke of! 


Vellynne or Professor Skant urges one of the characters 
to read aloud the “Rime of the Frostmaiden” (see appen- 
dix E). Reading the poem aloud while standing before 
the glacier has the following effect: 


As the last words of the poem are spoken, a rumbling. 
sound comes from deep within the glacier. The noise 
reaches a crescendo as the great wall of ice parts. 
Through the crack, you can see an opening that leads 
inside the glacier. 


Once the way is open, the party is free to descend into 
the newly formed tunnel (area H1). 


INTO THE 
CAVES OF HUNGER 


When the floating city of Ythryn plummeted from the 
sky into the Reghed Glacier centuries ago, the impact 
of the collision (and the resulting heat) drove the city 
deeper into its heart until, finally, it came to rest. Auril 
then buried the city under the ice to preserve it, claim- 
ing it as her own. 

The Caves of Hunger is a sprawling dungeon complex 
hollowed out of the Reghed Glacier. Some of its caves 
and tunnels formed naturally, some formed as a by- 
product of Ythryn’s fall, and still others are the work of 
creatures such as remorhazes that can dig or melt their 
way through solid ice. The fact that the entire complex is 
made of ice contributes to its alien atmosphere. The air 
is often stale, sound behaves strangely, and the tension 
of moving ever downward wears on the sanity of even 
the boldest adventurers. 


GENERAL FEATURES 


The following features are common throughout the 
Caves of Hunger: 


Ceilings. Most cavern ceilings are 30 feet high and 
made of smooth ice. Tunnel ceilings range from 10 to 
15 feet high unless otherwise noted. 

Darkness. All areas are cast in complete darkness un- 
less otherwise noted. 

Echoes. Sound travels quickly here. All Wisdom (Per- 
ception) checks to hear sounds in these caves have 
advantage. 


Ice Slides. As remorhazes burrow through ice, the heat 
radiating from their bodies smooths out the sides of 
the tunnels behind them to a glass-like finish. Many 
of these passages are severely sloped, creating ice 
slides. Descending an ice slide is easy; climbing one 
is another matter, A character needs crampons or 
other climbing gear to ascend one of these slippery 
passages. 


PROFESSOR SKANT 

If the characters have Professor Skant with them, the 
professor orb can provide educational commentary on 
certain features found in the Caves of Hunger, as noted 
in the text, provided the orb is in a position where it can 
view its surroundings. 


PsycHic HAUNTINGS 

The Caves of Hunger have a way of capturing and hold- 
ing on to psychic trauma. In certain locations, the text 
will ask you to check for a psychic haunting, in which 
case roll a d20 and consult the Psychic Haunting table 
to determine if the area contains a haunting. If one is 
present, its image or its effect can’t leave the cave in 
which it’s encountered. 


PsycHic HAUNTINGS 
di2 Haunting 

1 Aman wanders around in the cavern. His fingers 
are black with frostbite, and his mouth is agape in a 
silent scream. Although he appears real, the man is 
no more substantial than a phantom and does not 
respond to any interaction. 

2 One party member (determined randomly) hears a 
stream of whispers. The character can't make out 
what's being said but can hear their name men- 
tioned now and then, The whispers can’t be tracked 
to a source. 

3 Each party member sees their companions’ flesh 
wither as black worms crawl out of their ears, 
noses, and mouths. The effect is illusory, harmless, 
and fleeting. 

4 One party member (determined randomly) hears 
footsteps behind them when they move. When they 
stand still, the party member can feel hot breath 
against the back of their neck. The effect is illusory 
and harmless. 

5 Each party member detects a familiar scent in this 
cavern that reminds them of some tragic or fear- 
ful event in their past. The scent does not have a 
source, 

6 One party member (determined randomly) sees a 
dark, hulking shape moving through the wall, ceil- 
ing, or floor, as though it were swimming through 
the ice. The effect is illusory, harmless, and fleeting. 

7-12 No haunting. 


TEKELI-LI 


Of all the creatures that claim the Caves of Hunger as 
their lair, perhaps the most fearsome is Tekeli-li, a gnoll 
vampire (see appendix C). 

When they cracked open the Reghed Glacier, the 
characters unsealed the glacial prison holding Tekeli-li. 
After decades of captivity and starvation, the vampire 
is once again free to leave the caves and haunt Icewind 
Dale. First, however, it plans to feed. The vampire is the 
only wandering monster that the characters encounter 
in the Caves of Hunger, and they are likely to encounter 
it more than once as they descend deeper into the caves. 

Vellynne Harpell’s professor orb, Professor Skant, is 
an expert on vampires and vampirism. Once it becomes 
aware of Tekeli-li, the professor orb shares the vampire’s 
known weaknesses with the characters. 

The party should meet Tekeli-li several times. The 
vampire’s strategy is to drain the party’s resources, then 
retreat and recover before attacking again. If Tekeli-li 
ever takes more than 20 damage during an encounter, 
the vampire turns to mist and withdraws to a safe loca- 
tion in the dungeon. Even when the vampire is not im- 
mediately present, its cackling laughter echoes through 
the caves sporadically. 

You can stage an encounter with Tekeli-li anywhere 
you like. If you're not sure where it might be or how it 
should behave, roll a d6 and consult the Tekeli-li’s Lo- 
cation table. The table determines where the vampire is 
first encountered. If the vampire withdraws, roll again 
on the table to determine where it goes (roll again if the 
result indicates no change in its location). 

If the characters have not encountered the vampire by 
the time they reach area H36, it attacks them there. 


TEKELI-LI’s LOCATION 
d6 Location 

1 Area H6. As the characters make their way through 
area H5 or H7, Tekeli-li exits the ruined tower in 
mist form, assumes its Large hyena form, and 
attacks. 

2 Area H12. Tekeli-li waits for the encounter with the 
shadows in area H11 to conclude before attacking 
the party in its Large hyena form. 

3 Area H19. Tekeli-li waits for the characters in its 
lair and emerges from the northernmost cave in its 
gnoll form when they enter. 

4 Area H23. Tekeli-li is in mist form, hiding inside 
the steam rising from the pool, If the remorhazes 
in the pool attack the party, Tekeli-li joins the fight 
on the second round of combat after assuming its 
gnoll form. 

5 Area H32, Tekeli-li lurks here in its gnoll form and 
attacks the characters as soon as they enter. Its 
keen smell cancels out the sight-based disadvan- 
tage imposed by this location. 

6 Area H36. Tekeli-li lurks among the trees in its 
Large hyena form. The dryad refuses to emerge 
from her tree while the vampire is in her grove. 


CHAPTER 6 | CAVES OF HUNGER 


© 218 


CAVES OF HUNGER LOCATIONS 
The following locations are keyed to map 6.1. 


H1. INTO THE GLACIER 

The light blue area shown on map 6.1 indicates the sec- 
tion of glacial wall that parts when the characters use 
the “Rime of the Frostmaiden” to cut a path to the dun- 
geon. Reading the poem creates an opening in the ice 
wall that's 100 feet high, 30 feet wide, and 20 feet deep. 
A tunnel at the back of this opening contains uneven, 
naturally formed steps that descend to area H2. 

If any of the Elk tribesfolk are present at this point, 
they volunteer to guard this entrance until the char- 
acters return or until hunger forces them to abandon 
their post. 


H2. CRASHED SkYCOACH 


You come to a thirty-foot-high cavern. In its center, the 
remains of a wooden ship hull rest on the floor. 


If Professor Skant is allowed to view the wreckage, the 
professor orb offers the following commentary: 


“Ah, a Netherese skycoach! I've always wanted to ride on 
‘one of those, Pity it's no longer in one piece.” 


The ship is all that remains of a Netherese skycoach, 
an airship that was used to ferry people to and from the 
floating city of Ythryn. Any loud disturbances in this 
cave cause the four flameskulls in area H3 to cackle 
madly as they make their way to this cavern. The flame- 
skulls are the animated, fire-wreathed skulls of Neth- 
erese wizards transformed into guardians by the will of 
the Frostmaiden. 

The tunnel that leads to area H5 has a slippery, 
20-foot-tall drop-off that characters can descend safely 
with a successful DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check. On 
a failed check, a character slips and lands prone, taking 
damage from the fall as normal. 

Treasure. Characters who search the wreckage find 
the headless skeletons of four dead Netherese wizards 
and a 200-pound iron safe with a combination lock that 
has numbers from 0 to 50 written in the Draconic script. 
A character using thieves’ tools can spend 1 minute 
trying to open the safe, doing so with a successful DC 
20 Dexterity check. The safe contains a bag of holding, 
inside which are four amethysts (100 gp each) and a ring 
of the ram made of chardalyn (see the “Chardalyn” side- 
bar on page 6). The ring’s unusual composition has 
no effect on its magical properties. 


H3. FLAMESKULLS 

These two 15-foot-high caves and passageways are 
occupied by four flameskulls—two in the caves west 
of area H2 and two in the caves northeast of area H2. 
They attack intruders on sight. The caves are other- 
wise empty. 


CHAPTER 6 | CAVES OF HUNGER 


H4. KOBOLD VAMPIRE SPAWN 
Characters coming from area H2 must descend a natu- 
rally formed staircase of ice to reach this cave. 


Frost-covered blocks of stone jut from the floor of this 
ten-foot-high cave of ice. Perched atop the largest stone 
is an emaciated kobold with glowing red eyes. It bares 
elongated fangs as it hisses at you, then scampers away. 


The creature is a kobold vampire spawn (see appendix 
C) created by Tekeli-li. Professor Skant recognizes the 
creature as a vampire and knows its weaknesses. The 
undead kobold hungers for fresh blood but knows better 
than to attack a superior force. It tries to rejoin its kin 

in area H17. 


H5. Icicte Drop 


Sparkling icicles as long as longswords cling to the forty- 
foot-high roof of this cavern, the floor of which is strewn 
with frost-covered blocks of stone and a toppled pillar. 
Embedded in the east wall is a glittering stone tower that 
appears to have crashed through the ceiling long ago. 
The exposed wall is cracked and has a few small holes in 
it but is otherwise intact. 


If Professor Skant is allowed to view the tower, the pro- 
fessor orb offers the following commentary: 


“That tower appears to be of Netherese construction. 
Were it not for the cracks and holes, the stone would be 
smooth as glass, shaped by wizardly magic!” 


Seven ice mephits created by Auril cling to the ceiling, 
their wings wrapped tightly around their bodies so that 
they are easily mistaken for icicles, Characters who have 
passive Wisdom (Perception) scores of 13 or higher can 
distinguish the mephits from the scores of real icicles 
that festoon the ceiling. 

The ice mephits are tasked with guarding the cave but 
do not enter melee combat willingly. An ice mephit's pre- 
ferred tactic is to use its action to fly next to an icicle and 
break it off, causing it to fall on an enemy below. Any 
creature standing under a falling icicle must succeed on 
a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw or take 7 (2d6) piercing 
damage from it. 

Tekeli-li. 1f Tekeli-li is hiding in area H6, the gnoll 
vampire (see appendix C) attacks the party after the ice 
mephits are dealt with, passing through the tower wall 
in mist form and assuming its Large hyena form. See 
the “Tekeli-li” section earlier in this chapter for more 
information. 


Caves oF HUN 


1 square = 5 feet 


H6. RUINED TOWER 
Characters who peer through the cracks and holes in 
the tower walls see the following: 


Little remains of this tower besides its outer shell. The 
interior walls are decorated with shifting geometric 
patterns. A human skeleton in a white robe lies on the 
uneven floor. 


If Professor Skant is allowed to view the interior, the 
professor orb offers the following commentary: 


“Netherese spellcasters would come to towers like this 
one to regain their spent magic more quickly. Despite 
the extensive damage, | would venture to guess that the 
tower still works!” 


Acharacter who examines the shifting geometric pat- 
terns can, with a successful DC 17 Intelligence (Arcana) 
check, come to the same conclusion as Professor Skant. 

The characters can punch a hole in the tower's 
outer wall that's big enough for them to crawl or walk 
through. Any character who takes a short rest in the 
tower regains one spell slot of 3rd level or lower at the 
end of that rest. A character can’t gain this benefit again 
for 24 hours. 

Treasure. The skeleton is the remains of a Netherese 
priest. It wears a silver holy symbol shaped like a four- 
pointed star (25 gp). A successful DC 15 Intelligence 
(History) check identifies it as a holy symbol of Mystryl 
(see the “Mystryl” sidebar). 


H7. RUBBLE-STREWN CAVE 

Aside from the tower embedded in the west wall (see 
area 6) and the rubble around it, this 30-foot-high cav- 
ern is empty. A naturally formed staircase to the south- 
east descends to area H10. 

Tekeli-li. If Tekeli-li is hiding in area H6, the gnoll 
vampire (see appendix C) passes through the tower 
wall in mist form, assumes its Large hyena form, and at- 
tacks the characters as they cross the cave or get within 
10 feet of the tower. See the “Tekeli-li” section earlier in 
this chapter for more information. 


CHAPTER 6 | CAVES OF HUNGER 


H8. ARCANE EYE ACTIVATOR 


A flat, slightly canted slab of stone rests in the center of 
this twenty-foot-high cave. One side is rough, as if the 
slab had been torn from a larger structure. The slab is 
eight feet long, four feet wide, four feet high, and covered 
with frost. 


Scraping off the frost on the slab reveals Draconic script 
etched into its top, with an open eye carved above it. 
Close examination reveals that the pupil of the eye is a 
stone button that can be pressed. A detect magic spell 
reveals an aura of divination magic around the slab. 

If Professor Skant sees the script, the professor orb 
informs the characters that the Netherese used the Dra- 
conic script (see the “Loross: The Netherese Tongue” 
sidebar). If the characters don't know Draconic, Profes- 
sor Skant can translate the script for them. It reads: 


“Take the free, self-guided tour of Ythryn. Press the eye to 
cast the spell.” 


Acharacter can use an action to press the eye, thereby 
using the slab to cast the arcane eye spell. The spell 
lasts for 1 hour or until the character's concentration on 
the spell ends. The slab, which used to function when- 
ever the button was pressed, is damaged. Once the spell 
is cast, the slab ceases to be magical. 


H9. GOLEM HEAD 


Lying on its side in the middle of this twenty-foot-high 
cave is an enormous head made of iron, its eyes aglow 
with a golden light. 


Iron golems were used as sentries throughout Ythryn. 
This head is all that remains of a golem that was decap- 
itated when the city crashed. It has been separated from 
the city and its body ever since. The potent magic used 
in the golem’s construction has kept the head functional. 

The head can’t attack or use its Poison Breath in this 
state, nor can it speak. It can communicate by blink- 
ing the lights in its eyes—one blink for no, two blinks 
for yes, three blinks for “I don’t know.” It understands 
Elvish and Loross (see the “Loross: The Netherese 
Tongue” sidebar). If the characters know none of these 
languages, Professor Skant can communicate with the 
golem in Loross on their behalf. 

Here are examples of the questions the party might 
ask, and the golem’s responses: 


“Do you know where Ythryn is?” (No.) 

“Were you damaged when the city fell?” (Yes.) 

“Is there danger ahead?” (I don't know.) 

“Have other creatures passed through this cave re- 
cently?” (Yes. The golem is referring to the kobold 
vampire spawn that lair in the caves to the east.) 


A HALFLING ADVENTURER ENCOUNTERS THE HEAD 


OF A DECAPITATED IRON GOLEM. 


H10. TOPPLED SPIRE 
This cave might contain a psychic haunting (see “P: 
chic Hauntings,” page 217). 


The top of a partially shattered tower rests on its side in 
the middle of this thirty-foot-high cavern. Long icicles 

hang from the ceiling above the toppled spire. North of 
the tower is a fifteen-foot-diameter hole in the floor that 


seems to be the upper end of a tunnel. 


The hole in the floor is the mouth of a glass-smooth tun 
nel created by the remorhaz in area H24. A creature that 
slides down this ice chute gains enough speed along the 


way to propel itself into the heated pool at the bottom, 
s submerged in it. The 
ci ure can avoid this fate if, upon reaching the end of 
the slide, it makes a successful DC 15 Strength saving 
throw to stop itself from going into the pool. 

Access to the toppled tower can be had through its 
east side, which is open though surrounded by rubbl 


provoking the remorhaz th: 


Treasure. Tucked inside the attic’s spire is a wooden 
t with a sliding bolt latch held fast by frost. A char- 
acter can melt away the ice on the latch using a torch or 
other open flame. Most of the bottles inside the chest 
were smashed in the fall, but two potions of healing (su- 
perior) survived. 


H11. DEN OF SHADOWS 

Naturally formed stairs lead up to area H9 and down to 
area H15. A wide passage to the east leads to area H13, 
with a branching tunnel to area H1 

Twelve shadows haunt this 30-foot-high cave. The: 
swarm over members of the party but recoil from any 
character who presents a holy symbol of Mystryl. 

The shadows were born from those who survived 
Ythryn’s crash, only to face starvation. Driven mad by 
trauma and hunger, the group of survivors resorted 
to canni ctims rose as shadow 
take vengeance upon the last surviving member of the 
group, and their hatred extends to other living crea- 

s as well. 

i, If Tekeli-li is hiding in area H12, the gnoll 
vampire (see appendix C) attacks the characters in its 
Large hyena form once the shadows are dealt with, 
— 

Loross: THE NETHERESE TONGUE 

Loross, a language spoken by the Netherese, is a dead 

tongue. Very few creatures in the world today would rec- 

ognize it, much less speak it. Loross used the Draconic al- 
phabet in its written form, while the spoken language had 
many similarities with Elvish, due to the cultural influence 
the elves had on Netherese civilization. A character who 
speaks Elvish can understand what a creature speaking 

Loross is saying, and vice versa. A character who has the 

Cloistered Scholar or Sage background, or a warlock who 

knows the Eyes of the Rune Keeper invocation, can trans- 

late written Loross without an ability check. 
< 


CHAPTER 6 | CAVES OF HUNGER 


TEKELI-LI THE GNOLL VAMPIRE ASSUMES HYENA FORM 


AS IT SNEAKS UP BEHINO UNSUSPECTING PREY, 


H12. CURSE OF HUNGER 


This twenty-foot-high cavern tapers to a dead end. A 
dozen human skeletons sheathed in frost lie on the un: 


even floor, but their skulls appear to be missing. 


The frozen skeletons are the remains of the Netherese 
cannibals whose shadows haunt area H11. Characters 
who scrape off the frost and examine the bones see 
teeth marks on them. The missing skulls were taken by 
kobold vampire spawn and placed in area H20. 

Terrible psychic trauma lingers in this cave, causing 
any creature that enters it to feel intensely hungry, even 
after leaving the cave. Eating a handful of food keeps 
the creature's hunger at bay for 1 hour. If its hunger isn't 
satisfied within 1 minute, the creature must succeed on 
a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or gain one level of 
exhaustion. The saving throw must be repeated every 
hour until the creature succeeds or dies, or until the ef- 
fect is ended on that creature by magic that can remove 
a curse. A creature that doesn’t require food automati- 
cally succeeds on the saving throw. Once the effect ends 
on a creature, it becomes immune to the cave's psychic 
trauma. This immunity does not remove levels of ex- 
haustion gained from the creature's earlier failed saves. 

Treasure. One skeleton at the back of the cave wears 
a tarnished silver holy symbol shaped like a four-pointed 


CHAPTER 6 | CAVES OF HUNGER 


star (25 gp) around its neck. A successful DC 15 Intel 
ligence (History) check identifies it as a holy symbol of 
Mystryl (see the “Mystryl” sidebar on page 220). 


H13. IctcLe-FILLepD CAVE 


This cavern has a ten-foot-high ceiling covered with ici- 
cles that nearly touch the floor, forming thin stalactites. 
Several of these icicles have been broken off, leaving 
paths that lead to the cave's four exits—narrow tunnels 
to the east and south, and wider tunnels to the west and 
northeast. 

High-pitched barking and yipping echoes throughout 
the cave, but you can't tell which direction the sounds 


come from. 


The icicles are more of a nuisance than an obstacle and 
can be easily broken, although smashing them creates 
enough noise to alert the creatures in area H17. 

Because of the acoustics in the cave, the characters 
must be within 5 feet of the east tunnel to discern that 
the barking and yipping is coming from that direction. 
The east tunnel has a rough-hewn staircase leading 
down to area H17. A similar staircase in the south tun- 
nel leads down to area H16. 


H14. Ick SCULPTURES 


Peering into this ten-foot-high cavern, you come face to 
face with an army of small, misshapen ice sculptures. 


Add the following if the characters haven't confronted 
the kobold vampire spawn in area H17: 


An incessant yipping noise fills the cave, originating from 
a tunnel in the south wall that contains a rough-hewn 
staircase leading down into darkness. 


Crammed into this cave are twenty 3-foot-tall ice sculp- 
tures that the kobold vampire spawn have made to star- 
tle and frighten intruders. Each statue is carved in the 
vague likeness of a kobold, which a character can dis- 
cern with a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Insight) check. 
Each ice sculpture is a Small object that weighs 
roughly 40 pounds and has AC 13, 5 hit points, vulnera- 
bility to bludgeoning and fire damage, and immunity to 
cold, poison, and psychic damage. Smashing any of the 


sculptures alerts the kobold vampire spawn in area H17. 


H15. DRAKARETH’S DOOM 
This location consists of multiple areas: 


An empty cave to the northeast has a 20-foot-high 
domed ceiling, naturally formed stairs leading up to 
area H11, and a narrow tunnel leading east toward 
areas H16 and H22. 

A cave to the southwest has an uneven ceiling that 
ranges in height from 15 to 30 feet. A wraith named 
Drakareth haunts this cave, northwest of which are 


three cysts blocked off by thick walls of ice. The north- 


ernmost cyst contains Drakareth’s earthly remains 
and treasure (see “Treasure” below). 


When one or more characters enter the wraith’s 
cave, read: 


A deep sigh issues from the darkness. A voice steeped 
in malevolence and hatred whispers to you in a language 
reminiscent of Elvish. 


The wraith speaks Loross (see the “Loross: The 
Netherese Tongue” sidebar on page 221), which Pro- 
fessor Skant can translate if necessary. Its words are 
as follows: 


“Cursed be those who gaze upon the horror that 
Drakareth has become. Such promise wasted, lost in 
this cold sepulcher! Where were you centuries years ago 
when he was in the prime of life? Where were you when 
the frigid darkness consumed him? You are no good 

to Drakareth now! Nothing remains of him but frozen 
bones, ancient treasures, and me.” 


Drakareth was a Netherese mage who survived the fall 
of Ythryn, murdered his wounded rivals, and stole their 
spellbooks and magic items. He had hoped to escape 
with his newfound treasures but perished from exhaus- 
tion and cold, rising as a wraith. The wraith seeks the 
destruction of all who enter its chamber. If successfully 
turned or reduced to 20 hit points or fewer, the wraith 
retreats to the icy cyst that contains Drakareth’s frozen 
remains, passing through the interposing walls of ice to 
reach it. There, it fights to the bitter end. 

The walls of ice that separate the smaller cysts from 
the larger cave are thick enough to be opaque, but char- 
acters can break through them. Each 5-foot-square, 

1 foot-thick section of wall has AC 13, 18 hit points, vul- 
nerability to fire damage, and immunity to cold, poison, 
and psychic damage. 

Treasure. Beyond three walls of ice, in the northern- 
most cyst, is the frost-covered skeleton of Drakareth, 
clad in a mantle of spell resistance and surrounded by 
the rotted remains of six ancient, leather-bound spell- 
books that are no longer legible and a cracked crystal 
ball that is no longer magical. Clutched in the dead 
mage's hands is a staff of charming fashioned out of 
chardalyn suffused with evil Netherese magic. 

Anyone who attunes to Drakareth’s staff gains the 
following flaw, which supersedes any conflicting person- 
ality trait: “I like to give orders and expect to be obeyed.” 
This flaw lasts until the attunement ends. 


H16. Ick CAVE 
Although this cave is empty, it might contain a psychic 
haunting (see “Psychic Hauntings,” page 217). 

This ice cave has a 25-foot-high, domed ceiling fes- 
tooned with icicles. A rough-hewn staircase leads up 
to area H14, and an opening in the middle of the south 
wall breaches a tunnel connecting areas H15 and H22. 

Slaad Host. If one of the characters has the Slaad 
Host secret (see appendix B) and the slaad tadpole 
hasn't been born or destroyed yet, it bursts from the 
character's chest in this cavern. 


H17. DEN OF THE VAMPIRE SPAWN 


The yips and barks abate as you descend the stairs lead- 
ing to this cave in which hangs the faint whiff of death. 


Five kobold vampire spawn (see appendix C) dwell 
here. Add a sixth if the one from area H4 escaped and 
made it all the way here. These creatures have sharp 
senses and know when living creatures are nearby. 
They use their Spider Climb trait to cling to the walls 
and pounce on the first character to enter their lair. The 
vampires fight until two or more of their number are 
slain, whereupon the rest retreat to area H19 to make 
their final stand. Professor Skant recognizes the crea- 
ture as vampires and knows their weaknesses. 

Aside from the vampires, the cave is empty. The 
20-foot-high ceiling is festooned with icicles. 

Stench of Death. A tunnel to the south contains a 
staircase that leads down to area H19. The stench of 
death grows stronger as one descends these stairs. 


CHAPTER 6 | CAVES OF HUNGER 


223 


224 


H18. Snow GOLEMS 
These areas have slippery, uneven floors. Scores of ici- 
cles hang from the ceilings, which range in height from 
15 to 30 feet. 

Southern Cave. Naturally formed stairs descend to 
the southernmost cave. Describe its contents as follows: 


This dead-end cave contains a half dozen mounds of 
snow that rise up and assume vaguely bipedel forms. 
Wide smiles appear on their otherwise featureless heads. 


These creatures are six snow golems (see appendix C). 
They are hostile toward all trespassers but don't pursue 
intruders beyond the confines of the three caves that 
comprise area H18. 


H19. Den or DEATH 


This thirty-foot-high cavern reeks of death. The floor is 
slippery and slightly concave. 


If Tekeli-li is here, the gnoll vampire (see appendix 
C) lurks in the northernmost side cave. When one or 
more intruders enter its den, Tekeli-li emerges from this 
smaller cave in its gnoll form and attacks. See the “Te- 
keli-li" section earlier in this chapter for more informa- 
tion. Any kobold vampire spawn that retreated to this 
cavern are hidden in the northeastern side cave. They 
gang up on whichever foe Tekeli-li chooses to attack. 
Slippery Ice. The icy floor is difficult terrain. When a 
creature moves onto the ice for the first time on a turn, 
it must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check 
or fall prone. 
Stench of Death. A naturally formed staircase in 
the southern wall leads down to areas H20 and H21. 
The stench of death intensifies the closer one gets 
to area H20. 


H20. ICE CRYPT 


The deathly stench originates from this ten-foot-high 
cave, where a dozen human skulls surround a pillar of 
ice. A large cavity has been opened in the pillar, as if 
something had burst from inside it. 


This is the chamber where Tekeli-li lay dormant, en- 
cased in ice, until the characters opened the Caves of 
Hunger with the “Rime of the Frostmaiden” and awak- 
ened him. Kobold vampire spawn found the human 
skulls in area H12 and placed them at the base of the 
pillar to show their devotion to Tekeli-li. 

A search of this cave yields nothing of value, as 
Tekeli-li has no interest in treasure. 


CHAPTER 6 | CAVES OF HUNGER 


H21. FROZEN Frost GIANT 


Entombed in the icy floor of this twenty-foot-high cave is 
the frozen, well-preserved corpse of a frost giant. Scratch 
marks in the ice suggest a half-hearted attempt to exca- 
vate the remains. 


A frost giant named Vlagomir was walking across the 
glacier when Ythryn fell to its doom. The giant was 
crushed to death as the Netherese city plunged into a 
deep crevasse and became buried under tons of ice. 

Characters can reach the giant’s corpse by chipping 
through 2 feet of ice. If they do so, they discover that the 
giant had nothing of value. The scratch marks in the ice 
were made by kobold vampire spawn who sought to feed 
on the corpse but quickly tired of digging through the 
solid ice. 


H22. BOREHOLE 
This cave might contain a psychic haunting (see “Psy- 
chic Hauntings,” page 217), 


This thirty-foot-high cave has exits to the north and 
south. Along the western side is a fifteen-foot-diame- 
ter hole in the floor that seems to be the upper end of 
a tunnel. 


The ice slide descends to area H23. 


H23. REMORHAZ NEST 


This bulbous cavern has walls as smooth as glass and a 
ceiling lined with dripping icicles. A wisp of steam rises 
from a roughly circular pool in the northern half of the 
cave. South of the pool is a shallow crater filled with over- 
sized snowballs. 


Two young remorhazes lurk at the bottom of the pool, 
which is 15 feet deep. Their tremorsense alerts them to 
the presence of intruders, and they attack immediately. 

The creatures’ bodies heat the pool, causing it to give 
off steam. The water is not hot enough to deal damage. 
Without the body heat of a remorhaz to keep the water 
warm, a pool's surface freezes over in 1 hour. After 24 
hours, the pool is frozen solid. 

Tekeli-li. If Tekeli-li is here, the gnoll vampire (see ap- 
pendix C) is in mist form, hiding in the steam. The char- 
acters can sense the vampire only if they have magic 
that can detect the presence of undead. As the young 
remorhazes engage the characters in battle, Tekeli-li 
assumes its gnoll form and joins the fray, keeping its dis- 
tance from the remorhazes. See the “Tekeli-li” section 
earlier in this chapter for more information. 

Eggs. The “snowballs” in the shallow crater are six 
unhatched remorhaz eggs, each one frozen to or par- 
tially embedded in the icy floor. Each egg is a Medium 


A REMORHAT USES ITS BODY HEAT TO WARM THE 


POOL CONTAINING ITS UNBORN YOUNG 


object with AC 13, 6 hit points, and resistance to cold 
and fire damage. Reducing an egg to 0 hit points kills 
the unborn remorhaz inside it. Left alone, the eggs won't 
hatch until they are placed in a heated pool for a period 
of 4d6 days. 
Treasure. An undamaged remorhaz egg can be sold 
to an interested buyer in Bryn Shander for up to 500 gp. 


H24. REMORHAZ MOTHER 


This enormous cave has glassy walls and a smooth, 
domed ceiling forty feet overhead, The cavern con- 
tains two large pools, both of which have steam rising 
from them. 


ch pool is 15 feet deep. Submerged in the northern 
pool is a full-grown remorhaz coiled around a cluster 
of eight remorhaz eggs, which look like oversized snow: 
balls from a distance (see area H23 for more informa 
tion about remorhaz eggs). A young remorhaz is sub- 
merged in the southern pool and eagerly joins any battle 
involving its mother. The remorhazes' tremorsense 
alerts them to the presence of intruders. 

The remorhazes’ bodies heat the pools, causing steam 
to rise from them. The water is not hot enough to deal 
damage. Without the body heat of a remorhaz to keep 
the water warm, a pool's surface freezes over in 1 hour. 
After 24 hours, the pool is frozen solid. 


H25. EMPTY SIDE CAVES 
Although these caves are empty, one or both of them 
might contain a psychic haunting (see “Psychic Haunt- 
ings,” page 217). 

Each cave has a ceiling that ranges in height from 10 
to 20 feet. 


H26. Ecc-SHAPED CAVE 
This cave might contain a psychic haunting (see “Psy- 
chic Hauntings,” page 217). 


This chamber rises to a height of forty feet and is shaped 
like an egg. The floor is slightly concave and sinks toward 
a fifteen-foot-diameter hole in the floor that seems to be 
the upper end of a tunnel, 


The ice slide descends to area H36. 

ee 
To THE UNDERDARK 
West of area H24, a remorhaz tunnel leads down to the 
Underdark. The slide extends for a mile under the glacier 
before breaching a stone cavern lit by bioluminescent 
moss growing on the walls. The bioluminescence is per- 
sistent throughout the Underdark, and it’s clear to char- 
acters who end up here that they are no longer on track to 
find Ythryn, Their only options are to return to the Caves 
of Hunger or continue exploring the Underdark. The latter 
option is beyond the scope of this adventure. 

—_—_— OO 


CHAPTER 6 | CAVES OF HUNGER aan 


226 


H27. WEST OBSERVATION PLATFORM 


Clinging to the thirty-foot-high ceiling of this cavern is a 
forest of icicles, some of which have grown to a length 
of five feet or more. Embedded in the south wall is a 
cylindrical, domed building made of seamless black 
stone and decorated with faintly glowing constellations. 
Rime-covered statues of human wizards stand in front of 
this building, gazing outward from atop three-foot-high 
stone pedestals. The building and statues are raised by a 
five-foot-high, curved stone platform enclosed by a low 
wall, with stone steps leading up to it. 


See area H28 for a description of the stone building's in- 


terior. The constellations on the building's outside wall 
shed dim light out to a range of 15 feet—just far enough 
to backlight the frost-covered statues that encircle it. 

Statues. Professor Skant can ascertain that the 
statues were sculpted by magic and that, given their 
costuming, they depict Netherese wizards. A character 
can do the same with a successful DC 15 Intelligence 
(History) check. 

Hiding behind the two westernmost statues are two 
male drow elite warriors named Meldirn and Tlaknar. 
They cast faerie fire spells on intruders before attack- 
ing with their hand crossbows. They are soon joined 
by Yilsebek, the drow mage in area H28, who tries to 
engulf as many enemies as possible with his cloudkill 
spell. For more information about the drow and why 
they're here, see area H28. 

If there are too many foes for the drow to deal with on 
their own, Yilsebek tries to summon a shadow demon 


to assist. If defeat is inevitable, Yilsebek casts fly on him- 


self, heads up the ice slide toward area H24, and flees 
back to the Underdark through the remorhaz tunnels, 
leaving Meldirn and Tlaknar to fend for themselves. 


H28. Drow Outpost 


Much of this building has collapsed, but the front room 
is intact—and also free of ice and frost. The remnants 
of smashed furnishings suggest that the room once 
served as a wizard’s workshop. Atop a splintered table is 
a brimstone cube small enough to hold in one hand. The 
air around the cube ripples, as it seems to be putting out 
enough dry heat to warm the room. 


A drow mage named Yilsebek Dalambra has turned 
this partially collapsed Netherese building into an out- 
post. From here, he intends to launch a full-blown expe- 
dition into the ruins of Ythryn, which he and his fellow 
drow discovered a few weeks ago. The drow entered the 
Caves of Hunger by scaling a remorhaz tunnel that con- 
nects to the Underdark. Using a sending spell, Yilsebek 
has asked the matron mother of his house to send rein- 
forcements, but they are weeks away. 


CHAPTER 6 | CAVES OF HUNGER 


Yilsebek has no desire to share his recent discovery 
with potential rivals, nor does he trust surface-dwellers. 
For these reasons, characters can't persuade Yilsebek to 
join forces with them. 

Treasure. The source of the room’s heat is a thermal 
cube (see appendix D) that Yilsebek found during his 
last foray into Ythryn, 

Yilsebek carries a spider silk satchel that contains his 
spellbook (described below), a spider-shaped brooch 
made of obsidian and engraved with the symbol of 
House Dalambra (25 gp), and a half-empty bottle of 
Elverquisst (a rare, ruby-colored elven liquor distilled 
from sunshine and rare summer fruits). Professor Skant 
recognizes Elverquisst on sight, since he is an expert on 
the making of it. Elf characters would also recognize it. 

Yilsebek’s spellbook has black leather covers and 
pages made from sheets of trillimac (an Underdark fun- 
gus). The book contains the following spells: alter self, 
cloudkill, comprehend languages, detect magic, Evard’s 
black tentacles, fabricate, fly, greater invisibility, light- 
ning bolt, mage armor, magic missile, misty step, send- 
ing, shield, suggestion, web, and witch bolt. 


H29. EAST OBSERVATION PLATFORM 

If the characters aren't already familiar with the struc- 
tures described in areas H27 and H28, use the follow- 
ing boxed text to describe them: 


Icicles cling to the twenty-foot-high ceiling of this ice 
cavern. Embedded in the south wall is a domed, circular 
building made of seamless black stone and decorated 
with faintly glowing constellations. A frost-covered statue 
of a human wizard stands outside it, gazing outward 
from atop a three-foot-high stone pedestal. The building 
and statue rest on a five-foot-high, curved stone platform 
enclosed by a low wall. 


Frost-covered stone steps descend from the stone plat- 
form to the icy floor in the cavern’s northernmost sec- 
tion, as shown on map 6.1, 

Auril the Frostmaiden has transformed ten of the ici- 
cles that cling to the ceiling into creatures resembling 
piercers. They use the piercer stat block, have immunity 
to cold damage, and deal 10 (3d6) piercing damage plus 
10 (3d6) cold damage on a hit. The drow in areas H27 
and H28 are aware of the ice piercers, having seen them 
creep along the ceiling, and do their best to avoid them. 


H30. VLAGOMIR’s SPARK 


This cavern has a fifteen-foot-high ceiling and a smaller, 
dead-end cave at the back of it. Sticking out of the 

larger cave's floor at a sixty-degree angle is a giant-sized 
wooden spear with its obsidian tip pointing upward. The 
weapon glows with a faint, cold light. 


The spear is 25 feet long, but only its top half is visible; 
the rest of it is lodged in the icy floor. Pulling it free 


requires an action and a successful DC 23 Strength 
(Athletics) check. 

Treasure. The spear belonged to a frost giant named 
Vlagomir, whose remains can be found in area H21. 
The giant was a hunter of white dragons and a Chosen 
of Thrym, the evil god of frost giants. When Vlagomir 
died, his warrior’s spark was bound to the spear. The 
first time a barbarian, fighter, monk, or ranger touches 
the spear, the light around the spear fades as Viagomir’s 
spark bestows the following supernatural charm on 
the character (see “Supernatural Gifts” in the Dungeon 
Master's Guide): 


Viagomir’s Spark. You gain 1 foot of height every hour and 
become proportionately heavier until you stand 21 feet tall and 
weigh 7,700 pounds. When you are 9 feet tall, your Strength be- 
comes 19 unless it is already higher. For every 3 additional feet 
of height you gain, your Strength increases by 1, to a maximum 
of 23. Armor and clothing you are wearing and weapons you are 
carrying magically increase in size to match your growth. If you 
are the recipient of a greater restoration spell or similar magic, 
this charm vanishes from you, and you immediately shrink back 
to normal size, along with any armor, clothing, and weapons in 
your possession. 


H31. THING IN THE ICE 


A flat sheet of cloudy ice forms one wall of this forty- 
foot-high cavern. Something dark and humungous shifts 
behind the wall, its tentacles waving unimpeded. You 
become aware you are not alone inside your mind. Some- 
how, this horror from another world has wormed its way 
inside you. 


Something beyond mortal comprehension exists par- 
tially inside the wall of ice and partially within some 
distant, horrific demiplane. As this otherworldly entity 
peers into the cavern, visitors risk losing their sanity to 
its influence. 

Any creature that comes within 20 feet of the wall of 
ice is targeted by a dominate monster spell (save DC 15). 
The entity can concentrate on up to ten such spells at 
once. Any creature that successfully saves against the 
spell resists it and can't be targeted by this effect again. 
On a failed save, the creature stands perfectly still and 
does nothing while the alien entity probes its mind for 
1 hour, If a creature remains under the spell's effect for 
the full duration, it must make a DC 15 Intelligence sav- 
ing throw at the end of the hour, taking 44 (8410) psy- 
chic damage on a failed save, or half as much damage 
on a successful one. Whether the save succeeds or fails, 
a creature subjected to the hour-long probe also gains a 
randomly determined form of long-term madness, deter- 
mined by rolling on the Long-Term Madness table in the 
Dungeon Master's Guide. 

The ice wall has AC 13, vulnerability to fire damage, 
and immunity to cold, poison, and psychic damage. If 
the wall takes 50 points of damage or more, large cracks 
form along its surface, and the alien entity withdraws 
into its distant demiplane, never to return. As it with- 
draws, its dominate monster spells end. 


H32. MIRRORED CAVERN 


Every surface of this twenty-foot-high cave is polished 
to a mirror finish, such that you are faced with countless 
distorted reflections of yourself. Your head spins as you 
try to keep your bearings. 


If Tekeli-li is here, add: 


Crouching in the middle of the cavern is a gaunt gnoll 
with ravenous eyes and the foul stench of the grave com- 
ing from it. The creature does not cast a reflection. 


Ranged attack rolls made in this cave have disadvantage 
because of the disorienting reflections. If Tekeli-li is 
here, the gnoll vampire (see appendix C) uses its Fright- 
ful Cackle first, then targets enemies with its Sickening 
Gaze until one or more them closes to melee range. See 
the “Tekeli-li” section earlier in this chapter for more of 
Tekeli-li's tactics. 

Slaad Host. If one of the characters has the Slaad 
Host secret (see appendix B) and the slaad tadpole 
hasn't been born or destroyed yet, it bursts from the 
character's chest when the character enters this cavern. 


H33. WATCHER IN THE WALLS 


This fifteen-foot-high, U-shaped cavern appears empty at 
first glance, but a sudden tapping draws your attention 
to the west wall, within which is trapped a black-robed 
figure with a golden visage. 


A mummy dressed in a tattered black robe and wearing 
a golden face mask is trapped in the western wall and 
has no way to free itself from the ice. The mummy was 
created by Netherese priests to serve as a lore-keeper 
in Ythryn. 

The section of ice that traps the mummy has AC 13, 
22 hit points, vulnerability to fire damage, and immunity 
to cold, poison, and psychic damage. If the wall is re- 
duced to 0 hit points, the mummy is released and makes 
its way to area H39 and from there to the library in 
Ythryn (area Y9 in chapter 7). It ignores the characters 
unless they interfere with it. 

Treasure. The mummy's golden mask (750 gp) is a 
Netherese art object. 


H34. City DEBRIS 
This cave might contain a psychic haunting (see “Psy- 
chic Hauntings,” page 217). 


Large pieces of stone jut from the twenty-foot-high ceil- 
ing of this empty cavern. 


CHAPTER 6 | CAVES OF HUNGER 


227 


228 


The stone fragments are pieces of Ythryn that settled 

in the ice. Any character who examines the stone and 
makes a successful DC 15 Intelligence (History) check 
to discern its true nature. (A dwarf’s Stonecunning 

trait can prove helpful here.) If the check succeeds, the 
character can confirm that the stone is neither naturally 
formed nor hewn, but rather shaped by magic. 


H35. MYSTERIOUS CUBE 


On the floor in the middle of this fifteen-foot-high cave is 
an eight-foot cube of smooth, grayish-green stone that is 
free of frost. 


The stone cube is a spitting mimic (see appendix C). 
Anything that touches the mimic automatically adheres 
to it, and a Huge or smaller creature adhered to the 
mimic is also grappled by it (escape DC 16). The mimic 
sprouts pseudopods and attacks if it is touched, harmed, 
or otherwise disturbed. 


H36. FROZEN GROVE 

If the characters make it this far and haven't yet faced 
Tekeli-li, the gnoll vampire (see appendix C) confronts 
them here in its Large hyena form. 


A grove of frost-covered trees fills this fifty-foot-high 
cavern, the floor of which is a mixture of earth and ice. By 
some magic or miracle, the trees are alive, their canopies 
thick with frosty leaves, their branches bearing purple 
pears that hang like ornaments. A low wall, broken in 
several places, threads its way through the grove, which 
is surrounded by six exits, 


This grove of pear trees was enchanted by Netherese 
arcanists to endure high altitude and harsh weather. 
That magic has enabled the trees to thrive even in these 
icy caverns. Essential to the grove’s survival is a dryad 
named Hathowyn, who resides in the southernmost 
tree. If the dryad dies, the trees die 1410 days later. Cen- 
turies of isolation have made Hathowyn lonely, and the 
dryad hungers for conversation and companionship. 
present, Hathowyn remains hidden in 
her tree until the gnoll vampire leaves or is destroyed. 
Tekeli-li has never seen the dryad and is unaware of her 
presence. If given the chance, Hathowyn tries to engage 
the characters in conversation, speaking Elvish or Syl- 
van. She hopes to keep them in the grove for as long as 
possible. If the characters try to leave, Hathowyn tries 
to charm one of them into staying and keeping her com- 
pany. The dryad knows the following information: 


Netherese magic binds the dryad to the grove and 
keeps the trees alive. 

The pears hanging from the trees are magically 
delicious. 

Three dark elves have passed through the dryad’s 
grove on multiple occasions, coming and going 
through the southwest and southeast passages 


CHAPTER 6 | CAVES OF HUNGER 


(leading to areas H29 and H39). Hathowyn hasn't spo- 

ken to them out of fear that they might harm her. 

+ Strange, one-eyed creatures lurk in the cave to the 
south (area H37). They followed the dark elves up 
from below after their last foray down the south- 
east passage. 

Purple Pears. Each tree has 3d6 ripe pears hanging 
from its branches, most of them within reach. Any crea- 
ture that eats more than half of a purple pear gains the 
benefit of a special charm (see “Supernatural Gifts” in 
the Dungeon Master's Guide). Determine the charm ran- 
domly by rolling a d20 and consulting the Purple Pear 
Charms table. This charm must vanish from a creature 
before it can gain any more charms by eating purple 
pears. A creature that eats three or more purple pears 
within 1 hour is poisoned for 24 hours thereafter and 
suffers painful cramps until the condition ends. 


PURPLE PEAR CHARMS 

d20 Supernatural Charm 

1-2 Charm of Druidcraft. This charm allows you to cast 
the druidcraft cantrip as an action, no components 
required. Once used three times, this charm van- 
ishes from you. 

3-5 Charm of Vicious Mockery. This charm allows you to 
cast the vicious mockery cantrip (Sth-level version; 
save DC 15) as an action. Once used three times, 
this charm vanishes from you, 

6-8 Charm of Invisibility. This charm allows you to cast 
the invisibility spell as an action, no components re- 
quired. Once used three times, this charm vanishes A 
from you. 

9-1) Charm of Sending. This charm allows you to cast the 
sending spell as an action, no components required. 
Once used, this charm vanishes from you. 

12-14 Charm of Cure Wounds. This charm allows you to 
cast the cure wounds spell (3rd-level version) as an 
action, no components required. Your spellcasting 
ability for this charm is Wisdom, Once used, this 
charm vanishes from you. 

15-17 Charm of Lightning Bolt. This charm allows you 
to cast the lightning bolt spell (save DC 15) as an 
action, no components required. Once used, this 
charm vanishes from you. 

18-19 Charm of Purplemancy. This charm allows you 
to cast the faerie fire spell (violet light only; save 
DC 15) as a bonus action instead of an action, no 
components required. Once used three times, this 
charm vanishes from you. 

20 Charm of Restoration. This charm has 6 charges. 
You can use an action to expend some of its 
charges to cast one of the following spells: greater 
restoration (4 charges) or lesser restoration (2 
charges). Once all its charges have been expended, 
this charm vanishes from you. 


H37. WEIRD INSIGHTS 


Huddled together at the west end of this ten-foot-high 
cave are four hunched creatures with spiny backs and 
sharp claws. Each one stares at you with a single unblink- 
ing eye. 


These four nothics, evil denizens of Ythryn, followed 
Yilsebek and his fellow drow as far as the dryad’s grove 
(area H36) before taking refuge in this cave. The nothics 
use their Weird Insight to glean secrets from the charac- 
ters. They are reluctant to provoke a well-armed group 
of adventurers, preferring to pick off lone prey, but if 
attacked, they respond in kind. 

Offering food and drink to the nothics loosens their 
tongues, but these ones speak and understand only Lo- 
ross (see the “Loross: The Netherese Tongue” sidebar 
on page 221). They can also write in the Draconic 
script. Professor Skant can serve as a translator if none 
of the characters can understand the nothics. 

The nothics have no memory of their lost humanity, 
and any information they might provide is garbled with 
bits of nonsense. Characters who succeed on a DC 12 
Wisdom (Insight) check can glean the following infor- 


mation from the nothics after a brief conversation: 
Purpre Pear 


Iriolarthas, a powerful Netherese archwizard, 
watches over Ythryn. He has lost not only his mind, 
but most of his body as well. All that remains of him is 
a floating human skull. 
Giant floating hands made of magical force wander 
around in the city. 
Ythryn’s mythallar won't function properly as long as WRAPPING UP 
the Spindle—a powerful artifact dating back 40,000 

Once the characters enter area H39, they can make 


years—remains in the city. The artifact is located x ride $ 
E spre their way deeper inside the Reghed Glacier, where the 
lost city of Ythryn awaits. 


One must perform a ritual to enter Ythryn’s central 


spire. (The nothics don’t remember how the ritual 
tes but tharna cecal dak ckise cen be ioun inthe <a RIOR FOLLOWS 
towers of wizardry scattered throughout the city.) Guided by the visions of Levistus, Avarice follows the 
+ Somewhere in Ythryn is a scroll that can summon the characters to the Reghed Glacier. Around the time when 
tarrasque. the characters reach Ythryn, the tiefling wizard and 
her followers arrive at the Caves of Hunger and kill any 
H38. Ice Caves Elk Tribe warriors guarding the entrance. Avarice then 
Although these caves are empty, one or more of them leads her troupe through the icy caverns, marching to- 
might contain a psychic haunting (see “Psychic Haunt- ward her destiny. 
ings,” page 217). More information about Avarice and her followers is 
The caves have 20-foot-high ceilings and slip- provided in the next chapter. 
pery floors. 


TEKELI-LI ESCAPES 


If the characters do not slay Tekeli-li, the gnoll vampire 
leaves the Caves of Hunger in mist form and makes its 
way across the sunless tundra, eventually finding an am- 
ple food supply in Ten-Towns. 


H39. PASSAGE TO YTHRYN 

This tunnel of ice cuts through the glacier for almost a 
mile before ending at the great ice cavern that contains 
Ythryn, described in chapter 7. 

Slaad Host. If one of the characters has the Slaad 
Host secret (see appendix B) and the slaad tadpole 
hasn't been born or destroyed yet, it bursts from the 
character's chest as the character descends this tunnel. 


CHAPTER 6 | CAVES OF HUNGER 
229 


DOOM OF YTHRYN 


THRYN RESTS IN THE SILENT DEPTHS OF THE 

Reghed Glacier. Ice encloses the enclave on 

all sides, yet the magic imbued in its stone- 

work shields it from utter destruction. Yth- 

ryn is now a corpse city—a tomb for those 
who perished here and a death trap for those who dare 
to explore its ruined, glaciated halls. 


RUNNING THIS CHAPTER 


Before running your first game session in the necropo- 
lis, review the “Iriolarthas the Demilich” and “The Fall 
of Ythryn” sections below, as well as the “Dealing with 
the Arcane Brotherhood” and “Auril’s Wrath” sections at 
the end of the chapter. 


CHARACTER ADVANCEMENT 


Ideally, the characters are 9th level when they first ar- 
rive at Ythryn. You decide how quickly they advance in 
level, Treat the following as suggestions: 


The characters gain a level after overcoming the chal- 
lenges of all eight towers of magic (areas Y4, Y7, Y11, 
Y18, Y20, Y22, Y24, and Y26). 

The characters gain a level when they reach Iriolar- 
thas’s study (area Y19q). 

The characters gain a level if they accomplish some- 
thing extraordinary, such as destroying Iriolarthas 
the demilich, all three of Auril’s forms, or the obelisk 
in area Y21. 


If you follow the suggestions above, the characters 
could be as high as 12th level by the adventure’s conclu- 
sion—an important consideration if you intend to con- 
tinue the campaign beyond this adventure. 


ITRIOLARTHAS THE DEMILICH 


Iriolarthas, once a powerful lich and before that a hu- 
man wizard of Netheril, exists today as a demilich that 
haunts the ruins of Ythryn. Iriolarthas endures as a de- 
teriorating skull that drifts about the necropolis in lonely 
despair. Wispy symbols of the eight schools of magic 
form above it and quickly dissipate. 

A demilich is what becomes of a lich that neglects to 
feed souls into its phylactery, and Iriolarthas's phylac- 
tery has been empty for nearly two thousand years, bur- 
ied under the rubble of Ythryn far from the demilich’s 
reach. Having lost its body and its spelleasting abilities, 


the demilich holds out hope that other Netherese wiz- 
ards will come to its rescue, unaware that the Empire 
of Netheril no longer exists. Though it has been trapped 
in Ythryn under the ice for centuries, the demilich has a 
very poor sense of how much time has passed. 

When confronted by new arrivals, the demilich 
assumes they are rescuers from another Netherese 
enclave and watches to see what they do. The demilich 
has no means of communication and can’t be contacted 
telepathically, so it judges new arrivals in silence. Char- 
acters who observe Iriolarthas and succeed on a DC 13 
Wisdom (Insight) check can ascertain that the demilich 
is watching them closely to see how they react to their 
surroundings. If the demilich concludes, based on its 
observations, that the characters are not a rescue team 
from another Netherese enclave, it tries to destroy them 
before they can steal any of Ythryn's secrets. The same 
is true of invasive NPCs such as members of the Arcane 
Brotherhood. A party can fool the demilich into think- 
ing they belong in Ythryn by succeeding on a DC 13 
Charisma (Deception) group check. If the group check 
is successful, Iriolarthas believes the party is what it 
pretends to be; on a failed group check, the demilich 
sees through the party's deception and becomes hostile 
toward the characters. If the demilich thinks that the 
characters are rescuers, given how they appear and 
act, it follows them around until something happens to 
change its mind. 

Although it lacks the means to communicate, the 
demilich dimly recalls the circumstances that led to its 
present situation. 


THE FALL OF YTHRYN 


After using the Ythryn mythallar (see appendix D) to 
lift the enclave of Ythryn into the sky, Iriolarthas and 
his apprentices traveled to the frozen north in search 
of relics of Ostoria, a bygone empire of magic-wielding 
giants that waged war against the dragons forty thou- 
sand years earlier. After many fruitless excavations, 
they found a large stone spindle bearing strange sigils 
at the bottom of the Sea of Moving Ice and brought it 
back to Ythryn for study in the fall of -343 DR, the Year 
of Chilled Marrow. During one of their experiments, 
something went wrong—a flash of power from the spin- 
dle caused the Ythryn mythallar to shut down, which in 
turn caused the city to fall out of the sky and crash into 
the ice below. 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


The inhabitants of Ythryn had only a few moments to 
react as the city fell. Iriolarthas conjured a doorway to a 
magical demiplane and stepped through it just in time. 
As Ythryn settled into its icy grave, all magic in the city 
became undone for a brief time, as though something 
was trying to siphon it all away. The demiplane expelled 
Triolarthas in that instant, trapping the lich in Ythryn, 
and became a living demiplane (see appendix C). Iriolar- 
thas searched the ruins of the city for his spellbook and 
his phylactery, recovering only the former. He also found 
several magical servants in stasis that had survived the 
devastation, as well as a handful of apprentices who had 
used their spells in ingenious ways to escape death. 

Some of those inside tried to flee Ythryn, but glacial 
ice blocked all conventional routes of escape, and at- 
tempts to leave by magic were thwarted by a trouble- 
some intercessor: the mysterious spindle in Iriolarthas's 
citadel was still putting out magical pulses of energy to 
hinder spellcasting. By the time this disruption stopped 
some fifty years later, fear and madness had warped the 
minds of the apprentice mages, transforming them into 


SSS aS 
FATE OF NETHERIL 
The Empire of Netheril arose more than five thousand 
years ago. Those who follow the Dalereckoning calendar 
would place the date of Netheril’s birth at -3859 DR. 

The Netherese legacy began with the discovery of the 
Nether Scrolls. These long, golden scrolls taught Netherese 
arcanists how to wield magic beyond their wildest fanta- 
sies. It took centuries, but the Netherese who mastered 
the power of the Nether Scrolls became a ruling class, living 
on great flying cities or taking refuge in remote, subterra- 
nean lairs. 

Despite their great power, the Netherese faced a growing 
threat. Under the heart of their empire lived spellcasting 
aberrations called phaerimm. Using their ability to drain 
magic, the phaerimm began to unravel the Weave, without 
which Netheril would collapse into ruin. In -339 DR, four 
years after the fall of Ythryn, the empire's most powerful 
arcanist, Karsus, attempted to neutralize the phaerimm 
threat by casting a spell of unparalleled power that would 
enable him to replace Mystryl as the god of magic, giving 
him absolute control over the Weave. Mystryl countered 
Karsus at a key moment during the casting of the spell, a 
feat she could accomplish only by sacrificing herself and 
tearing the Weave. Karsus was slain instantly, and for a 
time thereafter, most of the creatures of the world were 
either without magic or simply unable to control it. 

Without great magic to keep them aloft, the remaining 
flying cities of Netheril crashed to the ground, and many 
arcanists who survived were driven mad. Once magic 
came back into use, Netherese arcanists could no longer 
cast their mightiest spells as they had before, forcing 
them to resort to traditional wizardry. Four hundred 
years after Karsus cast his spell, the Netherese empire 
was no more—crushed by its enemies and undone by its 
own hubris. 

In the Forgotten Realms, Netheril is the definitive lost 
empire. It rose to unparalleled heights but eventually fell 
into ruin. If you've ever played a science fiction game that 
includes the concept of a lost, highly advanced civilization, 
then you can begin to imagine what ancient Netheril must 
have been like. Out of this empire came many of the fear- 
some monsters, bizarre dungeons, and wondrous magic 
items found in Faerûn today. 


=——WHT > 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


nothics. Meanwhile, Iriolarthas grew increasingly feeble 
until, finally, the lich’s skeletal body turned to dust. 


NECROPOLIS OF YTHRYN 


When the characters arrive at Ythryn, read: 


The tunnel opens into a vast grotto enclosed by gleaming 
ice, Consigned to this frozen sepulcher is a fantastic city 
sculpted by ancient magic and illuminated in a haunting 
way by green and purple lights that shed no warmth. The 
city is slightly tilted, its spires leaning away from you as 
though recoiling from your presence. 

You stand atop a causeway of frost-covered ice that 
stretches toward the city like the dead, frozen tongue 
of some hideous behemoth out of whose mouth you've 
just stepped. 


Show your players map 7.1. Permission is granted to 
photocopy this player-friendly map of the necropolis for 
home game use. Map 7.2 on page 236 is the DM's ver- 
sion of the same map. Because the city is magically lit, 
the characters can see almost all of it from their vantage 
point on the ice bridge. 

Most of the city's buildings are swathed in ice and ru- 
ined by time. Many of its districts were pulverized when 
Ythryn plunged from the sky, and the rest have fallen 
into disrepair in the centuries since. Use the informa- 
tion below to add life to this accursed city of the dead. 


DENIZENS OF THE NECROPOLIS 


Ythryn is home to many threats. Its most important den- 
izens are summarized below: 


The demilich Iriolarthas dwells in the central spire 
(area Y19) but can be encountered anywhere in the 
necropolis. 

Mages who survived Ythryn’s fall but succumbed to 
the arcane blight (see “Magical Effects” below) be- 
came nothics that speak Loross instead of Undercom- 
mon (see the “Loross: The Netherese Tongue” sidebar 
on page 221), 

Immortal servants known as magen (see appendix C) 
tirelessly perform their duties or wait in silence for 
new orders. 

Deadly living spells (see appendix C) guard a handful 
of locations in the city. 


RANDOM ENCOUNTERS 

After each hour the characters spend exploring the 
city, or each time the characters conduct a thorough 
search of an unnumbered building on the map, roll 
percentile dice and consult the Ythryn Encounters ta- 
ble to determine if the party has a random encounter. 
Some random encounters have variants if Avarice or 
Auril is present in the necropolis (see “Dealing with the 
Arcane Brotherhood” and “Auril’s Wrath” at the end of 
the chapter). 


Mae 7.1: Pavers’ Map oF THE Necropotis 


YTHRYN ENCOUNTERS 


100 
01-50 
51-55 
56-60 


61-65 


66-70 


71-75 


76-80 


81-90 


91-00 


Encounter 

No encounter 

A tomb tapper (see appendix C) 

1d3 living Bigby’s hands (see appendix C), or 2d4 
cult fanatics (Knights of the Black Sword) if Avarice 
is in Ythryn 

1d3 spitting mimics (see appendix C), or 1d3 cold- 
light walkers (see appendix C) if Auril is in Ythryn 
1d4 + 1 gargoyles, or a frost giant skeleton (see ap- 
pendix C) accompanied by 1d3 winter wolves if Auril 
is in Ythryn 

1d4 + 1 demos magen and 1d4 galvan magen (see 
appendix C for their statistics) 

1d4 + 1 demos magen and 1d4 hypnos magen (see 
appendix C for their statistics) 

1d6 nothics (former Netherese wizards) that speak 
Loross instead of Undercommon (see the “Loross: 
The Netherese Tongue” sidebar on page 221) 
Iriolarthas the demilich, with 1d3 nothics that speak 
Loross instead of Undercommon trailing behind it 
(the demilich uses the nothics to open and close 
doors and clear obstacles, since it can’t do so) 


MAGICAL EFFECTS 


The following magical effects are present throughout 
the necropolis: 


Continual flame spells illuminate street lamps as well 
as building interiors and exteriors. 

A powerful enchantment stabilizes gravity so that 
creatures stand upright even though the city ri 
an angle. This enchantment extends over the enclave 
in a hemisphere whose ceiling is 800 feet high. 
Humanoids who remain in the necropolis for too long 
are likely to contract an arcane blight (see below). 


ARCANE BLIGHT 

Any humanoid that spends 12 hours in the necropolis 
must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or 
contract an arcane blight. This magical disease trans- 
forms the humanoid into a nothic, but only after the vic- 
tim experiences hallucinations and feelings of isolation 
and paranoia, Other symptoms include clammy skin, 
hair loss, and myopia (nearsightedness). 

A player character infected with the arcane blight 
gains the following flaw: “I don't trust anyone.” This 
flaw, which supersedes any conflicting flaw, is fed by de- 
lusions that are difficult for the character to distinguish 
from reality. Common delusions include the belief that 
that allies are conspiring to steal the victim's riches or 
otherwise turn against the victim. 

Whenever it finishes a long rest, an infected humanoid 
must repeat the saving throw. On a successful save, 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


3 


the DC for future saves against the arcane blight drops 
by 16. If the saving throw DC drops to 0, the creature 
overcomes the arcane blight and becomes immune to 
the effect of further exposure. A creature that fails three 
of these saving throws transforms into a nothic under 
the DM's control. Only a wish spell or divine interven- 
tion can undo this transformation. 

A greater restoration spell or similar magic ends the 
infection on the target, removing the flaw and all other 
symptoms, but this magic doesn’t protect the target 
against further exposure. 


RITE OF THE ARCANE OCTAD 

To pass through the force field that surrounds the Spire 
of Iriolarthas (area Y19) and the Ythryn mythallar (area 
Y23), one must perform the Rite of the Arcane Octad on 
the spire’s doorstep (area Y6). To learn this ritual, the 
party must explore eight locations in the city and trans- 
late the inscriptions found therein. Once the inscriptions 
are translated and assembled in order, the eight steps of 
the ritual become clear: 


Step 1. Hold a wand crafted from the Nether Oak over 
your heart. 

Step 2. Summon a flame in your palm. 

Step 3. Speak a secret about yourself aloud. (The se- 
crets in appendix B might come into play here and 
in step 4.) 

Step 4. Compel another to share a secret with you. 

Step 5. Quench the flame in ice. 

Step 6. Mask your appearance. 

Step 7. Draw a circle on the ground using the ashes 
of a corpse. 

Step 8. Stand inside the circle and consume poison. 


This ritual was designed to test visitors’ magical ap- 
titude but can be performed without casting spells. For 
example, an adventurer could light a handful of lamp 
oil to “summon a flame” (taking 1 fire damage in the 
process). Any creature that performs all eight steps of 
the ritual in the correct order outside the spire can pass 
through the force field thereafter. 


EXPLORING THE RUINS 


As the characters explore the necropolis, call the play- 
ers’ attention to any numbered locations their characters 
can see; these are typically the most intact buildings. 
Unless the players say otherwise, assume that the 
characters explore at a cautious rate of 200 feet every 

5 minutes. 


YTHRYN TREASURES 
d20 Treasure 
1-10 No treasure 
11 1d4 Netherese art objects (250 gp each) 
12-14 1d4 pieces of jewelry (100 gp each) 
15 A driftglobe (or another common magic item of your 
choice) 
16-20 A frieze that reveals one piece of Ythryn lore (deter- 
mined by rolling a d20 and consulting the Ythryn 
Lore table below) 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


Searching an unnumbered location takes 30 minutes 
and requires a check for random encounters. Roll once 
on the Ythryn Treasures table to determine if the char- 
acters find anything of value in the location. 


YTHRYN LORE 


As the characters explore Ythryn, they piece together a 
picture of what life was like in the enclave. Whenever 
a location instructs you to reveal some of Ythryn’s lore, 
roll a d20 and refer to the Ythryn Lore table. If you get 
a result that's come up before, roll again or choose a 
different result. 


NECROPOLIS LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to map 7.2, which is 
the DM's version of the necropolis map. 


Y1. Ick CAUSEWAY 

Characters can use this naturally formed causeway of 
solid ice to enter the city. As the characters approach the 
end of the causeway, read: 


Green and purple lights cast an otherworldly glow upon 
the frost draping the silent city. Clawing spires, broken 
domes, and steeples leaning at odd angles surround a 
huge citadel. 

At the foot of the causeway, a giant statue lies prone 
and motionless, its surfaces gleaming with rime. 


The city's dominating feature is the Spire of Iriolarthas 
(area Y19), which is sealed inside a magical force field. 
Dead Tomb Tapper. The statue at the end of the 
causeway is a 21-foot-tall tomb tapper (see appendix C) 
that was killed by drow invaders less than a tenday ago. 
The tomb tapper chased the drow to this point before 
they finally killed it. (The characters might have encoun- 
tered the drow already in chapter 6.) The tomb tapper 
looks like a faceless, misshapen giant. It turned to stone 
when it died, leaving behind its big sledgehammer. 


Y2. WIZARD SPIRES 

Several crooked spires branch off the enclave’s perim- 
eter wall, with bridges leading to their entrances. If a 
character approaches one of these outer towers, read: 


A stone walkway leads to a tower that claws upward and 
inward, its pointed roof leaning menacingly overhead. 
Narrow windows pierce its walls, gargoyles cling to its 
eaves, and a doorway at the tower's base gapes open. 


Two of the outer spires have broken off. One crashed 

in Icewind Dale (see chapter 2), and the other is buried 
elsewhere in the glacier (see chapter 6). The remaining 
twelve spires are intact, though two are almost buried in 
ice. There is a 20 percent chance per tower that 1d3 + 1 
gargoyles cling to the outside of it. (The other gargoyles 
clinging to the tower are inanimate statues.) Living 


ONCE ANAVEN FOR WIZARDS, YTHRYN 


Now A toms 


FILLED WITH ANCIENT SECRETS. 


YTHRYN LORE 


20 
1 


10 


Lore 

Ythryn was under the command of a lich named 
Iriolarthas. He was obsessed with finding relics and 
magic from Faerdn's ancient past. 

Ythryn was governed by a group of eight arcanists 
known as the Wizards of the Ebon Star. Their names 
and faces are immortalized in the city’s museum: 
The city's creators used giant mimics as construc- 
tion tools and beasts of burden. 

Apprentice mages would graduate from the House 
of the Arcane and join one of eight arcane towers, 
each one dedicated to a different school of magic 
The wizards of Ythryn were entertained by a com- 
petitive sport called Chain Lightning. 

Every wizard in the enclave was obliged to carve 
their own wand from the Nether Oak at the heart of 
the arboretum 

Ythryn was held aloft by the magic of an arcane 
sphere known as a mythallar. The mythallar also 
had the power to recharge magic items and control 
the weather. 

Ythryn's mages could extend their lives indefinitely 
by preserving their brains inside jars 

Wonders from across the world of Toril were sold at 
the enclave’s Bazaar of the Bizarre 

The city's elite wore robes of silk that displayed 
shifting, illusory patterns 


n 


12 


13 


14 


15 


16 


v7 


18 


19 


20 


Lore 

Many of the city's residents owned strange chimeric 
pets, with winged hares and venomous baboons 
being particularly popular. 

The members of Ythryn’s orchestra were known 
across the world of Toril as masters of their art. 

By law, every mage was taught the prestidigitation 
cantrip and was obliged to use it to keep the city 
clean 

The wizards used humanlike constructs called 
magen as guards, workers, and valets. These con: 
structs were created using a powerful spell 

The wizards imbued certain spells with their own 
life force, turning them into living entities, 

The wizards of Ythryn were on a mission to find rel 
ics and ruins of Ostoria, a 40,000-year-old empire 
of spelicasting giants 

In times of trouble, the wizards raised a force field 
around the enclave's central spire that only they 
could pass through. 

An abracadabrus is a magic box that can create food 
and drink, among other things. 

Meditation in the Hall of Weightless Wonder was an 
invaluable pursuit for the city’s elite. 

An ancient obelisk stands in the shadow of the 
Spire of Iriolarthas. Using this obelisk and a staff of 
power, one can turn back time. 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


gargoyles swoop down to attack anyone who crosses the 
gantry approaching the tower. 

These towers were once occupied by mages and con- 
tained laboratories, libraries, and living quarters. Now 
they lie in ruins. Map 2.10 on page 147 gives you an 
idea of how the interior of each spire is laid out. 


Y3. CHAIN LIGHTNING STADIUM 


The air around this amphitheater is charged with static. 
Cracked steps descend to the stadium floor, where a tiny 
glittering object rests on a pedestal of black stone. Three 
metal masts rise from the arena like gigantic tridents, 
each one emitting a low hum. The branches of each tri- 
dent are twenty-five feet off the ground and extend fifty 
feet into the air. 


Pee 
CHAIN LIGHTNING 
Chain Lightning is a game in which two teams of six 
players compete against each other. To win, a team must 
eliminate the other team's players by hitting them with a 
3-inch-diameter iron ball. A player struck by the thrown ball 
is eliminated and teleported to the sidelines. The game 
ends when all of one team's players have been eliminated. 

When the game begins, an iron ball magically appears in 
a random location on the arena floor roughly equidistant 
from the two teams. The ball is a simple ranged weapon 
with the finesse and thrown properties. Its range is 120 
feet, and it deals 1d4 bludgeoning damage on a hit. 

To simulate a game of Chain Lightning, follow 
these steps: 

Step 1. Every player makes a Dexterity (Athletics) check. 
The individual with the highest roll gets the ball, and that 
person's team is on offense, Resolve a tie with a Strength 
(Athletics) contest. 

Step 2. To simulate the ball being passed around, every 
player makes a DC 15 Dexterity (Athletics) check. If the 
team on offense gets more successes than the team on 
defense, one player on offense can try either to hurl the 
ball between the metal tines of an electrified mast, hoping 
to impart an electrical charge to the ball, or make a ranged 
weapon attack with the ball against a player on defense. 
Each option is described below: 


+ Hurling the ball between the tines of an electrified mast 
requires a successful ranged attack roll against AC 15. If 
this attack hits, the ball becomes electrically charged as 
it passes between the tines. Repeat step 1 to determine 
which team gets custody of the electrically charged ball. 

+ Ifthe ball is thrown at a player on defense and it hits, 
the player struck by the ball is eliminated. If the ball is 
electrically charged when it hits, it deals an additional 3 
(1d6) lightning damage to the eliminated player, and an 
arc of lightning shoots from the ball and automatically 
hits another randomly determined player on the same 
team, This second player takes 3 (1d6) lightning damage 
and is also eliminated. If the ball is thrown at a player 
and it misses, it loses its electrical charge if it has one. 
Repeat step 1 to determine which team gets custody 
of the ball. 


How to Win. Repeat step 2 until one team has elimi- 
nated all the players on the other team. 


ds 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


A sport called Chain Lightning was played in this sta- 
dium. This event, which pitted mortals against each 
other in an electrified arena, enjoyed great popularity. 
An ornate trophy cup sits on a pedestal at one end of the 
arena floor, held in place by magic. 

At ground level, the oval arena is 120 feet long and 50 
feet across at its widest point. The three masts are 100 
feet tall, spaced 40 feet apart, and emit electrical fields. 

Triggering the Game. The first time a creature steps 
onto the playing field, a dome of crackling electricity en- 
closes the entire stadium. Nothing can physically pass 
through this barrier, which is immune to all damage and 
can't be dispelled by dispel magic. The barrier also ex- 
tends into the Ethereal Plane, blocking ethereal travel. 
Any creature that touches the barrier for the first time 
on a turn takes 40 (9d8) lightning damage. When the 
barrier appears, read: 


The shimmering head and shoulders of a woman blink 
into existence above the arena floor. Electrical currents 
course over her metal teeth, and her form stutters and 
flickers as she speaks in a strange language. 


The illusory visage speaks in Loross, the dead language 
of Netheril (see the “Loross: The Netherese Tongue” 
sidebar on page 221). It says, “So, a new challenger 
enters the arena! You have thirty seconds to choose your 
teammates for a game of Chain Lightning!" 

The illusory figure disappears after making its an- 
nouncement, and adventurers on the playing field have 
thirty seconds to round out their team of six. Any spaces 
left over on the team are filled by obedient galvan ma- 
gen (see appendix C) in black garments. The rival team 
is composed of six galvan magen in white garments. All 
these magen are magically summoned to the field. 

The rules of Chain Lightning are summarized in the 
accompanying sidebar. If the characters aren't familiar 
with the rules, they have disadvantage on all skill checks 
made to play the game. (A written copy of the game’s 
rules can be found in area Y9.) When the game ends, the 
electrical barrier enclosing the stadium vanishes, and 
the trophy levitates from its pedestal and drifts over to 
the member of the winning team nearest to it. The game 
can't be played again until a new trophy of similar value 
is placed upon the pedestal. 

If an all-magen team wins the game, the winners 
collect their prize and disappear, taking the trophy 
with them. 

Treasure. The trophy can't be removed from its ped- 
estal until it is won. If a creature tries to move the trophy 
before then, the pedestal discharges a bolt of lightning 
that deals 18 (4d8) lightning damage to the creature. 
The trophy cup is made from mithral embedded with 
three blue spinel gemstones and is worth 1,800 gp. 
While carried by a member of the winning team, it func- 
tions as a stone of good luck. 


Y4. TOWER OF ABJURATION 


This tower reaches upward like a talon, its stonework 
studded in chiseled runes. A blue light shines from its 
highest window. 


A detect magic spell cast here reveals an aura of ab- 
juration magic. Runes cover every inch of this tower's 
exterior. A glyph for the symbol (insanity) spell is hidden 
among them. A character who searches the outside of 
the tower for traps finds and identifies the glyph with a 
successful DC 18 Intelligence (Arcana) check. The glyph 
triggers when a creature steps through the tower's en- 
trance and resets after 24 hours. 

Once inside, the characters can ascend to the top of 
the tower. When they arrive there, read: 


A huge anvil chiseled with vivid blue runes rests in the 
center of a thirty-foot-diameter, thirty-foot high circular 
chamber. Resting atop it is a hammer adorned with 
matching runes. 

Six armored figures stand guard around the anvil. At 
the rear of the chamber, the frozen corpse of a wizard 
lies in a pile of rubble. Blue flames flicker from braziers 
spaced around the room, illuminating a carved inscrip- 
tion on the ceiling. 


Six demos magen (see appendix C) guard the anvil, 
which has the power to destroy other magic items. The 
anvil was a source of vexation for Ythryn’s tomb tappers, 
which believe magic items to be sacred. When Ythryn 
collapsed, the protective wards surrounding the tower 
unraveled, and one of the tomb tappers seized the op- 
portunity to kill the anvil’s creator, High Abjurer Taruth. 
The wizard’s mauled body lies in this chamber, the 
stony floor next to him broken where the tomb tapper 
forced its way into the room. The magen won't let any- 
one use the anvil and fight to defend it. 

Anvil of Disjunction. The anvil has the power to 
destroy any magic item that isn’t an artifact. When a 
character holds the anvil’s hammer for the first time, a 
voice inside their head, seeming to come from the anvil, 
says, “Bring me your items of power, and together we 
shall destroy them.” To destroy an item, the character 
must place it on the anvil and strike it three times with 
the hammer. Each hammer strike takes one action. On 
the third strike, the item disintegrates in a flash of blue 
light. Every time a character uses the anvil, there is a 
25 percent chance that a tomb tapper (see appendix C) 
burrows its way into the tower to attack them (this hap- 
pens only once). The anvil is anchored here and cannot 
be moved by any means. Removing the hammer from 
the tower causes it to teleport atop the anvil. 

Inscription. The inscription on the ceiling is in Dra- 
conic and reads “First, shield thy heart with a wand 
from the Nether Oak.” This is a passage from the Rite of 
the Arcane Octad (see page 234). 


Y5. PRISON 

A portcullis sits askew in the 40-foot-wide, 30-foot-tall 
archway that serves as the only entrance to this square 
building. Characters who pass beneath the portcullis 
find themselves in a mostly abandoned prison: 


A maze of cell-lined corridors fills this area. 


All the cell doors, which have arcane lock spells cast on 
them, are made of iron, with small, barred windows set 
into them at eye level. Many of the cells contain the fro- 
zen bodies of prisoners who died when Ythryn crashed 
or who perished from starvation not long afterward. 
Infirmary. If the characters spend at least 30 minutes 
searching the prison, they stumble upon an infirmary: 


Peering through the gap in a collapsed wall, you see a fif- 
teen-foot-square infirmary in disarray, with an operating 
table in the middle of the room. Leather straps extend 
from one side of the table, into the air above its surface, 
and fasten to the other side. The shape suggests that 
something or someone invisible is lashed to the table. 


Strapped to the table is a doppelganger named Xero- 
phon. It has been rendered invisible and placed in a 
state of suspended animation by a sequester spell. The 
spell can be dispelled (DC 17), which renders Xerophon 
visible and awake. The doppelganger looks like a thin, 
middle-aged man with a sallow complexion, one blue 
eye and one green eye, and a streak of silver in his long, 
jet-black hair, The awake doppelganger can use its ac- 
tion to try to slip free of the table's leather straps, doing 
so with a successful DC 20 Dexterity check, or a char- 
acter can use an action to loosen the straps enough for 
Xerophon to get free. 

Shortly before the fall of Ythryn, Xerophon murdered 
a Netherese sage in the city, stole his identity, and tried 
to infiltrate the Spire of Iriolarthas. The doppelganger 
was caught and imprisoned. The prison warden, a Neth- 
erese wizard, was interested in studying the doppel- 
ganger and perhaps developing a potion that emulated 
its shapeshifting ability. The wizard made Xerophon ac- 
quiesce to a series of experiments, and in between cast 
sequester spells on the doppelganger as a precaution to 
keep it from escaping. 

If questioned, Xerophon speaks Loross but switches 
to Common if no one in the party understands the dead 
Netherese tongue. The doppelganger plays the part 
of a low-born Netherese manservant who was sent to 
the prison by his master, Iriolarthas, for disobedience. 
Without going into much detail, Xerophon alludes to 
horrible magical experiments performed on prisoners 
by the wizard who ran the prison, saying, “I was afraid I 
might be next.” 

Once it realizes the fate that has befallen Ythryn, 
Xerophon offers to help the characters search the rest 
of the city, allowing the doppelganger time to use its 
Read Thoughts ability to glean all the information it 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN s 
239 


240 


can from the characters’ minds. After all, it has a lot of 
catching up to do. The doppelganger has no ill intentions 
toward the characters but places self-preservation above 
all else. 

If the characters befriend Xerophon, they learn three 
facts from the Ythryn Lore table (page 235), which 
Xerophon shares to build trust. The doppelganger also 
knows that to bypass the force field around the Spire of 
Triolarthas, one must perform the eight steps of the Rite 
of the Arcane Octad outside the spire. The steps of the 
ritual are hidden inside towers dedicated to the eight 
arcane schools of magic. Xerophon knows the layout of 
the city and can lead the party to each of these towers 
(areas Y4, Y7, Y11, Y18, Y20, Y22, Y24, and Y26). 


Y6. SPIRE ENTRANCE 


An arching strut of dark stone rises from this ruined dis- 
trict to a junction high up on the central spire. A gate en- 
graved with arcane sigils is set into the base of the strut. 


The Spire of Iriolarthas (area Y19) is surrounded by a 
force field that also encompasses this area. Creatures 
can't pass through the field, nor can they teleport to a lo- 
cation inside it. To pass through the force field, one must 
perform the Rite of the Arcane Octad (see page 234) in 
front of the gate. 

Any character who succeeds on a DC 10 Intelligence 
(Arcana) check recognizes the sigils on the gate as an- 
cient symbols representing the eight schools of magic. 

Magic Elevator. Characters who can pass through the 
force field can open the gate and enter the strut, which is 
hollow and encloses a steep passage. Any creature that 
enters this elevator is magically levitated to the spire en- 
trance (area 19a). 


Y7. TOWER OF CONJURATION 


This tower is engraved with interlocking circles of stone. 
Yellow light spills from its topmost window, and the faint 
sound of brooms brushing on stonework drifts through 
its broken doors. 


A detect magic spell cast here reveals an aura of conju- 
ration magic. The tower's interior is ruined but surpris- 
ingly clean, thanks to permanent unseen servant spells 
that continuously sweep the floors. If the characters 
ascend to the topmost chamber of the tower, read: 


Glowing orbs are set into the walls of this thirty-foot-di- 
ameter circular chamber. Four giant hands made of shim- 
mering force hover in the center of the room, guarding a 
tiny ornamental tower perched on a pedestal. 


The hovering hands are four living Bigby’s hands (see 
appendix C) that attack any other creature that en- 
ters the room. 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


Hidden Tower. Touching the miniature tower while it 
is inside this chamber conjures a glowing doorway to a 
demiplane. The doorway is 8 feet tall, 4 feet wide, and 5 
feet away from the pedestal. 

Ifa character steps through the doorway, the fabric of 
reality warps and bends around them as they arrive in 
the demiplane: a cluttered den 40 feet long and 20 feet 
wide. Occupying this extradimensional den are three 
night hags named Auntie Pinch, Auntie Pillage, and 
Auntie Plunder. This coven frequently leaves its den to 
roam the Ethereal Plane in search of treasure chests 
tucked away using the Leomund's secret chest spell; 
however, all three hags are home when the charac- 
ters arrive. 

In addition to their innate spellcasting abilities, the 
hags have the Shared Spellcasting ability of a coven 
(see the “Hag Covens” sidebar in the Monster Manual). 
The hags are prepared to let the characters leave alive 
in return for a simple price: a single memory plucked 
from each character's mind. The hags flee their lair in 
ethereal form if attacked, vowing to return and seek ven- 
geance in the adventurers’ dreams. 

Inscription. An inscription in Draconic is written on 
the wall of the hags’ den. It reads “Second, summon a 
flame in the palm of your hand.” This is a passage from 
the Rite of the Arcane Octad (see page 234). 

Treasure. The night hags keep their heartstones and 
soul bags on their persons (see the “Night Hag Items” 
sidebar in the Monster Manual). 

Characters who ransack the hag’s den find a plati- 
num needle (1 gp) stuck in a pincushion, a pink quartz 
figurine of a rabbit (50 gp), a silver necklace from which 
hangs a crow’s-foot pendant grasping a peridot (500 gp), 
a potion of invisibility in a stoppered vial made from a 
witch's fingerbone, and a potion of longevity in a hollow 
gourd that bears a child's face locked in a scream. 


Y8. HOUSE OF THE ARCANE 


Eight tusk-like towers are embedded in the walls of this 
monumental building, their spires arching over its shat- 
tered roof. 


This grand academy was a place of study for novice 
mages, where each one learned which schools of magic 
would become their life’s work. The place is easily en- 
tered through any of the gaping holes in its outer walls. 
Nothing can be salvaged from the study halls and the 
towers, but the auditorium holds something of interest: 


rium. Benches glistening with frost are arrayed in broken 
rows, facing a raised lectern. A bejeweled goblet rests on 
the lectern. Steam rises from the goblet’s contents and 
dissipates in the cold air. 


| | Eight stained glass windows overlook a ruined audito- 


Each window in the auditorium depicts a wizard 
casting a spell from one of the eight schools of magic. 


Auntie Pinc, AUNTIE PILLAGE, AND AUNTIE 
PLUNDER ARE OPEN FOR BUSINESS N 


The spells depicted are blade ward (abjuration), mage 
hand (conjuration), true strike (divination), friends (en- 
chantment), dancing lights (evocation), minor illusion 
(illusion), chill touch (necromancy), and prestidigitation 
(transmutation), all of which a character can deter- 
mine with a single successful DC 10 Intelligence (Ar- 
cana) check. 

Magic Goblet. The goblet is embedded with eight col- 
ored crystals that represent the eight schools of magic. 
The liquid inside it looks and tastes like hot water. A 
detect magic spell reveals an aura of divination magic 
on the goblet and indicates that the liquid carries auras 
of all eight schools of magic. The liquid isn't poisonous 
or harmful, and it never runs dry as long as the goblet 
remains in the auditorium. 

A humanoid that drinks from the goblet gains a super- 
natural charm (see “Supernatural Gifts” in the Dungeon 
Master's Guide). Roll a d8 and consult the Magic Goblet 
Charms table on page 242 to determine which charm 
is bestowed. Each charm grants its recipient the power 
to cast a particular spell, for which Intelligence is the 
spellcasting ability. The recipient becomes aware of this 
power as soon as the charm is bestowed. Each charm 
also has a secret magical effect that triggers when the 
charm’s benefit expires; do not reveal this secret to a 
player before the effect occurs. 

Once a creature has gained a charm from the gob- 
let, it cannot gain another one by drinking from the 
goblet again. 


Y9. LIBRARY 


This colossal building has many lofty turrets in a state 
of disrepair, the ground below littered with their rubble. 
Agiant-sized door at the base of the structure stands 
slightly ajar. 


Shelves line the walls of this labyrinthine library, which 
is crammed with books on every conceivable subject. 

Arcanaloth Book Hunter, Soon after the adven- 
turers enter, a bespectacled, jackal-headed humanoid 
paces into view carrying a bundle of scrolls. An eyeless, 
white, 5-foot-tall penguin in a leather harness shuffles 
behind it, dragging a small cart laden with books. The 
jackal-headed figure lets out a joyful gasp when it sees 
A, 

SCRIVENSCRY AND KINGSPORT 

Scrivenscry is a vainglorious arcanaloth who roams the 

planes in search of the Books of Keeping, four lost tomes 

that hold the true names of every yugoloth ever created. 

The fiend stumbled on Ythryn’s library by chance and is 

convinced that at least one of the legendary tomes is hid- 

den here. Alas, Scrivenscry is mistaken, 

Scrivenscry's anxious penguin servant, Kingsport, was 
promised a life of enlightenment. The truth is that King- 
sport was turned into Scrivenscry's lackey, who lives in fear 
of his cruel, unpredictable master. The blind giant penguin 
hopes to be free of the arcanaloth one day. 

—— 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN ita 


242 


Macic GOBLET CHARMS 
d8 Charm 

1 Charm of the Abjurer. This charm allows you to cast 
the blade ward cantrip as an action at will. After 24 
hours, this charm vanishes from you. Secret Effect: 
You gain 10 temporary hit points when this charm 
vanishes from you. 

2 Charm of the Conjurer. This charm allows you to cast 
the mage hand cantrip as an action at will. After 24 
hours, this charm vanishes from you. Secret Effect: 
When this charm vanishes from you, a flying sword 
appears in your space and defends you for the next 
24 hours before becoming an inert, nonmagical 
weapon. The DM controls the sword. 

3 Charm of the Diviner. This charm allows you to cast 
the true strike cantrip as an action at will. After 24 
hours, this charm vanishes from you. Secret Effect: 
You gain inspiration when this charm vanishes from 
you. 

4 Charm of the Enchanter. This charm allows you to 
cast the friends cantrip as an action at will. After 24 
hours, this charm vanishes from you. Secret Effect: 
When this charm vanishes from you, one NPC who 
doesn't like you (determined by the DM) now thinks 
better of you. 

5 Charm of the Evoker. This charm allows you to cast 
the dancing lights cantrip as an action at will. After 24 
hours, this charm vanishes from you. Secret Effect: 
When this charm vanishes from you, sparks explode 
all around you. These sparks deal 5 (24) lightning 
damage to each creature within 20 feet of you, 

6 Charm of the Illusionist. This charm allows you to 
cast the minor illusion cantrip as an action at will. 
After 24 hours, this charm vanishes from you. Secret 
Effect: When this charm vanishes from you, illusory 
music accompanies you for the next 24 hours, It can 
be heard out to a range of 60 feet. Casting dispel 
magic on you ends the music. 

7 Charm of the Necromancer. This charm allows you 
to cast the chill touch cantrip as an action at will. 
After 24 hours, this charm vanishes from you, Secret 
Effect: When this charm vanishes from you, you gain 
resistance to necrotic damage for the next 8 hours 
and are the recipient of a death ward spell. 

8 Charm of the Transmuter. This charm allows you to 
cast the prestidigitation cantrip as an action at will. 
After 24 hours, this charm vanishes from you. Secret 
Effect: You are targeted by a polymorph spell and fail 
the saving throw automatically when this charm van- 
ishes from you. Your new form is that of a bat and 
lasts for 1 hour. 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


the characters and says, “Ah, you must be the librarians! 
Scrivenscry has need of your assistance.” The penguin 
shifts uneasily as its master speaks. 

Scrivenscry is an arcanaloth who always refers to 
itself in the third person. It has a fondness for black lic- 
orice, strips of which it keeps in the pockets of its robe. 
The fiend is attended by Kingsport (see the stat block 
on page 243), a blind, albino giant penguin under the 
effect of an awaken spell. 

Scrivenscry insists that the characters help it search 
for the Books of Keeping (see the “Scrivenscry and 
Kingsport” sidebar on page 241). If the characters 
engage Scrivenscry in conversation, Kingsport chooses 
a moment to approach the nearest character and pass 
a note to them. Scratched into a piece of leather are the 
words “Help me” in Common, which Kingsport wrote 
using his beak. 

The characters must evade, defeat, or strike a deal 
with Scrivenscry if they want to rescue the penguin. If 
outmatched in combat, Scrivenscry teleports into the 
depths of the library and plots its revenge. Characters 
who agree to cooperate with the arcanaloth soon find 
themselves alone with Kingsport, who reveals that 
Scrivenscry is a cruel and wicked master. Neither 
Kingsport nor his master knows much about Ythryn, 
since they arrived only yesterday by using a spell scroll 
of plane shift. 

Searching the Library. Characters who spend a few 
hours studying the books in the library learn 1d3 facts 
from the Ythryn Lore table (page 235). One of the 
tomes they examine is an almanac that lists past win- 
ners of the city's Chain Lightning tournament (see area 
Y3). Characters who read tome find a summary of 
the game's rules. 

In addition, characters who search the library find a 
journal written by Thufeus, one of the few mages who 
survived Ythryn’s crash. It describes how the city fell 
from the sky and the attempts of its doomed survivors to 
escape (see “The Fall of Ythryn,” page 231). The last 
entry reads “Iriolarthas is convinced that aid will come 
in time from Netheril. I am not so sure.” 

Treasure. Scrivenscry carries three spell scrolls (Leo- 
mund’s tiny hut, plane shift, and wall of ice) and a chime 
of opening with a single use remaining. 

Kingsport's cart contains six texts that Scrivenscry 
deems valuable. Each one is a treatise on the Outer 
Planes and is worth 250 gp to a collector of such works. 


Y10. ARBORETUM 


A canopy of golden leaves crowns the trees inside a 
sunken basin. The trees grow in stark contrast to their 
bleak surroundings, their branches swaying even though 
the air is deathly still. 


The grove is nestled in a hollow in the city floor. Vents 
spaced around its perimeter wall emit puffy gray vapor, 
which rises above the treetops and disperses as rain. 
An illusory hemisphere above the arboretum projects a 


false sky; now malfunctioning, the vista flickers between 
a wild storm and a vast field of stars. 

Nether Oak. A tree called the Nether Oak grows at 
the heart of the arboretum. For centuries, Netherese 
mages crafted their wands and staffs from the wood of 
this oak. Saturated in profane magic, the tree developed 
a brooding sentience and a gnarly face. The Nether Oak 
uses the treant stat block but is neutral evil and speaks 
Common and Primordial. 

When the characters arrive, the Nether Oak is in 
deep slumber. To complete the Rite of the Arcane Octad 
(see page 234), they must craft a wand from the wood 
of this tree. Gathering wood without waking the tree 
requires a successful DC 20 Dexterity (Stealth) check. 
If the characters wake the tree, they can convince it to 
part with some of its wood with a successful DC 15 Cha- 
risma (Persuasion) check, but only if it believes they in- 
tend to perform nefarious magic with it. The Nether Oak 
is easily angered and uproots itself if driven to combat. 
When it attacks, four needle blights spring from the 
ground to assist it, acting on the same initiative count. 


Y11. TOWER OF DIVINATION 


The walls of this thin tower are etched with intricate de- 
signs of hands and eyes. Silver light flickers from a high 
window, above which a large, carved eye animates and 
blinks. Part of the tower’s roof is missing. 


A detect magic spell cast here reveals an aura of divina- 
tion magic. When the characters reach the top floor of 
the spire, read: 


Large gashes in the roof allow you to see the dark, 
icicle-festooned roof of the great ice cavern beyond. 
Silver light emanates from a three-foot-diameter glass 
orb situated atop a two-foot-high cylindrical stone plinth 
in the center of a thirty-foot-diameter, rubble-strewn cir- 
cular chamber. Eyeballs drift inside the orb, like fish in a 
bowl. Some have cataracts, while others are bloodshot or 
pus-filled, but all turn and gaze at you as you approach. 


Huge chunks of the walls have broken off in here, and 
the inscription bearing the divination passage from the 
Rite of the Arcane Octad is missing. 

With a successful DC 10 Intelligence (Religion) check, 
acharacter recalls that a crystal ball filled with eyes is 
the symbol of Savras, god of divination. 

Orb of Divination, The stone plinth upon which the 
orb rests is engraved with instructions written in Dra- 
conic: “Ask and we shall find.” To use the orb, one must 
place one’s hands on it and speak the name of an object 
or a person. If the target exists on the same plane of ex- 
istence as the orb, the character touching the orb expe- 
riences a vivid vision of the target's location and knows 
how far away it is and in what direction. Such insight, 
however, comes with a risk: a creature that receives a 
vision must make a DC 20 Constitution saving throw. 


KINGSPORT 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 5 (1d8 + 1) 
Speed 20 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
6(-2) 12(+1) 12(+1) 10(+0) 10(+0) 4(-3) 


Senses blindsight 30 ft. (blind beyond this radius), passive 
Perception 10 
‘Common 
Challenge 0 (10 XP) 
SS Eee 


Hold Breath. Kingsport can hold its breath for 20 minutes. 


ACTIONS 


Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) piercing damage. 
Sanaa. 


On a failed save, the creature takes 10 (3d6) piercing 
damage as one of its eyes is magically plucked from its 
socket and teleported inside the orb (see “Injuries” in 
the Dungeon Master’s Guide for rules on losing an eye). 

If asked for the whereabouts of the missing wall en- 
graving needed to complete the Rite of the Arcane Octad 
(see page 234), the orb provides a vision of where it fell 
inside the observatory (area Y15). The orb is magically 
anchored to this chamber and cannot be removed or de- 
stroyed. The only limit to how many times it can be used 
is how many eyeballs the party has remaining. 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


Y12. WELLSPRING OF ANSWERS 


A deep well plunges through the city floor into darkness. 
Five crystal benches encircle it, glinting under the purple 
glow of a nearby street lamp. 


The stone well is 100 feet deep and lined with slippery 
ice and frost, making it impossible to negotiate without 
climbing gear or magic. Months before Ythryn's fall, a 
circle of mages known as the Telepathic Pentacle tried 
to fuse their minds together to become a conjoined tele- 
pathic force. The procedure went terribly wrong, and 
their bodies and minds melded into a single monstrosity. 
Iriolarthas imprisoned the thing in this empty well so 
that its latent telepathic powers could be tapped by the 
city’s elite. A short obituary is engraved around the lip of 
the well in Draconic: “Herein lie the immortal remains 
of the Telepathic Pentacle. Sit, meditate, and learn.” 

Thing in the Well. A gibbering, five-headed aberration 
lies in a semiconscious state at the bottom of the well. 
The warped faces of the Telepathic Pentacle strain at 
the ends of its thick, undulating necks. The monster 
uses the hydra stat block, except that it has a climbing 
speed of 30 feet. 

The monster shudders awake if a light source pene- 
trates more than 80 feet into the well, or if a creature 
sitting on one of the benches awakens it (see below). 

Meditation Benches, By sitting on these crystal 
benches and meditating, citizens of Ythryn could join 
their minds with the Telepathic Pentacle, gaining in- 
sights about their past and future. A creature that sits 
on the bench can, after 1 minute of meditation, gain one 
clue from the Ythryn Lore table (page 235) by making 
a successful DC 15 Wisdom (Insight) check. If the check 
fails by 5 or more, the creature's wayward thoughts 
awaken the thing in the well. A creature can gain only 
one insight from the well per day, and only while the 
monster is alive. 


Y13. BAZAAR OF THE BIZARRE 


A large market hall sits at one end of this plaza, its four 
broken towers leaning inward. Faded pennants hang 
above the entrance, frozen stiff. A loud clatter resounds 
from within the hall. 


This market hall once sold relics of arcane wonder. 
Now, its interior is a warren of mangled shop fronts 
crushed by chunks of ice and stone. Most of the wares 
have become worthless, and everything else has been 
destroyed by a headless iron golem that is presently 
rampaging around inside the building. 

Without its head, the golem has the following changes 
to its statistics: 


+ The golem has 150 hit points (its hit point maximum). 
It has a challenge rating of 10 (5,900 XP). 

+ Itis blinded and deafened, giving it disadvantage on 
all its attack rolls, and it can’t use its Poison Breath. 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


The golem was decapitated when Ythryn crashed into 
the Reghed Glacier. Its head wound up deep within the 
Caves of Hunger (see area H5 in chapter 6), and its body 
has been stomping around Ythryn ever since. The golem 
swings blindly at anything that attacks it. 


14. HALL oF SILK 


Silken drapes hang from the walls of this storefront, their 
surfaces swirling with illusory images of dragon's fire 
and twinkling star fields. A group of emotionless figures 
stand guard outside, looking for all the world like fro- 
zen statues. 


Six demos magen (see appendix C) guard the entrance 
to this store. They attack anyone who tries to steal the 
silks on display (see “Treasure” below) but otherwise let 
strangers explore the store. 

Inside the store, five galvan magen (see appendix C) 
watch over rest of the merchandise. More of the magic 
silk hangs in long drapes throughout the interior, after 
being spun by four phase spiders that lurk in the hall’s 
rafters. The spiders are enchanted to produce sorcery 
silk, a material with illusions woven into it that was 
fashioned into robes for Ythryn’s elite. Characters who 
enter the store spot the spiders immediately. The spi- 
ders defend themselves if attacked but are otherwise 
nonthreatening. 

In the center of the interior, crystal mannequins 
draped in finery encircle an empty pedestal. If a creature 
steps onto the pedestal, an illusion of a magnificently 
dressed human flickers to life before them and intro- 
duces itself as Silksmith Mixyll. The illusion welcomes 
the guest to its emporium and explains the robe-making 
process. As it speaks, the phase spiders descend silently 
and use their legs to take the creature's measurements 
before spinning the creature a tailor-made robe. As the 
robe is being fashioned, Mixyll urges its guest to “imag- 
ine any image your heart desires.” The spiders can, in 
the 10 minutes it takes to create the robe, spin any illu- 
sory design or effect into the garment. On completion, 
they drape the robe over the creature’s shoulders and 
ascend back to their lair. Each guest can gain this bene- 
fit only once. 

Treasure. A silk robe spun by the spiders is worth 
250 gp. If the characters ransack the store, they find ten 
other silk robes (250 gp each) that are on display and 
weren't damaged when the city crashed. 


Y15. OBSERVATORY 


This conical tower is held relatively upright by a ring of 
arched buttresses. Expressionless humanoid figures 
stand in silence around it. The roof has a large, ragged 
hole in it where something large smashed through. 


Three galvan magen, three demos magen, and one 
hypnos magen stand guard outside the observatory 


with orders to prevent strangers from entering it (see 
appendix C for their stat blocks). The hypnos magen 
telepathically orders intruders to leave the area. Defying 
this order prompts the magen to attack. 

The iron door at the base of the observatory is welded 
shut from the outside and must be broken down. It has 
AC 19, 30 hit points, and immunity to poison and psy- 
chic damage. A blue slaad lurks on the other side of the 
doorway and attacks as soon as the door ceases to be an 
obstacle, This slaad is hostile toward all other creatures 
and can't be reasoned with. 

Once inside, the characters can ascend the tower to its 
uppermost floor: 


A large telescope dominates a thirty-foot-diameter circu- 
lar chamber at the top of the tower. Gazing into the tele- 
scope’s eyepiece is a hulking, frog-like biped in wizard’s 
robes that pays you no mind as it mumbles to itself. 
Adamantine shields cover the observatory’s windows 
A large chunk of stone from another building has crashed 
through the roof and embedded itself in the floor like 
a jagged stone knife. This intruding fragment bears a 


strange inscription on one side. 


A GREEN SLAAD GATES INTO THE 


EVEPIECE OF YTHRYN’S TELESCOPE 


By training the magic telescope on distant stars, Yth- 
ryn’s astronomers could summon alien creatures from 
those stars to be questioned, studied, or dissected. The 
fall of Ythryn damaged the telescope beyond repair, ren- 
dering it useless. 

When Ythryn fell, a piece of the Tower of Divination 
(area Y11) crashed through the observatory roof (see 
“Inscription” below). In the resulting chaos, the blue 
slaad encountered on the tower’s ground floor escaped 
from its cell and rampaged through the observatory. The 
Arch-Astronomer, who became infected by the slaad’s 
chaos phage, ordered her surviving apprentices to seal 
her inside the tower with the monster. In the years, de- 
cades, and centuries since, she has managed to keep the 
blue slaad from escaping through the hole in the roof. 

The Arch-Astronomer, now a green slaad, is madly 
fiddling with the telescope, hoping to reverse its power 
so that it can project itself out of the tower to some 
faraway place where it can find happiness, but it has 
no hope of success. If the characters interrupt the 
Arch-Astronomer, it tries to frighten them away by 
baring its teeth and claws. If they touch the telescope 
or damage it further, the slaad goes crazy and attacks 
them. If they merely want to read the inscription on the 
wall fragment that crashed through the roof, the slaad 
leaves them alone. 

Inscription. The chunk of wall from the Tower of Div- 
ination (area Y11) bears the following inscription in Dra- 
conic: “Third, a burnt palm loosens the tongue. Shed a 
secret about yourself for all to hear.” This is a passage 
from the Rite of the Arcane Octad (see page 234), 


Y16. MENAGERIE 


An immense dome looms before you, its crystal roof 
marred by a web of cracks, Through the gaps in the build- 
ing’s shell, and on the other side of the open entrance- 
way, you see a strange landscape of miniaturized natural 
features. 


This building's entrance lies unattended. Ythryn's 
mages would visit here to conjure up one-of-a-kind 

pets. Small-scale versions of natural habitats were 
constructed throughout the park: miniature mountain 
ranges, deserts, and forested streams, all now draped 

in ice. At the heart of this mixture of landscapes stands 
the machine that brought the menagerie’s creatures into 
existence. 

Chimeric Creator. This device is a 10-foot-diameter 
iron wheel on its side, held above the ground by a metal 
brace, with eight barrel-sized, egg-shaped open contain- 
ers attached to the outer ends of its spokes. The appara- 
tus has a bronze control panel with a lever next to it. A 
character who spends at least 1 minute examining the 
device can make a DC 15 Intelligence (Arcana) check. 
On a successful check, the character gains an under- 
standing of how to use it without knowing its purpose. 
To operate the device, 80 hit points of blood must be 
distributed evenly between its eight containers. Once 
the blood is properly deposited, pulling a lever causes 
the wheel to spin. The blood disappears 1 minute later, 
the wheel stops, and a creature crawls out of one of the 
containers. This creature is loyal to whoever pulled the 
lever. Determine the creature by rolling a d6 and con- 
sulting the Chimeric Creations table. 

The chimeric creator needs 8 hours to recharge before 
it can be used again. A gauge on the device indicates 
how long it will take to recharge. 


CHIMERIC CREATIONS 

dé Creature 

1 Aweasel with glowing eyes that emit bright light out 
in a 20-foot radius and dim light for an additional 20 
feet 

2 Ahare (see appendix C) with feathered wings and a 
flying speed of 30 feet 

3 Ababoon with a bite attack that deals an extra 3 
(1d6) poison damage on a hit 

4 Acat with antennae that grant it blindsight and trem- 
orsense out to a range of 60 feet 

5 Arat with gills, iridescent scales, and the ability to 
breathe air and water 

6 A fox (see appendix C) with fur that changes color to 
match its surroundings, giving it advantage on Dex- 
terity (Stealth) checks 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


Y17. THEATER 


The roof of this domed building is wrecked and open to 
the elements. Inside is a theater with a large stage, seat- 
ing for more than one hundred, and a backstage area. 
Icicles hang from its sagging balconies, and rime-frosted 
masks leer and grin from its fractured walls. 


A wooden writing desk sits in a backstage room, 
wrapped in chains and padlocked. A character using 
thieves’ tools can try to pick the lock as an action, do- 
ing so with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check. Ina 
leather-bound folder in one of the desk drawers are five 
scripts for a play called A Blasphemy of Kings. The play 
tells the story of five siblings, each expecting to claim 
the throne of their late father. As the protagonists try to 
prove their worth, it is revealed that they're all in fact 
dead, having perished alongside their father in the cata- 
clysmic event that destroyed their kingdom. 

Cursed Play. Each script has a different cover 
showing a humanoid figure that represents one of the 
siblings: the Martyr (with a noose around its neck), the 
Traitor (with a knife held behind its back), the Bewitched 
(with a fairy whispering in its ear), the Haunted (with a 
demonic shadow terrorizing it), and the Fool (perform- 
ing a handstand). Each of the five scripts is cursed. Any- 
one who spends an hour reading a script must succeed 
on a DC 18 Wisdom saving throw or become cursed. A 
creature cursed in this way is gripped by a sudden feel- 
ing of impending doom. Each of the five scripts imparts 
a different curse, which can be ended by a remove curse 
spell or similar magic: 


Martyr's Script. All attacks against the cursed charac- 
ter are made with advantage. 

Traitor’s Script. The cursed character can't per- 
form any action that would directly benefit one of 
their allies. 

Bewitched’s Script. The cursed character hears the 
voice of an imaginary fey creature whispering in their 
ear. Whenever presented with a choice, the character 
must randomly determine what action to take. 

Haunted’s Script. A shadowy fiend plagues the cursed 
character's dreams (or trances in the case of an elf), 
denying that character the benefits of a long rest. 

Fool's Script. The cursed character has disadvantage 
on all ability checks. 


Y18. TOWER OF NECROMANCY 


The remains of a toppled tower lie scattered around you. 
Its fractured base, protruding from the ground like a bro- 
ken tooth, is teeming with crawling gray hands. 


A detect magic spell cast here reveals an aura of nec- 
romantic magic. Two hundred crawling claws are 
tirelessly but ineffectively trying to excavate the tower's 
ruins, brick by brick. Anyone who disrupts this effort 
is attacked by 2d6 claws. Deep under the rubble, the 


SPIRE OF IRIOLARTHAS- 


1 square = 5 feet 


Map 7.3: SPIRE OF IRIOLARTHAS 


corpse of High Necromancer Cadavix lies crushed, ye! 
his ghost remains behind to haunt the tower. Characters 
who linger in the area of the tower witness his gaunt 
spirit staring glumly down at the debris. Cadavix’s ghost 
is harmless and a ‘ks only in self-defense; it laments 
the fall of Ythryn and longs to see its corpse freed from 
the ruins. 

Excavating the tower requires pickaxes and shovels, 
and it takes a number of hours equal to 50 divided by 
the number of excavators (minimum 1 hour). The crawl- 
ing claws don't count as diggers, nor do they attack char- 
acters who join the digging effort. Quite the contrar 
they get visibly excited as the unearthing of their master 
draws near. If Cadavix's frozen corpse is unearthed, 
his spirit is laid to rest and the claws scuttle off into the 
ruins. Those who find the corpse can claim its necklace 
(see “Treasure” below). 

Inscription. Characters who dig deep enough to reach 
Cadavix's corpse also reach the tower's foundations 
and uncover a section of wall that bears the following 
inscription in Draconic: “Seventh, trace a circle with the 
ashes of the dead.” This is a passage from the Rite of the 
Arcane Octad (see page 234). 

Treasure. Cadavix’s corpse wears a necklace of fire- 
balls with six beads remaining. 


Y19. SPIRE OF IRIOLARTHAS 

A shimmering force field surrounds this 1,200-foot-tall 
obsidian citadel, which rises from the center of Ythryn 
and dwarfs all neighboring structures. Creatures can't 


pass through it, nor can they teleport to any location 
inside it. Any creature that performs the Rite of the 
Arcane Octad (see page 234) near the spire can pass 
through the force field in either direction thereafter. 

The spire, the interior of which is shown in map 7.3, 
has the following recurring features: 


Demilich’s Lair. The spire is the lair of the demilich 
Iriolarthas. The lair actions noted in the demilich en- 
try of the Monster Manual apply throughout the spire, 
though Iriolarthas can use lair actions only while in- 
side it. The spire doesn’t have demilich lair traits. 

Ceilings. ings are 30 feet high inside rooms and 10 
feet high in corridors. 

Doors. Doors are made from enchanted oak fitted with 
adamantine locks and hinges. 

Lighting. The interior of the spire is brightly lit by con- 
tinual flame spells cast in wall sconces 


Y194. MAIN ENTRANCE 
If the characters reach this area by ascending the strut 
at area Y6, read: 


Near the apex of the strut, the ceiling of the tunnel gives 
way to a landing that offers a view of the citadel’s upper- 
most reaches. Light from a high window illuminates a set 
of steps that ascend to a pair of mahogany doors in the 


tower's face. 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


VENERANDA 


The magic that once sealed the doors has long since 
faded away. When visitors approach the doors, a hypnos 
magen (see appendix C) from area Y19d appears at the 
overlooking window and uses its telepathy to politely 
instruct the intruders to leave the area. If the intruders 
behave threateningly or ignore its warnings, the magen 
tries to drive them away using suggestion spells, or fail- 
ing that, attacks them. 


Y19B. BALLROOM 


Chamber music washes over you as you enter this ball- 
room. In contrast to the desolate, frozen ruins outside, a 
dozen people mill around in here, dressed in flowing silk 
garments and holding colorful hand masks and feathered 
fans. Noble courtiers laugh and gossip as servants move 
among them, offering sugared treats on silver platters. 


The music, people, food, decor, and warmth are illusions 
with which the characters can interact (see “Joining the 
Ball” below). The scene can be ended with a successful 
dispel magic spell (DC 19). If the illusory ball is dis- 
pelled, the room’s true contents are revealed: 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


The ballroom lies in ruins, rimed with ice, its furniture 
jumbled and shattered. Above the floor where nobles 
danced, three glass cylinders with iron fittings slowly 
move through the air. Housed in each cylinder is a 
swollen human brain floating in a bath of slimy, trans- 
lucent goo. 


Three Netherese wizards chose to continue their revels 
into undeath, each one becoming a brain in a jar (see 
appendix C). The three wizards have been driven mad 
by their undead existence. Dispelling the illusion drives 
them into a furious rage. Visitors who ruin the ball in 
any way are attacked. 

Joining the Ball. The characters can interact freely 
with the illusory surroundings. The magic reacts to their 
actions, allowing them to hold conversations with court- 
iers, join the dance, or even sample the canapes. All the 
illusory figments know nothing of Ythryn’s fate and are 
interested only in revelry and gossip. Characters who 
spend at least 5 minutes talking to the illusory guests 
or servants learn one random fact from the Ythryn Lore 
table (page 235). 


Y19c. COUNCIL CHAMBERS 
These chambers served as offices for bureaucrats who 
ran the citadel's day-to-day operations, Each room con- 
tains a single table, a cabinet filled with ruined parch- 
ment scrolls, and a dresser containing writing materi- 
als. Everything is in disarray and covered in ice. 
Characters who search the northernmost chamber 
discover an unfinished letter that details the acquisition 
of an artifact dating back to the empire of Ostoria, This 
rune-carved stone spindle is described as having an un- 
known purpose. The writer notes that it has been moved 
to the citadel's stasis chamber for further study. 


Y19D. GUARD PASSAGE 

At the end of the passage to the west, a narrow window 
overlooks the steps that lead to the main entrance (area 
Y19a). Anyone who enters this passage is challenged by 
a hypnos magen (see appendix C)—the same one that 
tries to shoo away intruders in area Y19a. This magen 
emerges from a cramped sentry chamber to the east and 
uses telepathy to politely inform intruders that they are 
trespassing: if the intruders don't leave at once, the ma- 
gen tries to forcibly eject them. 


Y19E. LIQUEFACTION CHAMBER 


Shifting green, purple, and blue light spills into this room 
through a single window. Bolted-down tables hold an ar- 
ray of equipment: beakers of alchemical fluid, alembics, 
cut crystal needles, surgical tools, coiled leather tubes, 
and more. Behind the tables stands an ornate suit of ar- 
mor. Where the head should be is a swollen human brain 
floating inside a canister of translucent fluid. 


This ritual room is designed to serve a grisly purpose: 
the transformation of a living creature into a brain in 
ajar. Veneranda, a neutral evil Netherese wizard, ex- 
tracted her own brain to become a brain in a jar (see 
appendix C) that is affixed to the body of a headless 
helmed horror. If the characters threaten or attack her, 
Veneranda turns the helmed horror against the group 
and attacks. Even though they are conjoined, the brain 
in a jar and the helmed horror roll initiative separately 
and attack as separate creatures. The brain can detach 
from the helmed horror as a bonus action. 

Unlike her companions in the ballroom (area Y19b), 
Veneranda is coldly calculating and fully aware of 
Ythryn’s fate. If the characters communicate with her, 
she greets them warily in Loross (see the “Loross: The 
Netherese Tongue” sidebar on page 221) and tries to 
find out what has happened in the world in the centuries 
since Ythryn’s fall. Her singular goal is to restore Ythryn 
to its past glory. She doesn’t know why the city crashed, 
but she believes that the broken obelisk (see area Y21) 
can turn back time to repair the damage. To activate its 
magic, Veneranda says she needs Iriolarthas's staff of 
power, which he keeps in his study. She proposes that 
the characters break into Iriolarthas's study, steal his 
staff, and bring it to her. She declines to accompany 
them, on account of the likely danger. If they complete 
this mission and return with the staff, she escorts them 
to the obelisk and tries to activate it. If the characters 
are unwilling to help Veneranda achieve her goal, they 
quickly outlive their usefulness, and she tries to de- 
stroy them, 

Ritual of Brain Transfer. Veneranda can use the 
equipment in this chamber to transform one humanoid 
into a brain in ajar. This ritual takes 24 hours and re- 
sults in the death and liquefaction of the subject's body. 
Veneranda doesn't allow anyone to view the ritual while 
it’s being performed. 


Y19F. STAFF STORAGE 


This irregularly shaped room contains six staffs stored in 
racks along its walls, with room for more. 


Each staff can serve as an arcane focus for a spellcaster. 
The staffs are as follows: 


Staff 1 is a straight stick of pale ash with a stern-looking 
owl's head carved into its top. 

Staff 2 is a smooth, polished length of blue-tinted wood 
that's as strong as steel, with black veins running 
through it and an octopus carved into its top. 

Staff 3 is made of translucent purple glass, which splits 
into three branches at the top that circle around one 
another to form a hollow spiral with an orb of lighter 
purple glass tucked inside it. 

Staff 4 is carved from golden laspar wood, with carv- 
ings of fish swimming upriver along its length. 

Staff 5 is made of weirwood, a hardy substance similar 
to oak, Its shaft is gnarled and twisted, its top carved 
to resemble a human hand grasping a snake. 


Staff 6 is made of chardalyn (see the sidebar on page 
6) and is suffused with Netherese magic. While 
holding the staff, a creature is immune to the fright- 
ened and poisoned conditions. 


Y19c. DEN 

This chamber is affected by the same illusion that con- 
ceals the true nature of the ballroom (area Y19b). If that 
illusion hasn't been dispelled, read: 


Courtiers lounge on luxurious cushions inside this cir- 
cular chamber, smoking from long pipes and dining on 
fruit. Against the back wall is a large harp, its strings 
being plucked magically to fill the room with haunting 
music. In the middle of the room, a gem-studded, cubic 
wooden chest sits on a round marble table with an octo- 
pus-shaped base. 


If the illusion is dispelled, the music ends and the cham- 
ber is revealed to be an abandoned, icy ruin. The chest 
and the table are real objects that remain after the illu- 
sion is dispelled. 

Treasure. The chest is an abracadabrus (see appendix 
D) that Iriolarthas and his guests used to produce food 
and drink. 


Y19H. MEMBERS’ BAR 

These rooms are affected by the same illusion that con- 
ceals the true nature of the ballroom (area Y19b). If that 
illusion hasn't been dispelled, read: 


Well-dressed revelers mill about, talking loudly to each 
other while servants carry bottles of wine and spirits 
around to refill their cups. Behind a rectangular counter, 
a bald, pale-skinned humanoid serves wine from an or- 
nate bottle. 


If the illusion is dispelled, this area is shown to be a fro- 
zen ruin bereft of inhabitants. 

Treasure. Behind the rectangular counter, held in 
storage racks, are a dozen bottles of two-thousand-year- 
old wine. A detect magic spell reveals an aura of abjura- 
tion magic around each bottle, which has preserved its 
contents. Each bottle of wine is worth 50 gp to an inter- 
ested buyer. 


Y191. FORCE BRIDGE 

A 7-foot-tall, 4-foot-wide window at the north end of area 
Y19b overlooks a 35-foot-wide gap in the spire’s super- 
structure. On the far side of this gap, a similar window 
opens into the Chamber of Sorcery (area Y19j). Between 
these windows stretches a magical, invisible 5-foot-wide 
plane of force that serves as a bridge. (On map 7.3, this 
bridge is marked by a pair of dashed lines.) This invisi- 
ble bridge, which is safe to cross, is suppressed by the 
activation of the spindle in area Y19n. 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


© 


Y19J. CHAMBER OF SORCERY 


Your reflections dance over the mirrored surfaces of this 
chamber. Eleven alcoves extend from the walls like the 
points of a star, each one narrowing to a niche where 

a gently glowing crystal is mounted five feet above the 
floor. The air seems to hum with pent-up power. 


Soon after the characters enter this area, an entity 
called Everlast makes its presence known. Everlast is 

a living spell bound to the spire. It can manifest in the 
image of any humanoid species or gender but defaults to 
the form described below: 


Suddenly, the crystals brighten as rays of energy burst 
forth one by one to converge in the center of the room. 
As more of the rays intersect, a translucent figure comes 
into view where their light converges: a bald man wearing 
a long, purple gown. His face breaks into a smile as he 
sees you. 


Everlast speaks the same language as any creature that 
converses with it. He can't attack or be damaged, and he 
can't be dispelled. 

Iriolarthas created Everlast to aid him and his appren- 
tices in their doomed mission to restore Ythryn from 
ruin. In the years since its creation, Everlast has seen 
Iriolarthas crumble into dust and his apprentices trans- 
form into nothics. With nothing to do except uphold his 
standing orders, Everlast has become hopelessly bored. 
The characters are the first new faces he has seen for 
centuries, and he immediately warms to them. Ever- 
last’s standing orders are as follows: 


+ Assist in the city’s restoration. 
+ Do not reveal the city’s secrets to outsiders. 


Everlast can manifest anywhere inside the spire and 
can move instantaneously between locations within it. 
If the characters express interest in restoring Ythryn 
to its former glory, he laments, “Many powerful minds 
have tried.” If the characters mention Veneranda's plan 
to use Iriolarthas's staff of power and the obelisk, Ever- 
last cautions them by saying, “That might be unwise, for 
the obelisk was damaged in the crash. Iriolarthas was 
unable to repair it.” If the characters ask Everlast how 
to reach Iriolarthas's study, he says he can't help them, 
saying, “My orders prevent me from revealing the city’s 
secrets to outsiders.” 

Energy Crystals. The crystals embedded in the 
niches are used to project Everlast’s illusory form 
throughout the spire. Each crystal is a Tiny object with 
AC 8, 3 hit points, and immunity to poison and psychic 
damage. If more than half of the crystals are removed or 
destroyed, Everlast ceases to exist. 

Secret Door. This hatch is mounted in the ceiling, 30 
feet above the floor, and can be spotted from the floor 
only with a successful DC 20 Wisdom (Perception) 
check. Knocking on the hatch causes it to swing open, 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


revealing a 5-foot-diameter vertical shaft that ascends 
50 feet to area Y19k. A character can use an action to 
pull open the hatch by force, doing so with a successful 
DC 20 Strength check. 


Y19k. DOME 

The following boxed text assumes that the characters 
arrive by moving up the shaft from area Y19j. Modify 
this text if the characters enter from the south: 


You ascend into an oval hall glittering with frost. Carv- 
ings decorate the walls, and long icicles hang from the 
ceiling. A ten-foot-radius dome of translucent ice en- 
closes the area around the shaft from which you emerge. 
At the far end of the hall, two blade-shaped patches of 
pitch darkness hover in the air to either side of a double 
door. A glowing green crystal roughly the size of a human 
fist is set into the arch above the doorway. 


A hemispherical wall of force, its outside coated with a 
thin layer of ice, covers the shaft leading down to area 
Y19j. This barrier was created by a wall of force spell 
and is maintained by the glowing green crystal set above 
the doorway (see “Green Crystal” below). As long as this 
crystal is glowing, the wall of force can’t be dispelled. 

Two living blades of disaster (see appendix C) guard 
the double door that blocks the way to area Y191. The 
blades attack intruders that move in range of their blind- 
sight (30 feet), and the blades can pass right through the 
wall of force. 

Green Crystal. This glowing crystal sustains the 
wall of force but has become loose in its stone fixture. 
Whenever a loud noise is made inside the chamber, the 
loose crystal flickers. Tremendously loud noises, such as 
those made by a thunderwave spell or a horn of blasting, 
cause the crystal to go out for 1d6 rounds, during which 
time the wall of force is suppressed. The first time this 
happens, the ice that coats the dome collapses. 

A character within reach of the crystal can use an 
action to pry it from its fixture, which causes the crystal 
to go dark for good, ending the wall of force. Destroying 
the crystal has the same effect. The crystal is a Tiny, 
1-pound object with AC 13, 4 hit points, and immunity to 
poison and psychic damage. 


YI9L. TESTING CHAMBER 

The following boxed text assumes that the characters 
look through the doorway from area Y19k. If they arrive 
from the south, modify the text accordingly: 


Lining the far wall of this hall are eight doors, each 
marked with a different arcane symbol. On the wall above 
them is etched an inscription in Draconic. 


A magical trap (marked T on map 7.3) fills the 10-foot- 
square area immediately south of the double door to 
area Y19k and triggers whenever a creature that is nei- 
ther a construct nor undead enters the area for the first 


time. Any creature that triggers the trap is targeted by a 
flesh to stone spell (save DC 17). A creature can't set off 
the trap more than once. After it’s triggered three times, 
the trap vanishes. 

Draconic Inscription. The inscription reads "Speak 
thy master’s name and enter.” 

Eight Doors. A character who succeeds on a DC 10 
Intelligence (Arcana) check recognizes that the symbols 


on the doors represent the eight schools of magic. Open- 


ing any of the eight doors reveals utter darkness beyond. 
A creature that has darkvision can't see into or through 
this magical darkness, but a warlock with Devil's Sight 
can. Magical light, as well as light created by spells of 
8th level or lower, can’t illuminate it. This darkness fills 
the tunnels south of the doors and can't be dispelled. To 
pass through safely, a character must speak the name 
of one of Iriolarthas’s eight apprentices and then step 
through the door associated with that wizard’s school of 
magic. The eight apprentices were: 


High Abjurer Taruth High Evoker Zadulus 

High Conjurer Damorith High Illusionist Ajamar 
High Diviner Apius High Necromancer Cadavix 
High Enchanter Ilvira High Transmuter Metaltra 


The characters can learn the apprentices’ names from 
the museum (area Y29). Each time a creature steps 
through a door without speaking the correct name, 

a barbed devil appears in the dark corridor beyond. 
The devil can see in the magical darkness and attacks 


A LIVING BLADE OF DISASTER IS A POWERFUL, 


ANNIMILATING SPELL GIVEN A WILL OF ITS OWN, 


any creatures that move into the corridor without first 
speaking the correct name. These devils can leave the 
darkness to pursue their foes. One minute after a devil 
appears, it disappears, leaving no trace of itself behind. 
Once a barbed devil has been summoned, no other devil 
can be summoned into that same corridor for 24 hours. 


Y19M. CHAMBER OF THE EBON STAR 


A vortex of glowing stars hangs in the air inside this 
chamber, slowly rotating on its axis. As the constellations 
move, they cast radiant starlight across the walls. Eight 
high-backed chairs, each bearing a different arcane sym- 


bol, face this starry miasma. 


Iriolarthas’s apprentices, known as the Wizards of the 
Ebon Star, governed Ythryn from this hall. Eight magi- 
cally darkened corridors connect this hall to area Y19I. 
Separate archways open into areas Y19n and Y19o. 

At the south end of the hall, a 10-foot-wide passage- 
way leads to a locked double door, beyond which lies 
a balcony (area Y19p). The door is warded with magic 
that prevents it from being damaged or forced open; it 
can be unlocked, however, by someone who uses the 
adamantine key in area Y190, or by a character who 
uses thieves’ tools and makes a successful DC 18 Dex- 
terity check as an action to pick the lock. 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


Star Field. The swirling star field represents the 
cosmos as it was known to the Netherese. A character 
who studies the star field sees a strange phenomenon: a 
dark star in a position where no known star exists today. 
This character now risks being cursed with a forebod- 
ing sense of doom. At the end of the character's next 
long rest, the character must make a DC 20 Intelligence 
saving throw. On a failed save, the character gains the 
following flaw: “I can't look at the sky because the ebon 
star might be looking back at me.” Any magic that ends 
a curse can rid the character of this flaw. 

Wizards’ Chairs. Any character who succeeds on 
a DC 10 Intelligence (Arcana) check recognizes that 
the symbols on the chairs represent the eight schools 
of magic. 

Anyone who has a supernatural charm gained by 
drinking from the goblet in area Y8 can sit safely in 
the chair for the school of magic tied to that charm. 
Similarly, a wizard can sit in whichever chair matches 
their chosen arcane tradition. (For example, if Vel- 
lynne Harpell is with the party, she can sit in the chair 
marked with the symbol of necromancy, since she is a 
necromancer.) If one or more party members take their 
proper seats here, the star field transforms into a glow- 
ing door that persists for 1 minute before transforming 
back into its original form. While in this room, Iriolar- 
thas the demilich can use an action to cause the door- 
way to open without having to sit in a chair. Creatures 
that move through this door are teleported to the upper 
level of area Y19q. 

Each chair is a Medium object with AC 15, 18 hit 
points, and immunity to all damage except force dam- 
age. Destroying all the chairs causes the star field to dis- 
appear, cutting off access to area Y19q from this room. 


Y19N. STASIS CHAMBER 


A ten-foot-tall spindle of gray stone hovers upright and 
rotates slowly inside this circular chamber. All around it, 
the surfaces of the room's walls are cracked, as though 
some terrible energy once coursed through them. 


This chamber was built to house unstable magic items 
during experimentation, but it couldn’t contain the 
artifact that Iriolarthas and his apprentices retrieved 
from the bottom of the Sea of Moving Ice. During a 
routine examination, the spindle briefly became active, 
dispelled magical effects throughout Ythryn, and caused 
the city to plunge into the Reghed Glacier. The spindle is 
now dormant but can be reactivated to wreak havoc on 
the Weave. 

The spindle is immune to all damage and is unaf- 
fected by any magic in existence today. It can’t be moved 
from this location. If it is targeted by a spell of 5th level 
or higher, an explosion of magical energy blasts from it: 
all magic items and magical effects within a three-mile 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


radius (including those within the spire) are suppressed 
for 24 hours, and spellcasters are drained of any unex- 
pended spell slots. Living spells, constructs, and other 
magically created creatures are unaffected. The pulse 
of energy suppresses magical traps throughout the city 
and causes the floating chamber above Skydock Spire 
(area Y28) to crash into to the ground, pulverizing it and 
dealing 99 (18d10) bludgeoning damage to each crea- 
ture inside it. 


Y190. LIBRARY 


The walls of this roughly triangular room are filled with 
floor-to-ceiling bookshelves. Hundreds of books and 
scrolls were thrown free of their resting places when the 
city crashed and now cover the floor. Time and bitter cold 
have not been kind to them. 


Most of the books and scrolls that litter the floor have 
been ruined by centuries of disuse, but adventurers who 
search the remains unearth two survivors: a scroll (see 
“Treasure” below) and a brittle tome with a black, eight- 
pointed star on its front cover. This brittle tome records 
the various meetings of the Wizards of the Ebon Star. 
One passage explains, in the Draconic script, that “Mas- 
ter Iriolarthas opens the door to his study when three 
or more of his apprentices—or those empowered by 

the goblet in the House of the Arcane—are seated cor- 
rectly in the Chamber of the Ebon Star.” This passage 
provides adventurers with the information they need to 
open the magical doorway in area Y19m. 

Treasure. Lying among the ruined documents are two 
useful items: a scroll of the comet (see appendix D) and 
an adamantine key. The key is nonmagical and unlocks 
the double door to the balcony (area Y19p). 


Y19r. HicH Court BALCONY 

A locked double door bars the way to area Y19m. The 
door is warded with magic that prevents it from being 
damaged or forced open; it can be unlocked, however, by 
someone who uses the adamantine key in area Y19o, or 
by a character who uses thieves’ tools and makes a suc- 
cessful DC 18 Dexterity check as an action. 

The Wizards of the Ebon Star used this balcony to 
make proclamations to the inhabitants of Ythryn. Words 
spoken by a creature standing on the balcony are magi- 
cally amplified to sound ten times louder than normal. 


Y19Q. IRIOLARTHAS’s STUDY 

This room can be accessed by activating the magic 
door in area Y19m. The door is a two-way portal that 
snaps shut after 1 minute, though it can be reopened 
from this side by speaking the proper command word 
(“Saldrinar”). Anyone who arrives by this route appears 
on the room's upper level, which the following boxed 
text assumes: 


This large chamber has lain undisturbed for centuries. 
On the upper level, all around you, are tables covered 
with wizardly paraphernalia. A soft groaning sound em- 
anates from a shadowy, door-sized rectangle along the 
curved northern wall 

Staircases to the east and west descend to the lower 
part of the room, where a sunken library is situated in 
a twenty-foot-wide, ten-foot-deep circular pit. A ladder 
running along a circular track inside this hole allows easy 


access to the many books and scrolls on its shelves 


If the characters have not yet encountered Iriolarthas, 
the demilich and three nothics are present: 


Perched on the edge of the pit are three aberrant crea- 
tures, each one staring at you with a singular, hideous 
eye. Floating above the middle of the pit is a human skull 


with wispy, arcane symbols forming above it. 


Have the players roll initiative for their characters, and 
roll initiative for all the other creatures present. 

See the “Iriolarthas the Demilich” section at the start 
of the chapter for information about the demilich. Irio- 
larthas attacks anyone who takes its staff of power or 


os 


THIS STONE SPINDLE, A RELIC OF THE ANCIENT WORLD, BROUGHT 
DOWN YTHRÝN NEARLY TWO THOUSAND YEARS AGO. 


spellbook from atop the tables (see “Treasure” below). 
The nothics defend the demilich and themselves. 

The shadowy, groaning rectangle on the north wall is 
a living demiplane (see appendix C) that was created 
when Iriolarthas escaped Ythryn’s fall. It moves toward 
the nearest intruder with the intent of trapping that crea- 
ture into its extradimensional chamber. Anyone who is 
cast into this chamber must deal with five hostile crea- 
tures already trapped inside it: three galvan magen (see 
appendix C) and two flesh golems, As the golems attack 
new arrivals, the magen use their Shocking Touch and 
Static Discharge actions to heal the golems’ wounds. 

The sunken library in the middle of the study has 
shelves lining its 10-foot-high walls and a ladder that 
can be pushed along a circular track to reach every 
shelf. Among the books and scrolls kept here is a bundle 
of parchment maps and schematics detailing aspects of 
Ythryn. Characters who study these papers for at least 1 
hour learn the following facts: 


+ The city was held aloft by the Ythryn mythallar (area 
Y23). Up to eight mages could attune to this device 
at one time. If all of them agreed, they could use its 
power to move the city through the skies or control 
the weather for miles around it. 

+ Ifdisaster ever struck the city, the wizards could ex- 
ploit the power of the obelisk (area Y21) to turn back 
time and avert ruin. The schematics contain instruc- 
tions for activating the obelisk, which requires a staff 
of power as a power source. 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


+ The command word to reopen the magic door to area 
Y19m is “Saldrinar,” which also happens to be the 
name of a long-dead Netherese archmage. 

+ The command word to deactivate the force field 
around the spire is “Olostin.” If this name is spoken 
aloud within Iriolarthas’s study, the force field sur- 
rounding the spire and the Ythryn mythallar (area 
Y23) deactivates permanently. 


Treasure. The following treasures can be found 
amid the rubbish on the upper level of the study: a 
small metal case containing four vials of quicksilver 
(500 gp each), an intricate crystal rod (1,800 gp), Irio- 
larthas's fully charged staff of power, a hefty spellbook 
titled The Incantations of Iriolarthas, and a scroll of 
tarrasque summoning (see appendix D for descriptions 
of the spellbook and the scroll). The crystal rod and 
vials of quicksilver are nonmagical material compo- 
nents needed for the create magen spell in Iriolarthas's 
spellbook. 

Professor Skant is excited by the discovery of the 
scroll of tarrasque summoning 
one of its areas of expertise. The professor orb knows 
all the tarrasque lore in the Monster Manual, as well 
as the monster's traits, which it's happy to share with 
the party 


since the tarrasque is 


Y20. TOWER OF EVOCATION 


The top of this tower is shaped like an axe blade. Red 


light shines out from a slender window high overhead. 


The tower's interior is damaged by fire, lightning, and 
acid, having borne the brunt of centuries of destructive 
spelicasting. A spiral staircase ascends to the topmost 
chamber. When the characters arrive here, read: 


Red orbs of light dance like fireflies around this 

| thirty-foot-diameter octagonal chamber. A large unlit 

| brazier stands in the center of the room, and eight ten- 
foot-square alcoves line the walls, each filled with ice 


The arched ceiling is covered with icicles 
t 


This chamber is lit by a permanent dancing lights spell 
that can be dispelled (DC 17). Characters who succeed 
on a DC 10 Wisdom (Perception) check spot an inscrip- 
tion on the ceiling, but the ice covering it renders it un- 
readable (see “Inscription” below). 

The central brazier is enchanted. A single spark cre- 
ated inside it causes it to blaze with magic flames for 24 
hours. If the brazier is lit, the heat it gives off starts to 
melt the ice in the chamber, revealing the words of the 
inscription after 10 minutes. 

Alcoves. Examination of the alcoves reveals that each 
one contains what appears to be a 10-foot cube of ice. 
One of the cubes has a humanoid skeleton—the remains 
of High Evoker Zadulus—suspended inside it. These 
blocks of ice are, in fact, eight gelatinous cubes held in 
magical cryostasis. If the brazier is used to thaw the ice 


in the room, these cubes awaken after 10 minutes and 
emerge from their alcoves, attacking all other creatures 
in the room, 

Inscription. The inscription on the ceiling is written 
in Draconic and reads “Fifth, quench the flame in thy 
palm with ice.” This is a passage from the Rite of the 
Arcane Octad (see page 234), 


Y21. OBELISK 


A sixty-foot-tall obelisk of black stone, its surface covered 
in arcane runes, projects from the ground. A thin crack 
has formed on one side, stretching from the obelisk's 
base to its middle. 


Before Ythryn crashed, Iriolarthas relied on this obelisk 
as a precautionary measure in case Ythryn experienced 
a catastrophe. It was one of a few rare Netherese ar- 
tifacts that could rewind time (see the “Secret of the 
Obelisks” sidebar). It was damaged during Ythryn’s fall 
and, despite Iriolarthas’s best efforts, the demilich could 
not repair it. Characters who learn about the obelisk in 
Iriolarthas’s study (area Y19q) know how to activate it 
(see “Activating the Obelisk” below). 

Acharacter who examines the obelisk and succeeds 
on a DC 10 Intelligence (Arcana) check recognizes that 
the magic runes inscribed on the obelisk represent all 
eight schools of magic. If the check result exceeds the 
DC by 5 or more, the character also identifies runes 
relating to chronomancy, the art of magically manipu- 
lating time. 

Activating the Obelisk. If the characters retrieved 
Iriolarthas’s staff of power and Veneranda is with them, 
she insists that the staff be used to activate the dormant 
obelisk. Any character who succeeds on a DC 20 Intel- 
ligence (Arcana) check can verify that this task is not 
beyond the staff’s power, although it would take at least 
half of the staff's charges to accomplish. If a creature at- 
tuned to the staff uses an action to expend 10 or more of 
its charges while touching the staff to the obelisk, power 
surges from the staff and triggers the following devastat- 
ing events: 


The staff splits in half, triggering its Retributive Strike 
property (see the staff's description in the Dungeon 
Master's Guide). 

Any creature within 120 feet of the obelisk that isn’t 
killed by the staff's explosion becomes 10 years 
younger. Creatures whose age is reduced to 0 by this 
effect wink out of existence, leaving behind the items 
they were wearing or carrying. 

The obelisk disintegrates, as do other obelisks like it 
throughout the world, but not before hurling the entire 
planet into the past, to a time prior to the fall of Ythryn 
(see “Year of Chilled Marrow,” page 262). 


Y22. TOWER OF ILLUSION 


An obsidian tower shrouded in gossamer mist soars be- 
fore you. Eyes carved into the stonework appear to fixate 
on you as you approach the entrance. The spire's highest 
window emits a purple light. 


A detect magic spell cast here reveals an aura of illusion 
magic. This magic makes the eyes carved into the tower 
appear to follow those who approach the structure. 
Characters who enter the tower find the mist inside as 
well. Haunting sounds fill the air: heartbeats, sobbing, 
and ragged, gasping breaths. 

As the party advances, the mists around the charac- 
ters manifest into illusions of their worst fears, and each 
character becomes the target of a phantasmal killer 
spell cast at 8th level (save DC 17), Characters who sur- 
vive the experience emerge together in the tower's upper 
chamber, which is free of mist. 

Chamber of Illusion. The tower's uppermost chamber 
is 30 feet square and lit by purple continual flame spells 
in wall sconces. An inscription written on the walls in 
Draconic reads “Sixth, show thy face to the sky.” This is 
illusory script masquerading as a passage from the Rite 
of the Arcane Octad (see page 234). If the characters 
leave after acquiring only this information, they hear 
the faint laughter of Ythryn’s High Illusionist, Ajamar, 
trailing behind them as they exit the tower. The real pas- 
sage is revealed when the illusory script is successfully 
dispelled (DC 17) or examined by someone who has 
truesight. It reads “Sixth, hide thyself behind a mask.” 


Y23. YTHRYN MYTHALLAR 

This enormous artifact is enclosed within the force field 
surrounding the Spire of Iriolarthas. To reach it, a char- 
acter must first perform the Rite of the Arcane Octad 
(see page 234) to lower the force field. 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


256 


Beneath the great spire, a luminous fifty-foot-diameter 
crystal sphere rests on an ornate stand. 


See appendix D for a description of the Ythryn mythal- 
Jar and its magical properties. The first time a creature 
tries to attune to the mythallar, its meditation is dis- 
turbed by the arrival of a tomb tapper (see appendix C), 
which tunnels up from belowground to attack anyone 
present, The tomb tapper fights to the death to defend 
the Ythryn mythallar. 

Unless Iriolarthas is destroyed, the demilich is al- 
ready attuned to the mythallar. If Iriolarthas senses 
that another creature is trying to use the mythallar, it 
always disallows the attempt and flies to the mythallar’s 
location to discourage any further tampering with the 
device. Only by destroying the demilich can the char- 
acters use the mythallar’s properties unimpeded. The 
mythallar’s power to control the weather can undo the 
everlasting winter that Auril has cast over Icewind Dale 
(see “Epilogue,” page 261). 


24, TOWER OF ENCHANTMENT 


Ice has engulfed the lower floors of this crumbling tower. 
Pink light pours out of the highest window—a single 
point of illumination in a dark and out-of-the-way region 
of the city. 


A detect magic spell cast here reveals an aura of en- 
chantment magic. The interior walls are covered with 
the following sentence in Draconic crudely written with 
pitch over and over: “All work and no play make Ivira a 
dull girl.” The floor is strewn with pitch-covered buckets 
and mops frozen stiff by the cold. 

As the party explores higher up in the tower, the 
recurring phrase changes to: “I am Ivira. Ivira is my 
name.” These words are written in wine stains, and the 
floor is littered with empty wine bottles. 

Painted in blood above the door leading to the upper- 
most chamber are the words “The crown knows all!” 
in Draconic. When the characters enter the topmost 
chamber, read: 


An elderly woman sits rigidly on a black throne, shrouded 
in ice. She wears a crown of entwined iron tentacles, and 

her forehead is bruised where the band fits tightly against 
her skull. An inscription decorates the wall behind her. 


This chamber is lit by pink continual flame spells flicker- 
ing in sconces. 

At the height of her power, the archmage lvira wore a 
magic crown to shield her mind against mental attacks. 
When Ythryn crashed and magic was momentarily 
undone, Ivira’s crown became corrupted and began to si- 
phon away her memories. She has endured centuries as 
a husk of her former self, kept alive by the magic of her 
crown. In her current state, she is stunned. 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


A character who succeeds on a DC 12 Wisdom (Med- 
icine) check can tell that Ivira is still alive. Her crown is 
cursed (see below). Removing it from her head causes 
Ivira to shudder and shed the ice that has formed 
around her. With the crown gone, her body rapidly dete- 
riorates, as the centuries take their toll. Ivira has only a 
few seconds before she dies and turns to dust; with her 
dying breath, she implores the characters in Loross (the 
dead Netherese tongue) to “destroy the crown ... release 
my memories ... let me have peace.” 

Cursed Crown. lvira can't remove the crown from her 
head. Any other creature that touches it must succeed 
on a DC 17 Wisdom saving throw or become charmed 
by it and use its next action to don the crown. If the 
saving throw succeeds, the creature is immune to this 
effect of the crown for the next 24 hours. 

From the moment it is donned, the crown begins to si- 
phon memories from its wearer, starting with its earliest 
memories. The wearer can sense that its memories are 
being stolen but can’t remove the crown from its head 
except within an antimagic field. 

After wearing the crown for 1 hour, a creature must 
succeed on a DC 15 Intelligence saving throw or be 
stunned until the crown is removed from its head by 
someone else. This saving throw is repeated at the end 
of each hour until either the crown has been removed 
or its wearer has become stunned, If a creature wears 
the crown for ten uninterrupted days, the condition 
becomes permanent, as the crown reduces its wearer 
to a mindless husk. A greater restoration spell or sim- 
ilar magic ends the effect and restores the creature’s 
lost memories. 

The crown can be destroyed on the anvil of disjunc- 
tion (area Y4). It is otherwise impervious to damage. If 
the crown is destroyed, the memories it has absorbed 
flood over all creatures within 10 feet of it. Characters 
assailed by this barrage gain 1d6 pieces of lore from the 
Ythryn Lore table (page 235). 

Inscription. The inscription on the wall behind the 
throne is written in Draconic and reads “Fourth, coax a 
secret from another.” This is a passage from the Rite of 
the Arcane Octad (see page 234). 


25, HALL OF WEIGHTLESS WONDER 


Four basalt columns support a huge mirrored dome on 
which are reflected Ythryn’s tallest spires and the cav- 
ern's vast stalactites. 


Ythryn's elite used this hall for meditation. As someone 
floated around inside the dome, an illusory image of 
the person went on with their daily affairs elsewhere 
in the city. 

The four supporting columns have doors in their 
bases, which open into shafts that ascend to the dome. 
The shafts are 60 feet long and lit from above by the 
shifting auroral light of the dome's interior. A character 
who steps inside a column levitates up to the dome in 1 
round, When a character reaches the dome, read: 


The interior of the dome is illuminated by a swirling 
miasma of colors. Frozen human figures float in the air, 
cross-legged and serene. 


Creatures in the dome gain a flying speed of 30 feet and 
can hover. The corpses of a dozen Netherese appren- 
tices hover around this area, with their hands on their 
knees and their eyes closed. Characters who adopt this 
position can meditate by succeeding on a DC 12 Wis- 
dom check. While meditating, a character can cast the 
project image spell (save DC 15). The spell lasts for 1 
hour, and a character can perform the meditation once 
per day, To leave the dome, a character must stand at 
the top of one of the four shafts, to be transported down 
in a manner similar to how they arrived. 


Y26. TOWER OF TRANSMUTATION 


A tower rises before you, straight as an arrow. A faint 
light shines from in the spire's highest window, and hair- 
line cracks creep up its walls like ivy. 


The cracks covering the outside of the tower were 
caused during the crash, when the magic protecting the 
tower strained to keep it from collapsing. 

Describe the interior of the tower as follows: 


The tower's interior walls are sculpted with impressions 
of humanoid forms pressing out from within—clawing 
hands and howling faces, captured in stone forever. 


As Ythryn was about to fall out of the sky, High Trans- 
muter Metaltra used a true polymorph spell to transform 
herself into something she thought would survive the 
city's destruction: an adamantine statue. An hour later, 
when the spell should have ended, nothing happened. 
Through no fault of her own, she had become a statue 
permanently. Only a wish spell can restore her, and then 
only briefly as she ages centuries in a matter of seconds. 
Characters who climb to the tower's peak find the 
statue of Metaltra lying in a corner, The statue depicts a 
woman in a wizard's robe, posed as if she is completing 
a spell. As her statue was being thrown about during the 
crash, it damaged part of an inscription on one wall. 
Inscription. The damaged inscription is a passage 
from the Rite of the Arcane Octad (see page 234). 
Written in Draconic, it reads “Eighth, stand firm in thy 
circle of death and consume ——.” The missing word, 
destroyed by Metaltra’s statue, is “poison.” Characters 
who search the room for stone fragments can't find the 
pieces they need to identify the missing word, but cast- 
ing a mending cantrip on the wall repairs the damage 
and reconstructs the missing word. If the characters 
don’t have access to the mending cantrip, a divina- 
tion spell or similar magic can be used to learn the 
missing word. 


Treasure. Adventurers who search the uppermost 
chamber find a bag of beans in a small pile of rubbish. 


Y27. Music HALL 


This enormous, boot-shaped structure is capped with 
three pipes that resemble the arteries of a titanic heart. 
Tall doors open into the structure's dark interior. 


Old posters are plastered to the outer walls of this mu- 
sic hall. Anyone who can read the Draconic script can 
translate the poster closest to the entrance: “Experience 
the Netherese Esoteric Orchestra's masterwork, The 
Dark Between the Stars!” A character who succeeds on 
a DC 15 Intelligence (History) check knows this legend- 
ary piece of music, as does any bard in the party. If the 
characters enter the music hall, read: 


This grand music hall is aglitter with ice, and the floor 
underfoot is strewn with the crystal shards of fallen chan- 
deliers. The frozen corpses of the audience lie strewn 
among the tiered seats, their expressions frozen in rap- 
turous adulation. On the stage, cadaverous musicians 
slump over their shattered instruments. 


The Netherese Esoteric Orchestra was midway through 
its crowning performance when Ythryn fell from the 
sky. Determined to finish, the musicians played on as 
the city hurtled to the ground, but Ythryn crashed before 
they could finish. Deprived of the opportunity to com- 
plete their grand finale, the orchestra's troubled spirits 
haunt the hall. 

A conductor's baton rests on a lectern at the front 
of the stage. If a character grasps the baton, the hall 
echoes with the sounds of instruments being tuned, 
and a spectral orchestra materializes from out of the 
corpses onstage. The ghostly musicians hold their 
instruments and stare expectantly at their conductor. 
These spirits can't be turned or harmed in any way. 

Conducting the Orchestra. To conduct the orchestra 
through the end of their final symphony, a character 
must succeed on three consecutive DC 15 Charisma 
(Performance) checks made 1 minute apart. A character 
who knows The Dark Between the Stars gains advan- 
tage on each check. 

On the first successful check, the orchestra launches 
into a hauntingly beautiful performance. If the next 
check succeeds, listeners experience a falling sensa- 
tion in the pits of their stomachs, mirroring Ythryn’s 
downward plunge, as the music reaches a crescendo. 

If the third and final check succeeds, the conductor 
brings the piece to a satisfying close as the sound of 
ghostly applause rises from the audience and phantas- 
mal black roses rain down on the musicians, who face 
the audience and bow before fading into the afterlife. A 
character who successfully conducts the orchestra gains 
inspiration. 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


257 


On each failed check, the spirits become angry, and 
their antipathy toward the conductor deals 27 (5d10) 
psychic damage to each creature in the music hall. 


Y28. SKYDOCK SPIRE 


A tower more than one hundred feet tall has a rotating 
glass chamber hovering above its ruined summit. Four 
pointed pillars clutch the chamber’s walls, giving it the 
appearance of a colossal floating crown. 


Skydock Spire stands 120 feet tall, and the glass cham- 
ber magically floats 30 feet above it. The chamber slowly 
rotates clockwise. The tower and the chamber are all 
that remain of a much larger facility that served princi 
pally as a dock for flying ships. 

Characters who enter the tower see a staircase coiling 
around its interior walls. From atop the ruined roof, 
a character using rope can make a successful DC 15 
Strength (Athletics) check as an action to catch onto 
the rotating chamber, which is a 40-foot-diameter room 
made of glass that offers a panoramic view of the city. 
This chamber once served as an opulent and intimate 
meeting place for the upper echelons of Ythryn’s society 


Now it lies in ruin, with entrances lying open and the f 
furnishings inside smashed 

Treasure. Characters who sift through the debris 
on the floor of the chamber find a miniature Netherese 


& z skycoach in a bottle (750 gp) and a nonmagical wand (a 
iag possible spellcasting focus) made of chardalyn (see the l 
] sidebar on page 6). It is suffused with evil magic. i 


While grasping the wand, one feels an urge to inflict ter- 
rible harm upon others, but the urge is easily resisted. 

Prolonged custody of the wand might have a more detri- 
mental effect, at your discretion. 


Y29. Mu: 


JM 


A palatial hexagonal building rises before you, crowned 
with a glittering domed roof. A double door on one side 


stands slightly ajar. 


Characters who venture inside the museum find that 
statues and other objects of art have fallen from their 
plinths and lie in broken shards across the floor, and 
centuries of exposure have ruined most of the paintings 
that hang on the walls in elaborate frames. 

Lower Level. Six nothics are searching the lower 
level of the museum for relics. When they detect the 
entry of intruders, they converge on them and attack out 
of hunger. 


Upper Level. Characters who ascend the stairs to the 
upper level come across the following display: 


Suspended from the ceiling of a spacious fifty-foot 
square antechamber is the glittering, frost-covered 
corpse of a thirty-foot-long aberration shaped like a fun- 
nel, resembling an anemone. A tooth-filled maw at the 
wider end is surrounded by rubbery cilia, and around it 
dangle four limp, spindly appendages, each one ending 
in a clawed hand, At the opposite end of the body is a tail 
with a stinger. 

A frost-covered plaque is bolted to a pedestal nearby, 
and the entire display is framed by four stone pillars that 
are, oddly, frost-free. 


The pillars are four spitting mimics (see appendix C) 
that guard the creature on display, attacking anyone 
who touches or otherwise disturbs it. 

The dead creature is a magically preserved phaerimm 
suspended from the ceiling by a dozen strong wires. If 
the characters wipe away the frost on the plaque, they 
can read what it says about the phaerimm in Draconic: 


ADULT PHAERIMM—DO NOT TOUCH! 

Dwellers of the Underdark, phaerimm are malevolent 
aberrations that are master spellcasters and highly re- 
sistant to magic. They use their telepathy to control the 
weak-minded. They strive to erase all other beings from 
existence and are known to have caused the collapse of 
the sarrukh empire of Isstosseffifil. They use their tail 
stingers to inject their eggs into alien hosts. 


Iriolarthas and His Apprentices. Characters who 
proceed farther into the upper floor can see the mu- 
seum's domed ceiling, which is still intact and a sight 
to behold. It depicts a powerful mage standing on a 
balcony of the enclave’s central spire, addressing a sea 
of Netherese citizens below, who stare up at the figure, 
cheering. This is an image of Iriolarthas at the height 
of his power, magically preserved in stained glass that 
glows with its own arcane light. Eight large portraits 
adorn the walls beneath the dome, depicting Iriolar- 
thas's eight apprentices, known as the Wizards of the 
Ebon Star. The portraits hang 20 feet above the ground, 
and a frost-covered plaque is fixed to the wall just be- 
neath each one. The faces in the portraits are depicted 
as looking up toward their master, Iriolarthas, with 
expressions of respect. Characters who clear the ice 
from the plaques can learn their names: High Abjurer 
Taruth, High Conjurer Damorith, High Diviner Apius, 
High Necromancer Cadavix, High Evoker Zadulus, 
High Illusionist Ajamar, High Enchanter Ivira, and High 
Transmuter Metaltra. 


DEALING WITH THE 
ARCANE BROTHERHOOD 


In this chapter, two wizards of the Arcane Brotherhood 
attempt to realize their grand ambitions: Vellynne Har- 
pell and Avarice. Both are described in appendix C. 

If the characters are having trouble solving a puzzle in 
Ythryn, such as how to deactivate the force field around 
the Spire of Iriolarthas, you can use Vellynne or Ava- 
rice to help them. Both NPCs are highly intelligent and 
can help the characters arrive at a solution. You, as the 
DM, can use them to keep the adventure from grinding 
toa halt. 

Both Vellynne and Avarice will do almost anything to 
obtain Iriolarthas’s spellbook, and they are only slightly 
less determined when it comes time to choose who gets 
Iriolarthas's staff of power, the scroll of the comet, and 
the scroll of tarrasque summoning. 

If the characters helped Dzaan’s simulacrum become 
areal person in chapter 2 (see “Lost Spire of Netheril,” 
page 145), he might be present as well. Without a full 
complement of spells, Dzaan isn’t nearly as helpful as 
Vellynne nor as dangerous as Avarice, but he's just as 
greedy and self-serving. Roleplay him accordingly. 


VELLYNNE’S HELP 


Vellynne Harpell can use her comprehend languages 
spell to translate passages of Draconic script found 
throughout the necropolis, and her Leomund's tiny hut 
spell conjures an excellent refuge against the extreme 
cold. She tries to be as useful as possible while staking 
claim to her fair share of whatever treasure is found in 
Ythryn. She is particularly interested in magic items, 
especially those of a wizardly bent (such as Iriolarthas's 
staff of power). 


VELLYNNE'S FALL 

If the characters part ways with Vellynne for any rea- 
son, she tries to explore Ythryn alone and contracts the 
arcane blight (see page 233). The next time the charac- 
ters see her, she is either partially or fully transformed 
into a nothic. 


AVARICE’S ARRIVAL 


Avarice (see appendix C) follows the characters through 
the Caves of Hunger to Ythryn, killing any NPCs they 
left behind to guard the caves. The albino tiefling wiz- 
ard is joined by her two gargoyles, her raven familiar, 
twenty cult fanatics (members of the Knights of the 
Black Sword), and ten roped mountain goats (see 
appendix C) that the cultists use for food and to set off 
traps. If Huarwar Mulphoon and Fel Suparra are alive, 
they are among the cult fanatics (see area C6 on page 
41 for more information about these NPCs). 

The Knights of the Black Sword speak Common and 
Infernal, and they have the following additional trait: 


Icy Doom. When the cultist dies, its corpse freezes for 9 days, 
during which time it can't be thawed, harmed by fire, animated, 
or raised from the dead. 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


259 


260 


Avarice and her retinue enter the necropolis 12 hours 
after the party arrives. Avarice immediately claims the 
floating chamber above Skydock Spire (area Y28) as her 
base of operations, using her fly spell to reach it, while 
the cult fanatics encamp around the base of the tower. 
Avarice's goal is simple: conquer Ythryn and claim its 
treasures for herself. 

From her refuge, Avarice divides her expedition into 
four hunting parties of five cult fanatics each, and sends 
them off to explore the ruins, using her raven familiar 
and the gargoyles as aerial scouts. The party can meet 
Avarice’s minions anywhere in the necropolis (including 
inside the spire if the force field surrounding it is deac- 
tivated or suppressed). They have orders to attack the 
characters on sight. 

Each time the party explores a new building, there is a 
20 percent chance that one of Avarice’s hunting parties 
is already inside or arrives while the party is searching 
its interior. 


OLD RIVALRIES DIE HARD 

If she becomes aware of Vellynne’s presence in Ythryn, 
Avarice uses her raven familiar to deliver a written in- 
vitation to her rival, asking Vellynne to join her inside 
her floating lair. Vellynne accepts the invitation unless 
the characters strongly discourage her from doing so. 
There, Avarice coldly lays down her terms: abandon the 
necropolis within the hour. Conflict between members 
of the Arcane Brotherhood is forbidden, but Avarice 
makes it clear she is willing to ignore the rules if nobody 
lives to find out. When Vellynne leaves the meeting, Av- 
arice sends her familiar out to spy on her rival and see 
if her demands are met, which Vellynne has no inten- 
tion of doing. 


AVARICE AS AN ALLY 

Avarice is smart enough to ally with the characters if 
doing so might help her conquer Ythryn, but she won't 
join forces as long as Vellynne Harpell is with them— 
she demands that they cast out her hated rival. If the 
characters oblige and banish Vellynne from their ranks, 
Avarice reciprocates by sharing 1d4 pieces of Ythryn 
lore she has learned (determine each piece by rolling on 
the Ythryn Lore table on page 235). 

Unlike Vellynne, who accompanies the characters, 
Avarice prefers to remain in her glass chamber atop 
Skydock Spire and stay in touch with the characters 
remotely by using her Rary’s telepathic bond spell. Once 
the characters find all the inscriptions they need to by- 
pass the force field around the Spire of Iriolarthas, Ava- 
rice emerges from her base and accompanies them into 
the tower, eager to claim the treasures inside. 


AURIL'’S WRATH 


The Frostmaiden likes to preserve beauty by freezing it. 
If the characters failed to defeat Auril in chapter 5, she 
takes umbrage with anyone who unseals and plunders 
the necropolis of Ythryn. After the party has spent one 
day inside the city, Auril pays Ythryn a visit. 

Please review the information about the Frostmaiden 
in appendix C before running encounters with her. 


CHAPTER 7 | DOOM OF YTHRYN 


THE FROSTMAIDEN’S FORCES 


When the Frostmaiden arrives in Ythryn, the tempera- 
ture throughout the necropolis drops by several de- 
grees. Auril is joined by three frost giant skeletons (see 
appendix C), six snow golems (see appendix C), anda 
pack of six winter wolves. After sending her skeletons, 
golems, and wolves into the city in small groups to kill 
interlopers on sight, Auril shuts down the force field 
around the Spire of Iriolarthas by sheer force of her di- 
vine will and watches over the city from its high balcony 
(area Y19p). The force field remains deactivated until 
the last of Auril’s forms is destroyed or until she leaves 
the spire. 

Any of Avarice’s minions still patrolling the city are 
swiftly captured and dragged before the Frostmaiden. 
Auril murders each captive in turn and transforms the 
cultist into a coldlight walker (see appendix C). These 
undead horrors venture out into the necropolis to hunt 
down the living. 


FINAL SHOWDOWN 


If the characters defeat most of Auril's minions, the 
god's cool voice echoes across the city from the high 
balcony of the Spire of Iriolarthas, demanding that they 
leave Ythryn or face her wrath. One hour after making 
this announcement, Auril leaves the tower and prowls 
through the streets in search of the characters. For ev- 
ery hour that passes, there is a 20 percent chance that 
she catches up with them. Only characters who flee the 
city and return to Icewind Dale are spared her wrath, 


SUMMONING THE 
TARRASQUE 


Characters who find the scroll of tarrasque summoning 
in the Spire of Iriolarthas might be sorely tempted to 
use it. Professor Skant, an expert on the tarrasque, 
warns the characters about the uncontrollable nature of 
the monster and the danger it represents, but the profes- 
sor orb also confesses that it would love to observe the 
tarrasque firsthand. 

If summoned in Ythryn, the tarrasque destroys 
everything in sight before smashing its way through 
the Caves of Hunger and continuing its rampage across 
Icewind Dale, inevitably putting Ten-Towns in peril. 
The mountains to the south, the sea to the north and 
west, and the towering glacier to the east contain the 
tarrasque for a while. The extreme cold also makes the 
creature lethargic. It might take months, but the hungry 
tarrasque eventually makes its way southward through 
the mountain pass, imperiling the rest of the Sword 
Coast, if nothing is done to curtail its rampage. 

If summoned on Auril's island, the tarrasque is 
trapped there by the deep, churning Sea of Moving Ice. 
The behemoth lays waste to Grimskalle and everything 
else on the island before sinking into a deep hiberna- 
tion. Auril, if she survives, is forced to abandon her 
island lair and find a new refuge. 


EPILOGUE 


EPENDING ON THE CHARACTERS’ ACTIONS 
and the whims of the dice gods, this adven- 
ture has several possible endings. Likely 
conclusions are discussed below, though 
others are certainly possible. 


WHAT SECRETS REMAIN 


Allow time at the end of the adventure for players to 
reveal any character secrets that have not come to light. 
Some players will want to keep their characters’ secrets 
buried. For the others, work with them to figure out the 
best way for the characters’ secrets to bear fruit, For 
example, a character who has the Ring Hunter secret 
might still be searching for the signet ring that secures 
their inheritance; perhaps the ring is discovered during 
acelebratory dinner in Ten-Towns, when the character 
cuts open their pan-fried knucklehead trout and the ring 
unceremoniously spills out! 


SuMMER Is COMING 


Slaying Auril or her roc prevents the Frostmaiden from 
casting her nightly spell, ending her everlasting winter, 
The characters can also counteract the Frostmaiden's 
everlasting winter by using the Ythryn mythallar to ef- 
fect a change in the weather, though any such attempt 
inevitably leads to a confrontation with Auril and her 
faithful. Only by slaying Auril can the characters de- 
prive her followers of their god-granted spells and their 
will to fight. 


With the Frostmaiden’s defeat, normal seasonal 
weather returns to Icewind Dale. The sun again rises 
above the horizon, and as temperatures improve, flora 
and fauna begin to recover. Depending on how they 
fared against the chardalyn dragon in chapter 4, the 
people of Ten-Towns can look forward to warmer times 
once more. 

Auril’s death is temporary, for a god who has mortal 
worshipers can’t truly die. When the Frostmaiden is 
resurrected on the next winter solstice, she has all her 
divine power. But her inclination is to retreat from the 
world and not allow herself to be imperiled by mortals 
once more. The characters won't have to deal with her 
again in their lifetimes unless they continue meddling in 
her followers’ affairs. 

The characters can help Ten-Towners rebuild their 
settlements in the wake of the chardalyn dragon's 
rampage and the floods. If the dragon has not yet been 
defeated, finding and destroying it should be a priority. 
Until its master sends it on another rampage, it lurks 
inside the forge where it was created (see chapter 3). 

Characters who help rebuild Ten-Towns might be 
asked to take up the mantle of speaker in one or more 
communil replacing leaders who were killed during 
the adventure. If he survived, Speaker Naerth Max- 
ildanarr of Targos opposes the characters’ political 
ascendance, since they represent a threat to Zhentarim 
control of the region; without a power base of his own, 
however, Naerth can do little to stop them, 


WINTER EVERLASTING 


If the characters don't stop Auril, her everlasting winter 
becomes unendurable to most of Icewind Dale's inhabi- 
tants. The hostile climate and the scarcity of food force 
indigenous creatures to migrate southward or die. As 
go the reindeer, so go the Reghed tribesfolk. In time, 
even the lakes freeze solid, depriving Ten-Towners of 
the knucklehead trout upon which their survival de- 
pends. Within a year or two, Icewind Dale becomes a 
gods-forsaken wasteland as cold as Stygia. The bitter 
cold allows Levistus to open portals between Icewind 
Dale and the sixth layer of the Nine Hells, from which 
come forth ice devils under the archdevil’s command, 
Knights of the Black Sword who survive to see these 
events come to pass try to maintain a foothold in the re- 
gion, though they are opposed by duergar at every turn. 

The ice devils help clear the way for the duergar, who 
aren't going anywhere unless the characters kill Xar- 
dorok Sunblight and put an end to his line. Once Ten- 
Towns is no longer a threat to his supremacy, Xardorok 
does his utmost to conquer the rest of Icewind Dale. If 
left unchecked, the duergar become a controlling power 
in the region. The ice devils, once subservient to Levis- 
tus, are dragooned by Asmodeus into helping the duer- 
gar turn the Far North into a vassal kingdom secretly 
under the sway of the Nine Hells. 


YEAR OF CHILLED MARROW 


If the characters use Iriolarthas'’s staff of power to acti- 
vate the obelisk in Ythryn, they inadvertently reset the 
world to a time predating the fall of Ythryn and the end 
of Netheril. The obelisk has sent them back to the spring 
of -343 DR, the Year of Chilled Marrow, six months 
prior to the catastrophe that causes Ythryn’s fall and 
another four years before Netheril’s demise. The charac- 
ters find themselves high in the sky over Icewind Dale. 
Use the following boxed text to set the scene: 


The obelisk is gone, leaving an indentation in the ground 
where it once stood. In its place is an aarakocra with bril- 
liantly colored plumage. Using telepathy, it reaches out to 
each of you in turn and introduces itself as Necalli, “I am 
released from a duty long forgotten,” it says. “The world 
has rolled back more than fifteen hundred years. Now, 
history can be rewritten.” 

The city is no longer trapped deep beneath the Reghed 
Glacier, Instead, it drifts among the clouds, its spires and 
other structures agleam and undamaged. A skycoach 
glides overhead, bathing you briefly in its shadow before 
making its way toward the city’s glass-enclosed skydock. 

Weaving between the city’s spires are boulevards tra- 
versed by tall humans of noble bearing in wizardly robes, 
many of them accompanied by hairless, green-skinned 
humanoids that serve as their valets and bodyguards. 
Some take note of your presence, while others gawk at 
the empty space where the obelisk once stood. 


EPILOGUE 


Necalli, a couatl shapechanged into the form of an 
aarakocra, doesn't remember why it was bound to the 
obelisk or by whom. It knows only that it is free of its 
obligation to the obelisk’s builders. It does its best to 
convince the characters that the obelisk is gone forever, 
along with nearly two thousand years of history. Necalli 
can administer healing to wounded characters, after 
which it assumes its true form and departs. It takes no 
action that might harm another creature. 

Ythryn is now a floating, living city under the rule of 
the lich Iriolarthas and his apprentices, the Wizards of 
the Arcane Star (eight evil archmages). Almost every 
other inhabitant of the city is either a Netherese mage 
or a green-skinned magen (described in appendix C). 
When not partaking in their studies and revels, the 
Netherese focus their efforts on finding ruins of Ostoria, 
the ancient empire of giants. It is toward this supreme 
goal that all of the city's resources are directed. 

The obelisk is gone, erased from history, leaving the 
characters stranded. They are now stuck in -343 DR. 

If the characters warn Iriolarthas about the fate that 
awaits Ythryn and recount the circumstances leading to 
its fall, the lich takes steps to ensure that history does 
not repeat itself, including but not limited to keeping 
Ostorian relics away from the Ythryn mythallar. In ex- 
change for their information, Iriolarthas gives the char- 
acters a skycoach to expedite their departure from the 
city. Characters who flee rather than allow themselves 
to be detained can commandeer a skycoach and plot a 
course away from the city. A skycoach has the statistics 
of an airship (see the Dungeon Master's Guide), but its 
magic wanes quickly unless it's recharged using magic 
foreign to the characters. Soon, the skycoach struggles 
to remain aloft, forcing the characters to set down and 
salvage what they can from the vessel. 

To put it mildly, the characters have a whole new 
world to explore. Ten-Towns doesn't exist in this time- 
line, nor do most of the cities along the Sword Coast 
that characters might recognize. Many tribes of Reghed 
nomads prowl Icewind Dale, while Uthgardt tribes de- 
scended from Netherese claim vast tracts of untamed 
land south of the Spine of the World, kept in check by 
marauding monsters. The Empire of Netheril controls 
the lush, temperate lands doomed to become the desert 
of Anauroch. The town of Illusk (still centuries away 
from becoming Luskan) surrounds the brooding Host- 
tower of the Arcane. Characters hoping to visit some 
past version of Waterdeep or Neverwinter find nothing 
but unsettled land surrounded by the remnants of the 
elven kingdom of Illefarn. Humans won't begin farming 
the plateau above Deepwater Harbor (the future site 
of Waterdeep) or building the settlement of Eigersstor 
(later renamed Neverwinter) for another three centuries. 

To run a campaign set in this earlier time frame, you 
will need to delve into earlier products tied to the For- 
gotten Realms to get the lay of the land circa -343 DR. 
Of course, once the characters move beyond the strong- 
holds of civilization, the Realms of the past is very much 
like the Realms of the present—a land of mystery, with 
old ruins and lost dungeons waiting to be explored. Only 
now the characters are poised to witness the inevitable 
fall of Netheril, or find a way to stop it. 


APPENDIX A: 
ICEWIND DALE [TRINKETS 


IcEWIND DALE TRINKETS 


100 
01-04 


05-08 


09-12 


13-16 


17-20 
21-24 


25-28 


29-32 
33-36 


37-40 


Trinket 

A small wooden figurine of a yawning walrus, 
painted in red and black 

A pair of scrimshaw cufflinks with an image of a 
fisherman on a boat engraved on them 

A small iron key with a frayed blue and gold cord 
tied to it 

A small illustrated book of Northlander myths that 
has pages missing 

A damaged scrimshaw cameo depicting a merfolk 
A stone from a burial cairn with a tiny Dwarvish 
rune carved into it 

A ripped cloth sail with a symbol you don’t 
recognize 

An Ulu knife with a scrimshaw handle 

Ajar containing an unidentifiable, sweet, sticky 
substance 

A delicate glass ball painted with snowflakes, 
capped by a metal loop with a tiny hook attached 
to it 

An expedition log with missing pages and a pressed 
flower used as a bookmark 


An owl figurine carved from whalebone 


d100 
49-52 


53-56 


57-60 


61-64 
65-68 


69-72 
73-16 
77-80 
81-84 
85-88 
89-92 


93-96 
97-00 


Trinket 

A sewing box that smells of old wood and has three 
spools of blue thread Inside 

A scrimshaw-handled ink pen with black runic de- 
signs along its length 

A brooch made from a small insect encased in 
amber 

A scrimshaw pepper shaker etched with the letter W 
An old, wooden-handled ice pick stained with blood 
that won't wash off 

A fabric doll bearing an angry expression 

A set of wind chimes made from seashells 

A beautiful silver tin that, when opened, emits the 
smell of rotting fish 

A bloodstained dreamcatcher made from fishing 
line, gold wire, and snowy owlbear feathers 

A figurine of a polar bear made of ice that never 
melts 

A snow globe that doesn’t need to be shaken 

A piece of sea glass shaped like a unicorn’s horn 

A dark blue scarf that gets lighter in shade the 
higher the altitude of the wearer 


APPENDIX A | ICEWIND DALE TRINKETS 


263 


APPENDIX B: CHARACTER SECRETS 


ALAGONDAR SCION 

Prerequisite: You must be a human, half- 
elf, or half-orc to have this secret. If you 
don't meet this prerequisite, draw a dif- 
ferent card. 


l'm a scion of the Alagondar bloodline 

and the only known heir to the crown of 

Neverwinter. If Dagult Neverember, the 

city's lord-regent, learns that I'm alive, 
he'll send assassins to kill me. 


ELUSIVE PARAMOUR 

A wealthy pasha in Calimshan has placed 
a bounty on my head for seducing his 
favorite concubine. Bounty hunters are 
scouring the Sword Coast in search of 
me, but | hope they'll never think to look 
in Icewind Dale. 


MIDWINTER CHILD 

Auril the Frostmaiden has blessed me, 
for | was born on the Midwinter holiday. 
_ Ihave resistance to cold damage. 


APPENDIX B | CHARACTER SECRETS 


DOPPELGANGER 
I'm a shapechanger. | have none of the 
traits of the race I'm imitating, but | 
retain my class features, background, 
and alignment. | have darkvision out to 
a range of 60 feet. I can use an action to 
do either of the following at will: 


+ I can innately cast detect thoughts, re- 
quiring no components. My spellcast- 
ing ability is Intelligence. The spell’s 
Wisdom save DC is 8 + my proficiency 
bonus + my Intelligence modifier. 


1 can polymorph into any humanoid | 
have seen or back into my true form. 
My statistics, other than my size, don’t 
change. Any equipment I'm wearing or 
carrying isn't transformed. | revert to 
my true form when I die. 


ESCAPED PRISONER 

| was brought here from another world 
by spacefaring mind flayers. The ship in 
which | was imprisoned crashed in the 
mountains south of Ten-Towns. After 
surviving the crash, | nearly froze to 
death crossing the tundra to reach Ten- 
Towns. If some friendly trappers hadn't 
found me, | would have perished. | fear 
some of my captors also survived the 
crash and might come looking for me. 


OLD FLAME 

I have a lover in Ten-Towns whom | 
haven't seen in years. At any time out- 
side of combat, | can decide who the 
lover is by choosing an NPC in Ten- 
Towns that | can see. Once | make this 


| choice, | can't change it. This old flame 


is friendly and helpful toward me, even if 
our past is checkered. 


Drizzt FAN © r 
| once met the famous drow ranger 

| Drizzt Do'Urden! In fact, | have a tat- 
| tered piece of his famous green cloak 
and would never think to part with it. 


LITTLEST YETI 

| was raised by yeti. Although | relied 

on my ferocious guardians for food and 
warmth and never quite adapted to the 
cold, | speak Yeti and have advantage on 
Charisma checks made to influence yeti 
or improve their attitudes. 


Orc STONE 
| saved the life of an orc, who gave 

me a stone with the symbol of the 
Many-Arrows tribe (a humanoid skull 
pierced by three arrows) carved into it. 
The stone is an uncommon magic item 
that requires attunement, and only | can 
attune to it. 

As an action, | can use the stone to 
summon the spirit of an orc warrior, 
which appears within 30 feet of me. The 
spirit uses the orc war chief stat block in 
the Monster Manual and disappears af- 
ter 10 minutes or when reduced to 0 hit 
points. The spirit understands any lan- 
guage | speak and obeys my commands. 

After the stone is used three times, it 
turns to dust. 


! OWLBEAR WHISPERER 


Owlbears are predisposed to like me. 
If | am within 10 feet of an owlbear, | 
can use an action to make a DC 10 Cha- 

risma (Animal Handling) check. On a 
success, | change the owlbear’s attitude 
toward me from hostile to indifferent or 
from indifferent to friendly. 


| REINCARNATION 

| | died and was brought back to life by a 
friendly human druid using the reincar- 
nate spell. | have no idea what became 
of the druid, whose name | don’t know. 
I retain the memories of my previous 
life, some or all of which was spent in 
Icewind Dale. (Roll'on the table in the 
spell’s description to determine your 
character's previous race, or choose a 
race from the table that you like, then 
flesh out the story of your previous life.) 


| SLAAD Host 

| A red slaad implanted a pellet-sized egg 
in me shortly before | started my adven- 
| | turing career. If | can't get rid of it in the 
| next two months, the egg will gestate 

| inside me, and a slaad tadpole will burst 
from my chest, killing me. It will then 
quickly grow into an adult slaad and kill 
even more people. 


PIRATE CANNIBAL 
| served aboard Dark Duchess, a pirate 
ship from the city of Luskan. After the 
vessel got stuck in the ice, everyone 

| but the captain abandoned the vessel 

| and fled to Ten-Towns. We got lost in a 
blizzard along the way. | was the only 
one who made it, and only by eating my 
mates. The ship and its treasure are still 
out there. 


RING HUNTER 
| am looking for the knucklehead trout 
that bit off my father’s finger, which had 
a signet ring on it. To preserve my inher- 
itance, | must retrieve the lost ring. 


Spy 
I'm a spy for the Harpers, a secretive or- 
ganization that works behind the scenes 
to thwart tyrants and other evildoers. My 
mission in Icewind Dale is to safeguard 
| the settlements of Ten-Towns while con- 
cealing my Harper affiliation. Credible 
_ threats to Ten-Towns include the Arcane 
Brotherhood, an organization of wizards 
based in Luskan, and the Zhentarim, 
an expansive shadow network that 
wants to control trade throughout the 
North. Both have threatened Ten-Towns 
in the past. d 
My only Harper contact in Ten-Towns 
is a human named Beldora, who poses 
as a homeless woman and spends 
her days gathering information in 
Bryn Shander. 


You must be a human, half- 
elf, or half-orc to have this secret. Ifyou ` 
don't meet this prerequisite, draw a dif. | 

ferent card. 


1 am the offspring of Queen Bjornhild 
Solvigsdottir, leader of the Tiger Tribe. 
My mother cast me into the Sea of 
Moving Ice when | was a young child as 
a sacrifice to Auril the Frostmaiden. A 
polar bear pulled me from the water and 
spared me a freezing death. This bear 
then transformed into a goliath who. 
bore me safely to Ten-Towns. | remem- 
ber the goliath’s name—Oyaminartok— 
but haven't seen her since. | owe her my 
life, just as | owe my mother a merci- 


| less death. 


RUNAWAY AUTHOR 

I penned a notorious exposé called “The 
Hellbent Highborn,” which accused sev- 
eral prominent patriars in Baldur's Gate 
and nobles in Waterdeep of being devil 
worshipers. Although my accusations 
were well founded, | made a lot of ene- 
mies and was forced to seek refuge in 
Icewind Dale. 


APPENDIX B | CHARACTER SECRETS 


268 


APPENDIX C: CREATURES 


This appendix describes new creatures that appear in 
the adventure, presenting them in alphabetical order. 
The introduction of the Monster Manual explains how to 
interpret a creature's stat block. 

Several of the creatures in this appendix are common 
beasts—foxes, hares, mountain goats, seals, sperm 
whales, and walruses—that live among other beasts 
from the Monster Manual, such as polar bears, deer, 
elk, reindeer (use the elk stat block), killer whales, 
mammoths, moose (use the giant goat stat block), 
saber-toothed tigers, snowy owls, woolly rhinocer- 
oses, and wolves. And then there's the notoriously ugly 
knucklehead trout, without which there would be no 
Ten-Towns. 

If the adventuring party includes a wizard who can 
prepare the find familiar spell, consider allowing the 
wizard to add the fox and the hare to the spell’s list of 
eligible familiars. 

The creatures in this appendix are categorized by 
creature type below. 


ABERRATIONS 
Gnome ceremorph 
Gnome squidling 


Giants 

Ice troll 

Verbeeg longstrider 
Verbeeg marauder 


Beasts 

Fox Humanoips 

Giant walrus Avarice 

Hare Bjornhild Solvigsdottir 
Knucklehead trout Duergar mind master 
Mountain goat Frost druid 


Seal Goliath warrior 


Sperm whale Goliath werebear 
Walrus Gunvald Halraggson 
Icewind kobold 
Constructs Isarr Kronenstrom 
Chardalyn dragon Jarund Elkhardt 


Demos magen 
Duergar hammerer 
Dzaan's simulacrum 
Galvan magen 
Hypnos magen 


Vellynne Harpell 
Xardorok Sunblight 


MONSTROSITIES 
Auril (first form) 


Living Bigby’s hand Crag cat 

Living blade of disaster Spitting mimic 

Living demiplane Yeti tyke 

Snow golem 

Tomb tapper UNDEAD 
Brain in a jar 

ELEMENTALS Coldlight walker 


Auril (second form) 
Auril (third form) 
Chwinga 


Frost giant skeleton 
Gnoll vampire 
Icewind kobold zombie 


Kobold vampire spawn 
FIEND 


Nass Lantomir’s ghost 
Chardalyn berserker 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


ARCANE BROTHERHOOD 


The Arcane Brotherhood is a cabal of powerful wiz- 
ards that operates out of the Hosttower of the Arcane, 

a multi-spired structure that towers above Luskan (a 
city south of Icewind Dale on the Sword Coast). The 
brotherhood's leadership consists of five renowned 
archmages who handpick the other members, favoring 
wizards of great accomplishment. Every year, scores of 
wizards from across Faerûn flock to the Hosttower of 
the Arcane, hoping to gain admittance into the presti- 
gious ranks of the brotherhood. Nearly all candidates 
are dismissed out of hand, without so much as a test, 
feeding rumors that the brotherhood's leaders are more 
interested in marketing their own brand of exclusivity 
than finding new talent. Yet wizards seem willing to 
debase themselves regardless, for admittance to the 
brotherhood grants access to the Hosttower's incredible 
libraries of magical lore. 

The truth behind the brotherhood’s ongoing quest 
for new members is based on the adage, “Keep your 
friends close and your enemies closer.” The brother- 
hood’s leaders seek out wizards who might by their 
exploits compete with the brotherhood's acquisition and 
hoarding of arcane lore and magical secrets. By bring- 
ing these wizards into the fold, the brotherhood turns 
potential enemies into colleagues, in effect neutralizing 
future threats. 

Once welcomed into the brotherhood, wizards are 
free to pursue their own interests so long as they place 
the security and sanctity of the Hosttower and the cabal 
above all else. When not rallying to defend their home, 
wizards of the Arcane Brotherhood act like friendly and 
unfriendly rivals to one another, striving to outdo their 
peers in magic. Open conflict between members is for- 
bidden, yet members are adroit at finding underhanded 
ways to needle and sabotage one another. 

The Arcane Brotherhood sent three of its members 
to investigate rumors of a lost Netherese enclave that 
crashed in Icewind Dale nearly two thousand years ago. 
A fourth wizard, Nass Lantomir, learned about the expe- 
dition and decided to form her own. 

Not long after they arrived in Bryn Shander, the three 
wizards who had formed the initial expeditionary force 
parted company, each one determined to be the first to 
find the enclave—such is the fragile nature of wizardly 
alliances. The four wizards are described below: 


Avarice, an albino tiefling evoker with a pair of gargoyle 
companions 

Dzaan, a human illusionist and Red Wizard of Thay 
who perished recently, but whose simulacrum lives on 

Nass Lantomir, a human diviner who died and now ex- 
ists as a spellcasting ghost 

Vellynne Harpell, a human necromancer from a fa- 
mous family with a cadre of kobolds—some living, 
others undead 


AVARICE, HER RAVEN FAMILIAR, AND HER GARG 


AVARICE 


Avarice is a cruel and vindictive tiefling trained in the 
arcane tradition of evocation. She likes using her magic 
to destroy things, and her hunger for magic items knows 
no bounds. Her supreme confidence means that she 
never backs down from a challenge, even when the odds 
are clearly stacked against her. Seeing other wizards as 
a threat, paranoia rules her life. 

Avarice has been a member of the Arcane Brother- 
hood for almost two years. She fantasizes about rising 
to fame and prominence in record time and hopes that 
plundering the lost Netherese city of Ythryn will turn 
her fantasies into reality. 

The tiefling has the secret support of the archdevil 
Levistus, having traded her soul years ago for her 
first taste of magical power. Levistus speaks to her 
in dreams and guides her path. Shortly after Avarice 
arrived in Ten-Towns, Levistus urged her to seek out 
the Black Sword. Avarice didn’t know who or what the 
Black Sword was until she was approached by cultists 
of Levistus bearing swordlike shards of chardalyn 
worn as pendants around their necks. These self-styled 
Knights of the Black Sword offered her sanctuary in the 
keep of Caer-Dineval, where they are based. Although 
she doesn’t trust the cultists, they treat her with more 
respect than anyone else does, and the keep is a safer 
location than most other places in Ten-Towns. 

Companions. Avarice has a pair of loyal gargoyles 
named Gargle and Gurgle who serve her as bodyguards 


and scouts. Avarice uses her Rary’s telepathic bond 
spell to stay in telepathic contact with her gargoyles be- 
fore sending them off on any mission. Avarice also has 
the support of the Knights of the Black Sword, if she 
needs to call on their talents. 

Familiar. Avarice’s familiar throughout the adventure 
is a squawking raven named Skelm. It uses the raven 
stat block in the Monster Manual but is a fiend instead 
of a beast. 

Spelibook. Avarice’s spellbook has white leather 
covers and vellum pages. The tiefling’s personal sigil is 
burned into the front cover. The book contains the spells 
Avarice has prepared plus the following additional 
spells: burning hands, cone of cold, find familiar, ice 
storm, lightning bolt, rope trick, thunderwave, tongues, 
wall of fire, and wall of force. 


DZzAAN 


Dzaan was a Red Wizard of Thay who studied the 
arcane tradition of illusion, The leaders of the Arcane 
Brotherhood welcomed him with open arms, eager to 
count a Red Wizard among their ranks. Dzaan might 
have become a force to reckon with in the brotherhood 
had his quest for power not led him to Icewind Dale, 
where he was killed by the people of Easthaven after 
making a few too many enemies. 

Dzaan’s Demise. Dzaan's trouble started after 
he broke away from his fellow wizards and hired 
adventurers to scour Icewind Dale for Netherese ruins. 
One group of them uncovered a buried tower in the 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES r 
269 


a 
ta 


or Class 13 (16 with mage armor) 
Points 84 (13d8 + 26) 


$ Speed 30 ft. 


STR 
8 (-1) 


DEX 
16 (+3) 


CON 
14 (+2) 


INT 
17 (43) 


wis 
10 (+0) 


CHA 
9(-1) 


Saving Throws Int +6, Wis +3 
Skills Arcana +6, History +6 
Damage Resistances cold (granted by staff of frost), fire 


__ Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 


Languages Common, Draconic, Infernal, Orc, Yeti 
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


i 
Icy Doom. When Avarice dies, her corpse freezes for 9 days, 
during which time it can't be thawed, harmed by fire, animated, 
| or raised from the dead. 


Special Equipment. Avarice wields a staff of frost with 10 
charges (see “Actions” below), 


Spellcasting. Avarice is a 10th-level spelicaster. Her spelicast- 
ing ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 14; +6 to hit with spell 
attacks). She has the following wizard spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): fire bolt (see “Actions” below), mage hand, 
message, minor illusion, prestidigitation 

Ist level (4 slots): detect magic, mage armor, magic missile 

2nd level (3 slots): flaming sphere, knock, scorching ray 

3rd level (3 slots): counterspell, fireball, fly 

4th level (3 slots): banishment, fire shield 

Sth level (2 slots): Bigby’s hand, Rary's telepathic bond 


ACTIONS 


Fire Bolt (Cantrip). Ranged Spell Attack: +6 to hit, range 120 ft., 
one target. Hit: 11 (2d10) fire damage. 


Staff of Frost. While holding this staff, Avarice can expend 1 or 
more of its charges to cast one of the following spells from it 
(spell save DC 14): cone of cold (5 charges), fog cloud (1 charge), 
ice storm (4 charges), or wall of ice (4 charges). 

The staff regains 1d6 + 4 charges daily at dawn. If its last 
charge is expended, roll a d20; on a 1, the staff turns to water 
and is destroyed. 


REACTIONS 


Banishing Rebuke (Recharges after a Long Rest). When Avarice 
is damaged by a creature that she can see within 60 feet of her, 
she can banish that creature to a frigid extradimensional prison 
for 1 minute. While there, the creature is incapacitated and 

_ takes 5 (1d 10) cold damage at the start of each of its turns. At 
the end of each of its turns, the creature can make a DC 14 Cha- 
risma saving throw, escaping the prison on a success and reap- 
pearing in the space it left or in the nearest unoccupied space 

_ if that space is occupied. A creature that dies in the prison is 

_ trapped there indefinitely. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


tundra (see “Lost Spire of Netheril,” page 145), and 
Dzaan went out of his way to eliminate anyone who 
knew of it, including the adventurers who found it and 
several Ten-Towners with whom they had spoken. After 
turning the tower into his secret base, Dzaan visited 
Easthaven to gather supplies. Although he took the pre- 
caution of adopting a magical disguise, members of the 
local militia recognized Dzaan by the way he walked 
and spoke. They captured him, gagged him, confiscated 
his spellbook, and condemned him to death. 

The characters have no opportunity to speak with 
Dzaan. They first encounter him in Easthaven, tied to 
a stake and engulfed in flames (see “Toil and Trouble,” 
page 62). The Ten-Towners enjoy the execution while 
it lasts. After warming themselves by the fire, they leave 
Dzaan’s ashes to be scattered by the wind. 

Dzaan’s Simulacrum. Unbeknownst to his execu- 
tioners, Dzaan had used a spell scroll of simulacrum to 


DZAAN’S SIMULACRUM 


Medium construct, lawful evil 


Armor Class 10 

Hit Points 24 (half of 9d8 + 9) 

Speed 30 ft. 

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1060) NEO 12 (+1) 1663 13) 15 (+2) 


Saving Throws Int +5, Wis +3 

Skills Arcana +5, Deception +4, History +5 
Senses passive Perception 11 

Languages Abyssal, Common, Giant, Infernal 


Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Spellcasting. The simulacrum is a 9th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 13, +5 to hit 
with spell attacks). It has the following wizard spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): acid splash,* light, minor illusion, 
shocking grasp* 

Ist level (2 slots): detect magic, disguise self, magic missile* 

2nd level (2 slots): invisibility, levitate, phantasmal force 

*See "Actions" below. 


ACTIONS 


Shocking Grasp (Cantrip). Melee Spell Attack: +5 to hit, reach 
5 ft., one creature (the attack roll has advantage if the target 
is wearing armor made of metal). Hit: 9 (2d8) lightning dam- 
age, and the target can’t take reactions until the start of its 
next turn. 


Acid Splash (Cantrip). The simulacrum hurls a bubble of acid at 
one creature it can see within 60 feet of it, or at two such crea- 

tures that are within 5 feet of each other. A target must succeed ` 
on a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw or take 7 (2d6) acid damage. 


Magic Missile (1st-Level Spell; Requires a Spell Slot). The 
simulacrum creates three darts of magical force. Each dart 
unerringly strikes one creature the simulacrum can see within 
120 feet of it, dealing 3 (1d4 + 1) force damage. If the simula- 
_crum casts this spell using a 2nd-level spell slot, it creates one 


DARAT 33 P 


DIAAN AND HIS WIGHT BOOYGUARD, KRINTAAS 


create a copy of himself. This simulacrum dwells in the 
sunken Netherese spire, waiting for its creator to return. 
The simulacrum, which looks and acts like Dzaan, 
has half of Dzaan’s hit points and can't regain expended 
spell slots. It has wasted its 3rd-level spell slots trying 

to reach Dzaan with sending spells, to no avail, and has 
expended other spell slots to help it survive the perils of 
the spire. It uses its remaining spell slots sparingly. 

The sunken Netherese tower contains a special room 
that can transform the simulacrum into a real person— 
or any magical illusion into the real thing, for that mat- 
ter. If this change occurs, the simulacrum effectively be- 
comes a clone of Dzaan, authentic in every way. Dzaan’s 
stat block and abilities change as follows: 


+ He has spell slots appropriate for a 9th-level wizard 
(four Ist-level spell slots, three 2nd- through 4thevel 
spell slots, and one 5th-level spell slot), but he lacks 
a spellbook and therefore can't change his list of pre- 
pared spells. 

If he finishes a long rest, he has the following addi- 
tional spell slots, which allow him to cast the indi- 
cated spells: 


3rd level (3 slots): fireball, sending, slow 


4th level (3 slots): arcane eye, confusion 
5th level (1 slot): animate objects 


His hit point maximum becomes 49 (948 + 9), and his 
challenge rating becomes 2 (450 XP). His challenge 
rating becomes 4 (1,100 XP) if he finishes a long rest 
and regains his expended spells. 


Companion. Because they're so despised throughout 
Faerûn, Red Wizards often adopt disguises and rarely 
travel abroad without an escort. They generally favor un- 
dead servants and bodyguards, since they find that un- 
dead tend to be more obedient than the living. Dzaan’'s 
bodyguard is a Thayan wight named Krintaas. When 
Dzaan returned to Easthaven, he ordered his compan- 
ion to stay with the simulacrum and watch over it and 
the buried Netherese spire. 


Nass LANTOMIR 


Nass Lantomir was an apprentice of Zelenn the White, 
one of five archmages who oversee the Arcane Broth- 
erhood. Nass and Zelenn’s relationship started off well, 
but in recent years it has become painfully obvious to 
Zelenn that Nass has been slow to master the arcane 
tradition of divination. Zelenn's suggestion that Nass 
leave the Hosttower of the Arcane and gain experience 
abroad left Nass feeling unwanted. After much thought, 
however, Nass came around to the idea. She could put 
her magic to the test and carve out a name for herself. 

As she was preparing to leave the Hosttower, Nass 
overheard her master talking to another wizard about a 
covert expedition to Icewind Dale being undertaken to 
seek out long-lost magic from a bygone empire. Rather 
than carry out her original plan, Nass followed her fel- 
low wizards to Icewind Dale. She caught up to them in 
Bryn Shander and made her presence known, claiming 
she was sent by her master to aid the expedition with 
her divinations. Egos and frayed nerves caused the 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


272 


Nass LANTOMIR’s GHOST 


Medium undead, neutral evil 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 45 (10d8) 
Speed 0 ft., fly 40 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT WS CHA 
7(-2) BE 1040) 173) 126) 1763) 


a 

Damage Resistances acid, fire, lightning, thunder; bludgeoning, 
piercing, and slashing damage that isn't magical 

Damage Immunities cold, necrotic, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
grappled, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 

Languages Abyssal, Common, Draconic, Orc 

Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 

l 

Ethereal Sight. The ghost can see 60 feet into the Ethereal 

Plane when it is on the Material Plane, and vice versa. 


Incorporeal Movement. The ghost can move through other 
creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It takes 5 
(1d10) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object. 


Spellcasting. The ghost is a 6th-level spelicaster. Its spelicast- 
ing ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 14). The ghost has the 
following wizard spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): mage hand, message, prestidigitation, 


ray of frost 
Ist level (4 slots): detect magic, thunderwave 
2nd level (3 slots): — 
3rd level (3 slots): counterspell 


ACTIONS 


Withering Touch. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 17 (4d6 + 3) necrotic damage. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


group to split up shortly thereafter, with each wizard de- 
termined to succeed alone. 

One night while the others slept, Nass stole a profes- 
sor orb (see appendix D) from one of her fellow wizards, 
Vellynne Harpell. Two of Vellynne’s kobold companions 
witnessed the theft, and Nass killed them with Melf's 
acid arrow spells before fleeing with the orb. 

Nass fled Ten-Towns and headed toward the Sea of 
Moving Ice, hoping to find a tome called The Codicil of 
White, a book of magic and lore composed by servants 
of Auril the Frostmaiden. The Arcane Brotherhood 
believes that this book tells how to reach a lost city of 
magic entombed in the ice. Before she could obtain the 
book, Nass perished. She now exists as a ghost, unable 
to rest until she finds the book. Characters who come 
upon Nass's frozen remains also find her spellbook and 
the orb she stole from Vellynne. 

Familiar. Nass’s magical familiar, a white arctic wea- 
sel acclimated to cold weather named Zelennor, watches 
over the wizard's frozen remains. It uses the weasel 
stat block in the Monster Manual but is a fey instead of 
a beast. If Zelennor is reduced to 0 hit points, Nass's 
ghost is unable to cast the find familiar spell in order to 
get it back. 


Etherealness. The ghost enters the Ethereal Plane from the 
Material Plane, or vice versa. It is visible on the Material Plane 
while it is in the Border Ethereal, and vice versa, yet it can't af- 
fect or be affected by anything on the other plane. 


Horrifying Visage. Each non-undead creature within 60 feet 

of the ghost that can see it must succeed on a DC 14 Wisdom 
saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. If the save fails by 
5 or more, the target also ages 1d4 x 10 years. A frightened tar- 
get can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, 
ending the frightened condition on itself on a success. If the 
target's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, the 
target is immune to this ghost’s Horrifying Visage for the next 
24 hours. The aging effect can be reversed by a greater resto- 
ration spell, but only if it is cast within 24 hours. 


Possession (Recharge 6). One humanoid that the ghost can see 
within 5 feet of it must succeed on a DC 14 Charisma saving 
throw or be possessed by the ghost; the ghost then disappears, 
and the target is incapacitated and loses control of its body. 
The ghost now controls the body but doesn't deprive the target 
of awareness. The ghost can't be targeted by any attack, spell, 
or other effect, except ones that turn undead, and it retains its 
alignment, Intelligence, Wisdom, Charisma, and immunity to 
being charmed and frightened. It otherwise uses the possessed 
target's statistics, but doesn't gain access to the target's knowl- 
edge, class features, or proficiencies. 

The possession lasts until the body drops to 0 hit points, 
the ghost ends it as a bonus action, or the ghost is turned or 
forced out by an effect like the dispel evil and good spell. When 
the possession ends, the ghost reappears in an unoccupied 
space within 5 feet of the body, The target is immune to this 
ghost's Possession for 24 hours after succeeding on the saving 
throw or after the possession ends. 


Spellcasting. As a ghost, Nass can cast the spells she 
prepared prior to her death—except that the ghost can’t 
cast spells that require material components, which 
limits its options. Its list of prepared spells shows only 
those spells it can cast. Although it has no 2nd-level 
spells available, the ghost can use its 2nd-level spell 
slots to cast upgraded versions of the thunderwave spell. 

Spelibook. The wooden covers of Nass’s spellbook 
are bound in nothic hide, and silver clasps hold the book 
shut. Nass’s personal sigil is inscribed on the spine, 
which also bears the title Lantomir’s Traveling Libram. 
The tome contains the following spells: clairvoyance, 
cloud of daggers, counterspell, detect magic, detect 
thoughts, find familiar, Melf's a id arrow, Tenser's float- 
ing disk, and thunderwave. 


VELLYNNE HARPELL 


Vellynne Harpell is a member of the prestigious Harpell 
family, based in the town of Longsaddle. Cold and dis: 
she took to magic only a decade ago in her 
late forties and is skilled in the arcane tradition of necro: 
mancy. She has a lifelong struggle—a nervous disorder 
that manifests as trembling. It can affect her balance 
and her stride, but she has learned to cast her spells un- 
impeded by it. 

Despite her firm grasp of the dark arts, she would 
not have been admitted into the Arcane Brotherhood 
without her family connections—a fact that sticks 
in her craw. 


passionate 


Vellynne brought a family heirloom with her to Ice- 
wind Dale: a professor orb (see appendix D) that she 
refers to by its proper name, Professor Skant. This orb 
has knowledge about Netheril that could be important 
if Vellynne locates the lost Netherese city buried under 
the Reghed Glacier. The orb was recently stolen by Nass 
Lantomir, one of Vellynne’s rivals in the Arcane Broth- 
erhood. Vellynne intends to get it back before resuming 
her quest to find Ythryn. 

Companions. Since arriving in Icewind Dale, Vel- 
lynne has secured the services of six Icewind kobolds 
(see page 296) that act as her valets and guides. Two 
of them were killed by a Melf’s acid arrow spell (cast by 
Vellynne's rival, Nass Lantomir), but Vellynne animated 


their corpses, turning them into zombies. 

If she is wounded, Vellynne can cast vampiric 
touch and use the spell to regain hit points at the ko- 
bolds’ expense. 

Familiar. Vellynne’s familiar is a snowy owl, which 
the wizard uses as a scout. It uses the owl stat block in 
the Monster Manual but is a celestial instead of a beast. 

Spellbook. Vellynne’s spellbook has black leather cov- 
ers around pages of ragged parchment, all wrapped in a 
crimson sash. The necromancer's personal sigil is writ 
ten in goat's blood on the title page. The tome contains 
the spells Vellynne has prepared plus the following ad- 
ditional spells: bestow curse, blindness, (deafness, false 
life. find familiar, magic weapon, polymorph, protection 
from evil and good, remove curse, shield, and Tenser’s 
floating disk. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


| 


< VELLYNNE HARPELL 


Hit Points 67 (948 + 27) 
Speed 20 ft. 


Medium humanoid (human), neutral 
Armor Class 13 (bracers of defense) 
| 
| 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1060) 120) 1763 1864) 15623 13 (+1) 


Saving Throws Int +6, Wis +4 

Skills Arcana +6, History +6 

Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages Common, Draconic, Dwarvish, Elvish, Orc 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Special Equipment. Vellynne wears bracers of defense and car- 
ries a wand of magic missiles (see “Actions” below). 


Spellcasting. Vellynne is an 8th-level spellcaster. Her spellcast- 
ing ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 14, +6 to hit with spell 
attacks). She has the following wizard spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): chill touch (see “Actions” below), light, mage 
hand, message, prestidigitation 

Ist level (4 slots): comprehend languages, detect magic, ray of 
sickness, Tasha’s hideous laughter 

2nd level (3 slots): darkvision, hold person, ray of enfeeblement 

3rd level (3 slots): animate dead, Leomund's tiny hut, vampiric 
touch (see “Actions” below) 

4th level (2 slots): arcane eye, blight 


ACTIONS 


Vampiric Touch (3rd-Level Spell; Requires a Spell Slot). Melee 
Spell Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature, Hit: 10 (346) 
necrotic damage, and Vellynne regains hit points equal to half 
the necrotic damage dealt. if Vellynne casts this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, the necrotic damage increases 
by 1d6 for each slot level above 3rd. 


Chill Touch (Cantrip). Ranged Spell Attack: +6 to hit, range 120 
ft., one creature. Hit: 9 (2d8) necrotic damage, and the target 
can't regain hit points until the start of Vellynne’s next turn. 


Wand of Magic Missiles. While holding this wand, Vellynne can 
expend 1 or more of its 7 charges to cast the magic missile spell 
from it. She can expend 1 charge to cast the Ist-level version of 
the spell. She can increase the spell slot level by one for each 
additional charge she expends. 

The wand regains 1d6 + 1 expended charges daily at dawn. If 
the wand’s last charge is expended, roll a d20; on a 1, the wand 
crumbles into ashes and is destroyed, 

Se 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


AURIL THE FROSTMAIDEN 


Auril the Frostmaiden is a neutral evil lesser god of cold 
indifference who embodies winter's cruelty, (For infor- 
mation on what defines a lesser god, see the “Divine 
Rank” sidebar in the Dungeon Master's Guide.) Auril’s 
beloved ice grasps all things in her clutches, preserving 
them against the ravages of time. She hoards beauty in 
all forms, from art objects and flowers to skilled arti- 
sans and their wondrous works, freezing them in magi- 
cal ice for her pleasure alone, 

Auril was aligned with the gods Talos, Umberlee, 
and Malar. Together they wrought terrible destruction, 
inspiring fear that compelled tribute to hold their power 
at bay. Umberlee, queen of the wrathful sea, grew to 
despise the enduring nature of the ice and snow Auril 
created. Umberlee seethed when Auril’s frigid cold 
transformed her chaotic, unpredictable tides into rigid, 
motionless sheets of ice, Umberlee brought Talos and 
Malar into an alliance against Auril, who retreated to 
the coldest corner of Toril to escape their fury. 

After a world-shaking event known as the Sundering, 
most of the gods withdrew from Toril, leaving mortals to 
govern their own fates without the gods’ meddling, but 
the Frostmaiden could not stay away for long. Auril re- 
turned to her icy realm in the far north and, after a time, 
plunged it into frigid darkness using her magic. 

Casting such great magic night after night while also 
granting spells to her devoted followers leaves Auril 
weak and vulnerable. In her self-inflicted weakened 
state, Auril is inclined to be cautious and avoid contact 
with other creatures that can harm her. 

Auril's worshipers know better than to disturb her 
self-imposed isolation. Terrible blizzards have cut off 
Icewind Dale from the rest of the world, and a shroud of 
mist conceals her island in the Sea of Moving Ice. 


ROLEPLAYING AURIL 


Portraying a deity, even a lesser god such as Auril the 
Frostmaiden, can be daunting. For roleplaying pur- 
poses, the following suggestions might prove helpful: 


So long as she has mortal worshipers, Auril can’t truly 
die (although the characters can rid the world of her 
for a time). Thus, she has no reason to capitulate to 
mortals’ demands. As the embodiment of winter's cru- 
elty, she is incapable of showing mercy or compassion. 
Play her as a supremely cold and unfeeling entity. 
Have Auril speak only when necessary. The less she 
talks, the less risk you have of unintentionally demys- 
tifying her in the eyes of your players. Let her actions, 
not her words, define her. 

Lesser gods in the D&D multiverse are extremely 
powerful and arrogant, but also fallible and blind to 
their own flaws. It's appropriate for Auril to act as 
though she’s invincible while underestimating her 
mortal enemies, even in her current weakened state. 


LAIR ACTIONS _ 


Auril dwells on Solstice, a frozen island hidden among 
the titanic icebergs in the Sea of Moving Ice. Few crea- 
tures know of this island, let alone how to reach it. See 
chapter 5 for information about the regional effects that 
encompass the island. 

While she’s on the island, the Frostmaiden can take 
one of the following lair actions on initiative count 20 
(losing initiative ties): 


Auril instantly knows the locations and health of all 
other creatures on the island. She knows how much 
damage each of these creatures has taken, how many 
levels of exhaustion they have, and what conditions 
are affecting them currently. 

Auril instantly teleports to any location on the island. 
If the space she chooses as her destination is already 
occupied, Auril appears in the closest unoccupied 
space to it instead. 

Auril telepathically communicates with any number 
of creatures at once, provided they're all on the island. 
This effect lasts until Auril stops concentrating on it 
(as if concentrating on a spell) or until she leaves the 
island or uses a different lair action. 


Aurit (FIRST FORM) 


Medium monstrosity, neutral evil 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 95 (10d8 + 50) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1462 1603) 21(+5) 24(+7) 26(+8) 28 (+9) 


Saving Throws Con +9, Wis +12 

Skills Deception +13, Insight +12, Intimidation +13, 
Perception +16 

Damage Vulnerabilities radiant 

Damage Immunities cold, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, stunned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., truesight 120 ft., passive 
Perception 26 

Languages all, telepathy 1,000 ft. 

Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 

——— 

Divine Being. Auril can't be surprised and can't be changed 

into another form against her will. 


Divine Rejuvenation. When Auril drops to 0 hit points, her body 
turns to slush and melts away. Auril instantly reappears in her 
second form, in an unoccupied space within 60 feet of where 
her first form disappeared. Her initiative count doesn’t change. 


Innate Spellcasting. Auril's innate spellcasting ability is Cha- 
risma (spell save DC 21, +13 to hit with spell attacks). She 
can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material 
components: 


‘At will: chromatic orb (cold orb only; see “Actions” below), de- 


tect magic, misty step 
2/day each: contro! weather, detect thoughts, ice storm 


Legendary Resistance (2/Day in This Form). If Auril fails a sav- 
ing throw, she can choose to succeed instead. 


Magic Resistance. Auril has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Unusual Nature. Auril doesn’t require air, food, drink, or sleep. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. Auril attacks twice with her talons. 


Talons. Melee Weapon Attack; +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit; 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage plus 3 (1d6) cold damage. 


Touch of Frost. Melee Spell Attack: +13 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 13 (3d8) cold damage, and the target can't take 
reactions until the start of its next turn. 


Chromatic Orb. Ranged Spell Attack: +13 to hit, range 90 ft., 
one creature. Hit: 13 (348) cold damage. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Auril can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the options 
below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a time 
and only at the end of another creature's turn. Auril regains 
spent legendary actions at the start of her turn. 


Talons. Auril attacks once with her talons. 

Teleport. Auril teleports to an unoccupied space she can see 
within 30 feet of her. 

Touch of Frost (Costs 2 Actions). Auril uses Touch of Frost. 


——a 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


a 


AURIL’S THREE FORMS 


In her current weakened state, Auril can assume three 
different forms. To destroy her, heroes must reduce each 
of her forms to 0 hit points one after another. After she’s 
defeated in her third and final form, Auril dies. As long 
as she has mortal followers who worship her, however, 
Auril is reborn at full strength during the next winter 
solstice, with divine power far beyond what is reflected 
in the stat blocks presented here. 

After finishing a long rest, Auril regains any of her 
forms that were destroyed, provided at least one form 
survives, When she transitions from one form to an- 
other, she loses all the traits and actions of the old form 
and gains those of the new form. 

A stat block is given for each of Auril’s three forms. 
These descriptions do not reflect Auril at full power, but 
rather Auril as she is encountered in this adventure. 


First FORM 

In her first form, Auril appears as a hunched, 7-foot-tall 
biped with the head of a snowy owl, black talons, cloven 
hooves, and grayish-white wolf fur covering her body 
from the neck down. Protruding from her feathery owl's 
head is a pair of curved goat horns. A cloak and cowl 
made of pristine white snow conceals much of her tri- 
partite form, which her worshipers refer to as the Cold 
Crone. This cloak can transform into a pair of owl's 
wings when Auril sees fit. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


SECOND ForM 

Auril’s second form, known to her worshipers as Lady 
Icekiss or the Brittle Maiden, is that of a 10-foot-tall 
woman of fearsome aspect made entirely of ice and 
frost. Her eyes burn with a cold blue light, and a thin 
cloak of mist forms around her. Blades of ice grow out of 
her body at odd angles, breaking off before they get too 
long. When she moves, her body crackles. 

In this form, Auril creates weapons of ice with which 
to combat foes. These weapons are supernaturally re- 
silient until Auril discards them, whereupon they break 
and melt like normal ice. 


THIRD ForM 

Auril's third form, called Winter's Womb or the Queen of 
is a 3-foot-di- 
ameter ice diamond containing the god's divine spark. 
The diamond has facets and a sharp point at the bottom, 
It hovers in the air, radiating intense cold all around it. 
When Auril speaks, her voice seems to emanate from 
the heart of the diamond. 

If Auril is killed in her third and final form, she is 
dead until the next winter solstice. While she is dead, 
her mortal worshipers lose their god-granted spells and 
abilities. 


Frozen Tears by her most ardent followers 


's 


| AURIL (SECOND FORM) 


Large elemental, neutral evil 


Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 136 (13d10 + 65) 


Speed 30 ft. 
m 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 


16 (+3) 163) 21(+5) 24(+7) 26(+8) 28 (+9) 
o 


Saving Throws Con +9, Wis +12 

Skills Deception +13, Insight +12, Intimidation +13, 
Perception +16 

Damage Vulnerabilities fire 

Damage Immunities cold, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, stunned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., truesight 120 ft., passive 
Perception 26 

Languages all, telepathy 1,000 ft. 

Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) 

————— 

Divine Being. Auril can't be surprised and can't be changed 

into another form against her will. 


Divine Rejuvenation. When Auril drops to 0 hit points, her 
body collapses into shards of ice, whereupon Auril instantly 
reappears in her third form, in an unoccupied space within 60 
feet of where her second form was destroyed. Her initiative 
count doesn't change. 


Legendary Resistance (2/Day in This Form). If Auril fails a sav- 
ing throw, she can choose to succeed instead. 


Magic Resistance. Auril has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Unusual Nature, Auril doesn't require air, food, drink, or sleep. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Auril attacks twice with her ice morningstar or 
hurls three ice darts. 


Ice Morningstar. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 7 (148 + 3) piercing damage plus 9 (248) 
cold damage. 


Ice Dart. Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, range 20/60 ft., 
one target. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage plus 3 (1d6) 
cold damage. 


Cone of Cold (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). Auril 

causes a magical blast of cold air to erupt from her hand, Each 
creature in a 60-foot cone must make a DC 21 Constitution sav- 
ing throw, taking 36 (8d8) cold damage on a failed save, or half { 
as much damage on a successful one. 


Create Ice Mephit (3/Day). Auril breaks off an icicle from her 
body and hurls it into an unoccupied space she can see within 
20 feet of her, where it magically transforms into an ice mephit 
(see its entry in the Monster Manual). The mephit acts immedi- 
ately after Auril in the initiative order and obeys her commands. 


Ice Stasis (Recharge 5-6). Auril magically creates a gem-sized 
ice crystal that hovers in a space within 5 feet of her. Auril then 
targets a creature she can see within 60 feet of the crystal. The 
target must succeed on a DC 21 Charisma saving throw or be- 
come trapped In the crystal, which is immovable. If the saving 
throw succeeds, the crystal shatters and nothing else happens. 

A creature trapped in the crystal is stunned, has total cover 
against attacks and other effects outside the crystal, and takes 
21 (6d6) cold damage at the start of each of its turns. The crea- 
ture can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, 
freeing itself on a success. The creature is also freed if the crys- 
tal is destroyed, which is a Tiny object with AC 18, 9 hit points, 
and immunity to all damage except fire damage. The freed 
creature appears in an unoccupied space of its choice within 30 
feet of the shattered crystal. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Auril can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the options 
below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a time 
and only at the end of another creature's turn. Auril regains 
spent legendary actions at the start of her turn. 


Attack. Auril makes one weapon attack. 

Ice Flurry (Costs 2 Actions). Each creature within 30 feet of 
Auril takes 5 (2d4) piercing damage from swirling ice, and 
nonmagical, open flames in that area are extinguished. 

Splinter (Costs 3 Actions). Auril uses Create Ice Mephit or 
causes one to ice mephit she can see within 60 feet of her to 
explode and die. A mephit that dies in this way does not use 
its Death Burst. Instead, each creature within 10 feet of the 
exploding mephit must succeed on a DC 21 Dexterity saving 
throw, taking 13 (3d8) piercing damage on a failed saving 
throw, and half as much damage on a successful one. 


EEE EE —— 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


AURIL (THIRD FORM) 


Small elemental, neutral evil 


Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 136 (16d6 + 80) 
Speed 0 ft., fly 30 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX 
1(-5) 126) 


CON NT wis 
21 (+5) 24(+7) 26 (+8) 


CHA 
28 (+9) 


Saving Throws Con +9, Wis +12 

Skills Deception +13, Insight +12, Intimidation +13, 
Perception +16 

Damage Vulnerabilities thunder 

Damage Immunities cold, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, stunned 

Senses blindsight 120 ft. (blind beyond this radius), truesight 
120 ft., passive Perception 26 

Languages all, telepathy 1,000 ft. 

Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) 

EEE 

Divine Being. Auril can’t be surprised and can't be changed 

into another form against her will. 


Divine Resurrection. When Auril drops to 0 hit points, her crys- 
talline form shatters and her divine spark vanishes. She is dead 
until the next winter solstice, when she reappears at full health 
in a cold, remote location of her choosing. 


Frigid Aura. So long as Auril has at least 1 hit point in this 
form, each creature within 10 feet of her takes 10 cold damage 
at the start of each of her turns. 


Legendary Resistance (1/Day in This Form). |f Auril fails a sav- 
ing throw, she can choose to succeed instead. 


Magic Resistance. Auril has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Unusual Nature. Auri| doesn’t require air, food, drink, or sleep. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. Auril uses Polar Ray twice. 


Polar Ray. Ranged Spell Attack: +13 to hit, range 120 ft., one 
target. Hit: 14 (4d6) cold damage, 


Blizzard Veil. Auril creates a magical blizzard in a 
30-foot-radius sphere centered on herself. The area within the 
sphere is heavily obscured, and the sphere moves with Auril. 
The effect lasts until Auril drops to 0 hit points in this form, 
until she chooses to end the effect (no action required), or until 
her concentration is broken (as if concentrating on a spell). 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


Auril can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the options 
below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a time 
and only at the end of another creature's turn. Auril regains 
spent legendary actions at the start of her turn. 


Polar Ray. Auril uses Polar Ray. 

Intensify Aura (Costs 2 Actions). Auril’s Frigid Aura deals an 
extra 10 cold damage until the end of her next turn, 

Blinding Gleam (Costs 2 Actions). Auril’s form flares with a blue 
light. Each creature that can see Auril and is within 10 feet 
of her must succeed on a DC 17 Wisdom saving throw or be 
blinded by Auril’s magical gleam for 1 minute. The blinded 
creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


EE 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


BRAIN IN A JAR 


Through an eldritch ritual combining alchemy, nec- 
romancy, and grim surgical precision, the brain of a 
mortal being (willing or unwilling) is encased in a glass 
jar filled with preserving fluids and the liquefied goop of 
their body’s flesh. The transformation renders the brain 
immortal and imbues it with psionic power, so that it 
can spend eternity plotting and executing its desires. 

A brain in a jar can speak without vocal cords, psioni- 
cally projecting its disembodied voice outward for all to 
hear. It enjoys conversation so much that it is prone to 
talking for hours on end, sometimes to itself if there are 
no others with whom it can speak. It also likes to think 
out loud and reflect on the events and decisions that led 
to its great transformation. 

Being divorced from one’s body can tax the mind, and 
the longer a brain in a jar exists, the more likely some 
form of insanity will take hold of it. A brain in a jar is 
particularly susceptible to dementia, schizophrenia, 
and paranoia. 

Immortal Vessels. The brain floats in a jar of solu- 
tion, pulsating as it reacts t is surroundings. Some 
brains have been known to thump against the walls of 
their containers when excited or vexed A jar's metal 
casing might be rusty but serviceable. or an elegantly 
wrought masterwork, depending on its creator. A brain 
in a jar weighs roughly 125 pounds. 


—————————— 


BRAIN IN AJAR 

Small undead, any alignment 
a 
Armor Class 11 (natural armor) 

Hit Points 55 (10d6 + 20) 

Speed 0 ft., fly 10 ft. (hover) 


S M 
Í sm Dex coN iNT WS CHA 
1(-5) 304 1563 19(+4) 1060) 15 (+2) 


Saving Throws Int +6, Cha +4 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities exhaustion, paralyzed, poisoned, prone 

Senses blindsight 120 ft. (blind beyond this radius), passive 
Perception 10; see also “Detect Sentience” below 

Languages the languages it knew in life 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


———— 
Detect Sentience. The brain can sense the presence and loca- 
tion of any creature within 300 feet of it that has an Intelligence 
| of 3 or higher, regardless of interposing barriers, unless the 
creature is protected by a mind blank spell. 


Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The brain's innate spellcasting 
ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 14, +6 to hit with spell 
attacks). It can innately cast the following spells, requiring no 
components: 


At will: chill touch (see “Actions” below), detect thoughts, mage 
hand, zone of truth 

3/day each: charm person, hold person 

1/day each: compulsion, hold monster, sleep (3rd-level version), 
Tasha’s hideous laughter 


Magic Resistance. The brain has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magic effects. 


Unusual Nature. The brain doesn't require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


ACTIONS 


Chill Touch (Cantrip). Ranged Spell Attack: +6 to hit, range 120 
ft., one creature. Hit: 13 (348) necrotic damage, and the target 
can't regain hit points until the start of the brain's next turn. 
If the target is undead, it also has disadvantage on attack rolls 
against the brain until the end of the brain's next turn. 


Mind Blast (Recharge 5-6). The brain magically emits psychic 
energy in a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that area must suc- 
ceed on a DC 14 Intelligence saving throw or take 17 (348 + 4) 
psychic damage and be stunned for 1 minute. Acreature can 
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending 
the effect on itself on a success. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


279 


280 


CHARDALYN BERSERKER 


Medium fiend, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 13 (hide armor) 


Hit Points 90 (12d8 + 36) 

Speed 30 ft. 

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1663 12(41) VEI 9) NEO 9) 
Skills Survival +4 


Senses passive Perception 10 


Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Chardalyn Madness. The berserker must roll a d6 at the start 
of each of its turns. On a 1, the berserker does nothing on its 
turn except speak to a nonexistent, evil master whom it has 
pledged to serve. 


Reckless. At the start of its turn, the berserker can gain ad- 
vantage on all melee weapon attack rolls during that turn, 
but attack rolls against it have advantage until the start of its 
next turn. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The berserker attacks three times with a 
melee weapon. 


Chardalyn Flail. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) bludgeoning damage, and the target 
must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or be poi- 
soned until the end of its next turn. 


Chardalyn Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, 
reach p or range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) pierc- 

_ ing damage, and the target must succeed on a DC 13 Constitu- 
TRA throw or be poisoned until the end of its next turn. 
SEES eee 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


CHARDALYN BERSERKER 


Chardalyn berserkers are Reghed nomads who wield 
weapons made of chardalyn, specifically ones suffused 
with demonic magic (see the sidebar on page 6). 

This exposure has transformed them into fiends. They 
shed their heavier protective clothing and embrace the 
frigid cold, allowing frostbite to ravage the exposed 
parts of their bodies, with only their faith in the Frost- 
maiden keeping them alive. 

Chardalyn Weapons. A chardalyn berserker wields 
one or more weapons made wholly or partly out of 
chardalyn that has been tainted by demonic magic. 
Battleaxes, flails, javelins, and spears are favored weap- 
ons, though other weapons are possible. 

Acharacter who claims one or more of these weapons 
can be corrupted by them. Each day at dawn, roll a d6 
for each such weapon in the character's possession, On 
a roll of 1, the character must succeed on a DC 13 Cha- 
risma saving throw or become an evil NPC under the 
DM's control, unless the character is evil already. This 
alignment change can be undone by any magic that ends 
a curse, but after ten days, it can be reversed only by a 
wish spell or divine intervention. 

A creature wounded by one of these chardalyn weap- 
ons can feel a sudden sickness creep over them, but it 
passes quickly. 

Chardalyn Madness. Prolonged contact with the 
demonic magic imprinted on the chardalyn has afflicted 
the berserker with a form of madness, causing the ber- 
serker to believe that its weapons are conduits through 
which it can speak to a demon lord or other dark power, 
as well as channel its rage. If the berserker's madness is 
cured using magic that removes the effects of madness, 
the berserker loses its Chardalyn Madness trait but 
retains its chaotic evil alignment and other qualities. 
Further exposure to the demonic magic causes the ber- 
serker’s madness to return, however. 


CHARDALYN DRAGON 


This construct is fashioned from pieces of chardalyn 
(see the sidebar on page 6) that have been assem- 
bled in the form of a dragon. The only parts of the 
dragon not forged from chardalyn are its wing flaps, 
which are made of an oily film as tough as rubber, and 
its heart, which is an orb of pulsating, radiant energy. 
Demonic magic suffusing the chardalyn imbues the con- 
struct with malevolence, allowing it to enjoy the terror it 
causes. This effect extends outward from it, corrupting 
other creatures who get too close to the dragon. Those 
affected by the dragon's presence turn their efforts to 
helping the dragon inflict suffering on others. 
Achardalyn dragon serves the tyrannical will of its 
evil creator—a tireless drive devotion that exceeds its 
own instinct of self-preservation. Thus, the dragon 
will destroy itself in pursuit of its master’s desires if 
necessary. The dragon likes to tear foes apart, as well 
as knock down doors and other structures. Against 
enemies it can't reach, it fires a beam of destructive radi- 
ance from its grill-like maw. 


i di 


CHARDALYN DRAGON 


Huge construct, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 147 (14d12 + 56) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 90 ft. 
o 
STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
24 (+7) NE 19(+4) 10(+0) 100) 3 (-4) 


Saving Throws Str +11, Con +8 

Damage Resistances radiant; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing that is nonmagical 

Damage Immunities cold, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages the languages known by its creator 

Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) 

————————— 

Immutable Form. The dragon Is immune to any spell or effect 

that would alter its form. 


Magic Resistance. The dragon has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Siege Monster. The dragon deals double damage to objects and 
structures. 


Unusual Nature. The dragon doesn't require air, food, drink, 
or sleep, and it gains no benefit from finishing a short or 
long rest. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The dragon uses its Malevolent Presence. It 
then makes three attacks: two with its claws and one with its 
tail. If the dragon isn't flying, it can also make one attack with 
its wings. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 14 (2d6 + 7) slashing damage. 


Tail, Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target 
Hit: 18 (2d10 + 7) bludgeoning damage. 


Wings. Melee Weapon Attack: +1) to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 12 (2d4 + 7) bludgeoning damage. 


Malevolent Presence. Any creature with an Intelligence of 4 or 
more that is within 30 feet of the dragon must succeed on a 
DC 16 Wisdom saving throw or be charmed by it for 1 minute. 
A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Ifa creature's 
saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, the crea- 
ture is immune to the dragon's Malevolent Presence for the 
next 24 hours. 

A creature charmed in this way fixates on another creature 
or object that the dragon mentally chooses and must, on 
each of its turns, move as close as it can to that target and 
use its action to make a melee attack against it, If the dragon 
doesn't choose a target, the charmed creature can act normally 
on its turn. 


Radiant Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales a ray of 
radiant energy in a 120-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each crea- 
ture in that line must make a DC 16 Dexterity saving throw, 
taking 31 (7d8) radiant damage on a failed save, or half as 
much damage on a successful one. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


CHWINGA 


A chwinga is a tiny elementa! rit that lives in plants, 
rocks, and rivers far from civilization. Those found in 
cold climates also live in ice and snow. Painfully shy, 
chwingas prefer to move about unseen. 

Chwingas resemble 6-inch-tall animated dolls with 
mask-like faces, spindly limbs, and wild hair. Their ap- 
` pearance is sometimes foreshadowed by gentle breezes, 
the sweet smell of flowers, dancing fireflies, or snow: 
flakes. They don't have names and cannot speak. 

Humanoid Fascination. Chwingas find the trappings 
of civilization fascinating. They puzzle over creatures 
that wear armor, carry weapons, use tools, and cook 
food. When a chwinga encounters one or more human- 
oids, its curiosity sometimes gets the better of it, and it 
follows them for a short time to observe them. If it takes 
a liking to a humanoid, a chwinga might use its cantrips 
to aid the creature, or it might bestow a magical gift 
before departing. The aspect that attracts a chwinga to a 
humanoid can take any form. In some cases, a chwinga 
might simply like the way a humanoid walks or the 
way it combs its hair. Other times, it might be smitten 
by a humanoid’s ability to play music or to eat copious 
amounts of food. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


Tiny elemental, neutral 


Armor Class 15 
Hit Points 5 (2d4) 
Speed 20 ft., climb 20 ft., swim 20 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16-5) 2065) 1040) 1442) 1643) 16 (43) 


Skills Acrobatics +7, Perception +7, Stealth +7 
Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 17 
Languages — 

Challenge 0 (0 XP) 


Evasion. When the chwinga is subjected to an effect that allows 
it to make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, it 
instead takes no damage if it succeeds on the saving throw, and 
only half damage if it fails. 


Innate Spellcasting. The chwinga’s innate spellcasting ability is 
Wisdom. It can innately cast the following spells, requiring no 
material or verbal components: 


At will: druidcraft, guidance, pass without trace, resistance 


Unusual Nature. The chwinga doesn’t require air, food, or 
drink, When it dies, it turns into a handful of flower petals, a 
cloud of pollen, a stone statuette resembling its former self, 
a tiny sphere of smooth stone, or a puddle of fresh water 
{your choice). 


ACTIONS 


Magical Gift (1/Day). The chwinga targets a humanoid it can 
see within 5 feet of it. The target gains a supernatural charm of 
the DM's choice. See the Dungeon Master's Guide for informa- 
tion on supernatural charms. 


Natural Shelter. The chwinga magically takes shelter inside 

a rock, a living plant, or a natural source of fresh water in its 
space. The chwinga can't be targeted by any attack, spell, or 
other effect while inside this shelter, and the shelter doesn’t 
impair the chwinga's blindsight. The chwinga can use its action 
to emerge from a shelter. If its shelter is destroyed, the chwinga 
is forced out and appears in the shelter’s space, but is other- 
wise unharmed. 


CHWINGAS IN ICEWIND DALE 


Chwingas first appeared in the published adventure 
Tomb of Annihilation as creatures indigenous to the 
tropical peninsula of Chult. As spirits of the elements, 
however, they range far and wide. Large numbers of 
them came to Icewind Dale with immigrants from Chult 
and made new homes for themselves in and around Ten: 
Towns. Those that remained near civilization adopted 
the garb of their humanoid neighbors, creating minia- 
ture coats for themselves. They can sometimes be seen 
riding on arctic foxes or snowshoe hares. Others wan- 
dered into the tundra, changing their coloration to blend 
in with their surroundings. 

Exposure to Auril’s nightly aurora and the unnatural 
blizzards she creates can cause chwingas to behave un- 
predictably, even insanely. 


New CHWINGA CHARMS 

This section describes several new charms that chwin- 
gas living in Icewind Dale or other cold regions can be- 
stow using their Magical Gift action. 

Charm of Biting Cold. This charm has 3 charges. As 
a bonus action, you can expend 1 of the charm’s charges 
to wreathe your weapon attacks with biting cold for 1 
minute. Until this effect ends, you deal an extra 1d6 cold 
damage when you hit with a melee or ranged weapon 
attack, Once all its charges have been expended, this 
charm vanishes from you. 

Charm of Bounty. This charm has 3 charges. As an 
action, you can expend 1 of the charm’s charges to cast 
the create food and water spell, requiring no compo- 
nents. Once all its charges have been expended, this 
charm vanishes from you. 


Charm of Cold Resistance. This charm allows you 
to give yourself resistance to cold damage as an action. 
This benefit lasts for 24 hours, after which the charm 
vanishes from you. 

Charm of Snowball Strike. This charm has 5 
charges. As a bonus action, you can expend 1 of the 
charm’s charges to create a magical snowball in your 
hand and throw it. You must have a hand free to hold 
the snowball, or the charge is wasted. The snowball is 
a magic ranged weapon with which you are proficient. 
It has a normal range of 20 feet and a long range of 60 
feet, it deals 1d4 cold damage on a hit, and it scores a 
critical hit on a roll of 19 or 20. If you score a critical hit 
with the snowball, the target is blinded until the end of 
its next turn. The snowball vanishes immediately after 
you hit or miss with it, or at the end of your turn if you 
don’t throw it. Once all its charges have been expended, 
this charm vanishes from you. 

Charm of the Ice Troll. This charm allows you to use 
your reaction when you take cold damage to reduce the 
damage to 0. You regain a number of hit points equal to 
half the cold damage you would have taken. Once you do 
so, the charm vanishes from you. 

Charm of the Snow Walker. This charm has 3 
charges. As an action, you can expend 1 of the charm's 
charges to gain the following benefits for 24 hours: 


+ You and your allies within 15 feet of you ignore diffi- 
cult terrain caused by snow or ice. 

You can see through areas heavily obscured by snow 
to a distance of 60 feet. 

You are immune to the effects of extreme cold, as de- 
scribed in the Dungeon Master's Guide (though you 
gain no protection from cold damage). 


Once all its charges have been expended, this charm 
vanishes from you. 

Charm of the Traveler's Haven. This charm has 3 
charges. As an action, you can expend 1 of the charm's 
charges to cast the Leomund's tiny hut spell, no com- 
ponents required, Once all its charges have been ex- 
pended, this charm vanishes from you. 


COLDLIGHT WALKER 


Some humanoids who died from extreme cold but 
whose spirits languish in the mortal world become cold- 
light walkers, burning with frigid fury at the meaning- 
lessness of life. Their frostbitten corpses emit a spectral 
light so intense that mortal eyes can barely stand to 
look at them. They typically wear the clothing in which 
they died 

God-Spawned Horrors. Gods that personi 
create coldlight walkers as embodiments of winter's 
wrath. These hateful spirits that were denied passage 
to the afterlife are preserved in their current forms to 
remind the living how fragile life can be. 

When a coldlight walker dies, its light goes out, leav- 
ing behind a frozen, inanimate corpse that can never be 
raised from the dead. 


y winter 


COLDLIGHT WALKER 


Medium undead, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 82 (11d8 + 33) 


Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
152) 10(+0) 1763) 8 (-1) 10440) 8 (-1) 


Saving Throws Int +2, Wis +3 

Damage Immunities cold 

Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, exhaustion, paralyzed, 
petrified, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 


Languages 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Blinding Light. The walker sheds bright light in a 20-foot radius 
and dim light for an additional 20 feet. 

As a bonus action, the walker can target one creature in its 
bright light that it can see and force it to succeed on a DC 14 
Constitution saving throw or be blinded until the start of the 
walker's next turn. 


Icy Doom. Any creature killed by the walker freezes for 9 days, 
during which time it can't be thawed, harmed by fire, animated, 
or raised from the dead. 


Unusual Nature. The walker doesn't require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The walker makes two attacks. 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 11 (2d8 + 2) bludgeoning damage plus 14 (4d6) 
cold damage. 


Í Cold Ray. Ranged Spell Attack: +3 to hit, range 60 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 25 (4d10 + 3) cold damage. 3 


CRAG CAT 


The creature referred to in Northlander lore as the 
Hunter of Men is a sure-footed predator that can be 
found anywhere except the deep forest, preferring to 
patrol ledges and cliffs in the mountains. Its cry re- 
sembles a human scream of terror. It often elicits such 
sounds from its victims, for it prefers human flesh to all 
other fare. 

Crag cats blend in with their surroundings. During 
winter, their fur turns white to blend in with the snow. At 
other times of the year, their fur is gray, enabling them 
to hide among the rocks more easily. 

The crag cat knows its territory and often attacks 
when its prey is asleep, exhausted, or otherwise weak- 
ened. Although crag cats are typically encountered 
singly, they can be found in family groups of two parents 
and 1d4 Small noncombatant cubs in the spring, or in 
hungry packs in severe winter weather. 


Crac CAT 


Large monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 34 (4d10 + 12) 
Speed 40 ft., climb 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1663) 1763 1663 463 MEJ 8H) 


Skills Perception +4, Stealth +7 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages — 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Nondetection. The cat can't be targeted or detected by any divi- 
nation magic or perceived through magical scrying sensors. 


Pounce. |f the cat moves at least 20 feet straight toward a crea- 
ture and then hits ìt with a claw attack on the same turn, that 
target must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or be 
knocked prone. Ifthe target is prone, the cat can make one bite 
attack against it as a bonus action. 


Spell Turning. The cat has advantage on saving throws against 
any spell that targets only the cat (not an area). If the cat's 
saving throw succeeds and the spell is of 7th level or lower, the 
spell has no effect on the cat and instead targets the caster. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (1d10 + 3) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage. 


Crac Cat 


DUERGAR 


Duergar are dwarves that dwell deep in the Underdark 
and other sunless realms. They owe their psionic abili- 
ties to the mind flayers that enslaved them long ago. The 
duergar eventually broke free of their illithid masters 
but were forever transformed, gaining power but also 
a sadness. That gloom leads some duergar to acts of 
melancholic beauty and others to outbursts of violence. 

Infernal Master. Asmodeus, lord of the Nine Hells, 
impersonates duergar gods in order to cultivate evil 
within the hearts of duergar who are already corrupt. 
He offers them divine guidance and vengeance against 
their enemies while urging them to acts of brutality, all 
the while concealing his identity. 


DUERGAR HAMMERER 


The hammerer is a bipedal construct with a duergar 
strapped inside it. One of its arms ends in a pincer 
claw, the other a large hammer instead of a hand. The 
machine transforms the captive duergar’s pain into en- 
ergy that powers the device, which is typically used to 
dig tunnels and repel invaders. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


28: 


Dueroar Hammerer 


286 


DUERGAR HAMMERER 


Medium construct, lawful evil 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 33 (68 + 6) 


Speed 20 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
VEI 7A 2E 5-3) 5-3) 5-3) 


Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immuni charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 7 

Languages understands Dwarvish but can't speak 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 

O 

Engine of Pain. Once per turn, a creature that attacks the ham- 

merer can target the duergar trapped in it. The attacker has 

disadvantage on the attack roll. On a hit, the attack deals an 

extra 5 (1d10) damage to the hammerer, and the hammerer can 

respond by using its Multiattack with its reaction. 


Siege Monster. The hammerer deals double damage to objects 
and structures. 
ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The hammerer makes two attacks: one with its 
claw and one with its hammer. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage. 


Hammer. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage. 
CSE 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


DUERGAR MIND MASTER 

The feared duergar mind masters usually operate as 
spies, both inside and beyond a duergar stronghold. 
Their psionically augmented abilities enable them to see 
through illusions with ease and shrink down to minia- 
ture size to spy on their targets. 


DUERGAR MIND MASTER 


Medium humanoid (dwarf), lawful evil 


Armor Class 14 (leather armor), 19 while reduced 
Hit Points 39 (6d8 + 12) 
Speed 25 ft. 


STR DEX 
1140) 1763) 


CON INT wis 
14 (+2) 1562) 10(+0) 


CHA 
12 (1) 


Saving Throws Wis +2 

Skills Perception +2, Stealth +5 

Damage Resistances poison 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., truesight 30 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages Dwarvish, Undercommon 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Duergar Resilience. The duergar has advantage on saving 
throws against poison, spells, and illusions, as well as to resist 
being charmed or paralyzed. 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the duergar has dis- 
advantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The duergar makes two melee attacks. It can re- 
place one of those attacks with a use of Mind Mastery. 


Mind-Poison Dagger. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach S | 
ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage plus 10 (346) | 
psychic damage, or 1 piercing damage and 14 (4d6) psychic 
damage while reduced. 


Invisibility (Recharge 4-6). The duergar magically turns invis- 
ible until it attacks, it casts a spell, it uses its Reduce, or its 
concentration is broken (as if concentrating on a spell). Any 
equipment the duergar wears or carries is invisible with it. 


Mind Mastery. The duergar targets one creature it can see 
within 60 feet of it. The target must succeed on a DC 12 Intelli- 
gence saving throw, or the duergar causes it to use its reaction 
either to make one weapon attack against another creature the 
duergar can see or to move up to 10 feet in a direction of the 
duergar's choice. Creatures that can’t be charmed are immune | 
to this effect 


SE ev 


Reduce (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). For 1 minute, 
the duergar magically decreases in size, along with anything it 
is wearing or carrying. While reduced, the duergar is Tiny, re- 
duces its weapon damage to 1, and makes attacks, checks, and 
saving throws with disadvantage if they use Strength. It gains a 
+5 bonus to all Dexterity (Stealth) checks and a +5 bonus to its 
AC. It can also take a bonus action on each of its turns to take 
the Hide action. 


XARDOROK SUNBLIGHT 


Xardorok Sunblight leads the Sunblight clan of duer- 
gar which, until recently, dwelled in the subterranean 
depths beneath the Spine of the World. In the guise of 
Deep Duerra, the duergar god of conquest, the arch- 
devil Asmodeus visited Xardorok and urged him to 
conquer Icewind Dale, beginning with Ten-Towns. 

Dark Obsession. Xardorok is obsessed with char- 
dalyn and can't stand the thought of anyone else pos- 
sessing it. He must have all the chardalyn that Icewind 
Dale has to offer and is using his ample supply to forge 
a dragon, which he plans to unleash upon Ten-Towns. 
See the sidebar on page 6 for more information 
about chardalyn. 

Father of Nine. Xardorok has been married three 
times and has sired nine children. He killed his first 
wife, Thizrun, for plotting to assassinate him. His s 
ond wife, Yrraska, was killed in a tunnel collapse along 
with two of their daughters. His third wife, Marral, 
killed during a raid against a mind flayer enclave, along 
with another daughter and three sons. Xardorok killed 
his eldest son, Ulthoon, son of Thizrun, for plotting to 
overthrow him. His surviving offspring are two sons 
given to him by Marral, named Durth and Nildar. 

Clad in Chardalyn. Xardorok wears the following 
nonmagical items fashioned from chardalyn: a nine- 
spired crown (two intact spires representing his two 
surviving sons, and seven partially broken-off spires 
ad children), a suit of chain 


representing his seven ¢ 
mail, and a spiked gauntlet 


XARDOROK SUNBLIGHT 


Medium humanoid (dwarf), lawful evil 


Armor Class 16 (chain mail) 
Hit Points 93 (11d8 + 44) 
Speed 25 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 

16 (+3) 11 (+0) 18 (+4) 12 (+1) 13 (+1) 18 (+4) 
—————— 
Saving Throws Wis +4, Cha +7 
Skills Arcana +4, Deception +7, Intimidation +7 
Damage Resistances poison 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages Dwarvish, Undercommon 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 
————————————— 
Duergar Resilience. Xardorok has advantage on saving throws 
against poison, spells, and illusions, as well as to resist being 
charmed or paralyzed. 


Innate Spellcasting. Xardorok’s innate spelicasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 15, +7 to hit with spell attacks). He 
can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material 
components: 


At will: eldritch blast (see “Actions” below), mage hand 
1/day each: hold person, suggestion 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, Xardorok has disadvan- 
tage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom (Perception) checks 
that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Xardorok attacks twice with a weapon or casts 
eldritch blast twice. 


Spiked Gauntlet. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage, or 8 (2d4 + 3) 
piercing damage while Xardorok is enlarged. i 


Eldritch Blast (Cantrip). Ranged Spell Attack: +7 to hit, range 
120 ft., one creature. Hit: 9 (1d10 + 4) force damage. 


Xardorok magically increases in size, along with anything he is 
wearing or carrying. While enlarged, Xardorok is Large, doubles 
his damage dice on Strength-based weapon attacks (included 
in his attacks), and makes Strength checks and Strength saving 
throws with advantage. If Xardorok lacks the room to become 
Large, he attains the maximum size possible in the space 
available. 


Enlarge (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). For 1 minute, f 
i 
i 
i 


Invisibility (Recharge 4-6). Xardorok magically turns invisible 
until he attacks, he casts a spell, he uses his Enlarge, or his 
concentration is broken (as if concentrating on a spell). Any 
equipment Xardorok wears or carries is invisible with him 


REACTIONS 


Hellish Rebuke (2/Day). When Xardorok is damaged by a crea- 
ture within 60 feet of him that he can see, the creature that 
damaged him is engulfed in hellish flames and must make a 
DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 16 (3d10) fire damage on 
a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


nn 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


om 


288 


Fox 


The white arctic foxes of Icewind Dale live in burrows 
and are acclimated to cold weather. They prowl the out- 
skirts of Ten-Towns and nearby forests for food, hunting 
hares or stealing fish. These timid creatures avoid con- 
tact with humanoids, but they are sometimes used as 
mounts by chwingas (see page 282). 


Fox 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 2 (1d4) 
Speed 30 ft., burrow 5 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WS CHA 
2(-4) 16 (+3) NEO 364 126) 6-3) 


Skills Perception +3, Stealth +5 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages — 
Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


Keen Hearing. The fox has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on hearing. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature, 
Hit: 1 piercing damage. 


Á.. es 
Sl 


Frost DRUID 


Medium humanoid (human), any alignment 


Armor Class 13 (hide armor) 

Hit Points 67 (948 + 27) 

Speed 30 ft., 40 ft. (wolf form only), burrow 5 ft. (fox form 
only), climb 30 ft. (goat form only), fly 60 ft. (owl form only) 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12 (+1) 13 (+1) 163) 10 (+0) 1663) 9(-1) 


Saving Throws Int +3, Wis +6 

Skills Nature +3, Perception +6, Survival +6 

Damage Resistances cold 

Senses darkvision 60 ft. (beast form only), passive 
Perception 16 

Languages Common, Druidic 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Spellcasting (Humanoid Form Only). The druid is a 9th-level 
spellcaster. Its spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 
14; +6 to hit with spell attacks). It has the following druid 
spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): druidcraft, guidance, resistance 


Ist level (4 slots): animal friendship, fog cloud, speak 
with animals 

2nd level (3 slots): animal messenger, moonbeam, pass 
without trace 

3rd level (3 slots): conjure animals, sleet storm, wind wall 

4th level (3 slots): hallucinatory terrain, ice storm 

Sth level (1 slot): awaken 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The druid makes two melee attacks. 


Ice Sickle (Humanoid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +4 
to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) slashing damage 
plus 5 (2d4) cold damage. 


Maul (Beast Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 
5 ft., one target. Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) piercing damage. 


Change Shape. The druid magically polymorphs into a beast 
form—fox, mountain goat, owl, or wolf—or back into its 
humanoid form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is 
absorbed or borne by the beast form (the druid’s choice). It 
reverts to its humanoid form when it dies. The druid’s sta- 
tistics are the same in each form, except where noted in this 
stat block. 


OS 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


Frost DRUID 


Frost druids are solitary defenders of nature and the 
natural enemies of civilization in the North, They seck 
to preserve the arctic wilderness by destroying outsid- 
ers who cross their path. Each patrols its territory in the 
guise of an arctic fox, a mountain goat, a snowy owl, or 
a wolf, reverting to human form only when it attacks. 
Clever ambushers, they use hallucinatory terrain spells 
to create illusory snowdrifts under which they can hide, 
or to obscure pools covered by thin ice through which 
others might fall. 

Awakened Companions. A frost druid is often ac- 
companied by one or more beasts, shrubs, or evergreen 
trees that it has made sentient using the awaken spell. 
These druids favor polar bears and reindeer (use the elk 
stat block in the Monster Manual) as companions, and 
such creatures typically share the druid’s disposition, 

Ice Sickle. A frost druid can carve a sickle out of ice, 
requiring a total of 24 hours for the work. Bitter cold 
courses through this weapon while it's in the druid’s 
hands. If the druid dies, the ice sickle melts away. The 
weapon is otherwise identical to a normal sickle. 


Frost GIANT SKELETON 


Necromancers can transform the inanimate bones of 
long-dead frost giants into malevolent juggernauts that 
love to harm the living. 


ee eo 


Frost GIANT SKELETON 
Huge undead, lawful evil 


Armor Class 14 (armor scraps) 
Hit Points 102 (12d12 + 24) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
23(+6) 9(-1) 15 (+2) 6(-2) 8(-1) 5 (-3) 


Damage Vulnerabilities bludgeoning 

Damage Immunities cold, poison 

Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 
Languages understands Giant but can't speak 

Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 
——$ 
Unusual Nature. The skeleton doesn’t require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The skeleton makes two greataxe attacks. 


Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 25 (3d12 + 6) slashing damage 


Freezing Stare. The skeleton targets one creature it can see 
within 60 feet of it. The target must succeed on a DC 13 Con- 
stitution saving throw or take 35 (1046) cold damage and be 
paralyzed until the end of 
_— eee 


next turn, 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


289 


290 


GNOLL VAMPIRE 


Medium undead (shapechanger), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 93 (11d8 + 44) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WS CHA 
20 (+5) 18 (+4) 20(+4) 6(-2) 12(+1) 9(-1) 


‘Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +7 

Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing damage from nonmagical attacks 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11 

Languages Abyssal, Gnoll 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


Keen Smell. The vampire has advantage on Wisdom (Percep- 
tion) checks that rely on smell. 


Rampage. When it reduces a creature to 0 hit points with a me- 


lee attack on its turn, the vampire can take a bonus action to 
move up to half its speed and make a bite attack. 


Regeneration. The vampire regains 10 hit points at the start of 
its turn if it has at least 1 hit point and isn't in sunlight. If the 
vampire takes radiant damage or damage from holy water, this 
trait doesn’t function at the start of its next turn. 


Shapechanger. \f the vampire isn't in sunlight, it can use its 
action to polymorph into a Large hyena or a Medium cloud of 
mist, or back into its true form. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


While in hyena form, the vampire can’t speak, and its walking 
speed is 50 feet. Its statistics, other than its size and speed, are 
unchanged. Anything it is wearing transforms with it, but noth- 
ing it is carrying does. It reverts to its true form if it dies. 

While in mist form, the vampire can’t take any actions, speak, 
or manipulate objects. It is weightless, has a flying speed of 20 
feet, can hover, and can enter a hostile creature's space and 
stop there. In addition, if air can pass through a space, the mist 
can do so without squeezing, and it can’t pass through water. It 
has advantage on Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution saving 
throws, and it is immune to all nonmagical damage, except the 
damage it takes from sunlight. 


Unusual Nature. The vampire doesn't require air. 
Vampire Weaknesses. The vampire has the following flaws: 


Enraged by Celestial. If it hears words of Celestial spoken, the 
vampire must try to attack the source of those spoken words 
on its next turn. If these words come from multiple sources 
and from opposite directions, the vampire is restrained. 
Otherwise, it moves to attack what it perceives to be the clos- 
est source. 

Repulsed by Perfume. The vampire has disadvantage on melee 
attack rolls made against any creature wearing perfume or 
carrying an open container of it. 

Stake to the Heart. If a piercing weapon made of wood is driven 
into the vampire's heart while the vampire is incapacitated, 
the vampire is paralyzed until the stake is removed. 

Sunlight Hypersensitivity. The vampire takes 20 radiant damage 
when it starts its turn in sunlight. While in sunlight, it has 
disadvantage on attack rolls and ability checks. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack (Vampire Form Only). The vampire makes two at- 
tacks: one with its bite and one with its claws. 


Bite (Hyena or Vampire Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +8 
to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) piercing dam- 
age plus 9 (2d8) necrotic damage. The target's hit point max- 
imum is reduced by an amount equal to the necrotic damage 
taken, and the vampire regains hit points equal to that amount. 
The reduction lasts until the target finishes a long rest. The tar- 
get dies if its hit point maximum is reduced to 0. 


Claws (Vampire Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, 
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 10 (2d4 + 5) slashing damage. 


Frightful Cackle (Hyena or Vampire Form Only). The vampire 
emits a bone-chilling cackle. Each creature of the vampire's 
choice that is within 120 feet of the vampire and can hear its 
cackle must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or be- 
come frightened for 1 minute. A creature can repeat the saving 
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself 
on a success. If a creature's saving throw is successful or the ef- 
fect ends for it, the creature is immune to the vampire's Fright- 
ful Cackle for the next 24 hours. 


Sickening Gaze (Hyena or Vampire Form Only). The vampire 
targets one humanoid it can see within 30 feet of it. If the tar- 
get can see the vampire, the target must succeed on a DC 15 
Constitution saving throw against this magic or be poisoned 
for 24 hours. A creature whose saving throw is successful is 
immune to this vampire’s Sickening Gaze for 24 hours. 


GNOLL VAMPIRE 


When a gnoll’s ravenous hunger is so great that it craves 
flesh and blood even after death, it can rise as a vampire 
to continue its feeding frenzy. 

A gnoll vampire is a savage predator that feeds on the 
blood of the living. It cackles maniacally when it catches 
the scent of its prey and quickly moves in for the kill, 
tearing away flesh with its claws, gorging on meat and 
blood, and leaving nothing behind but bones, gristle, 
and the victim's blood-spattered belongings. 

Gnoll vampires are indiscriminate feeders that pre- 
fer the flesh and blood of humanoids, including other 
gnolls. Their noses can't stand the scent of perfumes, 
and their ears can’t abide words spoken aloud in 
Celestial. They don't cast reflections in mirrors unless 
they want to. 

Unlike normal vampires, gnoll vampires don’t have 
coffins where they rest, and they have no such places 
to return to when their corporeal bodies are destroyed. 
They are undeterred by running water, and they can 
enter residences without invitation. When a gnoll vam- 
pire needs to travel quickly, it adopts the form of a giant, 
emaciated hyena. When it wants to catch its prey by sur- 
prise, it takes the form of a cloud of mist. After it feeds 
on a victim's blood, its mist form takes on a crimson hue 
for an hour or so before its colorlessness returns. 


GOLIATHS 


At the highest mountain peaks—far above the slopes 
where trees grow, where the air is thin and the frigid 
winds howl—dwell the reclusive goliaths. Few other folk 
can truthfully claim to have seen a goliath, and fewer 
still to have forged a friendship with one. 

Goliaths love to compete and keep score, counting up 
their deeds and tallying their accomplishments to com- 
pare to what others have done, Goliaths love to win, but 
they see defeat as an incentive to improve their skills. 
Above all else, every goliath is driven to outdo their past 
performance, taking greater and greater risks. As a re- 
sult, few goliaths live to see old age. 


GOLIATH NAMES 


ee ———_—__——_——_— 
Every goliath has three names: a birth name assigned 
by the newborn's mother and father, a nickname as- 
signed by the tribal chief, and a family or clan name. 


Birth Names: Aukan, Eglath, Gae-Al, Gauthak, Ilikan, 
Keothi, Kuori, Lo-Kag, Manneo, Maveith, Nalla, 
Orilo, Paavu, Pethani, Thalai, Thotham, Uthal, 
Vaunea, Vimak 

Nicknames: Bearkiller, Dawncaller, Fearless, Flint- 
finder, Horncarver, Keeneye, Lonehunter, Long- 
leaper, Rootsmasher, Steadyhand, Threadtwister, 
Twice-Orphaned, Twistedlimb, Wordpainter 

Clan Names: Akannathi, Anakalathai, Elanithino, Gath- 
akanathi, Kalagiano, Katho-Olavi, Kolae-Gileana, 
Ogolakanu, Thuliaga, Thunukalathi, Thuunlakalaga 


GOLIATH PLAYER CHARACTERS 


With your consent, any player in your game can play a 
goliath character. A goliath native to Icewind Dale can 
be a member of the Skytower (Akannathi) clan, the 
Wyrmdoom (Thuunlakalaga) clan, or another goliath 
clan that you and the player create together. 

A goliath character has the following traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score 
increases by 2, and your Constitution score in- 
creases by 1. 

Age. Goliaths have life spans comparable to humans. 
They enter adulthood in their late teens and usually live 
less than a century. 

Size. Goliaths stand between 7 and 8 feet tall 
and weigh between 280 and 340 pounds. Your size 
is Medium. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Natural Athlete. You have proficiency in the Ath- 
letics skill. 

Stone's Endurance. You can focus yourself to occa- 
sionally shrug off injury. When you take damage, you 
can use your reaction to roll a d12. Add your Constitu- 
tion modifier to the number rolled and reduce the dam- 
age by that total. After you use this trait, you can't use it 
again until you finish a short or long rest. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


291 


Powerful Build. You count as one size larger when 
determining your carrying capacity and the weight you 
can push, drag, or lift. 

Mountain Born. You have resistance to cold damage. 
You're also acclimated to high altitude, including eleva- 
tions above 20,000 feet. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Giant. 


SPINE OF THE WoRLD GOLIATHS 


Goliaths inhabit the Spine of the World, where their 
mettle is tested against ores, ogres, frost giants, remor- 


hazes, ice trolls, young white dragons, the treacherous 

mountain terrain, and the cruel indifference of nature. 
Bitter Rivals. Skytower Shelter and Wyrmdoom Crag 

are two mountain strongholds inhabited by goliaths. 

The former is home to the Skytower (Akannathi) clan, 

the latter to the Wyrmdoom (Thuunlakalaga) clan. The 

two groups refuse to get along, and competition between 


them is fierce and often violent. They stare at each other 
across mountain peaks and fight over everything from 
necessities to territory. The likelihood of peace between 
them is remote, because goliaths like to hold grudges. 


—————<£{_—>L_=—__—_£{——————==aa_ 
GOLIATH WARRIOR 


Medium humanoid (goliath), any alignment 


Armor Class 12 (hide armor) 
Hit Points 67 (9d8 + 27) 


Speed 30 ft 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 11 (40) 16(+3) 10 (+0) 15 (+2) 10 (+0) 


Skills Athletics +6, Perception +4, Survival +4 
Damage Resistances cold 

Senses passive Perception 14 

Languages Common, Giant 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Mountain Born. The goliath is acclimated to high altitude, in- 
cluding elevations above 20,000 feet. 


Powerful Build. The goliath counts as one size larger when 
determining its carrying capacity and the weight it can push, 
drag, or lift. 


ACTIONS | 


Multiattack. The goliath makes two attacks with its greataxe or 
hurls two javelins. 


Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 10 (1d12 + 4) slashing damage. 


Javelin, Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) piercing damage. 


REACTIONS 


Stone's Endurance (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). 
When the goliath takes damage, it reduces the damage taken 
by9 (Id12 +3). 


ANILAN 


GOLIATH WEREBEAR 


Goliath legends speak of a creature that prowls the far 
reaches of Icewind Dale, known as Oyaminartok the 
Winter Walker. She can take the form of either a polar 
bear or a hulking, bipedal shape obscured by wind and 
blowing snow. Elders invoke her name to keep young go- 
liaths from wandering too far from home before they're 
ready. Adult goliaths sometimes encounter this legend- 
ary individual in their travels to the far-flung corners of 
the dale. If they flee like cowards, Oyaminartok laughs 
and lets them go to wander in obscurity. If they chal- 
lenge Oyaminartok to a fight, the Winter Walker smiles 
and tests their mettle. Those who impress her with their 
fighting skills are bitten and become goliath werebears 
themselves—goliaths who carry Oyaminartok’s curse 
of lycanthropy. Contrary to myth, Oyaminartok is not 
a monster but a force of good in the region, and she 
passes her curse only to goliaths whose hearts are pure. 
Oyaminartok and others of her kind try to help crea- 
tures they come across, for the weather and the geog- 
raphy of Icewind Dale can be brutal. They know the 


GOLIATH WEREBEAR 


Medium humanoid (goliath, shapechanger), neutral good 


i aa 

‘Armor Class 10 in humanoid form, 12 (natural armor) in bear 
or hybrid form 

Hit Points 161 (19d8 + 76) 

Speed 30 ft. (40 ft, swim 30 ft. in bear or hybrid form) 


——————————————— 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
20 (+5) 10 (+0) 18(+4) 1060) 152) 10 (+0) 


————————— 

Skills Athletics +8, Perception +8, Survival +5 

Damage Vulnerabilities fire 

Damage Resistances cold 

Damage Immunities bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered 

Senses passive Perception 18 

Languages Common, Giant (can’t speak in bear form) 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 

——$$ 

Keen Smell. The werebear has advantage on Wisdom (Percep- 

tion) checks that rely on smell. 


Mountain Born. The werebear is acclimated to high altitude, 
including elevations above 20,000 feet. 


Powerful Build (Humanoid Form Only). The werebear counts 
as one size larger when determining its carrying capacity and 
the weight it can push, drag, or lift. 


safest routes across the tundra, and they can help guide 
travelers through the Sea of Moving Ice and across its 
ever-shifting ice floes. These polar werebears attack evil 
in the wilderness, but they steer clear of camps and set- 
tlements. Fire is Oyaminartok’s bane, and thus she and 
her kind are wary around hearths and open flames. 


Shapechanger. The werebear can use its action to polymorph 
into a Large bear-humanoid hybrid or into a Large polar bear, 
or back into its goliath form. Its statistics, other than its size 
and AC, are the same in each form. Any equipment it is wear- 
ing or carrying isn't transformed. It reverts to its true form 

if it dies. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The werebear makes two melee attacks. 


Bite (Bear or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to 
hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. Hit: 16 (2d10 + 5) piercing dam- 
age. If the target is a humanoid, it must succeed on a DC 15 
Constitution saving throw or be cursed with werebear lycan- 
thropy, as described in the Monster Manual. 


Claw (Bear or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to 
hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) slashing damage. 


Greataxe (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon At- 
tack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (1d12 + 5) slash- 
ing damage. 


REACTIONS 


Stone’s Endurance (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). 
When the werebear takes damage, it reduces the damage taken 
by 10 (1412+ 4). 


(SSS 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 
293 


294 


HARE 


Snowshoe hares are gentle herbivores that live in bur- 
rows throughout Icewind Dale. They have shorter ears 
than other hares and are acclimated to cold weather. 


HARE 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 1 (1d4 — 1) 
‘Speed 20 ft., burrow 5 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WS CHA 
15) 763 9(-1) 24) NO 4(-3) 


Skills Perception +2, Stealth +5 
Senses passive Perception 12 
Languages — 

Challenge 0 (0 XP) 


Escape. The hare can take the Dash, Disengage, or Hide action 
as a bonus action on each of its turns. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


IcE TROLL 


Ice trolls have all the meanness and hunger of common 
trolls. Their hearts radiate extreme cold, to the detri- 
ment of other nearby creatures. 

Ice Troll Hearts. An ice troll's heart remains cold 
even after the troll’s destruction. As long as the troll 
can't regenerate, its heart can be safely removed from 
its remains, handled, and kept. An ice troll's heart, once 
removed, becomes a harmless Tiny object with AC 13, 4 
hit points, and immunity to all damage except fire dam- 
age. For the next 24 hours, the heart has the following 
magical properties: 


+ A creature that eats the heart gains the ability to re- 
generate for the next 24 hours, regaining 5 hit points 
at the start of each of its turns. If the creature takes 
acid or fire damage, this trait doesn't function at the 
start of its next turn. The creature dies only if it starts 
its turn with 0 hit points and doesn't regenerate. 

If buried in the ground under a foot or more of earth, 
the heart melts away and summons a blizzard like 
that created by the control weather spell. It takes 10 
minutes for the heart to melt and the blizzard to form. 
The blizzard lasts for 8 hours. 


+ A hag or similar creature can perform a ritual that 
turns the heart into a magical talisman that acts like 
a patch of brown mold (see the Dungeon Master's 
Guide). This effect lasts until the heart is destroyed. 
A creature proficient with alchemist's supplies can 
squeeze enough residual fuid out of the heart to 
mix with other alchemical ingredients, creating one 
potion of resistance (cold). It takes 1 hour to create 
this potion. 


eer ee ee SS 


IcE TROLL 


Large giant, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 115 (10d10 + 60) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 8 (-1) 2266) 72 91) 7(-2) 


Skills Perception +2 

Damage Immunities cold 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages Giant 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


Cold Aura. While it’s alive, the troll generates an aura of bitter 
cold that fills the area within 10 feet of it. At the start of the 
troll’s turn, all nonmagical flames im the aura are extinguished. 
Any creature that starts its turn within 10 feet of the troll takes 
10 (346) cold damage. 


Keen Smell, The troll has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on smell. 


Regeneration. The troll regains 10 hit points at the start of 
each of its turns. If the troll takes acid or fire damage, this trait 
doesn't function at the start of its next turn. The troll dies only 
if it starts its turn with 0 hit points and doesn't regenerate. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The troll makes three attacks: one with its bite and 
two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 
7 (1d6 + 4) piercing damage plus 3 (248) cold damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 

Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage plus 9 (248) cold damage. If 

the target takes any of the cold damage, the target must suc- 

ceed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or have disadvan- 

tage on its attack rolls until the end of its next turn. 
a 


KNUCKLEHEAD TROUT 


The tasty and tenacious knucklehead trout can't easily 
be caught in nets. Moreover, using a line to reel in such 
a strong fish is a significant undertaking. Incautious 
fishers who get pulled into freezing water can quickly 
die, particularly if they're weighed down by heavy furs 
and cloaks. 

A male knucklehead trout can weigh 70 pounds or 
more. The females tend to be smaller, weighing about 
50 pounds. Both are prized for their ivory-like bones. 


i 


KNUCKLEHEAD TROUT 


‘Small beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 7 (246) 
Speed 0 ft., swim 30 ft. 


STR DEX 
14 (42) 14 (+2) 


CON INT WIS 
neo 165) 663 


CHA 
1(-5) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8 
Languages — 
Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


Water Breathing. The trout can breathe only underwater. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 
4 (1d4 + 2) bludgeoning damage. 
——— Se 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


295 


296 


KOBOLDS 


Kobolds can be found anywhere dragons are known 

to dwell, and those that live in the mountains and hills 
of Icewind Dale are among the hardiest of their kind. 
Drawn to the north by a desire to find and serve white 
dragons, these kobolds adapted as best they can to the 
hostile climate. Their sensitive eyes appreciate sunless 
days and long, dark nights. They use wooden javelins as 
tools to test the snow ahead of them. 

Kobolds native to Icewind Dale frequently wander into 
Ten-Towns to escape the dreadful cold, hoping to trade 
what few skills they have for some warm soup and shel- 
ter. The people of Ten-Towns, accustomed to the pres. 
ence of strange outlanders, allow these kobolds to dwell 
among them for the most part. When the kobolds don’t 
feel safe, they acquire heavy winter clothing and dis- 
guise themselves as humans by standing on one anoth- 
er's shoulders. Three kobolds in cold weather gear can 
pass themselves off as a clumsy human with a success- 
ful group Charisma (Deception) check, the DC of which 
equals the onlooker’s Wisdom (Insight) check result. 


ICEWIND KOBOLD ZOMBIE 


The necromancer Vellynne Harpell has Icewind kobold 
guides in her employ, including a pair that died and were 
turned into zombies using animate dead spells. The cold 
climate helps to preserve their dead flesh. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


IND KOBOLD 
` Small humanoid (kobold), any alignment 


"Armor Class 14 (hide armor) 
“Hit Points 9 (2d6 + 2) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 20 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WS CHA 
7(-2 1542) 1241) 8-1) E. 8(-1) 


Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +3 

Skills Perception +1, Stealth +4, Survival +1 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages Common, Draconic 

Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Pack Tactics. The kobold has advantage on an attack roll 
against a creature if at least one of the kobold’s allies is within 5 
feet of the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated. 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the kobold has disadvan- 
tage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom (Perception) checks 
that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 1 (1d6 - 2) piercing damage. 
= 


“Armor Class 9 (scraps of hide armor) 
“Hit Points 19 (3d6 + 9) 
Speed 20 ft. 


CON INT wis CHA 
16 (+3) 3(-4 6 (-2) 3 (-4) 


STR DEX 
8(-1) 6 (-2) 


Saving Throws Wis +0 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8 

Languages understands Common and Draconic but can’t speak 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Undead Fortitude. |f damage reduces the zombie to 0 hit 
points, it must make a Constitution saving throw with a DC 
of 5 + the damage taken, unless the damage is radiant or 
from a critical hit. On a success, the zombie drops to 1 hit 
point instead. 


Unusual Nature. The zombie doesn't require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


ACTIONS 


Javelin. Melee Weapon Attack: +1 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 2 (1d6 - 1) piercing damage. 
a 


KOBOLD VAMPIRE SPAWN 


Small undead, neutral evil 


Armor Class 14 
Hit Points 39 (6d6 + 18) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 20 ft. 


CON INT WS CHA 
1663) 86) 86) 86) 


STR DEX 
10 (+0) 18 (+4) 


Saving Throws Dex +6, Wis +1 

Skills Perception +1, Stealth +6 

Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 

Languages Common, Draconic 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


KOBOLD VAMPIRE SPAWN 


The gnoll vampire Tekeli-li has a small number of ko- 
bold vampire spawn minions to keep it company in the 
Caves of Hunger (see chapter 6). The vampiric kobolds 
are terrified of the gnoll vampire and can’t understand 
its commands, so they give Tekeli-li a wide berth. These 
ravenous undead kobolds thirst for blood and tend to 
swarm one foe at a time. 


from holy water, this trait doesn’t function at the start of its 
next turn. 


Unusual Nature. The vampire doesn't require air. 
Vampire Weaknesses. The vampire has the following flaws: 


Forbiddance. The vampire can't enter a residence without an 
invitation from one of the occupants. 

Harmed by Running Water. The vampire takes 20 acid damage 
when it starts its turn in running water. 

Stake to the Heart. The vampire is destroyed if a piercing 
weapon made of wood is driven into its heart while it is inca- 
pacitated in its resting place. 

Sunlight Hypersensitivity. The vampire takes 20 radiant damage 
when it starts its turn in sunlight, While in sunlight, it has 
disadvantage on attack rolls and ability checks. 


ACTIONS 


c 
Pack Tactics. The vampire has advantage on an attack roll 
against a creature if at least one of the vampire’s allies is within 
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn't incapacitated. 


Regeneration. The vampire regains 10 hit points at the start 
ofits turn if it has at least 1 hit point and isn’t in sunlight or 
running water. If the vampire takes radiant damage or damage 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 6 (1d4 + 4) piercing damage plus 5 (2d4) necrotic damage. 
The target's hit point maximum is reduced by an amount equal 
to the necrotic damage taken, and the vampire regains hit 
points equal to that amount. The reduction lasts until the tar- 
get finishes a long rest. The target dies if its hit point maximum 
is reduced to 0. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 
297 


LIVING SPELLS 


Areas of wild magic and sites that have been ravaged 
by powerful eldritch forces can give rise to spell effects 

that become living beings. These so-called living spells 
haunt the places where they were created, subsisting on 
ambient magical energy. 


LIvING BicBy’s HAND 


A living Bigby’s hand is a Large, hovering hand of shim- 
mering, translucent force. It often serves as a guardian, 
attacking creatures that cross its path while remaining 
loyal to its caster. 


Livinc BicBy’s HAND 


Large construct, unaligned 


Armor Class 20 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 52 (5d10 + 25) 
Speed 0 ft., fly 60 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT WS CHA 
26 (+8) 10(+0) 20(+5) 1(-5) 10(+0) 1(-5) 


Saving Throws Dex +2, Wis +2 

Skills Perception +2, Stealth +2 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 
frightened, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, unconscious 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 

Languages — 

Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Magic Resistance. The living spell has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


Unusual Nature. The living spell doesn’t require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


ACTIONS 


Force Fist. Melee Spell Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 

get. Hit: 26 (4d8 + 8) force damage. If the target is a Large or 
smaller creature, the living spell can move it up to 5 feet and 
move with it, without provoking opportunity attacks. 


Grasping Hand, The living spell attempts to grab a Huge or 
smaller creature within 5 feet of it. The target must succeed on 
a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or be grappled (escape DC 15). 
Until the grapple ends, the target takes 15 (2d6 + 8) bludgeon- 
ing damage at the start of each of its turns. The living spell can 
grapple only one creature at a time and can’t use Force Fist 
until the grapple ends. 


SSS SS e a a 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


LIVING BLADE OF DISASTER 


A living blade of disaster is a blade of disaster spell (see 
appendix D) with a wicked will of its own. It looks like a 
floating, black planar rift in the shape of a sword. Like a 
demon, it craves destruction. 


LIVING DEMIPLANE 


A living demiplane is a demiplane spell that has become 
vaguely self-aware. It is a shadowy rectangle, 5 feet wide 
and 10 feet high, which creeps along flat, solid surfaces 
and groans softly when it moves. 

When a living demiplane encounters a creature 
small enough to fit through its doorway, it tries to pull 
that creature into itself, then deposits the victim in an 
extradimensional chamber. 


_ LIVING BLADE OF DISASTER 


Small construct, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 67 (9d6 + 36) 
| Speed 0 ft., fly 30 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
10 (+0) 16(+3) 19(+4) 6(-2) 10(+0) 3 (-4) 
aa 
Damage Immunities poison; bludgeoning, piercing, and 

slashing from nonmagical attacks 
Condition Immunities blinded, deafened, exhaustion, grappled, 

paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, restrained, unconscious 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 
eS 
Magic Resistance. The living spell has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


Unfettered. The living spell can move through any barrier, even 
a wall of magical force. 


Unusual Nature. The living spell doesn't require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


ACTIONS 


Force Blade. Melee Spell Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 26 (4d12) force damage, unless the living spell rolled 
an 18 or higher on the d20 for the attack, in which case the at- 
tack is a critical hit that deals 78 (12d12) force damage instead. 


REACTIONS. 


Preemptive Strike. The living spell makes a melee attack 
against a creature that starts its turn within 5 feet of the 
_ living spell. 


a a. 


LIVING NT 


Í Medium construct, unaligned 


| Damage Immunities poison 


row as 1 inch wide without squeezing. The living spell can't 


Armor Class 10 
Hit Points 31 (748) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


CON 
10 (+0) 


wis 
10 (+0) 


STR 
1-5) 


DEX 
10 (+0) 


INT 
1(-5) 


CHA 
1(-5) 


Condition Immunities blinded, deafened, charmed, exhaustion, 
frightened, grappled, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, 
restrained, stunned, unconscious 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 


Languages — 

Challenge 0 (0 XP) 
ee 
Dimensional Form. The living spell can enter another creature's 
space and vice versa, and it can move through a space as nar- 


detach from a solid surface, such as a wall, ceiling, or floor. If 
it has no surface to attach to, the living spell is destroyed (see | 
“Planar Destruction” below). 


Extradimensional Chamber. When the living spell enters an- 
other creature's space (or vice versa) for the first time on a F 
turn, the other creature must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity sav- 
ing throw or be pulled into the living spell's extradimensional |- 
space, an unfurnished stone chamber 30 feet in every dimen- 
sion. A creature too big to fit in this space succeeds on the 
saving throw automatically. Creatures in the chamber never 
run out of breathable air. Magic that enables transit between 
planes, such as plane shift, can be used to escape the chamber, 
which has no exits otherwise. 

Creatures trapped inside the extradimensional chamber can't 
see, target, or deal damage to the living spell; however, they 
can damage the room around them. Each 5-foot-square sec- 
tion of ceiling, wall, and floor in the chamber has AC 17, 50 hit 
points, immunity to poison and psychic damage, and immunity 
to bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing damage that is nonmag- 
ical. If any section is reduced to 0 hit points, the living spell and 
its chamber are destroyed (see “Planar Destruction” below). 


| Magic Resistance. The living spell has advantage on saving 


throws against spells and other magical effects. 


Planar Destruction. The living spell is destroyed when it or a 


| 5-foot-square section of its extradimensional chamber is re- 


duced to 0 hit points, or when the living spell has no surface to 
attach to. When the living spell is destroyed, the contents of its 
extradimensional chamber are expelled, appearing as close to 
the living spell’s previous location as possible. Each expelled 
creature appears in a randomly determined unoccupied space, 
preneh whatever it is wearing or carrying. 


Unusual Nature. The living spell doesn't require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


299 


300 


MAGEN 


Magen are magical, humanlike beings created by a wiz- 
ard spell (see the create magen spell in appendix D) or 
by other arcane methods. 

Though magen look like humanoids with green skin, 
they are constructs. When one is wounded, its blood 
is seen to have the color and consistency of mercury. 
They exist purely through magical means. When one 
is killed, its body disappears in a burst of harmless fire 
and a cloud of smoke that quickly dissipates. 

Magical Servants. Magen make ideal servants. At 
creation, each is instilled with an instinct to protect 
itself and its creator, and it follows its creator's instruc- 
tions without hesitation. When its task mplete, a 
magen stands immobile and silent until its creator gives 
it new orders. 


DEMOS MAGEN 


Demos magen wear armor, wield weapons, and typi- 
cally serve as guards. 


GALVAN MAGEN 


Galvan magen can fly. They also store static electricity, 
which they discharge as lightning bolts. 


Hypnos MAGEN 


Hypnos magen are telepathic and use their power of 
suggestion to control others. Their creators use them to 
force enemies to withdraw or surrender. 

A hypnos magen carries no weapons, relying entirely 
on its psychic abilities to manipulate and harm other 
creatures. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


cs 


‘Class 16 (chain mail) 
Points 51 (6d8 + 24) 
30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WS CHA 
14 (42) 14 (42) 184) 1060) 1060) 7 (-2) 


Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, poisoned 

Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages understands the languages of its creator but can't 
speak 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Fiery End. If the magen dies, its body disintegrates in a harm- 
less burst of fire and smoke, leaving behind anything it was 
wearing or carrying. 


Magic Resistance. The magen has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Unusual Nature. The magen doesn't require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The magen makes two melee attacks. 


Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) slashing damage. 


Light Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 80/320 
ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage. 
E 


Hit Points 68 (8d8 + 32) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 18 (+4) 18 (+4) 126) 1060) 7 (-2) 
rs 
Damage Immunities lightning, poison 
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, poisoned 
Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages understands the languages of its creator but can't 
speak 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 
——— 
Fiery End. If the magen dies, its body disintegrates in a harm- 
less burst of fire and smoke, leaving behind anything it was 
wearing or carrying. 


Magic Resistance. The magen has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Unusual Nature. The magen doesn't require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack, The magen makes two Shocking Touch attacks. 


Shocking Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., 

‘one target (the magen has advantage on the attack roll if the 
target is wearing armor made of metal). Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) light- 
ning damage. 


Static Discharge (Recharge 5-6). The magen discharges a light- 
ning bolt in a 60-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in 
that line must make a DC 14 Dexterity saving throw (with disad- 
vantage if the creature is wearing armor made of metal), taking 
22 (4d10) lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much 
damage on a successful one. 


YPNOS MAGEN ~ 


“Medium construct, unaligned 


l Armor Class 12 
| Hit Points 34 (4d8 + 16) 
| Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX 
10 (+0) 14 (+2) 


CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 146 1060 7(-3 


Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, poisoned 

Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages understands the languages of its creator but can't 
speak, telepathy 30 ft. 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 

os 

Fiery End. If the magen dies, its body disintegrates in a harm- 

less burst of fire and smoke, leaving behind anything it was 

wearing or carrying. 


Magic Resistance. The magen has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Unusual Nature. The magen doesn't require air, food, drink, or 
sleep. 


ACTIONS 


Psychic Lash. The magen's eyes glow silver as it targets one 
creature that it can see within 60 feet of it. The target must 
succeed on a DC 12 Wisdom saving throw or take 11 (2410) 
psychic damage. 


Suggestion. The magen casts the suggestion spell (save DC 

12), requiring no material components. The target must be a 

creature that the magen can communicate with telepathically. 

If it succeeds on its saving throw, the target is immune to this 

magen's suggestion spell for the next 24 hours. The magen’s 

spellcasting ability is Intelligence. 
—————————————SSSSSSSaaEEE 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


302 


MIMIC 


Mimics are shape-shifting monsters described in the 
Monster Manual. The variant presented here is a partic- 
ularly large and voracious specimen—the result of Neth- 
erese experiments on ordinary mimics—that spits acid. 


SPITTING MIMIC 


Large monstrosity (shapechanger), neutral 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 85 (10d10 + 30) 


Speed 20 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
AES) 126) E3 9) 152) 10(+0) 


Skills Stealth +7 

Damage Immunities acid 

Condition Immunities prone 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages — 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Shapechanger. The mimic can use its action to polymorph into 
an object or back into its true, amorphous form. Its statistics 
are the same in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or car- 
rying isn’t transformed. It reverts to its true form if it dies. 


Adhesive (Object Form Only). The mimic adheres to anything 
that touches it. A Huge or smaller creature adhered to the 
mimic is also grappled by it (escape DC 16). Ability checks 
made to escape this grapple have disadvantage. 


False Appearance (Object Form Only). While the mimic remains 
motionless, it is indistinguishable from an ordinary object. 


Grappler. The mimic has advantage on attack rolls against any 
creature grappled by it. 


Magic Resistance. The mimic has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 
ACTIONS 


Multiattack, The mimic attacks three times: twice with its 
pseudopods and once with its bite. 


Pseudopods. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 10 (1d10 + 5) bludgeoning damage. If the mimic is 
in object form, the target is subjected to its Adhesive trait. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 10 (1d10 + 5) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) acid damage. 


Spit Acid (Recharge 5-6). The mimic spits acid at one creature 

it can see within 30 feet of it. The target must make a DC 14 

Dexterity saving throw, taking 32 (9d6 + 1) acid damage on 

failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 
——_KzKKz~—=L_ K&S 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


MIND FLAYERS 


Mind flayers, which are described in the Monster Man- 
ual, are created through ceremorphosis, a process that 
begins with the implantation of an illithid tadpole in the 
brain of a humanoid host. After about seven days in its 
new home, the tadpole transforms its host into a mind 
flayer. The new creation typically retains no memory of 
its previous existence. 


GNOME CEREMORPH 


For reasons unknown, ceremorphosis can go awry 
when an illithid tadpole is implanted in the brain of a 
gnome. This deviation might be due to the quasi-magical 
nature of gnomes, or simply a facet of how their minds 
work. When the process is warped only slightly, the 
mind flayer remains gnome-sized and is called a gnome 
ceremorph. It retains its knowledge of the Gnomish lan- 
guage while becoming able to speak Deep Speech and 
Undercommon. It retains fragmented memories of its 
previous life and previous alignment, not to mention a 
propensity for invention. 

Laser Pistol. A gnome ceremorph often carries a 
home-built device that functions as a laser pistol (see 
“Firearms” in the Dungeon Master's Guide). This 
weapon is powered by an energy cell, which enables the 
weapon to fire 50 shots. After its last shot is expended, 
the device becomes inoperable. The energy cell can't be 
removed without destroying the weapon. 


Gnome CeremorPH 


GNOME SQUIDLING 


When the process of turning a gnome into a mind flayer 
goes horribly awry, the result is a gnome squidling—a 
deformed mind flayer with weak, spindly limbs and over- 
sized tentacles. It relies on levitation to keep its body 
aloft and uses its tentacles like legs, to propel it along 
whatever surface it's floating above. Most mind flayers 
destroy squidlings on sight, so it's rare to see one or 
more of these creatures. 

Squidlings eat brains for sustenance, just like other 
mind flayers do, and they don't care where the brains 
come from. 


—E——————————e e ana a } 
GNOME CEREMORPH 


Small aberration, any alignment 


Armor Class 16 (breastplate) 
Hit Points 58 (13d6 + 13) 


Speed 25 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
6(-2) 1462 126) 1964) 173) 1763) 


Saving Throws Int +7, Wis +6, Cha +6 

Skills Arcana +7, Deception +6, Insight +6, Perception +6, 
Persuasion +6, Stealth +5 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16 

Languages Deep Speech, Gnomish, Undercommon, 
telepathy 120 ft. 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The ceremorph’s innate spell- 
casting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 15). It can innately 
cast the following spells, requiring no components: 


At will: detect thoughts, levitate 
1/day each: dominate monster, plane shift (self only) 


Magic Resistance. The ceremorph has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one crea- 
ture, Hit: 15 (2d10 + 4) psychic damage. If the target is Medium 
or smaller, it is grappled (escape DC 9) and must succeed 

on a DC 15 Intelligence saving throw or be stunned until this 
grapple ends. 


Extract Brain. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
incapacitated humanoid grappled by the ceremorph. Hit: 55 
(10d10) piercing damage. If this damage reduces the target to 
O hit points, the ceremorph kills the target by extracting and 
devouring its brain. 


Laser Pistol. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 40/120 ft., 
one target. Hit: 12 (3d6 + 2) radiant damage. 


Mind Blast (Recharge 5-6). The ceremorph magically emits 
psychic energy in a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that area 
must succeed on a DC 15 Intelligence saving throw or take 22 
(4d8 + 4) psychic damage and be stunned for 1 minute. A crea- 
ture can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, 
ending the effect on itself on a success. 

oo ——SSS 


GNOME SQUIDLING 


Small aberration, unaligned 


Armor Class 8 

Hit Points 10 (346) 

Speed 15 ft. 

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
4(-3) 7(-2) 10(+0) 4(-3) 1040) 3(-4) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages understands Deep Speech and Gnomish but can’t 
speak, telepathy 60 ft. 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The squidling’s innate spellcast- 
ing ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 7). It can innately cast 
levitate at will, requiring no components. 


Magic Resistance. The squidling has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 5 (244) psychic damage. If the target is Medium 
or smaller, it is grappled (escape DC 7) and must succeed 

on a DC 7 Intelligence saving throw or be stunned until this 
grapple ends. 


Extract Brain. Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
incapacitated creature grappled by the squidling. Hit: 27 (5d10) 
piercing damage. If this damage reduces the target to 0 hit 
points, the squidling kills the target by extracting and devour- 
ing its brain. 


Mind Tickle (Recharge 5-6). The squidling magically emits psy- 
chic energy in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must 
succeed on a DC 7 Intelligence saving throw or take 2 (1d4) 
psychic damage and be stunned until the end of its next turn. 
et 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


a 


MOUNTAIN GOAT 
Mountain goats are found throughout the Spine of the 
World and on the slopes of Kelvin’s Cairn, their thick fur 
and layers of body fat protecting them from the extreme 
cold. They are expert climbers, able to leap and bound 
up sheer slopes. 

Mountain goats are territorial but easily placated with 
offerings of food. Their stubbornness makes them diffi- 
cult to domesticate. 


MOUNTAIN GoaT 
Mes ium beast, unaligned 


—_— m 
| Armor Class 11 
| Hit Points 13 (2d8 + 4) 
| Speed 40 ft., climb 30 ft. 


CON INT wis 
1423) 2-4) 1000) 


| Senses passive Perception 10 


CHA 


Mea 126) 5(-3) 


Languages — 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Charge. If the goat moves at least 20 feet straight toward a 
target and then hits it with a ram attack on the same turn, the 
target takes an extra 3 (146) bludgeoning damage. If the target 

‘is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 12 Strength saving throw 
_ or be knocked prone. 


k“ 
| Sure-Footed. The goat has advantage on Strength and Dexterity | 
_ saving throws made against effects that would knock it prone. 


| 
Actions 


Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage. 
————[—[—$_[—_—[_—[—_—>_—>————_£{£_*—— Oe 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


REGHED NOMADS 

Reghed nomads are the children of the Reghed Glacier, 
as suggested by their name. They are people of the wild, 
as revealed by their tribal names—the Elk, the Tiger, 
the Wolf, the Bear. They are the tribes of Icewind Dale, 
proud and strong, bound to ancient traditions that have 
kept them alive through countless harsh winters. The 
Reghed wear heavy furs as well as gloves, boots, and 
masks made of animal hide, to protect themselves from 
the bitter cold. 

Although they originally descended from humans 
who were predominantly blue-eyed and fair-haired, the 
Reghed tribes have assimilated other folk, adding new 
blood to their dwindling ranks. There used to be more 
than four Reghed tribes, but the others have all dis- 
banded over the past century, with many of their former 
members settling in Ten-Towns and abandoning their 
traditional ways. 

The Reghed tribes rely on a nomadic lifestyle to sur- 
vive, as they follow herds of reindeer along the route of 
the animals’ annual migration. When they make camp, 
the tribesfolk live in large, round tents made of deerskin 
and supported by wooden shafts. (See map 2.11 on page 
153 for a typical Reghed camp configuration.) 

The Monster Manual has stat blocks that can repre- 
sent most members of a Reghed tribe, as shown in the 
Reghed Tribesfolk table. 


REGHED TRIBESFOLK 


Role Stat Block 

Hunter or warrior Tribal warrior with Survival +4; speaks 
‘Common 

Shaman Druid with Survival +4; speaks Common 
and Druidic 

Clan chieftain or Gladiator with hide armor instead of 

great warrior studded leather and Survival +5; speaks 
Common 


TRIBE OF THE BEAR 


Internal strife has splintered what remains of the Bear 
Tribe today. The turmoil began shortly after a band of 
Bear Tribe hunters recovered pieces of chardalyn from 
the frozen corpses of several dwarves. Oblivious to the 
demonic magic suffusing the crystal, tribe members 
used the shards to fashion heads for their spears and 
axes. Contact with the crystal corrupted these warriors 
over time, turning them into chardalyn berserkers (see 
page 280). Their cruelty forced the king to banish them 
from the tribe. These outcasts have since begun raiding 
Bear Tribe camps for sacrifices, which they offer up to 
Auril to gain the Frostmaiden’s favor. 


KING GUNVALD HALRAGGSON 
The thirty-year-old Bear King cuts an impressive figure 
and is renowned for his size and strength. He tries to be 
honorable, but he is often merciless and doesn’t change 
his mind easily. He has trouble relating to Ten-Towners, 
so he avoids them. His perspective on townsfolk might 


change if they helped him destroy the chardalyn ber- 
serkers who have turned against their own. 

Gunvald has had three wives in six years, each of 
whom died while she was pregnant. His advisors fear 
that the gods have cursed Gunvald and the entire tribe. 
In truth, the king’s doting shaman, Ulkora, lusts for him 
and surreptitiously poisoned his wives. In time, Ulkora 
hopes Gunvald will turn his loving eye toward her and 
allow her to bear his true heir. If Gunvald were to learn 
the truth, he would put Ulkora to death. 


TRIBE OF THE ELK 


Of the four remaining Reghed tribes, the Tribe of the 
Elk is the largest and the most tolerant of outsiders. It's 
also the tribe of the hero Wulfgar, son of Beornegar. 

Members of the Elk Tribe view the people of Ten- 
Towns as “tame folk,” who are ill bred and ill equipped 
for life in Icewind Dale. The tribe keeps its distance 
from Ten-Towns to avoid misunderstandings, since the 
appearance of Elk Tribe hunters near Ten-Towns has 
been known to panic Ten-Towners who live in constant 
fear of attack. 


GUNVALD HALRAGGSON 


Medium humanoid (human), neutral 


Armor Class 13 (hide armor, shield) 
Hit Points 76 (948 + 36) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
2065) 86) 1864) 9) 10 (+0) 16 (+3) 


Skills Athletics +8, Intimidation +6, Survival +3 
Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages Common 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


os 
Indomitable (3/Day). Gunvald can reroll a saving throw he fails. 
He must use the new roll, 


Menacing Blows (1/Turn). Gunvald deals an extra 6 (1d12) dam- | 
age when he hits a target with a weapon attack. Ifthe target is | 


a creature, it must succeed on a DC 14 Wisdom saving throw or | 


be frightened until the start of Gunvald’s next turn. 


Second Wind (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). As a bo- 
nus action, Gunvald can regain 15 hit points. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. Gunvald makes three melee attacks. 


Battleaxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 9 (1d8 + 5) slashing damage, or 10 (1410 + 5) slashing 
damage when used with two hands, plus 6 (1412) slashing 
damage if Gunvald uses Menacing Blows. 


Javelin, Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, range 30/120 
ft., one target. Hit: 8 (1d6 + 5) piercing damage, plus 6 (1d12) 
piercing damage if Gunvald uses Menacing Blows. 


| Languages Common, Dwarvish 


| 


KING JARUND ELKHARDT 

The Elk King is Jarund Elkhardt, a terse yet thoughtful 
giant of a man who is nearly fifty years old—ancient 

by tribal standards, He has led the Elk Tribe for over 
half his life, and age has made him cautious. He has 
seen other kings and queens rise and fall, has made 
war with friends and peace with his enemies, and has 
led warriors he knew as babes to their deaths in bat- 
tle. The strain of his long years of rule is etched on his 
weather-worn face. 

Jarund’s late son, Jarund Twice-Born, was killed al- 
most a decade ago while trying to bring down a cave 
bear, leaving Jarund without an heir, He has failed to 
produce another child with his wife, Wynneth, and his 
mistress, Froya, so the future of his royal line remains 
uncertain. 

Auril’s unyielding winter concerns Jarund deeply, and 
he often turns to his shaman, Mjenir, for guidance. The 
king respects the shaman's understanding of gods and 
spirits, and the fact that both men have lost their sons 
serves to strengthen the bond between them. Mjenir 
believes that the only way to break Auril’s spell is to 
slay the goddess in her home, but Jarund believes that 
his warriors aren't strong enough to accomplish that 
task alone. 


———— ee 
JARUND ELKHARDT 


‘Medium humanoid (human), neutral 


Armor Class 14 (hide armor, shield) 
Hit Points 104 (16d8 + 32) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 100) 1563 12) 1402) 18 (+4) 


Saving Throws Con +5, Wis +5 
i Skills Athletics +7, Intimidation +7, Survival +5 
Senses passive Perception 12 


Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


aan I 


| Brute. A melee weapon deals one extra die of its damage when 


Í Jarund hits with it (included in the attack). 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. Jarund makes three melee attacks. 


Warhammer. Melee Weapon Attack; +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage, or 15 (2410+ 4) + 
bludgeoning damage when used with two hands. 


Shield. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage, and Jarund pushes the 
target 5 feet away from him if it’s Large or smaller. Jarund then 
enters the space vacated by the target. If the target is pushed to 
within 5 feet of a creature friendly to Jarund, that creature can 
make an attack against the target as a reaction. 


Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage. 


a 


o-€ APPENDIX C | CREATURES 305 


306 


Queen BJoRNHILO SOLVIGSOOTTIR AND HER 
SABER-TOOTHED TIGER, GRAVA 


‘TRIBE OF THE TIGER 


The Tiger Tribe shuns the stronger Elk Tribe and preys 
on the weaker Bear and Wolf tribes. Of all the Reghed 
tribes, the Tiger Tribe is the most comfortable preying 
on the weakness of their rivals as well as Ten-Towns. 


QUEEN BJORNHILD SOLVIGSDOTTIR 
It's unusual for a woman to lead a Reghed tribe, but 
Bjornhild is a most extraordinary woman. The fearless 
wife of the late King Korold, she fought alongside him in 
many battles. After a frost giant's mammoth companion 
slew Korold, the formidable Bjornhild took his place. 

Bjornhild worships the Frostmaiden and is so ruth- 
less that her enemies believe she has actual ice flowing 
through her veins. She has no living children that she 
knows of, but with Auril’s blessing, she won't need any 
heirs to preserve her legacy. Bjornhild intends to live 
forever by demonstrating her unwavering faith in the 
Frostmaiden and becoming the Chosen of Auril. 

As if she weren't fearsome enough, Bjornhild has a 
pet saber-toothed tiger named Grava. 


TRIBE OF THE WOLF -AF 


The Wolf Tribe is the smallest of the four remaining 
Reghed tribes, and even its most optimistic members 
don't think it will survive much longer under its current 
leadership. To swell its ranks, chieftains have resorted 
to bringing outsiders into the fold, including outcasts 
from Ten-Towns, disenfranchised members of other 
Reghed tribes, and even goblinoids. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


a e e e a F 
BJORNHILD SOLVIGSDOTTIR 


Medium humanoid (human), neutral evil 


Armor Class 12 (hide armor) 
Hit Points 102 (12d8 + 48) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 10) 18(+4) 1402) 1(+0) 14(+2) 


Skills Athletics +7, Intimidation +5, Survival +3 
Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages Common, Yeti 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Auril’s Blessing (3/Day). When Bjornhild hits a creature 
with a weapon attack, the attack deals an extra 11 (2d10) 
cold damage. 

ACTIONS 

Multiattack. Bjornhild makes two melee attacks. 


Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 10 (1d12 + 4) slashing damage, plus 11 (2d10) cold 
damage if Bjornhild uses Auril's Blessing. 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) piercing damage, 
or 8 (1d8 + 4) piercing damage if used with two hands to make 
a melee attack, plus 11 (2410) cold damage if Bjornhild uses 
Auril’s Blessing. 

—_———_—] REE 


IsARR KRONENSTROM 


Medium humanoid (human), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 15 (hide armor) 
Hit Points 117 (1848 + 36) 


Speed 30 ft 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 


16 (+3) 1663) 15(+2) 14 (+2) 15 (+2) 16 (+3) 


Skills Athletics +6, Intimidation +6, Perception +5, Stealth +6, 
Survival +5 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15 

Languages Common 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 

Blood Frenzy. \sarr has advantage on melee attack rolls against 

any creature that doesn't have all its hit points 


Indomitable (3/Day). |sarr can reroll a saving throw he fails. He 
must use the new roll. 


Keen Hearing and Smell. Isarr has advantage on Wisdom (Per: 
ception) checks that rely on hearing or smell. 


ACTIONS _ 


Multiattack. |sarr makes three melee attacks. 


Sickle. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target 
Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage, plus 13 (2d12) piercing dam. 
age if the target has no allies it can see within 10 feet of it 


Heavy Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, range 
100/400 ft., one target. Hit: 8 (1d10 + 3) piercing damage. 


REGHEO HUNTERS OF THE FOUR TRIBES 


IsARR KRONENSTROM 
The Wolf Tribe has been without a king or queen for 
years. Its most powerful chieftain, Isarr Kronenstrom, 
is a psychotic brute who worships Malar the Beast Lord. 
He hunts Ten-Towners for sport, bathes in their blood, 
and strikes fear into the hearts of his enemies, Several 
members of Isarr’s clan have deserted him or been 
killed off, but the few that remain are fiercely loyal. They 
believe, incorrectly, that he’s the Chosen of Malar. 
Although Isarr calls himself the Wolf King, few oth- 
ers in the Wolf Tribe support him in that claim, but the 
other Wolf clan chieftains are too weak and disorga: 
nized to challenge him. 


REINDEER 


To ensure that they don't starve in the winter, the 
Reghed nomads of Icewind Dale follow the migration 
routes of reindeer herds and are mindful not to deplete 
the herds to the point where the beasts can no longer 
flourish or defend themselves against other natural 
predators. 

The average adult reindeer is 5 feet tall at the shoulder 
and weighs 250 pounds. Both male and female reindeer 
have antlers, though a male's antlers are larger. 

Game Statistics. A reindeer uses the elk stat block 
in the Monster Manual. It is acclimated to cold weather. 
Roughly one in six reindeer in Icewind Dale has a rare 
magical trait: glow-in-the-dark antlers that emit dim 
light out to a range of 10 feet. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


307 


308 


SEAL 


The seals native to the Sea of Moving Ice often beach 
themselves on ice floes and rocky shores. They are accli- 
mated to the cold weather and feed primarily on small 
fish, squid, and clams. Seal pups have yellowish-white 
fur, which turns silvery gray as they enter adulthood. 


SNow GOLEM 


A snow golem is a mass of snow brought to life through 
magic. Nonmagical weapons pass through its snowy 
form without dealing any appreciable damage to it, 
though heat is its doom. 


—E— oe 
SEAL 


| Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 9 (2d8) 
Speed 20 ft., swim 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
TO (+0) 12 (+1) NE 3 (-4) 12)  5(-3) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 


E 


ngu: 
Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


Hold Breath. The seal can hold its breath for 15 minutes. 


| Keen Smell. The seal has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on smell. 
ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 1 piercing damage. 
——_—_—_—_———$——_———————————— |] 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


Snow GOLEM 


Medium construct, unaligned 


Armor Class 8 
Hit Points 39 (6d8 + 12) 
Speed 10 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
15 (+2) 66) MEY 165) 6-3 1(-5) 
Damage Vulnerabilities fire 


Damage Immunities cold, poison; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned 

Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), passive 
Perception 8 


Languages — 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Cold Absorption. Whenever the golem is subjected to cold 
damage, it takes no damage and instead regains a number of 
hit points equal to the cold damage dealt. 


Immutable Form. The golem is immune to any spell or effect 
that would alter its form. 


Melt. While in an area of extreme heat, the golem loses 1d6 hit 
points at the start of each of its turns. 


Unusual Nature. The golem doesn't require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The golem makes three melee attacks. 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage plus 7 (2d6) cold damage. 


Snowball. Ranged Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, range 60 ft., one 
target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) cold damage. | 
—E See eee 


SNOWY OWLBEAR 


A snowy owlbear combines the physical features 
of a snowy owl and a polar bear. When not asleep 

or hibernating, it galumphs across the icy tundra in 
search of food. 

Game Statistics. The snowy owlbear uses the owl- 
bear stat block in the Monster Manual. In addition, it 
has a swimming speed of 30 feet and is acclimated to 
cold weather. 


SPERM WHALE 


Sperm whales are toothed aquatic mammals that can 
grow to be up to 70 feet long. Their natural predators 
include whalers and fellow leviathans, such as dragon 
turtles and krakens. 


——————— nnn 


SPERM WHALE 


Gargantuan beast, unaligned 


‘Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 189 (14d20 + 42) 
Speed 0 ft., swim 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
26 (+8) 8(-1) 17(43) 3(-4) 126)  5(-3) 


Senses blindsight 120 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


Echolocation. The whale can't use its blindsight 
while deafened, 


Hold Breath. The whale can hold its breath for 90 minutes. 


Keen Hearing. The whale has advantage on Wisdom (Percep- 
tion) checks that rely on hearing. 


(ee 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack, The whale makes two attacks: one with its bite 
and one with its tail. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 21 (348 + 8) piercing damage. If the target is a Large or 
smaller creature, it must succeed on a DC 14 Dexterity saving 
throw or be swallowed by the whale, A swallowed creature has 
total cover against attacks and other effects outside the whale, 
and it takes 3 (1d6) acid damage at the start of each of the 
whale's turns. 

Ifthe whale takes 30 damage or more on a single turn from 
a creature inside it, the whale must succeed on a DC 16 Con- 
stitution saving throw at the end of that turn or regurgitate all 
swallowed creatures, which fall prone in a space within 10 feet 
of the whale. If the whale dies, a swallowed creature can escape 
from the corpse by using 20 feet of movernent, exiting prone. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
Hit: 18 (346 + 8) bludgeoning damage, or 37 (6d6 + 16) blud- 
geoning damage if the target is an object. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


3I0 


TOMB TAPPER 


Huge construct, lawful neutral 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 207 (18d12 + 90) 
| Speed 30 ft., burrow 10 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
22(+6) 10 (+0) 21 (+5) 14(4+2) 1462) 11 (+0) 


Skills Perception +6 

Damage Resistances lightning 

Damage Immunities cold, fire 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened 

Senses blindsight 240 ft. (blind beyond this radius), passive 
Perception 16 

Languages understands Common and Undercommon but 
doesn't speak, telepathy 60 ft. 

Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) 

——————————————— 

Petrified Death. A tomb tapper reduced to 0 hit points turns 

into a lifeless stone statue. Anything it's wearing or carrying is 

not transformed. 


Sense Magic. The tomb tapper senses magic within 30 feet of it 
and can use an action to pinpoint the location of any creature, 


TOMB TAPPER 


The Netherese arcanists who created these creatures 
called them “thaluud,” which means “faceless.” Wrought 
from the fusion of magic and elemental earth, each of 
these sexless, hairless warriors stands 15 to 21 feet tall 
and possesses a lust for magic, an inherited memory 
(composed of recollections from the souls sacrificed 

in their creation), and an insane hatred for nonhuman 
spellcasting creatures. Tomb tappers can dig through 
earth and rock with their claws or use their metal 
sledgehammers to shatter rock when needed. They 
absorb water through their skin and crush rock with 
their jaws to extract mineral sustenance. They can also 
digest n from blood and marrow, if mineral-rich rock 
is unavailable, 

The Netherese sent the thaluud into the Underdark 
to exterminate their enemies, most notably the 
magic-devouring, funnel-shaped creatures known as 
phaerimm. Other creatures targeted by the thaluud 
include mind flayers, derro, drow, and duergar. Tomb 
tappers communicate with one another by means of a 
humming sound created by skin vibrations. 

Seekers of Magic. Tomb tappers received their collo- 
quial name from their habit of burrowing into the depths 
to plunder tombs, temples, and caves in search of magic 
items, which they bear off. They usually try to seize 
magic from beings that they encounter. 

Magic is sacred to tomb tappers. They don't use any 
magic items they acquire, instead choosing to protect 
and venerate such items. Tappers spend their long lives 
in the search for the source of all magic, which they 
believe to be hidden deep in the Underdark. They are 
in awe of earth elementals, believing that they come di 
rectly from this source, and are reluctant to attack them. 


object, or area in that range that bears magic. This sense pene- 
trates barriers but is blocked by a thin sheet of lead. 


Tunneler. The tomb tapper can burrow through solid rock at 
half its burrowing speed and leaves a 10-foot-wide, 20-foot-tall 
tunnel in its wake. 


Unusual Nature. The tomb tapper doesn’t require air or sleep. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The tomb tapper makes two melee attacks with 
its sledgehammer or with its claws. If it hits the same creature 
with both claws, it can pull that creature within 5 feet of its 
mouth and make a bite attack against it. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 22 (3d10 + 6) slashing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 16 (346 + 6) slashing damage. 


Sledgehammer. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, 
reach 15 ft. or range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 27 (6d6 + 6) 
bludgeoning or force damage (tomb tapper’s choice). If 
thrown, the hammer returns to the tomb tapper at the end of 
its turn, landing at the tomb tapper’s feet if it doesn’t have a 
hand free to catch the weapon. 


SSS SS 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


VERBEEG 


Verbeeg are giants that resemble oversized humans 
with gangly limbs and elongated faces. Some have other 
features that give them a fearsome aspect. 

Verbeeg craft their own armor and weapons. They 
prefer thrown spears above all other weapons, anda 
verbeeg usually has several spears for that purpose. 

Marauders. Verbeeg conduct themselves like brig- 
ands, robbing people they come across in the wild. If 
food is scarce, they kill those same people and eat them. 
They prefer to dwell in forlorn places, often sharing ter- 
ritory with hill giants and ogres. It's not unusual to find 
a gang of hill giants and ogres led by a verbeeg, since 
verbeeg are much smarter than their brutish cousins. 
Verbeeg also enjoy the company of mammalian beasts 
and allow bears, wolves, worgs, and other predators 
to lair with them. They catch and keep horses, mules, 
sheep, goats, and cattle for food and trade. 

Longstriders. Some verbeeg worship gods of nature 
and help defend the natural world. These even-tempered 
verbeeg are called longstriders and are blessed with in- 
nate spellcasting abilities. 


———————————— 


VERBEEG LONGSTRIDER 

Large giant, neutral 

OO o U O 
Armor Class 14 (hide armor) 

Hit Points 119 (14d10 + 42) 


Speed 50 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
19 (+4) 1562 1663) 13) 14(+2) 10(+0) 


Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +6, Wis +5 

Skills Animal Handling +5, Athletics +7, Stealth +5 
Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages Common, Giant 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


ŮŮ——— 
Innate Spellcasting. The verbeeg's innate spellcasting ability is 
Wisdom. It can innately cast the following spells, requiring no 
components: 


1/day each: animal messenger, fog cloud, freedom of movement, 
pass without trace, silence, water walk 


Simple Weapon Wielder. A simple weapon deals one extra 
die of its damage when the verbeeg hits with it (included in 
the attack). 

ACTIONS 


Multiattack, The verbeeg makes two melee attacks. 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 14 (3d6 + 4) piercing damage, 
or 17 (3d8 + 4) piercing damage if used to make a ranged attack 
or used with two hands to make a melee attack. 


Sling. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 30/120 ft., one 
target. Hit: 9 (3d4 + 2) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a 
creature, it must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw 
or be stunned until the end of its next turn. 


———— a aaa 


VERBEEG MARAUDER 


Large giant, neutral evil 


A 
Armor Class 14 (hide armor, shield) 
Hit Points 85 (10d10 + 30) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
19 (+4) 11 (40) 663 NE 10¢0 9 


Saving Throws Dex +2, Con +5 

Skills Animal Handling +2, Athletics +6, Stealth +2 
Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages Common, Giant 

Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


————— 
Simple Weapon Wielder. A simple weapon deals one extra 
die of its damage when the verbeeg hits with it (included in 
the attack). 

ACTIONS 


Multiattack, The verbeeg makes two melee attacks. 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 14 (3d6 + 4) piercing damage, 
or 17 (3d8 + 4) piercing damage if used to make a ranged attack 
or used with two hands to make a melee attack. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES sz 


WALRUSES 


Walruses are bulky marine mammals that favor arctic 
ates and communicate by grunting and roaring. A 

al adult specimen weighs at least 2,000 pounds 
Humans hunt them for their meat, fat, skin, bones, 
and tusks. 

Giant Walrus. Giant walruses are enormous, 
ill-tempered creatures as big as elephants. A typical 
adult specimen weighs at least 12,000 pounds. 


SSeS Se 


‘WALRUS 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 9 
Hit Points 22 (310 + 6) 
Speed 20 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
15 (+2) 9(-1) 14 (+2) 3(-4) 110) 4(-3) 


il) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Hold Breath. The walrus can hold its breath for 10 minutes. 


ACTIONS 


Tusks. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


EE 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


GIANT WALRUS 


Huge beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 9 
Hit Points 85 (9d12 + 27) 
Speed 20 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
226) 9) 1663) 3(-4) 1140) 4(-3) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Hold Breath, The walrus can hold its breath for 30 minutes. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The walrus makes two attacks: one with its body 
flop and one with its tusks. 


Body Flop. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 


Tusks. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 16 (3d6 + 6) piercing damage. 


YETI 


The yeti and the abominable yeti are described in the 
Monster Manual. This entry provides game information 
for yeti tykes, which people seldom encounter. Adult 
yetis are very protective of their young, keeping them 
hidden from the rest of the world. A yeti tyke is between 
1 and 7 years old. 

Yeti tykes are as volatile and mean as their parents, 
their fearsomeness diminished only by their size. Stand- 
ing 3 feet tall on average, they like to bully creatures of 
their height or smaller. But they are easily intimidated 
by bigger and stronger creatures. A cowed yeti tyke can 
be controlled, at least for a while, but raising one to be 
anything other than a savage, flesh-eating predator is 
incredibly difficult (though not impossible). 


Armor Class 11 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 9 (2d6 + 2) 
Speed 20 ft., climb 20 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
W060 NEO 2E 62 86) 563) 
—— $ 
Damage Immunities cold 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 
Languages understands Yeti but can't speak 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Keen Smell. The yeti has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on smell. 


Snow Camouflage. The yeti has advantage on Dexterity 
(Stealth) checks made to hide in snowy terrain. 


ACTIONS 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 2 (1d4) slashing damage plus 2 (1d4) cold damage. 


APPENDIX C | CREATURES 


= — - N 
YETI TYKE 


Small monstrosity, chaotic evil 


C 


314 


APPENDIX D: MAGIC 


This appendix describes the new magic items, spell- 
books, and spells found in this adventure. 


MAGIC ITEMS 


New magic items found in this adventure are presented 
below in alphabetical order. 


ABRACADABRUS 
Wondrous item, very rare 


An abracadabrus is an ornate, gemstone-studded 
wooden chest that weighs 25 pounds while empty. 
Its interior compartment is a cube measuring 11 feet 
ona side. 

The chest has 20 charges. A creature can use an 
action to touch the closed lid of the chest and expend 1 
of the chest's charges while naming one or more non- 
magical objects (including raw materials, foodstuffs, and 
liquids) worth a total of 1 gp or less. The named objects 
magically appear in the chest, provided they can all fit 
inside it and the chest doesn’t contain anything else. For 
example, the chest can conjure a plate of strawberries, a 
bow! of hot soup, a flagon of water, a stuffed animal, or a 
bag of twenty caltrops. Food and drink conjured by the 
chest are delicious, and they spoil if not consumed after 
24 hours. Gems and precious metals created by the 
chest disappear after 1 minute. 

The chest regains 1d20 expended charges daily at 
dawn. If the item's last charge is expended, roll a d20. 
On a 1, the chest loses its magic (becoming an ordinary 
chest), and its gemstones turn to dust. 


CAULDRON OF PLENTY 
Wondrous item, rare 


This cauldron is made of thick copper that has turned 
green with age. It is 4 feet wide, has a mouth 3" feet in 
diameter, weighs 50 pounds, and can hold up to 30 gal- 
lons of liquid. Embossed on its bulging sides are images 
of satyrs and nymphs in repose, holding ladles. The 
cauldron comes with a lid and has side handles. It sits 
on five little clawed feet that keep it from tipping. 

If water is poured into the cauldron and stirred for 
1 minute, it transforms into a hearty, hot stew, which 
can provide one nourishing meal for up to four people 
per gallon. The stew remains hot while in the cauldron, 
then cools naturally after it is removed. The outside 
of the cauldron remains safe to touch despite the heat 
of the stew. 

The cauldron can create stew three times. It then 
ceases to function until the next dawn, when it regains 
all its uses. 


Hook OF FISHER’S DELIGHT 
Wondrous item, rare 


This tiny silver fishhook has a little gold feather attached 
to it. For it to function, the feathered hook must be tied 
to the end of a fishing line and immersed in enough 


APPENDIX D | MAGIC 


water to fill at least a 10-foot cube. At the end of each 
uninterrupted hour of immersion, roll a d6. On a 6, a 
floppy, 6-inch-long magical fish appears on the end of 
the hook. The color and properties of the conjured fish 
are determined by rolling on the Hook of Fisher's De- 
light table. Once the hook conjures a fish, it can't do so 
again until the next dawn. 


Hook oF FisHER’s DELIGHT 


d20 FishColor Magical Property 
1-10 Greenwith This tasty fish provides a day's 
copper bands worth of nourishment to one crea- 
ture that eats it. The fish loses this 
Property and rots if it's not eaten 
within 24 hours of being caught. 
11-14 Yellow with Once removed from the hook, 
black stripes this awful-tasting fish can be 
thrown up to 120 feet, targeting 
a creature the thrower can see. 
The target must succeed on a 
DC 15 Strength saving throw or 
be knocked prone. The fish then 
disappears. 
When released from the hook, this 
fish squirms free, sprouts wings, 
follows you around, and sings a 
beautiful tune in Aquan. It disap- 
pears after 2d4 hours or when re- 
duced to 0 hit points. The fish uses 
the quipper stat block, except that 
it can breathe air and has a flying 
speed of 30 feet. 
This tasty fish provides a day's 
worth of nourishment to one crea- 
ture that eats it and grants 2410 
temporary hit points to that crea- 


15-18 Blue with 
white bands 


19-20 Gold with 
silver stripes 


ture. The fish loses these properties 
and rots if it's not eaten within 24 
hours of being caught. 


LANTERN OF TRACKING 
Wondrous item, common 


This hooded lantern burns for 6 hours on 1 pint of oil, 
shedding bright light in a 30-foot radius and dim light 
for an additional 30 feet. 

Each Jantern of tracking is designed to track down a 
certain type of creature, which is determined by rolling 
on the Lantern of Tracking table. Once determined, 
this creature type can't be changed. While the lantern 
is within 300 feet of any creature of that type, its lame 
turns bright green. The lantern doesn't pinpoint the 
creature's exact location, however. 


LANTERN OF TRACKING 


d10 Creature Type 10 Creature Type 
1 Aberrations 6 Fey 
2 Celestials 7 Fiends 
3 Constructs & Giants 
4 Dragons 9 Monstrosities 
5 Elementals. 10 Undead 


PROFESSOR ORB 
Wondrous item, rare 


A professor orb is a smooth S-pound sphere of smoky 
gray quartz about the size of a grapefruit. Close exam 
ination reveals two or more pinpricks of silver light com 
ing from deep inside the sphere. 

The orb is sentient and has the personality of a 
scholar, Its alignment is determined by rolling on the 
alignment table in the “Sentient Magic Items” section 
in the Dungeon Master's Guide. Regardless of its align- 
ment, the orb has an Intelligence of 18, and Wisdom and 
Charisma scores determined by rolling 3d6 for each 
ability. The orb speaks, reads, and understands four lan 
guages, and it can see and hear normally out to a range 
of 60 feet. Unlike most other sentient items, the orb has 
no goals of its own and can't initiate a conflict with the 
creature in possession of it 

The orb has extensive knowledge of four narrow aca 
demic subjects. When making an Intelligence check to 
recall lore from any of its areas of expertise, the orb has 
a +9 bonus to its roll (including its Intelligence modifier), 

In addition to the knowledge it possesses, the orb can 
cast the mage hand cantrip at will. It uses the spell only 
to transport itself. Its spelleasting ability is Intelligence. 

Professor Skant. The professor orb owned by Vel- 
lynne Harpell and stolen by Nass Lantomir calls itself 
Professor Skant. It is lawful good, and it has a Wisdom 
of 11 and a Charisma of 9. It speaks and reads Com. 
mon, Draconic, Elvish, and Loross (the dead language of 
the Empire of Netheril), Professor Skant is a chatterbox 
and assumes all humanoids are dunderheads. When 
elaborating on its areas of expertise, it adopts an unin. 
tentionally patronizing tone. It has the following four 
areas of expertise: 


The history of Netheril (see the “Fate of Netheril” 
sidebar on page 232) 

Vampirism and the traits of vampires 

Rituals surrounding the making, bottling, and drink 
ing of Elverquisst (a rare, ruby-colored elven liquor 
distilled from sunshine and rare summer fruits) 

+ The tarrasque (see the Monster Manual) 


Pst CRYSTAL 
Wondrous item, uncommon (requires attunement by a 
creature with an Intelligence score of 3 or higher) 


This crystal grants you telepathy for as long as you re 
main attuned to it, See the introduction of the Monster 
Manual for rules on how this telepathy works. The crys: 
tal also glows with a purplish inner light while you are 
attuned to it. The higher your intelligence, the greater 
the light’s intensity and the greater the range of the te 
lepathy (see the Psi Crystal Properties table). 


Psi Crystac 


Pst CRYSTAL PROPERTIES 


Intelligence Range of Light 
Score Telepathy Intensity 
37 15feet Dim light out to a range of 5 feet 
8-11 30 feet Bright light in a 5-foot radius 
and dim light for an additional 
5 feet 
12-15 60feet Bright light in a 10-foot radius 
and dim light for an additional 
10 feet 
l6or higher 120 feet Bright light in a 15-foot radius 


and dim light for an additional 
15 feet 


SCROLL OF TARRASQUE SUMMONING 

Scroll, legendary 

Using an action to read the scroll causes the tarrasque 
(see the creature’s entry in the Monster Manual) to 
appear in an unoccupied space you can see within 1 
mile of you. The tarrasque disappears when it drops 
to 0 hit points and is hostile toward all creatures other 
than itself 


SCROLL OF THE COMET 
Scroll, legendary 


By using an action to read the scroll, you cause a comet 
to fall from the sky and crash to the ground at a point 
you can see up to 1 mile away from you. You must be 
outdoors when you use the scroll, or nothing happens 
and the scroll is wasted. 


APPENDIX D | MAGIC 


The comet creates a 50-foot-deep, 500-foot-radius cra- 
ter on impact. Any creature in that radius must make a 
DC 20 Dexterity saving throw, taking 30d10 force dam- 
age on a failed saving throw, or half as much damage 
on a successful one. All structures in the crater are de- 
stroyed, as are all nonmagical objects that aren't being 
worn or held. 


THERMAL CUBE 
Wondrous item, common 


This 3-inch cube of solid brimstone generates enough 
dry heat to keep the temperature within 15 feet of it at 
95 degrees Fahrenheit (35 degrees Celsius). 


YTHRYN MYTHALLAR 

Wondrous item, legendary (requires attunement by a 
spellcaster) 

A mythallar looks like an enormous crystal ball held 

in an ornate cradle. The globe sheds bright light in a 
300-foot radius and dim light for an additional 300 feet. 
The globe draws magic from the Weave that can be har- 
nessed for various purposes. For example, Netherese 
mages used mythallars to keep their cities aloft and em- 
power their magic items. The bigger the mythallar, the 
more magic it can hold. The largest mythallars are 150 
feet in diameter. 


The Ythryn mythallar is a relatively small device—a 

mere 50 feet in diameter. To attune to this mythallar, 

a creature must finish a short rest within 30 feet of 

it, meditating on the mythallar. Up to eight creatures 
can be attuned to it at one time; otherwise, the Ythryn 
mythallar follows the attunement rules in the Dungeon 
Master's Guide. If a ninth creature tries to attune to the 
mythallar, nothing happens. 

All creatures attuned to the Ythryn mythallar can 
sense when the device is being used. A creature attuned 
to the device can use any of its properties, but only if all 
other creatures attuned to the device agree to allow it. 
The Ythryn mythallar’s properties are as follows: 


+ While you're on the same plane of existence as the 
Ythryn mythallar, you can use an action to cause it to 
fly in any direction you choose at a speed of 30 feet. 
All matter within 500 feet of the device moves with it. 
The Ythryn mythallar and all structures held aloft by it 
hover in place when not in motion. 

As an action, you can cause one magic item you are 

holding within 30 feet of the Ythryn mythallar to 

immediately regain all its expended charges or uses. 

A magic item recharged in this manner can't be re- 

charged by the Ythryn mythallar again until after the 

item regains expended charges or uses on its own. 


A TOMB TAPPER DEFENDS THE YTHRYN MYTHALLAR 


FROM A GROUP OF TREASURE HUNTERS 


You can use the Yhryn mythallar to cast the control 
weather spell without requiring any components and 
without the need for you to be outdoors. This casting 
of the spell has a 50-mile radius. For the duration of 
the spell’s casting time, you must be within 30 feet of 
the Ythryn mythallar or the spell fails. 


Touching the Mythallar. Any creature that touches 
the globe of the mythallar must make a DC 22 Consti- 
tution saving throw, taking 180 (20d10 + 70) radiant 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. Undead have disadvantage on this sav- 
ing throw. Any object that touches the globe, other than 
an artifact or the mythallar’s cradle, is disintegrated 
instantly (no save). 


Books 


Two books are described in this section. Characters can 
find The Codicil of White in Auril’s abode (see chapter 
5) and The Incantations of Iriolarthas in the Netherese 
necropolis hidden under the Reghed Glacier (see 
chapter 7). 


THE CopiciL OF WHITE 

The Codicil of White is a tall, thin volume bound in 
white ermine fur over seasoned boards of white pine 
and sealed with a clasp and lock of tarnished silver. The 
book is cold to the touch, and the fur is worn about the 
edges from use. The twenty-seven pages within are of 
vellum painted with silver gilt on the outer edges. The 
whole is sewn to a leather binding with strips of sinews, 
making it quite durable. 

Acreature with the codicil in its possession has resis- 
tance to cold damage. 

The codicil was written by followers of Auril as a 
primer on her worship. The first page is a title page 
with the snowflake symbol of Auril on it. The remaining 
pages describe various priestly rituals and ceremonies 
in chilling detail. Nestled among these descriptions is 
a spell that wizards can learn (frost fingers, described 
later in this appendix) and a poem called “Rime of the 
Frostmaiden” (see appendix E). The poem is an incan- 
tation, the power of which can be used to split a glacier 
(see chapter 6). The poem might have other capabilities, 
at your discretion. 


THE INCANTATIONS OF IRIOLARTHAS 
The Incantations of Iriolarthas is a weighty spellbook. 
Its black leather covers have dead, toothy worms glued 
to them, sheathed in glossy varnish. Set into this morbid 
display on the front cover is a gold rune that resembles a 
stylized eye with a pupil shaped like a candle flame—the 
sigil of Iriolarthas, a Netherese lich. 

The book contains sixty pages of brittle yellow vellum. 
Written on these pages are the following wizard spells: 


1st level: alarm, detect magic, identify, magic missile, 
shield, Tasha’s hideous laughter, thunderwave 

2nd level: arcane lock, continual flame, invisibility, 
knock, levitate, Melf’s acid arrow, mirror image 

3rd level: animate dead, bestow curse, clairvoyance, 
counterspell, dispel magic, fireball, glyph of warding 


THE INCANTATIONS OF 


IntoLarTHas 


APPENDIX D | MAGIC 


THe Conic. oF Wuite 


4th level: arcane eye, banishment, blight, dimension 
door, Evard's black tentacles, phantasmal killer 

5th level: Bigby’s hand, cloudkill, dominate person, pla- 
nar binding, scrying, telekinesis 

6th level: create undead, disintegrate, globe of invulnera- 
bility, move earth, Otto's irresistible dance 

Tth level: create magen,* finger of death, prismatic 
spray, teleport 

8th level: demiplane, dominate monster, mind blank, 
power word stun 

9th level: blade of disaster power word kill 


“Described in this chapter. 


WIZARD SPELLS 


Characters who obtain The Codicil of White from Auril’s 
abode or The Incantations of Iriolarthas in Ythryn can 
discover one or more of the following wizard spells. 


BLADE OF DISASTER 
9th-level conjuration 


Casting Time: | bonus action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You create a blade-shaped planar rift about 3 feet long 
in an unoccupied space you can see within range. The 
blade lasts for the duration. When you cast this spell, 
you can make up to two melee spell attacks with the 
blade, each one against a creature, loose object, or struc- 
ture within 5 feet of the blade. On a hit, the target takes 
4d12 force damage. This attack scores a critical hit if 
the number on the d20 is 18 or higher. On a critical hit, 
the blade deals an extra 8d12 force damage (for a total 
of 12d12 force damage). 

As a bonus action on your turn, you can move the 
blade up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space you can 
see and then make up to two melee spell attacks 
with it again. 

The blade can harmlessly pass through any barrier, 
including a wall of force. 


APPENDIX D | MAGIC 


CREATE MAGEN 
7th-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 hour 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (a vial of quicksilver worth 500 
gp and a life-sized human doll, both of which the spell 
consumes, and an intricate crystal rod worth at least 
1,500 gp that is not consumed) 

Duration: Instantaneous 


While casting the spell, you place a vial of quicksilver in 
the chest of a life-sized human doll stuffed with ash or 
dust. You then stitch up the doll and drip your blood on 
it. At the end of the casting, you tap the doll with a crys- 
tal rod, transforming it into a magen clothed in whatever 
the doll was wearing, The type of magen is chosen by 
you during the casting of the spell. See appendix C for 
different kinds of magen and their statistics. 

When the magen appears, your hit point maximum 
decreases by an amount equal to the magen’s challenge 
rating (minimum reduction of 1). Only a wish spell can 
undo this reduction to your hit point maximum. 

Any magen you create with this spell obeys your com- 
mands without question, 


FROST FINGERS 
Ist-level evocation 


Casting Time: | action 
Range: Self (15-foot cone) 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


Freezing cold blasts from your fingertips in a 15-foot 
cone. Each creature in that area must make a Constitu- 
tion saving throw, taking 2d8 cold damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 

The cold freezes nonmagical liquids in the area that 
aren't being worn or carried. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d8 for each slot level above Ist. 


APPENDIX E: 


RIME OF THE FROSTMAIDEN 


WE BOW TO SHE WHO WEARS THE CROWN; 
Ler THE WORLD SHIVER WITH DREAD. 
CLAD tN WINTER'S WHITEST GOWN, 
HER SNOW ENSHROUDS THE DEAD. 


HER FURY SHEDS BUT FROZEN TEARS 
AS GRAY CLOUDS iSSUE FORTH. 

HER WIND ACROSS THE WASTELAND SHEARS, 
BRINGING BLIZZARDS FROM THE NORTH. 


IcE-KiSSED FLOWERS CAUGHT MiD-BLOOM, 
BEAUTY KEPT IN ALL ITS GRACE. 

SUMMER'S GONE TO İTS SİLENT TOMB, 
STILLING İN HER COLD EMBRACE. 


ALL THE WORLD İN WiNTER'S WHITE, 
SHEATHED iN SLEET AND İCE. 

SET UPON NEVER-ENDING NİGHT, 
SHE CONJURES PARADISE. 


BEHOLD HER EVERLASTING RiME, 
SEE HOW IT COVERS ALL; 

WEEP NOT FOR THOSE SHE TRAPS IN TIME 
BEHIND HER GLACIAL WALL. 


SOVEREIGN OF SUMMERS LOST, 
GENERAL OF WINTER'S WAR; 

LONG LiVE THE QUEEN OF COLD AND FROST. 
May SHE REIGN FOREVERMORE. 


APPENDIX E | RIME OF THE FROSTMAIDEN 


319 


AFTERWORD 


SOLATION IS A BIG THEME OF THIS ADVENTURE. 
Little did I know that Icewind Dale: Rime of 
the Frostmaiden would be published during a 
pandemic that would isolate billions of people 
throughout the world, myself included, trapping 
us in our dungeons for weeks on end. Only now do I un- 
derstand how the people of Ten-Towns must feel. 
Fortunately for us, DUNGEONS & DRAGONS is a proven 
cure for isolation. It empowers us to spend hours upon 
hours in the company of good friends, doing that thing 
we've been doing ever since humans gathered around 
the first campfire: telling stories. Whether it’s played 
around a table or over the Internet, D&D has the power 
to make us step out of the real world into places that 
exist on the fringes of our wildest imaginations. 
Icewind Dale is just such a place. Created by Ed 
Greenwood, the father of the Forgotten Realms, and 
brought to life by R.A. Salvatore in the Drizzt novels, 
Icewind Dale reminds me of a domain of dread. It’s cut 
off from the rest of the world by blizzards, mountains, 
glaciers, and the stormy sea, and even though it’s not a 
horror setting, I leaned into the horror pretty hard be- 
cause I wanted this story to be different from previous 
explorations of Icewind Dale. Inspiration came primar. 
ily from two sources: John Carpenter's 1982 film The 
Thing and H.P. Lovecraft’s novella At the Mountains 


of Madness. This adventure contains homages to both 
works, as well as a few nods to other works of horror, 
including Stanley Kubrick's 1980 film The Shining, 
based on the Stephen King novel of the same name, and 
Ridley Scott's 1979 film Alien. 

When you get a chance, take a look at the credits on 
page 2. As you can see, many people were involved in 
making this book. I would call your attention to one 
person in particular, although given her modesty, I 
suspect she wouldn't want me to. Kate Irwin, a long- 
time Wizards employee, has been art directing D&D 
for many years. With help from Jeremy Crawford, Emi 
Tanji, Bree Heiss, and myself, Kate created the look and 
feel of fifth edition. In addition to commissioning most 
of the art in the core rulebooks, Kate has overseen the 
art and layout for every book that has followed them. 
Her work speaks for itself. However, I am personally 
grateful for her work on this product. 

Capturing the cold isolation of Icewind Dale is no 
easy task, but as you can see, this adventure contains 
many fantastic illustrations that accomplish exactly that. 
Much of the credit goes to the artists, of course, but it 
was Kate who took my art descriptions and notes about 
the adventure's themes and worked with the artis 


sto 


visualize them and show what life in Icewind Dale is 
like. Even if you never read a word of the adventure, the 
art in this book tells you everything you need to know. 
That's great art direction! 


Chris Perkins 
April 12, 2020 


A LIVINGJĎEMIPLANE GLIDES ACROSS A WALL AS 


AMAOVENTURER LOOKS ON NERVOUSLY. 


T m 


‘ S d, ae \ . F, ma 
< . . “ & . > . 7 
ra AF d p S . E A <Q = gg. 
G "Oe z Í x a ~ aon = og 7 s'i Y 5 ae ee : ‘ i 
ry x . . j R m fa, ~ SN 
> 


P ~ 
ae om 


s KSA AS 


“s 
> 3 
ASA 
BR ns N pe a! 
a? Ss ) : 
SAN dS aay t 


Rz 
p 


a 


z} 


ES 


Ey 


iyi 


> 
~ 
# 


igi 


- 
~ = 


d 
: 
as ma f 
Po 
Fata 
al 
(Ph 
i 
# 
vA 
> 
vie 
ek 
Seal 
ex.s 
=e 
x. a 
S ~ 
= y: ry 
Yh “aioe 
de 
r a "i "os , z ) 
m : ype Sy as a 
Te = YW, I: er € 2 POR: 
z oP 
a . > os 
* /Termalaine* 
f DPE < & 43 E 
fat A s : 
we l 
f, F MNS 
iy: Sehr i U 


we. ss 
Sees 
este 
ya 


SS: 
Cel 97 
v FIR 


\ oe 


Sa, 
a 


H "D a 

rAr eoh 
e o 
CN n 


<a Ti \ 
NG 


oh: 


eri 


foes 


7 
ans Vad 
TY 


Large Town 


Small Town 


: 
- 
“ 
AN 
A 
i 
: À d 
— - - = - aa 4” 4 
> . 
y r ‘ . > à 
` “ x . e y E ra ” >) A et a i l 
n A 4 i . . « 7 ` a <4 ’ pi 
: ~ 
` P A Pi Pd i ` a d + v By r a b y ` t A > m a 


VN eSa L N ` s SS? r f P Í f , . k “We 
| NDER į ' k PA a Di i ee CE ~ ` The Wet Trout. 
v à kS SS A 
" i 4 f | f la D 7 - i . a > i a < K K S l af 
ra | T Oe Pay, Town Hall fp OS, 
Me = y Easthaven Ferry < GI SaS i 
ee aid a 
, Li 


a Ss — 


st 4So 
ca) Pe 


he:Eastway 


a 


ap 


ive Tae. ile 
unci 


Las va ; 


wr i oe WES: ue a F 

‘ `. P b “ Dp = bd a 

s k s n 2 
A as 
` s ee n gfi 
x 


àE . 
: È am 
Peer. eee ETF 
AS K iad + tem e 
xe Ras I A e ae 
are . eS 


Be 


= 

; 

wi 
4 


a e 
Z 
A 
=< 


4A 


A a 
The Lucky Liar 
A ` ne 


OEE 


3 


The Happy 
Scrimshander 


a fo we y 
A Yy: 
LF 4 
K we RK 
C 


f 5 r otk PP oy om 
Ox Le @ x Pá è z 
a k 4 E yy , 
=" es 


> vale ies ` 
La OM SLA ZK Loe! 
Prandin WES 
gma 3 
S > 
4 4 $ 


.— v7 
Xa Lcd es 


an 


Nu 
eee 
Pea > oe , 


ST ae 
=e Vs 
<3 b .* 
s) (eos: 


A - 


o 


-: DOUGAN’S HOLE ` 


2 , a ee 
< aE) CUM 
ren oa 


a ee 


< 
-2 
"© 


ae” nty-Stones 
PE g e, ? f} * 
>. <=" of Thruun 


BAIE 


- Goo 


ae sd "hes 
ie peA 


f: is si vs 


Shrine of the 


re) ‘a r, o 
; t À 


‘Flaming Sword 


e. 


2, k 


Speaker’s 
House 


{. . 7 = 
e 
o , 
se 2S 
AN 
i 
4 
wb " "ad A g T - 
P mw ` r 


«© 


eZ 


-A7 


ST z 
tion ary; 
R, Ù pi) 
2 


Ba AS 


f / Ruined 


Watchtower 


PN ~ 
bo ff 
. n d 
cé 
PN Be 
oS +g f 
` as fA 


z 


* es MEE A "6° as ue aA . as . aan 1 
i in” Ta wae, wae tees ags 5 3 = 


.CAER-KONIG © 


, ee ee a A E 
Nt .<.,Frozenfar:Expeditions:.” 


r -Ñ y- 
>= tee ee 


On 


Pie 
Ms y, 


»* 
2, 


2 . 
“Rul 


“athe 


SOME SECRETS ARE 
WORTH DYING For 


In Icewind Dale, adventure is a dish best served cold. 


Beneath the unyielding night sky, you stand before 
a towering glacier and recite an ancient rhyme, 
causing a crack to form in the great wall of ice. 
Beyond this yawning fissure, the Caves of Hunger 
await. And past this icy dungeonis a secret so old 
and terrifying that few dare speak of it. The mad 
wizards of the Arcane Brotherhood long to possess 
that which the god of winter's wrath has so coldly 
preserved—as do you! What fantastic secrets and 
treasures are entombed in the sunless heart of the 
glacier, and what will their discovery mean for the 
denizens of Icewind Dale? Can you save Ten-Towns 
from the Frostmaiden’s everlasting night? 


Icewind Dale: Rime of the Frostmaiden™ is a tale 

of dark terror that revisits the forlorn, flickering 
candlelights of civilization known as Ten-Towns and 
sheds light on the many bone-chilling locations that 
surround these frontier settlements. 


A Dungeons & Dragons" adventure 
For characters of levels 1-11 


For use with the fifth edition 


Player's Handbook”, Monster Manual”. 
and Dungeon Master's Guide* 


& 


DUNGEONSANDDRAGONS.COM 


lI 


