= ———_ 
— " Atmenagerie of deadly: monsters 
~ for the 2 world’ s greatest roleplaying game 
Ng ~A 


< < 
\ = oe 


bh), 


CREDITS 


D&D Lead Designers: Mike Mearls, Jeremy Crawford 


Monster Manual Lead: Christopher Perkins 


_Stat Block Development: Chris Sims, Rodney Thompson, 


Peter Lee 

Story Development: Robert J. Schwalb, Matt Sernett, 
Steve Townshend, James Wyatt 

Editing: Scott Fitzgerald Gray 

Managing Editor: Jeremy Crawford 

Producer: Greg Bilsland 


Art Directors: Kate Irwin, Dan Gelon, Jon Schindehette, 
Mari Kolkowsky, Melissa Rapier, Shauna Narciso 

Graphic Designers: Bree Heiss, Emi Tanji, Barry Craig 

Cover Illustrator: Raymond Swanland 

Interior Illustrators: Tom Babbey, Daren Bader, John-Paul 
Balmet, Mark Behm, Eric Belisle, Michael Berube, Zoltan 
Boros, Christopher Bradley, Aleksi Briclot, Filip Burburan, 
Christopher Burdett, Sam Burley, Mike Burns, Wesley Burt, 
Milivoj Ceran, Jedd Chevrier, Conceptopolis, Adam Danger 
Cook, Julie Dillon, Dave Dorman, Jesper Ejsing, Emrah 
Elmasli, Wayne England, Mike Faille, Toma Feizo Gas, 
Emily Fiegenschuh, Tomas Giorello, E.M. Gist, Lars Grant- 
West, E.W. Hekaton, jD, Jon Hodgson, Ralph Horsley, Kurt 
Huggins and Zelda Devon, Lake Hurwitz, Tyler Jacobson, 
Vance Kovacs, Daniel Landerman, Lindsey Look, Daniel 
Ljunggren, Raphael Liibke, Titus Lunter, Slawomir Maniak, 
Andrew Mar, Brynn Metheney, Christopher Moeller, Mark 
Molnar, Marco Nelor, Jim Nelson, Mark A. Nelson, Hector 
Ortiz, Ryan Pancoast, Adam Paquette, Jim Pavelec, Kate 
Pfeilschiefter, Steve Prescott, Vincent Proce, Darrell Riche, 
Ned Rogers, Scott Roller, Jasper Sandner, Mike Sass, Marc 
Sasso, Ilya Shkipin, Carmen Sinek, Craig ) Spearing, Annie 
Stegg, Zack Stella, Matt Stewart, Raymond Swanland, 
Justin Sweet, Anne Stokes, Matias Tapia, Cory Trego- 
_Erdner, Autumn Rain Turkel, Cyril Van Der Haegen, David 

. Vargo, Franz Vohwinkel, Richard Whitters, Sam Wood, Ben 

Wootten, Kieran Yanner, Min Yum, Mark Zug 


620A9218000001 EN 
ISBN: 978-0-7869-6561-8 
First Printing: September 2014 


C€ 


987654321 


Additional Contributors: Bruce R. Cordell, Kim Mohan, Chris 
Dupuis, Tom LaPille, Miranda Horner, Jennifer Clarke Wilkes, 
Steve Winter, Chris Youngs, Ben Petrisor, Tom Olsen, 

R.A. Salvatore 


Project Management: Neil Shinkle, Kim Graham, John Hay 

Production Services: Cynda Callaway, Brian Dumas, 
Jefferson Dunlap, David Gershman, Matt Knannlein, 
Anita Williams 


Brand and Marketing: Nathan Stewart, Liz Schuh, 
Chris Lindsay, Shelly Mazzanoble, Hilary Ross, 
Laura Tommervik, Kim Lundstrom, Trevor Kidd 


Based on the original game created by 
E. Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson, 
with Brian Blume, Rob Kuntz, James Ward, and Don Kaye 
Drawing from further development by 
J. Eric Holmes, Tom Moldvay, Frank Mentzer, Aaron Allston, 
Harold Johnson, David “Zeb” Cook, Ed Greenwood, 
Keith Baker, Tracy Hickman, Margaret Weis, Douglas Niles, 
Jeff Grubb, Jonathan Tweet, Monte Cook, Skip Williams, 
Richard Baker, Peter Adkison, Bill Slavicsek, Andy Collins, 
and Rob Heinsoo 


Playtesting provided by 
over 175,000 fans of D&D. Thank you! 

Additional feedback provided by 
Robert Alaniz, Anthony Caroselli, josh Dillard, Curt Duval, 
Sam E. Simpson Jr., Adam Hennebeck, Sterling Hershey, 
Paul Hughes, Doug Irwin, Ken J. Breese, Yan Lacharité, Tom 
Lommel, Jonathan Longstaff, Rory Madden, Matt Maranda, 
Paul Melamed, Mike Mihalas, David Milman, Daren Mitchell, 
Claudio Pozas, John Proudfoot, Karl Resch, M. Sean Molley, 
Sam Sherry, Pieter Sleijpen, David “Oak” Stark, Vincent 
Venturella, Fredrick Wheeler, Arthur Wright 


ON THE COVER 


Raymond Swanland illustrates the Xanathar 
ambushing explorers in the darkest depths 
of Undermountain, proving that the beholder 
crime lord’s interests run deep beneath the 
city of Waterdeep. 


Disclaimer: Any similarities between monsters depicted in this book and monsters that actually exist are purely 
coincidental. That goes double for mind flayers, which absolutely, utterly, and completely do not exist, nor do they 
secretly run the D&D team. Do we really need a disclaimer to tell you that? You shouldn't use your brain to consider 
such irrational thoughts. They only make the mind cluttered, confused, and unpleasantly chewy. A good brain is nice, 
tender, and barely used. Go ahead, put down this book and watch some reality TV or Internet cat videos. They're really 
funny these days. You won't regret it. We say this only because we love you and your juicy, succulent gamer brain. 


_DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, Forgotten Realms, the dragon ampersand, Player’s Handbook, Monster Manual, Dungeon Master's Guide, all other Wizards of 
the Coast product names, and their respective logos are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast in the USA and other countries. All characters and their-distinctive likenesses are property 
6f Wizards of the Coast. This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained 


herein is prohibited without the express written permission of Wizards of the Coast. 


©2014 Wizards 6f the Coast LLC, PO Box 707, Renton, WA 98057-0707, USA. Manufactured by Hasbro SA, Rue Emile-Boéchat 31, 2800 Delémont, CH, . 
pte r Square, Stockley Park, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UBII 1ET. UK, PRINTED IN THE USA. Shs 


‘Reptesen ope, 4 The : 
‘Please -tétain company détails for future reference, | 


a i eh 
AN ge 
ee je 

4 


Miicoduction .......aehs..ss Lowe. 4 
Aarakocra......... Bae. V3 
Sia) be See a. Sd 13 
PEBGIG .... 0a s+ sage OME oe on 15 
mniunated ObjectS = ve. ........-ss 19 
PATI MAES.» ss oc ic Mine Mee Me ee eke 21 
ee a ee ee py) 
he CU: Sie 3 cag ees 23 
PATTING isis ss sa a 0 cttes Ene ake 24 
BOCA. Sapte. ss. = oe eee ne ere 25 
EOLOEIGIM. ... sinus oe . oo 26 
BALES 0 ss. ces «  Seieie og 31 
td i a oe. 33 
BAIR 5 sss » SSMU wee ers ae 34 
TROT Vis Boe. . « 35 
OO 36 
atom TAWIED OT iia ssce es’ 37 
wt on (hah gd Ss. ee a 38 
}) i eee»: ee 39 
PETE cis so ctWs OY sce cst ed ec ek. 40 
CARON... voile + cgiase es Chu 41 
(bar Ce. 42 
G0 Ah, Se ois sill 43 
iS aE 6 (Ol: gs i 44 
Malic » i. 45 
TOA TRESILIG .. uth res bs ccs e eee 46 
Ieee, 9S 47 
Demilich ©... . i / 3 =e. 48 
Demions'......... ue ie 50 
VIS me. . Glee. Me cis ailla « » of 66 
ID oS ocala 79 
Dikplaces Beast... o0) 2... 8. 81 
Doppelganger........... YAO Oe 82 
Lis ote A Te a 83 
Dragon, Shadow...............: 84 
BO CAGONIS. 2... « += aasiaiiere weal 86 
PORAOE LUTEIC ... . soe cpg sss et 119 
ntlko> . ners eer .. 120 
DO IEIEME <.. SMneicis « 50+ «rca 11 
LD: ee ae ais 122 
IGIOOUIAIS 2. ccs. c ee cece ee 123 
Ve aT OW a hisica as oe cere caw eee 126 
eg ee, en eo oe 130 
S21 iiisn) » vo agartitte «6 + 131 
OT i i 132 
apie UGAGON ..........00e200> 133 
ROMAIN ok ces c cree ene ce 134 
RNR =. sitios vs cacesss- 135 
Lesh 7) 136 
ee! 2 ie 137 
MOUSE, 6 veces e eee sessece 139 
PI COMENOMED) =< sous cdosinly ss secs > + 140 
Woe. i Se 141 
iS). i a aan 147 
Eis es a 3 0 ie vu... 148 
eS a i a 149 
Gibbering Mouther............. 157) 


eeeeses ve tteesencenesbaeenaoe 


eeoereeneececneovrevoesseeeeanes 


Gnome, Deep (Svirfneblin) 

Goblins 

Golems 

OrGOD’... . . alow. cannes. oe 171 
Cit i oe ee 172 
Griek?:. alas... ste ce eer. e 173 
CrPITTON ... «ce ees « « aha ccs 174 
TOC RK Se a vic.s sos. oes « teal 
Lh See a ee 176 
Halt Dragon 2: .... .2oeeeee er 180 
Tar Dy cee... +o vets gs gener 181 
ell Hotnd.. .¢. 4s. ..< scene 182 
Helméed*Horror ........aenenee 183 
RUDD ORTUI. «suo Beises css Meee 184 
Hioppouling oy, wt: ae ss vee. sos 185 
MAOLDUTIG UES. ee ek cow woe ve 188 
Hook Horter no. s.ceas «. des a 189 
Leh? a, Se 190 
Intellect Devourer.............. 191 
Invisible Stalker............... 192 
AGKAIWETES 6c. seen cae. oe 193 
04) ee ot 194 
PEG OOIAS eee esis o 5 os oe EN 195 
LI | rch lic. 5 196 
Riisoctea) 805... sacs Be ae nes 198 
ee Pie. Pek. ce Ce ee 201 
PROG « . gee Ses. as Act 202 
ra itlies Ss bees eda ee 204 
LYGATILNSGPGS’. «05. ose veneers 206 
eS) ee 212 
PUATIRO ees oss sieceiediilea a vs 213 
acolo) Ae a a 214 
AERTS tieee:«.. sgummea alin’ s «nach 215 
3) 10] a a oe 218 
TOUETEGIVE « «:saxeieconwsnseisia « « MME = sine ve 219 
PREEMPT cremees «6»: siethone Wamucycuec aes cl 220 
POM PIQVED ... os seu sim se aie 221 
MAGRAUE fax tne « O8 OR cans, oe a Ze3 
PMPTIHTES? 201s sa ow Uae auagayare 6 Ste won 224 
BARES vax uve bso. ceeeee 227 
WIMGSIIONS . 2c. wicks s Sd ees 230 
eT eee 233 
iG HAI 6 ac. 0 scesewweeee oes 235 
Pe atiinananameraeneethas 236 
Oc soxsectoeraciiesssteeninecenniunnnin 237 
oe ae 239 
i ee 240 
i ee nr 244 
SPI DTIe., < sce sss ss rents» ote 248 
OC aS ee 249 
TR eee ss canass veces anc 250 
he 0). 251 
[ldeest,. .00 0) 22 
Po a 253 
ISGGUOGGAGGN «bis sae gress scue 254 
Miple Wenn... Wins. sce. 255 
Oil a i a ee 256 


Rakeliasa*..2......°o0rURR.e. 


oeuvre neaeeuerenaeeas 


Rust Monster ............. Csi 262 
SAnWagin aw... sae ies .. 263 
Salamanders ........ 7. ie nf 265 
SE ea is 8 kh PF8 
DOCATCCIOW .... 0. Meese MeL ee 268 
Shadow «.. 0.0... 05 «wcll orm t+ 269 
Shambling Mound .............,.270 
Shield Guardian....,.. 4 oo ate 271 
Skeletons ...... me). poe 272 
SIAAG! . ... 5.50 seu ee eee aes 274 
SDECEL . .. 0. Ne. ale, 279 
Sphinxes .. oo... oes ps ae 280 
Sprite... ..7 sees Pree LI 2 Ftdds » . 283 
Stifge...... cee eee . gee ». 284 
Succubus/Incubus............. 285 
Tarrasqu@s. ..c.ss.. + cee eo: 286 
THAME... oes. 288 
TYAN ..1.65.+ 0805050 289 
Troglodyte. ........:... eee 290 
TOL... . ses... 0000s ee 291 
Umber Hulk . .. . sacs. were . See 292 
Unieoiit’. ... 02.2625... + eee 293 
Vampires ............. 00 ee 295 
Water Weird .....2c.9) see 299 
MGM cass. sn see ee 300 
Will-o’-wisp ...........000: 4. ae) 
Writ) ....... sates. .o. eee 302 
WYVEIR ... skccnave... ae 303 
oi I ce 304 
VOUS ius. <3 + 5. « «nets » sagen ae 305 
PC re 307 
Yugolotiis .........50. 0. . 311 
ZGMbIES ..... sige ie. «eee "315 
Appendix A: Miscellaneous 

Greatunes ee... co ees «6 317 
Appendix B: Nonplayer 

Chanactérs 4.4% . sarees ee 342 
Index of Stat Blocks ............ 351 


-) INTRODUCTION | 


INTRODUCTION 


Se his bestiary is for storytellers and world- 
builders. If you have ever thought about 
running a DUNGEONS & DRAGONS game 
for your friends, either a single night's 
adventure or a long-running campaign, 
this tome contains page after page of 
inspiration. It’s your one-stop shop for 

creatures both malevolent and benign. 

Some of the creatures that inhabit the worlds of 
D&D have origins rooted in real-world mythology and 
fantasy literature. Other creatures are D&D originals. 
The monsters in this book have been culled from all 
previous editions of the game. Herein you'll discover 
classic critters such as the beholder and the displacer 
beast next to more recent creations such as the chuul 
and the twig blight. Common beasts mingle with the 
weird, the terrifying, and the ridiculous. In collecting 
monsters from the past, we’ve endeavored to reflect the 
multifaceted nature of the game, warts and all. D&D 
monsters come in all shapes and sizes, with stories that 
not only thrill us but also make us smile. 

If you’re an experienced Dungeon Master (DM), a few 
of the monster write-ups might surprise you, for we’ve 
gone into the Monster Manuals of yore and discovered 
some long-lost factoids. We've also added a few new 
twists. Naturally, you can do with these monsters what 
you will. Nothing we say here is intended to curtail 
your creativity. If the minotaurs in your world are 
shipbuilders and pirates, who are we to argue with you? 
It’s your world, after all. 


How To USE THIS BOOK 


‘The best thing about being a DM is that you get to invent 
your own fantasy world and bring it to life, and nothing 
brings a D&D world to life more than the creatures 

that inhabit it. You might read a monster's entry and 

be spurred to create an adventure revolving around it, 
‘or you might have an awesome idea for a dungeon and 
need just the right monsters to populate it. That’s where 
the Monster Manual comes in handy. 

The Monster Manual is one of three books that form 
the foundation of the DUNGEONS & DRAGONS game, 
the other two being the Player's Handbook and the 
Dungeon Master's Guide. The Monster Manual, like 
the Dungeon Master's Guide, is a book for DMs. Use it 
to populate your D&D adventures with pesky goblins, 
stinky troglodytes, savage orcs, mighty dragons, anda 
veritable horde of creepy crawlies. 

Guidelines for creating encounters with monsters can 
be found in the Dungeon Master’s Guide. That book also 
contains wandering monster tables and other goodies 
to help you use the monsters in this book in interesting 
ways, as well as advice for modifying monsters and 
creating your own. 

If you've never run a D&D adventure before, we 
‘recommend that you pick up the DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 
Starter Set, which demonstrates how to take a bunch of 
monsters and build an exciting adventure around them. 


eae oe 


WHAT Is A MONSTER? 


A monster is defined as any creature that can be 
interacted with and potentially fought and killed. Even 
something as harmless as a frog or as benevolent as 

a unicorn is a monster by this definition. The term 

also applies to humans, elves, dwarves, and other 
civilized folk who might be friends or rivals to the player 
characters. Most of the monsters that haunt the D&D 
world, however, are threats that are meant to be stopped: 
rampaging demons, conniving devils, soul-sucking 
undead, summoned elementals—the list goes on. 

This book contains ready-to-play, easy-to-run 
monsters of all levels, and for nearly every climate and 
terrain imaginable. Whether your adventure takes place 
in a swamp, a dungeon, or the outer planes of existence, 
there are creatures in this book to populate that 
environment. 


WHERE Do MONSTERS DWELL? 


If you are new to the D&D game, you might not be 
familiar with the weird and wondrous places where 
monsters can be found and fought. 


DUNGEONS 

When most people think of a dungeon, images of dark 
cells with iron bars and shackles spring to mind. In 
the D&D game, the word “dungeon” takes on a broader 
meaning to include any enclosed, monster-infested 
location. Most dungeons are sprawling underground 
complexes. Here are a few other examples: 


. Aruined wizard’s tower atop a lonely hill riddled with 
goblin-infested tunnels 

» A pharaoh’s pyramid filled with haunted crypts and 

secret treasure vaults 

A lost city in the jungle, overgrown with vines and 

overrun with demons and demon-worshiping cultists 

- The icy tomb of a frost giant king 

- A filthy, labyrinthine sewer system controlled by a 
gang of wererats 


THE UNDERDARK 

There is no greater dungeon than the Underdark, the 

underworld beneath the surface world. It is a vast 

subterranean realm where monsters accustomed to 
darkness dwell. It is a place filled with lightless caverns 
connected by tunnels that wind ever downward. One 
could spend a lifetime (however brief!) exploring the 
Underdark and find such places as the following: 


« A mind flayer prison or asylum, filled with mindless 
thralls and raving lunatics 

. A lost dwarven necropolis containing row after row of 

dusty tombs waiting to be plundered 

A fortified outpost bristling with armaments, guarding 

the way to a magnificent drow city 

. Asubterranean rift filled with giant fungi and ruled by 
a megalomaniacal beholder or mad fomorian king 

- Achain of rocky islands on a vast, sunless sea that’s 
home to aboleths and insane kuo-toa 


THE WILDERNESS 

Not all monsters lurk underground. Many of them 
inhabit deserts, mountains, swamps, canyons, forests, 
and other natural settings. The wilderness can be just 
as dangerous as any dungeon, particularly when there’s 
nowhere to hide! Some wilderness locations are just as 
memorable as any dungeon: 


« Aroc’s nest made of shattered ship hulls, built atop a 
lonely mountain or rocky hill 

- Avast arctic tundra that serves as a hunting ground 
for berserkers and yeti 

- A primeval forest protected by treants or corrupted by 
demon-worshiping gnolls 

+ A fog-shrouded swamp haunted by lizardfolk that 
worship a vile black dragon 

« A jungle island inhabited by dinosaurs and human 
tribal warriors 


TOWNS AND CITIES 

Some of the best adventures unfold in the cradles of 
civilization. Urban settings afford adventurers the 
chance to rub shoulders with the rich and powerful, butt 
heads with the dregs of society, and peel back the veneer 
of civility to see the monstrous evil lurking beneath. 
Within a medieval town or city are places as deadly as 
any dungeon: 


« Aclock tower that serves as a base for a guild of 

kenku rogues and assassins 

A slavers’ den hidden in an orphanage run bya 

rakshasa disguised as the headmaster 

« Awizard’s academy rife with corruption and practi- 
tioners of the necromantic arts 

« Anoble’s manor where rich, devil-worshiping cultists 
gather to perform sacrifices 

« Atemple, vault, or museum watched day and night by 
animated constructs 


UNDERWATER 

Not all adventures take place on land. This book casts 
light on several creatures that haunt the oceans of the 
world, from the devilish sahuagin to the peaceful aquatic 
elves who loathe them. Within this aquatic domain are 
many surprising adventure locations: 


« A graveyard of sunken ships haunted by sharks, 
aquatic ghouls, and angry ghosts 

- Astorm giant’s coral castle, beautiful yet foreboding 

A lost city on the sea floor, encased in a magic bubble 

of air and ruled by a medusa queen 

« A kraken’s cave or bronze dragon’s cavernous lair, 
filled with ancient treasures 

- Asunken temple of Sekolah, evil god of the sahuagin 


THE PLANES OF EXISTENCE 

The Abyss. The Nine Hells. The City of Brass. Such 
faraway places beckon high-level adventurers to their 
doorsteps, defying the brave and the foolhardy to 
overthrow their evil masters and unlock their hidden 
mysteries. Many powerful, weird creatures live on other 


planes of existence, from orderly modrons to murderous 
dermmons. When it comes to interesting adventure 
locations, not even the sky is the limit when you pass 
beyond the boundaries of the world: 


- A pit fiend’s stronghold on Avernus, the first layer of 
the Nine Hells 

- A haunted castle in the Shadowfell that serves as a 
shadow dragon’s lair 

« An elf queen’s tomb in the Feywild 

A djinni’s palace on the Elemental Plane of Air, filled 

with marvelous stolen treasures 

» Alich’s secret demiplane, where the undead archmage 
hides its phylactery and spellbook 


See the Dungeon Master’s Guide for more information 
on the planes of existence. 


WHAT MONSTERS TO USE? 


Many monsters inhabit dungeons, while others live in 
deserts, forests, labyrinths, and other environments. 
Regardless of which environment a monster 
traditionally calls home, you can place it anywhere 
you want. After all, “fish out of water” stories are 
memorable, and sometimes it’s fun to surprise players 
with gricks hiding under the desert sands or a dryad 
living in a giant mushroom in the Underdark. 


STATISTICS 


A monster’s statistics, sometimes referred to as its stat 
block, provide the essential information that you need 
to run the monster. 


SIZE 


‘A monster can be Tiny, Small, Medium, Large, Huge, 
or Gargantuan. The Size Categories table shows how 


“fhuch space a creature of a particular size controls 


in combat. See the Player’s Handbook for more 
‘information on creature size and space. 


S1ZE CATEGORIES 


Size Space Examples 

Tiny 22 by 242 ft. Imp, sprite 

Small 5 by 5 ft. Giant rat, goblin 
Medium 5 by 5 ft. Orc, werewolf 

Large 10 by 10 ft. Hippogriff, ogre 
Huge 15 by 15 ft. Fire giant, treant 
Gargantuan 20 by 20ft. orlarger Kraken, purple worm 


_ ——~————EE———————— | 
MODIFYING CREATURES 


Despite the versatile collection of monsters in this book, 
you might be at a loss when it comes to finding the perfect 
creature for part of an adventure. Feel free to tweak an 
existing creature to make it into something more useful for 
you, perhaps by borrowing a trait or two from a different 
monster or by using a variant or template, such as the 
ones in this book. Keep in mind that modifying a monster, 
including when you apply a template to it, might change its 
_ challenge rating. 

For advice on how to customize creatures and calculate 

their challenge ratings, see the Dungeon Master's Guide. 


QT 


INTRODUCTION 


> 7 1 
"TYBROF 5 7). eo ft 


A monster’s'type speaks to its fundamental nature. 
Certain spells, magic items, class features, and othér 
effects in the game interact in special ways with 
creatures of a particular type. For example, an arrow of 
dragon slaying deals extra damage not only to dragons 
but also other creatures of the dragon type, such as 
dragon turtles and wyverns. 

The game includes the following monster types, which 
have no rules of their own. 

Aberrations are utterly alien beings. Many of them 
have innate magical abilities drawn from the creature’s 
alien mind rather than the mystical forces of the world. 
The quintessential aberrations are aboleths, beholders, 
mind flayers, and slaadi. 

Beasts are nonhumanoid creatures that are a natural 
part of the fantasy ecology. Some of them have magical 
powers, but most are unintelligent and lack any society 
or language. Beasts include all varieties of ordinary 
animals, dinosaurs, and giant versions of animals. 

Celestials are creatures native to the Upper Planes. 
Many of them are the servants of deities, employed 
as messengers or agents in the mortal realm and 
throughout the planes. Celestials are good by nature, 
so the exceptional celestial who strays from a good 
alignment is a horrifying rarity. Celestials include 
angels, couatls, and pegasi. 

Constructs are made, not born. Some are 
programmed by their creators to follow a simple set of 
instructions, while others are imbued with sentience 
and capable of independent thought. Golems are the 
iconic constructs. Many creatures native to the outer 
plane of Mechanus, such as modrons, are constructs 
shaped from the raw material of the plane by the will of 
more powerful creatures. 

Dragons are large reptilian creatures of ancient origin 
and tremendous power. True dragons, including the 
good metallic dragons and the evil chromatic dragons, 
are highly intelligent and have innate magic. Also in this 
category are creatures distantly related to true dragons, 
but less powerful, less intelligent, and less magical, such 
as wyverns and pseudodragons. 

Elementals are creatures native to the elemental 
planes. Some creatures of this type are little more than 
animate masses of their respective elements, including 
the creatures simply called elementals. Others have 
biological forms infused with elemental energy. The 
races of genies, including djinn and efreet, form the 
most important civilizations on the elemental planes. 
Other elemental creatures include azers, invisible 
stalkers, and water weirds. 

Fey are magical creatures closely tied to the forces of 
nature. They dwell in twilight groves and misty forests. 
In some worlds, they are closely tied to the Feywild, also 
called the Plane of Faerie. Some are also found in the 
Outer Planes, particularly the planes of Arborea and the 
Beastlands. Fey include dryads, pixies, and satyrs. 

Fiends are creatures of wickedness that are native 
to the Lower Planes. A few are the servants of deities, 
but many more labor under the leadership of archdevils 
and demon princes. Evil priests and mages sometimes 


: MG ei —————— 

‘a Gen fiends to the ‘material world to do their bidding. 

- If an evil celestial is a‘rarity, a good fiend is almost 
inconceivable. Fiends include demons, devils, hell 
hounds, rakshasas, and yugoloths. 

Giants tower over humans and their kind. They are 
humanlike in shape, though some have multiple heads 
(ettins) or deformities (fomorians). The six varieties of 
true giant are hill giants, stone giants, frost giants, fire 
giants, cloud giants, and storm giants. Besides these, 
creatures such as ogres and trolls are giants. 

Humanoids are the main peoples of the D&D 
world, both civilized and savage, including humans 
and a tremendous variety of other species. They have 
language and culture, few if any innate magical abilities 
(though most humanoids can learn spellcasting), and a 
bipedal form. The most common humanoid races are 
the, ones most suitable as player characters: humans, 
dwarves, elves, and halflings. Almost as numerous but 
far more savage and brutal, and almost uniformly evil, 
are the races of goblinoids (goblins, hobgoblins, and 
bugbears), orcs, gnolls, lizardfolk, and kobolds. 

A variety of humanoids appear throughout this book, 
but the races detailed in the Player’s Handbook—with 
the exception of drow—are dealt with in appendix B. 
That appendix gives you a number of stat blocks that 
you'can use to make various members of those races. 

Monstrosities are monsters in the strictest sense— 
frightening creatures that are not ordinary, not truly 
natural, and almost never benign. Some are the 
results of magical experimentation gone awry (Such 
as owlbears), and others are the product-of terrible 
curses (including minotaurs and yuan-ti). They defy 
categorization, and in some sense serve as a catch-all 
category for creatures that don’t fit into any other type. 

Oozes are gelatinous creatures that rarely have a 
fixed shape. They are mostly subterranean, dwelling 
in caves and dungeons and feeding on refuse, carrion, 
or creatures unlucky enough to get in their way. Black 
puddings and gelatinous cubes are among the most 
recognizable oozes. 

Plants in this context are vegetable creatures, not 
ordinary flora. Most of them are ambulatory, and some 
are carnivorous. The quintessential plants are the 
shambling mound and the treant. Fungal creatures 
such as the gas spore and the myconid also fall into 
this category. 

Undead are once-living creatures brought to a 
horrifying state of undeath through the practice of 
necromantic magic or some unholy curse. Undead 
include walking corpses, such as vampires and zombies, 
as well as bodiless spirits, such as ghosts and specters. 


TAGS 

A monster might have one or more tags appended to 

its type, in parentheses. For example, an orc has the 
humanoid (orc) type. The parenthetical tags provide 
additional categorization for certain creatures. The tags 
have no rules of their own, but something in the game, 
such as a magic item, might refer to them. For instance, 
a spear that is especially effective at fighting demons 
would work against any monster that has the demon tag. 


Ler 


ALIGNMENT 


A monster's alignment provides a clue to its disposition - i 
and how it behaves in a roleplaying or combat situation.) - 
For example, a chaotic evil monster might be difficult 
to reason with and might attack characters on sight, 
whereas a neutral monster might be willing to negotiate. 
See the Player’s Handbook for uescripie of the 
different alignments. 

The alignment specified in a monster’s stat block is is 
the default. Feel free to depart from it and change a 
monster’s alignment to suit the needs of your campaign. 
If you want a good-aligned green dragon or an, evil ‘storm, 
giant, there’s nothing stopping you. a 

Some creatures can have any alignment. In ottier ‘ 
words, you choose the monster's aligninent. Some ~ 
monster’s alignment entry indicates a tendency or 
aversion toward law, chaos, good, or evil. For example, 

a berserker can be any chaotic alignment (chaotic good, 
chaotic neutral, or chaotic evil), as befits its wild nature. 

Many creatures of low intelligence have no 
comprehension of law or chaos, good or evil. They don’t G 
make moral or ethical choices, but rather act on instinct. i 
These creatures are unaligned, which means they don’t 
have an alignment. ai 


ARMOR CLASS 


A monster that wears armor or carries a shield has a 
an Armor Class (AC) that takes its armor, shield, and 
Dexterity into account. Otherwise, a monster’s AC is 
based on its Dexterity modifier and natural armor, 

if any. If a monster has natural armor, wears armor, rhe 
or carries a shield, this is noted in parentheses after 
its AC value. 


mee 


HiT PoINnts 


A monster usually dies or is destroyed when it 
drops to 0 hit points. For more on hit points, see the 
Player’s Handbook. 

A monster’s hit points are presented both as a die 
expression and as an average number. For example, 
a monster with 2d8 hit points has 9 hit points on 
average (2 x 41). (ay 

A monster’s size determines the die used to calculate ay 
its hit points, as shown in the Hit Dice by Size table. May | 


Hit Dice By SIZE fi: 


Monster Size Hit Die Average HP per Die a 
Tiny d4 21, ah 
Small d6 32 
Medium d3 4Y2 i 
Large d10 52 il 
Huge di2 6V2 |! 
Gargantuan d20 10V2 a ry 


A monster’s Constitution modifier also affects the Gy 
number of hit points it has. Its Constitution modifier is a 
multiplied by the number of Hit Dice it possesses, and = = “hi 
the result is added to its hit points. For example, ifa ets ti if 
monster has a Constitution of 12 #1 modifier) and 248 Mi arith ee 
Hit Dice, it has 2d8 + 2 hit points (average 11). Weak hi rl 


| 


Tipe ob 1 
i 
' i 


a Weal Sa 
“wa re Ue. - 
i ne 


SPEED 


A monster’s speed tells you how far it can move on 
its turn. For more information on speed, see the 
Player’s Handbook. 

All creatures have a walking speed, simply called the 
monster's speed. Creatures that have no form of ground- 
based locomotion have a walking speed of 0 feet. 

Some creatures have one or more of the following 
additional movement modes. 


BURROW 

A monster that has a burrowing speed can use that 
speed to move through sand, earth, mud, or ice. A 
monster can’t burrow through solid rock unless it has a 
special trait that allows it to do so. 


CLIMB 

A monster that has a climbing speed can use all or 

part of its movement to move on vertical surfaces. The 
monster doesn’t need to spend extra movement to climb. 


FLy 

A monster that has a flying speed can use all or part 

of its movement to fly. Some monsters have the ability 
to hover, which makes them hard to knock out of the 

air (as explained in the rules on flying in the Player’s 
Handbook). Such a monster stops hovering when it dies. 


SwIM 
A monster that has a swimming speed doesn’t need to 
spend extra movement to swim. 


ABILITY SCORES 


Every monster has six ability scores (Strength, 
‘Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and 


Charisma) and corresponding modifiers. For more 


information on ability scores and how they're used in 


. play, see the Player’s Handbook. 


NG THROWS 


The Saving Throws entry is reserved for creatures 
that are adept at resisting certain kinds of effects. 

For example, a creature that isn’t easily charmed or 
frightened might gain a bonus on its Wisdom saving 
throws. Most creatures don’t have special saving throw 
bonuses, in which case this section is absent. 

A saving throw bonus is the sum of a monster’s relevant 
ability modifier and its proficiency bonus, which is 
determined by the monster’s challenge rating (as shown 
in the Proficiency Bonus by Challenge Rating table). 


Lin agenedelieakenie te mioirenenal 


ie 
fae t! ell 
1 ONG 


oe 
he 
=— 


NGS hay a RL 
ita &. = of= =f 


r yen 


; er tS 
PROFICIENCY BONUS BY CHALLENGE RATING 
Proficiency Proficiency 
Challenge Bonus Challenge Bonus 
0 +2 14 +5 
1/8 42 15 45 
1/4 42 16 45 
1/2 +2 7 +6 
1 +2 18 +6 
2 +2 19 +6 
3 +2 20 +6 
4 +2 2] +7 
5 +3 22 +7 
6 +3 23 +7 
7 +3 24 +7 
8 +3 25 +8 
9 +4 26 +8 
10 +4 27 +8 
11 +4 28 +8 
12 +4 29 +9 
13 +5 30 +9 
SKILLS 


The Skills entry is reserved for monsters that are 
proficient in one or more skills. For example, a monster 
that is very perceptive and stealthy might have bonuses 
to Wisdom (Perception) and Dexterity (Stealth) checks. 
A skill bonus is the sum of a monster’s relevant 
ability modifier and its proficiency bonus, which is 
determined by the monster's challenge rating (as 
shown in the Proficiency Bonus by Challenge Rating 
table). Other modifiers might apply. For instance, a 
monster might have a larger-than-expected bonus 
(usually double its proficiency bonus) to account for 
its heightened expertise. 


VULNERABILITIES, RESISTANCES, 
AND IMMUNITIES 


Some creatures have vulnerability, resistance, or 
immunity to certain types of damage. Additionally, 

some creatures are immune to certain conditions. Ifa 
monster is immune to a game effect that isn’t considered 
damage or a condition, it has a special trait. 


SENSES 


The Senses entry notes a monster's passive 
Wisdom (Perception) score, as well as any special 
senses the monster might have. Special senses are 
described below. 


BLINDSIGHT 
A monster with blindsight can perceive its surroundings 
without relying on sight, within a specific radius. 
Creatures without eyes, such as grimlocks and gray 
oozes, typically have this special sense, as do creatures 
with echolocation or heightened senses, such as bats 
and true dragons. 
If a monster is naturally blind, it has. a parenthetical 
note to this effect, indicating that the radius of its 
blindsight defines the maximum range of its perception. 


4. Piet ls 
Armor, WEAPON, AND TOOL PROFICIENCIES 
Assume that a creature is proficient with its armor, weapons, 
and tools. If you swap them out, you decide whether the 
creature is proficient with its new equipment. 

For example, a hill giant typically wears hide armor and 
wields a greatclub. You could equip a hill giant with chain 
mail and a greataxe instead, and assume the giant is 
proficient with both, one or the other, or neither. 

See the Player’s Handbook for rules on using armor or 
| weapons without proficiency. 

DARKVISION 

A monster with darkvision can see in the dark within a 
specific radius. The monster can see in dim light within 
the radius as if it were bright light, and in darkness as 
if it were dim light. The monster can’t discern color in 
darkness, only shades of gray. Many creatures that live 
underground have this special sense. 


‘TREMORSENSE 

A monster with tremorsense can detect and pinpoint 
the origin of vibrations within a specific radius, 
provided that the monster and the source of the 
vibrations are in contact with the same ground or 
substance. Tremorsense can’t be used to detect flying or 
incorporeal creatures. Many burrowing creatures, such 
as ankhegs and umber hulks, have this special sense. 


‘TRUESIGHT 

A monster with truesight can, out to a specific range, see 
in normal and magical darkness, see invisible creatures 
and objects, automatically detect visual illusions and 
succeed on saving throws against them, and perceive 
the original form of a shapechanger or a creature that 

is transformed by magic. Furthermore, the monster can 
see into the Ethereal Plane within the same range. 


LANGUAGES 


The languages that a monster can speak are listed 

in alphabetical order. Sometimes a monster can 
understand a language but can’t speak it, and this is 
noted in its entry. A “—” indicates that a creature neither 
speaks nor understands any language. 


‘TELEPATHY 
Telepathy is a magical ability that allows a monster to 
communicate mentally with another creature within a 
specified range. The contacted creature doesn’t need 

to share a language with the monster to communicate 
in this way with it, but it must be able to understand at 
least one language. A creature without telepathy can 
receive and respond to telepathic messages but can’t 
initiate or terminate a telepathic conversation. 

A telepathic monster doesn’t need to see a contacted 
creature and can end the telepathic contact at any time. 
The contact is broken as soon as the two creatures are 
no longer within range of each other or if the telepathic 
monster contacts a different creature within range. A 
telepathic monster can initiate or terminate a telepathic 
conversation without using an action, but while the 
monster is incapacitated, it can’t initiate telepathic 
contact, and any current contact is terminated. 


A creature within the area of an antimagic field or in i 


any other location where magic doesn’t function can’t 
send or receive telepathic messages. : 


f 
CHALLENGE 


A monster’s challenge rating tells you how great a 
threat the monster is. An appropriately equipped and 
well-rested party of four adventurers should be able to 
defeat a monster that has a challenge rating equal to its 
level without suffering any deaths. For example, a party 
of four 3rd-level characters should find a monster with 
a challenge rating of 3 to be a worthy challenge, but not 
a deadly one. 

Monsters that are significantly weaker than Ist-level 
characters have a challenge rating lower than 1. 
Monsters with a challenge rating of 0 are insignificant 
except in large numbers; those with no effective attacks 
are worth no experience points, while those that have 
attacks are worth 10 XP each. 

Some monsters present a greater challenge than 
even a typical 20th-level party can handle. These 
monsters have a challenge rating of 21 or higher and are 
specifically designed to test player skill. 


EXPERIENCE POINTS 

The number of experience points (XP) a monster is 
worth is based on its challenge rating. Typically, XP is 
awarded for defeating the monster, although the DM 
may also award XP for neutralizing the threat posed by 
the monster in some other manner. 

Unless something tells you otherwise, a monster 
summoned by a spell or other magical ability is worth 
the XP noted in its stat block. 

The Dungeon Master’s Guide explains how to create 
encounters using XP budgets, as well as how to adjust 
an encounter’s difficulty. 


EXPERIENCE POINTS BY CHALLENGE RATING 


Challenge XP Challenge XP 
0 Oor 10 14 11,500 
1/8 25 15 13,000 
1/4 50 16 15,000 
1/2 100 117 18,000 
1 200 18 20,000 
2 450 19 22,000 
3 700 20 25,000 
4 1,100 21 33,000 
2) 1,800 22 41,000 
6 2,300 23 50,000 
7 2,900 24 62,000 
8 3,900 25 75,000 
9 5,000 26 90,000 
10 5,900 27 105,000 
am) 7,200 28 120,000 
12 8,400 29 135,000 
13 10,000 30 155,000 


a! 


i, 

- A 
‘iio 
ves 


SPECIAL TRAITS 


Special traits (which appear after a monster’s challenge 
rating but before any actions or reactions) are 
characteristics that are likely to be relevant in a combat 
encounter and that require some explanation. 


INNATE SPELLCASTING 

A monster with the innate ability to cast spells has 

the Innate Spellcasting special trait. Unless noted 
otherwise, an innate spell of 1st level or higher is 
always cast at its lowest possible level and can’t be cast 
at a higher level. If a monster has a cantrip where its 
level matters and no level is given, use the monster’s 
challenge rating. 

An innate spell can have special rules or restrictions. 
For example, a drow mage can innately cast the /evitate 
spell, but the spell has a “self only” restriction, which 
means that the spell affects only the drow mage. 

A monster’s innate spells can’t be swapped out with 
other spells. If a monster's innate spells don’t require 
attack rolls, no attack bonus is given for them. 


SPELLCASTING 

A monster with the Spellcasting class feature has a 
spellcaster level and spell slots, which it uses to cast 
its spells of 1st level and higher (as explained in the 
Player’s Handbook). The spellcaster level is also used 
for any cantrips included in the feature. 

The monster has a list of spells known or prepared 
from a particular class. The list might also include 
spells from a feature in that class, such as the Divine 
Domain feature of the cleric or the Druid Circle feature 
of the druid. 

A monster can cast a spell from its list at a higher level 
if it has the spell slot to do so. For example, a drow mage 
with the 3rd-level Jightning bolt spell can cast it as a 
5th-level spell by using one of its 5th-level spell slots. 

You can change the spells that a monster knows or 
has prepared, replacing any spell on a monster’s spell 
list with a different spell of the same level and from 
the same class list. If you do so, you might cause the 
monster to be a greater or lesser threat than suggested 
by its challenge rating. 


PSIONICS 

A monster that casts spells using only the power of its 
mind has the psionics tag added to its Spellcasting or 
Innate Spellcasting special trait. This tag carries no 
special rules of its own, but other parts of the game 
might refer to it. A monster that has this tag typically 
doesn’t require any components to cast its spells. 


ACTIONS 


When a monster takes its action, it can choose from the 
options in the Actions section of its stat block or use one 
of the actions available to all creatures, such as the Dash 
or Hide action, as described in the Player’s Handbook. 


MELEE AND RANGED ATTACKS 

The most common actions that a monster will take in 
combat are melee and ranged attacks. These can be 
spell attacks or weapon attacks, where the “weapon” 


Tre! 
nips 
i 


*: 


wor: ‘a manuiaetired item or a natural weapon, such 
as a claw or tail spike: For more information on different 
kinds of attacks, see the Player’s Handbook. 
Creature vs. Target. The target of a melee or ranged 
attack is usually either one creature or one target, 
the difference being that a “target” can be a creature 
or an object. 
Hit. Any damage dealt or other effects that occur as 
a result of an attack hitting a target are described after 
the “Hit” notation. You have the option of taking average 
damage or rolling the damage; for this reason, both the 
average damage and the die expression are presented. 
Miss. If an attack has an effect that occurs on a miss, 
that information is presented after the “Miss:” notation. 


MULTIATTACK 

A creature that can make multiple attacks on its 

turn has the Multiattack ability. A creature can’t use 
Multiattack when making an opportunity attack, which 
must be a single melee attack. 


AMMUNITION 

A monster carries enough ammunition to make its 
ranged attacks. You can assume that a monster has 2d4 
pieces of ammunition for a thrown weapon attack, and 
2d10 pieces of ammunition for a projectile weapon such 
asa bow or crossbow. 


REACTIONS . 


If a monster can do something special with its reaction, 
that information is contained here. If a creature has no 
special reaction, this section is absent. 


LIMITED USAGE 


Some special abilities A restrictions on the number 
of times they can be used. 

X/Day. The notation “X/Day” means a special ability 
can be used X number of times and that a monster must 
finish a long rest to regain expended uses. For example, 
“1/Day” means a special ability can be used once and 
that the monster must finish a long rest to use it again. 

Recharge X-Y. The notation “Recharge X-Y” means 

_amonster can use a special ability once and that the 
ability then has a random chance of recharging during 
each subsequent round of combat. At the start of each 
of the monster’s turns, roll a d6. If the roll is one of the 
numbers in the recharge notation, the monster regains 
the use of the special ability. The ability also recharges 
when the monster finishes a short or long rest. 


ll 
GRAPPLE RULES FOR MONSTERS 
Many monsters have special attacks that allow them to 
quickly grapple prey. When a monster hits with such an 
attack, it doesn’t need to make an additional ability check to 
_ determine whether the grapple succeeds, unless the attack 
says otherwise. 

A creature grappled by the monster can use its action to try 
to escape. To do so, it must succeed on a Strength (Athletics) 
or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check against the escape DC in the 
monster’s stat block. If no escape DC is given, assume the 
DC is 10 + the monster's Strength (Athletics) modifier. 


For example, “Recharge 5-6” means a monster ¢an bys h 
use the special ability once. Then, at the startofthe 9 9 99 9) ¥ 
monster’s turn, it regains the use of that ability if it rolls” ) hi 
a5or6onad6. ; 

Recharge after a Short or Long Rest. This notation 
means that a monster can use a special ability once and 
then must finish a short or long rest to use it again. Rhian, 


EQUIPMENT aU 
A stat block rarely refers to equipment, other‘than i 
armor or weapons used by a monster. A creature that ype 
customarily wears clothes, such asa humanoidyis ted 
assumed to be dressed appropriately. ae 1 
You can equip monsters with additional gear and 
trinkets however you like, using the equipment chapter rie 
of the Player’s Handbook for inspiration, and you decide ah 
how much of a monster’s equipment is recoverable after 
the creature is slain and whether any of that equipment 
is still usable. A battered suit of armor made for a Ne 
monster is rarely usable by someone else, for instance. 
If a spellcasting monster needs material components 
to cast its spells, assume that it has the material 
components it needs to cast the spells in its stat block. 


LEGENDARY CREATURES 


A legendary creature can do things that ordinary 
creatures can’t. Legendary creatures can take special 
actions outside their turns, and a few can exert power 
over their environment, causing extraordinary magical 
effects to occur in their vicinity. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


A legendary creature can take a certain number of 
special actions—called legendary actions—outside its 
turn. Only one legendary action option can be used at 

a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. A 
legendary creature regains spent legendary actions at 
the start of its turn. It isn’t required to use its legendary 
actions, and it can’t use legendary actions while 
incapacitated. 


A LEGENDARY CREATURE’S LAIR 


A legendary creature might have a section describing 
its lair and the special effects it can create while there, 
either by act of will or simply by being present. Not all 
legendary creatures have lairs. This section only applies at 
to legendary creatures that spend a great deal of time in i 
their lairs and are most likely to be encountered there, 


Lair ACTIONS i | 
If a legendary creature has lair actions, it can use them ‘ 
to harness the ambient magic in its lair. On initiative etl 
count 20 (losing all initiative ties), the creature can | 
use one of its lair action options, or forgo using any of ht 
them that round. “ig 


REGIONAL EFFECTS if if 
The mere presence of a legendary creature can have Lg aa 
strange and wondrous effects on its environment, as Hai ie ie 7, 


noted in this section. Regional effects end abruptlyor 
dissipate over time when the legendary creature dies. 9) 


. AR a 
A KOCRA 


Medium humanoid (aarakocra), neutral good 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 13 (3d8) 
| ) Speed 20 ft., fly 50 ft. 
| 
| 


j 


Wy STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
\ 10 (+0) =14(42) 100) 11440) 12(+1) ~~ 11 (+0) 


Skills Perception +5 
: . Senses passive Perception 15 
_ Languages Auran 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


: _ Dive Attack. {f the aarakocra is flying and dives at least 30 feet 
. - straight toward a target and then hits it with a melee weapon 
attack, the attack deals an extra 3 (1d6) damage to the target. 


ACTIONS 


Talon. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) slashing damage. 


’ Javelin, Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 


range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


AARAKOCRA 


Aarakocra range the Howling Gyre, an endless storm 
of mighty winds and lashing rains that surrounds the 
tranquil realm of Aaga in the Elemental Plane of Air. 
Making aerial patrols, these birdlike humanoids guard 
the windy borders of their home against invaders from 
the Elemental Plane of Earth, such as gargoyles, their 
sworn enemies. 

Enemies of Elemental Evil. In service to the Wind 
Dukes of Aaqa, aarakocra scout the planes in search 
of temples of Elemental Evil. They spy on malign 
elemental creatures and then either take the fight to 
those creatures or report back to the Wind Dukes. 

On the Material Plane, aarakocra create aeries atop 
the highest mountains, especially peaks near portals 
to the Elemental Plane of Air. From such heights, 
aarakocra watch for signs of elemental incursions, 
as well as for nascent threats to their home plane. 
Aarakocra prefer to live their lives like the wind— 
unburdened and ever moving—yet they watch over a 
region for years if that’s what it takes to guard against 
the incursions of Elemental Evil. 

Aarakocra have no concept of political borders or 
property ownership, and the value of gems, gold, and 
other precious materials means little to aarakocra. In 
their eyes, a creature should use what is necessary and 
then cast what is left on the wind for others to use. 

Search for the Seven Shards. The Wind Dukes 
of Aaqa come from a race of elemental beings called 
the vaati, which once ruled many worlds. A creature 
known as the Queen of Chaos arose and initiated an 
interplanar war against vaati rule. To combat the threat, 
seven vaati heroes combined their powers to create 
the mighty Rod of Law. In a battle against the queen’s 
greatest general, Mishka the Wolf Spider, a vaati killed 
Mishka by thrusting the rod into him like a spear. The 
rod shattered into seven shards that scattered across 
the multiverse. Aaracokra seek signs of the pieces’ 
locations in order to rebuild what is now know as the 
Rod of Seven Parts. 


EE 
SUMMONING AIR ELEMENTALS 
Five aarakocra within 30 feet of each other can magically 
summon an air elemental. Each of the five must use its 
action and movement on three consecutive turns to perform 
an aerial dance and must maintain concentration while 
doing so (as if concentrating on a spell). When all five have 
finished their third turn of the dance, the elemental appears 
in an unoccupied space within 60 feet of them. it is friendly 
toward them and obeys their spoken commands. It remains 
for 1 hour, until it or all its summoners die, or until any of 
its summoners dismisses it as a bonus action. A summoner 
can’t perform the dance again until it finishes a short rest. 
When the elemental returns to the Elemental Plane of Air, any 
aarakocra within 5 feet of it can return with it. 


a a eed al 


| Large aberration, lawful evil 


ij 


ABOLETH > 


_ Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 135 (18d10 + 36) 


Speed 10 ft., swim 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
21 (+5) 9(-1) 15(42) 18(+4) 15 (42) 18 (+4) 


ee eT —™ 


_ Saving Throws Con +6, Int +8, Wis +6 


Skills History +12, Perception +10 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 20 
Languages Deep Speech, telepathy 120 ft. 
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) 


Se ——————————— ee C— 
Amphibious. The aboleth can breathe air and water. 


Mucous Cloud. While underwater, the aboleth is surrounded 
by transformative mucus. A creature that touches the aboleth 
or that hits it with a melee attack while within 5 feet of it must 
make a DC 14 Constitution saving throw. On a failure, the 
creature is diseased for 1d4 hours. The diseased creature can 
breathe only underwater. 


Probing Telepathy. \f a creature communicates telepathically 
with the aboleth, the aboleth learns the creature's greatest 
desires if the aboleth can see the creature. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The aboleth makes three tentacle attacks. 


| Tentacle. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
| target. Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a 


creature, it must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution saving throw 


can be removed by any magic that cures disease. After 1 minute, 

the diseased creature’s skin becomes translucent and slimy, the 

creature can’t regain hit points unless it is underwater, and the 
disease can be removed only by heal or another disease-curing 
spell of 6th level or higher. When the creature is outside a body 
of water, it takes 6 (1d12) acid damage every 10 minutes unless 
moisture is applied to the skin before 10 minutes have passed. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft. one target. 
Hit: 15 (3d6 + 5) bludgeoning damage. 


Enslave (3/Day). The aboleth targets one creature it can see 
within 30 feet of it. The target must succeed on a DC 14 
Wisdom saving throw or be magically charmed by the aboleth 
until the aboleth dies or until it is on a different plane of 
existence from the target. The charmed target is under the 
aboleth’s control and can’t take reactions, and the aboleth and 
the target can communicate telepathically with each other over 
any distance. 

Whenever the charmed target takes damage, the target can 
repeat the saving throw. On a success, the effect ends. No 
more than once every 24 hours, the target can also repeat the 
saving throw when it is at least 1 mile away from the aboleth. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The aboleth can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
aboleth regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Detect. The aboleth makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Tail Swipe. The aboleth makes one tail attack. 

Psychic Drain (Costs 2 Actions). One creature charmed by the 
aboleth takes 10 (3d6) psychic damage, and the aboleth 
regains hit points equal to the damage the creature takes. 


ABOLE 


—.. 


—— = = bu i Oa a SL 7 > = 
or become diseased. The disease has no effect for 1 minute and 


Hi 
I 


Me 


rane 2 alii 


HAN 
“CouLo IT BE THAT ABOLETHS ARE OLDER T 


.- THAT BEFORE THE DIVINE ONES CAME 


THE GODS .- ‘ 
S SHAPED TRE MULTIVERSES 


TO BE, SUCH HORROR ; 
Now THERE'S A CHILLING THOUGHT. 
—Vagir ZEKH’R, GITHTERAL PHILOSOPHER AND 


auTHoR OF THE FAR REALM: REAL YET UNREAL 


ABOLETH 


Before the coming of the gods, aboleths lurked in 
primordial oceans and underground lakes. They 
reached out with their minds and seized control of the 
burgeoning life-forms of the mortal realm, making those 
creatures their slaves. Their dominance made them 

like gods. Then the true gods appeared, smashing the 
aboleths’ empire and freeing their slaves. 

Aboleths have never forgotten. 

Eternal Memories. Aboleths have flawless memories. 
They pass on their knowledge and experience from 
generation to generation. Thus, the injury of their defeat 
by the gods remains perfectly preserved in their minds. 

Aboleths’ minds are treasure troves of ancient lore, 
recalling moments from prehistory with perfect clarity. 
They plot patiently and intricately across eons. Few 


cteatures can conceive of the extent of an aboleth’s plan. 


Gods in the Lake. Aboleths dwell in watery 


Mh ‘environments, including ocean abysses, deep lakes, 
- and the Elemental Plane of Water. In these domains 


and the lands that adjoin them, aboleths are like gods, 
demanding worship and obedience from their subjects. 
When they consume other creatures, aboleths add 

the knowledge and experiences of their prey to their 
eternal memories. 

Aboleths use their telepathic powers to read the minds 
of creatures and know their desires. An aboleth uses 
this knowledge to gain a creature’s loyalty, promising to 
fulfill such wants in exchange for obedience. Within its 
lair, the aboleth can further use its powers to override 
senses, granting creatures, such as its followers, the 
illusion of promised rewards. 

Enemies of the Gods. The aboleths’ fall from power 
is written in stark clarity on their flawless memories, 
for aboleths never truly die. If an aboleth’s body is 
destroyed, its spirit returns to the Elemental Plane 
of Water, where a new body coalesces for it over 
days or months. 

Ultimately, aboleths dream of overthrowing the 
fods and regaining control of the world. Aboleths have 
had untold eons to plot and to prepare their plans for 
perfect execution. 


Treg 8 ange a tenn ee ns 


Bek ch a a a ge rate it 
—— ree rn ee re 
‘ ' 


Ala iy 


sey | xy - ' a ah 
AN'‘ABOLETH’S LAIR ™ 
Aboleths lair in subterranean lakes or the rocky depths 
of the ocean, often surrounded by the ruins of an 
ancient, fallen aboleth city. An aboleth spends most of 
its existence underwater, surfacing occasionally to treat 
with visitors or deranged worshipers. 


a 
Tes 


: Ea pet 
at & 


LAIR ACTIONS 

When fighting inside its lair, an aboleth can invoke the 
ambient magic to take lair actions. On initiative count 20 
(losing initiative ties), the aboleth takes a lair action to 
cause one of the following effects: 


* The aboleth casts phantasmal force (no components 
required) on any number of creatures it can see within 
60 feet of it. While maintaining concentration on this 
effect, the aboleth can’t take other lair actions. If a tar- 
get succeeds on the saving throw or if the effect ends 
for it, the target is immune to the aboleth’s phantasma! 
force lair action for the next 24 hours, although such a 
creature can choose to be affected. 

- Pools of water within 90 feet of the aboleth surge out- 
ward in a grasping tide. Any creature on the ground 
within 20 feet of such a pool must succeed on a DC 14 
Strength saving throw or be pulled up to 20 feet into 
the water and knocked prone. The aboleth can’t use 
this lair action again until it has used a different one. 

+ Water in the aboleth’s lair magically becomes a con- 
duit for the creature's rage. The aboleth can target any 
number of creatures it can see in such water within 90 
feet of it. A target must succeed on a DC 14 Wisdom 
saving throw or take 7 (2d6) psychic damage. The 
aboleth can’t use this lair action again until it has used 
a different one. 


REGIONAL EFFECTS 

The region containing an aboleth’s lair is warped by the 
creature’s presence, which creates one or more of the 
following effects: 


¢ Underground surfaces within 1 mile of the aboleth’s 
lair are slimy and wet and are difficult terrain. 

- Water sources within 1 mile of the lair are supernat- 
urally fouled. Enemies of the aboleth that drink such 
water vomit it within minutes. 

» Asan action, the aboleth can create an illusory image 
of itself within 1 mile of the lair. The copy can appear 
at any location the aboleth has seen before or in any 
location a creature charmed by the aboleth can cur- 
rently see. Once created, the image lasts for as long 
as the aboleth maintains concentration, as if concen- 
trating on a spell. Although the image is intangible, 
it looks, sounds, and can move like the aboleth. The 
aboleth can sense, speak, and use telepathy from the 
image’s position as if present at that position. If the 
image takes any damage, it disappears. 


If the aboleth dies, the first two effects fade over the 
course of 3d10 days. 


‘ 4 L FE al 
iin - mid 7) 
fl > aie cul eevee, cen Li i 
Lage rae! ie H 
alt pea 
, # Ene 
id Ea > 


ANGELS 


An angel is a celestial agent sent forth into the planes | > - 
to further its god’s agenda for weal or woe. Itssublime | * 
beauty and presence can drive awestruck onlookers ss 
to their knees. Yet angels are destroyers foo, and their 
appearance portends doom as often as it signals hope. 

Shards of the Divine. Angels are formed from the 
astral essence of benevolent gods and are thus divine é' 
beings of great power and foresight. i ‘4 

Angels act out the will of their gods with tireless 
devotion. Even chaotic good deities command lawful 
good angels, knowing that the angels’ dedication to 
order best allows them to fulfill divine commands. An 
angel follows a single driving purpose, as decreed by 
its deity. However, an angel is incapable of following 
commands that stray from the path of law and good. 

An angel slays evil creatures without remorse. As the 
embodiment of law and good, an angel is almost never 
mistaken in its judgments. This quality can create a K 
sense of superiority in an angel, a sense that comes to 
the fore when an angel’s task conflicts with the goals of | 
another creature. The angel never acquiesces or gives 
way. When an angel is sent to aid mortals, it is sent not 
to serve but to command. The gods of good therefore 
send their angels among mortals only in response to the 
most dire circumstances. 

Fallen Angels. An angel’s moral compass grants 
it a sense of infallibility that can sometimes spell 
its undoing. Angels are usually too wise to fall for a 
simple deception, but sometimes pride can lead one to 
commit an evil act. Whether intentional or accidental, 
such an act is a permanent stain that marks the angel 
as an outcast. 

Fallen angels retain their power but lose their 
connection to the deities from which they were made. 
Most fallen angels take their banishment personally, Mi 
rebelling against the powers they served by seeking 
rulership over a section of the Abyss or a place among 
other fallen in the hierarchy of the Nine Hells. Zariel, 
the ruler of the first layer of the Nine Hells, is such a 
creature. Rather than rebel, some fallen angels resign 
themselves to an isolated existence on the Material 
Plane, living in disguise as simple hermits. If they are 
redeemed, they can become powerful allies dedicated to 
justice and compassionate service. 

Immortal Nature. An angel doesn’t require food, 
drink, or sleep. 


| 
| 
\" 


DEvA 


Devas are angels that act as divine messengers or 
agents to the Material Plane, the Shadowfell, and the 
Feywild and that can assume a form appropriate to the 
realm they are sent to. 

Legend tells of angels that take mortal form for years, 
lending aid, hope, and courage to goodhearted folk. A 
deva can take any shape, although it prefers to appear 
to mortals as an innocuous humanoid or animal. When 
circumstances require that it cast off its guise, a deva is 
a beautiful humanoid-like creature with silvery skin. Its 
hair and eyes gleam with an unearthly luster, and large 
feathery wings unfurl from its shoulder blades. 


1 
ij 


DEVA 


Medium celestial, lawfiul good 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 136 (16d8 + 64) 


"| Speed 30 ft., fly 90 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 18 (+4) 18(+4) 17 (+3) 20(45) 20 (45) 


Saving Throws Wis +9, Cha +9 

Skills Insight +7, Perception +9 

Damage Resistances radiant; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical weapons 


_ Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened 


Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 19 


_ Languages all, telepathy 120 ft. 


Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) 


ee —————————————— 


| Angelic Weapons. The deva’s weapon attacks are magical. 


| When the deva hits with any weapon, the weapon deals an 
| extra 4d8 radiant damage (included in the attack). 


Innate Spellcasting. The deva’s spellcasting ability is Charisma 
(spell save DC 17). The deva can innately cast the following 


spells, requiring only verbal components: 


At will: detect evil and good 
i/day each: commune, raise dead 


an 


_ Magic Resistance. The deva has adva ; = on saving throws 


against spells and other magical. effec 


AcTIONS es se Ss 


Multiattack. The deva makes two melee attacks. _ 


Mace. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage plus 18 (4d8) 
radiant damage. 


Healing Touch (3/Day). The deva touches another creature. 


The target magically regains 20 (4d8 + 2) hit points and is freed | 


from any curse, disease, poison, blindness, or deafness. 


Change Shape. The deva magically polymorphs into a 
humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating equal to or 
less than its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its 
true form if it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is 
absorbed or borne by the new form (the deva’s choice). 

In a new form, the deva retains its game statistics and ability 
to speak, but its AC, movement modes, Strength, Dexterity, 
and special senses are replaced by those of the new form, and 
it gains any statistics and capabilities (except class features, 
legendary actions, and lair actions) that the new form has but 
that it lacks. 


PLANETAR 


Pianetars act as the weapons of the gods they serve, 
presenting a tangible representation of their deities’ 
might. A planetar can call down rain to relieve a 
drought, or can loose an insect plague to devour crops. 


A planetar’s celestial ears detect every falsehood, and its 


radiant eyes see through every deception. 
Planetars are muscular and hairless and have 


opalescent green skin and white-feathered wings. They 


tower over most humanoids, brandishing immense 

swords with grace. Sometimes sent to aid powerful 

mortals on important tasks for good, planetars are 
especially fond of missions that involve battling fiends. 


‘PLANETAR we 


Large celestial, lawful good 


f 
1 


Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 200 (16d10 + 112) 


| 4 | Speed 40 ft., fly 120 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
24 (+7) 20(45) 24(47) 19(+4) 22(46) 25 (47) 
= = ==. oe 
Saving Throws Con +12, Wis +11, Cha +12 
t Skills Perception +11 


fi | Damage Resistances radiant; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical weapons 

! | Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened 

| Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 21 

_ Languages all, telepathy 120 ft. 

| Challenge 16 (15,000 XP) 


a eS 
Angelic Weapons. The planetar’s weapon attacks are magical. 
When the planetar hits with any weapon, the weapon deals an 


extra 5d8 radiant damage (included in the attack). 


Divine Awareness. The plaretarkfons hears a jie. nae, | 
Innate Spellcasting. The planetar’s spell casting ability is re 
Charisma (spell save DC 20). The planetar can innately cast the 
following spells, requiring no material components: ) 


At will: detect evil and good, invisibility (self only) 

3/day each: blade barrier, dispel evil and good, flame strike, 
raise dead 

1/day each: commune, control weather, insect plague 


' 
Magic Resistance. The planetar has advantage on saving } 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 

I 


ACTIONS | 


Multiattack. The planetar makes two melee attacks. | 


Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 5 ft., } 
one target. Hit: 21 (4d6 + 7) slashing damage plus 22 (5d8) 
radiant damage. 
Healing Touch (4/Day). The planetar touches another creature. | 
The target magically regains 30 (6d8 + 3) hit points and is freed 

from any curse, disease, poison, blindness, or deafness. a 


ae 


SOLAR 


A solar is godlike in its glory and power. 
On the battlefield, the solar’s sword flies into the 
fray on its own, and a single arrow from a solar’s bow 
can strike a target dead on contact. So great is a solar’s 
celestial might that even demon princes shrink at its 
resonant commands. 

It is said that only twenty-four solars exist. The few 
solars that are known are stewards of specific deities. 
The others rest in a state of contemplation, waiting for 
the time when their services are needed to stave off 
some cosmic threat to the cause of good. 


ae CE ee ele 


SOLAR 


| Large celestial, lawful good 


—— 


4) Armor Class 21 (natural armor) 
/ Hit Points 243 (18d10 + 144) 
| Speed 50 ft., fly 150 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
26 (+8) 22 (+6) 26(+8) 25 (+7) 25 (+7) 30 (+10) 


q ee 


Saving Throws Int +14, Wis +14, Cha +17 


4} Skills Perception +14 


) Damage Resistances radiant; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical weapons 

Damage Immunities necrotic, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, 

| frightened, poisoned 

| Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 24 

| Languages all, telepathy 120 ft. 

Challenge 21 (33,000 XP) 

ee ——————————————————————, 


Angelic Weapons. The solar’s weapon attacks are magical. 
When the solar hits with any weapon, the weapon deals an 
extra 6d8 radiant damage (included in the attack). 


| Divine Awareness. The solar knows if it hears a lie. 


} Innate Spellcasting. The solar’s spellcasting ability is Charisma 
, (spell save DC 25). It can innately cast the following spells, 
j tegulring no material components: 


At will: detect evil and good, invisibility (self only) 
3/day each: blade barrier, dispel evil and good, resurrection 
} I/day each: commune, control weather 


| Magic Resistance. The solar has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The solar makes two greatsword attacks. 


Sa 


aERSEEEES aoe eee Bie SS Se ee ae Feel ae 


Greatsword. Melee ee Weapdn Attack: +15 to hit, réach 5 ft., 


' one target. Hit: 22 (4d6 + 8) slashing damage plus 27 (6d8) 


radiant damage. 


Slaying Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, range 
120/600 ft., one target. Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) piercing damage plus 
27 (6d8) radiant damage. If the target is a creature that has 100 
hit points or fewer, it must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution 
saving throw or die. 


Flying Sword. The solar releases its greatsword to hover 
magically in an unoccupied space within 5 feet of it. If the solar | 
can see the sword, the solar can mentally command it as a 
bonus action to fly up to 50 feet and either make one attack 
against a target or return to the solar’s hands. If the hovering 
sword is targeted by any effect, the solar is considered to be 
holding it. The hovering sword falls if the solar dies. 


Healing Touch (4/Day). The solar touches another creature. 
The target magically regains 40 (8d8 + 4) hit points and is freed 
from any curse, disease, poison, blindness, or deafness. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The solar can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
solar regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Teleport. The solar magically teleports, along with any 
equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 120 feet to an 
unoccupied space it can see. 


all 
ce i SS ——=4 


| 
| 


} 


| 


Searing Burst (Costs 2 Actions). The solar emits magical, divine 


energy. Each creature of its choice in a 10-foot radius must 
make a DC 23 Dexterity saving throw, taking 14 (4d6) fire 


{ 
ft 


damage plus 14 (4d6) radiant damage on a failed save, or half | 


as much damage on a successful one. 

Blinding Gaze (Costs 3 Actions). The solar targets one creature 
it can see within 30 feet of it. Ifthe target can see it, the 
target must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw 
or be blinded until magic such as the lesser restoration spell 
removes the blindness. 


I 
| 


SETS ey TR 


A. ae tage ee 

ANIMATED OBJECTS 

Animated objects are crafted with potent magic to follow 
the commands of their creators, When not commanded, 
they follow the last order they received to the best of 
their ability, and can act independently to fulfill simple 
instructions. Some animated objects (including many of 
those created in the Feywild) might converse fluently or 
adopt a persona, but most are simple automatons. 

Constructed Nature. An animated object doesn’t 
require air, food, drink, or sleep. 

The magic that animates an object is dispelled when 
the construct drops to 0 hit points. An animated object 
reduced to 0 hit points becomes inanimate and is too 
damaged to be of much use or value to anyone. 


ANIMATED ARMOR 


This empty steel shell clamors as it moves, heavy 

plates banging and grinding against one another like 
the vengeful spirit of a fallen knight. Ponderous but 
persistent, this magical guardian is almost always a suit 
of plate armor. 

To add to its menace, animated armor is frequently 
enchanted with scripted speech, so the armor can utter 
warnings, demand passwords, or deliver riddles. Rare 
suits of animated armor are able to carry on an actual 
conversation. 


FLYING SWORD 

A flying sword dances through the air, fighting with the 
confidence of a warrior that can’t be injured. Swords 
are the most common weapons animated with magic. 
Axes, clubs, daggers, maces, spears, and even self- 
loading crossbows are also known to exist in animated 
object form. 


RUG OF SMOTHERING 


Would-be thieves and careless heroes arrive at the 
doorsteps of an enemy’s abode, eyes and ears alert for 
traps, only to end their quest prematurely as the rugs 
beneath their feet animate and smother them to death. 
A rug of smothering can be made in many different 
forms, from a finely woven carpet fit for a queen to 
a coarse mat in a peasant’s hovel. Creatures with 
the ability to sense magic detect the rug’s false 
magical aura. 
In some cases, a rug of smothering is disguised as 
a carpet of flying or another beneficial magic item. 
However, a character who stands or sits on the rug, or 
who attempts to utter a word of command, is quickly 
trapped as the rug of smothering rolls itself tightly 
around its victim. 


A NIMA’ rE “ED ARMOR — 


Medium construct, unaligned 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6) 


Speed 25 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14(+2) 11 (+0) 13 (1) 1 (~5) 3 (-4) 1 (-5) 


Damage Immunities poison, psychic 

Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 
frightened, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned 

Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
passive Perception 6 

Languages — 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Antimagic Susceptibility. The armor is incapacitated while in 
the area of an antimagic field. \f targeted by dispel magic, the 
armor must succeed on a Constitution saving throw against the 
caster’s spell save DC or fall unconscious for 1 minute. 


False Appearance. While the armor remains motionless, it is 
indistinguishable from a normal suit of armor. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The armor makes two melee attacks. 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack; +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage. 


| 
| 
| 
| 


rs ' 


WERE THE 
cai 


FLEW FRO 
Sri GOT THE S 
— Levin: 


CAR. 
QuickSTITEH) 


HALFLING ROGUE 


1 Armor Class 17. = armor) 
| Hit Points 17 (5d6) 


) Saving Throws Dex +4 
| Damage Immunities poison, psychic 
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned 
) Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
| | passive Perception 7 
_ Languages — 
| Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 
| EEE —————————————— eee 


| Speed 0 ft., fly 50 ft. 
| 
| 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
Wiz). 152) 110) 1¢5) 5(-3) 1(-5) 


Antimagic Susceptibility. The sword is incapacitated while in | 
the area of an antimagic field. If targeted by dispel magic, the 
sword must succeed on a Constitution saving throw against | 
the caster’s spell save DC or fall unconscious for 1 minute. 


False Appearance. While the sword remains motionless and 
isn’t flying, it is indistinguishable from a normal sword. 
| ACTIONS 


| Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
, target. Hit: 5 (1d8 + 1) slashing damage. 


| ANIMATED OBJECTS 


ls 


—; ee 
— ee —_——— ah rl 


Large constr ct, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
| Hit Points 33 (6d10) 


| Speed 10 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
17 (43) 1442) 10(40) 1(-5) 3 (-4)—-1(-5) 


Damage Immunities poison, psychic 

Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned 

Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
passive Perception 6 

Languages — 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 

Re —— 


Antimagic Susceptibility. The rug is incapacitated while in 
the area of an antimagic field. If targeted by dispel magic, the 
rug must succeed on a Constitution saving throw against the 
caster’s spell save DC or fall unconscious for 1 minute. 


patton ante’ petiaaireaneilod 


| 
Damage Transfer. While it is grappling a creature, the rug takes | 


only half the damage dealt to it, and the creature grappled by 
the rug takes the other half. 


False Appearance. While the rug remains motionless, it is 


indistinguishable from a normal rug. 


| ACTIONS 


Smother. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
Medium or smaller creature. Hit: The creature is grappled 


blinded, and at risk of suffocating, and the rug can’t smother 
: another target. In addition, at the start of each of the target’s 
turns, the target takes 10 (2d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage. 


(escape DC 13). Until this grapple ends, the target is restrained, 


Sanaa ae SARE aEel 


ANKHEG 


An ankheg resembles an enormous many-legged 
insect, its long antennae twitching in response to any 
movement around it. Its legs end in sharp hooks adapted 
for burrowing and grasping its prey, and its powerful 
mandibles can snap a small tree in half. 

Lurkers in the Earth. The ankheg uses its powerful 
mandibles to dig winding tunnels deep beneath the 
ground. When it hunts, an ankheg burrows upward, 
waiting below the surface until its antennae detect 
movement from above. Then it bursts from the earth 
and seizes prey in its mandibles, crushing and grinding 
while it secretes acidic digestive enzymes. These 
enzymes help dissolve a victim for easy swallowing, but 
the ankheg can also squirt acid to take down foes. 

Bane of Field and Forest. Although ankhegs receive 
a certain portion of their nutrients from the soil through 
which they burrow, they must supplement their diet with 
fresh meat. Pastures teeming with grazing livestock and 
forests rife with game are an ankheg’s prime hunting 
grounds. Ankhegs are thus the bane of farmers and 
rangers everywhere. 

Earthen Tunnels. As it burrows through earth, the 
ankheg leaves a narrow, partially collapsed tunnel in its 
wake. In these tunnels, one might find the remnants of 
molted ankheg chitin, hatched ankheg eggs, or the grisly 
remains of ankheg victims, including coins or other 
treasures scattered during the creature’s attack. 


ANKHEG 
Large monstrosity, unaligned 


' Armor Class 14 (natural armor), 11 while prone 
Hit Points 39 (6d10 + 6) 
Speed 30 ft., burrow 10 ft. 
(ee —= —- 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
ize3) Wf+0) 1341) 1(-5) 31) 6(-2) 
Se os = = 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft., 
passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


_ ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 9 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage plus 3 (1d6) acid damage. If 
the target is a Large or smaller creature, it is grappled (escape 
, DC 13). Until this grapple ends, the ankheg can bite only the 

_ grappled creature and has advantage on attack rolls to do so. 


| Acid Spray (Recharge 6). The ankheg spits acid in a line that is 
| 30 feet long and 5 feet wide, provided that it has no creature 

: grappled. Each creature in that line must make a DC 13 

| Dexterity saving throw, taking 10 (3d6) acid damage ona failed © 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


2k, 


7 
5 + 7 [Wy 
Fite! Jaweful reutral , 


| Armor Class 17, (natural armor, shield) 

Hit Points 39 (6d8 + 12) 

Speed 30 ft. 
"STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
117,43) 1241) «15 (42) «12 (@1),—s«:13 @1)_—s«*10 G0) 
 ——————————————————————————————— 
Saving Throws Con +4 

) Damage Immunities fire, poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses passive Perception 11 

Languages Ignan 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


ss 


Heated Body. A creature that touches the azer or hits it with a 


Heated Weapons. When the azer hits with a metal melee 
weapon, it deals an extra 3 (1d6) fire damage (included in 
the attack). 

dim light for an additional 10 feet. 


ACTIONS 


Warhammer. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 


i target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) bludgeoning damage, or 8 (1d10 + 3) 
bludgeoning damage if used with two hands to make a melee 
attack, plus 3 (1d6) fire damage. 


| HMumination. The azer sheds bright light in a 10-foot radius and | 


AZER 
Natives of the Elemental Plane of Fire, azers are 
master crafters, expert miners, and sworn foes of the 
efreet. In appearance and manner, an azer resembles 
a male dwarf, but this is a facade. Beneath its metallic- 
looking skin, an azer is a being of fire, which outwardly 
manifests in its fiery hair and beard. 
Made, Not Born. Azers don’t reproduce. They are 
each crafted from bronze by another azer and 
imbued with a portion of the crafter’s inner flame. 
Each azer is sculpted with unique features. This 
crafting process limits the growth of the azer 
population and is the primary reason that these 
creatures remain rare. 
Volcanic Dwellers. Azers dwell in a kingdom 
on the border between the Elemental Plane 
of Earth and the Elemental Plane of Fire—a 
range of mountains and volcanoes whose spires 
rise as a series of fortresses. Beneath mountain 
peaks, under volcanic calderas, and amid rivers 
of magma, azers extract gleaming metals and 
glittering gems from the earth. Squads of azer patrol 
the passes and tunnels of their realm, fending off the 
salamander raiders whose efreet masters order strikes 
against the azer kingdom. 

Enemies of the Efreet. Long ago, the efreet and 
the azers were allies. Azers helped create the City of 
Brass, forging that home of the efreet into one of the 
most wondrous places in creation. When the azers had 
finished their work, the efreet betrayed them, making 
a failed attempt to enslave the azers so. as to protect 
the secrets of the city. Despite occasional raids and 
skirmishes, however, the two sides have so far refrained 
from all-out conflict. The azers believe that only the 
threat of them revealing the hidden ways into the City of 
Brass keeps the efreet in check. 

Masters of Metal and Gems. Azers are masterful 
artisans, and create beautiful works from the gems and 
precious metals found in their volcanic habitat. They 
rate the value of such treasures above all other things, 
sometimes dispatching parties across the planes to seek 
out rare metals and gemstones. 

When azers are called by magic to the Material Plane, 
it is typically to help forge an elaborate magic item or 
work of art, for it is said that their skill in such craft 
knows no equal. 

Living Fire. An azer doesn’t require food, 
drink, or sleep. 


melee attack while within 5 feet of it takes 5 (1d10) fire damage. Het 


= 


BANSHEE 


When night falls, unlucky travelers hear the faint cries 
of the forlorn dead. This woeful spirit is a banshee, a 
spiteful creature formed from the spirit of a female elf. 

Banshees appear as luminous, wispy forms that 
vaguely recall their mortal features. A banshee’s face is 
wreathed in a wild tangle of hair, its body clad in wispy 
rags that flutter and stream around it. 

Divine Wrath. Banshees are the undead remnants of 
elves who, blessed with great beauty, failed to use their 
gift to bring joy to the world. Instead, they used their 
beauty to corrupt and control others. Elves afflicted by 
the banshee’s curse experience no gladness, feeling 
only distress in the presence of the living. As the curse 
takes its toll, their minds and bodies decay, until death 
completes their transformation into undead monsters. 

Sorrow Bound. A banshee becomes forever bound to 
the place of its demise, unable to venture more than five 
miles from there. It is forced to relive every moment of 
its life with perfect recall, yet always refuses to accept 
responsibility for its doom. 

Beauty Hoarders. The vanity that inspired the 
banshee’s cursed creation persists in undeath. These 
creatures covet beautiful objects: fine jewelry, paintings, 
statues, and other objects of art. At the same time, a 
banshee abhors any mirrored surface, for it can’t bear to 
see the horror of its own existence. A single glimpse of 
itself is enough to send a banshee into a rage. 

Undead Nature. A banshee doesn’t require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


BANSHEE iia > 
| Medium undead, chaotic evil vd A wer 


1 1 
Armor Class 12 
| Hit Points 58 (13d8) 
Speed 0 ft., fly 40 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1 (-5) 14 (42) 10 (40) 12(+1) 11 (40) (17 (+3) 


Saving Throws Wis +2, Cha +4 

Damage Resistances acid, fire, lightning, thunder; bludgeoning, 
! piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons 

Damage Immunities cold, necrotic, poison 

, Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 

| grappled, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages Common, Elvish 

Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Se 


4 
} 
1 
| 


\ ; 

| Detect Life. The banshee can magically sense the presence 

! of living creatures up to 5 miles away. She knows the general 
| direction they're in but not their exact locations. 


* eats and objects as g if they 


5 (1d10) force damage if she onda her 


ACTIONS , mae \ 
Corrupting Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +4 to hit, Mach 5ft.,one — 
target. Hit: 12 (3d6 + 2) necrotic damage. f 


Horrifying Visage. Each non-undead creature within 60 feet of 
the banshee that can see her must succeed on a DC 13 Wisdom | 
saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. A frightened target 
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, 
with disadvantage if the banshee is within line of sight, ending 
the effect on itself on a success. Ifa target’s saving throw is 
successful or the effect ends for it, the target is immune to the 
banshee’s Horrifying Visage for the next 24 hours. 


Wail (1/Day). The banshee releases a mournful wail, provided 
that she isn’t in sunlight. This wail has no effect on constructs 
and undead. All other creatures within 30 feet of her that can 
hear her must make a DC 13 Constitution saving throw. On 

a failure, a creature drops to 0 hit points. On a success, a 
creature takes 10 (3d6) psychic damage. 


SNo ONE CARVES STATUES OF FRIGHTENED 


WARRIORS. LF YOU SEE ONE, KEEP YOUR EYES 


n 
EARS OPEN. 
CLOSED AND YOUR 
—X THe Mystic’s 4TH RULE OF 
DUNGEON SURVIVAL 


a 
Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 52 (8d8 + 16) 

Speed 20 ft. 


1 

' 

it 
i 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 8(-1) 152) 2(-4) 8(-1) 7 (-2) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 
/ Languages — 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Petrifying Gaze. \f a creature starts its turn within 30 feet of the 
| basilisk and the two of them can see each other, the basilisk 
can force the creature to make a DC 12 Constitution saving 
throw if the basilisk isn’t incapacitated. On a failed save, the 
creature magically begins to turn to stone and is restrained. It 
must repeat the saving throw at the end of its next turn. Ona 
success, the effect ends. On a failure, the creature is petrified 

| until freed by the greater restoration spell or other magic. 

} Acreature that isn’t surprised can avert its eyes to avoid the 

| saving throw at the start of its turn. If it does so, it can’t see 

| the basilisk until the start of its next turn, when it can avert its 
eyes again. If it looks at the basilisk in the meantime, it must 

| immediately make the save. 

| If the basilisk sees its reflection within 30 feet of it in bright 

| light, it mistakes itself for a rival and targets itself with its gaze. 


as 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) poison damage. | 


BASILISK 


Travelers sometimes find objects that look like pieces of 
remarkably lifelike stone carvings of wildlife. Missing 
parts appear to have been bitten off. Seasoned explorers 
regard such relics as warnings, knowing that the 
basilisk that created them is likely to be nearby. 

Adaptable Predators. Basilisks thrive in arid, 
temperate, or tropical climates. They lair in caves 
or other sheltered sites. Most often, basilisks are 
encountered underground. 

A basilisk born and raised in captivity can be 
domesticated and trained. Such a trained basilisk 
knows how to avoid meeting the eyes of those its master 
wishes to protect from its gaze, but it makes a daunting 
guardian beast. Because of this use, basilisk eggs are 
highly prized. 

Gaze of Stone. Basilisks are ponderous for hunting 
creatures, but they needn't chase prey. Meeting a 
basilisk’s supernatural gaze can be enough to affect a 
rapid transformation, transforming a victim into porous 
stone. Basilisks, with their strong jaws, are able to 
consume the stone. The stone returns to organic form in 
the basilisk’s gullet. 

Some alchemists are said to know how to process 
the basilisk’s gullet and the fluids contained within. 
Properly handled, the gullet produces an oil that can 
return petrified creatures to flesh and life. Unfortunately 
for such a victim, any parts lost in stone form remain 
absent if the creature revives. Revivification using the 
oil is impossible if a vital part of the petrified creature, 
such as its head, is detached. 


ante aS 
rs 


4 
; 


owen ere 


1 


ee 


sain 


a I ee, 


se a ta ioe 


“Armor Class 17, (natural armor) : 
Hit Points 168 (16d12 + 64) 

| 

I 


Ly ee aes ew Natt cs | 
H i y, Reutral evil mah ‘ tf 
, “aid i 


Speed 51 ft., climb 40 ft. 


Cl 


., STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
“23 (+6) 16(43) 18(44) 7(-2) 14442) 12 (41) 


Skills Perception +6, Stealth +7 

Damage Immunities lightning 

Senses darkvision 90 ft., passive Perception 16 
Languages Draconic 

Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) 


ACTIONS 
M 


ultiattack. The behir makes two attacks: one with its bite and 
one to constrict. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 22 (3d10 + 6) piercing damage. 


Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
Large or smaller creature. Hit: 17 (2d10 + 6) bludgeoning 
damage plus 17 (2d10 + 6) slashing damage. The target is 
grappled (escape DC 16) if the behir isn’t already constricting a 
creature, and the target is restrained until this grapple ends. 


Lightning Breath (Recharge 5-6). The behir exhales a line of 
lightning that is 20 feet long and 5 feet wide. Each creature 

in that line must make a DC 16 Dexterity saving throw, taking 
66 (12d10) lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much 
damage on a successful one. 


Swallow. The behir makes one bite attack against a Medium or 


. smaller target it is grappling. If the attack hits, the target is also 


Nea mainly 


a ae 


swallowed, and the grapple ends. While swallowed, the target 
is blinded and restrained, it has total cover against attacks 
and other effects outside the behir, and it takes 21 (6d6) acid 
damage at the start of each of the behir’s turns. A behir can 
have only one creature swallowed at a time. 

If the behir takes 30 damage or more ona single turn from 
the swallowed creature, the behir must succeed on a DC 14 
Constitution saving throw at the end of that turn or regurgitate | 
the creature, which falls prone in a space within 10 feet of } 
the behir. If the behir dies, a swallowed creature is no longer 
restrained by it and can escape from the corpse by using 15 feet | 
of movement, exiting prone. 


REE GIANT BATS» sik 


N TH 
EATE AYER TODAY: 


MIND FL 
ES: AND i » 
OGLODYTE*: ; mINM 
a ATt’S OKAY: PLENTY oe 
1H : 
| ou AND YOUR eee FRONT! 
ly ¥ € BEHIR, CONF 


TH . oF 
~LiLvoo In THE Lost CAVERNS 
“et 


‘Y've ALREADY 


BEHIR 


The serpentine behir crawls along floors and clambers 
up walls to reach its prey. Its lightning breath can 
incinerate most creatures, even as more powerful foes 
are constricted in its coils and eaten alive. 

A behir’s monstrous form resembles a combination 
of centipede and crocodile. Its scaled hide ranges from 
ultramarine to deep blue in color, fading to pale blue on 
its underside. 

Cavern Predators. Behirs lair in places inaccessible 
to other creatures, favoring locations where would-be 
intruders must make a harrowing climb to reach them. 
Deep pits, high caves in cliff walls, and caverns reached 
only by narrow, twisting tunnels are prime sites for a 
behir ambush. A behir’s dozen legs allow it to scramble 
through its lair site with ease. When not climbing, it 
moves even faster by folding its legs beside its body and 
slithering like a snake. 

Behirs swallow their prey whole, after which they 
enter a period of dormancy while they digest. While 
dormant, a behir chooses a hiding place where intruders 
in its lair might overlook it. 

Foes of the Dragons. In times long forgotten, 
giants and dragons engaged in seemingly endless 
war. Storm giants created the first behirs as weapons 
against the dragons, and behirs retain a natural hatred 
for dragonkind. 

A behir never makes its lair in an area it knows to be 
inhabited by a dragon. If a dragon attempts to establish 
a lair within a few dozen miles of a behir’s lair, the behit®. 
is compelled to kill the dragon or drive it off. Only if the” 
dragon proves too powerful to fight does a behir back 
down, seeking out a new lair site a great distance away. 


put 
ferry FOR 


NG ADVENTURERS 
SrsoucANTH 


BEHOLDERS 

One glance at a beholder is enough to assess its foul 
and otherworldly nature. Aggressive, hateful, and 
greedy, these aberrations dismiss all other creatures as 
lesser beings, toying with them or destroying them as 
they choose. 

A beholder’s spheroid body levitates at all times, and 
its great bulging eye sits above a wide, toothy maw, while 
the smaller eyestalks that crown its body twist and turn 
to keep its foes in sight. When a beholder sleeps, it closes 
its central eye but leaves its smaller eyes open and alert. 

Xenophobic Isolationists. Enemies abound, or 
! so every beholder believes. Beholders are convinced 
that other creatures resent them for their brilliance 
and magical power, even as they dismiss those lesser 
creatures as crude and disgusting. Beholders always 
suspect others of plotting against them, even when no 
other creatures are around. 

The disdain a beholder has for other creatures 
extends to other beholders. Each beholder believes its 
form to be an ideal, and that any deviation from that 
form is a flaw in the racial purity of its kind. Beholders 
vary greatly in their physical forms, making conflict 
between them inevitable. Some beholders are protected 
by overlapping chitinous plates. Some have smooth 
hides. Some have eyestalks that writhe like tentacles, 
while others’ stalks bear crustacean-like joints. Even 
slight differences of coloration in hide can turn two 
beholders into lifelong enemies, 

Eye Tyrant. Some beholders manage to channel 
their xenophobic tendencies into a terrible despotism. 
Rather than live in isolation, the aptly named eye tyrants 
enslave those other creatures, founding and controlling 
vast empires. An eye tyrant sometimes carves out a 
domain within or under a major city, commanding 
networks of agents that operate on their master’s behalf. 

Alien Lairs. Because they refuse to share territory 
with others, most beholders withdraw to frigid hills, 
abandoned ruins, and deep caverns to scheme. A 
beholder’s lair is carved out by its disintegration eye ray, 
emphasizing vertical passages connecting chambers 
stacked on top of each other. Such an environment 
allows a beholder to move freely, even as it prevents 
intruders from easily creeping about. When intruders 
do break in, the height of its open ceilings allows a 
beholder to float up and harry foes on the floor. 

As alien as their creator, the rooms in a beholder’s lair 
reflect the creature’s arrogance. It festoons its chambers 
with trophies from the battles it has won, including 
petrified adventurers standing frozen in their horrified 
final moments, pieces of other beholders, and magic 
items wrested from powerful foes. A beholder judges 
its own worth by its acquisitions, and it never willingly 
parts with its treasures. 


A BEHOLDER’S LAIR 


A beholder’s central lair is typically a large, spacious 
cavern with high ceilings, where it can attack without 
fear of closing to melee range. A beholder encountered 
in its lair has a challenge rating of 14 (11,500 XP). 


ane, AEMHONS é 

‘When fighting inside its lair, a beholder can invoke the 
ambient magic to take lair actions. On initiative count 

20 (losing initiative ties), the beholder can take one lair 
action to cause one of the following effects: 


¢ A50-foot square area of ground within 120 feet of the 
beholder becomes slimy; that area is difficult terrain 
until initiative count 20 on the next round. 

« Walls within 120 feet of the beholder sprout grasping 
appendages until initiative count 20 on the round after 
next. Each creature of the beholder’s choice that starts 
its turn within 10 feet of such a wall must succeed 
ona DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or be grappled. 
Escaping requires a successful DC 15 Strength 
(Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check. 

- An eye opens on a solid surface within 60 feet of the 
beholder. One random eye ray of the beholder shoots 
from that eye at a target of the beholder’s choice that it 
can see. The eye then closes and disappears. 


The beholder can’t repeat an effect until they have 
all been used, and it can’t use the same effect two 
rounds in a row. 


REGIONAL EFFECTS 

A region containing a beholder’s lair is warped by the 
creature’s unnatural presence, which creates one or 
more of the following effects: 


« Creattires within 1 mile of the beholder’s lair some- 
times feel as if they’re being watched when they aren't. 
- When the beholder sleeps, minor warps in reality 
occur within 1 mile of its lair and then vanish 24 
oi hours later. Marks on cave walls might change subtly, 
i an eerie trinket might appear where none existed 
‘2 before, harmless slime might coat a statue, and so 
1 on. These effects apply only to natural surfaces and to 
nonmagical objects that aren’t on anyone’s person. 


If the beholder dies, these effects fade over the course 
of 1d10 days. 


DEATH TYRANT 


On rare occasions, a beholder’s sleeping mind drifts to 
places beyond its normal madness, imagining a reality 
in which it exists beyond death. When such dreams take 
hold, a beholder can transform, its flesh sloughing away 
to leave a death tyrant behind. This monster possesses 
the cunning and much of the magic it had in life, but it is 
fueled by the power of undeath. 

A death tyrant appears as a massive, naked skull, with 
a pinpoint of red light gleaming in its hollow eye socket. 
With its eyestalks rotted away, ten spectral eyes hover 
above the creature and glare in all directions. 

Deathly Despot. As they did when they were 
beholders, death tyrants lord their power over other 
creatures. Moreover, a beholder’s ability to quash 
magical energy with its central eye gives way to a more 
sinister power in a death tyrant, which can transform 
former slaves and enemies into undead servants. 

Zombies created by a death tyrant are used and 
discarded as needed. They stand guard at the entrances 
to the death tyrant’s lair or guard its treasure vaults. 


— a os ops ch we LE ashi 


be pe be ran re ——41 =. a 


Acting as bait for traps or as combat fouden: roribies 
keep powerful enemies distracted while the death tyrant rh 
moves into position and prepares to destroy them, | bye bat 
Armies of the Dead. A death tyrant thatembraces 
undeath becomes an engine of destruction. Driven by 
a hunger for power and security, it advances against 
humanoid settlements, using its eye rays to destroy 
every creature it encounters, then building an army of 
undéad. If left unchecked, a death tyrant might, wipe out 
the population of a city in weeks, then set its undead eye 


on wider conquest. As each settlement falls, the death ta 
tyrant’s zombie forces build to overwhelming numbers. ho Ait ‘ 

Undead Nature. A death tyrant doesn’t require aif, i Ri 1a 
food, drink, or sleep. a 


A DEATH TYRANT’S LAIR ' 


A death tyrant’s lair is usually the same site it held as 

a beholder, but it contains more trappings of death ea 
and decay. A death tyrant encountered in its lair has a ll 
challenge rating of 15 (13,000 XP). ey 


LAIR ACTIONS 

When fighting inside its lair, a death tyrant can invoke 
the ambient magic to take lair actions. On initiative 
count 20 (losing initiative ties), the death tyrant can take ; 
one lair action to cause one of the following effects: | y 


- An area that is a 50-foot cube within 120 feet of the " 
tyrant is filled with spectral eyes and tentacles. To pene Y| 
creatures other than the death tyrant, that area is i yell 
lightly obscured and difficult terrain until initiative Le 
count 20 on the next round. A 

« Walls sprout spectral appendages until initiative i 
count 20 on the round after next. Any creature, includ- 
ing one on the Ethereal Plane, that is hostile to the 
tyrant and starts its turn within 10 feet of a wall must nv tt 
succeed on a DC 17 Dexterity saving throw or be grap- May 
pled. Escaping requires a successful DC 17 Strength 
(Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check. 

« Aspectral eye opens in the air at a point within 50 feet 
of the tyrant. One random eye ray of the tyrant shoots 
from that eye, which is considered to be an ethereal 
source, at a target of the tyrant’s choice. The eye then 
closes and disappears. 


The death tyrant can’t repeat an effect until all three ar 
have been used, and it can’t use the same effect on Hale 
consecutive rounds. om 


REGIONAL EFFECTS (aa 
A region containing a death tyrant’s lair is warped by 
the creature’s unnatural presence, which creates one or 
more of the following effects: 


- Creatures within 1 mile of the tyrant’s lair sometimes ‘Vato 
feel as if they’re being watched even when they aren't. tH Yt 

- When a creature hostile to the tyrant and aware of ee! 
its existence finishes a long rest within 1 mile of the | ie 
tyrant’s lair, roll a d20 for that creature. On a roll of 10 
or lower, the creature is subjected to one random eye 
ray of the tyrant. 


If the death tyrant dies, these effects fade over the 
course of 1d10 days. 


Antimagic Cone. The beholder’s central eye creates an area of 


“) the start of each of its turns, the beholder decides which way 


“EVERY BEHOLDER THINKS IT IS THE EPITOME 
OF BEHOLOERKING, ANO THE ONLY THING IT 
FEARS 1S THAT IT MIGHT BE WRONG. 
~VALKARA IRONFELL, DWARF SAGE 


BEHOLD DE ae ih tl > ——— iil on its eee TT reatun 
™ . ne throw at the end ofeach ofits t irns, ending 

barge aberration, awful evil - as 

iT ona success, " “a a he 

5. Enervation Ray. the targeted creature’ must make z a Dc 16 


Hit Points 180 (19d10 + 76) - Constitution saving throw, taking 36 (848) necrotic damage on | 


“Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 


—— a —— Pa 


| Speed 0 ft., fly 20 ft. (hover) a failed save, or half as much damage on’a successful one. 
G. Telekinetic Ray. If the target is a creature, it must succeed | 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA on a DC 16 Strength saving throw or the beholder moves | 
10 (+0) 1442) 18(¢4) 1743) 15(42) 17 (43) it up to 30 feet in any direction. It is restrained by the ray’s. 


telekinetic grip until the start of the beholder’s next turn or | 
until the beholder is incapacitated. 


(RR ee—le 
Saving Throws Int +8, Wis +7, Cha +8 


| 

| Skills Perception +12 If the target is an object weighing 300 pounds or less that t 
) Condition Immunities prone isn’t being worn or carried, it is moved up to 30 feet in any 
’ Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 22 direction. The beholder can also exert fine control on objects 

| Languages Deep Speech, Undercommon with this ray, such as manipulating a simple tool or openinga | 
| Challenge 13 (10,000 XP) door or a container. 
Ra 7. Sleep Ray. The targeted creature must succeed onaDC 16 | 


Wisdom saving throw or fall asleep and remain unconscious 
for 1 minute. The target awakens if it takes damage or another 
creature takes an action to wake it. This ray has no effect on | 
constructs and undead. 

8. Petrification Ray. The targeted creature must make a DC 
16 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the creature begins | 
to turn to stone and is restrained. It must repeat the saving | 


antimagic, as in the antimagic field spell, in a 150-foot cone. At 


the cone faces and whether the cone is active. The area works 
i against the beholder’s own eye rays. 


| ACTIONS 
Ve —<— =. =.= throw at the end of its next turn. On a success, the effectends. | 
1 Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Ona failure, the creature is petrified until freed by the greater —_| 
Hit: 14 (4d6) piercing damage. restoration spell or other magic. 


9. Disintegration Ray. lf the target is a creature, it must | 
succeed on a DC 16 Dexterity saving throw or take 45 (10d8) 
force damage. If this damage reduces the creature to 0 hit 
points, its body becomes a pile of fine gray dust. 


i Eye Rays. The beholder shoots three of the following magical 
/ eye rays at random (reroll duplicates), choosing one to three 
} targets it can see within 120 feet of it: 


| 1, Charm Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC if the target is a Large or smaller nonmagical object or | 
| 16 Wisdom saving throw or be charmed by the beholder for 1 creation of magical force, it is disintegrated without a saving | 

hour, or until the beholder harms the creature. throw. If the target is a Huge or larger object or creation of : 
| 2. Paralyzing Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a magical force, this ray disintegrates a 10-foot cube of it. 
DC 16 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. 10. Death Ray. The targeted creature must succeedonaDC | 
| The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 16 Dexterity saving throw or take 55 (10d10) necrotic damage. | 
| turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. The target dies if the ray reduces it to 0 hit points. 
| 3. Fear Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 16 
| Wisdom saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. The target LEGENDARY ACTIONS 
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, The beholder can take 3 legendary actions, using the Eye Ray | 
| ending the effect on itself on a success. option below. It can take only one legendary action atatime | 
, _4. Slowing Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The beholder 
} DC 16 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the target’s regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


; speed is halved for 1 minute. In addition, the creature can’t 
, take reactions, and it can take either an action or a bonus Eye Ray. The beholder uses one random eye ray. 


emt Ol P| 
=i i 


es F itt 
' C if f i; aba 
Tht a Ae f - 
oe Seve ta Re 
=; Cashed 
“it 


' 
n 
1 


‘Deata Ty RA NT 


| Large undead, awful evil i. 
| Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 

| Hit Points 187 (25d10 + 50) 

| Speed 0 ft., fly 20 ft. (hover) 


f STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
) 10(40) 14(42) 14(42) 19(44) 15(42) 19 (+4) 
A 
| Saving Throws Str +5, Con +7, Int +9, Wis +7, Cha +9 
Skills Perception +12 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, paralyzed, 
petrified, poisoned, prone 
| Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 22 
Languages Deep Speech, Undercommon 
Challenge 14 (11,500 XP) 


Negative Energy Cone. The death tyrant’s central eye emits an 
| invisible, magical 150-foot cone of negative energy. At the start 
| of each of its turns, the tyrant decides which way the cone faces 
| and whether the cone is active. 
| Any creature in that area can’t regain hit points. Any 
_ humanoid that dies there becomes a zombie under the tyrant’s 
| command. The dead humanoid retains its place in the initiative 
order and animates at the start of its next turn, provided that 
| its body hasn't been completely destroyed. 
J 


| 
| 


| ACTIONS 


j Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 14 (4d6) piercing damage. 


| Eye Rays. The death tyrant shoots three of the following 
| magical eye rays at random (reroll duplicates), choosing one to 
three targets it can see within 120 feet of it: 

_ 1. Charm Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 
17 Wisdom saving throw or be charmed by the tyrant for 1 
hour, or until the beholder harms the creature. 

| 2. Paralyzing Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a 

! DC 17 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. 
The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 

| turns, ending the effect on itself on a success, 

| 3. Fear Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 17 


) | Wisdom saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. The target 


| can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, 


| ending the effect on itself on a success. 


4. Slowing Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a 


te) — 


ee asi 
Ese MOTES 


LLowQuitt: 


Ho 
hy NTAIN 


ov 
exprorer oF U Ore 


as aa zt 


sted H “pc Dext SIN how Ow. One apf iled's ave, the target's at 
speed i is halved for 1 min te. vn adc ition, : itn 


the ci creature ¢ can 
take reactions, and it can take either an < action or e a bonus 
action on its turn, not both. The creature can repe eat the saving 
throw at the end of each of its turns, Snptbe: Re effect on ugh 
on a success. 

5. Enervation Ray. The targeted creature must male aDC17 
Constitution saving throw, taking 36 (8d8) necrotic damage. on 
a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 

6. Telekinetic Ray. \f the target is a creature, it must succeed 
ona DC 17 Strength saving throw or the tyrant moves it up to 
30 feet in any direction. The target is restrained by the ray’s 
telekinetic grip until the start of the tyrant’s next turn or until 
the tyrant is incapacitated. 

If the target is an object weighing 300 pounds or less that 
isn't being worn or carried, it is moved up to 30 feet in any 
direction. The tyrant can also exert fine control on objects with | 
this ray, such as manipulating a simple tool or opening a door 
or a container. 

7. Sleep Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 17 
Wisdom saving throw or fall asleep and remain unconscious 
for 1 minute. The target awakens if it takes damage or another 
creature takes an action to wake it. This ray has no effect on 
constructs and undead. 

8. Petrification Ray. The targeted creature must make a DC 
17 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the creature begins 
to turn to stone and is restrained. It must repeat the saving 
throw at the end of its next turn. On a success, the effect ends. 
On a failure, the creature is petrified until freed by the greater 
restoration spell or other magic. 

9, Disintegration Ray. If the target is a creature, it must 
succeed on a DC 17 Dexterity saving throw or take 45 (10d8) 
force damage. If this damage reduces the creature to 0 hit 
points, its body becomes a pile of fine gray dust. 

If the target is a Large or smaller nonmagical object or 
creation of magical force, it is disintegrated without a saving 
throw. If the target is a Huge or larger object or creation of 
magical force, this ray disintegrates a 10-foot cube of it. 

10, Death Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 
17 Dexterity saving throw or take 55 (10d10) necrotic damage. 
The target dies if the ray reduces it to 0 hit points. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The death tyrant can take 3 legendary actions, using the Eye 
Ray option below. It can take only one legendary action at a 
time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The tyrant 
regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Eye Ray. The death tyrant uses one random eye ray. 


Fi) Tah 
ip 7th 


i “loupe 


Spectator 


? Medium aberration, lawful neutral 


4 Armor Class 14 ar iglarmor) 


Hit Points 39 (6d8 + 12) 
Speed 0 ft., fly 30 ft. (hover) 
i STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
8 (-1) 14 (42) 14(42) 13(41) 14(42) 11 (40) 
| Skills Perception +6 


| Condition Immunities prone 

) Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16 

| Languages Deep Speech, Undercommon, telepathy 120 ft. 
| Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


| ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +1 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
, Hit: 2 (1d6 - 1) piercing damage. 


| Eye Rays. The spectator shoots up to two of the following 
magical eye rays at one or two creatures it can see within 90 
| feet of it. It can use each ray only once on a turn. 


1. Confusion Ray. The target must succeed on a DC 13 
Wisdom saving throw, or it can’t take reactions unti! the end 
of its next turn. On its turn, the target can't move, and it uses 


‘ BEHOLDERS 


SPECTATOR 


A spectator is a lesser beholder that is summoned 
from another plane of existence by a magical ritual, the 
components of which include four beholder eyestalks 
that are consumed by the ritual’s magic. Appropriately, 
a spectator has four eyestalks, two on each side of the 
wide eye at the center of its four-foot diameter body. 
Magical Guardians. A summoned spectator guards 
a location or a treasure of its summoner’s choice 
for 101 years, allowing no creature but its 
summoner to enter the area or access the item, 
unless the summoner instructed otherwise. If 
the item is stolen or destroyed before the years 
have all passed, a summoned spectator vanishes. 
It otherwise never abandons its post. 
Glimmers of Madness. Though it can speak, a 
spectator communicates primarily by way of telepathy. It 
is civil while on guard, openly discussing its orders and 
its summoner. However, even a brief conversation with 
a spectator is enough to reveal quirks in its personality 
brought on by its years of isolation. It might invent 
imaginary enemies, refer to itself in the third person, or 
try to adopt the voice of its summoner. 

Like any beholder, a spectator views itself as the 
epitome of its kind, and it has an intense hatred of other 
spectators. If two spectators encounter one another, 
they almost always fight to the death. 

Freed from Service. When a spectator has fulfilled 
its service, it is free to do as it pleases. Many take 
up residence in the places they previously guarded, 
especially if their summoners have died. With the 
spectator’s loss of purpose, the flickers of madness it 
displayed during its servitude flourish. 


a 


its action to make a melee or ranged attackagainst a randomly 7 
determined creature within range. If the target can’t attack, it 
does nothing on its turn. al 
2. Paralyzing Ray. The target must succeed on a DC 13 
Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. The 
target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. | 
3. Fear Ray. The target must succeed on a DC 13 Wisdom | 
saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. The target can | 
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, with | 
disadvantage if the spectator is visible to the target, ending the | 
effect on itself on a success. 
4, Wounding Ray. The target must make a DC 13 Constitution 
saving throw, taking 16 (3d10) necrotic damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


Create Food and Water. The spectator magically creates 
enough food and water to sustain itself for 24 hours. 


REACTIONS 


Spell Reflection. \f the spectator makes a successful saving 
throw against a spell, or a spell attack misses it, the spectator | 
can choose another creature (including the spellcaster) it can 
see within 30 feet of it. The spell targets the chosen creature | 
instead of the spectator. If the spell forced a saving throw, the | 
chosen creature makes its own save. If the spell was an attack, 

the attack roll is rerolled against the chosen creature. 


BLIGHTS 


“Awakened plants gifted with the powers of 
intelligence and mobility, blights plague 
lands contaminated by darkness. Drinking 
that darkness from the soil, a blight carries 
out the will of ancient evil and attempts to 
spread that evil wherever it can. 

Roots of the Gulthias Tree. Legends 
tell of a vampire named Gulthias who 
worked terrible magic and raised up 
an abominable tower called Nightfang 
Spire. Gulthias was undone when a 
hero plunged a wooden stake through 
his heart, but as the vampire was 
destroyed, his blood infused the stake 
with a dreadful power. In time, tendrils 
of new growth sprouted from the wood, 
growing into a sapling infused with the 
vampire’s evil essence. It is said that 
a mad druid discovered the sapling, 
transplanting it to an underground grotto 
where it could grow. From this Gulthias 
tree came the seeds from which the first 
blights were sown. 

Dark Conquest. Wherever a tree or plant 
is contaminated by a fragment of an evil mind 
or power, a Gulthias tree can rise to infest and 
corrupt the surrounding forest. Its evil spreads 
through root and soil to other plants, which perish 
or transform into blights. As those blights spread, 
they poison and uproot healthy plants, replacing them 
with brambles, toxic weeds, and others of their kind. 
In time, an infestation of blights can turn any land or 
forest into a place of corruption. 

In forests infested with blights, trees and 
plants grow with supernatural speed. Vines and 
undergrowth rapidly spread through buildings and 
overrun trails and roads. After blights have killed 
or driven off their inhabitants, whole villages can 
disappear in the space of days. 

Controlled by Evil. Blights are independent 
creatures, but most act under a Gulthias tree’s control, 
often displaying the habits and traits of the life force or 
spirit that spawned them. By attacking their progenitor’s 
old foes or seeking out treasures valuable to it, they 
carry on the legacy of long-lost evil. 


NEEDLE BLIGHT 


In the shadows of a forest, needle blights might 
be taken at a distance for shuffling, hunched 
humanoids. Up close, these creatures reveal 
themselves as horrid plants whose conifer-like 
needles grow across their bodies in quivering 
clumps. A needle blight lashes out with these 
needles or launches them as an aerial assault that 
can punch through armor and flesh. 

When needle blights detect a threat, they loose a 
pollen that the wind carries to other needle blights 
throughout the forest. Alerted to their foes’ location, 
needle blights converge from all sides to drench their 
roots in blood. 


BEHOLD THE LEGACY OF 
GULTHIAS THE VAMPIRE: PLANTS 
WITH A TASTE FOR BLOOD. 


Twic BLIGHT 


Twig blights can root in soil, which they do when living 


prey are scarce. While rooted, they resemble woody 
shrubs. When it pulls its roots free of the ground to 
move, a twig blight’s branches twist together to form a 
humanoid-looking body with a head and limbs. 

Twig blights seek out campsites and watering holes, 
rooting there to set up ambushes for potential victims 
coming to drink or rest. Huddled together in groups, 


twig blights blend in with an area’s natural vegetation or 


with piles of debris or firewood. 
Given how dry they are, twig blights are particularly 
susceptible to fire. 


VINE BLIGHT 


Appearing as masses of slithering creepers, vine blights 


hide in undergrowth and wait for prey to draw near. By 


animating the plants around them, vine blights entangle 


and hinder their foes before attacking. 
Vine blights are the only blights capable of speech. 
Through its connection to the evil spirit of the Gulthias 


{ree it serves, a vine blight speaks in a fractured version 
of its dead master’s voice, taunting victims or bargaining 


with powerful foes. 


4 ee Class 12 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 11,(2d8 + 2) 
| Speed 30 ft. 


DEX 
12 (+1) 


CON 
13 (+1) 


INT 
4 (-3) 


wis 
8 (-1) 


CHA 


12 (+1) 3 (-4) 


Condition Immunities blinded, deafened 
') Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
| passive Perception 9 
Languages understands Common but can’t speak 
| Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


} STR 
| 


| ACTIONS 


| Hit: 6 (2d4 + 1) piercing damage. 


| Needles. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range 30/60 ft., one 
| target. Hit: 8 (2d6 + 1) piercing damage. 


_ Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


"Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
‘Hit Points 4 (1d6 + 1) 


_ Speed 20 ft. 

ppp 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
ui6(-2) .l1a(+l) 12(+l)  4(-3) —~ 8-1) — 3-4) 


lis 


| Speed 10 ft. 

A eS 
_ STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1542) 8-1) 14 (42) 5-3) 1040) 3.-4) 


Skills Stealth +3 

Damage Vulnerabilities fire 

Condition Immunities blinded, deafened 

Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
passive Perception 9 

Languages understands Common but can’t speak 

Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


False Appearance. While the blight remains motionless, it is 
indistinguishable from a dead shrub. 


ACTIONS 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) piercing damage. 


_ Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 
~ Hit Points 26 (4d8 + 8) 


FI 
- Skills Stealth +1 
. Condition Immunities blinded, deafened 


Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
passive Perception 10 
Languages Common 


Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


False Appearance. While the blight remains motionless, it is 


_ indistinguishable from a tangle of vines. 


ACTIONS 


Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage, and a Large or 
smaller target is grappled (escape DC 12). Until this grapple 
ends, the target is restrained, and the blight can’t constrict 


| another target. 


Entangling Plants (Recharge 5-6). Grasping roots and vines 
sprout in a 15-foot radius centered on the blight, withering 
away after 1 minute. For the duration, that area is difficult 
terrain for nonplant creatures. In addition, each creature 

of the blight’s choice in that area when the plants appear 


_ must succeed on a DC 12 Strength saving throw or become 


restrained. A creature can use its action to make a DC 12 


_ Strength check, freeing itself or another entangled creature 


within reach on a success. 


BUGBEARS 


Bugbears are born for battle and mayhem. Surviving 
by raiding and hunting, they bully the weak and despise 
being bossed around, but their love of carnage means 
they will fight for powerful masters if bloodshed and 
treasure are assured. 

Goblinoids. Bugbears are often found in the company 
of their cousins, hobgoblins and goblins. Bugbears 
usually enslave goblins they encounter, and they bully 
hobgoblins into giving them gold and food in return 
for serving as scouts and shock troops. Even when 
paid, bugbears are at best unreliable allies, yet goblins 
and hobgoblins understand that no matter how much 
bugbears might drain a tribe of resources, these 
creatures are a potent force. 

Followers of Hruggek. Bugbears worship Hruggek, 
a lesser god who dwells on the plane of Acheron. In the 


absence of their goblinoid kin, bugbears form loose war _ 


bands, each one led by its fiercest member. Bugbears 

believe that when they die, their spirits have a chance 

to fight at Hruggek’s side. They try to prove themselves 

worthy by defeating as many foes as possible. 

Venal Ambushers. Despite their intimidating builds, 

‘bugbears move with surprising stealth. They are fond of 

setting ambushes and flee when outmatched. They are 
‘ dependable mercenaries as long as they are supplied 
food, drink, and treasure, but a bugbear forgets any 
bond when its life is on the line. A wounded member of 
a bugbear band might be left behind to help the rest of 
the band escape, Afterward, that bugbear might help 
pursuers track down its former companions if doing so 
saves its life. 


M edium ” hu anoid (gobiinoidy chaotic evil 

i ; 

| Armor Class 16. (hide armor, shield) 
Hit Points 27 (5d8 + 5) 


eee C—O 


bersee 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1542) 1442) 1341) 8(-1) 1140) 9(-1) 


Skills Stealth +6, Survival +2 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
_ Languages Common, Goblin 

_ Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


RRM ees 
/ 


d | Brute. A melee weapon deals one extra die of its damage when the 
| bugbear hits with it (included in the attack). 

| Surprise Attack. lf the bugbear surprises a creature and hits it 

_ with an attack during the first round of combat, the target takes 
_ anextra 7 (2d6) damage from the attack. 


| ACTIONS 


Morningstar. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
| target. Hit: 11 (2d8 + 2) piercing damage. 


Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) piercing damage 
in melee or 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage at range. 


a a 


.n CHIEF re 

Med m hur he (goblinoid), chaotic evil 

j sa a ERROR 
Armor Class 17 (chain shirt, shield) 
Hit Points 65 (10d8 + 20) 


| DUGBEA 


! 
I 
Speed 30 ft. | 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA |, 
17 (+3) 14 (42) «14 (42) «11 (40) 12 (41) 11 (40) 
SE —————————————————————— 
| Skills Intimidation +2, Stealth +6, Survival +3 3 
) Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 
| Languages Common, Goblin ‘ 
_ Challenge 3 (700 XP) | 
Se 
_ Brute. A melee weapon deals one extra die of its damage when the | 
bugbear hits with it (included in the attack). { 
_ Heart of Hruggek. The bugbear has advantage on saving 
throws against being charmed, frightened, paralyzed, 
| poisoned, stunned, or put to sleep. | 
_ Surprise Attack. |f the bugbear surprises a creature and hits it |) | 
f 


with an attack during the first round of combat, the target takes 
an extra 7 (2d6) damage from the attack. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The bugbear makes two melee attacks. 


Morningstar. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 12 (2d8 + 3) piercing damage. 


| Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or | 
| range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage 
| in melee or 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage at range. 


‘| 


BULETTE 


A bulette is a massive 
predator that terrorizes 
any lands it inhabits. Also 
called a “land shark,” it 
lives only to feed. Irascible 
and rapacious, bulettes 
fear no other creature, and 
they attack with no regard 
for superior numbers 

or strength. hae lt 

Underground Hunters. Billa stoatars 
Bulettes use their powerful 
claws to tunnel through the 
earth when they hunt. Heedless 
of obstruction, they uproot trees, cause 
landslides in loose slopes, and leave sinkholes 
behind them. When vibrations in the soil and rock alert 
a bulette to movement, it shoots to the surface, its jaws 
Spread wide as it attacks. 

Wandering Monster. A bulette ranges across 
“{emperate lands, feeding on any animals and 
humanoids it comes across. These creatures dislike 
dwarf and elf flesh, although they often kill them before 
realizing what they are. A bulette loves halfling meat the 
‘most, and it is never happier than when chasing plump 
halfiings across an open field. 

A bulette has no lair, but roams a hunting territory 
up to thirty miles wide. Its sole criterion for territory is 

availability of food, and when it has eaten everything 
in an area, a bulette moves on. These creatures often 
home in on humanoid settlements, terrorizing them 
until their panicked residents have fled, or until the 
bulette is slain. 

All creatures shun bulettes, which treat anything 

that moves as food—even other predators and bulettes. 
Bulettes come together only to mate, resulting in a 
bloody act of claws and teeth that usually ends with the 
male’s death and consumption. 

Arcane Creation. Some sages believe the bulette 

is the result of a mad wizard’s experiments at 
crossbreeding snapping turtles and armadillos, with 
infusions of demon ichor. Bulettes have been thought 
to be extinct at different times, but after years without 
a sighting, the creatures inevitably reappear. Because 
their young are almost never seen, some sages suspect 
that bulettes maintain secret nesting grounds from 
which adults strike out into the world. 


BULETTE 


BULETTE 
Large monstrosity, unaligned 
Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 94 (9d10 + 45) 
Speed 40 ft., burrow 40 ft. 
ee 
STR DEX CON INT 
19 (+4) 11 (40) = 21 (45) 


Wis CHA 
2 (-4) 10 (+0) 5 (-3) 


a = 


Skills Perception +6 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft., 
passive Perception 16 


Languages — 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Standing Leap. The bulette’s long jump is up to 30 feet and its 
high jump is up to 15 feet, with or without a running start. 


ACTIONS . 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 30 (4d12 + 4) piercing damage. 


Deadly Leap. |f the bulette jumps at least 15 feet as part of 
its movement, it can then use this action to land on its feet 

in a space that contains one or more other creatures. Each of 
those creatures must succeed on a DC 16 Strength or Dexterity 
saving throw (target’s choice) or be knocked prone and take 
14 (3d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage plus 14 (3d6 + 4) slashing 
damage. Ona successful save, the creature takes only half 
the damage, isn’t knocked prone, and is pushed 5 feet out of 
the bulette’s space into an unoccupied space of the creature’s 
choice. If no unoccupied space is within range, the creature 
instead falls prone in the bulette’s space. 


BULLYWUG , 
Life as a bullywug is nasty, brutish, and wet. These frog- 
headed amphibious humanoids must stay constantly 
moist, dwelling in rainy forests, marshes, and damp 
caves. Always hungry and thoroughly evil, bullywugs 
overwhelm opponents with superior numbers when 
they can, but they flee from serious threats to search for 
easier prey. 

Bullywugs have green, gray, or mottled yellow skin 
that shifts through shades of gray, green, and brown, 
allowing them to blend in with their surroundings. They 
wear crude armor and wield simple weapons, and can 
deliver a powerful bite to foes that press too close. 

Foul Aristocracy. Bullywugs consider themselves 
the right and proper rulers of the swamps. They follow 
an. etiquette of sorts when dealing with outsiders and 
each other, subject to the whims and fancies of their 
leader—a self-styled lord of the muck. Bullywugs introduce 
themselves with grand-sounding titles, make great shows 
of bowing and debasing themselves before their superiors, 
and endlessly vie to win their superiors’ favor. 

A bullywug has two ways to advance among its kind. 
It can either murder its rivals, though it must take 
pains to keep its criminal deeds secret, or it can find 
| a treasure or magic item and present it as tribute or a 

. token of obeisance to its liege. A bullywug that murders 
its rivals without cunning is likely to be executed, so 
it’s more common for bullywugs to stage raids against 
caravans and settlements, with the goal of securing 
precious baubles to impress their lords and win their “ 
good graces. Invariably, such fine goods are reduced Armor Class 15 (hide armor, shield) 
to filthy tatters through abuse and neglect. Once a gift Hit Points 1] (2d8 + 2) 
loses its sheen, a bullywug lord invariably demands that Speed 20 ft., swim 40 ft. 
its subjects bring it more treasure as tribute. 

Unruly Diplomacy. Bullywugs love nothing more than 
lording over those who trespass on their territories. 
Their warriors attempt to capture intruders rather than 


te oe ~saf hal Le — — ——— 
[ ee 
wu 


la 6 , fF hy ay a : 
> Medium humanoid (bullywug), neutral evil 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA | 
12 (+1) «12 (41) 13 @1) 7(-2) 10(40) 7 (-2) | 
! 
| 


fray slaving th Skills Stealth +3 
eae ay eas ert : Senses passive Perception 10 
Captives are dragged before the king or queen—a Languages Bullywug 
bullywug of unusually large size—and forced to beg Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


.' for mercy. Bribes, treasure, and flattery can trick the 


bullywug ruler into letting its captives go, but not before Ibi ro oe.” 
’ it tries to impress its “guests” with the majesty of its a eg: Vile Duty wu Blea ae erenalr and water: | 


treasure and its realm. Struck with a deep inferiority Speak with Frogs and Toads. The bullywug can communicate __| 
3 complex, bullywug lords fancy themselves as kings simple concepts to frogs and toads when it speaks in Bullywug. 
and queens, but desperately crave the fear and respect 


Swamp Camouflage. The bullywug has advantage on Dexterity | 


i De itie Allies. Bullywugs speak a language (Stealth) checks made to hide in swampy terrain. | 
that allows them to communicate over large areas by Standing Leap. The bullywug’s long jump is up to 20 feet and | 

i croaking like frogs. News of intruders or other events its high jump is up to 10 feet, with or without a running start. | 
in the swamp spread within minutes across this crude | 
communication system. 1 a 

Simple concepts in the language are understandable Multiattack, The bullywug makes two melee attacks: one with | 

to frogs and toads. Bullywugs use this capability to its bite and one with its spear. 


form strong bonds with giant frogs, which they train 
as guardians and hunters. Larger specimens are 
sometimes used as mounts as well. The frogs’ ability 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) bludgeoning damage. ing 


to swallow creatures whole provides a bullywug Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
hunting band an easy means of carrying prey back to range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage, or | 
their villages. 5 (1d8 + 1) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a 


melee attack. 


BULE TS ES WL A 


'CAMBION 3 
| Medium fiend, any evil alignment — 
| 
| Armor Class 19 (scale mail) 
; Hit Points 82 (11d8 + 33) 
| Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft. 


ie ed 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 18 (+4) 16 (+3) 14 (42) 9-12 (+1) ~—s*'16 (+3) 
RR pps 
| Saving Throws Str +7, Con +6, Int +5, Cha +6 
Skills Deception +6, Intimidation +6, Perception +4, Stealth +7 
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning, poison; bludgeoning, 
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
_ Languages Abyssal, Common, Infernal 
| Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


| 
ee ———————_—_—_————te 


Fiendish Blessing. The AC of the cambion includes its 
| Charisma bonus. 


Innate Spellcasting. The cambion’s spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 14). The cambion can innately cast the 
following spells, requiring no material components: 


) a 
GAMBION 


-3/day each: alter self, command, detect magic 


“THEY CRAWL FROM THEIR MOTHERS’ 
WOMBS TO SPREAD CORRUPTION 
THROUGHOUT THE MULTIVERSE. 
Wuar’s Nor to Love?” 


~ BaBa Yaca 


CAMBION 


A cambion is the offspring of a fiend (usually a succubus 
or incubus) and a humanoid (usually a human). 
Cambions inherit aspects of both parents, but their 
horns, leathery wings, and sinewy tails are hallmarks of 
their otherworldly parentage. 

Born to Be Bad. Cambions grow into ruthless adults 
whose wickedness and perversion horrifies even the 
most devoted mortal parent. Even as a youth, a cambion 
identifies its rightful place as an overlord of mortals. It 
might orchestrate uprisings in towns and cities, gathering 
gangs of humanoids and lesser devils to serve it. 

Pawns of the Mighty. A cambion forced to serve its 
fiendish parent does so out of admiration and dread, but 
also with the expectation that it will one day rise toa 
place of prominence. Cambions raised in the Nine Hells 
serve as soldiers, envoys, and personal attendants to 
greater devils. In the Abyss, a cambion carries only as 
much authority as it can muster through sheer strength 
and force of will. 

Spawn of Graz’zt. The demon lord Graz’zt is fond of 


_ Srocreating with humanoids who have made pacts with 


fiends, and he has sired many cambions who help him 
sow chaos across the multiverse. These cambions are 
characterized by charcoal-black skin, cloven hooves, six- 
fingered hands, and unearthly beauty. 


I/day: plane shift (self only) ™ 


Po ey, eae fi 
« 3 ra 
ct 


ACTIONS: | | 
Multiattack. The cambion makes two melee attacks or uses its 
Fire Ray twice. 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) piercing damage, or 
8 (1d8 + 4) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a 
melee attack, plus 3 (1d6) fire damage. 


Fire Ray. Ranged Spell Attack: +7 to hit, range 120 ft., one | 
target. Hit: 10 (3d6) fire damage. 


Fiendish Charm. One humanoid the cambion can see within 
30 feet of it must succeed on a DC 14 Wisdom saving throw or 
be magically charmed for 1 day. The charmed target obeys the 
cambion’s spoken commands. If the target suffers any harm 
from the cambion or another creature or receives a suicidal 
command from the cambion, the target can repeat the saving 
throw, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a target’s 
saving throw is successful, or if the effect ends for it, the 
creature is immune to the cambion’s Fiendish Charm for the 
next 24 hours. | 


CARRION CRAWLER 


Carrion,crawlers scour putrid flesh from carcasses and 
gobble the slimy bones that remain. They aggressively 
attack any creature that trespasses on their territory or 
disturbs their feasting. 

Carrion Eaters. A carrion crawler follows the 
scent of death to its food, but it prefers not to compete 
with other scavengers. These foul creatures thus 
hunker down in territories where death is plentiful 
and other carrion eaters have limited mobility. Caves, 
sewers, dungeons, and forested marshes are their 
favored lairs, but carrion crawlers are also drawn to 
battlefields and cemeteries. 

A carrion crawler roams on the hunt, its tentacles 
probing the air for the scent of blood or decay. In tunnels 
or ruins, carrion crawlers scurry across the ceiling as 
they move toward food. In this way, they avoid contact 
with oozes, otyughs, and other dangerous inhabitants 
of the darkness, even as they surprise potential meals 
that don’t think to look up. 

Patient Predators. Whether in subterranean 
darkness or while hunting at night, light signals a 
potential meal. A carrion crawler might follow a light 
source from a distance for hours, hoping to pick up the 
scent of blood. Despite their great size, carrion crawlers 
can also easily set up ambushes by waiting around blind 
corners for prey to come to them. 

When facing potential prey or intruders, a carrion 
crawler lets its poison do the work. Once a victim goes 
rigid with paralysis, the carrion crawler wraps it with 
its tentacles and drags it away to a high ledge or isolated 
passageway, where it can be killed safely. The monster 
then resumes patrolling its territory while waiting for its 
meal to ripen; 


CARRION CRAWLER 


| Large monstrosity, unaligned 
| 
| 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) | 
Hit Paints 51 (6d10 + 18) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14 (+2) 1341) 16 (+3) 1(-5} 12 (41) = 55 (-3) 
4 


L 
Skills Perception +3 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages — 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Keen Smell. The carrion crawler has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on smell. 


Spider Climb. The carrion crawler can climb difficult surfaces, 
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 
ability check. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The carrion crawler makes two attacks: one with 
its tentacles and one with its bite. 


Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 

creature. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) poison damage, and the target must 

succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned 
| for 1 minute. Until this poison ends, the target is paralyzed. 
| The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each ofits | 


| turns, ending the poison on itself on a success. }, 


| Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. — 
| Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) piercing damage. <i 


PARR IGN OAM LEI ¥ 


= ta ——__— SS - 37 


| CENTAUR 


Large mons osity, neutral good 


r Armor Class 12 
} Hit Points 45 (6d10 + 12) 


“a | Speed 50 ft. 

ARE 

eh | .. STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 14(42) 14 (42) 9(-1) 13 (+1) 11 (+0) 


Skills Athletics +6, Perception +3, Survival +3 
) Senses passive Perception 13 
| Languages Elvish, Sylvan 
| Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


| 
Charge. |f the centaur moves at least 30 feet straight toward a 


target and then hits it with a pike attack on the same turn, the 
| target takes an extra 10 (3d6) piercing damage. 


— 


_ ACTIONS 


| Multiattack. The centaur makes two attacks: one with its pike 


| and one with its hooves or two with its longbow. 


Pike. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 


’ 
Hit: 9 (1d10 + 4) piercing damage. 
* | Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


| Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 150/600 ft., 
m | one target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage. 


S GENTAUR 


38 


*] HEAR CENTAURS MAKE & 


XCELLENT MOUNTS! — 

A HALFLING’ ADVENTURER 
p HOOVES OF FURY, 
ORN OF SUNDOWN 


~— BATLEY SuMMERFOOT, 
wHo NEVER REA 
ay Irvit GRAYS 


CENTAUR 


Reclusive wanderers and omen-readers of the wild, 
centaurs avoid conflict but fight fiercely when pressed. 
They roam the vast wilderness, keeping far from 
borders, laws, and the company of other creatures. 

Wilderness Nomads. Centaur tribes range across 
lands with mild to hot climates, where a centaur 
requires only light furs or oiled skins to deal with 
inclement weather. They are hunter-gatherers and rarely 
build shelters or even use tents. 

Centaur migrations span continents and take decades 
to repeat, so that a centaur tribe might not retread 
the same path for generations. These long-ranging 
patterns can lead to conflict when centaurs encounter 
settlements of other creatures built along their 
traditional routes. 

Reluctant Settlers. A centaur that can’t keep pace 
with the rest of its tribe is left behind. Some such 
centaurs vanish into the wilderness and are never 
seen again. Those that can bear the loss of their tribe 
might take up residence among other races. Frontier 
settlements value the nature knowledge of their centaur 
residents. Many such communities owe their survival to 
the insight and acumen of a centaur. 

Despite their reclusive nature, centaurs trade with 
elves and with the caravans of other benevolent 
humanoids they meet during their wanderings. A trader 
might save the life of a wounded or an elderly centaur 
unfit for long travel, escorting it to a settlement where it 
can peacefully live out the rest of its days. 


CHIMERA 


_ Large monstrosity, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 114 (12d10 + 48) 
_ Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft. 
| Le  ——————————————— 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4) 11 (40) 19 (44) 3(-4) 14(42) 10 (+0) 


Skills Perception +8 

, Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 18 
Languages understands Draconic but can’t speak 
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The chimera makes three attacks: one with its 
bite, one with its horns, and one with its claws. When its 
fire breath is available, it can use the breath in place of its 
bite or horns. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage. 


Horns. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 10 (1d12 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage. 


Fire Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon head exhales fire in a 
15-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 15 
Dexterity saving throw, taking 31 (7d8) fire damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


= SS Sh 


CHIMERA 


Chimeras were created after mortals summoned 
Demogorgon to the world. The Prince of Demons, 
unimpressed with the creatures that surrounded 
it, transformed them into horrific, multi-headed 
monstrosities. This act gave rise to the first chimeras. 
Gifted with demonic cruelty, a chimera serves as a 
grim reminder of what happens when demon princes 
find their way to the Material Plane. A typical specimen 
has the hindquarters of a large goat, the forequarters of 
a lion, and the leathery wings of a dragon, along with the 
heads of all three of those creatures. The monster likes 
to surprise its victims, swooping down from the sky and 
engulfing prey with its fiery breath before landing. 
Conflicted Creature. A chimera combines the worst 
aspects of its three parts. Its dragon head drives it to 
raid, plunder, and accumulate a great hoard. Its leonine 
nature compels it to hunt and kill powerful creatures 
that threaten its territory. Its goat head grants it a vicious, 
stubborn streak that compels it to fight to the death. 
These three aspects drive a chimera to stake out a 
territory that is as large as 10 miles wide. It preys on 
wild game, viewing more powerful creatures as rivals 
to be humiliated and defeated. Its greatest rivals are 
dragons, griffons, manticores, perytons, and wyverns. 
When it hunts, the chimera looks for easy ways to 
amuse itself. It enjoys the fear and suffering of weaker 
creatures. The monster often toys with its prey, breaking 
off an attack prematurely and leaving a creature 
wounded and terrified before returning to finish it off. 
Servant of Evil. Though chimeras are far from 
cunning, their draconic ego makes them susceptible ta 
flattery and gifts. If offered food and treasure, a chimera 
might spare a traveler. A villain can lure a chimera into 
service by keeping it well fed and its treasure hoard 
well stocked. 


(AUER ANT PA 
j } 41 aL) Hi 


Z. Whi bai Zane 


=i 
= Merril | 


ee 


40 


CHUUL 


Survivors of the ancient aboleth empire, chuuls are 
crustaceans the aboleths modified and endowed with 
sentience. They follow the ingrained directives of their 
creators, as they have done since the dawn of time. 

Primeval Relics. In the primeval ages, aboleths ruled 
a vast empire that spanned the oceans of the world. In 
those days, the aboleths used mighty magic and bent 
the minds of the nascent creatures of the mortal realm. 
However, they were bound to the water and could not 
enforce their will beyond it without servants. Therefore, 
they created chuuls. 

Perfectly obedient, the chuuls collected sentient 
creatures and magic at the aboleths’ command. Chuuls 
were designed to endure the ages of the world, growing 
in size and strength as the eons passed. When the 
aboleths’ empire crumbled with the rise of the gods, 
the chuuls were cast adrift. However, these creatures 
continue to do what they did for the aboleths, slowly 
collecting humanoids, gathering treasure, amassing 
magic, and consolidating power. 

Tireless Guardians. Chuul still guard the ruins of the 
ancient aboleth empire. They linger in silent observance 
of eons-old commands. Rumors and ancient maps 
sometimes lure treasure seekers to these ruins, but the 
reward for their boldness is death. 


_ QHUUL 


a 


; Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
"Hit Points 93 (11d10 + 33) 
- Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4) 10(+0) 16(+3) 5(-3) (+0) 5 (-3) 


Skills Perception +4 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages understands Deep Speech but can’t speak 


, Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


a nn 


Amphibious. The chuul can breathe air and water. 


. Sense Magic. The chuul senses magic within 120 feet of it at 


will. This trait otherwise works like the detect magic spell but 
isn’t itself magical. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The chuul makes two pincer attacks. If the 
chuul is grappling a creature, the chuul can also use its 
tentacles once. 


Pincer. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. The target is grappled 
(escape DC 14) if it is a Large or smaller creature and the chuul 
doesn’t have two other creatures grappled. 


Tentacles. One creature grappled by the chuul must succeed on 
a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned for 1 minute. 
Until this poison ends, the target is paralyzed. The target can 
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending 
the effect on itself on a success. 


Whatever riches that the explorers bring with them 
adds to the hoard guarded by the chuuls. Chuuls can 
sense magic at a distance. This sense couples with 
an innate drive that leads them to slay explorers, 
take their gear, and bury it in secret locales aboleths 
dictated eons ago. 

Waiting Servants. Although the aboleths’ ancient 
empire fell long ago, the psychic bonds between them 
and their created servants remain intact. Chuuls that 
come into contact with aboleths immediately assume 
their old roles. Such chuuls redirect their compulsions 
to the service of the aboleths’ sinister purposes. 


- ot hh Saale = a= man 


—— hi Oe ee ee Eee 
lage = LL ot 


Le 7 
| Armor Class 14 (natural armor) : 
_ Hit Points 78 (12d10 + 12) 
| Speed 10 ft., fly 40 ft. 


4, STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 

173) 1542) 12@1) 1341) 1241) 14(2) 
Rn rr 
Skills Stealth +5 

| Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 

| Languages Deep Speech, Undercommon 

_ Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


NN 


| Damage Transfer. While attached to a creature, the cloaker | 
_ takes only half the damage dealt to it (rounded down), and that = 
ye 


creature takes the other half. 


_ False Appearance. While the cloaker remains motionless ln | 
| without its underside exposed, it is indistinguishable from a CLOAKER 
_ dark leather cloak. Cloakers earned their names for the resemblance 
| Light Sensitivity. While in bright light, the cloaker has they bear to dark leathery cloaks. Lurking in BALE) 
_ disadvantage on attack rolls and Wisdom (Perception) checks | dungeons and caves, these stealthy predators wait 
| that rely on sight. to slay lone or injured prey stumbling through 
the darkness. 

ACTIONS | Camouflaged Lurkers. Like a stingray, a cloaker’s 

Multiattack. The cloaker makes two attacks: one with its bite | body is composed of cartilage and muscle. With its tail 

pric caveserith itsitaill | and fins unfurled, it flies through darkness and lurks 


among the shadows of caverns the same way a stingray 
glides through water and hides on the ocean floor. 
Parallel rows of round, black eyespots run along its back 
like buttons, and the ivory-colored claws on its cowl 
resemble bone clasps. 

When a cloaker unfurls and moves to attack, it reveals 
its pale underside and makes its true nature evident. 
Red eyes glow above rows of sharp teeth, and a long 
pendulous tail whips behind it. 

Opportunistic Predators. When hunting, cloakers 
glide through the shadows at a safe distance behind 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage, and if the target is Large or 
smaller, the cloaker attaches to it. If the cloaker has advantage 
against the target, the cloaker attaches to the target’s head, 
and the target is blinded and unable to breathe while the 

cloaker is attached. While attached, the cloaker can make this 
attack only against the target and has advantage on the attack 
_ roll. The cloaker can detach itself by spending 5 feet of its 
/ movement. A creature, including the target, can take its action | 
| to detach the cloaker by succeeding on a DC 16 Strength check. 


ee ee eee 


; 
| 
| 
Ft | Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one creature. | groups of other creatures traversing the Underdark. 
Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage. They follow parties of humanoids to prey on the 
1 Moan. Each creature within 60 feet of the cloaker that can | wounded after a battle, or pursue herds of Underdark 
. hear its moan and that isn’t an aberration must succeed ona __ | beasts, attacking the sick, the weak, or the straggling. 
DC 13 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened until the Cloakers strike quickly and consume their meals 
4 end of the cloaker’s next turn. If a creature’s saving throw is as swiftly as possible, enveloping and devouring 
| successful, the creature is immune to the cloaker’s moan for | their victims. While it feeds, a cloaker uses its swift, 
- the next 24 hours whiplike tail for defense, although it rarely takes a stand 


against dangerous foes or groups of creatures. As an 
added defense, cloakers can create illusory duplicates 
of themselves. 

Haunting Moan. Cloakers’ thoughts are alien to other 
life-forms, and they communicate with one another 
through subsonic moans inaudible to most creatures. At 


| Phantasms (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). The cloaker 
j magically creates three illusory duplicates of itself if it isn’t in 
bright light. The duplicates move with it and mimic its actions, 
shifting position so as to make it impossible to track which 
| cloaker is the real one. If the cloaker is ever in an area of bright 
light, the duplicates disappear. 


against an effect that deals damage, the duplicate disappears. their habitats. When this convergence is complete, the 


cloakers separate again. 


| Whenever any creature targets the cloaker with an attackor | ‘higher intensities, a cloaker’s haunting moan becomes 
| a harmful spell while a duplicate remains, that creature rolls | audible, evoking sensations of doom and dread in 

__ randomly to determine whether it targets the cloaker or one of | creatures that hear it. 

} _ the duplicates. A creature is unaffected by this magical effect if Cloaker Conclaves. Cloakers prefer isolation, but j 
t it can’t see or if it relies on senses other than sight. they sometimes convene with other cloakers for defense ne 
| Aduplicate has the cloaker’s AC and uses its saving throws. or to exchange information about new dangers, suitable 
! If an attack hits a duplicate, or if a duplicate fails a saving throw hunting grounds, or developments that might affect 

| 


| - 


‘ 
‘ 


~CocKaTrRIC 


Small monstrosity, unaligned 


. Armor Class 11 
, Hit Points 27 (6d6 + 6) 
| Speed 20 ft., fly 40 ft. 


J STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 


6 (-2) 12 (+1) 12 (+1) 2 (~4) ~—-13 (+1) 5 (-3) 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 ) G OCKATRICE 
| Languages — 


The cockatrice looks like a hideous hybrid of lizard, 
bird, and bat, and it is infamous for its ability to turn 
flesh to stone. These omnivores have a diet that consists 
ACTIONS of berries, nuts, flowers, and small animals such as 
insects, mice, and frogs—things they can swallow 


Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 


Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) piercing damage, and the target must succeed whole. They would be no threat to anything else if not 
on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw against being magically for their fierce and frenzied response to even a hint of 
petrified. On a failed save, the creature begins to turn to stone danger. A cockatrice flies into the face of any threat, 

| and is restrained. It must repeat the saving throw at the end of squawking and madly beating its wings as its head darts 
its next turn. On a success, the effect ends. On a failure, the out to peck. The smallest scratch from a cockatrice’s 
creature is petrified for 24 hours. beak can spell doom as its victim slowly turns fo stone 


= ——— from the injury. 


GOCKATRICE 


m ce estial, lawful good 


i 


a a 
| Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 

"Hit Points 97 (13d8 + 39) 

Speed 30 ft., fly 90 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 20(+5) 17443) 1844) 20(445) 18444) 


| Saving Throws Con +5, Wis +7, Cha +6 
Damage Resistances radiant 
Damage Immunities psychic; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical weapons 
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 15 
Languages all, telepathy 120 ft. 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


| 

| 

j 

4 

{ 

i 

| Innate Spellcasting. The couatl’s spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 14). it can innately cast the following 

spells, requiring only verbal components: 


At will: detect evil and good, detect magic, detect thoughts 
3/day each: bless, create food and water, cure wounds, lesser 

restoration, protection from poison, sanctuary, shield 
1/day each: dream, greater restoration, scrying 


Magic Weapons. The couatl’s weapon attacks are magical. 


Shielded Mind. The couatl is immune to scrying and to any 
effect that would sense its emotions, read its thoughts, or 
detect its location. 


ACTIONS 


Hit: 8 (1d6 + 5) piercing damage, and the target must succeed 
on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned for 

24 hours. Until this poison ends, the target is unconscious. 
Another creature can use an action to shake the target awake. 


Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
Medium or smaller creature. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) bludgeoning 
damage, and the target is grappled (escape DC 15). Until this 
grapple ends, the target is restrained, and the couatl can’t 
constrict another target. 


et ie 


humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating equal to or 
less than its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its 

| true form if it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is 
absorbed or borne by the new form (the couatl’s choice). 

In a new form, the couatl retains its game statistics and 
ability to speak, but its AC, movement modes, Strength, 
Dexterity, and other actions are replaced by those of the new 
form, and it gains any statistics and capabilities (except class 
features, legendary actions, and lair actions) that the new 


Change Shape. The couatl magically polymorphs into a 


couatl can use its bite in that form. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 


form has but that it lacks. If the new form has a bite attack, the 


COUATL 


Couatls are benevolent serpentine beings of great 
intellect and insight. Their brilliantly colored wings and 
gentle manner speak to their celestial origins. 

Divine Caretakers. Couatls were created as 
guardians and caretakers by a benevolent god not 
worshiped since the dawn of time, and which is 
forgotten now by all but the couatls themselves. Most of 
the divine mandates given to these beings are long since 
fulfilled or failed. However, a number of couatls still 
watch over ancient power, await fulfillment of prophecy, 
or safeguard the heirs of creatures they once guided 
and protected. Regardless of a couatl’s task, it prefers to 
remain hidden, revealing itself only as a last resort. 

Truth Tellers. A couatl can’t lie, but it can withhold 
information, answer questions vaguely, or allow 
others to jump to the wrong conclusions if doing so is 
necessary to protect something, to keep promises, or to 
hide the secret of its existence. 

Ancient and Few. A couatl can live for ages without 
sustenance, even surviving without air, but these 
creatures can die of disease or the passage of time. A 
couatl can sense its end up to a century beforehand, but 
it has no insight into the manner of its demise. 

If a couatl has already accomplished what it set out 
to do, it accepts its fate. However, if its imminent death 
endangers the completion of its goals, it actively seeks 
out another couatl with which to produce offspring. 

The mating ritual of couatls is a beautiful and 
elaborate dance of magic and light, which results in 
a gem-like egg from which a new couatl hatches. The,, 
parent that sought out the mate raises the newborn | 
couatl and instructs it as to its duties, so that it.can 
complete whatever task the parent leaves unfinished. 


etd tl de 


e | i ; UATE: 
a 1h (yea ; e= 


ie 


| Armor Class 12.. 
| Hit Points 2 (144) 
' Speed 20 ft., climb 20 ft. 


v 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
(13441) 1442) 140) 5(-3) 1040) 4 (-3) 


| 


Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, poisoned 
| Senses blindsight 30 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 

| passive Perception 10 

Languages understands Common but can’t speak 
Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


Turn Immunity. The claw is immune to effects that 
turn undead. 


ACTIONS 


_ Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) bludgeoning or slashing damage 


(claw’s choice). 


CRAWLING CLAW 


Crawling claws are the severed hands of murderers 
animated by dark magic so that they can go on killing. 
Wizards and warlocks of a dark bent use crawling claws 
as extra hands in their labors. 

Magical Origins. Through dark necromantic rituals, 
the life force of a murderer is bound to its severed hand, 
haunting and animating it. If a dead murderer's spirit 
already manifests as another undead creature, if the 
murderer is raised from death, or if the spirit has long 
passed on to another plane, the ritual fails. 

The ritual invoked to create a crawling claw works 
best with a hand recently severed from a murderer. To 
this end, ritualists and their servants frequent public 
executions to gain possession of suitable hands, or 
make bargains with assassins and torturers. 

Creator's Control. A crawling claw can’t be turned, 
nor can it be controlled by spells that control undead. 
These foul monsters are entirely bound to the will of 
their creator, which can concentrate on a claw in sight 
to mentally command its every action. If the crawling 
claw’s creator doesn’t command it, the claw follows its 
last command to the best of its ability. 

Commands given to a crawling claw must be simple. A 
claw can’t be tasked with finding and killing a particular 
person, because its limited senses and intelligence 
prevent it from tracking and picking out specific 
individuals. However, a command to kill all creatures 
in a particular locale works. A crawling claw can easily 
feel out the contours of keys and doorknobs, crawling 
from room to room on a blind killing spree. 

Malign Intelligence. A crawling claw possesses little 
of the intellect and memories of the individual of which 
it was once a living part. The hate, jealousy, or greed 
that drove that person to murder lingers on, however, 
amplified by the claw’s torturous fragmented state. 

Left to its own devices, a crawling claw imitates and 
recreates the same murderous acts it committed in life. 

Living Claws. If a crawling claw is animated from 
the severed hand ofa still-living murderer, the ritual 
binds the claw to the murderer’s soul. The disembodied 
hand can then return to its former limb, its undead flesh 
knitting to the living arm from which it was severed. 

Made whole again, the murderer acts as though 
the hand had never been severed and the ritual had 
never taken place. When the crawling claw separates 
again, the living body falls into a coma. Destroying the 
crawling claw while it is away from the body kills the 
murderer. However, killing the murderer has no effect 
on the crawling claw. 

Undead Nature. A crawling claw doesn't require air, 
food, drink, or sleep. 


SS < 


CYCLOPS 


Cyclopes are one-eyed giants that eke out a meager 
existence in wild lands. Isolationists by nature, they 
avoid contact with other races and try to drive away 
strangers in their territory. 

Nonreligious. Legends claim that the cyclopes are 
the spawn of one of the gods of the giants, but these 
creatures pay little heed to any deities. They see little 
benefit in prayer and dislike ritual, which they perceive 
as complex and foreign. However, a cyclops that gains 


direct benefit from some site of divine power, or which is 


threatened by a supernatural force or creature, will pay 
homage as long as the benefit or threat remains. 

Unsophisticated. Though they are reasonably 
intelligent, cyclopes live simple, reclusive lives, keeping 
herds of animals for food. They prefer to dwell alone 
or in small family groups, lairing in caves, ruins, or 
rough structures of dry stone construction they build 
themselves. A cyclops keeps its herd animals with it at 
night, sealing the entrance to its home with boulders to 
let it serve double duty as a barn. 

A cyclops lairs within a day’s journey of other 
cyclopes, so that they can meet to trade goods or seek 
mates. They craft weapons and tools of wood and stone, 
but will use metal when they can find it. Although 
cyclopes understand the Giant tongue, they write 
nothing and speak little, using grunts and gestures for 
their interactions with each other. 

Cyclopes don’t use money for trade, but they value 
gold, shells, and other glittering and colorful objects as 
jewelry. A cyclops might wear a necklace strung with 
feathers and silver coins, but also with pewter goblets, 
cutlery, and other bits of ruined metal. 

Unwise. Cyclopes aren't great thinkers or strategists. 
Slow to learn and bound to their traditional ways, they 
find innovation difficult. Although they are a terrifying 
threat in combat due to their size and strength, they can 
often be tricked by clever foes. 

Cyclopes can be cowed and awed by obvious displays 
of magic. Rustics with little exposure to magic, they can 
be deceived into mistaking a warlock, cleric, or other 
caster for a powerful divine figure. However, their sense 
of pride causes them to react with vengeful, bloodthirsty 
violence once they learn that the individual they 
assumed was a “god” is a mere mortal. 


Soe ——— a a —— —————— 


target. Hit: 28 (4d10 + 6) es pg damage. 


Y Cyciors. 


Huge giant, chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 138 (12d12 + 60) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
22 (+6) 11(40) 20(4+5) 8(-1) 6(-2) = 10 (+0) 
(ee  O—eSt—“i‘“_ 
Senses passive Perception 8 
Languages Giant 
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


Poor Depth Perception. The cyclops has disadvantage on any 
attack roll against a target more than 30 feet away. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The cyclops makes two greatclub attacks. 


 Greatclub. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 


target. Hit: 19 (3d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 
Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, range 30/120 ft., one 


a P 
abr» ee ee . SS eae 


DARKMANTLE | 


A darkmantle clings to cavern ceilings, remaining 
perfectly still as it waits for creatures to pass beneath . 
it. From a distance, it can pass itself off as a stalactite 
or a lump of stone. Then it drops from the ceiling and 
unfurls, surrounding itself with magical darkness as it 
engulfs and crushes its prey. 
Darkmantles are found throughout the Underdark, but 
they are equally common on the Shadowfell. Thriving in 
that dark realm, they fill an ecological niche similar to 
bats on the Material Plane. Intelligent creatures of the 
Shadowfell sometimes train darkmantles as guardians 
or companions. 


ACTIONS ‘ _—i 
Crush. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. _ 
Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage, and the darkmantle 


gned 


) Armor Class 11 a attaches to the target. If the target is Medium or smaller and 
| Hit Points 22 (5d6 + 5) the darkmantle has advantage on the attack roll, it attaches by 

| Speed 10 ft., fly 30 ft 

1 an F engulfing the target’s head, and the target is also blinded and 

| 

| 


unable to breathe while the darkmantle is attached in this way. 

While attached to the target, the darkmantle can attackno ; 
other creature except the target but has advantage on its attack | 
rolls. The darkmantle’s speed also becomes 0, it can’t benefit 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 12(41) 13(41) 2(-4) 10(+0) 5(-3) 


| 
| 
| 


Skills Stealth +3 : 

| fi : 
Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 10 “ae a e in i eu i os dhl we ful | 
Languages — creature can detach the darkmantie by making a successtfu 


DC 13 Strength check as an action. On its turn, the darkmantle 
| Chall P 
ae 24) can detach itself from the target by using 5 feet of movement. 


Darkness Aura (1/Day). A 15-foot radius of magical darkness 
extends out from the darkmantle, moves with it, and spreads 
around corners. The darkness lasts as long as the darkmantle 


 Echolocation. The darkmantle can’t use its blindsight 
while deafened. 


False Appearance. While the darkmantle remains motionless, it maintains concentration, up to 10 minutes (as if concentrating 
is indistinguishable from a cave formation such as a stalactite ona spell). Darkvision can’t penetrate this darkness, and no 
or stalagmite. natural light can illuminate it. If any of the darkness overlaps | 


with an area of light created by a spell of 2nd level or lower, the | 
spell creating the light is dispelled. 


DARKMANTLE 


DEATH KNIGHT 
When a paladin that falls from grace dies without 
seeking atonement, dark powers can transform the 
once-mortal knight into a hateful undead creature. A 
death knight is a skeletal warrior clad in fearsome plate 
armor. Beneath its helmet, one can see the knight’s 
skull with malevolent pinpoints of light burning in its 
eye sockets. 

Eldritch Power. The death knight retains the ability 
to cast divine spells. However, no death knight can 
use its magic to heal. A death knight also attracts and 
commands lesser undead, although death knights that 
serve powerful fiends might have fiendish followers 
instead. Death knights often use warhorse skeletons 
and nightmares as mounts. 

Immortal Until Redeemed. A death knight can arise 
anew even after it has been destroyed. Only when it 


atones for a life of wickedness or finds redemption can it 


finally escape its undead purgatory and truly perish. 


a 


LorD SOTH 


Lord Soth began his fall from grace with an act of heroism, 
saving an elf named Isolde from an ogre. Soth and Isolde 
fell in love, but Soth was already married. He had a servant 
dispose of his wife and was charged with murder, but fled 
with Isolde. When his castle fell under siege, he prayed for 
guidance and was told that he must atone for his misdeeds 
by completing a quest, but growing fears about Isolde’s 
fidelity caused him to abandon his quest. Because his 
mission was not accomplished, a great cataclysm swept 
the land. When Isolde gave birth to a son, Soth refused to 
believe that the child was his and slew them both. All were 
incinerated in a fire that swept through the castle, yet Soth 
would find no rest in death, becoming a death knight. 


TT SS RE 


‘DEATH KNIGHT 


Medium undead, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 20 (plate, shield) 
Hit Points 180 (19d8 + 95) 
_ Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
20 (+5) 11 (+0) 20(+5) 12(41) 16(4+3) 18 (+4) 


——————— _— 


Saving Throws Dex +6, Wis +9, Cha +10 

Damage Immunities necrotic, poison 

Condition Immunities exhaustion, frightened, poisoned 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages Abyssal, Common 

Challenge 17 (18,000 XP) 


Y 
i 


Magic Resistance. The death knight has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


| Marshal Undead. Unless the death knight is incapacitated, 
it and undead creatures of its choice within 60 feet of it have 
| advantage on saving throws against features that turn undead. 


| Spellcasting. The death knight is a 19th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 18, +10 to hit 
with spell attacks). it has the following paladin spells prepared: 


Ist level (4 slots): command, compelled duel, searing smite 
2nd level (3 slots): hold person, magic weapon 

3rd level (3 slots): dispel magic, elemental weapon 

4th level (3 slots): banishment, staggering smite 


5th level (2 slots): destructive wave (necrotic) 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The death knight makes three longsword attacks. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 9 (1d8 + 5) slashing damage, or 10 (1d10 + 
5) slashing damage if used with two hands, plus 18 (4d8) 
necrotic damage. 


Hellfire Orb (1/Day). The death knight hurls a magical ball 
of fire that explodes at a point it can see within 120 feet of it. 
Each creature in a 20-foot-radius sphere centered on that point _ 
must make a DC 18 Dexterity saving throw. The sphere spreads 
around corners. A creature takes 35 (10d6) fire damage and 

35 (10d6) necrotic damage on a failed save, or half as much 
damage on a successful one. 


REACTIONS 


Parry. The death knight adds 6 to its AC against one melee 
attack that would hit it. To do so, the death knight must see the 
attacker and be wielding a melee weapon. 


Ll 


DEATH RM DOP 


| -DEMILICH — } 7 | 
AG "Tiny undead, neutral evil a oe eS 
| 
ie \ Armor Class 20 (natural armor) 
(iu Hit Points 80 (20d4) 
| mM | Speed 0 ft., fly 30 ft. (hover) 
i ‘le | STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
Hi + 5 1(-5) 20 (45) = 10 (440) 20 (45) 17 (+3) 20 (+5) 
i Py, C632 penser 
a i , | Saving Throws Con +6, Int +11, Wis +9, Cha +11 
Wil) : Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
(ee | magic weapons 
ie | Damage Immunities necrotic, poison, psychic; bludgeoning, 
vit ae piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons 
i Condition Immunities charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 
7 | frightened, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, stunned 
| Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 13 
7 | Languages — 
j ' Challenge 18 (20,000 XP) 
eeUeeeeeeeeeeeeEeeEeEE————eee—————ee 
>’ | Avoidance. \f the demilich is subjected to an effect that allows 
it to make a saving throw to take only half damage, it instead 
/ takes no damage if it succeeds on the saving throw, and only 
a | half damage if it fails. 
: | 
*' _ Legendary Resistance (3/Day). \f the demilich fails a saving 


| throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


| Turn Immunity. The demilich is immune to effects that 
/ turn undead. 


ACTIONS 


| 


| How! (Recharge 5-6). The demilich emits a bloodcurdling 
| howl. Each creature within 30 feet of the demilich that can hear 


pets pe be OL 
Seapied eraas 


“1, ACERERAK THE ETERNAL, 
YOUR Doom. Come, FOOLIs 
TREASURES, IF YOU DARE. 
ALL HAVE FaiLep! From 


ee a 
'BECKON You TO 
H'ONES, PLUNDER my 
f 

OTHERS Have TRIED. 


$s 
HALL BE WOVEN, AND YOUR BONES WILL CARPEY MY 


TOM 
8. ONLY Iam BEYOND Deatn’s gpeacy Onty I 
KNOW THE SECRET ‘ 
TO TRUE IMMORTALITY.” 


—~EPiraew or A DEMILICH 


reis 
i, A ry ah 


or drop to 0 hit’ points. On a successful save, the creatu 
frightened until the end ofits next turn, om chal teat y 


Life Drain, The demilich targets up to three creatures that it 
can see within 10 feet of it. Each target must succeed on a'DC — 

19 Constitution saving throw or take 21 (6d6) necrotic damage, 
and the demilich regains hit points equal to the total damage . 
dealt to all targets. | 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 2 See a | 

The demilich can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 

options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 

at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 

demilich regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 
| 


Flight. The demilich flies up to half its flying speed. 

Cloud of Dust. The demilich magically swirls its dusty remains. 
Each creature within 10 feet of the demilich, including around 
a corner, must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw | 
or be blinded until the end of the demilich’s next turn. A ; 
creature that succeeds on the saving throw is immune to this | 
effect until the end of the demilich’s next turn. i 

Energy Drain (Costs 2 Actions). Each creature within 30 feet 
of the demilich must make a DC 15 Constitution saving 
throw. On a failed save, the creature’s hit point maximum 
is magically reduced by 10 (3d6). If a creature’s hit point 
maximum is reduced to 0 by this effect, the creature dies. j 
A creature’s hit point maximum can be restored with the 
greater restoration spell or similar magic. 

Vile Curse (Costs 3 Actions). The demilich targets one creature | 
it can see within 30 feet of it. The target must succeed ona 
DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or be magically cursed. Until the | 
curse ends, the target has disadvantage on attack rolls and | 
saving throws. The target can repeat the saving throw atthe 
end of each of its turns, ending the curse on a success. 


SA LTA Jab 
Poe eS eee ce 


gee es ee ee ee 
er 7 ar er 


The immortality granted to a lich lasts only as long as 
it feeds mortal souls to its phylactery. If it falters or fails 
in that task, its bones turn to dust until only its skull 
remains. This “demilich” contains only a fragment of 
the lich’s malevolent life force—just enough so that if it 
is disturbed, these remains rise into the air and assume 
a wraithlike form. The skull then emits a terrifying 
howl that can slay the weak-hearted and leave others 
trembling with fear. Left alone, it sinks back down and 
returns to the empty peace of its existence. 

Few liches seek to become demiliches, for it means an 
end to the existence they hoped to preserve by becoming 
undead. However, time can erode the lich’s reason and 
memory, causing it to retreat into its ancient tomb and 
forget to feed on souls. The spells it once knew fade 
from its mind, and it no longer channels the arcane 
energy it wielded as a lich. However, even as a mere 
skull it remains a deadly and vexing enemy. 

Enduring Existence. Even after a lich is reduced to 
a demilich state, its phylactery survives. As long as its 
phylactery is intact, the demilich can’t be permanently 
destroyed. Its skull reforms after 1d10 days, restoring 
the creature to its wretched state. If it has the presence 
of mind to do so, a demilich can reclaim its former 
power by feeding just one soul to its phylactery. Doing 
so restores the demilich to lich form, reconstituting its 
undead body. 

Undead Nature. A demilich doesn’t require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. So great is a demilich’s will to survive 
that it always has the maximum number of hit points for 
its Hit Dice, instead of average hit points. 


DEMILICH’S LAIR 


A demilich hides its earthly remains and treasures in a 
labyrinthine tomb guarded by monsters and traps. At the 
heart of this labyrinth rests the demilich’s skull and the 
dust from its other bones. 

In its crypt, a demilich has access to lair actions 
and additional uses for its legendary actions. Its whole 
lair also has unique traits. A demilich in its lair has a 
challenge rating of 20 (24,500 XP). 


Lair ACTIONS 

On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the demilich 
rolls a d20. On a result of 11 or higher, the demilich 
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects. It 
can't use the same effect two rounds in a row. 


¢ The tomb trembles violently for a moment. Each crea- 
ture on the floor of the tomb must succeed on a DC 19 
Dexterity saving throw or be knocked prone. 

« The demilich targets one creature it can see within 
60 feet of it. An antimagic field fills the space of the 
target, moving with it until initiative count 20 on 
the next round. 

« The demilich targets any number of creatures it can 
see within 30 feet of it. No target can regain hit points 
until initiative count 20 on the next round. 


LAIR TRAITS 
A demilich’s tomb might have any or all of the following 
effects in place: rea 


- The first time a non-evil creature enters the tomb’s Bt 
area, the creature takes 16 (3d10) necrotic damage. 

« Monsters in the tomb have advantage on saving 
throws against being charmed or frightened, and 
against features that turn undead. ' 

+ The tomb is warded against the magical travel of 
creatures the demilich hasn’t authorized. Such crea- 
tures can’t teleport into or out of the tomb’s area 
or use planar travel to enter or leave it. Effects that 
allow teleportation or planar travel work within the 
tomb as long as they aren’t used to leave or enter the 
tomb’s area. 


If the demilich is destroyed, these effects fade over the 
course of 10 days. 


eee 
ACERERAK AND His DISCIPLES | 


The transformation into a demilich isn’t a bitter end for td 
all liches that experience it. Made as a conscious choice, ey 
the path of the demilich becomes the next step in a dark ys 
evolution. The lich Acererak—a powerful wizard and vom 
demonologist and the infamous master of the Tomb of | | 
Horrors—anticipated his own transformation, preparing for | 4 an 
it by setting enchanted gemstones into his skull’s eye sockets . 
and teeth. Each of these soul gems possessed the power to ; 
: - \ 

capture the souls on which his phylactery would feed. 

Acererak abandoned his physical body, accepting that it 4 
would molder and dissolve to dust while he traveled the ’ 
planes as a disembodied consciousness. If the skull that 
was his last physical remains was ever disturbed, its gems 4 
would claim the souls of the insolent intruders to histomb, ! 
magically transferring them to his phylactery. | 

Liches who follow Acererak’s path believe that by becoming , 
free of their bodies, they can continue their quest for power 
beyond the mortal world. As their patron did, they secure 
their remains within well-guarded vaults, using soul gems to 
maintain their phylacteries and destroy the adventurers who 
disturb their lairs. 

Acererak or another demilich like him has a challenge 
rating of 21 (33,000 XP), or 23 (50,000 XP) in its lair, and 
gains the following additional action option. 

Trap Soul. The demilich targets one creature that it can see 
within 30 feet of it. The target must make a DC 19 Charisma my 


saving throw. On a failed save, the target's soul is magically iho ain 
trapped inside one of the demilich’s gems. While the soul is Oe » 
trapped, the target’s body and all the equipment it is carrying i i. 

cease to exist. On a successful save, the target takes 24 ‘ ‘a 


(7d6) necrotic damage, and if this damage reduces the target | 
to 0 hit points, its soul is trapped as if it failed the saving ; 
throw. A soul trapped in a gem for 24 hours is devoured and a 
ceases to exist. ! owe 

If the demilich drops to 0 hit points, it is destroyed and ny 
turns to powder, leaving behind its gems. Crushing a gem eet eile: 
releases any soul trapped within, at which point the target’s | Ley te 
body re-forms in an unoccupied space nearest to the gem Wi ke 
and in the same state as when it was trapped. hie Hi) 


4 
: DEMONS 
{ Spawned in the Infinite Layers of the Abyss, demons 
i are the embodiment of chaos and evil—engines of 
destruction barely contained in monstrous form. 
Possessing no compassion, empathy, or mercy, they 
exist only to destroy. 

Spawn of Chaos. The Abyss creates demons as 
extensions of itself, spontaneously forming fiends out of 
filth and carnage. Some are unique monstrosities, while 
others represent uniform strains virtually identical to 
each other. Other demons (such as manes) are created 
from mortal souls shunned or cursed by the gods, or 
which are otherwise trapped in the Abyss. 

Capricious Elevation. Demons respect power and 
power alone. A greater demon commands shrieking 
mobs of lesser demons because it can destroy any lesser 
demon that dares to refuse its commands. A demon’s 
status grows with the blood it spills; the more enemies 
that fall before it, the greater it becomes. 

A demon might spawn as a manes, then become 
a dretch, and eventually transform to a vrock after 
untold time spent fighting and surviving in the Abyss. 
Such elevations are rare, however, for most demons 
are destroyed before they attain significant power. The 
greatest of those that do survive make up the ranks of 
the demon lords that threaten to tear the Abyss apart 
with their endless warring. 

By expending considerable magical power, demon 
lords can raise lesser demons into greater forms, though 
such promotions never stem from a demon’s deeds or 
accomplishments. Rather, a demon lord might warp a 
manes into a quasit when it needs an invisible spy, or 
turn an army of dretches into hezrous when marching 
against a rival lord. Demon lords only rarely elevate 
demons to the highest ranks, fearful of inadvertently 
creating rivals to their own power. 

Abyssal Invasions. Wherever they wander across the 
Abyss, demons search for portals to the other planes. 
They crave the chance to slip free of their native realm 
and spread their dark influence across the multiverse, 
undoing the works of the gods, tearing down civilizations, 
and reducing the cosmos to despair and ruin. 

_Some of the darkest legends of the mortal realm are 
built around the destruction wrought by demons set 
loose in the world. As such, even nations embroiled 
in bitter conflict will set their differences aside to help 
contain an outbreak of demons, or to seal off abyssal 
breaches before these fiends can break free. 

Signs of Corruption. Demons carry the stain of 
abyssal corruption with them, and their mere presence 

' changes the world for the worse. Plants wither and die 
in areas where abyssal breaches and demons appear. 

_ Animals shun the sites where a demon has made a 

| kill. The site of a demonic infestation might be fouled 

by a stench that never abates, by areas of bitter cold or 

| burning heat, or by permanent shadows that mark the 

| places where these fiends lingered. 

| Eternal Evil. Outside the Abyss, death is a minor 

/ nuisance that no demon fears. Mundane weapons can’t 

} stop these fiends, and many demons are resistant to 

the energy of the most potent spells. When a lucky hero 


| manages to drop a demon in combat, the fiend dissolves 
~~ into foul ichor. It then instantly reforms in the Abyss, its 
» mind and essence intact even as its hatred is inflamed. 

The only way to truly destroy a demon is to seek it in the 

Abyss and kill it there. 

Protected Essence. A powerful demon can take steps 
to safeguard its life essence, using secret methods and 
abyssal metals to create an amulet into which part of 
that essence is ceded. If the demon’s abyssal form is 
ever destroyed, the amulet allows the fiend to reform at 
a time and place of its choosing. 

Obtaining a demonic amulet is a dangerous 
enterprise, and simply seeking such a device risks 
drawing the attention of the demon that created it. A 
creature possessing a demonic amulet can exact favors 
from the demon whose life essence the amulet holds— 
or inflict great pain if the fiend resists. If an amulet is 
destroyed, the demon that created it is trapped in the 
Abyss for a year and a day. 

Demonic Cults. Despite the dark risks involved in 
dealing with fiends, the mortal realm is filled with 
creatures that covet demonic power. Demon lords 
manipulate these mortal servants into performing ever 
greater acts of depravity, furthering the demon lord’s 
ambitions in exchange for magic and other boons. 
‘However, a demon regards any mortals in its service as 
tools to’ use and then discard at its whim, consigning 
their mortal souls to the Abyss. 

Demon Summoning. Few acts are as dangerous as 

' summoning a demon, and even mages who bargain 
freely with devils fear the fiends of the Abyss. Though 
demons yearn to sow chaos on the Material Plane, they 
show no gratitude when brought there, raging against 
their prisons and demanding release. 

Those who would risk summoning a demon might 
do so to wrest information from it, press it into service, 
or send it on a mission that only a creature of absolute 
evil can complete. Preparation is key, and experienced 
summoners know the specific spells and magic items 
that can force a demon to bend to another’s will. If a 
single mistake is made, a demon that breaks free shows 
no mercy as it makes its summoner the first victim 
of its wrath. 

Bound Demons. The Book of Vile Darkness, the 
Black Scrolls of Ahm, and the Demonomicon of Iggwilv 
are the foremost authorities on demonic matters. These 
ancient tomes describe techniques that can trap the 
essence of a demon on the Material Plane, placing it 
within a weapon, idol, or piece of jewelry and preventing 
the fiend’s return to the Abyss. 

An object that binds a demon must be specially 
prepared with unholy incantations and innocent blood. 
It radiates a palpable evil, chilling and fouling the 
air around it. A creature that handles such an object 
experiences unsettling dreams and wicked impulses, 
but is able to control the demon whose essence is 
trapped within the object. Destroying the object 
frees the demon, which immediately seeks revenge 
against its binder. 

Demonic Possession. No matter how secure its 
bindings, a powerful demon often finds a way to escape 

an object that holds it. When a demonic essence 


leer uf 


i at uy Wl 
— ar rn ey eerste 
a a Tar ite ae eT 
i! 


emerges from its container, it can possess a mortal host. 4 va hig 
Sometimes a fiend employs stealth to hide a successful.’ Alls Ay 
possession. Other times, it unleashes the full brunt of its. Ha, 
fiendish drives through its new form. l Weatita he Oe rei, 

As long as the demon remains in possession of its ory ce 
host, the soul of that host is in danger of being dragged 
to the Abyss with the demon if it is exorcised from the 
fiesh, or if the host dies. If a demon possesses a creature 
and the object binding the demon is destroyed, the «. 
possession lasts until powerful magic is used to drive 
the demonic spirit out of its host. 


DEMON LORDS 


The chaotic power of the Abyss rewards demons of vie, 
particular ruthlessness and ingenuity with a dark py 
blessing, transforming them into unique fiends whose Russ: 
power can rival the gods. These demon lords rule ae 
through cunning or brute force, hoping to one day claim thy 9 
the prize of absolute control over all the Abyss. a I, 
Reward for Outsiders. Although most demon “ 
lords rise up from the vast and uncountable mobs of 
demons rampaging across the Abyss, the plane also 
rewards outsiders that conquer any of its infinite layers. 
The elven goddess Lolth became a demon lord after 
Corellon Larethian cast her into the Abyss for betraying 
elvenkind. Sages claim that the Dark Prince Graz’zt 
originated on some other plane before stealing his 
abyssal title from another long-forgotten demon lord. 
Power and Control. The greatest sign of a demon 
lord’s power is its ability to reshape an abyssal realm. A 
layer of the Abyss controlled by a demon lord becomes 
a twisted reflection of that fiend’s vile personality, 
and demon lords seldom leave their realms for fear of 
allowing another creature to reshape and seize it. . 
As with other demons, a demon lord that dies on Hb) 
another plane has its essence return to the Abyss, where “a 
it reforms into a new body. Likewise, a demon lord that 
dies in the Abyss is permanently destroyed. Most demon 
lords keep a portion of their essence safely stored away 
to prevent such a fate. 


BAPHOMET 
The demon lord Baphomet, also known as the Horned 
King and the Prince of Beasts, rules over minotaurs and 
other savage creatures. If he had his way, civilization 
would crumble and all races would embrace their base 
animal savagery. ae 
The Prince of Beasts appears as a huge, black-furred 
minotaur with iron horns, red eyes, and a blood-soaked 
mouth. His iron crown is topped with the rotting heads 
of his enemies, while his dark armor is set with spikes 
and skull-like serrations. He carries a huge glaive 
named Heartcleaver, but often hurls it into the fray so as 
to face his enemies with horns and hooves. 


DEMOGORGON 

The Sibilant Beast and the self-styled Prince of 
Demons, Demogorgon yearns for nothing less than 
undoing the order of the multiverse. An insane 
assemblage of features and drives, the Prince of Han 
Demons inspires fear and hatred among other demons, Hal 
and demon lords. | 


ite 
ern 


I) 


i 
WN: 


Demogorgon towers three times the height of 

a human, his body as sinuous as a snake’s and as 
powerful as a great ape’s. Suckered tentacles take 
the place of his arms. His saurian lower torso ends 
in webbed and clawed feet, and a forked tail whose 


whip-like tips are armed with cruel blades. The Prince 


of Demons has two baleful baboon heads, both of 
them mad. It is only the conflict between the two 
halves of his dual nature that keeps the demon lord’s 
ambitions in check. 


GRAZ’2T 

The demon lord Graz’zt appears as a darkly handsome 
figure nearly nine feet tall. Those who refer to the 
Dark Prince as the most humanoid of the demon 

lords vastly underestimate the capacity for evil in his 
scheming heart. 

Graz’zt is a striking physical specimen, whose 
demonic nature shows in his ebon skin, pointed ears, 
yellow fangs, crown of horns, and six-fingered hands. 
He delights in finery, pageantry, and sating his decadent 
desires with subjects and consorts alike, among whom 
incubi and succubi are often his favorites. 


JUIBLEX 

The demon lord of slimes and oozes, Juiblex is a stew 
of noxious fluids that lurks in the abyssal depths. The 
wretched Faceless Lord cares nothing for cultists 

or mortal servants, and its sole desire is to turn all 
creatures into formless copies of its horrid self. 

In its resting state, Juiblex spreads out in a noxious 
mass, bubbling and filling the air with a profound 
stench. On the rare occasions when creatures confront 
the demon lord, Juiblex draws itself up into a shuddering 
cone of slime striated with veins of black and green. 
Baleful red eyes swim within its gelatinous body, while 
dripping pseudopods of ooze lash out hungrily at any 


_ cfeature they can reach. 


- Lorru 
The Demon Queen of Spiders is the evil matron of the 


drow. Her every thought is touched by malice, and the 


_ depth of her viciousness can surprise even her most 
‘| faithful priestesses. She directs her faithful while she 


weaves plots across the worlds of the Material Plane, 


_ ‘looking forward to the time when her drow followers 
bring those worlds under her control. 


Lolth appears as a lithe, imperious drow matriarch 
when she manifests to her followers in the mortal 


_fealm, which she does with unusual frequency. When 


battle breaks out—or if she has a reason to remind her 
followers to fear her—Lolth’s lower body transforms into 
that of a huge demonic spider, whose spike-tipped legs 
and mandibles tear foes apart. 


Orcus 
Known as the Demon Prince of Undeath and the Blood 
Lord, the demon lord Orcus is worshiped by the undead 
and by living creatures that channel the power of 
undeath, A brooding and nihilistic entity, Orcus yearns 
to make the multiverse a place of death and darkness, 

} forever Hnchanging except by his will. 


oe pale ee ee oe 
Se ae — 


T hé é’Déindn Prince of Undeath a fel ‘antd aoneaiet 
creature, with A -humanoid torso, powerful goat legs, 
and the desiccated head of a ram. His sore-ridden body 
stinks of disease, but his decaying head and glowing 
red eyes are as a creature already dead. Great black 
bat wings sprout from his back, stirring reeking air 
as he moves. 

Orcus wields a malevolent artifact known as the 
Wand of Orcus, a mace-like rod of obsidian topped 
by a humanoid skull. He surrounds himself with 
undead, and living creatures not under his control are 
anathema to him. 


YEENOGHU 
Known as the Gnoll Lord and the Beast of Butchery, 
the demon lord Yeenoghu hungers for slaughter 
and senseless destruction. Gnolls are his mortal 
instruments, and he drives them to ever-greater 
atrocities in his name. Delighting in sorrow and 
hopelessness, the Gnoll Lord yearns to turn the world 
into a wasteland in which the last surviving gnolls tear 
each other apart for the right to feast upon the dead. 
Yeenoghu appears as a huge, scarred gnoll with a 
spiky crest of black spines, and eyes that burn with 
emerald flame. His armor is a patchwork of shields and 
breastplates claimed from fallen foes, and decorated by 
those foes’ flayed skins. Yeenoghu can summon a triple 
flail he calls the Butcher, which he wields to deadly 
effect or wills to fly independently into battle as he tears 
foes apart with teeth and claws. 


OTHER DEMON LORDS 

No one knows the full number of demon lords that 
rage in the Abyss. Given the infinite depths of that 
plane, powerful demons constantly rise to become 
demon lords, then fall almost as quickly. Among the 
demon lords whose power has endured long enough 
for demonologists to name them are Fraz-Urb’luu, the 
Prince of Deception; Kostchtchie, the Prince of Wrath; 
Pazuzu, Prince of the Lower Aerial Kingdoms; and 
Zuggtmoy, Lady of Fungi. 


DEMON TYPES 


Demonologists organize the chaotic distribution of 
demons into broad categories of power known as 
types. Most demons fit into one of six major types, with 
the weakest categorized as Type 1 and the strongest 

as Type 6. Demons outside the six main types are 
categorized as minor demons and demon lords. 


DEMONS BY TYPE 

Type 
1 barlgura, shadow demon, vrock 

chasme, hezrou 

glabrezu, yochlol 

nalfeshnee 

marilith 

balor, goristro 


Examples 


aA & W DN 


ees arth his NES tk: 


1 hts i He TF Ty. 
7 a in aie bs fe 


Les 
ta ih 1a i 
= Spare ie Ls! mu ipsa = 
er 7 =—- FE Sse ————— -= 


_ Figures of ancient and terrible evil, balors rule as 
generals over demonic armies, yearning to seize power 
while destroying any creatures that oppose them. 

Wielding a flaming whip and a longsword that 
channels the power of the storm, a balor’s battle 
prowess is fueled by hatred and rage. It channels this 
demonic fury in its death throes, falling within a blast of 
fire that can destroy even the hardiest foes. 


BARLGURA 


The barlgura represents the savagery and brutality 

of the Abyss. Barlguras gather in packs to take down 

tougher foes, keep gruesome trophies from their 

victories, and decorate their territory with such objects. 
A barlgura looks like a hulking orangutan with a 

gruesome, drooping visage and tusks jutting from 

its jaw. Standing just under 8 feet tall, it has broad 

shoulders and weighs 650 pounds. It moves apishly 

along the ground, but it climbs with great speed 

and agility. 


CHASME 


This loathsome demon resembles an unspeakable 
crossing of humanoid and fly. A chasme shuffles about 
on four spindly legs that can find purchase on walls 
and ceilings. A droning sound precedes the approach 
of a chasme, inflicting foes with a terrible lethargy that 
leaves them open to attack. 

The lowly chasmes serve more powerful masters as 
interrogators or taskmasters. A chasme lives to dole 
out torture as punishment, and has a knack for spotting 
demons that have deserted their lords. Capturing and 
returning such traitors allows a chasme to torment the 
of victim without fear of reprisal. 


DRETCH 


Dretches are among the weakest of demons—repulsive, 
self-loathing creatures doomed to spend eternity ina 
state of perpetual discontent. Their low intelligence 
makes dretches unsuitable for anything but the simplest 
tasks. However, what they lack in potential, they make 
up for in sheer malice. Dretches mill about in mobs, 
voicing their displeasure as an unsettling din of hoots, 
snarls, and grunts. 


GLABREZU 


A glabrezu takes great pleasure in destroying mortals 
through temptation, and these creatures are among the 
few demons to offer their service to creatures foolish 
enough to summon them. 

Although glabrezus are devastating in combat, they 
prefer to tempt victims into ruin, using power or wealth 
as a lure. Engaging in guile, trickery, and evil bargains, 
a glabrezu hoards riches that it uses to fulfill promises 
to shortsighted summoners and weak-willed mortals. 

_ However, if its attempts to entice or deceive fail, a 
_ glabrezu has the strength to fight and win. 


: ST Te i 


GORISTRO 


The goristro resembles a fiendish minotaur towering ; 
more than twenty feet tall. When controlled by a demon ye te 
lord, goristros make formidable living siege engines abil)" cis 
prized pets. Goristros possess preternatural cunning nt 
when navigating labyrinthine passages and shifting 
corridors, pursuing foes in a terrifying hunt. 

A hulking goristro sometimes bears a palanquiny, 
carrying smaller demons on its broad shoulders, much 
like an elephant carries riders on its back. ‘ 


HEZROU oe 


Hezrous serve as foot soldiers in the demonic hordes of 
the Abyss. Although physically powerful, they aré weak- 
minded and hezrous can easily be duped into sacrificing 
themselves by more powerful demons. As they press 
their attacks into the heart of an enemy’s forces, their 
foul stench can sicken even the toughest foes. 


MANES me 


Souls of evil creatures that descend to the Lower 
Planes are transformed into manes—the lowest form 
of demonkind. These wretched fiends attack any non- 
demon they see, and they are called to the Material 
Plane by those seeking to sow death and chaos. 
Orcus, the Prince of Undeath, has the power to On 
transform manes into undead monsters, most often mr 
ghouls and shadows. Other demon lords feed on manes, 
destroying them utterly. Otherwise, killing a manes 
causes it to dissipate into a cloud of reeking vapor that 
reforms into another manes after one day. | 


MARILITH 


Terrible to behold, a marilith has the lower body of a 
great serpent and the upper torso of a humanoid female 
with six arms. 

Wielding a wicked blade in each of its six hands, a 
marilith is a devastating foe that few can match in battle. 
These demons possess keen minds and a finely honed 
sense of tactics, and they are able to lead and unite 
other demons in common cause. Mariliths are often 
encountered as captains at the head of a demonic horde, 
where they embrace any opportunity to rush headlong 
into battle. 


DEMON TRUE NAMES 
Though demons all have common names, every demon lord 
and every demon of type 1 through 6 has a true name that 
it keeps secret. A demon can be forced to disclose its true 
name if charmed, and ancient scrolls and tomes are said to 
exist that list the true names of the most powerful demons. 

A mortal who learns a demon’s true name can use 

powerful summoning magic to call the demon from the 
Abyss and exercise some measure of control over it. 

_ However, most demons brought to the Material Plane in this 
manner do everything in their power to wreak havoc or sow 

discord and strife. 


rpoe Se ee 


NALFESHNEE. 


The nalfeshnee is one of the most grotesque demons—a 
corpulent mockery of ape and boar standing twice the 
height of a human, with feathered wings that seem 
too small for its bloated body. These brutish features 
conceal a remarkable intelligence and cunning. 
Nalfeshnees are devastating in combat, using 
their wings to soar above the front ranks and reach 
vulnerable adversaries that can be dispatched with little 
effort. From the thick of battle, they telepathically bellow 
commands to lesser demons, even as they inspire a 
sense of dread that forces their foes to scatter and run. 
Nalfeshnees feed on hatred and despair, but they 
crave humanoid flesh above all else. They keep their 
larders filled with humanoids abducted from the 
Material Plane, then eat those creatures alive during 
elaborate feasts. Thinking of themselves as refined and 
cultured, nalfeshnees employ stained and rusted cutlery 
when they dine. 


JUASIT. # _ 

Quasits infest the Lower Planes. Physically weak, they 
keep to the shadows to plot mischief and wickedness. 
More powerful demons use quasits as spies and 
messengers when they aren’t devouring them or pulling 
thern apart to pass the time. 

A quasit can assume animal forms, but in its true form 
it looks like a 2-foot-tall green humanoid with a barbed 
tail and horns. The quasit has clawed fingers and toes, 
and these claws can deliver an irritating poison. It 
prefers to be invisible when it attacks. 


IHADOW DEMON 


When a demon’s body is destroyed but the fiend is 

prevented from reforming in the Abyss, its essence 
sometimes takes on a vague physical form. These 
shadow demons exist outside the normal abyssal 
hierarchy, since their creation results most often from 

‘mortal magic, not from transformation or promotion. 

* Shadow demons all but disappear in the darkness, 
and they can creep about without making a sound. A 
shadow demon uses its insubstantial claws to feast on 
its victim’s fears, to taste its memories, and drink in 
its doubts. Bright light harries this fiend and shows its 
distinct shape, resolving it from a blur of darkness to a 
winged humanoid creature whose lower body trails off 
into nothing, and whose claws rend a victim’s mind. 

Shadowy Nature. A shadow demon doesn’t require 
“alt, food, drink, or sleep. 


VROCK 


Vrocks are dull-witted, capricious fiends that live only 

to create pain and carnage. A vrock resembles a giant 
hybrid of humanoid and vulture, its gnarled, bestial body 
and broad wings stinking of offal. 


Vrocks gobbléshumanoid flesh whenever they can, 
stunning potential prey with an ear-splitting shriek, then 
swooping down to attack with beak and claw. Vrocks 
can shake their wings, releasing clouds of toxic spores. 

Coveting pretty things, vrocks turn against each 
other for the chance to lay claim to cheap jewelry or 
ornamental stones. Despite their love of treasure, vrocks 
are difficult to bribe, seeing no reason to bargain when 
they can simply take what they want from a would-be 
bargainer’s corpse. 


YOCHLOL 


The yochlols are the Handmaidens of Lolth—extensions 
of the Spider Queen’s will dedicated to acting as 
her spies, taskmasters, and agents of villainy. They 
attend their goddess in the Demonweb Pits, but Lolth 
sometimes dispatches yochlols to the Material Plane 
to guard her temples and to aid her most devout 
priestesses. Yochlols don’t form outside Lolth’s realm of 
the Demonweb, and they serve no demon lords except 
their queen. 

Outside the Abyss, a yochlol can assume the guise 
of a female drow or monstrous spider to conceal its 
demonic form. In its true form, the fiend appears as a 
pillar of yellow slime with a single malevolent eye. In its 
drow and true form, a yochlol’s touch carries the same 
venomous touch as its spider form’s bite. 


> a, ie) OO — 
VARIANT: DEMON SUMMONING 


Some demons can have an action option that allows them to | 
summon other demons. 

Summon Demon (1/Day). The demon chooses what to 
summon and attempts a magical summoning. 


« A balor has a 50 percent chance of summoning 1d8 

vrocks, 1d6 hezrous, 1d4 glabrezus, 1d3 nalfeshnees, 1d2 | 

mariliths, or one goristro. | 

A barlgura has a 30 percent chance of summoning one 

barlgura. 

« Achasme has a 30 percent chance of summoning one 

chasme. 

A glabrezu has a 30 percent chance of summoning 1d3 

vrocks, 1d2 hezrous, or one giabrezu. 

« A hezrou has a 30 percent chance of summoning 2d6 
dretches or one hezrou. 

« Amarilith has a 50 percent chance of summoning 1d6 
vrocks, 1d4 hezrous, 1d3 glabrezus, 1d2 nalfeshnees, or 
one marilith. 

» Analfeshnee has a 50 percent chance of summoning 1d4 
vrocks, 1d3 hezrous, 1d2 glabrezus, or one nalfeshnee. 

« A vrock has a 30 percent chance of summoning 2d4 
dretches or one vrock. 

« Ayochlol has a 50 percent chance of summoning one 
yochlol. 


A summoned demon appears in an unoccupied space within 
60 feet of its summoner, acts as an ally of its summoner, and | 
can’t summon other demons. It remains for 1 minute, until 

it or its summoner dies, or until its summoner dismisses it 

as an action. 


————————— —— — . - ~~ —a - wi 
= —————— ~ SS i ar = : = PRM aaAE! Fa eae tay 
. " Z : - 1 A hy ny re tn 
i” | : - 25 “ - i il AT ey 

tr 


> - 7 = ail a _ e 4 i _ Sfroyite ln na = te 1 Re is a iF 


BALOR 


Fuge fiend (demon), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 
| Hit Points 262 (21d12 + 126) 
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft. 


ee 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
26 (+8) 15 (+2) 22(4+6) 20(+5) 16 (+3) 22 (+6) 
ae ie! c= 
Saving Throws Str +14, Con +12, Wis +9, Cha +12 
Damage Resistances cold, lightning; bludgeoning, piercing, 
and slashing from nonmagical weapons 
Damage Immunities fire, poison 
Condition Immunities poisoned 
| Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft. 
| Challenge 19 (22,000 XP) 


ee 


Death Throes. When the balor dies, it explodes, and each 
creature within 30 feet of it must make a DC 20 Dexterity 
saving throw, taking 70 (20d6) fire damage on a failed save, 

_ or half as much damage on a successful one. The explosion 

_ ignites flammable objects in that area that aren’t being worn or 
carried, and it destroys the balor’s weapons. 


Fire Aura. At the start of each of the balor’s turns, each 
creature within 5 feet of it takes 10 (3d6) fire damage, and 
flammable objects in the aura that aren’t being worh or carried 
ignite. A creature that touches the balor or hits it with a melee 
attack while within 5 feet of it takes 10 (3d6) fire damage. 


Magic Resistance. The balor has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Magic Weapons. The balor’s weapon attacks are magical. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The balor makes two attacks: one with its 
longsword and one with its whip. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 10 ft., 
one target. Hit: 21 (3d8 + 8) slashing damage plus 13 (3d8) 
lightning damage. If the balor scores a critical hit, it rolls 
damage dice three times, instead of twice. 


Whip. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 30 ft., one target. 
Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) slashing damage plus 10 (3d6) firedamage, _| 
and the target must succeed on a DC 20 Strength saving throw | 
or be pulled up to 25 feet toward the balor. 


Teleport. The balor magically teleports, along with any 
equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 120 feet to an 
unoccupied space it can see. 


— : 4 


a0) UC Re Ps 


aT ™ 
~ 


ee = SR RP SI I Ss Nef ae aea ae 


D = 
" — 


56 


] 
i 


BARLGURA 


Large fiend (demon), chaotic evil 


—T 


——— ae 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 68 (8d10 + 24) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 15 (+2) 16 (+3) 


7 (-2) ‘14 (+2) 
Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +6 

Skills Perception +5, Stealth +5 

Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15 
Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft. 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


a Se SS 


9 (-1) 


—. 


Innate Spelicasting. The barlgura’s spellcasting ability is 
Wisdom (spell save DC 13). The barlgura can innately cast the 
following spells, requiring no material components: 


1/day each: entangle, phantasmal force 
2/day each: disguise self, invisibility (self‘only) 


Reckless. At the start of its turn, the barlgura can gain 
advantage on all melee weapon attack rolls it makes during 
that turn, but attack rolls against it have advantage until the 
start of its next turn. 


Running Leap. The barlgura’s long jump is up to 40 feet and its 
high jump is up to 20 feet when it has a running start. 
ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The barlgura makes three attacks: one with its 
bite and two with its fists. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage. 


Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 
9 (1d10 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


CHASME 


| Large fiend (demon), chaotic evil 


' (i a a 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 


| Hit Points 84 (13d10 + 13) 


Speed 20 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (+2) 15 (42) 12 (41) = 1140) 1442) _~—-10 (40) 
a a a 
Saving Throws Dex +5, Wis +5 


| Skills Perception +5 

| Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning 

_ Damage Immunities poison 

| Condition Immunities poisoned 

| Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15 


Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft. 
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


a 


_ Drone. The chasme produces a horrid droning sound to 


which demons are immune. Any other creature that starts its 


| turn within 30 feet of the chasme must succeed on a DC 12 

| Constitution saving throw or fall unconscious for 10 minutes. 

_ Acreature that can’t hear the drone automatically succeeds on 

_ the save. The effect on the creature ends if it takes damage or if 


another creature takes an action to splash it with holy water. If 
a creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 
it is immune to the drone for the next 24 hours. 


Magic Resistance. The chasme has advantage on saving throws 


| against spells and other magical effects. 


Spider Climb. The chasme can climb difficult surfaces, 
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 


| ability check. 


ACTIONS 


Proboscis. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
Creature. Hit: 16 (4d6 + 2) piercing damage plus 24 (7d6) 
necrotic damage, and the target’s hit point maximum is 
reduced by an amount equal to the necrotic damage taken. If 
this effect reduces a creature’s hit point maximum to 0, the 
creature dies. This reduction to a creature’s hit point maximum 
lasts until the creature finishes a long rest or until it is affected 
by a spell like greater restoration. 


1 yu i \ 


pita rile 
ul) 


DRETCH 


Small fiend (demon), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 11 (hatural armor) 
Hit Points 18 (4d6 + 4) 


Speed 20 ft. 

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

THO) & 11 (40) .12(+1) 5 (-3) 8 CI) «(3'G4) 
| 


——————————— 

Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 

Languages Abyssal, telepathy 60 ft. (works only with creatures 
that understand Abyssal) 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The dretch makes two attacks: one with its bite 
and one with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 3 (1d6) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (2d4) slashing damage. 


Fetid Cloud (1/Day). A 10-foot radius of disgusting green gas 
extends out from the dretch. The gas spreads around corners, 
and its area is lightly obscured. It lasts for 1 minute or until a 
strong wind disperses it. Any creature that starts its turn in that 
area must succeed on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw or be 
poisoned until the start of its next turn. While poisoned in this 
way, the target can take either an action ora bonus actionon =| 
its turn, not both, and can’t take reactions. i 


DEN GHS 


i 
- _ 57 


_GLABREZU 


| 


i 
| 


) Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 


Large fiend (demon), chaotic evil 


Hit Points 157 (15d10 + 75) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
20 (+5) 15(+2) 2145) 19(+4) 173) 16 (43) 
——————— 
Saving Throws Str +9, Con +9, Wis +7, Cha +7 
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, 
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities poisoned 
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 13 


_ Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft. 


Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 


apr —™ 


Innate Spelicasting. The glabrezu’s spellcasting ability is 


| Intelligence (spell save DC 16). The glabrezu can innately cast 
the following spells, requiring no material components: 


58 ~~ 


At will: darkness, detect magic, dispel magic 
I/day each: confusion, fly, power Word stun 


Magic Resistance. The glabrezu has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The glabrezu makes four attacks: two with its 
pincers and two with its fists. Alternatively, it makes two 
attacks with its pincers and casts one spell. 


Pincer. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 16 (2d10 + 5) bludgeoning damage. If the target is 
a Medium or smaller creature, it is grappled (escape DC 15). 
The glabrezu has two pincers, each of which can grapple only 
one target. 


Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: | 
7 (2d4 + 2) bludgeoning damage. 


GORISTRO 
Fluge fiend (demon), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 310 (23d12 + 161) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
25 (+7) 11 (+0) 25 (47) 6(-2) 341) 14 (42 
eer 
| Saving Throws Str +13, Dex +6, Con +13, Wis +7 
Skills Perception +7 
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, 
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities poisoned 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 17 
Languages Abyssal 
Challenge 17 (18,000 XP) 


Charge. \f the goristro moves at least 15 feet straight toward a 
| target and then hits it with a gore attack on the same turn, the 


target takes an extra 38 (7d10) piercing damage. If the target is 


a creature, it must succeed on a DC 21 Strength saving throw 
or be pushed up to 20 feet.away and knocked prone, 


Labyrinthine Recall. The goristro can petfectly recall any path it 
has traveled. 


Magic Resistance. The goristro has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Siege Monster. The goristro deals double damage to objects 
and structures. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The goristro makes three attacks: two with its 
fists and one with its hoof. 


Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 20 (3d8 + 7) bludgeoning damage. 


Hoof. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 23 (3d10 + 7) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a 
creature, it must succeed on a DC 21 Strength saving throw or 
be knocked prone. 


Gore. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 


ye i 


Le esl 
saat tl 
pet 
h ! | WW 


“SN 


Hit: 45 (7d10 + 7) piercing damage. he 


Hi | 


> ee 


60 


ee 2 ee ——— — = a = 
Armor Class 9 
Magic Resistance. The hezrou has advantage on saving throws Hit Points 9 (2d6 + 2) 
against spells and other magical effects. Speed 20 ft. 
Stench. Any creature that starts its turn within 10 feet of the STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
hezrou must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution saving throw 10 (40) 9 (-1) 13 (41) 3(-4) 8 (-1) 4 (-3) 
or be poisoned until the start of its next turn. On a successful ae z= a a 
saving throw, the creature is immune to the hezrou’s stench - A. 
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning 
for 24 hours. D i. ‘ 
amage Immunities poison 
: Condition immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned 
ACTION : = Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 
Multiattack. The hezrou makes three attacks: one with its bite Languages understands Abyssal but can’t speak 
and two with its claws. Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. ~ —— an 
Hit: 15 (2d10 + 4) piercing damage. ACTIONS 
" Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Be Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage. Hit: 5 (2d4) slashing damage. | 


a 


LE 
zy FOR THIS DAMNA®P 


U 
HING COULD GROW UP 
u 


TIC 
EMIRIKOL THE Craett 


— 


HEZROU 


Large fiend (demon), chaotic evil 


ee ————— - —— 


Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 

Hit Points 136 (13d10 + 65) 

Speed 30 ft. 

— EE — —___—___ 

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

19 (+4) 17(43) 20 (+5) 95 (-3) «12 (#1) ~—«13. G1) 

te mii aa 

Saving Throws Str +7, Con +8, Wis +4 

Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, 
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11 

Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft. 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


Small fiend (demon), chaotic evil 


DEMONS 


_MARILITH 
| Large fiend (demon), chaotic evil 


' Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 


_ Hit Points 189 (18d10 + 90) 
| Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 20 (+5) 20(4+5) 18(4+4) 16 (43) 20 (+5) 


| Saving Throws Str +9, Con +10, Wis +8, Cha +10 
| Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, 
| piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons 
) Damage Immunities poison 
' Condition Immunities poisoned 
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 13 
| Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft. 
| Challenge 16 (15,000 XP) 
rr —™ 


| Magic Resistance. The marilith has advantage on saving throws 
| against spells and other magical effects. 


| Magic Weapons. The marilith’s weapon attacks are magical. 


Reactive. The marilith can take one reaction on every turn 
in a combat. ’ 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The marilith makes seven attacks: six with its 
longswords and one with its tail. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) slashing damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 15 (2d10 + 4) bludgeoning damage. If the target is Medium | 
or smaller, it is grappled (escape DC 19). Until this grapple 
ends, the target is restrained, the marilith can automatically hit 
the target with its tail, and the marilith can’t make tail attacks 
against other targets. 


Teleport. The marilith magically teleports, along with any 
equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 120 feet to an 
unoccupied space it can see. 


REACTIONS 


Parry. The marilith adds 5 to its AC against one melee attack 
that would hit it. To do so, the marilith must see the attacker | 
and be wielding a melee weapon. f 


ya ho 
HE 
i Fear = Co faery Lak a 
af ' Nie el fee ote 


1 Cc 
— vee te Le —t 
i — 


NALFESHNEE 


Large fiend (demon), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 184 (16d10 + 96) 


_ Speed 20 ft., fly 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
21 (+5) 10(+0) 22(+6) 19(+4) 12(41) 15 (42 


Saving Throws Con +11, Int +9, Wis +6, Cha +7 

Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, 
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 11 

Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft. 


| Challenge 13 (10,000 XP) 


Magic Resistance. The nalfeshnee has advantage on saving 


throws against spells and other magical effects. 


Multiattack. The nalfeshnee uses Horror Nimbus if it can. 
It then makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with 
its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 32 (5d10 + 5) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 15 (3d6 + 5) slashing damage. 


Horror Nimbus (Recharge 5-6). The nalfeshnee magically 
emits scintillating, multicolored light. Each creature within 15 
feet of the nalfeshnee that can see the light must succeed on 

a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. A 
creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. if a creature’s 
saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, the 
creature is immune to the nalfeshnee’s Horror Nimbus for the 
next 24 hours. 


Teleport. The nalfeshnee magically teleports, along with 
any equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 120 feet to an 
unoccupied space it can see. 


ee a ee ee. 


——— 


VARIANT: QUASIT FAMILIAR 


Mortal spellcasters interested in extraplanar familiars find 
quasits easy to summon and eager to serve. The quasit plays 
the part of the obsequious servant. It serves its master well, 
but it goads the mortal to greater and greater acts of chaos 
and evil. Such quasits have the following trait. 

Familiar. The quasit can serve another creature as a 
familiar, forming a telepathic bond with its willing master. 
While the two are bonded, the master can sense what the 
quasit senses as long as they are within 1 mile of each other. 
While the quasit is within 10 feet of its master, the master 
_ shares the quasit’s Magic Resistance trait. At any time and 
for any reason, the quasit can end its service as a familiar, 
ending the telepathic bond. 


QUASIT 


Tiny fiend (demon, shapechanger), chaotic evil 


, Armor Class 13 
_ Hit Points 7 (3d4) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
5 (-3) 17 (+3) 10(+0) 7(-2) 10(+0) 10 (+0) 
- ‘ : 
Skills Stealth +5 
_ Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, 
| piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons 
_ Damage Immunities poison 
_ Condition Immunities poisoned 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10 
_ Languages Abyssal, Common 
_ Challenge 1 (200 XP) 
| 


Shapechanger. The quasit can use its action to polymorph into 
| a beast form that resembles a bat (speed 10 ft. fly 40 ft.), a 
_centipede (40 ft., climb 40 ft.), or a toad (40 ft., swim 40 ft.), 
_ or back into its true form. Its statistics are the same in each 


form, except for the speed changes noted. Any equipment it is 


FSS aR eT Sa 
wearing or carrying isn’t transformed. It reverts to its true form 
if it dies. 

Magic Resistance. The quasit has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Claws (Bite in Beast Form). Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, 
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage, and 
the target must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw 
or take 5 (2d4) poison damage and become poisoned for 1 
minute. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of 
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Scare (1/Day). One creature of the quasit’s choice within 20 
feet of it must succeed on a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw or be 
frightened for 1 minute. The target can repeat the saving throw 
at the end of each of its turns, with disadvantage if the quasit is 
within line of sight, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Invisibility. The quasit magically turns invisible until it 
attacks or uses Scare, or until its concentration ends (as if 
concentrating on a spell). Any equipment the quasit wears or =| | 
carries is invisible with it. ie 


win. 
SHADOW DEMON 


Medium fiend (demon), chaotic evil’ 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 66 (12d8 + 12) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft. 


CHA 
14 (+2) 


STR —_— DEX 
1(-5) 17 (43) 


CON INT WIS 
12 (+1) 14 (42) ~—-13 (41) 


Saving Throws Dex +5, Cha +4 
Skills Stealth +7 
Damage Vulnerabilities radiant 
Damage Resistances acid, fire, necrotic, thunder; bludgeoning, 
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons 
_ Damage Immunities cold, lightning, poison 
Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed, 
petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11 
| Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft. 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


ee 


Incorporeal Movement. The demon can move through other 
creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It takes 5 
(1d10) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object. 


Light Sensitivity. While in bright light, the demon has 
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight. 


Shadow Stealth. While in dim light or darkness, the demon can 
take the Hide action as a bonus action. 

ACTIONS 

Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 


6 / qe 
‘ 


creature. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) psychic damage or, if the demon had | 


> advantage on the attack roll, 17 (4d6 + 3) psychic damage. 


“Vrock 


Large fiend (demon), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 104 (11d10 + 44) 
Speed 40 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
17 (43) =—- 15 (42) 18 (44) = 8 (-1) =: 13 (41) ~—s 8 (-1) 
EE Eee 
Saving Throws Dex +5, Wis +4, Cha +2 
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, 
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities poisoned 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages Abyssal, telepathy 120 ft. 
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


Aa a 


Magic Resistance. The vrock has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The vrock makes two attacks: one with its beak 
and one with its talons. 


‘Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 14 (2d10 + 3) slashing damage. 


Spores (Recharge 6). A 15-foot-radius cloud of toxic spores 
extends out from the vrock. The spores spread around 
corners. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 
14 Constitution saving throw or become poisoned. While 
poisoned in this way, a target takes 5 (1d10) poison damage 

at the start of each of its turns. A target can repeat the saving 
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself | 
on a success. Emptying a vial of holy water on the target also 
ends the effect on it. 


Stunning Screech (1/Day). The vrock emits a horrific screech. 
Each creature within 20 feet of it that can hear it and that isn’t a 
demon must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution saving throw or | 
be stunned until the end of the vrock’s next turn. 


YOCHLOL 
| Medium fiend (demon, shapechanger), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 136 (16d8 + 64) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (+2) 14(+2) 18 (44) 13 (41) 15 (42) 15 (42) 
Ee 
_ Saving Throws Dex +6, Int +5, Wis +6, Cha +6 
| Skills Deception +10, Insight +6 
_ Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, 
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons 
_ Damage Immunities poison 
| Condition Immunities poisoned 
| Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12 
| Languages Abyssal, Elvish, Undercommon 
| Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) 


__ ae 


_ Shapechanger. The yochlol can use its action to polymorph 

_ into a form that resembles a female drow or giant spider, or 
back into its true form. Its statistics are the same in each form. 

_ Any equipment it is wearing or carrying isn’t transformed. It 

| reverts to its true form if it dies. 


| Magic Resistance. The yochlol has advantage on saving throws 
_ against spells and other magical effects. 


| Spider Climb. The yochlol can climb difficult surfaces, 


ability check. 


Innate Spellcasting. The yochlol’s spellcasting ability is 


including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 


Charisma (spell save DC 14), The yochlol can innately cast the ' 
following spells, requiring no matérial components: | 


At will: detect thoughts, web 
1/day: dominate person 


Web Walker. The yochlol ignores movement restrictions caused 
by webbing. 


ACTIONS I 


Multiattack. The yochlol makes two melee attacks. | 


Slam (Bite in Spider Form). Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, 
reach 5 ft. (10 ft. in demon form), one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) 
bludgeoning (piercing in spider form) damage plus 21 (6d6) 
poison damage. 


Mist Form. The yochlol transforms into toxic mist or reverts to | i 
its true form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is also 
transformed. It reverts to its true form if it dies. 
While in mist form, the yochlol is incapacitated and can’t | 
speak. It has a flying speed of 30 feet, can hover, and can 
pass through any space that isn’t airtight. It has advantage on | 
Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution saving throws, and itis | 
immune to nonmagical damage. 
While in mist form, the yochlo! can enter a creature’s space | 
and stop there. Each time that creature starts its turn with h 
the yochlol in its space, the creature must succeed on a DC r 
14 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned until the start i 
of its next turn. While poisoned in this way, the target is 
incapacitated. { 


DEVILS 

Devils personify tyranny, with a totalitarian society 
dedicated to the domination of mortal life. The shadow 
of the Nine Hells of Baator extends far across the 
multiverse, and Asmodeus, the dark lord of Nessus, 
strives to subjugate the cosmos to satisfy his thirst for 
power. To do so, he must continually expand his infernal 


,armies, sending his servants to the mortal realm to 


corrupt the souls from which new devils are spawned. 

Lords of Tyranny. Devils live to conquer, enslave, 
and oppress. They take perverse delight in exercising 
authority over the weak, and any creature that defies the 
authority of a devil faces swift and cruel punishment. 
Every interaction is an opportunity for a devil to display 
its power, and all devils have a keen understanding of 
how to use and abuse their power. 

Devils understand the failings that plague intelligent 
mortals, and they use that knowledge to lead mortals 
into temptation and darkness, turning creatures into 
slaves to their own corruption. Devils on the Material 
Plane use their influence to manipulate humanoid 
rulers, whispering evil thoughts, fomenting paranoia, 
and eventually driving them to tyrannical actions. 

Obedience and Ambition. In accordance with their 
lawful alignment, devils obey even when they envy or 
dislike their superiors, knowing that their obedience 
will be rewarded. The hierarchy of the Nine Hells 
depends on this unswerving loyalty, without which that 
fiendish plane would become as anarchic as the Abyss. 

At the same time, it is in the nature of devils to 
scheme, creating in some a desire to rule that eclipses 
their contentment to be ruled. This singular ambition 
is strongest among the archdevils whom Asmodeus 
appoints to rule the nine layers of the Nine Hells. These 
high-ranking fiends are the only devils to ever sample 
true power, which they crave like the sweetest ambrosia. 

Dark Dealers and Soul Mongers. Devils are confined 
to the Lower Planes, but they can travel beyond those 
planes by way of portals or powerful summoning magic. 
They love to strike bargains with mortals seeking to 
gain some benefit or prize, but a mortal making such 
a bargain must be wary. Devils are crafty negotiators 
and positively ruthless at enforcing the terms of an 
agreement. Moreover, a contract with even the lowliest 
devil is enforced by Asmodeus’s will. Any mortal 
creature that breaks such a contract instantly forfeits its 
soul, which is spirited away to the Nine Hells. 

To own a creature’s soul is to have absolute control 
over that creature, and most devils accept no other 
currency in exchange for the fiendish power and boons 
they can provide. A soul is usually forfeited when a 
mortal dies naturally, for devils are immortal and can 
wait years for a contract to play out. If a contract allows 
a devil to claim a mortal’s soul before death, it can 
instantly return to the Nine Hells with the soul in its 
possession. Only divine intervention can release a soul 
after a devil has claimed it. 


Tuk INFERNAL HIERARGHY INFERNAL HIERARCHY eich i) if 
pri enn cet areata te er oR . iat i! ty Vil . ri } j 
The Nine Hells has a rigid hierarchy that defines every 1 lembre Seas TET aul tO 
aspect of its society. Asmodeus is the supreme ruler Lesser devils 8: hornedideyt) Ha th we 
of all devils, and the only creature in the Nine Hells 2 ime 9, erinyes Pasta) ri 
with the powers of a lesser god. Worshiped as such 3. spined devil 10. ice devil fon) 
in the Material Plane, Asmodeus inspires the evil : 11. pit fiend 
z ; ‘ 4. bearded devil 
humanoid cults that take his name. In the Nine Hells, ; 
‘ a. 5. barbed devil Archdevils 
he commands scores of pit fiend generals, which in turn a etiaat duke 6c ath 
command legions of subordinates. piel Ve ee a ‘ul 
7. bone devil 13. archduke or archduchess 


A supreme tyrant, a brilliant deceiver, and a master 
of subtlety, Asmodeus protects his throne by keeping 
his friends close and his enemies closer. He delegates 
most matters of rulership to the pit fiends and lesser 


Demotion is the customary punishment for failure or mn 
disobedience among the devils. Archdevils or greater bul 


archdevils that make up the infernal bureaucracy of the devils can demote a lesser devil to a lemure, which, "i 
loses all memory of its prior existence. An archdevil ir 


Nine Hells, even as he knows that those powerful devils i : 
can demote a greater devil to lesser devil status, but the Sh 


conspire to usurp the Throne of Baator from which he : — 5 ; 
rules. Asmodeus appoints archdevils, and he can strip demoted devil retains its memories—and might seek | 


any member of the infernal hierarchy of rank and status vengeance if the severity of the demotion is excessive. 
senha No devil can promote or demote another devil that has 


If it dies outside the Nine Hells, a devil disappears not sworn fealty to it, preventing rival archdevils from 
in a cloud of sulfurous smoke or dissolves into a pool demoting each other’s most powerful servants. Since all 
of ichor, instantly returning to its home layer, where it devils swear fealty to Asmodeus, he can freely demote ‘ 
reforms at full strength. Devils that die in the Nine Hells any other devil, transforming it into whatever infernal 
are destroyed forever—a fate that even Asmodeus fears. form he desires. 

Archdevils. The archdevils include all the current 
and deposed rulers of the Nine Hells (see the Layers ee a 
and Lords of the Nine Hells table), as well as the dukes 
and duchesses that make up their courts, attend them 
as advisers, and hope to supplant them. Every archdevil 
is a unique being with an appearance that reflects its 
particular evil nature. 

Greater Devils. The greater devils include the pit 
fiends, erinyes, horned devils, and ice devils that 


The Nine Hells are a single plane comprising nine 
separate layers (see the Layers and Lords of the Nine 
Heils table). The first eight layers are each ruled by 
archdevils that answer to the greatest archdevil of all: 
Asmodeus, the Archduke of Nessus, the ninth layer. 

To reach the deepest layer of the Nine Hells, one must 
descend through all eight of the layers above it, in order. 


command lesser devils and attend the archdevils. The most expeditious means of doing so is (hiiver 


Lesser Devils. The lesser devils include numerous Styx, which nlliages evel deeper a6: Hower 
. strains of fiends, including imps, chain devils, spined lager 2 ite tial. Gniy the test counaigecuei ss eas 
devils, bearded devils, barbed devils, and bone devils. eenapabaiensd fie somment gid Hoenig On ita ae 


Lemures. The lowest form of devil, lemures are meet ian 
the twisted and tormented souls of evil and corrupted DEVIL TRUE NAMES AND TALISMANS 
mortals. A lemure killed in the Nine Hells is only Though devils all have common names, every devil above a 
permanently destroyed if it is killed with a blessed lemure in station also has a true name that it keeps secret. A 
weapon or if its shapeless corpse is splashed with holy devil can be forced to disclose its true name if charmed, and 
water before it can return to life. ancient scrolls and tomes are said to exist that list the true 
Promotion and Demotion. When the soul of an evil names of certain devils. | 


A mortal who learns a devil's true name can use powerful 
summoning magic to call the devil from the Nine Hells and my) 
bind it into service. Binding can also be accomplished with 
the help of a devil talisman. Each of these ancient relics is ' 


mortal sinks into the Nine Hells, it takes on the physical 
form of a wretched lemure. Archdevils and greater 
devils have the power to promote lemures to lesser 


devils. Archdevils can promote lesser devils to greater inscribed with the true name of a devil it controls, and was | 
devils, and Asmodeus alone can promote a greater devil bathed in the blood of a worthy sacrifice—typically someone | 
to archdevil status. This diabolic promotion invokes a the creator loved—when crafted. , 
brief, painful transformation, with the devil’s memories However it is summoned, a devil brought to the Material i 
passing intact from one form to the next. Plane typically resents being pressed into service. However, : 

Low-level promotions are typically based on need, the devil seizes every opportunity to corrupt its summoner | 
such as when a pit fiend transforms lemures into imps so that the summoner’s soul ends up in the Nine Hells. 


Only imps are truly content to be summoned, and they easily ni 
commit to serving a summoner as a familiar, but they stilldo oi 
their utmost to corrupt those who summon them. 


to gain invisible spies under its command. High-level 
promotions are almost always based on merit, such 

as when a bone devil that distinguishes itself in battle 
is transformed into a horned devil by the archdevil it 
serves. A devil is seldom promoted more than one step 
at a time in the hierarchy of infernal forms. 


VARIANT: DEviL SUMMONING 
Some devils can have an action option that allows them to 
summon other devils. 

Summon Devil (1/Day). The devil chooses what to 
summon and attempts a magical summoning. 


+ A barbed devil has a 30 percent chance of summoning one 
barbed devil. 

¢ A bearded devil has a 30 percent chance of summoning 
one bearded devil. 

» A bone devil has a 40 percent chance of summoning 2d6 
spined devils or one bone devil. 

| + An erinyes has a 50 percent chance of summoning 3d6 
spined devils, 1d6 bearded devils, or one erinyes. 

» A horned devil has a 30 percent chance of summoning one 
horned devil. 

+ An ice devil has a 60 percent chance of summoning one 
ice devil. 

« A pit fiend summons 2d4 bearded devils, 1d4 barbed 
devils, or one erinyes with no chance of failure. 


A summoned devil appears in an unoccupied space within 
60 feet of its summoner, acts as an ally of its summoner, and 
can’t summon other devils. It remains for 1 minute, until it 


or its summoner dies, or until its summoner dismisses it 


as an action. 


BARBED DEVIL (HAMATULA) 


Creatures of unbridled greed and desire, barbed devils 
act as guards to the more powerful denizens of the Nine 
Hells and their vaults. Resembling a tall humanoid 
covered in sharp barbs, spines, and hooks, a barbed 
devil has gleaming eyes that are ever watchful for 
objects and creatures it might claim for itself. These 
fiends welcome any chance to fight when victory 
promises reward. 

Barbed devils are known for an alertness that makes 
them difficult to surprise, and they attend to their duties 
without boredom or distraction. They use their sharp 
claws as weapons or hurl balls of flame at foes that try 
to flee them. 


BEARDED DEVIL (BARBAZU) 


Bearded devils serve archdevils as shock troops, 
fighting shoulder-to-shoulder and reveling in the glory 
of battle. They respond with violence to any slight, 
real or imagined, gorging themselves on violence 

as their infernal saw-toothed glaives carve a path 
through their foes. 


LAYERS AND LORDS OF THE NINE HELLS 


Layer LayerName Archduke or Archduchess 


1 Avernus Zariel Bel, Tiamat 

2 Dis Dispater _ 

3 Minauros Mammon t= 

4 Phlegethos Belial and Fierna — 

5 Stygia Levistus Geryon 

6 Malbolge Glasya Malagard, Moloch 
7 Maladomini _Baalzebul -- 

8 Cania Mephistopheles - 

9 Nessus Asmodeus — 


Previous Rulers 


a= 


A bearded devil is humanoid in form, with pointed 
ears, scaly skin, a long tail, and claws that clearly show 
its fiendish nature. These devils take their names from 
the snakelike growths that adorn their chins, which they 
use to lash and poison enemies, weakening them with 
their virulent venom. 


BONE DEVIL (OsYLUTH) 


Driven by hate, lust, and envy, bone devils act as the 
cruel taskmasters of the Nine Hells. They set weaker 
devils to work, taking special delight in seeing fiends 
that defy them demoted. At the same time, they long for 
promotion and are bitterly envious of their superiors, 
attempting to curry favor though it irks them to do so. 

A bone devil appears as a humanoid husk, with dried 
skin stretched tight across its skeletal frame. It bears a 
fearsome skull-like head and the tail of a scorpion, and 
a foul odor of decay hangs in the air around it. Though 
they are devastating in combat with their claws, bone 
devils also wield hooked polearms made of bone, which 
they use to subdue enemies before striking with their 
venomous tails. 


CHAIN DEvIL (KyYTON) 


This ominous fiend wears chains like a shroud. Driving 
lesser creatures before it with its fearsome gaze, a chain 
devil animates the chains that cover its body as well as 
inanimate chains nearby, which sprout hooks, blades, 
and spikes to eviscerate enemies. 

Chain devils act as sadistic jailers and torturers in 
the infernal realms, relishing pain and living to inflict 
it on others. They are called on to torment mortal souls 
trapped in the Nine Hells, inflicting their sadistic fury on 
the horrid lemures in which those souls manifest. 


ERINYES 


The most beautiful and striking of all lesser and greater 
devils, the erinyes are fierce and disciplined warriors. 
Sweeping down from the skies, they bring swift death 
to creatures that have wronged their masters or defied 
the edicts of Asmodeus. The erinyes appear as male 

or female humanoids with statuesque builds and large 
feathery wings. Most wear stylized armor and horned 
helms, and carry exquisite swords and bows. A few also 
use ropes of entanglement to ensnare powerful foes. 


Primary Inhabitants 

Erinyes, imps, spined devils 

Bearded devils, erinyes, imps, spined devils 
Bearded devils, chain devils, imps, spined devils 
Barbed devils, bone devils, imps, spined devils 
Bone devils, erinyes, ice devils, imps 

Barbed devils, bone devils, horned devils, imps 
Barbed devils, bone devils, horned devils, imps 
Horned devils, ice devils, imps, pit fiends 

All devils 


i . l 1 
OTE Bah i = i i 

ta Liat atte Lie be be ped es er a a er Pee ye 
=—ss —— - a ae 1 ea i a ee RR ep 


Legends tell that the first erinyes were angels that 
fell from the Upper Planes because of temptation or 
misdeed. Erinyés are always willing to take advantage 
of being mistaken for celestials in their missions of 
conquest and corruption. 


HornNED DEVIL (MALEBRANCHE) 


Horned devils are lazy to the point of belligerence and 
reluctant to put themselves in harm’s way. Moreover, 
they hate and fear any creature stronger than 
themselves. When they are sufficiently provoked or 
antagonized, the fury of these fiends can be terrifying. 

A malebranche stands as tall as an ogre and is 
sheathed in scales as tough as iron. The flying infantry 
of the hellish legions, horned devils follow orders to the 
letter. Their huge wings and sweeping horns create an 
intimidating presence as they drop from the sky and 
strike with deadly forks and lashing tails. 


IqE DEVIL (GELUGON) 


Found most commonly on the cold layers of Stygia and 
Cania, ice devils serve as commanders of the infernal 
armies of the Nine Hells, tormenting lesser devils as 

an outlet for their anger and resentment. Coveting 

the power of their pit fiend superiors, ice devils work 
ceaselessly toward promotion, slaughtering the enemies 
of the Nine Hells and claiming as many souls as they 
can for their archdevil masters. 

Resembling a giant bipedal insect, an ice devil has 
clawed hands and feet, powerful mandibles, anda 
long tail covered in razor-sharp spikes. Some carry 
barbed spears whose icy touch can render a foe all but 
helpless in combat. 


IMP 


Imps are found throughout the Lower Planes, either 
running errands for their infernal masters, spying on 
rivals, or misleading and waylaying mortals. An imp will 
proudly serve an evil master of any kind, but it can’t be 
relied on to carry out tasks with any speed or efficiency. 
An imp can assume animal form at will, but in its 
natural state it resembles a diminutive red-skinned 
humanoid with a barbed tail, small horns, and leathery 
wings. It strikes while invisible, attacking with 
its poison stinger. 


LEMURE 


A lemure arises when a mortal soul is twisted by evil 
and banished to the Nine Hells for eternity. The lowest 
type of devil, lemures are repugnant, shapeless creatures 
doomed to suffer torment until they are promoted to a 
higher form of devil, most commonly an imp. 

A lemure resembles a molten mass of flesh with 
a vaguely humanoid head and torso. A permanent 
expression of anguish twists across its face, its feeble 
mouth babbling even though it can’t speak. 


VARIANT: IMP FAMILIAR 


Imps can be found in the service to mortal spellcasters, acting 
as advisors, spies, and familiars. An imp urges its master to 
acts of evil, knowing the mortal’s soul is a prize the imp might 
ultimately claim. Imps display an unusual loyalty to their 
masters, and an imp can be quite dangerous if its master is 
threatened. Some such imps have the following trait. 

Familiar. The imp can enter into a contract to serve 
angther creature as a familiar, forming a telepathic bond with 
its willing master. While the two are bonded, the master can 
sense what the imp senses as long as they are within 1 mile 
of each other. While the imp is within 10 feet of its master, 
the master shares the imp’s Magic Resistance trait. If its 
master violates the terms of the contract, the imp can end its 
service as a familiar, ending the telepathic bond. 


PIT FIEND 


The undisputed lords of most other devils, pit fiends 
attend the archdukes and archduchesses of the Nine 
Hells and carry out their wishes. These mighty devils 
are the generals of the Nine Hells, leading its infernal 
legions into battle. 

With an inflated sense of superiority and entitlement, 
pit fiends form a grotesque aristocracy in the infernal 
realm. These domineering and manipulative tyrants 
conspire to eliminate anything that stands between 
them and their desires, even as they negotiate the 
convoluted and dangerous politics of the Nine Hells. 

A pit fiend is a hulking monster with a whip-like tail 
and enormous wings that it wraps around itself like a 
cloak. Armored scales cover its body, and its fanged 
maw drips a venom that can lay the mightiest mortal 
creatures low. Fearless in battle, a pit fiend takes on the 
most powerful foes in single combat, demonstrating 
its supremacy and an arrogance that prevents it from 
acknowledging any chance of defeat. 


SPINED DEVIL (SPINAGON) 


Smaller than most other devils, spinagons act as 
messengers and spies for greater devils and archdevils. 
They are the eyes and ears of the Nine Hells, and even 
fiends that despise a spined devil’s weakness treat it 
with a modicum of respect. 

A spined devil’s body and tail bristle with spines, and 
it can fling its tail spines as ranged weapons. The spines 
burst into flame on impact. 

When not delivering messages or gathering 
intelligence, spined devils serve in the infernal legions 
as flying artillery, making up for their relative weakness 
by mobbing together to overwhelm their foes. Though 
they crave promotion and power, spined devils are 
craven by nature, and they will quickly scatter if a fight 
goes against them. 


a. 


® Nd : 


‘Barsepd DEvit 


Medium fiend (devil), lawful evil 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 


Hit Points 110 (13d8 + 52) 


| Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 17(43) 18 (+4) 12(41) 1442) 14 (2) 


er re 

Saving Throws Str +6, Con +7, Wis +5, Cha +5 

Skills Deception +5, Insight +5, Perception +8 

Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing 
from nonmagical weapons that aren’t silvered 

Damage Immunities fire, poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 18 

Languages Infernal, telepathy 120 ft. 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 

(Rn 


Barbed Hide. At the start of each of its turns, the barbed devil 
deals 5 (1d10) piercing damage to any creature grappling it. 


Devil’s Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the devil’s 
darkvision. 


| Magic Resistance. The devil has advantage on saving throws 


: CER Eis 
70 be _ 


| object that isn’t being worn or carried, it also catches fire. 


against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The devil makes three melee attacks: one with 
its tail and two with its claws. Alternatively, it can use Hurl 
Flame twice. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


| 
| 


10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


Hurl Flame. Ranged Spell Attack: +5 to hit, range 150 ft., one 
target. Hit: 10 (3d6) fire damage. If the target is a flammable 


BEARD ) 
| Medium fierid (devil), lawful evil 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 


DED DEVIL 


i 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 52 (8d8 + 16) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 15(+2) 15 (+2) 9(-1) 110) 11 (40) 


a 

Saving Throws Str +5, Con +4, Wis +2 

Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing 
from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered 

Damage Immunities fire, poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages Infernal, telepathy 120 ft. 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 

eee 


Devil’s Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the devil’s 
darkvision. 


Magic Resistance. The devil has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Steadfast. The devil can't be frightened while it can see an 
allied creature within 30 feet of it. 


ACTIONS 


Muiltiattack. The devil makes two attacks: one with its beard 
and one with its glaive. 


Beard. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage, and the target must succeed 
ona DC 12 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned for 1 
minute. While poisoned in this way, the target can’t regain hit 
points. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of 
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Glaive. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (1d10 + 3) slashing damage. If the target is a creature 
other than an undead or a construct, it must succeed on a DC 
12 Constitution saving throw or lose 5 (1d10) hit points at the 
start of each of its turns due to an infernal wound. Each time 
the devil hits the wounded target with this attack, the damage 


| dealt by the wound increases by 5 (1d10). Any creature can take | 


an action to stanch the wound with a successful DC 12 Wisdom 


_ (Medicine) check. The wound also closes if the target receives 
_ magical healing. 


VARIANT: BONE DEVIL POLEARM 


Some bone devils have the following action options. 
Multiattack. The devil makes two attacks: one with its 
hooked polearm and one with its sting. 
Hooked Polearm. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 
10 ft., one target. Hit: 17 (2d12 + 4) piercing damage. If the 
_ target is a Huge or smaller creature, itis grappled (escape 
DC 14). Until this grapple ends, the devil can’t use its 
polearm on another target. 


Bone DEVIL 


Large fiend (devil), lawful evil —F is 


, Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 142 (15d10 + 60) 
| Speed 40 ft., fly 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) «16 (43) «18 44) =—-13- (41) 14 (+2) 16 (+3) 
| EE ——————— 
| Saving Throws Int +5, Wis +6, Cha +7 
| Skills Deception +7, Insight +6 
| Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing 
from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered 
_., Damage Immunities fire, poison 
| Condition Immunities poisoned 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages Infernal, telepathy 120 ft. 


| 


| Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) | 
————EE———— ! 


Devil’s Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the devil’s — 
darkvision. i. ‘ 


Magic Resistance. The devil has advantage on saving throws | 
against spells and other magical effects. | 


AGHONS FO a ey 


Multiattack. The devil makes three attacks: two with its claws 
and one with its sting. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) slashing damage. 


Sting. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage plus 17 (5d6) poison 
damage, and the target must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution 
saving throw or become poisoned for 1 minute. The target can 
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending 
the effect on itself on a success. 


, 
4 

| 
BA ews 


DEVILS: 
Sotto 


> 


— a 

CHAIN DEVIL 

' Medium fiend (devil), lawful evil 

| Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 85 (10d8 + 40) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIs CHA 
18 (+4) «15 (+2) 18 (+4) 11 (40) «12 (+1) _~—s: 14 (42) 
SS 
i Saving Throws Con +7, Wis +4, Cha +5 
_ Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing 
| from nonmagical weapons that aren’t silvered 
Damage Immunities fire, poison 
Condition Immunities poisoned 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11 
| Languages Infernal, telepathy 120 ft. 
| Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


Devil's Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the devil’s 
) darkvision. 


Magic Resistance. The devil has advantage on saving throws 


against spells and other magical effects. 
i 


| ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The devil makes two attacks with its chains. 


Chain. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target, 


Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage. The target is grappled 
(escape DC 14) if the devil isn’t already grappling a creature. 
Until this grapple ends, the target is restrained and takes 7 
(2d6) piercing damage at the start of each of its turns. 


Animate Chains (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). Up 
to four chains the devil can see within 60 feet of it magically 
sprout razor-edged barbs and animate under the devil’s 
control, provided that the chains aren’t being worn or carried. 
Each animated chain is an object with AC 20, 20 hit points, 
resistance to piercing damage, and immunity to psychic and 
thunder damage. When the devil uses Multiattack on its turn, 
it can use each animated chain to make one additional chain 
attack. An animated chain can grapple one creature of its own 
but can’t make attacks while grappling. An animated chain 
reverts to its inanimate state if reduced to 0 hit points or if the 
devil is incapacitated or dies. 


REACTIONS 


Unnerving Mask. When a creature the devil can see starts its 
turn within 30 feet of the devil, the devil can create the illusion 
that it looks like one of the creature’s departed loved ones 

or bitter enemies. If the creature can see the devil, it must 
succeed on a DC 14 Wisdom saving throw or be frightened 
until the end of its turn. 


ieee | i 


BY 
ay THE SWORD AND KILL 
purty 'S NOTHING 


RATH.. 
THE BOOK.OF 


VILE DARKNESS 


VARIANT: ROPE OF ENTANGLEMENT 


Some erinyes carry a rope of entanglement (detailed in the 
Dungeon Master’s Guide). When such an erinyes uses its 
Multiattack, the erinyes can use the rope in place of two of 
the attacks. 


ERINYES 
Medium fiend (devil), lawful evil 


Armor Class 18 (plate) 
Hit Points 153 (18d8 + 72) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 16 (43) 18(+4) 14(42) 14(42) 18 (44) 


Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +8, Wis +6, Cha +8 

Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing 
from nonmagical weapons that aren’t silvered 

Damage Immunities fire, poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 12 

Languages Infernal, telepathy 120 ft. 

Challenge 12 (8,400 XP) 


ee 


Hellish Weapons. The erinyes’s weapon attacks are magical 
and deal an extra 13 (3d8) poison damage on a hit (included in 
the attacks). 


Magic Resistance. The erinyes has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The erinyes makes three attacks. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) slashing damage, or 9 (1d10 + 
4) slashing damage if used with two hands, plus 13 (3d8) 
poison damage. 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, range 150/600 
ft., one target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage plus 13 
(3d8) poison damage, and the target must succeed on a DC 
14 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned. The poison 
lasts until it is removed by the lesser restoration spell or 
similar magic. 


REACTIONS 


Parry. The erinyes adds 4 to its AC against one melee attack 
that would hit it. To do so, the erinyes must see the attacker 
and be wielding a melee weapon. 


Tee Li 


HORNED DEVIL 
Large fiend (devil), lawful evil 


, Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 178 (17410 + 55) 
_ Speed 20 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
22 (+6) 17 (43) 21 (45) 12(41) 16 (43) ~—«17 (43) 
a ear oo Ce. — nn 
Saving Throws Str +10, Dex +7, Wis +7, Cha +7 
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing 
from nonmagical weapons that aren’t silvered 
| Damage immunities fire, poison 
Condition Immunities poisoned 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages Infernal, telepathy 120 ft. 
Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) 


= ———" ———— ——_— 


Devil’s Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the devil’s 
darkvision. 


| Magic Resistance. The devil has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The devil makes three melee attacks: two with its 
fork and one with its tail. lt can use Hurl Flame in place of any 
melee attack. 


Fork. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) piercing damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 

Hit: 10 (1d8 + 6) piercing damage. If the target is a creature 

other than an undead or a construct, it must succeed on a DC 

17 Constitution saving throw or lose 10 (3d6) hit points at the 

start of each of its turns due to an infernal wound. Each time 

the devil hits the wounded target with this attack, the damage 

dealt by the wound increases by 10 (3d6). Any creature can take 

an action to stanch the wound with a successful DC 12 Wisdom 
(Medicine) check. The wound also closes if the target receives 

magical healing. 


Hurl Flame. Ranged Spell Attack: +7 to hit, range 150 ft., one 
target. Hit: 14 (4d6) fire damage. If the target is a flammable 
object that isn’t being worn or carried, it also catches fire. 


Icz Devi — 7 
t Large fiend (devil), lawful evil 1 & 
| 


, Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 180 (19d10 + 76) 
Speed 40 ft. 


| STR DEX 
| 21645) 14(42)) (18 (44) «18 (44) «15 (42) 18 (+4) 
| EEE oOo, 
Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +9, Wis +7, Cha +9 
_ Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
| nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered 
Damage Immunities cold, fire, poison 
Condition Immunities poisoned 
| Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages Infernal, telepathy 120 ft. 
| Challenge 14 (11,500 XP) 


CON INT WIS CHA 


| Devil’s Sight. Magical darkness doesn't impede the devil’s 
' darkvision. 


| Magic Resistance. The devil has advantage on saving throws 
| against spells and other magical effects. 

| 

ACTIONS 


\ Multiattack. The devil makes three attacks: one with its bite, 
_ one with its claws, and one with its tail. 


rs VARIANT: ICE DEVIL SPEAR 


; ff 7 
ia 1 rh 
Ca v ' \ ae 4 
= i i 4 
. = ae ‘ae ~~ 


| Some ice devils have the following action options. 

Multiattack. The devil makes two attacks: one with its 
spear and one with its tail. 

Ice Spear. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., 
one target. Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) 
cold damage. If the target is a creature, it must succeed 
ona DC 15 Constitution saving throw, or for 1 minute, its 
speed is reduced by 10 feet; it can take either an action or a 
bonus action on each of its turns, not both; and it can’t take 
reactions. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end 
of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself.on a success. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Ata +10 to fi , reach 5 ft., , one target. — 
Hit: 10 (2d4 + 5) slashing damage plus 10 (3d6) cold « damage. 


Tail, Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) bludgeoning damage plus 10 (3d6) 
cold damage. 


Wall of Ice (Recharge 6). The devil magically forms an opaque | 
wall of ice on a solid surface it can see within 60 feet of it. The 
wall is 1 foot thick and up to 30 feet long and 10 feet high, or 

it's a hemispherical dome up to 20 feet in diameter. 

When the wall appears, each creature in its space is pushed 
out of it by the shortest route. The creature chooses which side | 
of the wall to end up on, unless the creature is incapacitated. | 
The creature then makes a DC 17 Dexterity saving throw, 
taking 35 (10d6) cold damage on a failed save, or halfas much | 
damage on a successful one. 

The wall lasts for 1 minute or until the devil is incapacitated 
or dies. The wall can be damaged and breached; each 10-foot | 
section has AC 5, 30 hit points, vulnerability to fire damage, 
and immunity to acid, cold, necrotic, poison, and psychic 
damage. If a section is destroyed, it leaves behind a sheet of 
frigid air in the space the wall occupied. Whenever a creature 
finishes moving through the frigid air on a turn, willingly or 
otherwise, the creature must make a DC 17 Constitution saving | 
throw, taking 17 (5d6) cold damage on a failed save, or half as 
much damage on a successful one. The frigid air dissipates 
when the rest of the wall vanishes. 


Imp 
i Tiny fiend ( devil, shapechanger), lawful evil 


‘ y a 


q Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 10 (3d4 + 3) 


Speed 20 ft., fly 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
6(-2) 17(+3) 131) (40) 12(+1) 14 (42) 


; ss 

Skills Deception +4, Insight +3, Persuasion +4, Stealth +5 

| Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing 
from nonmagical weapons that aren’t silvered 

| Damage Immunities fire, poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

| Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11 

| Languages Infernal, Common 

| Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


rr ar parr pr ee 


_ Shapechanger. The imp can use its action to polymorph into a 
beast form that resembles a rat (speed 20 ft.), a raven (20 ft., 

| fly 60 ft.), or a spider (20 ft., climb 20 ft.), or back into its true 
form. Its statistics are the same in each form, except for the 

speed changes noted. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying 
isn’t transformed. It reverts to its true form if it dies. 


_ Devil’s Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the imp’s 
darkvision. 


Magic Resistance. The imp has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Sting (Bite in Beast Form). Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, 
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage, and 
the target must make on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw, 
taking 10 (3d6) poison damage on a failed save, or half as 
much damage on a successful one. 


_ Invisibility. The imp magically turns invisible until it attacks or 
- until its concentration ends (as if concentrating on a spell). Any | 
equipment the imp wears or carries is invisible with it. 


E AU RE J 


Medi um fiend (devil), lawful evil 


Lem 


_ Armor Class 7 
_ Hit Points 13 (3d8) 


| Speed 15 ft. 

| wil 

STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
10 (+0) 5(-3) 11 (40) 1(-5) M1 (40)  3(-4) 


NN 
_ Damage Resistances cold 

Damage Immunities fire, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages understands Infernal but can't speak 

Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


ee a EE 


Devil's Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the lemure’s 
darkvision. 


Hellish Rejuvenation. A lemure that dies in the Nine Hells 
comes back to life with all its hit points in 1d10 days unless itis | 
killed by a good-aligned creature with a bless spell cast on that 
creature or its remains are sprinkled with holy water. 


ACTIONS 

Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: | 
| 2 (1d4) bludgeoning damage. 
| 


‘Pit FIEND = AS 
|. Large fiend (devil), lawful evil 


| Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 300 (24d10 + 168) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
26 (+8) 14 (42) 24(47) 2246) 18(4) 24 (47) 


Saving Throws Dex +8, Con +13, Wis +10 

Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing 
from nonmagical weapons that aren’t silvered 

Damage Immunities fire, poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 14 

Languages Infernal, telepathy 120 ft. 

Challenge 20 (25,000 XP) 


————————————————————>—$—$$$——=_—_—_—___ = 


| Fear Aura. Any creature hostile to the pit fiend that starts its 
turn within 20 feet of the pit fiend must make a DC 21 Wisdom 
saving throw, unless the pit fiend is incapacitated. On a failed 
save, the creature is frightened until the start of its next turn. If 
a creature’s saving throw is successful, the creature is immune 
| to the pit fiend’s Fear Aura for the next 24 hours. 


| Magic Resistance. The pit fiend has advantage on saving 
\ throws against spells and other magical effects. 


= 4 


_ Magic Weapons. The pit fiend's weapon attacks are magical. 


Innate Spellcasting. The pit fiend’s spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 21). The pit fiend can innately cast the 
following spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: detect magic, fireball 
3/day each: hold monster, wall of fire 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The pit fiend makes four attacks: one with its bite, 
one with its claw, one with its mace, and one with its tail. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


Hit: 22 (4d6 + 8) piercing damage. The target must succeed on | 


a DC 21 Constitution saving throw or become poisoned. While 
poisoned in this way, the target can’t regain hit points, and it 
takes 21 (6d6) poison damage at the start of each of its turns. 
The poisoned target can repeat the saving throw at the end of 
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) slashing damage. 


Mace. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) bludgeoning damage plus 21 (6d6) 
fire damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 24 (3d10 + 8) bludgeoning damage. 


BE 


aru 


SPINED DEVIL 

Small herd (devil), lawful evil 

Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 

Hit Points 22 (5d6 + 5) 

Speed 20 ft., fly 40 ft. 

—_—_—SS_——-_ a — = a = 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (40) 15(+2) 1241) 11140) 1442) 8(-1) 
Damage Resistances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing 
from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered 

Damage Immunities fire, poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12 

Languages Infernal, telepathy 120 ft. 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


a — 


Devil’s Sight. Magical darkness doesn’t impede the devil’s 
darkvision. 


g Flyby. The devil doesn’t provoke an opportunity attack when it 
flies out of an enemy’s reach. 


) Limited Spines. The devil has twelve tail spines. Used spines 
regrow by the time the devil finishes a long rest. 


Magic Resistance. The devil has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 
ee ‘ c - 
' vay PRETTIES! FLX! ce ae op PHLEGETHO®: Multiattack. The devil makes two attacks: one with its bite and 
ie —FieRna, ArcHpuc aineo DEVIL BEGIONS one with its fork or two with its tail spines. 


COMMANDING HER ® 


| 
| 
| 
| 


| 
1 


| Tail Spine. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 20/80 


| ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage plus 3 (1d6) 
=- | fire damage. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (2d4) slashing damage. 


Fork. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 3 (1d6) piercing damage. 


DINOSAURS 


Dinosaurs, or behemoths, are among the oldest reptiles 
in the world. Predatory dinosaurs are savage, territorial 
hunters. Herbivorous dinosaurs are less aggressive, but 
they might attack to defend their young, or if startled 

or harassed. 

Dinosaurs come in many sizes and shapes. Larger 
varieties often have drab coloration, while smaller 
dinosaurs have colorful markings akin to birds. 
Dinosaurs roam rugged and isolated areas that 
humanoids seldom visit, including remote mountain 
valleys, inaccessible plateaus, tropical islands, 
and deep fens. 


ALLOSAURUS 


The allosaurus is a predator possessing great size, 
strength, and speed. It can run down almost any prey 
over open ground, pouncing to pull creatures down with 
its wicked claws. 


ANKYLOSAURUS 


Thick armor plating covers the body of the plant-eating 
ankylosaurus, which defends itself against predators 
with a knobbed tail that delivers a devastating strike. 
Some varieties of ankylosaurus have spiked tails that 
deal piercing damage instead of bludgeoning damage. 


PLESIOSAURUS 


A plesiosaurus is a marine dinosaur whose compact 
body is driven by powerful flippers. Predatory and 
aggressive, it attacks any creature it encounters. Its 
flexible neck accounts for a third of its total length, 
letting it twist in any direction to deliver a powerful bite. 


PTERANODON 


These flying reptiles have wingspans of 15 to 20 feet 
and typically dive for small marine prey, though they 
are opportunists and will attack any creature that 
appears edible. A pteranodon has no teeth, instead 
using its sharp beak to stab prey too large to swallow 
with one gulp. 


TRICERATOPS 


One of the most aggressive of the herbivorous 
dinosaurs, a triceratops has a skull that flares out to 
form a protective plate of bone. With its great horns 
and formidable speed, a triceratops gores and tramples 
would-be predators to death. 


TYRANNOSAURUS REX 


This enormous predator terrorizes all other creatures in 
its territory. Despite its size and weight, a tyrannosaurus 
is a swift runner. It chases anything it thinks it can eat, 
and there are few creatures it won't try to devour whole. 
While prowling for substantial prey, a tyrannosaurus 
subsists on carrion, and on any smaller creatures that 
try to dart in to steal its meal. 


_ Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 


_ Languages — 


Huge beast, unaligned 


Hit Points 51 (6d10 + 18) 
Speed 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4) 1341) 17(43) 2(-4) 1241) 5(-3) 


Skills Perception +5 
Senses passive Perception 15 


Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Pounce. If the allosaurus moves at least 30 feet straight toward 
a creature and then hits it with a claw attack on the same turn, 
that target must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw 

or be knocked prone. If the target is prone, the allosaurus can 
make one bite attack against it as a bonus action. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 15 (2d10 + 4) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) slashing damage. 


— 


_ Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 68 (8d12 + 16) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
4) +O) «(151 (+2) 2 (-4) ~—-'12 (+1) 5 (-3) 


Senses passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 18 (4d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a 
creature, it must succeed on a DC 14 Strength saving throw or 
be knocked prone. 


BiNOasuns, 


i rT LESIC . y 
arg e beast, naligned 


_Armor Class 13 figural armor) < 
Hit Points 68 (8d10 + 24) - 
Speed 20 ft., swim 40 ft. 


Prete 


CHA ve 
5 (-3) 


INT 
2 (-4) 


WIS 
12 (+1) 


| STR 
“18 (+4) 


DEX 
15 (+2) 


CON 
16 (+3) 


Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4 
Senses passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

| Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


J 4} Hold Breath. The plesiosaurus can hold its breath for 1 hour. 


| ACTIONS 


| Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 14 (3d6 + 4) piercing damage. 


} | Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 


| Hit Points 95 (10d12 + 30) 
| Speed 50 ft. 
a 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
B2+6) ~S(-1Y 17,43). 2(-4) 110) 5 (3) 


) Senses passive Perception 10 
Lie Languages — 
r _ Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


SS —™ 


| Trampling Charge. |f the triceratops moves at least 20 feet 

| straight toward a creature and then hits it with a gore attack on 
| the same turn, that target must succeed on a DC 13 Strength 

| saving throw or be knocked prone. If the target is prone, 

| the triceratops can make one stomp attack against it as a 

| bonus action. 


ACTIONS 
Gore. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
_ Hit: 24 (4d8 + 6) piercing damage. 


) Stomp. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one prone 
creature. Hit: 22 (3d10 + 6) bludgeoning damage | 
A RST I RSA Sa TET TRS SRS ear TST] 


; DINOSAURS 


q ain beast, unaligned — 


| Armor Class ]3 (natural armor) 


>TERANO 


Hit Points 13 (3d8) 
Speed 10 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR 
12 (41) 


DEX 
15 (+2) 


CON 
10 (+0) 


INT 
2 (-4) 


wis 
9 (-1) 


CHA 
5 (-3) 


Skills Perception +1 


Senses passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Flyby. The pteranodon doesn’t provoke an opportunity attack 
when it flies out of an enemy’s reach. 
ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (2d4 + 1) piercing damage. 


- Armor Class 7 aa armor) 
Hit Points 136 (13d12 + 52) 


Speed 50 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
25 (+7) 10(40) 19(+4) 2(-4) 1241) 9(-1) 


Skills Perception +4 

Senses passive Perception 14 
Languages — 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The tyrannosaurus makes two attacks: one with 
its bite and one with its tail. It can’t make both attacks against 
the same target. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 33 (4d12 + 7) piercing damage. If the target is a Medium 
or smaller creature, it is grappled (escape DC 17). Until this 
grapple ends, the target is restrained, and the tyrannosaurus 
can’t bite another target. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 20 (3d8 + 7) bludgeoning damage. 


SSS ee 


DISPLACER BEAST 


This monstrous predator takes its name from its 
ability to displace light so that it appears to be several 
feet away from its actual location. A displacer beast 
resembles a sleek great cat covered in blue-black fur. 
However, its otherworldly origins are clear in its six 


legs and the two tentacles sprouting from its shoulders, 


both ending in pads tipped with spiky protrusions. A 
displacer beast’s eyes glow with an awful malevolence 
that persists even in death. 

Unseelie Origins. Displacer beasts roamed the 
twilight lands of the Feywild for ages, until they were 
captured and trained by the Unseelie Court. The 
warriors of the court selectively bred the beasts to 
reinforce their ferocious and predatory nature, using 
them to hunt unicorns, pegasi, and other wondrous 
prey. However, it didn’t take long for the displacer 
beasts to use their malevolent intelligence to escape 
their masters. 

Running and breeding freely in the Feywild, the 
displacer beasts soon came to the attention of the 
Seelie Court. With blink dog companions at their side, 
fey hunters drove these predators to the fringes of the 
Feywild, where many crossed over to the Material 
Plane. To this day, displacer beasts and blink dogs 
attack each other on sight. 

Love of the Kill. Displacer beasts kill not just for 
food but also for sport. They target prey even when 
not hungry, often toying with their victims to entertain 
themselves until they are ready to eat. After killing 
its prey using its tentacles, a displacer beast drags 
the corpse to a quiet place where it can feed without 
distraction. 

Displacer beasts hunt alone or in small prides that 
demonstrate skill at setting ambushes. A single beast 
will strike and withdraw, luring prey into a densely 
wooded area where its packmates wait. Packs of 
displacer beasts hunting near trade roads recall the 
frequency and schedule of regular caravans, laying 
down afnbushes to pick off those caravans. 


| Armor Class 13 irataral armor) 


Hit Points 85 (10d10 + 30) 
duu 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIs CHA 
| “18 (+4) 15(+2) 16 (+3) 6 (-2) 12 (+1) 8 (-1) 
ET -——— 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 

Languages — 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 
 eeenrniabaniieeneeseemematinniabedadaians ae 


_ Avoidance. |f the displacer beast is subjected to an effect that 
_ allows it to make a saving throw to take only half damage, it 


instead takes no damage if it succeeds on the saving throw, 
and only half damage if it fails. 


Displacement. The displacer beast projects a magical illusion 
that makes it appear to be standing near its actual location, 
causing attack rolls against it to have disadvantage. If it is hit 
by an attack, this trait is disrupted until the end of its next 
turn. This trait is also disrupted while the displacer beast is 


_ incapacitated or has a speed of 0. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The displacer beast makes two attacks with its 
tentacles. 


Tentacle. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage plus 3 (1d6) 
piercing damage. 


Prized Guards and Pets. Intelligent evil creatures 
favor displacer beasts as pets, but a displacer beast 
enters such an alliance only if it appears beneficial... 
A displacer beast might guard a vault or.act as.a. 
bodyguard for a prominent individual, 


ek SW ew tee 


oo 


A a etry terete 


7 ; c A NGER i-° 
| Medit nstrosity (shapechanger), neutral 
t = hy — ~ == : 
‘| Armor Class 14 
| Hit Points 52 (8d8 + 16) 

| Speed 30 ft. 
,. 


i 


f 
| 
=i STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
11 (+0) 1844) 1442) 1140) 12(+1) 14¢@2) | 
| 
| 


Skills Deception +6, Insight +3 

Condition Immunities charmed 

| Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages Common 

| Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Shapechanger. The doppelganger can use its action to 
polymorph into a Small or Medium humanoid it has seen, or 
back into its true form. Its statistics, other than its size, are the 
same in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying isn’t 
transformed. It reverts to its true form if it dies. 


Ambusher. The doppelganger has advantage on attack rolls 
against any creature it has surprised. | 


Surprise Attack. If the doppelganger surprises a creature and 
_ hits it with an attack during the first round of combat, the 
target takes an extra 10 (3d6) damage from the attack. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The doppelganger makes two melee attacks. 


\ | Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


| thoughts of one creature within 60 feet of it. The effect can 

penetrate barriers, but 3 feet of wood or dirt, 2 feet of stone, 

| 2 inches of metal, or a thin sheet of lead blocks it. While the 

_ target is in range, the doppelganger can continue reading its —_| 

_ thoughts, as long as the doppelganger’s concentration isn’t f 

_ broken (as if concentrating on a spell). While reading the 

target’s mind, the doppelganger has advantage on Wisdom | 
| 


| 
_ Read Thoughts. The doppelganger magically reads the surface 


(Insight) and Charisma (Deception, Intimidation, and 
| Persuasion) checks against the target. 


i ri Doppelgangers are devious shapeshifters that take part of a long-term plot might keep its double alive and 
aie on the appearance of other humanoids, throwing off close at hand for weeks, probing the victim’s mind daily 
A pursuit or luring victims to their doom with misdirection to learn how to behave and speak authentically. 
and disguise. Few creatures spread fear, suspicion, and Hedonistic Swindlers. Doppelgangers work alone 
deceit better than doppelgangers. Found in every land or in small groups, with group roles shifting from con 

ba, and culture, they can take on the guise of any individual to con. While one doppelganger takes the place of a 

Abs; of any race. murdered merchant or noble, the others take on a 
Stealing Secrets. A doppelganger’s adopted form number of identities as circumstances warrant, playing 

pee,” "4 allows it to blend into almost any group or community, the parts of family or servants while they live off the 

be but its transformation doesn’t impart languages, victim’s riches. 

* mannerisms, memory, or personality. Doppelgangers Changelings. Doppelgangers are too lazy or self- 
often follow or capture creatures they intend to interested to raise their young. They assume attractive 
impersonate, studying them and probing their minds for male forms and seduce women, leaving them to raise 
secrets. A doppelganger can read a creature’s surface their progeny. A doppelganger child appears to be a 
thoughts, allowing it to glean that creature’s name, normal member of its mother’s species until it reaches 
desires, and fears, along with a few scattered memories. adolescence, at which point it discovers its true nature 
A doppelganger impersonating a specific creature as and is driven to seek out its kind to join them. 


., DOPFELGANGER, 


== —— —_—__—_ -- = — a er eT 


r ae sy, 


————— : a Re 


DRACOLICH 

Even as long-lived as they are, all dragons must 
eventually die. This thought doesn’t sit well with 
many dragons, some of which allow themselves to 

be transformed by necromantic energy and ancient 
rituals into powerful undead dracoliches. Only the 
most narcissistic dragons choose this path, knowing 
that by doing so, they sever all ties to their kin and the 
dragon gods. 

Beyond Death. A dracolich retains its shape and 
size upon transforming, its skin and scales drawing 
tight to its bones or sloughing away to leave a skeletal 
form behind. Its eyes appear as glowing points of light 
floating in shadowy sockets, hinting at the malevolence 
of its undead mind. 

Though many dragons pursue vain goals of 
destruction and dominance, dracoliches are more 
nefarious than the most evil dragons, driven to rule 
over all. A dracolich is a fiendishly intelligent tyrant that 


crafts complex webs of foul schemes, attracting servants 


motivated by greed and a lust for power. Acting from 
the shadows and actively plotting to keep its existence a 
secret, a dracolich is a cunning and challenging foe. 
Dracolich Phylacteries. Creating a dracolich requires 
the cooperation of the dragon and a group of mages or 
cultists that can perform the proper ritual. During the 
ritual, the dragon consumes a toxic brew that slays it 
instantly. The attendant spellcasters then ensnare its 
spirit and transfer it to a special gemstone that functions 
like a lich’s phylactery. As the dragon’s flesh rots 
away, the spirit inside the gem returns to animate the 
dragon’s bones. 
If a dracolich’s physical form is ever destroyed, its 
spirit returns to the gem as long as the two are on 
the same plane. If the gem comes into contact with 
another dragon’s corpse, the dracolich’s spirit can take 
possession of that corpse to become a new dracolich. If 
the dracolich’s spirit gem is taken to another plane, the 
dracolich’s spirit has nowhere to go when its undead 
body is destroyed and simply passes into the afterlife. 


DRACOLICH TEMPLATE 


Only an ancient or adult true dragon can be transformed 
into a dracolich. Younger dragons that attempt to 
undergo the transformation die, as do other creatures 
that aren’t true dragons but possess the dragon type, 
such as pseudodragons and wyverns. A shadow dragon 
can’t be transformed into a dracolich, for it has already 
lost too much of its physical form. 

When a dragon becomes a dracolich, it retains its 
Statistics except as described below. The dragon loses 
any trait, such as Amphibious, that assumes a living 
physiology. The dracolich might retain or lose any or all 
of its lair actions or inherit new ones, as the DM sees fit. 

Type. The dracolich’s type changes from dragon 
to undead, and it no longer requires air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 

Damage Resistance. The dracolich has resistance to 
necrotic damage. 


Damage Immunities. The dracolich has immunity 
to poison. It also retains any immunities it had prior to 
becoming a dracolich. 

Condition Immunities. The dracolich can’t be 
charmed, frightened, paralyzed, or poisoned. It also 
doesn’t suffer from exhaustion. 

Magic Resistance. The dracolich has advantage on 
saving throws against spells and other magical effects, 


IAGOLIGD 
7. = = - 


EE 


83 


S) DRAGON, SHAnGW, 


a HOB 2h es 


Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 225 (18d12 + 108) 
| Speed 40 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 80 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

| 25 (+7) 10. (+0) 23 (46) 16 (43) 15. (+2) 19 (+4) 
a 
Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +11, Wis +7, Cha +9 

Skills Perception +12, Stealth +5 

| Damage Resistances necrotic 

_ Damage Immunities lightning, poison 

| Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 

} paralyzed, poisoned 

| Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 22 

| Languages Common, Draconic 

/ Challenge 17 (18,000 XP) — 


Pa 


} Legendary Resistance (3/Day). \f the dracolich fails a saving 
| throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


Magic Resistance. The dracolich has advantage on saving 
| throws against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


| Multiattack. The dracolich can use its Frightful Presence. 
It then makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with 
| its claws. 


\ Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 18 (2d10 + 7) piercing damage plus 5 (1d10) 
| lightning damage. 


DRAGON, SHADOW 


Shadow dragons are true dragons that were either born 
in the Shadowfell or transformed by years spent within 
“its dismal confines. Some shadow dragons embrace 
the Shadowfell for its bleak landscapes and desolation. 
Others seek to return to the Material Plane, hungry to 
‘spread the darkness and evil of the Plane of Shadow. 
Dark Portals. Portals to the Shadowfell manifest 


“Sin forlorn places and the deep gloom of subterranean 


caverns. The dragons that lair in such places often 
discover these portals and find themselves transported 
to a new realm. Ancient dragons that sleep in their lairs 
“for months or years at a time might find themselves 
spirited away, never knowing that a portal has formed 
without their knowledge as they dream. 

Recast in Shadow. The transformation to a shadow 
dragon happens over a period of years, during which 
time a dragon’s scales lose their luster and fade to a 
charcoal hue. Its leathery wings become translucent, its 
eyes paling to pools of opalescent gray. Shadow dragons 
find sunlight abhorrent, and they are weaker in bright 
light than they are in darkness. Darkness makes the 
dragon fade to a spectral shadow of its former self. 

The magical nature of dragons holds an attraction 


-. for the Shadowfell, which seems somehow to crave 


ieee 
. 9 C aw. Melee eapon Attack: +1 +1240 i Fe ach! eS target. 
Hit: 14 (2d6 +. 7) slashing damage, Me ie 4 i *) 


Tail Melee Weapon Attack: sal? i hit, reach 15 ft one target. 


Hit: 16 NeEk +7) bludgeoning damage. 5 i 


Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dracolich’s choice that 

is within 120 feet of the dracolich and aware of it must succeed 
ona DC 18 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Ifa 
creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 

the creature is immune to the dracolich’s Frightful Presence for 
the next 24 hours. 


Lightning Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dracolich exhales 
lightning in a 90-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in 
that line must make a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw, taking 
66 (12d10) lightning damage ona failed save, or half'as much 
damage on a successful one. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The dracolich can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from 
the options below. Only one legendary action option can be 
used at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. 
The dracolich regains spent legendary actions at the start 

of its turn. 


Detect. The dracolich makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Tail Attack. The dracolich makes a tail attack. 

Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dracolich beats its tattered 
wings. Each creature within 10 feet of the dracolich must 
succeed on a DC 21 Dexterity saving throw or take 14 (2d6 
+ 7) bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. After 
beating its wings this way, the dracolich can fly up to half its 
flying speed. 


the might and majesty of these great reptiles. The 
Shadowfell also has a dispiriting effect on its denizens, 
such that the longer a creature remains on the plane, 
the more it accepts the plane’s malaise. As months and 
years pass for a dragon on the Shadowfell, it becomes 
aware of the transformation being wrought upon it, and 
yet can do nothing to prevent it. 

‘Back in the World. A shadow dragon is so suffused 
with the power of the Shadowfell that even a return to 
the Material Plane can’t undo its transformation. Some 
shadow dragons attempt to lure other creatures from 
the mortal realm back to the Shadowfell to keep them 
company, at least until they tire of their guests and 
devour them. Others are happy to leave the Shadowfell 
behind forever, understanding that treasure and power 
are easier to come by in the Material Plane. 


SHADOW DRAGON TEMPLATE 


Only a true dragon can transform into a shadow dragon, 
and only if it is born in the Shadowfell or remains there 
for several years. A dracolich can’t be turned into a 
shadow dragon, since it loses its draconic nature when it 
becomes undead. 

When a dragon becomes a shadow dragon, it retains 
its statistics except as described below. The shadow 


dragon might retain or lose any or all of its lair actions 
or inherit new ones, as the DM sees fit. 

Damage Resistances. The dragon has resistance to 
necrotic damage. 

Skill Proficiency: Stealth. The dragon’s proficiency 
bonus is doubled for its Dexterity (Stealth) checks. 

Living Shadow. While in dim light or darkness, 
the dragon has resistance to damage that isn’t force, 
psychic, or radiant. 

Shadow Stealth. While in dim light or darkness, the 
dragon can take the Hide action as a bonus action. 

Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the dragon 
has disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight. 

New Action: Bite. If the dragon deals acid, cold, fire, 
lightning, or poison damage with its bite, change that 
damage type to necrotic. 

New Action: Shadow Breath. Any damage-dealing 
breath weapon possessed by the dragon deals 
necrotic damage instead of its original damage type. A 
humanoid reduced to 0 hit points by this damage dies, 
and an undead shadow rises from its corpse and acts 


immediately after the dragon in the initiative count. The 


shadow is under the dragon’s control. 


“<y 


aa 


= 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 178 (17d10 + 85) 
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft., fly 80 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 

23 (+6) 10(+0) 21 (45) 14(42) 1140) 19 (+4) 
Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +9, Wis +4, Cha +8 
Skills Perception +8, Stealth +8 
Damage Resistances necrotic 
Damage Immunities fire 
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 18 
Languages Common, Draconic 
Challenge 13 (10,000 XP) 
2 


Living Shadow. While in dim light or darkness, the dragon has 
resistance to damage that isn’t force, psychic, or radiant. 


Shadow Stealth. While in dim light or darkness, the dragon can 
take the Hide action as a bonus action. 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the dragon has 
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite 
and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 17 (2d10 + 6) piercing damage plus 3 (1d6) 
necrotic damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage. 


Shadow Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales shadowy 
fire in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make 

a DC 18 Dexterity saving throw, taking 56 (16d6) necrotic 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage ona 
successful one. A humanoid reduced to 0 hit points by this 
damage dies, and an undead shadow rises from its corpse and 
acts immediately after the dragon in the initiative count. The 
shadow is under the dragon’s control. 


DRAGON) SHADOW! 


YouNG RED SHADOW DRAGON 


Large dragon, chaotic evil 


DRAGONS 


True dragons are winged reptiles of ancient lineage and 
fearsome power. They are known and feared for their 
predatory cunning and greed, with the oldest dragons 

‘accounted as some of the most powerful creatures in 
the world. Dragons are also magical creatures whose 
innate power fuels their dreaded breath weapons and 
other preternatural abilities. 

Many creatures, including wyverns and dragon 
turtles, have draconic blood. However, true dragons fall 
into the two broad categories of chromatic and metallic 
dragons. The black, blue, green, red, and white dragons 
are selfish, evil, and feared by all. The brass, bronze, 
copper, gold, and silver dragons are noble, good, and 
highly respected by the wise. : 

Though their goals and ideals vary tremendously, all 
true dragons covet wealth, hoarding mounds of coins 
and gathering gems, jewels, and magic items. Dragons 
with large hoards are loath to leave them for long, 
venturing out of their lairs only to patrol or feed. 

True dragons pass through four distinct stages of 
life, from lowly wyrmlings to ancient dragons, which 
can live for over a thousand years. In that time, their 
might can become unrivaled and their hoards can grow 
beyond price. 


DRAGON AGE CATEGORIES 


Category Size Age Range 
Wyrmling Medium 5 years or less 
Young Large 6-100 years 
Adult Huge 101-800 years 
Ancient Gargantuan 801 years or more 


0 
_ VARIANT: DRAGONS AS INNATE SPELLCASTERS 

| Dragons are innately magical creatures that can master a few 

| spells as they age, using this variant. 

A young or older dragon can innately cast a number of 
spells equal to its Charisma modifier. Each spell can be cast 
once per day, requiring no material components, and the 

_ spell’s level can be no higher than one-third the dragon’s 

| challenge rating (rounded down). The dragon’s bonus to 

hit with spell attacks is equal to its proficiency bonus + its 

| Charisma bonus. The dragon’s spell save DC equals 8 + its 

| proficiency bonus + its Charisma modifier. 


DRAGONS 


A 


CHROMATIC DRAGONS: \ 


The black, blue, green, red, and white dragons represent 
the evil side of dragonkind. Aggressive, gluttonous, and 
vain, chromatic dragons are dark sages and powerful 
tyrants feared by all creatures—including each other. 

Driven by Greed. Chromatic dragons lust after 
treasure, and this greed colors their every scheme 
and plot. They believe that the world’s wealth belongs 
to them by right, and a chromatic dragon seizes that 
wealth without regard for the humanoids and other 
creatures that have “stolen” it. With its piles of coins, 
gleaming gems, and magic items, a dragon's hoard is 
the stuff of legend. However, chromatic dragons have 
no interest in commerce, amassing wealth for no other 
reason than to have it. 

Creatures of Ego. Chromatic dragons are united by 
their sense of superiority, believing themselves the most 
powerful and worthy of all mortal creatures. When they 
interact with other creatures, it is only to further their 
own interests. They believe in their innate right to rule, 
and this belief is the cornerstone of every chromatic 
dragon’s personality and worldview. Trying to humble 
a chromatic dragon is like trying to convince the wind 
to stop blowing. To these creatures, humanoids are 
animals, fit to serve as prey or beasts of burden, and 
wholly unworthy of respect. 

Dangerous Lairs. A dragon’s lair serves as the seat 
of its power and a vault for its treasure. With its innate 
toughness and tolerance for severe environmental 
effects, a dragon selects or builds a lair not for shelter 
but for defense, favoring multiple entrances and exits, 
and security for its hoard. 

Most chromatic dragon lairs are hidden in dangerous 
and remote locations to prevent all but the most 
audacious mortals from reaching them. A black dragon 
might lair in the heart of a vast swamp, while a red 
dragon might claim the caldera of an active volcano. In 
addition to the natural defenses of their lairs, powerful 
chromatic dragons use magical guardians, traps, and 
subservient creatures to protect their treasures. 

Queen of Evil Dragons. Tiamat the Dragon Queen 
is the chief deity of evil dragonkind. She dwells on 
Avernus, the first layer of the Nine Hells. As a lesser 
god, Tiamat has the power to grant spells to her 
worshipers, though she is loath to share her power. She 
epitomizes the avarice of evil dragons, believing that 
the multiverse and all its treasures will one day be hers 
and hers alone. 

Tiamat is a gigantic dragon whose five heads reflect 
the forms of the chromatic dragons that worship her— 
black, blue, green, red, and white. She is a terror on the 
battlefield, capable of annihilating whole armies with 
her five breath weapons, her formidable spellcasting, 
and her fearsome claws. 

Tiamat’s most hated enemy is Bahamut the Platinum 
Dragon, with whom she shares control of the faith 
of dragonkind. She also holds a special enmity for 
Asmodeus, who long ago stripped her of the rule 
of Avernus and who continues to curb the Dragon 
Queen’s power. 


ANCIENT BLACK DRAGON 


Gargantuan dragon, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 22 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 367 (21d20 + 147) 
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

27 (+8) 14 (+2) 25 (+7) 16(4+3) 15 (+2) 19 (+4) 
[a aE 
Saving Throws Dex +9, Con +14, Wis +9, Cha +11 
Skills Perception +16, Stealth +9 
Damage Immunities acid 
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 26 
Languages Common, Draconic 
Challenge 21 (27,500 XP) 


Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water. 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 
ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then 
| makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 19 (2d10 + 8) piercing damage plus 9 (2d8) acid damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
’ Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) slashing damage. 


—— 


ES ll 


Tail. Mélee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) bludgeoning damage. 


Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that 

is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed 
ona DC 19 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 

minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 

each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Ifa 

creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 

the creature is immune to the dragon’s Frightful Presence for 
the next 24 hours. 


Acid Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales acid in a 
90-foot line that is 10 feet wide. Each creature in that line 
must make a DC 22 Dexterity saving throw, taking 67 (15d8) 
acid damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. 

Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. 
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed 
ona DC 23 Dexterity saving throw or take 15 (2d6 + 8) 
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can 
then fly up to half its flying speed. 


\DRAGGNA 


™_ 
tet | ett A 
it dy i 


So ound BLACK DR tcon 


Large dragon, chaotic evil 


rs 


ADULT BLAcK DRAGON 


Huge dragon, chaotic evil 


| Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
f Hit Points 127 (15d10 + 45) 
= Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. 


' Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 195 (17d12 + 85) I 
Saeuue Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. | 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4) 14(42) 17(43) 12 (41) ‘11 (40) 15 (42) 


_ Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +6, Wis +3, Cha +5 

Skills Perception +6, Stealth +5 

Damage Immunities acid 

Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16 
Languages Common, Draconic 
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
23(+6) 14 (+2) 21 (45) 14 (+2) 13 (+1) 17 (43) 


|" Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +10, Wis +6, Cha +8 
\ Skills Perception +11, Stealth +7 
4 Damage Immunities acid 
fA Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 21 
\ jay Languages Common, Draconic 
1 Challenge 14 (11,500 XP) 


4 Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water. 


| Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite 


Aj | Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water. ps 
h =) and two with its claws. 


| 
2 AcTIONS | 
| 


Ae Legendary Resistance (3/Day). |f the dragon fails a saving 
~} throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


i Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
#3 Hit: 15 (2d10 + 4) piercing damage plus 4 (1d8) acid damage. 
d | 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then 
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


Eons Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
me Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage. 


' Acid Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales acid in a 
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 30-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line 


Hit: 17 (2d10 + 6) piercing damage plus 4 (1d8) acid damage. must make a DC 14 Dexterity saving throw, taking 49 (11d8) 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. acid damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage. | | successful one. 
Le a oe ee a 


i Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. ———e = 
ey Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage. iH 
tele, alii calli | BLAGE DRAGON WYRMLING | 
| Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that Medium dragon, chaotic evil 
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed | lninnssnnesensetepshanssssssnenasastennsnnseeeneesennenensennensnnennnsttntatnen 
ona DC 16 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for] | Armor Class 17 (natural armor) i 
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6) 


each of its turns, ending the effect on itselfona success. lfa | Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft., swim 30 ft. 

creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, r 

the creature is immune to the dragon’s Frightful Presence for STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
the next 24 hours. | 15 (+2) 14.(+2)) 13 (41) = 10 (40) 11 (40) ~—s13 (+1) 


ig Acid Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales acid ina 

* 4 60-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line 

1} must make a DC 18 Dexterity saving throw, taking 54 (12d8) 
acid damage on a failed save, or half as much damage ona 
successful one. 


Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +3, Wis +2, Cha +3 

Skills Perception +4, Stealth +4 

Damage Immunities acid | 

Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 | 

Languages Draconic 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 
} 


, 
| 
, 
, 
} 
, 
| 


| LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 

options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The ACTIONS 
_ dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. | Hit: 7 (1d10 + 2) piercing damage plus 2 (1d4) acid damage. 
| Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. ' 
_ Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. Acid Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales acid in a 
| Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed | 15-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line 
| ona DC 19 Dexterity saving throw or take 13 (2d6 + 6) must make a DC 11 Dexterity saving throw, taking 22 (5d8) 
| _ bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can |. acid damage on a failed save, or half as much damage ona 
B 8 & 8 8 


then fly up to half its fying speed, 


_ successful one. 


i-., DRAGONS 
88 ~— SS 


en ie - TUR es. '- 
vege’ ve Mae ts tei 
M ' t 


BLAGcK DRaGon 
The most evil-tempered and vile of the chromatic 
dragons, black dragons collect the wreckage and 
treasures of fallen peoples. These dragons loathe seeing 
the weak prosper and revel in the collapse of humanoid 
kingdoms. They make their homes in fetid swamps and 
crumbling ruins where kingdoms once stood. 

With deep-socketed eyes and broad nasal openings, 

a black dragon’s face resembles a skull. Its curving, 
segmented horns are bone-colored near the base and 
darken to dead black at the tips. As a black dragon ages, 
the flesh around its horns and cheekbones deteriorates 
as though eaten by acid, leaving thin layers of hide that 
enhance its skeletal appearance. A black dragon’s head 
is marked by spikes and horns. Its tongue is flat with a 
forked tip, drooling slime whose acidic scent adds to the 
dragon’s reek of rotting vegetation and foul water. 

When it hatches, a black dragon has glossy black 
scale. As it ages, its scales become thicker and duller, 
helping it blend in to the marshes and blasted ruins that 
are its home. 

Brutal and Cruel. All chromatic dragons are evil, but 
black dragons stand apart for their sadistic nature. A 
black dragon lives to watch its prey beg for mercy, and 
will often offer the illusion of respite or escape before 
finishing off its enemies. 

A black dragon strikes at its weakest enemies first, 
ensuring a quick and brutal victory, which bolsters its 
ego as it terrifies its remaining foes. On the verge of 
defeat, a black dragon does anything it can to save itself, 
but it accepts death before allowing any other creature 
to claim mastery over it. 

Foes and Servants. Black dragons hate and fear other 
dragons. They spy on draconic rivals from afar, looking 
for opportunities to slay weaker dragons and avoid 
stronger ones. If a stronger dragon threatens it, a black 
dragon abandons its lair and seeks out new territory. 

Evil lizardfolk venerate and serve black dragons, 
raiding humanoid settlements for treasure and food to 

give as tribute and building crude draconic effigies along 
the borders of their dragon master’s domain. 

A black dragon’s malevolent influence might also 
cause the spontaneous creation of evil shambling 
mounds that seek out and slay good creatures 

approaching the dragon’s lair. 

Kobolds infest the lairs of many black dragons like 
vermin. They become as cruel as their dark masters, 
often torturing and weakening captives with centipede 
bites and scorpion stings before delivering them to sate 
the dragon’s hunger. 

Wealth of the Ancients. Black dragons hoard the 
treasures and magic items of crumbled empires and 
conquered kingdoms to remind themselves of their 
greatness. The more civilizations a dragon outlasts, 
the more entitled it feels to claim the wealth of current 
civilizations for itself. 


= - iret) 
7 See 
tae 


A BLACK DRAGON’S LAIR ae 


Black dragons dwell in swamps on the frayed edges 

of civilization. A black dragon’s lair is a dismal cave, 
grotto, or ruin that is at least partially flooded, providing 
pools where the dragon rests, and where its victims can 
ferment. The lair is littered with the acid-pitted bones 

of previous victims and the fly-ridden carcasses of fresh 
kills, watched over by crumbling statues. Centipedes, 
scorpions, and snakes infest the lair, which is filled with 
the stench of death and decay. 


LAIR ACTIONS 

On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon 
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects; 
the dragon can’t use the same effect two rounds in a row: 


¢ Pools of water that the dragon can see within 120 feet 
of it surge outward in a grasping tide. Any creature on 
the ground within 20 feet of such a pool must succeed 
on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or be pulled up to 
20 feet into the water and knocked prone. 

« Acloud of swarming insects fills a 20-foot-radius 
sphere centered on a point the dragon chooses within 
120 feet of it. The cloud spreads around corners and 
remains until the dragon dismisses it as an action, 
uses this lair action again, or dies. The cloud is 
lightly obscured. Any creature in the cloud when it 
appears must make on a DC 15 Constitution saving 
throw, taking 10 3d6) piercing damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. A 
creature that ends its turn in the cloud takes 10 (3d6) 
piercing damage. 

« Magical darkness spreads from a point the dragon 
chooses within 60 feet of it, filling a 15-foot-radius 
sphere until the dragon dismisses it as an action, uses 
this lair action again, or dies. The darkness spreads 
around corners. A creature with darkvision can’t see 
through this darkness, and nonmagical light can’t 
illuminate it. If any of the effect’s area overlaps with 
an area of light created by a spell of 2nd level or lower, 
the spell that created the light is dispelled. 


REGIONAL EFFECTS 

The region containing a legendary black dragon's lair 
is warped by the dragon’s magic, which creates one or 
more of the following effects: 


¢ The land within 6 miles of the lair takes twice as long 
as normal to traverse, since the plants grow thick and 
twisted, and the swamps are thick with reeking mud. 

- Water sources within 1 mile of the lair are supernat- 
urally fouled. Enemies of the dragon that drink such 
water regurgitate it within minutes. 

- Fog lightly obscures the land within 6 miles of the lair. 


If the dragon dies, vegetation remains as it has grown, 
but other effects fade over 1d10 days. 


cui ‘pale 


il 
aq 
| 
] 


ihe : F 6h! : 
EE - ane TE 8 ee 


ERE BLUE DRAGON 


Gargantuan dragoh, lawful evil 


i Armor Class 22 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 481 (26d20 + 208) 
Speed 40 ft., burrow 40 ft., fly 80 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
29 (+9) 10(+0) 27(+8) 18(+4) 17(+3) 21 (45) 
DEE 
| Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +15, Wis +10, Cha +12 
| Skills Perception +17, Stealth +7 
| Damage Immunities lightning 
| Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 27 
» _ Languages Common, Draconic 
Challenge 23 (32,500 XP) 


| Legendary Resistance (3/Day). \f the dragon fails a saving 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


» ACTIONS 


| Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then 


makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


| Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 15 ft., one 
} target. Hit: 20 (2d10 + 9) piercing damage plus 11 (2d10) 
lightning damage. 


| Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 16 (2d6 + 9) slashing damage. 


Tail Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target. 
Hit: 18 (2d8 + 9) bludgeoning damage. 


Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon’s choice that 

is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed 
on a DC 20 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 

each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a 
creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 

the creature is immune to the dragon’s Frightful Presence for 
the next 24 hours. 


Lightning Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales lightning 
in a 120-foot line that is 10 feet wide. Each creature in that line 
must make a DC 23 Dexterity saving throw, taking 88 (16d10) 
lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on 
a successful one. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. 

Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. 
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed 
on a DC 24 Dexterity saving throw or take 16 (2d6 + 9) 
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can 
then fly up to half its > Sole speed. 


2 3 IRAGONS 
jo MuptgoNS 


‘ 


a 


t, 
i 
‘s 
rl Te, 


— ee = _—— = 


Avutr BLUE Deacon 
Huge dragon, lawful evil 


Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 225 (18d12 + 108) 
Speed 40 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 80 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
25 (+7) 10(+0) 23(46) 16(43) 15 (+2) 19 (44) 


Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +11, Wis +7, Cha +9 
Skills Perception +12, Stealth +5 
| Damage Immunities lightning 


, Languages Common, Draconic 
Challenge 16 (15,000 XP) 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then 
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 18 (2d10 + 7) piercing damage plus 5 (1d10) 
lightning damage. 


| Claw. Melee Weapon Attack; +12 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 14 (2d6 + 7) slashing damage. 


_ Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target, 
Hit: 16 (2d8 + 7) bludgeoning damage. 


| Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon’s choice that 

is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed 
ona DC 17 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 

minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 

each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Ifa 
creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 

the creature is immune to the dragon’s Frightful Presence for 
the next 24 hours. 


Lightning Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales lightning 
in a 90-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line 
must make a DC 19 Dexterity saving throw, taking 66 (12d10) 
lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on 
a successful one. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
_ options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


_ Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 

| Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. 

_ Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. 

Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed 

on a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw or take 14 (2d6 + 7) 

bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can 
then fly up to half its flying speed. 

———————— 


eS i i 


'YounG BLuE DRAGON 


) Skills Perception +9, Stealth +4 


| Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 19 
= | Languages Common, Draconic 
|=] Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 


Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 22 | 


. ay and two with its claws. 


yj must make a DC 16 Dexterity saving throw, taking 55 (10d10) 
| lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on 
| a successful one. 


| Oe tal dragon, lawful evil 


' a successful one. 


——————— =i) 


Large dragen, lawful evil 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 152 (16d10 + 64) 
Speed 40 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 80 ft. 


DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 19(44) 1442) 134) 17443) 


STR 
21 (+5) 


Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +8, Wis +5, Cha +7 


Damage immunities lightning 


i 
ie) 
a 
0 
z 
7 


| 


Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite | 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 16 (2d10 + 5) piercing damage plus 5 (1d10) 
lightning damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage. 


Lightning Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales lightning 
in an 60-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line 


a ee el 


SSS 


SS ——_ SC . 


“BLUE picox WYRMLING 


| arvor Class 17 (natural armor) 
“Hit Points 52 (8d8 + 16) 
Speed 30 ft., burrow 15 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
17 (43) 10(+0) 15 (+2) 12(41) 1140) 15 (+2) 


Saving Throws Dex +2, Con +4, Wis +2, Cha +4 

Skills Perception +4, Stealth +2 

Damage Immunities lightning 

Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages Draconic i = -agi 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) ie . 


. 
u 7 


j en i i =| 
‘ LA a. a A 
ACTIONS | “hanger 
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 8 (1d10 + 3) piercing damage plus 3 (1d6) 
lightning damage. 


Lightning Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales lightning | 
in a 30-foot line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line 

must make a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw, taking 22 (4d10) — | 
lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on 


/pRaciond 
es 


; i ee |, Hl Hi 
ro, ; te rite ra 


—- 


BiLuE DRAGON 


Vain and territorial, blue dragons soar through the skies 
over deserts, preying on caravans and plundering herds 
and settlements in the verdant lands beyond the desert’s 
reach, These dragons can also be found in dry steppes, 
searing badlands, and rocky coasts. They guard their 
territories against all potential competitors, especially 
brass dragons. 

-A blue dragon is recognized by its dramatic frilled 
ears and the massive ridged horn atop its blunt head. 
Rows of spikes extend back from its nostrils to line its 
brow, and cluster on its jutting lower jaw. 

A blue dragon’s scales vary in color from an iridescent 
azure to a deep indigo, polished to a glossy finish by the 
desert sands. As the dragon ages, its scales become 
thicker and harder, and its hide hums and crackles 
with static electricity. These effects intensify when the 
dragon is angry or about to attack, giving off an odor of 
ozone and dusty air. 

Vain and Deadly. A blue dragon will not stand for any 
remark or insinuation that it is weak or inferior, taking 
great pleasure in lording its power over humanoids and 
other lesser creatures. 

A blue dragon is a patient and methodical combatant. 
When fighting on its own terms, it turns combat into an 
extended affair of hours or even days, attacking from a 
distance with volleys of lightning, then flying well out of 
harm’s reach as it waits to attack again. 

Desert Predators. Though they sometimes eat cacti 
and other desert plants to sate their great hunger, blue 
dragons are carnivores. They prefer to dine on herd 


_animals, cooking those creatures with their lightning 


breath before gorging themselves. Their dining habits 


‘inake blue dragons an enormous threat to desert 
caravans and nomadic tribes, which become convenient 
‘collections of food and treasure to a dragon's eye. 


‘When it hunts, a blue dragon buries itself in the desert 


_ Sand so that only the horn on its nose pokes above the 


surface, appearing to be an outcropping of stone. When 
prey draws near, the dragon rises up, sand pouring from 
its wings like an avalanche as it attacks. 

Overlords and Minions. Blue dragons covet valuable 


_ and talented creatures whose service reinforces their 


sense of superiority. Bards, sages, artists, wizards, and 
assassins can become valuable agents for a blue dragon, 
which rewards loyal service handsomely. 

A blue dragon keeps its lair secret and well protected, 
and even its most trusted servants are rarely allowed 
within. It encourages ankhegs, giant scorpions, and 
other creatures of the desert to dwell near its lair for 
additional security. Older blue dragons sometimes 
attract air elementals and other creatures to serve them. 

Hoarders of Gems. Though blue dragons collect 
anything that looks valuable, they are especially fond 
of gems. Considering blue to be the most noble and 
beautiful of colors, they covet sapphires, favoring 
jewelry and magic items adorned with those gems. 

A blue dragon buries its most valuable treasures deep 
in the sand, while scattering a few less valuable trinkets 
in plainer sight over hidden sinkholes to punish and 
eliminate would-be thieves. 


I | 
oe nN ha 


: a. 
Pet rk I i. 
= - 7 4 el bis lay a la i per Be be eee ae, Lad 
een Bs Bt - rs — meer i eles er rn 
5 7 


A BLUE DRAGON’s LarR 
Blue dragons thake their lairs in barren places, © 

using their lightning breath and their burrowing 

ability to carve out crystallized caverns and tunnels 
beneath the sands. 

Thunderstorms rage around a legendary blue dragon's 
lair, and narrow tubes lined with glassy sand ventilate 
the lair, all the while avoiding the deadly sinkholes that 
are the dragon’s first line of defense. 

A blue dragon will collapse the caverns that make up 
its lair if that lair is invaded. The dragon then burrows 
out, leaving its attackers to be crushed and suffocated. 
When it returns later, it collects its possessions—along 
with the wealth of the dead intruders. 


Lair ACTIONS 

On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon 
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects; 
the dragon can’t use the same effect two rounds in a row: 


- Part of the ceiling collapses above one creature that 
the dragon can see within 120 feet of it. The creature 
must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or 
take 10 (3d6) bludgeoning damage and be knocked 
prone and buried. The buried target is restrained and 
unable to breathe or stand up. A creature can take an 
action to make a DC 10 Strength check, ending the 
buried state on a success. 

« Acloud of sand swirls about in a 20-foot-radius sphere 
centered on a point the dragon can see within 120 feet 
of it. The cloud spreads around corners. Each creature 
in the cloud must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution 
saving throw or be blinded for 1 minute. A creature 
can repeat the saving throw at the erid of each of its 
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 

- Lightning arcs, forming a 5-foot-wide line between 
two of the lair’s solid surfaces that the dragon can 
see. They must be within 120 feet of the dragon and 
120 feet of each other. Each creature in that line must 
succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or take 10 
(3d6) lightning damage. 


REGIONAL EFFECTS 

The region containing a legendary blue dragon’s lair 
is warped by the dragon’s magic, which creates one or 
more of the following effects: 


- Thunderstorms rage within 6 miles of the lair. 

« Dust devils scour the land within 6 miles of the lair. A 
dust devil has the statistics of an air elemental, but it 
can’t fly, has a speed of 50 feet, and has an Intelligence 
and Charisma of 1 (-5). 

Hidden sinkholes form in and around the dragon’s 
lair. A sinkhole can be spotted from a safe distance 
with a successful DC 20 Wisdom (Perception) check. 
Otherwise, the first creature to step on the thin 

crust covering the sinkhole must succeed on a DC 

15 Dexterity saving throw or fall 1d6 x 10 feet into 
the sinkhole. 


If the dragon dies, the dust devils disappear 
immediately, and the thunderstorms abate within 1d10 
days. Any sinkholes remain where they are. 


Cd 


> L 
ae ee eee = 
SP ee eS ri 


————= SE ee 


ANCIENT GREEN DRAGON 


_ Gargantuan dragon, lawful evil 


, Armor Class 21 (natural armor) 


Hit Points 385 (22d20 + 154) 
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
27 (+8) 12 (+1) 25 (+7) = 20 (45) 17: (43) =: 19 (+4) 


Saving Throws Dex +8, Con +14, Wis +10, Cha +11 


| Skills Deception +11, Insight +10, Perception +17, 


Persuasion +11, Stealth +8 


| Damage Immunities poison 


Condition Immunities poisoned 


Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 27 


| Languages Common, Draconic 
| Challenge 22 (30,000 XP) 
er 


| Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then 
| makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


| 


Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water. 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). |f the dragon fails a saving 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


AcTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 15 ft., one 
target. Hit: 19 (2d10 + 8) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) 
poison damage. 


SS —_S—E—E—————— 


wee! 


7 Se  — 
Claw. Melee Weapon Aitack: +15 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 22 (4d6 + 8) slashing damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) bludgeoning damage. 


Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon’s choice that 

is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed 
on a DC 19 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 

minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 

each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Ifa 
creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 

the creature is immune to the dragon’s Frightful Presence for 
the next 24 hours. 


Poison Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales poisonous 
gas in a 90-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make 

a DC 22 Constitution saving throw, taking 77 (22d6) poison 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. 

Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. 
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed 
on a DC 23 Dexterity saving throw or take 15 (2d6 + 8) 
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can | 
then fly up to half its flying speed. 


‘ARE A 


I aT 
ed ae | i 


/ sat 
i. AyD \ \ 
‘ee 


Ss ae 


ADULT GREEN DRAGON 
Huge dragon, lawful evil 
Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 207 (18d12 + 90) 
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
23 (+6) = 12(+1) 21 (45) 18 (+4) 15 (42) 17 (+3) 


ett 


sheestndntnceteetetemen = 


Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +10, Wis +7, Cha +8 
Skills Deception +8, Insight +7, Perception +12, 

Persuasion +8, Stealth +6 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition immunities poisoned 
Senses blindsight 60 ft,, darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 22 
Languages Common, Draconic 
Challenge 15 (13,000 XP) 


Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water. 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). \f the dragon fails a saving 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


ACTIONS _ 1 
Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then 


He makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


S Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
ny target. Hit: 17 (2d10 + 6) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) 


poison damage. 


off 


- YOUNG GREEN DRAGON 


) Large dragon, lawful evil 


— ae fetes rtnceritaecet 


4 Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
| Hit Points 136 (16d10 + 48) 
| Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. 


= a = — el 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4) 1241) 17443) 16(43) 13 (41) 15 (42) 


ee a 


Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +6, Wis +4, Cha +5 

Skills Deception +5, Perception +7, Stealth +4 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive 
Perception 17 

Languages Common, Draconic 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


ee re 


. DRAGONS 


vw 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +1] to hit, reach 5 fty one target. 
Hit: 13 (2d6 +.6) slashing damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 


Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that 

is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed 
on a DC 16 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 

each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a 
creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for 
the next 24 hours. 


Poison Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales poisonous 
gas in a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make 

a DC 18 Constitution saving throw, taking 56 (16d6) poison 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS __ 


The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. 

Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. 
Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed 
ona DC 19 Dexterity saving throw or take 13 (2d6 + 6) 
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can 
then fly up to half its flying speed. 


Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water. 


ACTIONS _ ans! act Ble 
Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite 
and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack; +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 15 (2d10 + 4) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) 
poison damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage. 


Poison Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales poisonous 
gas in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make 

a DC 14 Constitution saving throw, taking 42 (12d6) poison 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. 


rai at mAs = 


Cyber Baden 


The most cunning and treacherous of true dragons, 
‘green dragons use misdirection and trickery to get the 
upper hand against their enemies. Nasty tempered and 
thoroughly evil, they take special pleasure in subverting 
and corrupting the good-hearted. In the ancient forests 
they roam, green dragons demonstrate an aggression 
that is often less about territory than it is about gaining 
power and wealth with as little effort as possible. 

A green dragon is recognized by its curved jawline 
and the crest that begins near its eyes and continues 
down its spine, reaching full height just behind the skull. 
A green dragon has no external ears, but bears leathery 
spiked plates that run down the sides of its neck. 

Awyrmling green dragon’s thin scales are a shade 
of green so dark as to appear nearly black. As a green 
dragon ages, its scales grow larger and lighter, turning 
shades of forest, emerald, and olive green to help it 
blend in with its wooded surroundings. Its wings have 
a dappled pattern, darker near the leading edges and 
lighter toward the trailing edges. 

A green dragon’s legs are longer in relation to its body 
than with any other dragon, enabling it to easily pass 
over underbrush and forest debris when it walks. With 
its equally long neck, an older green dragon can peer 
over the tops of trees without rearing up. 

Capricious Hunters. A green dragon hunts by 
patrolling its forest territory from the air and the 
ground. It eats any creature it can see, and will consume 
shrubs and small trees when hungry enough, but its 
favorite prey is elves, 


DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12(+1)  13(41) -14(42) 1140) 13 (41) 


- Saving Throws Dex +3, Con +3, Wis +2, Cha +3 
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +3 
Damage Immunities poison 
, Condition Immunities poisoned 
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages Draconic 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Eee ———— 
| Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (1d10 + 2) piercing damage plus 3 (1d6) poison damage. 


Poison Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales poisonous 
gas ina 15-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make 

a DC 11 Constitution saving throw, taking 21 (6d6) poison 
damage ona failed save, or half as much damage ona 
successful one. 


po Np 


| 
Green dragons are consummate liars and masters ore 


double talk. They favor intimidation of lesser creatures,’ 4 ete 


but employ more subtle manipulations when dealing 


with other dragons. A green dragon attacks animals and: i | 


monsters with no provocation, especially when dealing 
with potential threats to its territory. When dealing with 
sentient creatures, a green dragon demonstrates a lust 
for power that rivals its draconic desire for treasure, and 
it is always on the lookout for creatures that can help it 
further its ambitions. 

A green dragon stalks its victims as it plans its 
assault, sometimes shadowing creatures for days... 

If a target is weak, the dragon enjoys the terror iis 
appearance evokes before it attacks. It never slays all its 
foes, preferring to use intimidation to establish control 
over survivors. It then learns what it can about othér 
creatures’ activities near its territory, and about any 
treasure to be found nearby. Green dragons occasionally 
release prisoners if they can be ransomed. Otherwise, a 
creature must prove its value to the dragon daily or die. 

Manipulative Schemers. A wily and subtle creature, 
a green dragon bends other creatures to its will 
by assessing and playing off their deepest desires. 

Any creature foolish enough to attempt to subdue a 
green dragon eventually realizes that the creature 
is only pretending to serve while it assesses its 
would-be master. 

When manipulating other creatures, green dragons 
are honey-tongued, smooth, and sophisticated. Among 
their own kind, they are loud, crass, and rude, especially 
when dealing with dragons of the same age and status. 

Conflict and Corruption. Green dragons sometimes 
clash with other dragons over territory where forest 
crosses over into other terrain. A green dragon typically 
pretends to back down, only to wait and watch— 
sometimes for decades—for the chance to slay the other 
dragon, then claim its lair and hoard. 

Green dragons accept the servitude of sentient 
creatures such as goblinoids, ettercaps, ettins, kobolds, 
orcs, and yuan-ti. They also delight in corrupting and 
bending elves to their will. A green dragon sometimes 
wracks its minions’ minds with fear to the point of 
insanity, with the fog that spreads throughout its forest 
reflecting those minions’ tortured dreams. 

Living Treasures. A green dragon's favored treasures 
are the sentient creatures it bends to its will, including 
significant figures such as popular heroes, well-known 
sages, and renowned bards. Among material treasures, 
a green dragon favors emeralds, wood carvings, musical 
instruments, and sculptures of humanoid subjects. 


A GREEN DRAGON’S LAIR 


The forest-loving green dragons sometimes compete 

for territory with black dragons in marshy woods and 
with white dragons in subarctic taiga. However, a forest 
controlled by a green dragon is easy to spot. A perpetual 
fog hangs in the air in a legendary green dragon’s wood, 
carrying an acrid whiff of the creature’s poison breath. 
The moss-covered trees grow close together except 
where winding pathways trace their way like a maze_ 


into the heart of the forest. The light that reaches the ee tb 


ofa re as ape ah 


forest floor carries an emerald green cast, and every movement. A creature in the thickets must make a DC 


sound seems muffled. 15 Dexterity,saving throw once each round it’s in con- 
At the center of its forest, a green dragon chooses tact with the thickets or take 3 (1d6) piercing damage 

a cave in a sheer cliff or hillside for its lair, preferring from thorns. 

an entrance hidden from prying eyes. Some seek out Each 10-foot-cube of thickets has AC 5, 30 hit 

cave mouths concealed behind waterfalls, or partly points, resistance to bludgeoning and piercing dam- 

submerged caverns that can be accessed through lakes age, vulnerability to fire damage, and immunity to 

or streams. Others conceal the entrances to their lairs psychic and thunder damage. 

with vegetation. ¢ Within 1 mile of its lair, the dragon leaves no physical 
evidence of its passage unless it wishes to. Tracking it 

Lair ACTIONS there is impossible except by magical means. In addi- 

On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon tion, it ignores movement impediments and damage 

takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects; from plants in this area that are neither magical nor 

the dragon can’t use the same effect two rounds in a row: creatures, including the thickets described above. The 


plants remove themselves from the dragon’s path. 


¢ Grasping roots and vines erupt in a 20-foot radius 
- Rodents and birds within 1 mile of the dragon’s lair 


centered on a point on the ground that the dragon 


can see within 120 feet of it. That area becomes dif- serve as the dragon’s eyes and ears. Deer and other 
ficult terrain, and each creature there must succeed large game are strangely absent, hinting at the pres- 
on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or be restrained ence of an unnaturally hungry predator. 

by the roots and vines. A creature can be freed if it If the dragon dies, the rodents and birds lose their 

or another creature takes an action to make a DC 15 supernatural link to it. The thickets remain, but within 
Strength check and succeeds. The roots and vines 1d10 days, they become mundane plants and normal 
wilt away when the dragon uses this lair action again difficult terrain, losing their thorns. 


or when the dragon dies. 

« Awall of tangled brush bristling with thorns springs 
into existence on a solid surface within 120 feet of the 
dragon. The wall is up to 60 feet long, 10 feet high, 


and 5 feet thick, and it blocks line of sight. When the o kee? wae 
wall appears, each creature in its area must make a c AN ANCIEN L AL ae 
DC 15 Dexterity saving throw. A creature that fails th Bites ice FADES QRAgon WH ine 
y g ure that fails the one sin pn oreen & yo THIST 
save takes 18 (4d8) piercing damage and is pushed 5 , pis T gone: E rRruet! 1g NAME 
feet out of the wall’s space, appearing on whichever in THE KING © a was. TINS GEO ans THE 
side of the wall it wants. A creature can move through He KINGS ae , AND HE “ r 
the wall, albeit slowly and painfully. For every 1 foot a 15 CYAN _ oF US Att SivaNes™! a 
creature travels through the wall, it must spend 4 feet ese 05 OF cnet 


of movement. Furthermore, a creature in the wall’s 
space must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw 
once each round it’s in contact with the wall, taking 
18 44d8) piercing damage on a failed save, or half as 
much damage on a successful one. Each 10-foot sec- 
tion of wall has AC 5, 15 hit points, vulnerability to 
fire damage, resistance to bludgeoning and piercing 
damage, and immunity to psychic damage. The wall 
sinks back into the ground when the dragon uses this 
lair action again or when the dragon dies. 

« Magical fog billows around one creature the dragon 
can see within 120 feet of it. The creature must 
succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or be 

charmed by the dragon until initiative count 20 on 
meat ee the next round. 


REGIONAL EFFECTS 

; _ The region containing a legendary green dragon’s lair 
‘ . is warped by the dragon’s magic, which creates one 
\.) or more of the following effects: 

a ¢ Thickets form labyrinthine passages within 


1 mile of the dragon’s lair. The thickets 
act as 10-foot-high, 10-foot-thick walls wa 
that block line of sight. Creatures 
can move through the thickets, 
with every 1 foot a creature 
moves costing it 4 feet of 


” 
a 


ANCIENT RED DRAGON 


Gargantuan dragon, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 22 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 546 (28d20 + 252) 
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft., fly 80 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

30 (+10) 10(+0) 29(+9) 18(+4) 15 (+2) 23 (+6) 
sss 
Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +16, Wis +9, Cha +13 
Skills Perception +16, Stealth +7 
Damage Immunities fire 
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 26 
Languages Common, Draconic 
Challenge 24 (36,500 XP) 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). |f the dragon fails a saving 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then 
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
Hit: 21 (2d10 + 10) piercing damage plus 14 (4d6) 
fire damage. 


i 
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 10 ft., F% a ' 
one target. Hit: 17 (2d6 + 10) slashing damage. a 


| Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 20 ft., 
one target. Hit: 19 (2d8 + 10) bludgeoning damage. 


Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that 
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed 
ona DC 21 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 

each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Ifa 
creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 

the creature is immune to the dragon’s Frightful Presence for 
the next 24 hours. 


Fire Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales fire in a 90-foot 
cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 24 Dexterity 
saving throw, taking 91 (26d6) fire damage on a failed save, or 
half as much damage on a successful one. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. 

Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. 
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed 
ona DC 25 Dexterity saving throw or take 17 (2d6 + 10) 
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can 

then fly up to half its flying speed. 


DRAGENS 
os 97 


ADULT RED DRAGON 
Huge dragon, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 19 (natu ral armor) 

Hit Points 256 (19d12 + 133) 

Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft., fly 80 ft. 

a —_—_ ae 

STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 

27 (+8) 10(40) 25(47) 16(43) 13(41) 21 (+5) 

*—————E——SS—— = —-- — 

Mm Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +13, Wis +7, Cha +11 

Skills Perception +13, Stealth +6 

Damage Immunities fire 

| Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 23 

Languages Common, Draconic 

Challenge 17 (18,000 XP) 


a 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). \f the dragon fails a saving 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then , 
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 19 (2d10 + 8) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) fire damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) slashing damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) bludgeoning damage. 


Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that 

is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed 
ona DC 19 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 

minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 

each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a 

creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 

the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for 
the next 24 hours. 


Fire Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales fire in a 60-foot 
=—@ cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 21 Dexterity 

) saving throw, taking 63 (18d6) fire damage on a failed save, or 
) half as much damage on a successful one. 


"| LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
a at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
‘a dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


iF Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 
Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. 

| Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. 
| Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed 
ona DC 22 Dexterity saving throw or take 15 (2d6 + 8) 


- | bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can 
=> then fly up to half its flying speed. 


| DRAGONS 


RED DRAGON WYRMLING 


YOUNG RED DRAGON 


Large dragon, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 178 (17d10 + 85) 
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft., fly 80 ft. 
Ss * . 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
23(+6) 10(40) 21(45) 1442) 1140) 19(44) 
[ , : Se A 
Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +9, Wis +4, Cha +8 
Skills Perception +8, Stealth +4 
Damage Immunities fire 
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 18 
Languages Common, Draconic 
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) 


—a —o 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite 
and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (2d10 + 6) piercing damage plus 3 (1d6) fire damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage. 


Fire Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales fire in a 30-foot 
cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 17 Dexterity 
saving throw, taking 56 (16d6) fire damage on a failed save, or 
half as much damage on a successful one. 


Medium dragon, chaotic evil 


——_——. —___ 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 

Hit Points 75 (10d8 + 30) 

Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft., fly 60 ft. 

rp 

STR DEX CON INT wis 

19 (44) 10(40) 1743) 12(41) 11 (40) 

Saving Throws Dex +2, Con +5, Wis +2, Cha +4 

Skills Perception +4, Stealth +2 

Damage Immunities fire 

Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 

Languages Draconic 

Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


CHA 
15 (+2) 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 9 (1d10 + 4) piercing damage plus 3 (1d6) fire damage. 


_ Fire Breath (Recharge 5—6). The dragon exhales fire in a 15-foot | 
cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 13 Dexterity 
saving throw, taking 24 (7d6) fire damage on a failed save, or 
half as much damage on a successful one. 


Reb DEACON 


The most covetous of the true dragons, red dragons 
tirelessly seek to increase their treasure hoards. They 
are exceptionally vain, even for dragons, and their 
conceit is reflected in their proud bearing and their 
disdain for other creatures. 

The odor of sulfur and pumice surrounds a red 
dragon, whose swept-back horns and spinal frill define 
its silhouette. Its beaked snout vents smoke at all times, 
and its eyes dance with flame when it is angry. Its wings 
are the longest of any chromatic dragon, and have a 
blue-black tint along the trailing edge that resembles 
metal burned blue by fire. 

The scales of a red dragon wyrmling are a bright 
glossy scarlet, turning a dull, deeper red and becoming 
as thick and strong as metal as the dragon ages. Its 
pupils also fade as it ages, and the oldest red dragons 
have eyes that resemble molten lava orbs. 

Mountain Masters. Red dragons prefer mountainous 
terrain, badlands, and any other locale where they can 
perch high and survey their domain. Their preference 
for mountains brings them into conflict with the hill- 
dwelling copper dragons from time to time. 

Arrogant Tyrants. Red dragons fly into destructive 
rages and act on impulse when angered. They are so 
ferocious and vengeful that they are regarded as the 
archetypical evil dragon by many cultures. 

No other dragon comes close to the arrogance of the 
red dragon. These creatures see themselves as kings 
and emperors, and view the rest of dragonkind as 
inferior, Believing that they are chosen by Tiamat to rule 
in her name, red dragons consider the world and every 
creature in it as theirs to command. 

Status and Slaves. Red dragons are fiercely territorial 
and isolationist. However, they yearn to know about 
events in the wider world, and they make use of lesser 
creatures as informants, messengers, and spies. They 
are most interested in news about other red dragons, 
with which they compete constantly for status. 

When it requires servants, a red dragon demands 
fealty from chaotic evil humanoids. If allegiance isn’t 
forthcoming, it slaughters a tribe’s leaders and claims 
lordship over the survivors. Creatures serving a red 
dragon live in constant terror of being roasted and eaten 
for displeasing it. They spend most of their time fawning 
over the creature in an attempt to stay alive. 

Obsessive Collectors. Red dragons value wealth 
above all else, and their treasure hoards are legendary. 
They covet anything of monetary value, and can often 
judge the worth of a bauble to within a copper piece at a 
glance. A red dragon has a special affection for treasure 
claimed from powerful enemies it has slain, exhibiting 
that treasure to prove its superiority. 

A red dragon knows the value and provenance of 
every item in its hoard, along with each item’s exact 
location. It might notice the absence of a single coin, 
igniting its rage as it tracks down and slays the thief 
without mercy. If the thief can’t be found, the dragon 
goes on a rampage, laying waste to towns and villages in 
an attempt to sate its wrath. 


A RED Dracon’s LAIR 


Red dragons lair in high mountains or hills, dwelling in. 
caverns under snow-capped peaks, or withinthe deep) 
halls of abandoned mines and dwarven strongholds. 
Caves with volcanic or geothermal activity are the most 
highly prized red dragon lairs, creating hazards that 
hinder intruders and letting searing heat and best 
gases wash over a dragon as it sleeps. 

With its hoard well protected deep within the ait 
a red dragon spends as much of its time outside the 
mountain as in it. For a red dragon, the great heights 
of the world are the throne from which it can look iy 
out to survey all it controls—and the wider world its 
seeks to control. 

Throughout the lair complex, servants erect 
monuments to the dragon’s power, telling the grim story 
of its life, the enemies it has slain, and the nations it 
has conquered. 


LAIR ACTIONS 

On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon 
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects; 
the dragon can’t use the same effect two rounds in a row: 


» Magma erupts from a point on the ground the dragon | 
can see within 120 feet of it, creating a 20-foot-high, } 
5-foot-radius geyser. Each creature in the geyser’s 
area must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, tak- 
ing 21 (6d6) fire damage on a failed save, or half as f 
much damage on a successful one. | 
A tremor shakes the lair in a 60-foot radius around 4. 
the dragon. Each creature other than the dragon on ; 
the ground in that area must succeed on a DC 15 
Dexterity saving throw or be knocked prone. q 
Volcanic gases form a cloud in a 20-foot-radius i 
4 


sphere centered on a point the dragon can see within 
120 feet of it. The sphere spreads around corners, 
and its area is lightly obscured. It lasts until initia- 
tive count 20 on the next round. Each creature that fe 
starts its turn in the cloud must succeed on a DC 13 
Constitution saving throw or be poisoned until the end 
of its turn. While poisoned in this way, a creature is 
incapacitated. 


REGIONAL EFFECTS nny 
The region containing a legendary red dragon’s lair is 
warped by the dragon’s magic, which creates one or if Ah 
more of the following effects: ‘| 


Small earthquakes are common within 6 miles of the 
dragon’s lair. 

Water sources within 1 mile of the lair are supernatu- f 
rally warm and tainted by sulfur. Mh 
Rocky fissures within 1 mile of the dragon’s lair form Pehl | 
portals to the Elemental Plane of Fire, allowing crea- ne) 
tures of elemental fire into the world to dwell nearby. 


If the dragon dies, these effects fade over the course 
of 1d10 days. 


q ANCIENT Waa Breas 


| Gargantuan dragon, chaotic evil 


4 Armor Class 20 (natural armor) 


Hit Points 333 (18d20 + 144) 
i Speed 40 ft., burrow 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
26 (+8) 10(+0) 26(+8) 10(+0) 13(+1) 14 (42) 


1 Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +14, Wis +7, Cha +8 
Skills Perception +13, Stealth +6 
Damage Immunities cold 
y Senses blindsight 60 ft. » darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 23 


} Ice Walk. The dragon can move across and climb icy surfaces 
) without needing to make an ability check. Additionally, difficult 
| terrain composed of ice or snow doesn't cost it extra moment. 


| Legendary Resistance (3/Day). |f the dragon fails a saving 
) throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


| ACTIONS 


| Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then 
) makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


| Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
4 Hit: 19 (2d10 + 8) piercing damage plus 9 (2d8) cold damage. 


Claw, Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target 
Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) slashing damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) bludgeoning damage. 


Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon’s choice that 

is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed 
ona DC 16 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 

minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 

each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a 
creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 

the creature is immune to the dragon’s Frightful Presence for 
the next 24 hours. 


Cold Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales an icy blast in 
a 90-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 22 

Constitution saving throw, taking 72 (16d8) cold damage on a 

failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. 

Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. 
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed 
ona DC 22 Dexterity saving throw or take 15 (2d6 + 8) 
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can | 
then fly up to half its fying Space. 


| ADULT WHITE DRAGON 


Huge dragon, chaotic evil 


y 


}, 
‘ 


P) Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
| Hit Points 200 (16d12 + 96) 
Speed 40 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 

22 (+6) 10(40) 22(46) 8(-1) 12(41) 12(41) 
aan 
Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +11, Wis +6, Cha +6 

Skills Perception +11, Stealth +5 

Damage Immunities cold 

Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 21 

Languages Common, Draconic 
_ Challenge 13 (10,000 XP) 


sss 


| Ice Walk. The dragon can move across and climb icy surfaces 
without needing to make an ability check. Additionally, difficult 
terrain composed of ice or snow doesn't cost it extra moment. 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). \f the dragon fails a saving 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then 


makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (2d10 + 6) piercing damage plus 4 (1d8) cold damage. 


YOUNG WHITE DRAGON 


Large dragon, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 133 (14d10 + 56) 
Speed 40 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 10 (+0) 18 (+4) 6(-2) 11(40) 12(41) 


Saving Throws Dex +3, Con +7, Wis +3, Cha +4 
Skills Perception +6, Stealth +3 
Damage Immunities cold 
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16 
Languages Common, Draconic 
, Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


Se. ae ——— 


———s a < —= —— 
ee aa eee a 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft.; one target. 
Hit; 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 


Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon’s choice that 

is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed 
ona DC 14 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 

minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 

each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Ifa 
creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 

the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for 
the next 24 hours. 


Cold Breath (Recharge 5—6). The dragon exhales an icy blast in _ 
a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 19 
Constitution saving throw, taking 54 (12d8) cold damage ona 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The 
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. 

Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. 
Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed 
ona DC 19 Dexterity saving throw or take 13 (2d6 + 6) 
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can 
then fly up to half its flying speed. 


ae ne ESS) EP he 


| 
Se Ee a a el 


Ice Walk. The dragon can move across and climb icy surfaces 
without needing to make an ability check. Additionally, difficult 
terrain composed of ice or snow doesn't cost it extra moment. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite | 
and two with its claws. 
f 


— 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 15 (2d10 + 4) piercing damage plus 4 (1d8) cold damage. | 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage. 


Cold Breath (Recharge 5—6). The dragon exhales an icy blast in 

a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 15 
Constitution saving throw, taking 45 (10d8) cold damageona | 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


DRAGONS 14 


8 


WHITE DRAGON 


“ie The smallest, least intelligent, and most animalistic of 
Bp _ the chromatic dragons, white dragons dwell in frigid 
Vit climes, favoring arctic areas or icy mountains. They are 
»vicious, cruel reptiles driven by hunger and greed. 
Br. A white dragon has feral eyes, a sleek profile, anda 
ay eT spined crest. The scales of a wyrmling white dragon 
glisten pure white. As the dragon ages, its sheen 
disappears and some of its scales begin to darken, 

so that by the time it is old, it is mottled by patches 

of pale blue and light gray. This patterning helps the 
dragon blend into the realms of ice and stone in which 
it hunts, and to fade from view when it soars across a 
cloud-filled sky. 

Primal and Vengeful. White dragons lack the 
cunning and tactics of most other dragons. However, 
their bestial nature makes them the best hunters among 
all dragonkind, singularly focused on surviving and 
slaughtering their enemies. A white dragon consumes 
only food that has been frozen, devouring creatures 
killed by its breath weapon while they are still stiff and 
frigid. It encases other kills in ice or buries them in 
snow near its lair, and finding such a larder is a good 
ah indication that a white dragon dwells nearby. 

Kj A white dragon also keeps the bodies of its greatest 
| enemies as trophies, freezing corpses where it can 
| look upon them and gloat. The remains of giants, 

} remorhazes, and other dragons are often positioned 
ni prominently within a white dragon’s lair as warnings 
hal to intruders. 

Though only moderately intelligent, white dragons 

have extraordinary memories. They recall every slight 

and defeat, and have been known to conduct malicious 
vendettas against creatures that have offended them. 

This often includes silver dragons, which lair in 


a? | 
ls 6 (r natu ral armor) 
ui Poi 32 (5d8+ 10) 


1 30 30 ft., burrow 15 ft., fly 60 ft., swim 30 ft. 


CHA 
11 (+0) 


CON 
14 (+2) 


DEX 
10 (+0) 


INT 
5 (-3) 


Wis 
10 (+0) 


STR 
) 14 (+2) 


) Saving Throws Dex +2, Con +4, Wis +2, Cha +2 
) Skills Perception +4, Stealth +2 
Damage Immunities cold 
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
|| Languages Draconic 
| Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


| AcTIONS 


: Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 7 (1d10 + 2) piercing damage plus 2 (1d4) cold damage. 


Cold Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales an icy blast of 
hail in a 15-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a 
DC 12 Constitution saving throw, taking 22 (5d8) cold damage 
on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


the same territories as whites. White dragons can 
speak as all dragons can, but they rarely talk unless 
moved. to do so. 

Lone Masters. White dragons avoid all other dragons 
except whites of the opposite sex. Even then, when 
white dragons seek each other out as mates, they stay 
together only long enough to conceive offspring before 
fleeing into isolation again. 

White dragons can’t abide rivals near their lairs. As a 
result, a white dragon attacks other creatures without 
provocation, viewing such creatures as either too weak 
or too powerful to live. The only creatures that typically 
serve a white dragon are intelligent humanoids that 
demonstrate enough strength to assuage the dragon’s 
wrath, and can put up with sustaining regular losses as 
a result of its hunger. This includes dragon-worshiping 
kobolds, which are commonly found in their lairs. 

Powerful creatures can sometimes gain a white 
dragon's obedience through a demonstration of physical 
or magical might. Frost giants challenge white dragons 
to prove their own strength and improve their status 
in their clans, and their cracked bones litter many a 
white dragon’s lair. However, a white dragon defeated 
by a frost giant often becomes its servant, accepting the 
mastery of a superior creature in exchange for asserting 
its own domination over the other creatures that serve 
or oppose the giant. 

Treasure Under Ice. White dragons love the cold 
sparkle of ice and favor treasure with similar qualities, 
particularly diamonds. However, in their remote arctic 
climes, the treasure hoards of white dragons more often 
contain walrus and mammoth tusk ivory, whale-bone 
sculptures, figureheads from ships, furs, and magic 
items seized from overly bold adventurers. 

Loose coins and gems are spread across a white 
dragon's lair, glittering like stars when the light strikes 
them. Larger treasures and chests are encased in layers 
of rime created by the white dragon’s breath, and held 
safe beneath layers of transparent ice. The dragon's 
great strength allows it to easily access its wealth, while 
lesser creatures must spend hours chipping away or 
melting the ice to reach the dragon's main hoard. 

A white dragon’s flawless memory means that it 
knows how it came to possess every coin, gem, and 
magic item in its hoard, and it associates each item with 
a specific victory. White dragons are notoriously difficult 
to bribe, since any offers of treasure are seen as an 
insult to their ability to simply slay the creature making 
the offer and seize the treasure on their own. 


A WHITE DRAGON’S LAIR 


White dragons lair in icy caves and deep subterranean 
chambers far from the sun. They favor high mountain 
vales accessible only by flying, caverns in cliff faces, and 
labyrinthine ice caves in glaciers. White dragons love 
vertical heights in their caverns, flying up to the ceiling a 
to latch on like bats or slithering down icy crevasses. 
A legendary white dragon's innate magic deepens 
the cold in the area around its lair. Mountain caverns 
are fast frozen by the white dragon’s presence. A 
white dragon can often detect intruders by the way the 
keening wind in its lair changes tone. 


r 
SS Se ie im art ee 
1 ? ins 4 
i ‘thee 


l = 7 yt 
——— aes ATT ica See + — 
= SNR RT LR? 


_ AWhite dragon rests on high! ice shelves and cliffs in its 
lair, the floor around it a treacherous morass of broken 
ice and stone, hidden pits, and slippery slopes. As foes 
struggle to move toward it, the dragon flies from perch to 
perch and destroys them with its freezing breath. 


LAIR ACTIONS 

On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon 
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects; 
the dragon can’t use the same effect two rounds in a row: 


- Freezing fog fills a 20-foot-radius sphere centered on 
a point the dragon can see within 120 feet of it. The 
fog spreads around corners, and its area is heavily 
obscured. Each creature in the fog when it appears 
must make a DC 10 Constitution saving throw, taking 
10 (3d6) cold damage on a failed save, or half as much 
damage on a successful one. A creature that ends its 
turn in the fog takes 10 (3d6) cold damage. A wind of 
at least 20 miles per hour disperses the fog. The fog 
otherwise lasts until the dragon uses this lair action 
again or until the dragon dies. 

» Jagged ice shards fall from the ceiling, striking up to 
three creatures underneath that the dragon can see 
within 120 feet of it. The dragon makes one ranged 
attack roll 47 to hit) against each target. On a hit, the 
target takes 10 (3d6) piercing damage. 

- The.dragon creates an opaque wall of ice on a solid 
surface it can see within 120 feet of it. The wall can 
be up to 30 feet long, 30 feet high, and 1 foot thick. 
When the wall appears, each creature within its area 
is pushed 5 feet out of the wall’s space, appearing on 
whichever side of the wall it wants. Each 10-foot sec- 
tion of the wall has AC 5, 30 hit points, vulnerability 
to fire damage, and immunity to acid, cold, necrotic, 
poison, and psychic damage. The wall disappears 
when the dragon uses this lair action again or when 
the dragon dies. 


REGIONAL EFFECTS 

The region containing a legendary white dragon’s lair 
is warped by the dragon’s magic, which creates one or 
more of the following effects: 


« Chilly fog lightly obscures the land within 6 miles of 
the dragon’s lair. 

« Freezing precipitation falls within 6 miles of the drag- 
on’s lair, sometimes forming blizzard conditions when 
the dragon is at rest. 

* Icy walls block off areas in the dragon’s lair. Each wall 
is 6 inches thick, and a 10-foot section has AC 5, 15 hit 
points, vulnerability to fire damage, and immunity to 
acid, cold, necrotic, poison, and psychic damage. 

If the dragon wishes to move through a wall, it can 
do so without slowing down. The portion of the wall 
the dragon moves through is destroyed, however. 


If the dragon dies, the fog and precipitation fade within 
1 day. The ice walls melt over the course of 1d10 days. 


METALLIC DRAGONS 


Metallic dragons seek to preserve and protect, viewing " 
themselves as one powerful race among the many races’ 
that have a place in the world. 

Noble Curiosity. Metallic dragons covet treasure 
as do their evil chromatic kin, but they aren’t driven 
as much by greed in their pursuit of wealth. Rather, 
metallic dragons are driven to investigate and collect, 
taking unclaimed relics and storing them in their fairs, 
A metallic dragon’s treasure hoard is filled with items 
that reflect its persona, tell its history, and preserve its 
memories. Metallic dragons also seek to protect*other 
creatures from dangerous magic. As such, powerful mi 
magic items and even evil artifacts are sometimes: ° 
secreted away in a metallic dragon's hoard. Jeng 

A metallic dragon can be persuaded to part with'an 
item in its hoard for the greater good. However, another 
creature’s need for or right to the item is often unclear 
from the dragon’s point of view. A metallic dragon must 
be bribed or otherwise convinced to part with the item. 

Solitary Shapeshifters. At some point in their long 
lives, metallic dragons gain the magical ability to 
assume the forms of humanoids and beasts. When a 
dragon learns how to disguise itself, it might immerse 
itself in other cultures for a time. Some dragons are too 
shy or paranoid to stray far from their lairs and their 
treasure hoards, but bolder dragons love to wander city 
streets in humanoid form, taking in the local culture and 
cuisine, and amusing themselves by observing how the 
smaller races live. 

Some metallic dragons prefer to stay as far away from 
civilization as possible so as to not attract enemies. 
However, this means that they are often far out of touch 
with current events. 

The Persistence of Memory. Metallic dragons 
have long memories, and they form opinions of 
humanoids based on previous contact with related 
humanoids. Good dragons can recognize humanoid 
bloodlines by smell, sniffing out each person they meet 
and remembering any relatives they have come into 
contact with over the years. A gold dragon might never 
suspect duplicity from a cunning villain, assuming 
that the villain is of the same mind and heart as a good 
and virtuous grandmother. On the other hand, the 
dragon might resent a noble paladin whose ancestor 
stole a silver statue from the dragon’s hoard three 
centuries before. 

King of Good Dragons. The chief deity of the metallic 
dragons is Bahamut, the Platinum Dragon. He dwells in 
the Seven Heavens of Mount Celestia, but often wanders 
the Material Plane in the magical guise of a venerable 
human male in peasant robes. In this form, he is usually 
accompanied by seven golden canaries—actually seven 
ancient gold dragons in polymorphed form. 

Bahamut seldom interferes in the affairs of mortal 
creatures, though he makes exceptions to help thwart 
the machinations of Tiamat the Dragon Queen and 
her evil brood. Good-aligned clerics and paladins 
sometimes worship Bahamut for his dedication to 
justice and protection. As a lesser god, he has the power’ i 


to grant divine spells. le 


hilri 


ANCIENT BRASS DRAGON 


N= 


Gargantuan dragon, chaotic good 


Armor Class 20 (natural armor) 
| Hit Points 297 (17d20 + 119) 
Speed 40 ft., burrow 40 ft., fly 80 ft. 


ee es — = 

i STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
27 (+8) 10(4+0) 25 (47) 16(4+3) 15(+2) 19 (+4) 

a _<<<— : 
| Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +13, Wis +8, Cha +10 
| Skills History +9, Perception +14, Persuasion +10, Stealth +6 
) Damage Immunities fire 
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 24 
| Languages Common, Draconic 
| Challenge 20 (24,500 XP) 
y 


—_— == 


5 
J 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


ee 


ACTIONS 


makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
Hit: 19 (2d10 + 8) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) slashing damage. 


' Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) bludgeoning damage. 


| Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon’s choice that 
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed 
ona DC 18 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Ifa 
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 


Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then 


Ql x oad 
the creature is immune to the dragon's Frightful Presence for 
the next 24 hours. 


Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the 
following breath weapons: 


Fire Breath. The dragon exhales fire in an 90-foot line that is 
10 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC 21 
Dexterity saving throw, taking 56 (16d6) fire damage ona 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 

Sleep Breath. The dragon exhales sleep gas in a 90-foot 
cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 21 
Constitution saving throw or fall unconscious for 10 minutes. [ 
This effect ends for a creature if the creature takes damage or 
someone uses an action to wake it. 


Change Shape. The dragon magically polymorphs into a 
humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating no higher than 
its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its true form if 
it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is absorbed or 
borne by the new form (the dragon’s choice). 

- In a new form, the dragon retains its alignment, hit points, 
Hit Dice, ability to speak, proficiencies, Legendary Resistance, | 
lair actions, and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as 

well as this action. Its statistics and capabilities are otherwise 

replaced by those of the new form, except any class features or / 
legendary actions of that form. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS | 


The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. | 

Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. 

Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. 
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed 
ona DC 22 Dexterity saving throw or take 15 (2d6 + 8) 
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can 
then fly up to half its flying speed. 


ADULT BRAss DRAGON ns: 


Auge dragon, chaotic good ie 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 172 (15d12 + 75) 
"Speed 40 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 80 ft. 


| STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
| 23 (46) 10(+0) 21(45) 14(42) 13441) 17 (43) 


| Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +10, Wis +6, Cha +8 

| Skills History +7, Perception +11, Persuasion +8, Stealth +5 

| Damage Immunities fire 
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 21 
, Languages Common, Draconic 

| Challenge 13 (10,000 XP) 


4 Legendary Resistance (3/Day). |f the dragon fails a saving 
7 throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


ACTIONS 


makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (2d10 + 6) piercing damage. 


: | Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
; Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage. 

Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +1] to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
) Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 


Tih 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 110 (13d10 + 39) 
| Speed 40 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 80 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4) «= 10 (40) = 17 (+3), 12 (41) (40) ~—s*5 (42) 
| EE EEE——————E—E——————————————— 
Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +8, Wis +5, Cha +7 
| Skills Perception +10, Persuasion +7, Stealth +5 
} _ Damage Immunities fire 
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 20 
_ Languages Common, Draconic 
| Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


EEE 


| ACTIONS 


A 


i - Frightful Presence,. Each Tresturelonid the 


Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then 


‘Youns BRASS DRAcon. aus 


- , Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite 


a = 
and two with its claws. ir 


{ragon's S$ choice that 
is within 120 feet of the dragon. and aware of it it must succeed 
ona DC 16 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for) | 
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself ona success. If a 
creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 
the creature is immune to the dragon’s Frightful Presence for 
the next 24 hours. 


Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the 
following breath weapons. 


Fire Breath. The dragon exhales fire in an 60-foot line that is 
5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC 18 
Dexterity saving throw, taking 49 (13d6) fire damage on a 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 
Sleep Breath. The dragon exhales sleep gas in a 60-foot 
cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 18 
Constitution saving throw or fall unconscious for 10 minutes. 
This effect ends for a creature if the creature takes damage or 
someone uses an action to wake it. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. 

Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. 
Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed 
ona DC 19 Dexterity saving throw or take 13 (2d6 + 6) 
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can 
then fly up to half its nyins speed. 


“Bite, Melee Weapon Attack: 49 to hit, ac ch 10 ft. one targets « 
Hit: 15 (2d10 + 4) piercing damage. 2 >A 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, ferch 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage. 


Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the 
following breath weapons. 


Fire Breath. The dragon exhales fire in a 40-foot line that is 
5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC 14 
Dexterity saving throw, taking 42 (12d6) fire damage ona ! 
failed save, or half as much damage ona successful one. 

Sleep Breath. The dragon exhales sleep gas in a 30-foot 
cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 14 
Constitution saving throw or fall unconscious for 5 minutes. | 
This effect ends for a creature if the creature takes damage or 
someone uses an action to wake it. 


4 DRAGONS |: 
7 RASH 


Brass DRAGON 


na The most gregarious of the true dragons, brass dragons 
a crave conversation, sunlight, and hot, dry climates. 
aa A brass dragon’s head is defined by the broad 
bays “protective plate that expands from its forehead and the 
aft, | spikes protruding from its chin. A frill runs the length of 
4 its neck, and its tapering wings extend down the length 
of its tail. A brass dragon wyrmling’s scales are a dull, 
mottled brown. As it-ages, the dragon's scales begin to 
shine, eventually taking on a warm, burnished luster. 
Its wings and frills are mottled green toward the edges, 
darkening with age. As a brass dragon grows older, its 
pupils fade until its eyes resemble molten metal orbs. 

Boldly Talkative. A brass dragon engages in 
conversations with thousands of creatures throughout 
its long life, accumulating useful information which it 
will gladly share for gifts of treasure. If an intelligent 
creature tries to leave a’ brass dragon’s presence without 
engaging in conversation, the dragon follows it. If the 
creature attempts to escape by magic or force, the 
dragon might respond with a fit of pique, using its sleep 
gas to incapacitate the creature. When it wakes, the 
creature finds itself pinned to the ground by giant claws 
or buried up to its neck in the sand while the dragon’s 
thirst for small talk is slaked. 

A brass dragon is trusting of creatures that appear 
to enjoy conversation as much as it does, but is smart 
enough to know when it is being manipulated. When 


nae 


BR CA LSS. D R AG 


oe taste at 


Z 


| Armor’ ane 16 (natural armor) 
“Hit Points 16 (3d8 + 3) 
"Speed 30 ft., burrow 15 ft., fly 60 ft. 


CHA 
13 (+1) 


WIS 
11 (+0) 


CON 
13 (+1) 


DEX 
10 (+0) 


INT 
10 (+0) 


STR 
15 (42) 


Saving Throws Dex +2, Con +3, Wis +2, Cha +3 
ait Skills Perception +4, Stealth +2 
| Damage Immunities fire 
| Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 | 
| Languages Draconic 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


| 
| 
Paint | ACTIONS 
| Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
: Hit: 7 (1d10 + 2) piercing damage. 
_ Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the 
i a | following breath weapons. 


5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC 11 
Dexterity saving throw, taking 14 (4d6) fire damage ona 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 
Sleep Breath. The dragon exhales sleep gas in a 15-foot 
cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 11 
Constitution saving throw or fall unconscious for 1 minute. 
’ This effect ends for a creature if the creature takes damage or 
someone uses an action to wake it. 


! ee | Fire Breath. The dragon exhales fire in an 20-foot line that is 
| 


— 


aa ial bed 
ioe aaa 


that happens, the dragon often responds in kind, 
treating a bout of mutual trickery as a game. 

Prized Treasures. Brass dragons covet magic 
items that allow them to converse with interesting 
personalities. An intelligent telepathic weapon or a 
magic lamp with a djinni bound inside it are among the 
greatest treasures a brass dragon can possess. 

Brass dragons conceal their hoards under mounds 
of sand or in secret places far from their primary 
lairs. They have no trouble remembering where their 
treasure is buried, and therefore have no need for maps. 
Adventurers and wanderers should be wary if they 
happen across a chest hidden in an oasis or a treasure 
cache tucked away in a half-buried desert ruin, for these 
might be parts of a brass dragon’s hoard. 


A BRASS DRAGON’S LAIR 


A brass dragon’s desert lair is typically a ruin, canyon, 
or cave network with ceiling holes to allow for sunlight. 


LAIR ACTIONS 
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon 
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects: 


« Astrong wind blows around the dragon. Each creature 
within 60 feet of the dragon must succeed on a DC 15 
Strength saving throw or be pushed 15 feet away from 
the dragon and knocked prone. Gases and vapors are 
dispersed by the wind, and unprotected flames are 
extinguished. Protected flames, such as lanterns, have 
a 50 percent chance of being extinguished. 

« Acloud of sand swirls about in a 20-foot-radius sphere 
centered on a point the dragon can see within 120 
feet of it. The cloud spreads around corners. Each 
creature in it must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution 
saving throw or be blinded for 1 minute. A creature 
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


REGIONAL EFFECTS 

The region containing a legendary brass dragon’s lair 
is warped by the dragon’s magic, which creates one or 
more of the following effects: 


« Tracks appear in the sand within 6 miles of the drag- 
on’s lair. The tracks lead to safe shelters and hidden 
water sources, while also leading away from areas 
that the dragon prefers to remain undisturbed. 

« Images of Large or smaller monsters haunt the des- 
ert sands within 1 mile of the dragon’s lair. These 
illusions move and appear real, although they can do 
no harm. A creature that examines an image from a 
distance can tell it’s an illusion with a successful DC 
20 Intelligence (Investigation) check. Any physical 
interaction with an image reveals it to be an illusion, 
because objects pass through it. 

«+ Whenever a creature with an Intelligence of 3 or 
higher comes within 30 feet of a water source within 1 
mile of the dragon’s lair, the dragon becomes aware of 
the creature’s presence and location. 


If the dragon dies, the tracks fade in 1d10 days, but the 
other effects fade immediately. 


; 
| 


PANGIENT BRONZE DRAGON — 


ie 


Gargantuan dragon, lawful good 


_ Armor Class 22 (natural armor) 


Hit Points 444 (24d20 + 192) 


Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. 


WIS 
17 (+3) 


DEX 
10 (+0) 


STR 
29 (+9) 


CON 
27 (+8) 


INT 
18 (+4) 


CHA 
21 (+5) 


Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +15, Wis +10, Cha +12 


_ Skills Insight +10, Perception +17, Stealth +7 


Damage Immunities lightning 
Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 27 


, Languages Common, Draconic 
| Challenge 22 (30,000 XP) 


Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water. 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). |f the dragon fails a saving 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


_ ACTIONS 


———— 


Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then 


makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
Hit: 20 (2d10 + 9) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 16 (2d6 + 9) slashing damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +16 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target. 
Hit: 18 (2d8 + 9) bludgeoning damage. 


Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that 
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed 
on a DC 20 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself.on a success. If a 
creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 


~ the next 24 hours. 


: He Breathe] is immune to tHe ne htful 


ore oe 


? ’ 
Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one oft the 
following breath weapons. 


Lightning Breath. The dragon exhales lightning in a 120-foot 
line that is 10 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make 
a DC 23 Dexterity saving throw, taking 88 (16d10) lightning 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. 

Repulsion Breath. The dragon exhales repulsion energy in a 
30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must succeed ona 
DC 23 Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the creature is 
pushed 60 feet away from the dragon. 


Change Shape. The dragon magically polymorphs into a 
humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating no higher than 
its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its true form if 
it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is absorbed or 
borne by the new form (the dragon’s choice). 

In a new form, the dragon retains its alignment, hit points, 
Hit Dice, ability to speak, proficiencies, Legendary Resistance, 


lair actions, and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as | 


well as this action. Its statistics and capabilities are otherwise 
replaced by those of the new form, except any class features or 
legendary actions of that form. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. 

Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. 
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed 
ona DC 24 Dexterity saving throw or take 16 (2d6 + 9) 

bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can 

then fly up to half its flying speed. 


Pre resence eo 


| 


Seana tee, pa 


a 


ae ‘ 


L sett eee 


108 


| ADULT BRONZE DRacon 
, Huge dragon, lawful good 


"Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 212 (17d12 + 102) 
| Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
25 (+7) 10 (+0) 23 (+6) 16(4+3) 15 (42) 19 (+4) 
ee ar Seeees—te 
Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +11, Wis +7, Cha +9 

Skills Insight +7, Perception +12, Stealth +5 
Damage Immunities lightning 


Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 22 


Languages Common, Draconic 
Challenge 15 (13,000 XP) 


, Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water. 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). |f the dragon fails a saving 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


ACTIONS 


| Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then 


makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


| Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
_ Hit: 18 (2d10 + 7) piercing damage. 


i 
| Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 14 (2d6 + 7) slashing damage. 


| Tail, Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 


_ Hit: 16 (2d8 + 7) bludgeoning damage. 


Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon’s choice that 
| is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed 
) ona DC 17 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 

minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 
_ each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Ifa 
| creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 


“YOUNG Bre 


| Large dragon, lawful good ; re YY eae 


| Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
| Hit Points 142 (15d10 + 60) 
"Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. 


WIS 
13 (+1) 


STR 
21 (+5) 


DEX 
10 (+0) 


INT 
14 (+2) 


CHA 
17 (+3) 


CON 
19 (+4) 


_ Saving Throws Dex +3, Con +7, Wis +4, Cha +6 
Skills Insight +4, Perception +7, Stealth +3 
| Damage Immunities lightning 
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 17 
_ Languages Common, Draconic 
| Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water. 


and two with its claws. 


the creature is immune to the dragon’ sF rightful Presence for | 
the next 24 hours. : fo) 


Breath Weapons (Recharge 5~6). The dragon uses one ofthe 
following breath weapons. 


Lightning Breath. The dragon exhales lightning in a 90-foot 
line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make 
a DC 19 Dexterity saving throw, taking 66 (12d10) lightning 
damage ona failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. 

Repulsion Breath. The dragon exhales repulsion energy in a 
30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must succeed ona 
DC 19 Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the creature is 
pushed 60 feet away from the dragon. 


Change Shape. The dragon magically polymorphs into a 
humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating no higher than 
its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its true form if 
it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is absorbed or 
borne by the new form (the dragon's choice). 

In a new form, the dragon retains its alignment, hit points, 
Hit Dice, ability to speak, proficiencies, Legendary Resistance, 


a 


} 
lair actions, and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as | 


well as this action. Its statistics and capabilities are otherwise 
replaced by those of the new form, except any class features or 
legendary actions of that form. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. 

Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. 
Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed 
ona DC 20 Dexterity saving throw or take 14 (2d6 + 7) 
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can 
then fly up to half its flying speed. 


| 


Multiattack. The dragon makes. three attacks: irl its bite | 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 X hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 16 (2d10 + 5) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage. 


Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the 
following breath weapons. 


Lightning Breath. The dragon exhales lightning in a 60-foot 
line that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make 
a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 55 (10d10) lightning 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. 

Repulsion Breath. The dragon exhales repulsion energy in a 
30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a 


DC 15 Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the creature is - 


pushed 40 feet away from the dragon. 


— ee ee = — 


BRONZE DRAGON 


Bronze dragons are coastal dwellers that feed primarily 
on aquatic plants and fish. They take the forms of 
friendly animals to observe other creatures of interest. 
They are also fascinated by warfare and eagerly join 
armies fighting for a just cause. 

A ribbed and fluted crest defines the shape of a bronze 
dragon’s head. Curving horns extend out from the crest, 
echoed by spines on its lower jaw and chin. To help them 
swim, bronze dragons have webbed feet and smooth 
scales. A bronze wyrmling’s scales are yellow tinged 
with green; only as the dragon approaches adulthood 
does its color deepen to a darker, rich bronze tone. The 
pupils of a bronze dragon’s eyes fade as the dragon ages, 
until they resemble glowing green orbs. 

Dragons of the Coast. Bronze dragons love to 
watch ships traveling up and down the coastlines near 
their lairs, sometimes taking the forms of dolphins or 
seagulls to inspect those ships and their crews more 
closely. A daring bronze dragon might slip aboard a 
ship in the guise of a bird or rat, inspecting the hold 
for treasure. If the dragon finds a worthy addition to its 
hoard, it barters with the ship’s captain for the item. 

War Machines. Bronze dragons actively oppose 
tyranny, and many bronze dragons yearn to test their 
mettle by putting their size and strength to good use. 

When a conflict unfolds near its lair, a bronze dragon 
ascertains the underlying cause, then offers its services 
to any side that fights for good. Once a bronze dragon 
commits to a cause, it remains a staunch ally. 

Well-Organized Wealth. Bronze dragons loot sunken 
ships and also collect colorful coral and pearls from 
the reefs and seabeds near their lairs. When a bronze 
dragon pledges to help an army wage war against 
tyranny, it asks for nominal payment. If such a request 
is beyond its allies’ means, it might settle for a collection 
of old books on military history or a ceremonial item 
commemorating the alliance. A bronze dragon might 
also lay claim to a treasure held by the enemy that it 
feels would be safer under its protection. 


A BRONZE DRAGON’S LAIR 


A bronze dragon lairs in coastal caves. It might salvage 
a wrecked ship, reconstruct it within the confines of its 
lair, and use it as a treasure vault or nest for its eggs. 


LAIR ACTIONS 
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon 
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects: 


+ The dragon creates fog as though it had cast the fog 
cloud spell. The fog lasts until initiative count 20 on 
the next round. 

- Athunderclap originates at a point the dragon can see 
within 120 feet of it. Each creature within a 20-foot 
radius centered on that point must make a DC 15 
Constitution saving throw or take 5 (1d10) thunder 
damage and be deafened until the end of its next turn. 


REGIONAL EFFECTS 
The region containing a legendary bronze dragon’s lair 
is warped by the dragon’s magic. 


edgy 


ss 17 natural armor), 
Points 32 (5d8 +10) _ 
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft., swim 30 ft. 
i “STR DEX CON INT WIS. CHA | 
(1743) 1040) 15 (42) 1241) 10) 15 (2) 


} Saving Throws Dex +2, Con +4, Wis +2, Cha +4 
| Skills Perception +4, Stealth +2 

Damage Immunities lightning 
_ Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 | 
_ Languages Draconic 
_ Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water. 


_ ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack; +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (1d10 + 3) piercing damage. 


_ Breath Weapons (Recharge 5—6). The dragon uses one of the 
| following breath weapons. 


Lightning Breath. The dragon exhales lightning in a 40-foot line 
that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC 
12 Dexterity saving throw, taking 16 (3d10) lightning damage 
on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 

Repulsion Breath. The dragon exhales repulsion energy in a 
30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must succeed ona 
DC 12 Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the creature is | 


pushed 30 feet away from the dragon. 


* Once per day, the dragon can alter the weather in a 
6-mile radius centered on its lair. The dragon doesn’t 
need to be outdoors; otherwise the effect is identical to 
the contro! weather spell. 

« Underwater plants within 6 miles of the dragon’s lair 
take on dazzlingly brilliant hues. 

- Within its lair, the dragon can set illusory sounds, 
such as soft music and strange echoes, so that they 
can be heard in various parts of the lair. 


If the dragon dies, changed weather reverts to normal, 
as described in the spell, and the other effects fade 
in 1d10 days. 


a 


DEAGGNA 


Actions 
Multiattack, The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then 


makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
Hit: 19 (2d10 + 8) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) slashing damage. | 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +15 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) bludgeoning damage. 


Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon’s choice that 

is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed 
on a DC 19 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 

minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 

each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a 

creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 

the creature is immune to the dragon’s Frightful Presence for 
the next 24 hours. 


Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the 
following breath weapons. 


Acid Breath. The dragon exhales acid in an 90-foot line thatis | 
10 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC 22 
Dexterity saving throw, taking 63 (14d8) acid damage ona 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 

Slowing Breath. The dragon exhales gas in a 90-foot cone. Each 
creature in that area must succeed on a DC 22 Constitution 
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature can’t use 
reactions, its speed is halved, and it can’t make morethan =| 
one attack on its turn, In addition, the creature can use either | 
an action or a bonus action on its turn, but not both. These | 
effects last for 1 minute. The creature can repeat the saving | 
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on 
itself with a successful save. | 


Change Shape. The dragon magically polymorphs into a 
humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating no higher than 
its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its true form if 
it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is absorbed or 
ES —o ' borne by the new form (the dragon’s choice). 

R DRAGON - {na new form, the dragon retains its alignment, hit points, 

. Hit Dice, ability to speak, proficiencies, Legendary Resistance, 
lair actions, and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as 
well as this action. Its statistics and capabilities are otherwise 


| Armor Class 21 (natural armor) 


\ i Hit Points 350 (20d20 + 140) replaced by those of the new form, except any class features or 
| Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft., fly 80 ft. legendary actions of that form. 
STR DEX CON INT. WIS CHA LEGENDARY ACTIONS 
(27.48) =12(41)) 25 (47) 20 (+5) 17 (43) ‘19 (+4) The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the | 
eS errr options below. Only one legendary action option can beused 
| Saving Throws Dex +8, Con +14, Wis +10, Cha +11 at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
» Skills Deception +11, Perception +17, Stealth +8 dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Damage Immunities acid 


Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 27 Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 
Languages Common, Draconic Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. : 


Challenge 21 (27,500 XP) Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. 
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed 
ona DC 23 Dexterity saving throw or take 15 (2d6 + 8) 
Legendary Resistance (3/Day). \f the dragon fails a saving _ | bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. |. then fly up to half its flying speed. 


ADULT Cc OPPER DRacon 


Huge dragon, chaotic good 


| Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 184 (16d12 + 80) 
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft., fly 80 ft. 


| STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
23 (46) «12(41) 21 (45) «18 (44) «15 (42) «17 (43) 


Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +10, Wis +7, Cha +8 
) Skills Deception +8, Perception +12, Stealth +6 
Damage Immunities acid 
| Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 22 
| Languages Common, Draconic 
' Challenge 14 (11,500 XP) 


| 


| Legendary Resistance (3/Day). |f the dragon fails a saving 
' throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


_ ACTIONS 


| 
| 
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 

Bite. Melee Weapon Attack; +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 17 (2d10 + 6) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage. 


) Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 
| 


Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon’s choice that 
_ is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed 
| ona DC 16 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 


‘Younc Copp 


Large dragon, chaotic good 


fs ae 


R DRAGON 


1 - 3 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 119 (14d10 + 42) 
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft., fly 80 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 


| 
| 
| 19(+4) 12(#1) 17 (#3) 16 (#3) 13. (HI) 15 (42) 


_ Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +6, Wis +4, Cha +5 
| Skills Deception +5, Perception +7, Stealth +4 
Damage Immunities acid 
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 17 
Languages Common, Draconic 
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


i 
oo nae 


ACTIONS 


1 { and two with its claws. 


; minute: IN creature can an tepeat the e Saving throw at at ‘the end of : 


Multiattack, The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then 


7: ck to hit tea ch10 ft., 0 ,one target. 
"Hit: 15 (210 + 4) piercing damage, Me . 


Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite 


each of its turns, ending the effect on itself ona success. Ifa 
creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 
the creature is immune to the dragon’s s Frightful Presence for 
the next 24 hours. 


Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the 
following breath weapons. 


Acid Breath. The dragon exhales acid in an 60-foot line that 
is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC 18 
Dexterity saving throw, taking 54 (12d8) acid damage ona 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 

Slowing Breath. The dragon exhales gas in a 60-foot cone. Each 
creature in that area must succeed on a DC 18 Constitution 
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature can’t use 
reactions, its speed is halved, and it can’t make more than 
one attack on its turn. In addition, the creature can use either 
an action or a bonus action on its turn, but not both. These 
effects last for 1 minute. The creature can repeat the saving 
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on 
itself with a successful save. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. 

Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. ' 
Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed 
ona DC 19 Dexterity saving throw or take 13 (2d6 + 6) 
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can 
then fly up to half its flying speed. 


ite. Melee Weapon Attack: 47° 


Pn ee 
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to’ hit, teach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6+ 4) slashing damage. 


Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The drdgon uses one of the 
following breath weapons. 


Acid Breath. The dragon exhales acid in an 40-foot line that 
is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC 14 
Dexterity saving throw, taking 40 (9d8) acid damage on a 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 

Slowing Breath. The dragon exhales gas in a 30-foot cone. Each | 
creature in that area must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution 
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature can’t use i 
reactions, its speed is halved, and it can’t make more than 
one attack on its turn. In addition, the creature can use either 
an action or a bonus action on its turn, but not both. These 
effects last for 1 minute. The creature can repeat the saving 
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on 
itself with a successful save. 


COPPER DRAGON 


Copper dragons are incorrigible pranksters, joke tellers, 
and riddlers that live in hills and rocky uplands. Despite 
their gregarious and even-tempered natures, they 
possess a covetous, miserly streak, and can become 
dangerous when their hoards are threatened. 

A copper dragon has brow plates jutting over its eyes, 
extending back to long horns that grow as a series 
nr of overlapping segments. Its backswept cheek ridges 
and jaw frills give it a pensive look. At birth, a copper 
dragon’s scales are a ruddy brown with a metallic tint. 
As the dragon ages, its scales become more coppery in 
color, later taking on a green tint as it ages. A copper 
dragon’s pupils fade with age, and the eyes of the oldest 
LM, copper dragons resemble glowing turquoise orbs. 
oy Good Hosts. A copper dragon appreciates wit, a 
Mis good joke, humorous story, or riddle. A copper dragon 
Rie becomes annoyed with any creature that doesn’t laugh 
at its jokes or accept its tricks with good humor. 

Copper dragons are particularly fond of bards. A 
dragon might carve out part of its lair as a temporary 
abode for a bard willing to regale it with stories, riddles, 
and music. To a copper dragon, such companionship is a 
treasure to be coveted. 


A mor 16 16 (natural armor) re 
Hit Points $22 tes Tt | i | 
| Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR 
15 (+2) 


DEX 
12 (+1) 


CON 
13 (+1) 


INT WIS CHA 
14 (42) 1140) 13 (41) 


- | Saving Throws Dex +3, Con +3, Wis +2, Cha +3 
') Skills Perception +4, Stealth +3 
Damage Immunities acid 
‘| Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
) Languages Draconic 
| Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


q Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 7 (1d10 + 2) piercing damage. 


| Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the 
following breath weapons. 


Acid Breath. The dragon exhales acid in an 20-foot line that 
is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC 11 
Dexterity saving throw, taking 18 (4d8) acid damage ona 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 
| Slowing Breath. The dragon exhales gas in a 15-foot cone. Each 
creature in that area must succeed on a DC 11 Constitution 
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature can’t use 
reactions, its speed is halved, and it can’t make more than 
one attack on its turn. In addition, the creature can use either 
an action or a bonus action on its turn, but not both. These 
effects last for 1 minute. The creature can repeat the saving 
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on 
itself with a successful save. 


| 
| 
) ACTIONS 
| 
| 
| 


; i ee 

Cautious and Crafty. When building its hoard, a 
copper dragon prefers treasures from the earth. Metals 
and precious stones are favorites of these creatures. 

A copper dragon is wary when it comes to showing off 
its possessions. If it knows that other creatures seek a 
specific item in its hoard, a copper dragon will not admit 
to possessing the item. Instead, it might send curious 
treasure hunters on a wild goose chase to search for the 
object while it watches from afar for its own pleasure. 


A COPPER DRAGON’S LAIR 


Copper dragons dwell in dry uplands and on hilltops, 
where they make their lairs in narrow caves. False 
walls in the lair hide secret antechambers where the 
dragon stores valuable ores, art objects, and other 
oddities it has collected over its lifetime. Worthless 
items are put on display in open caves to tantalize 
treasure seekers and distract them from where the real 
treasure is hidden. 


Lair ACTIONS 
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon 
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects: 


¢ The dragon chooses a point on the ground that it can 
see within 120 feet of it. Stone spikes sprout from the 
ground in a 20-foot radius centered on that point. The 
effect is otherwise identical to the spike growth spell 
and lasts until the dragon uses this lair action again or 
until the dragon dies. 

+ The dragon chooses a 10-foot-square area on the 
ground that it can see within 120 feet of it. The ground 
in that area turns into 3-foot-deep mud. Each creature 
on the ground in that area when the mud appears 
must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or 
sink into the mud and become restrained. A creature 
can take an action to attempt a DC 15 Strength check, 
freeing itself or another creature within its reach and 
ending the restrained condition on a success. Moving 
1 foot in the mud costs 2 feet of movement. On initia- 
tive count 20 on the next round, the mud hardens, and 
the Strength DC to work free increases to 20. 


- REGIONAL EFFECTS 


The region containing a legendary copper dragon’s lair 
is warped by the dragon's magic, which creates one or 
more of the following effects: 


» Magic carvings of the dragon’s smiling visage can be 
seen worked into stone terrain and objects within 6 
miles of the dragon’s lair. 

« Tiny beasts such as rodents and birds that are nor- 
mally unable to speak gain the magical ability to 
speak and understand Draconic while within 1 mile 
of the dragon's lair. These creatures speak well of the 
dragon, but can’t divulge its whereabouts. 

« Intelligent creatures within 1 mile of the dragon's lair 
are prone to fits of giggling. Even serious matters sud- 
denly seem amusing. 


If the dragon dies, the magic carvings fade over the 
course of 1d10 days. The other effects end immediately. 


= —— = — SSS 


i 4 iin 
1a OF 
yt 


ee 
Sa arene TT SELEY a 
+ 


/ 


ANCIENT GOLD DRAGON 


Gargantuan dragon, lawful good 


_ Armor Class 22 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 546 (28d20 + 252) 
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. 


“STR DEX CON INT. WIS CHA 
30 (+10) 14(42) 29(+9) 18(4+4) 17(43) 28 (49) 
\ — —SaSEEE—ee—ee—ee se eee eee 
Saving Throws Dex +9, Con +16, Wis +10, Cha +16 

| Skills Insight +10, Perception +17, Persuasion +16, Stealth +9 

| Damage Immunities fire 


, Languages Common, Draconic 
Challenge 24 (36,500 XP) 


Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water. 


| Legendary Resistance (3/Day). \f the dragon fails a saving 
' | throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


| ACTIONS 


| Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then 
_ makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


) Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
Hit: 21 (2d10 + 10) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (2d6 + 10) slashing damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target. 
Hit: 19 (2d8 + 10) bludgeoning damage. 


Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon’s choice that 

is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed 
on a DC 24 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 

minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 

each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Ifa 
creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 

the creature is immune to the dragon’s Frightful Presence for 
the next 24 hours. 


| Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the 
| following breath weapons. 


y 


| Fire Breath. The dragon exhales fire in a 90-foot cone. Each 
| creature in that area must make a DC 24 Dexterity saving 
throw, taking 71 (13d10) fire damage on a failed save, or half 
as much damage on a successful one. . 
| Weakening Breath. The dragon exhales gas in a 90-foot cone. 
Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 24 Strength 
| saving throw or have disadvantage on Strength-based attack 
rolls, Strength checks, and Strength saving throws for 1 
| minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


_ Change Shape. The dragon magically polymorphs into a 
_ humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating no higher than 
its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its true form if 
it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is absorbed or 
borne by the new form (the dragon's choice). 
In a new form, the dragon retains its alignment, hit points, 
~ Hit Dice, ability to speak, proficiencies, Legendary Resistance, 


: lair actions, and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as 


} Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 27 | 


well as this action. Its statistics and capabilities are otherwise 


replaced by those of the new form, except any class features or 
legendary actions of that form. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. 

Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. 
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed 
ona DC 25 Dexterity saving throw or take 17 (2d6 + 10) 
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can 
then fly up to haif its fi 


——S 


_ | Ag ONe 


SS a 


Ss 


a 


ae ee ae 


af 


GOLD DRAGON 


The most powerful and majestic of the metallic dragons, 
gold dragons are dedicated foes of evil. 

A gold dragon has a sagacious face anointed with 
flexible spines that resemble whiskers. Its horns sweep 
back from its nose and brow, echoing twin frills that 
adorn its long neck. A gold dragon’s sail-like wings start 
at its shoulders and trace down to the tip of its tail, letting 

~it fly with a distinctive rippling motion as if swimming 
through the air. A gold dragon wyrmling has scales 
of dark yellow with metallic flecks. Those flecks grow 
larger as the dragon matures. As a gold dragon ages, its 
pupils fade until its eyes resemble pools of molten gold. 

Devourer of Wealth. Gold dragons can eat just about 
anything, but their preferred diet consists of pearls and 
gems. Thankfully, a gold dragon doesn’t need to gorge 
itself on such wealth to feel satisfied. Gifts of treasure 
that it can consume are well received by a gold dragon, 
as long as they aren't bribes. 

Reserved Shapeshifters. Gold dragons are respected 
by the other metallic dragons for their wisdom and 


Th 
nt alee PERL sl ah al cies ald 
amr ys = eee ra re 


a as 


0 Sa 
fairties, but they are the most alobF and grim of the 
good-aligned dragons. They value their privacy to the 
extent that they rarely fraternize with other dragons 
except their own mates and offspring. 

Older gold dragons can assume animal and humanoid 
forms. Rarely does a gold dragon in disguise reveal its 
true form. In the guise of a peddler, it might regularly 
visit a town to catch up on local gossip, patronize honest 
businesses, and lend a helping hand in unseen ways. In 
the guise of an animal, the dragon might befriend a lost 
child, a wandering minstrel, or an innkeeper, serving as 
a companion for days or weeks on end. 

Master Hoarders. A gold dragon keeps its hoard in 
a well-guarded vault deep within its lair. Magical wards 
placed on the vault make it all but impossible to remove 
any treasures without the dragon knowing about it. 


A GOLD DRAGON’S LAIR 


Gold dragons make their homes in out-of-the-way 
places, where they can do as they please without 
arousing suspicion or fear. Most dwell near idyllic lakes 


AputtGotD DRAGON 


\ Huge dragon, lawful good 


Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 256 (19d12 + 133) 
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
27 (+8) 14(42) 2547) 16(43) 15 (+2) 24 (47) 


| Saving Throws Dex +8, Con +13, Wis +8, Cha +13 


Damage Immunities fire 
| Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 24 


{ Skills Insight +8, Perception +14, Persuasion +13, Stealth +8 


Languages Common, Draconic 


{ | Challenge 17 (18,000 XP) 


i Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water. 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the dragon fails a saving 


| throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 
i 


ACTIONS 


makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


| Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 19 (2d10 + 8) piercing damage. 
| 


, Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


| Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) slashing damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
i Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) bludgeoning damage. 
I 
} 


Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon’s choice that 
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed 
on a DC 21 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 


‘| minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 


‘ each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Ifa 
; creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 


| Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then 


a Sees as 
the erature Is is immune to the dragon’ es pe iii i 
_ the next 24 hours. wee 


ty iF 


Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one i the 
following breath weapons. 


Fire Breath. The dragon exhales fire in a 60-foot cone. Each 
creature in that area must make a DC 21 Dexterity saving 
throw, taking 66 (12d10) fire damage on a failed save, or half 
as much damage on a successful one. 

Weakening Breath. The dragon exhales gas in a 60-foot cone. 
Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 21 Strength 
saving throw or have disadvantage on Strength-based attack 
rolls, Strength checks, and Strength saving throws for 1 
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Change Shape. The dragon magically polymorphs into a 
humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating no higher than 
its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its true form if 
it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is absorbed or 
borne by the new form (the dragon’s choice). 

In a new form, the dragon retains its alignment, hit points, 
Hit Dice, ability to speak, proficiencies, Legendary Resistance, 


lair actions, and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as | 


well as this action. Its statistics and capabilities are otherwise 
replaced by those of the new form, except any class features or 
legendary actions of that form. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. 

Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. 
Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed 
ona DC 22 Dexterity saving throw or take 15 (2d6 + 8) 
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can 
then fly up to half its flying speed. 


re aye inidcte i ; 
rs oa) r 


ans 
a 
: 


‘arid Tivers, mist-shrouded islands, cave complexes 
hidden behind sparkling waterfalls, or ancient ruins. 


LAIR ACTIONS 

On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon 
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects; 
the dragon can’t use the same effect two rounds in a row: 


- The dragon glimpses the future, so it has advantage 
on attack rolls, ability checks, and saving throws until 
initiative count 20 on the next round. 

- One creature the dragon can see within 120 feet of it 
must succeed on a DC 15 Charisma saving throw or 
be banished to a dream plane, a different plane of exis- 
tence the dragon has imagined into being. To escape, 
the creature must use its action to make a Charisma 
check contested by the dragon’s. If the creature wins, 
it-escapes the dream plane. Otherwise, the effect 
ends on initiative count 20 on the next round. When 
the effect ends, the creature reappears in the space 
it left or in the nearest unoccupied space if that one 
is occupied. 


“Arm Class 18 ( natural = 

3 it Points 178 (17d10 + 85) 

inka 40 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. 

a es ee 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

| “23(46) 14 (42) 21 (45) 16 (43) «13 (41) 20 (45) 


Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +9, Wis +5, Cha +9 
| Skills Insight +5, Perception +9, Persuasion +9, Stealth +6 
Damage Immunities fire 


_ Languages Common, Draconic 


_ Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) 


Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite 
_ and two with its claws. 


| 
} 
| 
| 
| 
| 
1 
} 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (2d10 + 6) piercing damage. 


“Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage. 


Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the 
| following breath weapons. 


| Fire Breath. The dragon exhales fire in a 30-foot cone. Each 
creature in that area must make a DC 17 Dexterity saving 
throw, taking 55 (10d10) fire damage on a failed save, or half 
as much damage on a successful one. 

Weakening Breath. The dragon exhales gas in a 30-foot cone. 
Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 17 Strength 
saving throw or have disadvantage on Strength-based attack 

rolls, Strength checks, and Strength saving throws for 1 

minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 

each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 19 | 


TY eg a ae ee 
a Chie 2 pee 


REGIONAL EFFECTS 
The region containing a legendary gold dragon’ s lair 
is warped by the dragon's magic, which creates one or 
more of the following effects: 


Whenever a creature that can understand a language 
sleeps or enters a state of trance or reverie within 6 
miles of the dragon's lair, the dragon can establish 
telepathic contact with that creature and converse 
with it in its dreams. The creature remembers its con- 
versation with the dragon upon waking. , 
Banks of beautiful, opalescent mist manifest within > a 
6 miles of the dragon’s lair. The mist doesn’t ébscure ie 
anything. It assumes haunting forms when evil.crea:, i 
tures are near the dragon or other non-evil creatures 
in the mist, warning such creatures of the danger. iit 
Gems and pearls within 1 mile of the dragon’s | 
lair sparkle and gleam, shedding dim light ina 
5-foot radius. } 


If the dragon dies, these effects end immediately. 


Gotp L AGON | WyE RMLING 
Mediu drag nlc awful good 

“Armor Class’ v7 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 60 (3d8 + 24) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft., swim 30 ft. 


|} osTR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4) 14(42) 1743) 14442) 1140) 16 (43) 


Saeaae 


) Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +6, Wis +2, Cha +5 
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +4 
_ Damage Immunities fire 
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
_ Languages Draconic 
| Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


err 


Amphibious. The dragon can breathe air and water. in 


ACTIONS iN 
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 9 (1d10 + 4) piercing damage. 


_ Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the 
_ following breath weapons. 


Fire Breath. The dragon exhales fire in a 15-foot cone. Each 
creature in that area must make a DC 13 Dexterity saving init 
throw, taking 22 (4d10) fire damage on a failed save, or half i 

|| as much damage on a successful one. ™ 
| Weakening Breath. The dragon exhales gas in a 15-foot cone. 

| Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 73 Strength 

| | __ saving throw or have disadvantage on Strength-based attack |) | 

rolls, Strength checks, and Strength saving throws for 1 Be 

minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at theend of |) 

each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


~ a 
ee SL) 


ANCIENT SILVER DRAGON 


| Gargantuan dragon, lawful good 


Armor Class 22 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 487 (25d20 + 225) 
Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft. 


CHA 
23 (+6) 


STR DEX 
30 (+10) 10 (+0) 


CON INT WIS 
29 (+9) 18 (+4) 15 (+2) 


Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +16, Wis +9, Cha +13 
Skills Arcana +11, History +11, Perception +16, Stealth +7 
Damage Immunities cold 


Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 26 


Languages Common, Draconic 
Challenge 23 (32,500 XP) 


Ee 


_ Legendary Resistance (3/Day). |f the dragon fails a saving 


throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


— DRAGONS 
— —S 


r16 = 


X, 


. 


ACTIONS 


] Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 


Hit: 21 (2d10 + 10) piercing damage. 


) Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 


Hit: 17 (2d6 + 10) slashing damage. 


| Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 20 ft., one target. 


Hit: 19 (2d8 + 10) bludgeoning damage. 


Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon's choice that 
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed 
on a DC 21 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Ifa 
creature's saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 
the creature is immune to the dragon’s Frightful Presence for 


|) the next 24 hours. 


Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the 
following breath weapons. 


Cold Breath. The dragon exhales an icy blast in a 90-foot cone. 
Each creature in that area must make a DC 24 Constitution 
saving throw, taking 67 (15d8) cold damage on a failed save, 
or half as much damage on a successful one. 

Paralyzing Breath. The dragon exhales paralyzing gas in a 90- 
foot cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 
24 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. A 
creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Change Shape. The dragon magically polymorphs into a 
humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating no higher than 
its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its true form if 
it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is absorbed or 
borne by the new form (the dragon’s choice). 

In a new form, the dragon retains its alignment, hit points, 
Hit Dice, ability to speak, proficiencies, Legendary Resistance, 


lair actions, and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as 


well as this action. Its statistics and capabilities are otherwise 
replaced by those of the new form, except any class features or 
legendary actions of that form. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. 

Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. 
Each creature within 15 feet of the dragon must succeed 
on a DC 25 Dexterity saving throw or take 17 (2d6 + 10) 
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can 
then fly up to half its flying speed. 


ie ee ee ee ea a 


Multiattack, The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then 
makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


it 
‘a , ett 


The friendliest and most social of the metallic dragons, 
silver dragons cheerfully assist good creatures in need. 

Asilver dragon shimmers as if sculpted from pure 
metal, its face given a noble cast by its high eyes and 
sweeping beard-like chin spikes. A spiny frill rises high 
over its head, tracing down its neck to the tip of its tail. 
A silver wyrmling’s scales are blue-gray with silver 
highlights. As the dragon approaches adulthood, its 
color gradually brightens until its individual scales are 
barely visible. As a silver dragon grows older, its pupils 
fade until its eyes resemble orbs of mercury. 

Dragons of Virtue. Silver dragons believe that living 
a moral life involves doing good deeds and ensuring 
that one’s actions cause no undeserved harm to other 
sentient beings. They don’t take it upon themselves to 
root out evil, as gold and bronze dragons do, but they 
will gladly oppose creatures that dare to commit evil 
acts or harm the innocent. 

Friends of the Small Races. Silver dragons enjoy 
the company of other silver dragons. Their only true 


R DRAGON — : 


ADULT SILvEI 
uge dragon, lawful good 


Armor Class 19 (natural armor) — 
Hit Points 243 (18d12 + 126) 
| Speed 40 ft., fly 80 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

| 27 (+8) 10 (+0) 25(+7) 16 (+3) 13 (+1) 21 (+5) 

rr rm” 
Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +12, Wis +6, Cha +10 

Skills Arcana +8, History +8, Perception +11, Stealth +5 
| Damage Immunities cold 

Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 21 
| Languages Common, Draconic 
| Challenge 16 (15,000 XP) 


| 


|" Legendary Resistance (3/Day). |f the dragon fails a saving 
| throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


ACTIONS 


| Multiattack. The dragon can use its Frightful Presence. It then 
| makes three attacks: one with its bite and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 19 (2d10 + 8) piercing damage. 


_ Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 15 (2d6 + 8) slashing damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 17 (2d8 + 8) bludgeoning damage. 


Frightful Presence. Each creature of the dragon’s choice that 
is within 120 feet of the dragon and aware of it must succeed 
on a DC 18 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 
minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of 
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a 
creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, 


friendships outside their own kin arise in the company 


of humanoids, and many silver dragons spend as much — 


time in humanoid form as they do in draconic form, A 
silver dragon adopts a benign humanoid persona such 
as a kindly old sage or a young wanderer, and it often 
has mortal companions with whom it develops strong 
friendships. 

Silver dragons must step away from their humasbid 
lives on a regular basis, returning to their true forms 
to mate and rear offspring, or to tend to their hoards 
and personal affairs. Because many lose track of time 
while away, they sometimes return to find that their 
companions have grown old or died. Silver dragons 
often end up befriending several generations of : 
humanoids within a single family as a result. 

Respect for Humanity. Silver dragons befriend 
humanoids of all races, but shorter-lived races such as 
humans spark their curiosity in a way the longer-lived 
elves and dwarves don’t. Humans have a drive and zest 
for life that silver dragons find fascinating. 

Hoarding History. Silver dragons love to possess 
relics of humanoid history. This includes the great 


5 Frightful acta 
~ Mm | a" 


Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The A uses one of t the 
following breath weapons. ¢ 


Cold Breath. The dragon exhales an icy blast in a 60-foot cone. 
Each creature in that area must make a DC 20 Constitution 
saving throw, taking 58 (13d8) cold damage on a failed ase 
or half as much damage on a successful one. 

Paralyzing Breath. The dragon exhales paralyzing gas in a 60- 
foot cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 
20 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. A 
creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Change Shape. The dragon magically polymorphs into a 
humanoid or beast that has a challenge rating no higher than 
its own, or back into its true form. It reverts to its true form if 
it dies. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying is absorbed or 
borne by the new form (the dragon’s choice). 

In a new form, the dragon retains its alignment, hit points, 
Hit Dice, ability to speak, proficiencies, Legendary Resistance, 


——— 


lair actions, and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as | 


well as this action. Its statistics and capabilities are otherwise 
replaced by those of the new form, except any class features or 
legendary actions of that form. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The dragon can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
dragon regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Detect. The dragon makes a Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Tail Attack. The dragon makes a tail attack. 

Wing Attack (Costs 2 Actions). The dragon beats its wings. 
Each creature within 10 feet of the dragon must succeed 
ona DC 21 Dexterity saving throw or take 15 (2d6 + 8) 
bludgeoning damage and be knocked prone. The dragon can 
then fly up to half its flying speed. 


= 


STR 


piles of coins they covet, minted by current and fallen 
‘humanoid empires, as well as art objects and fine 


_ jewelry crafted by numerous races. Other treasures 
‘that make up their hoards can include intact ships, the 


remains of kings and queens, thrones, the crown jewels 
of ancient empires, inventions and contraptions, and 
monoliths carried from the ruins of fallen cities. 


A_SILVER DRAGON’s LAIR 


Silver dragons dwell among the clouds, making 

their lairs on secluded cold mountain peaks. Though 
many are comfortable in natural cavern complexes or 
abandoned mines, silver dragons covet the lost outposts 
of humanoid civilization. An abandoned mountaintop 
citadel or a remote tower raised by a long-dead wizard is 
the sort of lair that every silver dragon dreams of. 


LAIR ACTIONS 
On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the dragon 
takes a lair action to cause one of the following effects: 


- The dragon creates fog as if it had cast the fog 
cloud spell. The fog lasts until initiative count 20 on 
the next round. 


Daimor Class 18 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 168 (16d10 + 80) 
| ‘Speed AO ft., fly 80 ft. 


DEX 
10 (+0) 


CON 
21 (+5) 


INT 
14 (42) 


WIS 
11 (+0) 


CHA 


23 (+6) 19 (+4) 


—— i inn 


| Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +9, Wis +4, Cha +8 


Skills Arcana +6, History +6, Perception +8, Stealth +4 
Damage Immunities cold 


| Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 18 


_ Languages Common, Draconic 


| Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 


] 


bani) | 
es) 


ACTIONS 


| Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (2d10 + 6) piercing damage. 


| Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
1 -s 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage. 


Breath Weapons (Recharge 5—6). The dragon uses one of the 
| following breath weapons. 


_ Cold Breath. The dragon exhales an icy blast in a 30-foot cone. 
Each creature in that area must make a DC 17 Constitution 

| saving throw, taking 54 (12d8) cold damage on a failed save, 
or half as much damage on a successful one. 

Paralyzing Breath. The dragon exhales paralyzing gas in a 30- 
foot cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 
17 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. A 
creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite 
| and two with its claws. 


| 


j 


str 


ee 
Saving Throws Dex +2, Con +5, Wis +2, Cha +4 
) Skills Perception +4, Stealth +2 


| 
| Armior Class: Seiten armor) ian |! 
| 
| 
| 


« A blisteringly cold wind blows through the lair near 
the dragon. Bach creature within 120 feet of the 
dragon must succeed on a DC_15 Constitution saving 
throw or take 5 (1d10) cold damage. Gases and vapors 
are dispersed by the wind, and unprotected flames are 
extinguished. Protected flames, such as lanterns, have 
a 50 percent chance of being extinguished. 


REGIONAL EFFECTS 

The region containing a legendary silver dragon’s lair 
is warped by the dragon’s magic, which creates one or 
more of the following effects. 


« Once per day, the dragon can alter the weather in a 
6-mile radius centered on its lair. The dragon doesn’t 
need to be outdoors; otherwise the effect is identical to 
the control weather spell. 

« Within 1 mile of the lair, winds buoy non-evil creatures 
that fall due to no act of the dragon’s or its allies. Such 
creatures descend at a rate of 60 feet per round and 
take no falling damage. 

« Given days or longer to work, the dragon can make 
clouds and fog within its lair as solid as stone, forming 
structures and other objects as it wishes. 


If the dragon dies, changed weather reverts to normal, 
as described in the spell, and the other effects fade 
in 1d10 days. 


Hit Points 45 (6d8 + 18) 
| Speed : 30 ft., fly 60 ft. 


INT 
12 (+1) 


WIS 
11 (+0) 


CHA 
15 (+2) 


DEX 
10 (+0) 


CON 


19 (+4) 17 (+3) 


Damage Immunities cold 

Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 | 
Languages Draconic 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


ACTIONS 


| 
| 
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 9 (1d10 + 4) piercing damage. 

| 


Breath Weapons (Recharge 5-6). The dragon uses one of the 
following breath weapons. 


Cold Breath. The dragon exhales an icy blast in a 15-foot cone. 
Each creature in that area must make a DC 13 Constitution 
saving throw, taking 18 (4d8) cold damage on a failed save, 
or half as much damage on a successful one. 

Paralyzing Breath. The dragon exhales paralyzing gas in a 15- 

foot cone. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 

13 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. A 

creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 

turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


DRAGON TURTLE 


Gargantuan dragon, neutral 


——— Ae eee —_ 


_ Armor Class 20 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 341 (22d20 + 110) 

- Speed 20 ft., swim 40 ft. 
(as ~ SP 

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

25 (+7) 10 (+0) 20(+5) 10(40) 12(+1) 12(41) 


——— 


——— es oo r 


Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +10, Wis +6 

Damage Resistances fire 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11 

| Languages Aquan, Draconic 

_ Challenge 17 (18,000 XP) 


a aii wo 


| Amphibious. The dragon turtle can breathe air and water. 


ACTIONS 


| Multiattack. The dragon turtle makes three attacks: one with 
its bite and two with its claws. It can make one tail attack in 
| place of its two claw attacks. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 26 (3d12 + 7) piercing damage. 


| Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
_ Hit: 16 (2d8 + 7) slashing damage. 


TER ROTO TENN RTA me ~~ 
f] ai 


| Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 15 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 26 (3d12 + 7) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a 

; creature, it must succeed on a DC 20 Strength saving throw 

' or be pushed up to 10 feet away from the dragon turtle and 

| knocked prone. 


Steam Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon turtle exhales 

scalding steam in a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that area 
- must make a DC 18 Constitution saving throw, taking 52 (15d6) | 
| fire damage on a failed save, or half as much damage ona 
_ successful one. Being underwater doesn’t grant resistance 
_ against this damage. 


DRAGON TURTLE 


Dragon turtles are among the most fearsome creatures 


of the oceans. As large and voracious as the oldest of its of coastline. If a choice cave is already inhabited, a 
land-based dragon kin, a dragon turtle strikes with its dragon turtle attacks its current residents in an attempt 
deadly jaws, steaming breath, and crushing tail. to take over. 
A dragon turtle’s rough shell is the same dark green Mercenary Monsters. A dragon turtle is smart 
color as the deep water where this monster dwells. enough to be bribed, and pirates sailing seas patrolled 
Silver highlights lining the shell resemble light by these creatures quickly learn to offer them treasure 
dancing on open water, and a surfacing dragon turtle in exchange for safe passage. Clever sahuagin 
is sometimes mistaken for the reflection of the sun or sometimes ally with dragon turtles, enticing them 
moon on the waves. with treasure to use their blistering breath weapons in 
Dragons of the Deep. Like true dragons, dragon sahuagin raids against ships and coastal settlements. 
turtles collect treasure, first by sinking ships and then Elemental Might. Dragon turtles sometimes find their 
by sifting through the wreckage for coins and other way through sunken planar rifts to the Elemental Plane 
precious items. A dragon turtle swallows treasure for of Water. Those monstrous specimens can often be 
transport, then regurgitates it when it reaches its lair. found in the service of marids, which strap magnificent 
Dragon turtles dwell in caves hidden in coral reefs coral thrones to the backs of dragon turtles and ride ea 
‘or beneath the seafloor, or along rugged stretches them as mounts. 


LAS CT eT Le 


At taal . ug 


ww 
QUEEN ONCE. NEVER AGAIN. 


Rs ED THE SPIDER 
— —PELLANISTRA THE DRIDER 


DRIDER 


Large monstrosity, chaotic evil 


"Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 123 (13d10 + 52) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA DRIDER 
16 (+3) 16 (43) 18(+4) 13(41) 1442) 12(41) 


When a drow shows great promise, Lolth summons it 
to the Demonweb Pits for a test of faith and strength. 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15 a te ig a eT aa 
L ; Queen’s favor. Those that fail are transformed into 
_ Languages Elvish, Undercommon dri heeraihenneineene ae ci id 
| Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) riders—a horri iybri of a drow and a giant spider 
that serves as a living reminder of Lolth’s power. Only 
drow can be turned into driders, and the power to create 
| Fey Ancestry. The drider has advantage on saving throws these creatures resides with Lolth alone. 
| against being charmed, and magic can’t put the drider to sleep. Scarred for Life. Drow transformed into driders 


| Skills Perception +5, Stealth +9 


| Innate Spelicasting. The drider's innate spellcasting ability is return to the Material Plane as twisted and debased 
| Wisdom (spell save DC 13). The drider can innately cast the creatures. Driven by madness, they disappear into 
| following spells, requiring no material components: the Underdark to become hermits and hunters, either 


wandering alone or leading packs of giant spiders. 
On rare occasion, a drider returns to the fringes of 
drow society despite its curse, most often to fulfill some 


| At will: dancing lights 
) 1/day each: darkness, faerie fire 


Spider Climb. The drider can climb difficult surfaces, including longstanding vow or vendetta from its former life. Drow 
upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an fear and shun the driders, holding them in lower esteem 

| ability check. than slaves. However, they tolerate the presence of, 

| Sunlight Sensitivity, While in sunlight, the drider has these creatures as living representatives of Lolth’s will, 

| disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom and a reminder of the fate that awaits all who fail the 

| (Perception) checks that rely on sight. Spider Queen. 


| | 
Web Walker. The drider ignores movement restrictions caused  _ —_—__ * 


VARIANT: DRIDER SPELLCASTING 


Driders that were once drow spellcasters might retain their 

ACTIONS ability to cast spells. Such driders typically have a higher 
se, TI =, i ae 7. 5 spellcasting ability (15 or 16) than other driders. Further, the 
drider gains the Spellcasting trait. A drider that was a drow 
divine spellcaster, therefore, could have a Wisdom of 16 (+3) 
and a Spellcasting trait as follows. 

Spelicasting. The drider is a 7th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 14, +6 to 
hit with spell attacks). The drider has the following spells 


. by webbing. 


Multiattack. The drider makes three attacks, either with its 
longsword or its longbow. It can replace one of those attacks 
with a bite attack. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit; 2 (1d4) piercing damage plus 9 (2d8) poison damage. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one prepared from the cleric spell list: 
target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage, or 8 (1d10 + 3) 
slashing damage if used with two hands. Cantrips (at will): poison spray, thaumaturgy 
Ist level (4 slots): bane, detect magic, sanctuary 
Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, range 120/600 2nd level (3 slots): hold person, silence 
ft., one target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage plus 4 (1d8) _ 3rd level (3 slots): clairvoyance, dispel magic 
s):d 


poison damage. | Ath level (2 slot 


ivination, freedom of movement 


gs «esate 


"ls, 
, 


\. DRIDER 


120 — = —— = — 


DRYAD 


Travelers entering a forest might catch a glimpse of a 


feminine form flitting through the trees. Warm laughter 
hangs on the air, drawing those who hear it deeper into 


the emerald shadows. 
Treebound. Powerful fey will sometimes bind lesser 


fey spirits to trees, transforming them into dryads. This 


is sometimes done as a punishment when the fey spirit 
falls in love with a mortal and that love is forbidden. 


A dryad can emerge from the tree and travel the lands 


around it, but the tree remains her home and roots her 
to the world. As long as the tree remains healthy and 


unharmed, the dryad stays forever youthful and alluring. 


If the tree is harmed, she suffers. If the tree is ever 

destroyed, the dryad descends into madness. 
Reclusive Fey. Dryads act as guardians of their 

woodland demesnes. Shy and reclusive, they watch 


interlopers from the trees. A dryad struck by the beauty 


of astranger might investigate more closely, perhaps 
even try to lure the individual away to be charmed. 
Dryads work with other sylvan creatures to defend 


their forests. Unicorns, treants, and satyrs live alongside [ 


them, in addition to druids that share the dryads’ 
devotion to the woods they call home. 

Woodland Magic. Dryads can speak with plants and 
animals. They can teleport from one tree to another, 
luring interlopers away from their groves. If pressed, a 
dryad can beguile humanoids with her enchantments, 


turning enemies into friends. They also know a handful 


of useful spells. 


i/ | 
( 
| 
4 


Dryap 


| Medium fey, neutral 


) Armor Class 11 (16 with barkskin) 
| Hit Points 22 (5d8) 
| Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 12 (+1) «11 40) 1442) 15 (42)_—18 (+4) 


| Skills Perception +4, Stealth +5 

| Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
| Languages Elvish, Sylvan 

| Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


' Innate Spellcasting. The dryad’s innate spellcasting ability is 


| Charisma (spell save DC 14). The dryad can innately cast the 
| following spells, requiring no material components: 


' At will: druidcraft 
| 3/day each: entangle, goodberry 
_ I/day each: barkskin, pass without trace, shillelagh 


| Magic Resistance. The dryad has advantage on saving throws 
_ against spells and other magical effects. 


\ Speak with Beasts and Plants. The dryad can communicate 
) with beasts and plants as if they shared a language. 


he — 
hs lls > | 


_— 


Tree Stride. Once on her turn, the dryad caf use 10 feet of her 
movement to step magically into one living tree within her 
reach and emerge from a second living tree within 60 feet of . £ 
the first tree, appearing in an unoccupied space within 5 feet of = ) 
a 


the second tree. Both trees must be Large or bigger. 


ACTIONS ; 


Club. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit (+6 to hit with shillelagh), 
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 2 (1d4) bludgeoning damage, or 8 @ 
(1d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage with shillelagh. 


Fey Charm. The dryad targets one humanoid or beast that she 
can see within 30 feet of her. If the target can see the dryad, it | 
must succeed on a DC 14 Wisdom saving throw or be magically 
charmed. The charmed creature regards the dryad as a trusted 
friend to be heeded and protected. Although the target isn’t 
under the dryad's control, it takes the dryad’s requests or ( 
actions in the most favorable way it can. 

Each time the dryad or its allies do anything harmful to the 
target, it can repeat the saving throw, ending the effect on itself | 
ona success. Otherwise, the effect lasts 24 hours or until the 
dryad dies, is on a different plane of existence from the target, / 
or ends the effect as a bonus action. If a target’s saving throw 
is successful, the target is immune to the dryad’s Fey Charm iar 
for the next 24 hours. 

The dryad can have no more than one humanoid and up to 
three beasts charmed at a time. 


_ Armor Class 16 (scale mail, shield) 
Hit Points 26 (4d8 + 8) 


DUERGAR 


The tyrannical duergar, also known as gray dwarves, 
dwell in fantastic cities deep in the Underdark. Using 
ancient dwarven knowledge and myriad slaves, they 
work tirelessly to expand their subterranean kingdoms. 

Most duergar (including females) are bald and have 
ashen gray skin. They wear drab clothing designed 

‘to blend in with stone, along with simple jewelry that 
reflects their severe and utilitarian demeanor. 

_ Slaves to Slavers. The duergar were once dwarves, 
before their greed and endless delving beneath the earth 
brought them into contact with the mind flayers. Held 
in captivity for generations by the illithids, the dwarves 
eventually won their independence with the aid of the 
evil god Laduguer. Slavery had forever changed them, 
however, darkening their spirits to make the duergar as 
evil as the tyrants they had escaped. Despite winning 
their freedom, duergar are dour, pessimistic, untrusting 
creatures, always toiling and complaining, with no 
memory of what it means to be happy or proud. Their 
craftsmanship and accomplishments endure, yet they 
are bereft of warmth or artistry. 

Duergar make war against their dwarven kin and all 
other subterranean races. They forge alliances when 
it is convenient, then break those alliances when they 
have nothing more to gain. They take and hold slaves to 
toil in the Underdark, regarding them as free labor and 
crude currency. 

Tough as Stone. Like dwarves, duergar have strong 
constitutions. Adding to their physical stamina is an 
incredible mental fortitude resulting from their time as 
slaves of the illithids. A duergar’s mind is a fortress, able 
to shrug off charms, illusions, and other spells. 

Born of Darkness. The Underdark is saturated with 
strange magical power, which the duergar absorbed 


“Over generations of imprisonment. A duergar can 


at 


| DUERGAR 


_ Languages Dwarvish, Undercommon 


Speed 25 ft. | 
‘STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA | 
1442) 1140) 1442), 1140) 1040) 9-1) 


er rr 


Damage Resistances poison 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10 


Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


cc 


Duergar Resilience. The duergar has advantage on saving 
throws against poison, spells, and illusions, as well as to resist 
being charmed or paralyzed. 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the duergar has 
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Enlarge (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). For 1 minute, | 
the duergar magically increases in size, along with anything it | 
is wearing or carrying. While enlarged, the duergar is Large, | 
doubles its damage dice on Strength-based weapon attacks 
(included in the attacks), and makes Strength checks and 


| Strength saving throws with advantage. If the duergar lacks the 


room to become Large, it attains the maximum size possible in 
the space available. 


| War Pick. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 


target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage, or 11 (2d8 + 2) 
piercing damage while enlarged. 


Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage, 
or 9 (2d6 + 2) piercing damage while enlarged. 


| Invisibility (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). The duergar 
| magically turns invisible until it attacks, casts a spell, oruses | 


its Enlarge, or until its concentration is broken, up to 1 hour (as , 
if concentrating on a spell). Any equipment the duergar wears 
or carries is invisible with it. 


increase its size and strength for a short time, becoming 
a powerful ogre-sized warrior. If it faces a foe it can’t 
fight, or when spying on creatures approaching its 
territory, it can just as easily become invisible to slip 
away into the darkness. 

Eons spent in the Underdark also sharpened their 
darkvision, allowing them to see twice as far as other 
dwarves. This keen eyesight comes at a cost, however, 
as a duergar’s vision is compromised by sunlight. 

Infernal Master. Asmodeus, Lord of the Nine Hells, 
has been known to impersonate duergar gods in order 
to cultivate the evil brimming in the hearts of the gray 
dwarves. He offers them divine guidance and vengeance 
against their enemies while urging them on toward 
greater acts of tyranny, all the while concealing his 
true identity. 


ELEMENTALS 


Elementals are incarnations of the elements that make 
up the universe: air, earth, fire, and water. Though 
little more than animated energy on their own planes 
of existence, they can be called on by spellcasters and 
powerful beings to take shape and perform tasks. 

Living Elements. On its home plane, an elemental is 
a bodiless life force. Its dim consciousness manifests 
as a physical shape only when focused by the power 
of magic. A wild spirit of elemental force has no 
desire except to course through the element of its 
native plane. Like beasts of the Material Plane, these 
elemental spirits have no society or culture, and little 
sense of being. 

Conjured by Magic. Certain spells and magic items 
can conjure an elemental, summoning it from the Inner 
Planes to the Material Plane. Elementals instinctively 
resent being pulled from their native planes and bound 
into service. A creature that summons an elemental 
must assert force of will to control it. 

Bound and Shaped. Powerful magic can bind an 
elemental spirit into a material template that defines 
a specific use and function. Invisible stalkers are air 
elementals bound to a specific form, in the same way 
that water elementals can be shaped into water weirds. 

The strength of the magic and materials that bind an 
elemental determines how well the elemental functions 
in a bound form. Golems are elemental spirits bound to 
physical forms, but weaker materials such as flesh and 
clay can’t bind elemental power sufficiently. Durable 
materials such as stone and iron require stronger magic, 
which consequently binds an elemental more securely. 

Elemental Nature. An elemental doesn’t require air, 
food, drink, or sleep. 


AIR ELEMENTAL _ 


An air elemental is a funneling cloud of whirling air with A 
a vague semblance of a face. Although it likes to riice Wi) 


across the ground, picking up dust and debris as it OES, 
it can also fly and attack from above. 

An air elemental can turn itself into a screaming 
cyclone, creating a whirlwind that batters creatures 
even as it flings them away. 


EARTH ELEMENTAL 


An earth elemental plods forward like a walking hill, 
club-like arms of jagged stone swinging at its sides. Its 
head and body consist of dirt and stone, occasionally set 
with chunks of metal, gems, and bright minerals. 

Earth elementals glide through rock and earth 
as though they were liquid. Earthbound creatures 
have much to fear from an earth elemental, since the 
elemental can pinpoint the precise location of any foe 
that stands on solid ground in its vicinity. 


FIRE ELEMENTAL 


A faint humanoid shape threads through the core of 
this wild, moving flame. A fire elemental is a force of 
capricious devastation. Wherever it moves, it sets its 
surroundings ablaze, turning the world to ash, smoke, 
and cinders. Water can halt its destructive progress, 
causing the fire elemental to shrink back, hissing and 
smoking in pain and rage. 


WATER ELEMENTAL 


A water elemental is a cresting wave that rolls across 
the ground, becoming nearly invisible at it courses 
through a larger body of water. It engulfs creatures that 
stand against it, filling their mouths and lungs as easily 
as it smothers flame. 


i Armor Class 15 
| Hit Points 90 (12d10 + 24) 


| | 
} Speed 0 ft., fly 90 ft. (hover) | , | 
) y : = = ‘ 7 r F “lah rine 7 = ' oz 
| sTR DEX CON INT WIS CHA EARTH ELEMENTAL. ; 
14(+2)  20(+5) 14 (+2) = 6 (-2) 10 (+0) ~— 6 (-2) Large elemental, neutral 


: |e rrp ’ A 
Damage Resistances lightning, thunder; bludgeoning, piercing, | Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 


4 


and slashing from nonmagical weapons 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed, 
petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained, unconscious 


| Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 


Languages Auran 


Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


} Air Form. The elemental can enter a hostile creature’s space 
and stop there. It can move through a space as narrow as 1 
inch wide without squeezing. 


| ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The elemental makes two slam attacks. 


| Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
) Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) bludgeoning damage. 


Whirlwind (Recharge 4-6). Each creature in the elemental’s 
space must make a DC 13 Strength saving throw. On a failure, 
| atarget takes 15 (3d8 + 2) bludgeoning damage and is flung 
up 20 feet away from the elemental in a random direction and 
knocked prone. If a thrown target strikes an object, such as a’ 
} wall or floor, the target takes 3 (1d6) bludgeoning damage for 
every 10 feet it was thrown. If the target is thrown at another 
creature, that creature must succeed on a DC 13 Dexterity 
saving throw or take the same damage and be knocked prone. 
} Ifthe saving throw is successful, the target takes half the 
bludgeoning damage and isn’t flung away or knocked prone. 


| 


Hit Points 126 (12d10 + 60) 


| Speed 30 ft., burrow 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
20 (+5)  8(-1) 20(+5) 5(-3) 10(+0) 5 (-3) 


a a 


Damage Vulnerabilities thunder 

Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical weapons 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities exhaustion, paralyzed, petrified, 
poisoned, unconscious 


_ Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft., 


passive Perception 10 
Languages Terran 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


; sss 


Earth Glide. The elemental can burrow through nonmagical, 
unworked earth and stone. While doing so, the elemental 
doesn’t disturb the material it moves through. 


Siege Monster. The elemental deals double damage to objects 
and structures. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The elemental makes two slam attacks. 


| Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 


Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) bludgeoning damage. 


SS 


Te 


Fire ILEMENTAL 


Large elemental neutral 


a 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 102 (12d10 + 36) 


_ | Speed 50 ft. 


7 


_ | Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
{ Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed, 


| Languages Ignan 


STR 
10 (+0) 


DEX 
17 (+3) 


CON INT 
16 (+3) 6 (-2) 


wis 
10 (+0) 


CHA 
7 (-2) 


nonmagical weapons 
Damage Immunities fire, poison 


petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained, unconscious 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 


Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


ne 


Fire Form. The elemental can move through a space as narrow 
as 1 inch wide without squeezing. A creature that touches the 
elemental or hits it with a melee attack while within 5 feet of 

| it takes 5 (1d10) fire damage. In addition, the elemental can 

| enter a hostile creature’s space and stop there. The first time it 


. | enters a creature’s space on a turn, that creature takes 5 (1d10) 


) fire damage and catches fire; until someone takes an action to 
| douse the fire, the creature takes 5 (1d10) fire damage at the 
start of each of its turns. 


Illumination. The elemental sheds bright light in a 30-foot 
| radius and dim light in an additional 30 feet. 


water, or for every gallon of water splashed on it, it takes 1 
cold damage. 


ACTIONS 


| 
i 
| Water Susceptibility. For every 5 feet the elemental moves in 
| 
| Multiattack. The elemental makes two touch attacks. 


Touch. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) fire damage. If the target is a creature or a 
flammable object, it ignites. Until a creature takes an action to 
douse the fire, the target takes 5 (1d10) fire damage at the start 


gq | of each of its turns. 


ay 
ten 


alee ¢ elemental neutral 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 


_ Hit Points 114 (12d10 + 48) 


Speed 30 ft., swim 90 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
18 (+4) 14442) 18 (+4) 5 (-3) 10(40) 8 (-1) 
ee i 
Damage Resistances acid; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing 

from nonmagical weapons 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed, 
petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained, unconscious 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 


_ Languages Aquan 


Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


a eeeeeeeeSSee—te 


Water Form. The elemental can enter a hostile creature’s space 
and stop there. It can move through a space as narrow as 1 


_ inch wide without squeezing. 


Freeze. If the elemental takes cold damage, it partially freezes; 
its speed is reduced by 20 feet until the end of its next turn. 


| ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The elemental makes two slam attacks. 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


Whelm (Recharge 4-6). Each creature in the elemental’s space 
must make a DC 15 Strength saving throw. On a failure, a 
target takes 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage. If it is Large or 
smaller, it is also grappled (escape DC 14). Until this grapple 
ends, the target is restrained and unable to breathe unless it 
can breathe water. If the saving throw is successful, the target 
is pushed out of the elemental’s space. 

The elemental can grapple one Large creature or up to two 
Medium or smaller creatures at one time. At the start of each 
of the elemental’s turns, each target grappled by it takes 13 
(2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage. A creature within 5 feet of the 
elemental can pull a creature or object out of it by taking an 
action to make a DC 14 Strength and succeeding. 


ELVES: DROW 

Tens of thousands of years ago, the elves were divided, 
with those of benevolent disposition battling those 
that were selfish and cruel. The war among elvenkind 
ended when the good elves banished their malevolent 
kin to the subterranean depths. Here, in the lightless 
caverns and endless warrens of twisting passages, the 
dark elves—the drow—found refuge. They also found 
leadership in the only elven deity who had not forsaken 
them. At her command, the dark elves built an empire in 
the underworld. 

Children of Lolth. The drow worship Lolth, a deity 
who resides in the Abyss. Known as the Spider Queen 
or the Demon Queen of Spiders, she is the figure around 
which the dark elves have built their subterranean 
civilization. Whatever she demands, the drow do. 

The wickedest of elves, drow are seldom seen by the 
surface world. Though they plot to destroy the elves 
that banished them, they no longer see themselves as 
exiles. They are the destined rulers of the darkness, and 
when Lolth commands them to rise up and destroy their 
surface-dwelling kin, they will. 

Creatures of Darkness. The drow have lived 
underground for so long that they have evolved to 
their surroundings and can see in the dark. However, 
they can no longer stand sunlight. When slaves are 
in short supply in the Underdark, the drow send 
raiding parties to the surface to capture humanoids 
under cover of darkness, bringing them back to their 
cities to be tortured into submission. Beyond those 
occasional excursions, the drow are content to remain 


in their subterranean realm, where they feel secure 
and in control. 


Underdark Cities. The dark elves build fantastic 
cities in enormous caverns where food and water are 
abundant. Their ability to sculpt stone rivals that of the 
greatest dwarf artisans, yet their structures retain a 
; decidedly elven aesthetic. Though appearing delicate, 
“4, drow settlements are structurally sound and remarkably 
a; resilient. The drow like to hollow out enormous 
talagmites and stalactites, creating populated spires 
that tise from the floors and ceilings. 
A drow city is a sprawling metropolis enclosed by high 
Walls. Non-drow visitors must conduct their business 
Outside the walls under watchful eyes. The drow raise 
oe and keep giant spiders to help protect their cities against 
‘ 
oe og h 
|, VARIANT: Drow MAGIC ARMOR AND WEAPONS 
if Drow often wear magic armor and carry magic weapons that 
_ lose their enhancement bonuses permanently if they are 
exposed to sunlight for 1 hour or longer. 
A drow wearing a +7 chain shirt and carrying a +7 
shortsword has AC 19 and a +1 bonus on attack and damage A. 
| rolls with shortsword attacks. \| Ss 
| Adrow elite warrior wearing +2 studded leather and carrying Vi 
\ a +2shortsword has AC 20 and a +2 bonus on attack and pi; 
damage rolls with shortsword attacks. 
A drow priestess of Lolth wearing +3 scale mail has AC 19. 


7 


intruders, even as they drape those cities in beautiful 
webbing, creating a gossamer snare to catch flying 
enemies that would otherwise soar over the walls. 

Drow Magic. Just as the drow have adapted to 
underground life, so too has their magic. In addition to 
using that magic to carve their cities from stone, they 
empower their weapons, create dangerous new magic 
items, and summon demons from the Abyss. Drow 
spellcasters are supremely arrogant and never hesitate 
to use their magic in the most abhorrent ways. 

Arms and Armor. Drow craft weapons made of 
adamantine, a dark and supernaturally hard metal. 
Drow artisans adorn their weapons and armor 
with web-like filigree and spider motifs, and mages 
sometimes imbue items with magic to enhance their 
effectiveness. However, such magic fades when exposed 
to sunlight, so that magical drow weapons and armor 
rarely retain their enhancement bonuses and magical 
properties when brought to the surface. 

Cutthroat Politics. Drow politics are cutthroat 
and rife with intrigue. When drow work together, it 
is typically to destroy a common foe and ensure their 
own survival, and such alliances are short lived and 
fraught with peril. 

Drow society is divided into noble houses, each ruled 
by a matron who seeks to raise the prestige and power 
of her fiouse above all others. Other high-ranking 
members of the house are blood relatives, while the 
middling ranks are flush with drow from weaker 
families that have sworn fealty to the greater house. 
Clinging precariously to the bottom rung of a house’s 
social ladder are the house slaves, made up of drow of 
low birth and the occasional non-drow captive. 

Matriarchal Rule. Lolth, through her faithful 
priestesses, dictates the rules of drow society, ensuring 
that her orders and plots are carried out. Since Lolth 
is prone to manifesting on the Material Plane and 
directly punishing those that disobey her, the drow 
have learned to heed what she says and do as her 
priestesses command. 

In drow society, males are subservient to females. 

A male drow might lead an Underdark patrol or a 
raiding party to the surface, but he reports to a female 
drow—either the matron of his house or one of her 
hand-picked female subordinates. Although male drow 
can fill almost any function in drow society, they can’t be 
priests, nor can they rule a house. 

Poison Predilection. Distilled from spider venom 
and the flora of the Underdark, poison can be found in 
abundance among the drow, and it plays an important 
part in their culture and politics. Drow mages concoct 
a viscid toxin that leaves enemies unconscious. Drow 
warriors coat their blades and crossbow bolts with this 
venom, looking forward to the interrogation and torture 
that follows combat. 


Drow ELITE WARRIOR 


DrGw elite warriors defend their hokece and fheis 
superiors against all enemies, although they specialize 
in fighting dwarves, gnomes, and elves (including 
other drow). They frequently raid surface settlements 


under cover of night, returning to the Underdark with 
prisoners and spoils in tow before dawn. 
Elite warriors can be male or female. 


DROw MAGE _ 


Privileged drow aie ca itera he strong and, 

fighting prowess to train as warriors have no recourse 

but to pursue the study of magic. For them, it is a matter 

of survival. Female drow with a natural affinity for-the | 
arcane arts may also become drow mages, although 
they are much less common. 


DROw PRIESTESS OF LOLTH 


Female drow with blood ties to a noble house are 
molded and trained from birth to become priestesses 
of Lolth. The Spider Queen doesn’t allow male drow to 
hold such positions. 

Such priestesses execute the will of the Spider 
Queen, and as a result, they wield tremendous power 
and influence in drow society. The matron mothers who 
rule the drow houses are the most powerful of Lolth’s 
priestesses, but they must constantly balance their 
devotion to the Spider Queen with their devotion to 
their families. 


G CRUELTY. THEY 


EYIN 
y. SUCH TERRI a 
RAVIT S ALL ELVENKINDO. 


N THAT PLAGUE 
x —NELAR AUTUMNWELL, 


N LARETHIAN 


“Such DEP 
ARE THE VILE POTS 


ELF CLERIC OF CoreELLO 


a = Drow. = — > - : 


MVRUW 
| han edium humanoid (elf), neutral evil - 


! 


a 
ay Armor Class 15. (chain shirt) 

tee Hit Points 13 (3d8) 

Speed 30 ft. 

| eee ee 

STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 


f |} 10440) 14(42) 10(40) 1176440) 11 (+0) 12 (41) 
y ee —————————————————_—$—$—_—_z=—=—_—_=_—— 
| Skills Perception +2, Stealth +4 

) Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12 

| Languages Elvish, Undercommon 

| Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


) Fey Ancestry. The drow has advantage on saving throws against 
| being charmed, and magic can’t put the drow to sleep. 


| Innate Spellcasting. The drow’s spellcasting ability is Charisma 
| (spell save DC 11). It can innately cast the following spells, 
requiring no material components: 


At will: dancing lights 
1/day each: darkness, faerie fire 


| Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the drow has 
, disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


: Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 


target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Hand Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120 
| ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage, and the 

target must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or 

_ be poisoned for 1 hour. If the saving throw fails by 5 or more, 
the target is also unconscious while poisoned in this way. The 
target wakes up if it takes damage or if another creature takes 
an action to shake it awake. 


ST oe —— 


Ty 


 BEVE§: DRO 
, rs = BLVES: DROW 


| 
y= 
| 


wi 


i 
i] 


Drow ELITE WARRIOR => 
Medium humanoid (elf), neutral evil ar 
= - : =r 
“Armor Class 18 (studded leather, shield) o 
Hit Points 71 (11d8 + 22) Dan 
Speed 30 ft. ; 

- 
= 
STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA [a 
13 (41) 18(+4) 14442) 1140) 1341) 21) 


Saving Throws Dex +7, Con +5, Wis +4 

Skills Perception +4, Stealth +10 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 14 

Languages Elvish, Undercommon 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Fey Ancestry. The drow has advantage on saving throws against | 
being charmed, and magic can’t put the drow to sleep. ‘ 


Innate Spellcasting. The drow’s spellcasting ability is Charisma | 
(spell save DC 12). It can innately cast the following spells, 
requiring no material components: 


At will: dancing lights 
1/day each: darkness, faerie fire, levitate (self only) 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the drow has 
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The drow makes two shortsword attacks. 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., 
one target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) 
poison damage. 


| 
Hand Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, range 30/120 | 
ft., one target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) piercing damage, and the 
target must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or 
be poisoned for 1 hour. If the saving throw fails by 5 or more, 
the target is also unconscious while poisoned in this way. The 
target wakes up if it takes damage or if another creature takes 
an action to shake it awake. 


REACTIONS | 


Parry. The drow adds 3 to its AC against one melee attack that / 
would hit it. To do so, the drow must see the attacker and be 
wielding a melee weapon. 


Drow MAGE 
Medium humanoid (elf), neutral evil 


Armor Class 12 (15 with mage armor) 
Hit Points 45 (10d8) 


B Speed 30 ft. 
—_= = ———— == SS = 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
9(-1) 14(42)  10(+0) 17(43) 1341) 12 (41) 


Skills Arcana +6, Deception +5, Perception +4, Stealth +5 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages Elvish, Undercommon 

Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 
ee 


Fey Ancestry. The drow has advantage on saving throws against 
being charmed, and magic can’t put the drow to sleep. 


sam Innate Spellcasting. The drow’s innate spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 12). It can innately cast the following 
spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: dancing lights 
\/day each: darkness, faerie fire, levitate (self only) 


Spelicasting. The drow is a 10th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 14, +6 to 
hit with spell attacks). The drow has the following wizard 
spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): mage hand, minor illusion, poison spray, 

ray of frost 
1st level (4 slots): mage armor, magic missile, shield, witch bolt 
2nd level (3 slots): alter self, misty step, web 
3rd level (3 slots): fly, lightning bolt 
4th level (3 slots): Evard’s black tentacles, greater invisibility 
5th level (2 slots): cloudkill 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the drow has 
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Staff. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 2 (1d6 — 1) bludgeoning damage, or 3 (1d8 - 1) 
bludgeoning damage if used with two hands, plus 3 (1d6) 
poison damage. 


Summon Demon (1/Day). The drow magically summons a 
quasit, or attempts to summon a shadow demon with a 50 
percent chance of success. The summoned demon appears in 
an unoccupied space within 60 feet of its summoner, acts as 
an ally of its summoner, and can’t summon other demons. It 
remains for 10 minutes, until it or its summoner dies, or until 

its summoner dismisses it as an action. 

——LLLL——————ReEEEEEL ELSE 


} Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


Drow PRIESTESS OF LOLTH 


Medium humanoid (elf), neutral evil 


Armor Class 16 (scale mail) 
Hit Points 71 (13d8 + 13) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10,(+0) 14(42) 1241) 13(41) 17443) 18 (+4) 


Saving Throws Con +4, Wis +6, Cha +7 

Skills Insight +6, Perception +6, Religion +4, Stealth +5 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16 
Languages Elvish, Undercommon 


i 


teeter 


Fey Ancestry. The drow has advantage on saving throws against 
being charmed, and magic can’t put the drow to sleep. 


Innate Spellcasting. The drow’s innate spellcasting ability 
is Charisma (spell save DC 15). She can innately cast the 
following spells, requiring no material components: 


| At will: dancing lights 
I/day each: darkness, faerie fire, levitate (self only) 


Spellcasting. The drow is a 10th-level spellcaster. Her 
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (save DC 14, +6 to hit with spell 
attacks). The drow has the following cleric spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): guidance, poison spray, resistance, spare the 
dying, thaumaturgy 

Ist level (4 slots): animal friendship, cure wounds, detect poison 
and disease, ray of sickness 

2nd level (3 slots): lesser restoration, protection from poison, web 

3rd level (3 slots): conjure animals (2 giant spiders), dispel magic 

4th level (3 slots): divination, freedom of movement 

5th level (2 slots): insect plague, mass cure wounds 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the drow has 
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight. 

ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The drow makes two scourge attacks. 


Scourge. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. | 


Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage plus 17 (5d6) poison damage. 


Summon Demon (1/Day). The drow attempts to magically 
summon a yochlo! with a 30 percent chance of success. If 

the attempt fails, the drow takes 5 (1d10) psychic damage. 
Otherwise, the summoned demon appears in an unoccupied 
space within 60 feet of its summoner, acts as an ally of its 
summoner, and can’t summon other demons. It remains for 10 
minutes, until it or its summoner dies, or until its summoner 
dismisses it as an action. 


| 


129 


EMPYREAN 
" Empyreans are the celestial children of the 

gods of the Upper Planes. They are universally, "§ 

beautiful, statuesque, and self-assured. a 
M3 Manifest Emotion. An empyrean can experience 
7 deity-like fits of serenity or rage. It can affect the 


environment around it by its mood. When an empyreati, 

is unhappy, the clouds might cry tears of salt water, the ~ 
wildflowers in surrounding meadows might wilt, dead 

fish might wash ashore in lakes or rivers, or a nearby 
forest might lose the leaves from its trees. When an 
empyrean is jubilant, sunlight follows it everywhere, 

small animals frolic in its footsteps, and birds fill the sky 
with their pleasing songs. 

Evil Empyreans. A few empyreans have turned to 
evil after venturing to the Lower Planes and becoming 
corrupted, or as the result of being cursed by evil gods. 
An evil empyrean can’t survive long on the Upper 
Planes and usually retreats to the Material Plane, 
where it can rule over a kingdom of mortals as an 
indomitable tyrant. 

Immortal Titans. Empyreans don’t age but can be 
slain. Because few empyreans can imagine their own 
demise, they fight fearlessly when drawn into battle, 
refusing to believe that the end is upon them even when 
standing at death’s door. When an empyrean dies, its 
spirit returns to its home plane. There, one of the fallen 
empyrean’s parents resurrects the empyrean unless he 
or she has a good reason not to. 


T of r 


hr ae | Huge: celestial (titan), chaotic good (75%) or neutral evil (259%) 


Armor Class 22 (natural armor) 
| Hit Points 313 (19d12 + 190) 
Speed 50 ft., fly 50 ft., swim 50 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
30 (410) 21 (+5) 30(+10) 21 (45) 22(+6) 27 (+8) 
a 
Saving Throws Str +17, Int +12, Wis +13, Cha +15 
Skills Insight +13, Persuasion +15 
Damage Immunities bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical weapons 
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 16 
_ Languages all 
1 Challenge 23 (32,500 XP) 


— 
— = oS 


| Innate Spellcasting. The empyrean's innate spellcasting ability 
| is Charisma (spell save DC 23, +15 to hit with spell attacks). 


. | It can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material 
| components: 
{ 


_ At will: greater restoration, pass without trace, water breathing, 
water walk 
\ | I/day each: commune, dispel evil and good, earthquake, fire 


| storm, plane shift (self only) 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the empyrean fails a saving 
| throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


EMPYREAN ee 


= 


Magic Resistance. The empyrean has ad 
throws against spells and pen magic 


ntage on i ae 
fects ; Md, 


aie 


Magic Weapons. The em pyrean ’s weapon attacks are aes 


ACTIONS 


Maul. Melee Weapon Attack: +17 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 31 (6d6 + 10) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a 


1 te f p. ee 


r 


creature, it must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw | 


or be stunned until the end of the empyrean’s next turn. 


Bolt, Ranged Spell Attack: +15 to hit, range 600 ft., one target. 


Hit: 24 (7d6) damage of one of the following types (empyrean’s | 


choice): acid, cold, fire, force, lightning, radiant, or thunder. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The empyrean can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from 
the options below. Only one legendary action option can be 
used at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. 
The empyrean regains spent legendary actions at the start 
of its turn. 


Attack. The empyrean makes one attack. 
Bolster. The empyrean bolsters all nonhostile creatures within 


120 feet of it until the end of its next turn. Bolstered creatures | 


can’t be charmed or frightened, and they gain advantage 
on ability checks and saving throws until the end of the 
empyrean’s next turn. 

Trembling Strike (Costs 2 Actions). The empyrean strikes the 
ground with its maul, triggering an earth tremor. All other 
creatures on the ground within 60 feet of the empyrean 

must succeed on a DC 25 Strength saving throw or be 

knocked prone. 


ETTERCAP 
Ettercaps are humanoid spiders that tend, feed, and 
watch over spiders the way a shepherd oversees a flock 
of sheep. They lair deep in remote forests. 

Fine strands of silk stream from glands in an 
ettercap’s abdomen, letting it shoot sticky strands of 
webbing to bind, entrap, or strangle its victims. It can 
also use its webbing to fashion elaborate snares and 
nets, which often festoon its lair. 

Quiet Killers. When travelers and explorers venture 
into an ettercap’s territory, the ettercap stalks them. 
Some meet their end wandering blindly into traps or 
sections of forest enclosed by webs. Others, the ettercap 
garrotes with strands of web or envenoms with its 
poisonous bite. 

Sylvan Despoilers. Though they dwell in the wilds, 
ettercaps have no desire to live in harmony with nature. 
A forest infested with ettercaps transforms into a 
gloomy place, choked with webs and infested with giant 
spiders, giant insects, and other sinister predators. 
Creatures that wander too far into such a wood are soon 
lost in a maze of webs that dangle with the bones and 
lost treasures of the ettercaps’ victims. 

Enemies of the Fey. Ettercaps are natural enemies 
of fey creatures. The foul creatures set web snares to 
catch sprites and pixies, which they hungrily devour, 
and will encase a dryad’s tree in webbing in a vain 
attempt to trap the dryad. Otherwise timid fey will 
sometimes approach outsiders for help in dealing with 
an ettercap infestation, being ill-equipped to deal with 

‘the malevolent.creatures themselves. 


ETTERCAP 


VARIANT: WEB GARROTE 


Some ettercaps like to strangle prey using garrotes fashioned 
from webbing, An ettercap so armed gains the following 
action option, which it uses in place of its claws. 

Web Garrote. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 
5 ft., one Medium or Small creature against which the 
ettercap has advantage on the attack roll. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) 
bludgeoning damage, and the target is grappled (escape DC 
12). Until this grapple ends, the target can’t breathe, and the 
ettercap has advantage on attack rolls against it. 


Medium monstrosity, neutral evil 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 44 (8d8 + 8) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14\(+2) » A15K42)' 131), .7(-2) 121) 8) 


Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4, Survival +3 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Spider Climb. The ettercap can climb difficult surfaces, 
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an | 
ability check. 


Web Sense. While in contact with a web, the ettercap knows 
the exact location of any other creature in contact with 
the same web. 


Web Walker. The ettercap ignores movement restrictions 
caused by webbing. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The ettercap makes two attacks: one with its bite 
and one with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage plus 4 (1d8) poison damage. | 
The target must succeed on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw | 
or be poisoned for 1 minute. The creature can repeat the saving 
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself 
on a success. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) slashing damage. 


Web (Recharge 5-6). Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 
30/60 ft., one Large or smaller creature. Hit: The creature is 
restrained by webbing. As an action, the restrained creature 
can make a DC 11 Strength check, escaping from the webbing 
on a success. The effect ends if the webbing is destroyed. The 
webbing has AC 10, 5 hit points, resistance to bludgeoning 
damage, and immunity to poison and psychic damage. 


| 


ee et 


t 


ET TER GARG, 


: Pal 


131 


“Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 
| Hit Points 85 (10d10 + 30) 
| Speed 40 ft. 


INT 
6 (-2) 


CHA 
8 (-1) 


STR 
21 (45) 


DEX 
8 (-1) 


CON 
17 (+3) 


WIS 
10 (+0) 


| Skills Perception +4 

} Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages Giant, Orc 

| Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Two Heads. The ettin has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks and on saving throws against being blinded, charmed, 
deafened, frightened, stunned, and knocked unconscious. 


Wakeful. When one of the ettin’s heads is asleep, its other 


head is awake. 


| ACTIONS 


| Multiattack. The ettin makes two attacks: one with its 
| battleaxe and one with its morningstar. 


¥ Battleaxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
. | target. Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) slashing damage. 


| Morningstar. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
.| target. Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) piercing damage. 


ETTIN 


Anettin is a foul, two-headed giant with the crude 
characteristics of an orc. It never bathes if it can help it, 
and its thick skin is usually encrusted with a thick layer 
of dirt and grime beneath the stinking hides it wears. 
Its long stringy hair hangs in an unkempt mess about 
its faces, and its breath reeks from mouths filled with 
crooked teeth and tusks. 

Dual Personality. The twin heads of an ettin are two 
individuals trapped in the same brutish body. Each head 
has its own mind, personality, and name, and possesses 
unique preferences and quirks. Bound from birth, both 
minds only rarely experience privacy or solitude. This 
familiarity breeds contempt, and an ettin bullies and 
argues with itself constantly, its two heads each taking 
constant offense at the other’s slights. 

When other creatures refer to an ettin, they combine 
its double names to form a single compound name that 
applies to the creature as a whole. If an ettin has one 
head named Hargle and another named Vargle, other 
creatures call the ettin Harglevargle. 

Solitary Lives. As much as an ettin argues 
with itself, it is even less tolerant of other ettins, 

since a conversation between two ettins almost 
always amounts to a shouting match between 
a crowd of four belligerent heads. Most ettins 

are solitary creatures as a result, tolerating 
one another only to reproduce. 
An ettin’s twin heads are always 
the same gender, with a body to match. 
Females are the dominant gender among 
ettins, and they initiate the ettins’ mating rituals. After 
finding a suitable den, a female ettin hunts and conquers 
a male, which cares for and feeds her during her six- 
month pregnancy. Once the child is born, the male 
ettin is released from servitude. When the child is old 
enough to hunt for itself, the mother sends it away and 
abandons the den. 

Two Heads are Better than One. When focused on 
a mutually beneficial purpose or united by a common 
threat, an ettin can resolve its personality differences 
and dedicate itself fully to a task. An ettin fights with a 
weapon in each hand, making twin attacks directed by 
its respective heads. When an ettin sleeps, one of its 
heads remains ever alert, gaining its only moments of 
privacy and keeping two eyes open for any creature that 
disturbs its precious solitude. 

Orcish Ties. In ancient dialects of Common, the word 
“ettin” translates as “ugly giant.” Legends tell of orcs 
that once stumbled upon a temple to Demogorgon, the 
magic of which transformed them into giant mockeries 
of the twin-headed Prince of Demons. Driven to near 
madness, these creatures scattered into the wilderness r 
to become the first ettins. , 

Whatever the truth of the ettins’ origin, orcs treat 
them as distant cousins, and orc tribes often entice 
ettins to serve as guards, scouts, and marauders. An 
ettin isn’t particularly loyal to its orc handlers, but the 
orcs can win it over with the promise of food and loot. 


FAERIE DRAGON hy cle’ 


_ Tiny dragon, chaotic good 


\ Armor Class 15 
| Hit Points 14 (4d4 + 4) 
| Speed 10 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
3(-4) 20 (+5) 13 (+1) 14 (42) 12 (41) ‘16 (43) 


, Skills Arcana +4, Perception +3, Stealth +7 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages Draconic, Sy!van 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) for a red, orange, or yellow faerie dragon; 
2 (450 XP) for a green, blue, indigo, or violet faerie dragon 


Superior Invisibility. As a bonus action, the dragon can 
| magically turn invisible until its concentration ends (as if 
- concentrating on a spell). Any equipment the dragon wears or 
carries is invisible with it. 


Limited Telepathy. Using telepathy, the dragon can magically 
communicate with any other faerie dragon within 60 feet of it. 


Magic Resistance. The dragon has advantage on saving throws 
| against spells and other magical effects. 


—— ae 


FAERIE DRAGON 


A faerie dragon is a cat-sized dragon with butterfly 
wings. It wears a sharp-toothed grin and expresses its 
delight by the twitching of its tail, its merriment fading 
only if it is attacked. 

Invisible Tricksters. The only warning of a faerie 
dragon’s presence is a stifled giggle. The dragon stays 
out of sight, watching invisibly as its victims contend. 
with its pranks. When its fun is done, the dragon might 
reveal itself, depending on the disposition of its’ “prey,” 

Friendly and Bright. A faerie dragon has a sharp 
mind, a fondness for treasure and good company, and 
a puckish sense of humor. Travelers can play to a faerie 
dragon’s draconic nature by offering it “treasure” in the 
form of sweets, baked goods, and baubles in exchange 
for information or safe passage through its territory. 

The Colors of Age. A faerie dragon’s scales change 
hue as it ages, moving through all the colors of the 
rainbow. All faerie dragons have innate spellcasting 
ability, gaining new spells as they mature. 


Dragon Color Age Range 

Red 5 years or less 
Orange 6-10 years 
Yellow 11-20 years 
Green 21-30 years 

Blue 31-40 years 
Indigo 41-50 years 
Violet 51 years or more 


Charisma (spell save DC 13). It can innately cast a number of 
spells, requiring no material components. As the dragon ages 
and changes color, it gains additional spells as shown below. 


Red, 1/day each: dancing lights, mage hand, minor illusion 
Orange, 1/day: color spray 

Yellow, 1/day: mirror image 

Green, 1/day: suggestion 

Blue, 1/day: major image 

Indigo, 1/day: hallucinatory terrain 

Violet, 1/day: polymorph 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 


Hit: 1 piercing damage. 


Euphoria Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales a puff of 
euphoria gas at one creature within 5 feet of it. The target must 
succeed on a DC 11 Wisdom saving throw, or for 1 minute, the 
target can’t take reactions and must roll a d6 at the start of 
each of its turns to determine its behavior during the turn: 

1-4. The target takes no action or bonus action and uses all 
of its movement to move in a random direction. 

5-6. The target doesn’t move, and the only thing it can do 
on its turn is make a DC 11 Wisdom saving throw, ending the 
effect on itself on a success. 


FAERIE D RAGE) 


Innate Spellcasting. The d ragon’s innate spellcasting ability is | 


134 


| FLAMESKUL 


Tiny undead, neutral evil 


i Armor Class 13 
| Hit Points 40 (9d4 + 18) 
, Speed 0 ft., fly 40 ft. 


Lt 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1(-5) 17443) 1442) 16 (#3), «10(+0)~—«-11: 40) 
Ee ———————————————————————————————— 

| Skills Arcana +5, Perception +2 

| Damage Resistances lightning, necrotic, piercing 

| Damage Immunities cold, fire, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, 
paralyzed, poisoned 

| Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 

Languages Common 
| Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


QQ EE 


\ Illumination. The flameskull sheds either dim light in a 15-foot 
) radius, or bright light in a 15-foot radius and dim light for 

_ an additional 15 feet. It can switch between the options as 

, an action. 


mi 
> FLAMES RY 


FLAMESKULL 

Blazing green flames and mad, echoing laughter follow 
a disembodied skull as it patrols its demesne. When 
the undead flameskull discovers trespassers, it blasts 
the intruders with fiery rays from its eyes and dreadful 
spells called up from the dark recesses of its memory. 

Dark spellcasters fashion flameskulls from the 
remains of dead wizards. When the ritual is complete, 
green flames erupt from the skull to complete its ghastly 
transformation. 

Legacy of Life. A flameskull only dimly recalls its 
former life. Though it might speak in its old voice and 
recount key events from its past, it is but an echo of its 
former self. However, its undead transformation grants 
it full access to the magic it wielded in life, letting it 
cast spells while ignoring the material and somatic 
components it can no longer employ. 

Eternally Bound. Intelligent and vigilant, a flameskull 
serves its creator by protecting a hidden treasure hoard, 
a secret chamber, or a specific individual. A flameskull 
carries out the directives given to it when it was created, 
and it interprets those commands to the letter. A 
flameskull’s master must craft its instructions with care 
to ensure that the creature carries out its tasks properly. 

Wreathed in Flame. The fire wreathing a flameskull 
burns continually, giving off bright light that the 
creature controls. It uses those flames as a weapon, 
focusing them to loose them as fiery rays from its 
eye sockets. 

Eldritch Rejuvenation. A flameskull’s shattered 
fragments reform unless they are splashed with holy 
water or subjected to a dispel magic of remove curse 
spell. If it can no longer fulfill its intended purpose, 
the re-formed flameskull is beholden to no one and 
becomes autonomous. 

Undead Nature. A flameskull doesn’t require air, 
food, drink, or sleep. 


Magic Resistance. The flameskull has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


Rejuvenation. If the flameskull is destroyed, it regains all its hit — 
points in 1 hour unless holy water is sprinkled on its remains or | 
a dispel magic or remove curse spell is cast on them. 


Spellcasting. The flameskull is a 5th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 13, +5 to 

hit with spell attacks). It requires no somatic or material 
components to cast its spells. The flameskull has the following | 
wizard spells prepared: 


Cantrip (at will): mage hand 

1st level (3 slots): magic missile, shield 
2nd level (2 slots): blur, flaming sphere 
3rd level (1 slot): fireball 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The flameskull uses Fire Ray twice. 


Fire Ray. Ranged Spell Attack: +5 to hit, range 30 ft., one target. 
Hit: 10 (3d6) fire damage. 


FLUMPH 


The mysterious flumphs drift through the Underdark, 
propelled through the air by the jets whose sound gives 
them their name. A flumph glows faintly, reflecting 

its moods in its color. Soft pink means it is amused, 
deep blue is sadness, green expresses curiosity, and 
crimson is anger. 

Intelligent and Wise. Flumphs communicate 
telepathically. Though they resemble jellyfish, flumphs 
are sentient beings of great intelligence and wisdom, 
possessing advanced knowledge of religion, philosophy, 
mathematics, and countless other subjects. 

Flumphs are sensitive to the emotional states of 
nearby creatures. If a creature’s thoughts suggest 
goodness, a flumph seeks that creature out. When 
facing creatures that exude evil, a flumph flees. 

Psionic Siphons. Flumphs feed by siphoning mental 
energy from psionic creatures, and they can be found 
lurking near communities of mind flayers, aboleths, 
githyanki, and githzerai. As passive parasites, they take 
only the mental energy they need, and most creatures 
feel no loss or discomfort from such feeding. 

Consuming psionic energy reveals the thoughts and 
emotions of the creatures on which the flumphs feed. 
Since so many of those creatures are evil, flumphs are 
often subjected to thoughts, emotions, and hungers that 
sicken their pure nature. When flumphs encounter good- 
hearted adventurers, they eagerly share the dark secrets 
they have learned in the hopes of casting down their 
evil sources of energy, even if doing so means they must 
seek out new sources of nourishment. 

Flumph Society. Flumphs live in complex and 
organized groups called cloisters, within which each 
flumph has a place and purpose. These harmonious 
groupings have no need for leaders, since all flumphs 
contribute in their own way. 


‘FLUMPH : pi 


“Small aberration, lawful good 


7 
\ Armor Class 12 

Hit Points 7 (2d6) 
Speed 5 ft., fly 30 ft. 


' STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
6 (-2) 15 (42) 10 (40) 1442) -1442)—-11 40) 
——————————E——eEeE———E—————— 
Skills Arcana +4, History +4, Religion +4 
Damage Vulnerabilities psychic 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 
| Languages understands Undercommon but can’t speak, 
telepathy 60 ft. 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


| Rg rc 


| Advanced Telepathy. The flumph can perceive the content of 
| any telepathic communication used within 60 feet of it, and it 
can’t be surprised by creatures with any form of telepathy. 


| Prone Deficiency. If the flumph is knocked prone, roll a die. 
1 On an odd result, the flumph lands upside-down and is 


“TRUST A FLUMPH.” 


~X tHe M 7 
YSTIC'S 1ST RULE OF DUNGEON SURVIVAL 


g thr ) , rig 

the incapacitated condition ‘fit succeeds. 

fe pie ~~ 

Telepathic Shroud. The flumph i is immune to any eff ct that 

would sense its emotions or read its thoughts, as well as all 
divination spells. 


ACTIONS 


Tendrils. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage plus 2 (1d4) acid 
damage. At the end of each of its turns, the target must make 
a DC 10 Constitution saving throw, taking 2 (1d4) acid damage 
on a failure or ending the recurring acid damage on a success. 
A lesser restoration spell cast on the target also ends the 
recurring acid damage. 


Stench Spray (1/Day). Each creature in a 15-foot cone 
originating from the flumph must succeed on a DC 10 
Dexterity saving throw or be coated in a foul-smelling liquid. 
A coated creature exudes a horrible stench for 1d4 hours. The 
coated creature is poisoned as long as the stench lasts, and 
other creatures are poisoned while within 5 feet of the coated 
creature. A creature can remove the stench on itself by using a 
short rest to bathe in water, alcohol, or vinegar. 


J 
| 


| 


a 


| Armor Class 14. (natural armor) 


| FOMUORIAN 


AN. 
‘giant, chaotic evil 


Hit Points 149°(13d12 + 65) 
Speed 30 ft. 


CON 
20 (+5) 


DEX 
10 (+0) 


INT 
9 (-1) 


WIS 
14 (+2) 


CHA 


23 (+6) 6 (-2) 


Skills Perception +8, Stealth +3 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 18 

Languages Giant, Undercommon 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 
ri 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The fomorian attacks twice with its greatclub or 


_ makes one greatclub attack and uses Evil Eye once. 


Greatclub. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 15 ft., one 
target. Hit: 19 (3d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 


Evil Eye. The fomorian magically forces a creature it can see 
within 60 feet of it to make a DC 14 Charisma saving throw. The 
creature takes 27 (6d8) psychic damage on a failed save, or half 
as much damage on a successful! one. 


Curse of the Evil Eye (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). 
With a stare, the fomorian uses Evil Eye, but on a failed 
save, the creature is also cursed with magical deformities. 
While deformed, the creature has its speed halved and has 
disadvantage on ability checks, saving throws, and attacks 
based on Strength or Dexterity. 

The transformed creature can repeat the saving throw 


whenever it finishes a long rest, ending the effect on a success. 


"Rp Ip en 


| STR 


FOMORIAN 

The: mdst hideous and wicked of all giantkind are the 
godless fomorians, whose deformed bodies reflect their 
vile demeanors. Some have facial features randomly 
distributed around their misshapen, warty heads, 
Others have limbs of grossly different sizes and shapes, 
or emit terrible howls each time they draw breath 
through misshapen mouths. Their wretched appearance 
rarely evokes sympathy, however, for the fomorians 
brought their doom upon themselves with the evil that 
rules their hearts and minds. 

Fey Curse. The elves remember when the fomorians 
were among the most handsome of races, possessed 
of brilliant minds and unrivaled magical ability. That 
physical perfection did not extend to their hearts, 
however, as a lust for magic and power consumed them. 

The fomorians sought to conquer the Feywild and 
enslave its inhabitants, claiming those creatures’ magic 
for themselves. When the fey united to defend their 
realm, the fomorians fought them and were subjected to 
a terrible curse. 

One by one, the giants fell as their bodies were 
warped to reflect the evil in their hearts. Stripped of 
their grace and magical power, the wretched horrors 
fled from the light, delving deep beneath the world 
to nurse their hatred. Cursing their fate, they have 
ever after plotted vengeance against the fey that 
wronged them. 

Giants of the Underdark. The fomorians dwell 
in eerily beautiful caverns in the Underdark, rarely 
venturing to the surface. Their lairs feature abundant 
access to water, fish, and mushroom forests, as well as 
to the creatures whose slave labor keeps the fomorians 
fed. When those slaves can no longer toil, they are 
slain and devoured. Wickedness and depravity are the 
cornerstones of fomorian society, in which the strongest 
and cruelest giants rule. Fomorians mark their 
territories with the corpses of their enemies, painting 
their cavern walls with blood or stitching together limbs 
and body parts to make mockeries of the creatures they 
have killed. 

Ruined Flesh, Evil Minds. The deformities visited 
on the fomorians prevent them from hurling rocks like 
their giant kin, or wearing anything more than scraps 
of cloth. However, the grotesque positioning of their 
eyes, noses, and ears gives fomorians keen perceptive 
abilities, making it hard to surprise or ambush them. 

The greed and evil of the fomorians lies at the heart 
of their degeneration and fall, and continues to plague 
them. Fomorians make alliances with other creatures 
when it suits them, but they are disloyal by nature and 
betray their allies on a whim. 

Curse of the Evil Eye. Fomorians can pass their 
curse onto others using a power called the evil eye—a 
last vestige of the giants’ once-remarkable spellcasting 
ability. A creature cursed by a fomorian’s evil eye is 
magically twisted and deformed, gaining a glimpse into 
the pain and malice that has consumed this evil race. 


FUNGI 


With its sky of jagged stone and perpetual night, the 
Underdark is home to all manner of fungi. Taking the 
place of plants in the subterranean realm, fungi are vital 
to the survival of many underground species, providing 
nourishment and shelter in the unforgiving darkness. 

Fungi spawn in organic matter, then break that matter, 
down to consume it, feeding on filth and corpses. As 
they mature, fungi eject spores that drift on the lightest 
breeze to spawn new fungi. 

Not needing sunlight or warmth to grow, fungi 
thrive in every corner and crevice of the Underdark. 
Transformed by the magic that permeates that 
underground realm, Underdark fungi often develop 
potent defensive mechanisms or abilities of mimicry 
and attack. The largest specimens can spread to ereate,), 
vast subterranean forests in which countless creaty res 5 : 
live and feed. ‘wal 


oe 


GAS SPORE | 


The first gas spores are thought to have been spawned 
from dead beholders, whose moldering corpses fed a 
parasitic fungus with aberrant magic. Having long since 
adapted into a unique plant creature, a gas spore grows 
quickly and purposefully out of any corpse, creating a 
malevolent-looking mockery of the most feared denizen 
of the Underdark. 

Eye Tyrant’s Form. A gas spore is a spherical, 
balloon-like fungus that resembles a beholder from a 
distance, though its true nature becomes increasingly 
obvious as one approaches it. The monster possesses 
a blind central “eye” and rhizome growths sprouting 
from its upper surface, superficially resembling a 
beholder’s eyestalks. 

Death Burst. A gas spore is a hollow shell filled with a 
lighter-than-air gas that enables it to float as a beholder 
does. Piercing the shell with even the weakest attack 
causes the creature to burst apart, releasing a cloud mS 
of deadly spores. A creature that inhales the spores 
becomes host to them, and is often dead within a day. Its ' 
corpse then becomes the spawning ground from which a, 
new gas spores arise. ' 

Beholder Memories. A gas spore that sprouts from a 
beholder’s corpse sometimes carries within it memories 
of its deceased parent. When the gas spore explodes, its 
deadly spores cast those memories adrift. Any creature 
that inhales the spores and survives inherits one or 
more of the beholder’s fragmented memories, and might 
gain useful information about the beholder’s former lair 
and other nearby places and creatures of interest. 


SHRIEKER 


A shrieker is a human-sized mushroom that emits a 
piercing screech to drive off creatures that disturb it. 
Other creatures use the fungi as an alarm to signal the 
approach of prey, and various intelligent races of the 
Underdark cultivate shriekers on the outskirts of their 
communities to discourage trespassers. 


- 


=a 
‘, . 
“Te 


r 


| Armor Class 
| Hit Points 1 (110 - 4) 
Speed 0 ft., fly 10 ft. (hover) 


4 STR 
5 (-3) 


CON 
3 (-4) 


INT 
1 (-5) 


WIS 
1 (-5) 


CHA 
1(-5) 


DEX 
1 (-5) 


Damage Immunities poison 
ut 
poisoned, prone 
Senses blindsight 30 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
j passive Perception 5 
| Languages — 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


SS SS 


) Death Burst. The gas spore explodes when it drops to 0 hit 


15 Constitution saving throw or take 10 (3d6) poison damage 

and become infected with a disease on a failed save. Creatures 

| immune to the poisoned condition are immune to this disease. 
Spores invade an infected creature's system, killing the 

creature in a number of hours equal to 1d12 + the creature’s 

Constitution score, unless the disease is removed. In half 

that time, the creature becomes poisoned for the rest of the 


] 


that grow to full size in 7 days. 


Eerie Resemblance. The gas spore resembles a beholder. A 
' | creature that can see the gas spore can discern its true nature 
with a successful DC 15 Intelligence (Nature) check. 


ACTIONS z 


Touch. Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
1 es | creature. Hit: 1 poison damage, and the creature must succeed 
— a ona DC 10 Constitution saving throw or become infected with 
> | the disease described in the Death Burst trait. 


) Condition Immunities blinded, deafened, frightened, paralyzed, | 


points. Each creature within 20 feet of it must succeed ona DC | 


duration. After the creature dies, it sprouts 2d4 Tiny gas spores 


. iy 
ae a ody 


ey ya ol va RR Sk 
he 


felt ja an 
fedium plant, unaligned 


f Armor Class 5 
_ Hit Points 13 (3d8) 


Speed 0 ft. 
_ STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1 (-5) 1(-5) —-10 (+0) 1 (-5) 3 (-4) 1 (-5) 


Condition Immunities blinded, deafened, frightened 
Senses blindsight 30 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
| passive Perception 6 
Languages — 
Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


J False Appearance. While the shrieker remains motionless, it is 


j indistinguishable from an ordinary fungus. 


-_ REACTIONS 


| shrieker, it emits a shriek audible within 300 feet of it. The 


range and for 1d4 of the shrieker’s turns afterward. 


VIOLET FUNGUS 


This purplish mushroom uses root-like feelers growing 


from its base to creep across cavern floors. The four 
stalks protruding from a violet fungi’s central mass 
are used to lash out at prey, rotting flesh with the 
slightest touch. Any creature killed by a violet fungus 
decomposes rapidly. A new violet fungus sprouts from 
the moldering corpse, growing to full size in 2d6 days. 


| Speed 5 ft. 
= —-—— 

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1 fF 3 (-4) 1(-5) — 10 (+0) 1 (-5) 3 (-4) 1 (-5) 


Rr tt  ——™ 


Condition Immunities blinded, deafened, frightened 

Senses blindsight 30 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
passive Perception 6 

, Languages — 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


ES 


Shriek. When bright light or a creature is within 30 feet of the 


LAL al ee 
al pe rl [ate 


= 


| 


shrieker continues to shriek until the disturbance moves out of 


eee 


False Appearance. While the violet fungus remains motionless, 


it is indistinguishable from an ordinary fungus. 
| 


_ ACTIONS 


___| Multiattack. The fungus makes 1d4 Rotting Touch attacks. 


- | Rotting Touch. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 10 ft., one | 


| creature. Hit: 4 (1d8) necrotic damage. 


—— Ne, Lt Ce 


eee Fro EE a 


| 


Se 


(i as ae 
* a : sp i 3 
- - i+ 


GALEB DUHR 


The galeb duhr is a boulder-like creature with stumpy 
appendages that act as arms and legs. It has the ability 
to animate the rocks and boulders around it, and is thus 
usually encountered in rocky terrain. 

Powerful magic allows a spellcaster to summon a 
galeb duhr from the Plane of Earth. Some galeb duhr 
also form naturally in places touched by that plane. The 
galeb duhr is imbued with greater intelligence than most 
elementals, allowing it to better assess threats and to 
communicate with creatures entering its guarded area. 

Stone Guardian. A galeb duhr doesn’t age or require 
sustenance, making it an excellent sentinel. A powerful 
druid might charge a galeb duhr with protecting a stone 
circle or sacred hilltop. Another galeb duhr might be 
created to guard an underground tomb or a wizard’s 
tower. When it chooses to, the galeb duhr can make 
itself look like an ordinary boulder, remaining perfectly 
‘still for years at a time. 


ts 
AY 


seh ~. 


GALEB DuHR 
Medium elemental, neutral 


oo 


Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 85 (9d8 + 45) 
| Speed 15 ft. (30 ft. when rolling, 60 ft. rolling downhill) 


| $$ = LL — 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
20 (+5) 14(+2) 20(+5) 1140) 12(4+1) 11 (40) 


AA 5 ————— 
| Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
) nonmagical weapons 
| Damage Immunities poison 
| Condition Immunities exhaustion, paralyzed, 

poisoned, petrified 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft., 

passive Perception 11 

Languages Terran 
| Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


——— $e 


False Appearance. While the galeb duhr remains motionless, it 
is indistinguishable from a normal boulder. 


oOo 


Rolling Charge. \f the galeb duhr rolls at least 20 feet straight 
toward a target and then hits it with a slam attack on the same 
turn, the target takes an extra 7 (2d6) bludgeoning damage. If 
the target is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 16 Strength 
saving throw or be knocked prone. 


| ACTIONS 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., onetarget. | 
| Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) bludgeoning damage. 


. Animate Boulders (1/Day). The galeb duhr magically animates | 
up to two boulders it can see within 60 feet of it. A boulder has | 
statistics like those of a galeb duhr, except it has Intelligence 1 | 
and Charisma 1, it can’t be charmed or frightened, and it lacks 
this action option. A boulder remains animated as long as 
the galeb duhr maintains concentration, up to 1 minute (as if 
concentrating on a spell). 


A galeb duhr is permanently bound to the Material 
Plane, so that when it dies, it doesn’t return to the Plane 
of Earth. It has an excellent memory and is more than 
happy to share information regarding its environment 
with creatures it doesn’t regard as threats. 

Stone Connection. A galeb duhr can become one with 
the earth around it, allowing it to imbue nearby rocks 
and boulders with a semblance of life. The galeb duhr 
uses its animated boulders to frighten away interlopers 
and defend whatever it has been charged to protect.. 
When it needs to move close to those intruders, it 
presses its limbs tight to its body and rolls. forward at'a 
furious pace. 


‘aa LEBER 
serene wore 139 


wooo ll lll 


——————==—— 


GARGOYLE 


Medium elemental, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 52 (7d8 + 21) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIs CHA 
15 (+2) 11 (40) 16 (+3) 6(-2) 11 (+0) 7 (-2) 
rr —™ 
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical weapons that aren’t adamantine 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities exhaustion, petrified, poisoned 


| Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
| Languages Terran 


Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Pl 


False Appearance. While the gargoyle remains motionless, it is 
indistinguishable from an inanimate statue. 


ACTIONS 


| Multiattack, The gargoyle makes two attacks: one with its bite | 


and one with its claws. 


| Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


7” . 
. GARGOYLE 
Sa 


| Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. | 


:| Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) slashing damage. 


ad 
| 


# = t a Y B iW 
‘ (teres r 
or ientaeardilibendreecer tien Pa ee an ee eee 2 ‘. i ee tp — ges hs ota, a cS 
ep nat a rr NR a tn eg 
4 vy ry y 
ie 


GARGOYLE 

The inanimate gargoyles that perch atop great buildings 
are inspired by these malevolent creatures of elemental 
earth that resemble grotesque, fiendish statues. A 
gargoyle lurks among masonry and ruins, as still as 

any stone sculpture, and delights in the terror it creates 
when it breaks from its suspended pose, as well as the 
pain it inflicts on its victims. 

Animate Stone. Gargoyles cling to rocky cliffs and 
mountains, or roost on ledges in underground caves. 
They haunt city rooftops, perching vulture-like among 
the high stone arches and buttresses of castles and 
cathedrals, and they can hold themselves so still that 
they appear inanimate. Able to maintain this state for 
years, a gargoyle makes an ideal sentry. 

Deadly Reputation. Gargoyles have a reputation for 
cruelty. Statues carved into the likenesses of gargoyles 
appear in the architecture of countless cultures to 
frighten away trespassers. Although such sculptures 
are only decorative, real gargoyles can hide among 
them to ambush unsuspecting victims. A gargoyle 
might alleviate the tedium of its watch by catching 
and tormenting birds or rodents, but its long wait only 
increases its craving for harming sentient creatures. 

Cruel Servants. Gargoyles are easily inspired by 
the cunning of an intelligent master. They enjoy simple 
tasks such as guarding a master’s home, torturing 
and killing interlopers, and anything else that involves 
minimum effort and maximum pain and carnage. 

Gargoyles sometimes serve demons for their 
propensity for wanton chaos and destruction. Powerful 
spellcasters can also easily enlist gargoyle guardians to 
keep watch over their gates and walls. Gargoyles have 
the patience and fortitude of stoné, and will serve even 
the cruelest master for years without complaint. 

Elemental Nature. A gargoyle doesn’t require air, 
food, drink, or sleep. 


SSS see 
SHARDS OF ELEMENTAL EVIL 
As Ogrémoch, the evil Prince of Elemental Earth, treads 
his stony realm, it leaves shards of broken rock in his wake. 
imbued with slivers of sentience, these shards thrum with 


~ the essence of the elemental prince, growing over long years 


into vaguely humanoid rock formations that resolve at last 
into the hard, cruel shapes of gargoyles. 

Ogrémoch doesn’t create gargoyles deliberately, but 
they are a physical manifestation of his evil. Gargoyles are 
mockeries of the elemental air that Ogrémoch despises. They 
are heavy creatures of living stone, yet capable of flight. Like 
their creator, they possess a fundamental hatred for beings 
of elemental air, aarakocra in particular, and relish every 
opportunity to destroy such creatures. 

On their home plane, gargoyles carve out earth motes that 
Ogrémoch hurtles into Aaga, the domain of the aarakocra 
and the benevolent Wind Dukes the bird folk serve in the 
Elemental Plane of Air. 


Ce 
— . 


a ae 


> oe 


e, GENIE S 
_ Genies are rare elemental creatures out of story 

and legend. Only a few can be found on the Material 
Piane. The rest reside on the Elemental Planes, where 
they rule from lavish palaces and are attended by 
worshipful slaves. 

Genies are as brilliant as they are mighty, as proud 
as they are majestic. Haughty and decadent, they have 
a profound sense of entitlement that stems from the 
knowledge that few creatures except the gods and other 
genies can challenge their power. 

Creatures of the Elements. A genie is born when 
the soul of a sentient living creature melds with the 
primordial matter of an elemental plane. Only under 
rare circumstances does such an elemental-infused soul 
coalesce into a manifest form and create a genie. 

A genie usually retains no connection to the soul 
that gave it form. That life force is a building block that 
determines the genie’s form and apparent gender, as 
well as one or two key personality traits. Although they 
resemble humanoid beings, genies are elemental spirits 
given physical form. They don’t mate with other genies 
or produce genie offspring, as all new genies are born 
out of the same mysterious fusion of spirit energy and 
elemental power. A genie with a stronger connection 
to its mortal soul might choose to sire a child with a 
mortal, although such offspring are rare. 

When a genie perishes, it leaves nothing behind 
except what it was wearing or carrying, along with 
a small trace of its native element: a pile of dust, a 
gust of wind, a flash of fire and smoke, or a burst of 
water and foam. 

Rule or Be Ruled. Mortal slaves serve to validate 
a genie’s power and high self-opinion. A hundred 
flattering voices are music to a genie’s ears, while 
two hundred mortal slaves prostrated at its feet are 
proof that it is lord and master. Genies view slaves as 
living property, and a genie without property amounts 
to nothing among its own kind. As a result, many 
genies treasure their slaves, treating them as honored 
members of their households. Evil genies freely threaten 
and abuse their slaves, but never to the extent that the 
slaves are no longer of use. 

In contrast to their love of slaves, most genies loathe 
being bound to service themselves. A genie obeys the 
will of another only when bribed or compelled by magic. 
All genies command the power of their native element, 
but a rare few also possess the power to grant wishes. 
For both these reasons, mortal mages often seek to bind 
genies into service. 

Decadent Nobility. Noble genies are the rarest of 
their kind. They are used to getting what they want, 
and have learned to trade their ability to grant wishes 
to attain the objects of their desire. This constant 
indulgence has made them decadent, while their 
supreme power over reality makes them haughty and 
arrogant. Their vast palaces overflow with wonders and 
sensory delights beyond imagination. 

Noble genies cultivate the jealousy and envy of other 
genics, asserting their superiority at every opportunity. 
Other genies respect the influence of the noble genies, 


knowing how unwise it is to defy a creature that can 
alter reality at a whim. A genie isn’t beholden to any 


noble genie, however, and will sometimes choose to defy _ 


a noble genie’s will and risk the consequences. 

The Power of Worship. Genies acknowledge the 
gods as powerful entities but have no desire to court 
or worship them. They find the endless fawning and 
mewling of religious devotees tiresome—except as it is 
directed toward them by their worshipful slaves. 

Their miraculous powers, the grandeur of their 
abodes, and the numbers of their slaves allow some 
genies to deceive themselves into believing they, are 
as powerful as the gods. Some go so far as to demand 
that mortals of other realms—even whole continggts or 
worlds—bow down before them. 


DAO 


Dao are greedy, malicious genies from the Elemental 
Plane of Earth. They adorn themselves with jewelry 
crafted from precious gems and rare metals, and when 
they fly, their lower bodies become columns of swirling 
sand. A dao isn’t happy unless it is the envy of other dao. 

All That Glitters. The dao dwell in complexes of 
twisting tunnels and glittering ore-veined caverns 
on the Elemental Plane of Earth. These mazeworks 
are continually expanding as the dao delve into and 
reshape the rock around them. Dao care nothing for 
the poverty or misfortune of others. A dao might grind 
powdered gems and gold dust over its food to heighten 
the experience of eating, devouring its wealth as mortals 
consume a precious spice. 

Lords of the Earth. A dao never assists a mortal 
unless the genie has something to gain, preferably 
treasure. Among the genies, dao are on speaking and 
trading terms with the efreet, but they have nothing 
but scorn for djinn and marids. Other races native to 
the Elemental Plane of Earth avoid the dao, which are 
always seeking new slaves to mine the mazeworks of 
their floating earth islands. 

Proud Slavers. The dao trade for the finest slaves 
that money can buy, forcing them to work in dangerous 
subterranean realms that rumble with earthquakes. 

As much as they enjoy enslaving others, the dao 
hate being enslaved. Powerful wizards have been 
known to lure dao to the Material Plane and trap them 
in the confines of magic gemstones or iron flasks. 
Unfortunately for the dao, their greed makes it relatively 
easy for mages to cozen them into service. 


DJINNI 


Proud, sensuous genies from the Elemental Plane 

of Air, the djinn are attractive, tall, well-muscled 
humanoids with blue skin and dark eyes. They dress in 
airy, shimmering silks, designed as much for comfort as 
to flaunt their musculature. 

Airy Aesthetes. Djinn rule floating islands of 
cloudstuff covered with enormous pavilions, or topped 
with wondrous buildings, courtyards, fountains, and 
gardens. Creatures of comfort and ease, djinn enjoy 
succulent fruits, pungent wines, fine perfumes, and 
beautiful music. 


ar ebwannsntial 


Djinn are known for their sense of mischief and their 
favorable attitude toward mortals. Among genies, djinn 
deal coolly with efreet and marids, whom they view as 
haughty. They openly despise dao and strike against 
them with little provocation. 

Masters of the Wind. Masters of the air, the djinn ride 
powerful whirlwinds that they create and direct ona 
whim, and which can even carry passengers. Creatures 
that stand against a djinni are assaulted by wind and 
thunder, even as the djinni spins away on that wind if 
outmatched in combat. When a djinni flies, its lower 
body transforms into a column of swirling air. 

Accepting Servitors. The djinn believe that servitude 
is a matter of fate, and that no being can contest the 
hand of fate. As a result, of all the genies, djinn are the 
ones most amenable to servitude, though they never 
enjoy it. Djinn treat their slaves more like servants 
deserving of kindness and protection, and they part with 
them reluctantly. 

A mortal who desires the brief service of a djinni can 
entreat it with fine gifts, or use flattery to bribe it into 
compliance. Powerful wizards are able to forgo such 
niceties, however, if they can summon, bind into service, 
or imprison a djinni using magic. Long-term service 
displeases a djinni, and imprisonment is inexcusable. 
Djinn resent the cruel wizards that have imprisoned 
their kind in bottles, iron flasks, and wind instruments 
throughout the ages. Betrayal, particularly by a mortal 
whom a djinni trusted, is a vile deed that only deadly 
vengeance can amend. 


EFREETI 


Hulking genies of the Elemental Plane of Fire, the efreet 
ate masters of flame, immune to fire and able to create 
it on a whim. Fine silk caftans and damask robes drape 
their magma-red or coal-black skin, and they bedeck 
themselves in brass and gold torcs, chains, and rings, 
all glittering with jewels. When an efreeti flies, its lower 
body transforms into a column of smoke and embers. 

Haughty and Cruel. The efreet are deceptive, 
cunning, arid cruel to the point of ruthlessness. They 
despise being forced into servitude and are relentless 
in pursuit of vengeance against creatures that have 
wronged them. Efreet don’t see themselves in this light, 
naturally, and regard their race as fair and orderly, even 
as they admit to an enlightened sense of self-interest. 

Spiteful Slavers. Efreet view all other creatures 
as enemies or potential serfs. They raid the Material 
Plane and the elemental planes for slaves, which they 
capture and bring back to their homes on the Elemental 
Plane of Fire. The efreet rule as oppressive tyrants, 
promoting only the cruelest among their slaves. Those 
overseers are given whips to help keep the rank-and-file 
slaves in line. 

Planar Raiders. Most efreet reside on the Elemental 
Plane of Fire, either in great domed fortresses of black 
glass and basalt surrounded by churning lakes of fire, or 
in the fabled City of Brass. Additionally, efreet military 
outposts thronging with their minions and slaves can be 
found scattered throughout the planes. 

On the Material Plane, efreet dwell in fiery regions 
such as volcanoes and the burning expanses of the 


cen 
=e OO 


ede oy ae: een | 
world’s deserts. Their love of the désert brings thein into 
conflict with the djinn that ride the desert whirlwinds, 
and with the earthbound dao. Efreet utterly despise 
marids, with whom they have maintained a passionate 
conflict throughout the history of both races. 


MARID 


Hailing from the Elemental Plane of Water, the marids 
are the most wondrous of genie-kind. Although all 
genies wield great power, even the lowliest marid sees 
itself as clearly superior to the flighty djinn, the ground- 
hugging dao, and the fuming efreet. 

Large and piscine, marids are a strange sight to 
behold, particularly when clad in the finely stitched vests 
and colorful pantaloons they favor. They speak in voices 
as soft as the sea breeze or as sonorous as storm waves 
breaking against a rocky cliff. In flight, their lower 
bodies transform into columns of foamy water. 

Water Lords. Water is a marid’s native element, 
and the genie can manipulate water in virtually any 
way it desires. A marid can walk on water and breathe 
naturally beneath its surface. It can create water or 
shape clouds of fog and mist from the vapor in the air. 

It can even transform itself into mist, or use water as a 
weapon to bludgeon its foes. 

Marid Homes. Marids are rare on the Material Plane. 
They inhabit mighty and majestic coral fortresses 
located in the Elemental Plane of Water. These citadels 
float in the depths of the plane and contain opulent, air- 
filled chambers where slaves and guests reside. 

A marid doesn’t expect much from its slaves, simply 
wanting to have them for the status of ownership. 
Marids go out of their way to obtain skilled slaves, and 
aren't above kidnapping mortal artists, entertainers, or 
storytellers for use in their courts. 

Egotistical Hierarchs. All marids claim a title of 
nobility, and the race is awash in shahs, sultans, muftis, 
and khedives. Most of these titles are mere pretense on 
the part of the self-important marids. 

Marids treat all others—including other genies—as 
inferiors of various grades, ranging from poor cousins to 
petty annoyances. They tolerate djinn, dislike dao, and 
despise efreet. 

' Humanoids are among the lowest of the creatures 
that marids must tolerate, although they sometimes 
deal with powerful wizards and exceptional leaders 
on an almost-equal footing. Doing so has sometimes 
proven to be a mistake, since wizards have managed to 
imprison marids in conch shells, flasks, and decanters 
over the ages. Bribery and flattery are the best means of 
dealing with marids, to which an obsequious mortal is a 
creature that knows its place. 

Whimsical Storytellers. Marids are champion tale- 
tellers, whose favorite legends emphasize the prowess 
of marids in general and of the speaker in particular. 
Fanciful genies, they lie often and creatively. They aren't 
always malicious in their deception, but embellishments 
suit their fancy. Marids consider it a crime for a lesser 
being to interrupt one of their tales, and offending a 
marid is a sure way to invoke its wrath. 


| Large elemental, neutral evil 


, Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 187 (15d10 + 105) 
Speed 30 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 30 ft. 


WIS CHA 
13 (+1) (14 (42) 


STR 
23 (+6) 


DEX 
12 (+1) 


CON 
24 (+7) 


INT 
12 (+1) 


Saving Throws Int +5, Wis +5, Cha +6 
Condition Immunities petrified 
) Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11 
| Languages Terran 
| Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) 


| Earth Glide. The dao can burrow through nonmagical, 
unworked earth and stone. While doing so, the dao doesn’t 
disturb the material it moves through. 


’ Elemental Demise. If the dao dies, its body disintegrates into 
crystalline powder, leaving behind only equipment the dao was 
wearing or carrying. 


GEM 


VE, 
ome TO THE Great DisMAL Dev he 
y c 
.. INNER PLAN ou ARE NOW SL 
F THE 
1GHTY ANO 
Queen OF T 


DIAMOND 


ey 
merciFuL KHA ' 
we MANTLED 


fo) 
oF THEM 
AU YiL JIN ZARAIN, 
DEPTHS, PontiFF OF THE 


CHIT 
F tHE MALA 
PROTECTOR © 0" 


50 ON AND 50 FORTH. 
— GARGOYLE SENESCHAL 5 


Innate Spellcasting, The dao’s innate'spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 14, +6 to hit with spell attacks). It 
can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material 
components: 


At will: detect evil and good, detect magic, stone shape 

3/day each: passwall, move earth, tongues 

1/day each: conjure elemental (earth elemental only), gaseous 
form, invisibility, phantasmal killer, plane shift, wall of stone 


Sure-Footed. The dao has advantage on Strength and Dexterity | 
saving throws made against effects that would knock it prone. | 


ACTIONS | 


Multiattack. The dao makes two fist attacks or two 
maul attacks. 


Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 


Maul. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 

Hit: 20 (4d6 + 6) bludgeoning damage. Ifthe target is a Huge _ 
or smaller creature, it must succeed on a DC 18 Strength check 
or be knocked prone. | 


er GENES 
7 i 


i) 


amtier men pana 
ah iy 
4 


TUN ZAFARA 


CaTHEORAL: 
= SCEPTER, ANO 


Ts 


STANDARD GREETING 


a Pte 


. 2 


Djiinnt ™ 


_ Large elemental, chaotic good 


_ Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 


Hit Points 161 (14d10 + 84) 


Speed 30 ft., fly 90 ft. 
4 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
21 (+5) 15 (+2) 22 (+6) 15 (+2) 16(+3) 20 (+5) 


Saving Throws Dex +6, Wis +7, Cha +9 


_ Damage Immunities lightning, thunder 


Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages Auran 
Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) 


Elemental Demise. \f the djinni dies, its body disintegrates into 
a warm breeze, leaving behind only equipment the djinni was 
wearing or carrying. 


Innate Spellcasting. The djinni’s innate spellcasting ability 

is Charisma (spell save DC 17, +9 to hit with spell attacks). It 
can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material 
components: 


At will: detect evil and good, detect magic, thunderwave 


GENIES 


LE ——— 
VARIANT: GENIE POWERS 
Genies have a variety of magical capabilities, including spells. 
A few have even greater powers that allow them to alter their 
appearance or the nature of reality. 

Disguises. Some genies can veil themselves in illusion to 
pass as other similarly shaped creatures. Such genies can 
innately cast the disguise self spell at will, often with a longer 
duration than is normal for that spell. Mightier genies can 
cast the true polymorph spell one to three times per day, 
possibly with a longer duration than normal. Such genies can 
change only their own shape, but a rare few can use the spell 
on other creatures and objects as well. 

Wishes. The genie power to grant wishes is legendary 
among mortals. Only the most potent genies, such as those 
among the nobility, can do so. A particular genie that has this 
power can grant one to three wishes to a creature that isn’t 
a genie. Once a genie has granted its limit of wishes, it can’t 
grant wishes again for some amount of time (usually 1 year), 
and cosmic law dictates that the same genie can expend 
its limit of wishes on a specific creature only once in that 
creature’s existence. 

To be granted a wish, a creature within 60 feet of the genie 
states a desired effect to it. The genie can then cast the 
wish spell on the creature's behalf to bring about the effect. 
Depending on the genie’s nature, the genie might try to 
pervert the intent of the wish by exploiting the wish’s poor 
wording. The perversion of the wording is usually crafted to 
be to the genie’s benefit. 

es ol 


3/day each: create food and water (can create wine instead of 
water), tongues, wind walk ’ 

1/day each: conjure elemental (air elemerital orily), creation, 
gaseous form, invisibility, major image, plane shift 


ACTIONS 


. Multiattack. The djinni makes three scimitar attacks. 


Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage plus 3 (1d 6) lightning 
or thunder damage (djinni’s choice). 


Create Whirlwind. A 5-foot-radius, 30-foot-tall cylinder of 
swirling air magically forms on a point the djinni can see 
within 120 feet of it. The whirlwind lasts as long as the djinni 
maintains concentration (as if concentrating on a spell). Any 
creature but the djinni that enters the whirlwind must succeed 
ona DC 18 Strength saving throw or be restrained by it. The 
djinni can move the whirlwind up to 60 feet as an action, 
and creatures restrained by the whirlwind move with it. The 
whirlwind ends if the djinni loses sight of it. 

A creature can use its action to free a creature restrained 
by the whirlwind, including itself, by succeeding on a DC 
18 Strength check. If the check succeeds, the creature is no 
longer restrained and moves to the nearest space outside the 
whirlwind. 


EFREETI 


_ Large elemental, lawful evil 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
| Hit Points 200 (16d10 + 112) 
| Speed 40 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
22 (+6) 12(+1) 24(47) 16(443) 15(42) 16 (43) 


| Saving Throws Int +7, Wis +6, Cha +7 
4 Damage Immunities fire 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12 
| Languages Ignan 
, Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) 


| Elemental Demise. If the efreeti dies, its body disintegrates ina 
| flash of fire and puff of smoke, leaving behind only equipment 


_ the efreeti was wearing or carrying. | : 


- Legion’ 
nous the 
AR i Bine 
Sc ihe ns ANO 
ev baa) a ensvee 
peo 
, GU R 0 ce oF 
a 5? no em 
: € Are gt" 
eur <7 
v Gor? 
| 
eR 
ev 
pin - Vy 
c LAM : (\. 4 
P TC a | " ==, 
’ ] oa 
‘| \ 
Wh fl / 
AM ‘ 
‘ r | 
y 


— =— 
Innate Spelicasting. The efreeti’s innate spellcasting ability 
is Charisma (spell save DC 15, +7 to hit with spell attacks). It 


can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material 
components: 


At will: detect magic 

3/day: enlarge/reduce, tongues 

1/day each: conjure elemental (fire elemental only), gaseous 
form, invisibility, major image, plane shift, wall of fire 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The efreeti makes two scimitar attacks or uses its | 
Hurl Flame twice. 


Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage plus 7 (2d6) 
fire damage. 


Hurl Flame. Ranged Spell Attack: +7 to hit, range 120 ft.,one | 
target. Hit: 17 (5d6) fire damage. 


GER TES 


148 


” Co 


- 


MARID 


— 


| Large elemental, chaotic neutral 


| 


| 
: 
: 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 229 (17d10 + 136) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft., swim 90 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 

22 (+6) 12(41) 26(4+8) 18(+4) 1743) 18 (44) 
Ss 
Saving Throws Dex +5, Wis +7, Cha +8 
Damage Resistances acid, cold, lightning 
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., 

passive Perception 13 
Languages Aquan 
Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) 


iss 


Amphibious. The marid can breathe air and water. 


Elemental Demise. If the marid dies, its body disintegrates into 


a burst of water and foam, leaving behind only equipment the 
marid was wearing or carrying. 


Innate Spelicasting. The marid’ s innate > spelicasting ability.i Boe 
Charisma (spell save DC 16, +8 to hit with spell attacks). It 
can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material 
components: 


At will: create or destroy water, detect evil and good, detect 
magic, fog cloud, purify food and drink 

3/day each: tongues, water breathing, water walk 

1/day each: conjure elemental (water elemental only), control 
water, gaseous form, invisibility, plane shift 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The marid makes two trident attacks. 


Trident. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 
ft. or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) piercing 
damage, or 15 (2d8 + 6) piercing damage if used with two 
hands to make a melee attack. 


Water Jet. The marid magically shoots water in a 60-foot line 
that is 5 feet wide. Each creature in that line must make a DC 
16 Dexterity saving throw. On a failure, a target takes 21 (6d6) 
bludgeoning damage and, if it is Huge or smaller, is pushed 
up to 20 feet away from the marid and knocked prone. On a 
success, a target takes half the bludgeoning damage, but is 
neither pushed nor knocked prone 


oie oe 
ae Tal 


GHOST 

A ghost is the soul of a once-living creature, bound to 
haunt a specific location, creature, or object that held 
significance to it in its life. 

Unfinished Business. A ghost yearns to complete 
some unresolved task from its life. It might seek to 
avenge its own death, fulfill an oath, or relay a message 
to a loved one. A ghost might not realize that it has died 
and continue the everyday routine of its life. Others 
are driven by wickedness or spite, as with a ghost that 
refuses to rest until every member of a certain family or 
organization is dead. 

The surest way to rid an area of a ghost is to resolve 
its unfinished business. A ghost can be destroyed more 
easily by invoking a weakness tied to its former life. 
The ghost of a person tortured to death might be killed 
again by the implements of that torture. The ghost of a 
gardener might become more vulnerable when exposed 
to a potent floral fragrance. 

Ghostly Manifestations. Sensations of profound 
sadness, loneliness, and unfulfilled yearning emanate 
from places where ghostly hauntings occur. Strange 
sounds or unnatural silences create an unsettling 
atmosphere. Cold spots settle in rooms that have 
roaring fires. A choking stench might seep into the area, 
inanimate objects might move of their own accord, and 
corpses might rise from the grave. The ghost has no 
control over these manifestations; they simply occur. 

Undead Nature. A ghost doesn’t require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


= a a ae ee ee ee ee te aes aA 


/ GHOST 


Medium undead, any alignment 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 45 (10d8) 
, Speed 0 ft., fly 40 ft. 


j 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
) 7(-2) 1341) 10(40) 10(+0) 12(41) 17 (+3) 
| ee ————— eee 
Damage Resistances acid, fire, lightning, thunder; bludgeoning, 
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons 
| Damage Immunities cold, necrotic, poison 
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
grappled, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 
| Languages any languages it knew in life 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Ts sss_____ ase 


Ethereal Sight. The ghost can see 60 feet into the Ethereal 
Plane when it is on the Material Plane, and vice versa. 


_ Incorporeal Movement. The ghost can move through other 
| creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It takes 5 
| (1d10) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object. 


| ACTIONS 


Withering Touch. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
| one target. Hit: 17 (4d6 + 3) necrotic damage. 


_ 4 Etherealness. The ghost enters the Ethereal Plane from the 
Material Plane, or vice versa. It is visible on the Material Plane 


while it is in the Border Ethereal, and vice versa, at it canit 
affect or be affected by anything on the other plane. 


Horrifying Visage. Each non-undead creature within 60 feet 
of the ghost that can see it must succeed on a DC 13 Wisdom 


saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. If the save fails by 


5 or more, the target also ages 1d4 x 10 years. A frightened 
target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its } 
turns, ending the frightened condition on itselfonasuccess. | 
lf a target’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, { 
the target is immune to this ghost’s Horrifying Visage for the 
next 24 hours. The aging effect can be reversed with a greater 
restoration spell, but only within 24 hours of it occurring. 


Possession (Recharge 6). One humanoid that the ghost can see 
within 5 feet of it must succeed on a DC 13 Charisma saving 
throw or be possessed by the ghost; the ghost then disappears, 
and the target is incapacitated and loses control of its body. 
The ghost now controls the body but doesn’t deprive the target 
of awareness. The ghost can’t be targeted by any attack, spell, 
or other effect, except ones that turn undead, and it retains its 
alignment, Intelligence, Wisdom, Charisma, and immunity to 
being charmed and frightened. It otherwise uses the possessed 
target’s statistics, but doesn’t gain access to the target’s | 
knowledge, class features, or proficiencies. | 
The possession lasts until the body drops to 0 hit points, 
the ghost ends it as a bonus action, or the ghost is turned or 
forced out by an effect like the dispel evil and good spell. When 
the possession ends, the ghost reappears in an unoccupied 
space within 5 feet of the body. The target is immune to this 
ghost’s Possession for 24 hours after succeeding on the saving } 
throw or after the possession ends. 


“HOST ul 


7 alr iad ue Ps ap Med a 
= a ee bs ee ; oy 
(ray i ih 
Vile tree 
pe 


14:7 


ry) 


GHOULS 


Ghouls roam the night in packs, driven by an insatiable 
hunger for humanoid flesh. 

Devourers of Flesh. Like maggots or carrion 
beetles, ghouls thrive in places rank with decay and 
death. A ghoul haunts a place where it can gorge on 
dead flesh and decomposing organs. When it can’t 
feed on the dead, it pursues living creatures and 
attempts to make corpses of them. Though they gain 
no nourishment from the corpses they devour, ghouls 
are driven by an unending hunger that compels them 
to consume. A ghoul’s undead flesh never rots, and this 
monster can persist in a crypt or tomb for untold ages 
without feeding. 

Abyssal Origins. Ghouls trace their origins to the 
Abyss. Doresain, the first of their kind, was an elf 

\ worshiper of Orcus. Turning against his own people, he 
feasted on humanoid flesh to honor the Demon Prince of 
Undeath. As a reward for his service, Orcus transformed 
Doresain into the first ghoul. Doresain served Orcus 
faithfully in the Abyss, creating ghouls from the demon 
lord’s other servants until an incursion by Yeenoghu, 
the demonic Gnoll Lord, robbed Doresain of his abyssal 
domain. When Orcus would not intervene on his behalf, 
Doresain turned to the elf gods for salvation, and 
they took pity on him and helped him escape certain 
destruction. Since then, elves have been immune to the 
ghouls’ paralytic touch. 

Ghasts. Orcus sometimes infuses a ghoul with 
a stronger dose of abyssal energy, making a ghast. 

| Whereas ghouls are little more than savage beasts, a 

str DEX CON INT wis CHA ghast is cunning and can inspire a pack of ghouls to 
16 (+3) 17(+3) 10(+0) 11(40) 10(+0) 8 (-1) follow its commands. 


| 
| TT ———————————— oo 
| 
{ 


{ 7) r \ ST \ 4 \, ’ 
Me dium un d ead, chaotic evil 
Armor Class 13 , 
Hit Points 36 (8d8) 
Speed 30 ft. 


Damage Resistances necrotic 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, poisoned 


“| J pice 


‘ 
chaotic evil 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 ys 11> 
’ A , j 
Languages Commer Whee oe aa 
| Challenge 2 (450 XP) Speed 30 ft | 
(Reg rr eeeees—te \ ; { 
Stench. Any creature that starts its turn within 5 feet of the + STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
ghast must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw or 13 (+1) 15 (+2) 10(+0) 7(-2) 10(+0) 6 (-2) 


be poisoned until the start of its next turn. On a successful 
saving throw, the creature is immune to the ghast’s Stench 
for 24 hours. 


Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Common 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


San 


Turning Defiance. The ghast and any ghouls within 30 feet 
of it have advantage on saving throws against effects that 
turn undead. 


ACTIONS 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
| Hit: 12 (2d8 + 3) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 

Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage. If the target is a creature 

other than an undead, it must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution | 
saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. The target can 

} repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending 


| the effect on itself on a success. | 


GHOULS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 


Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) slashing damage. If the target is a creature 
other than an elf or undead, it must succeed on a DC 10 
Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. The 


, target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 


| turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


GIANTS 


Ancient empires once cast long shadows over a world 
that quaked beneath the giants’ feet. In those lost days, 
these towering figures were dragon slayers, dreamers, 
crafters, and kings, but their kind fell from glory long 
ago. However, even divided among secluded clans 
scattered throughout the world, the giants maintain the 
customs and traditions of old. 

Old as Legend. In remote regions of the world, 
the last remaining plinths, monoliths, and statues of 
the great giant empires bow their heads in desolate 
obscurity. Where once those empires sprawled 
across all lands, now the giants dwell in isolated 
tribes and clans. 

Giants are almost as old as dragons, which were 
still young when the giants’ heavy feet first shook the 
foundations of the world. As they spread across new 
lands, giants and dragons fought bitter generational 
wars that nearly brought both sides low. No living giant 
remembers what started the conflict, but myths and 
tales of their race’s glorious dawn are still sung in their 
steadings and holdfasts, vilifying the primeval wyrms. 
Giants and dragons continue to harbor grudges against 
one another, and it is seldom that they will meet or 
occupy the same area without a fight. 


THE ORDNING 


Each of the main giant races—the cloud, fire, frost, 

hill, stone, and storm giants—are related by common 
elements of history, religion, and culture. They view one 
another as kindred, keeping any inherent animosity over 
territory and ambition to a minimum. 

Giants belong to a caste structure called the ordning. 
Based on social class and highly organized, the ordning 
assigns a social rank to each giant. By understanding 
its place in the ordning, a giant knows which other 
giants are inferior or superior to it, since no two giants 
are equal. Each of the giant races analyzes a different 
combination of skills or qualities to determine the 
ordning. Giants make excelling in these qualities the 
purpose of their lives. 

At the highest level of the ordning, the races of the 
giants are also ranked according to status. Storm giants 
are the highest in the ordning, followed by cloud giants, 
fire giants, frost giants, stone giants, hill giants, and 
finally giant kin such as fomorians, ettins, and ogres. 

Regardless of a giant’s rank among its own race, the 
chief of a hill giant tribe is inferior to the most common 
of stone giants. The lowest ranked giant of any type is 
superior to the highest ranked giant of an inferior type. 
It isn’t considered evil to disrespect or even betray a 
giant of another type, merely rude. 


€D OUR WALLS ANO CAST 


N’GAPS THROUGH WHICH 


cy 
WEAPONS IN HAND. 
DwerNn ADDLESTONE S$ 


£ SIEGE OF STERNGATE 


“ BoUuLDERS ASSAIL 
THEM DOWN, tEAV! 
& GIANTS STRODE: 

—Caryhin 


H 
PARTIAL ACCOUNT oFT 


TH 


Cloud giants live extravagant lives high above the world, 


_showing little concern for the plights of other races 


except as amusement. They are muscular with light skin 


‘and have hair of silver or blue. 


High and Mighty. Cloud giants are spread to the 
winds, encompassing vast areas of the world. In times 
of need, scattered cloud giant families band together as 


.a unified clan. However, they can seldom do so quickly. 


Attuned to the magic of their airy domains, cloud 
giants are able to turn into mist and create clouds of 
billowing fog. They dwell in castles on high mountain 
peaks, or on the solid clouds that once held their fiefs. 
Still gracing the skies on occasion, these magic clouds 
are a lasting remnant of the giants’ lost empires. 

Better spellcasters than most other giants, some cloud 
giants can control weather, bring storms, and steer the 
wind almost as well as their cousins, the storm giants. 

Affluent Princes. Although cloud giants are lower 
in the ordning than storm giants, the reclusive storm 
giants rarely engage with the rest of giantkind. As a 
result, many cloud giants see themselves as having 
the highest status and power among the giant races. 
They order lesser giants to seek out wealth and art 
on their behalf, employing fire giants as smiths and 
crafters, and using frost giants as reavers, raiders, and 
plunderers. Dimwitted hill giants serve them as brutes 
and combat fodder—sometimes fighting for the cloud 
giants’ amusement. A cloud giant might order hill or 


.frost giants to steal from nearby humanoid lands, which 
. it considers to be a fair tax for its continued beneficence. 


On their mountain summits and solid clouds, cloud 


“giants keep extraordinary gardens. Grapes as big 
‘as apples grow there, along with apples the size of 


pumpkins, and pumpkins the size of wagons. From 
ihe errant seeds of these gardens, tales of cottage- 


‘sized produce and magic beans are spread in the 


mortal realm. 
As humanoid nobles keep an aerie for hunting hawks, 


‘so do cloud giants keep griffons, perytons, and wyverns 


as their own flying beasts of prey. Such creatures also 
patrol the cloud giants’ gardens by night, along with 
trained predators such as owlbears and lions. 


Frost Giant Boutoer 


STONE GIANT Boutder 


mvc “ 7 - pe ce 


Children of the Trickster. The patron god and — 
father of the cloud giants is Memnor the Trickster, the 
cleverest and slyest of the giant deities. Cloud giants 
align themselves according to the aspects and exploits 
of Memnor that they most admire, with evil cloud 
giants emulating his deceitfulness and self-interest and 
good cloud giants emulating his intellect and silver- 
tongued speech. Family members usually align in the 
same direction. 

Wealth and Power. A cloud giant earns its place in 
the ordning by the treasure it accumulates, the wealth 
it wears, and the gifts it bestows on other cloud giants. 
However, value is only one part of the assessment. The 
extravagances a cloud giant wears or places about its 
home must also be beautiful or wondrous. Sacks of gold 
or gems are worth less to a cloud giant than the jewelry 
that might be crafted from those materials, creating 
treasures that bring esteem to a cloud giant’s household. 

Rather than steal from one another or fight over 
treasures, cloud giants are inveterate gamblers with a 
hunger for high risks and high rewards. They frequently 
bet on the outcome of events nominally outside their 
control, such as the lives of lesser creatures. Ordning 
ranks and kings’ ransoms can be won and lost in bets 
over the military triumphs of humanoid nations. Fixing 
wagers by interfering in the conflict causes the loss of 
the bet, but such deceit is considered to be cheating 
only if it is discovered. Otherwise, it is cleverness 
honoring Memnor. 


FIRE GIANT 


Master crafters and organized warriors, fire giants 
dwell among volcanoes, lava floes, and rocky mountains. 
They are ruthless militaristic brutes whose mastery of 
metalwork is legendary. 

Fire Forged. Fire giant fortresses are built around 
and inside volcanoes or near magma-filled caverns. 
The blistering heat of their homes fuels the fire giants’ 
forges, and causes the iron of their fortress walls to 
glow a comforting orange. In lands far removed from 
volcanic heat, fire giants mine coal to burn. Traditional 
smithies occupy places of honor in their demesnes, and 
the giants’ stony fortresses constantly belch plumes of 
sooty smoke. In more remote outposts, fire giants burn 
wood to keep their forge fires lit, deforesting leagues of 
land in all directions. 


Hitt Giant Boutoer 


Storm GiANt BouLtoer 


Fir giarits shun. dole as aie as their cousins 
the frost giants hate heat. They can adapt to cold 
environments with effort, though, keeping their hearth 
fires burning bright and wearing heavy woolen clothing 
and furs to stay warm. 

Martial Experts. From birth, a fire giant is taught 
to embrace a legacy of war. At the cradle, its parents 
chant songs of battle. As children, fire giants play at 
war, hurling igneous rocks at one another across the 
banks of magma rivers, In later years, formal martial 
training becomes an integral part of life in the giants’ 
fortresses and underground realms of smoke and ash. 
The fire giants’ songs are odes of battles lost and won, 
while their dances are martial formations of pounding 
feet that resound like smiths’ hammers throughout their 
smoky halls. 

Just as fire giants pass down their knowledge of 
crafting from generation to generation, their renowned 
fighting prowess comes not from wild fury but from 
endless discipline and training. Enemies make the 
mistake of underestimating fire giants based on their 
brutish manner, learning too late that these giants live 
for combat and can be shrewd tacticians, 

Feudal Lords. Humanoids conquered in war become 
serfs to the fire giants. The serfs work the farms and 
fields on the outskirts of fire giant halls and fortresses, 
raising livestock and harvesting fields whose bounty is 
almost entirely tithed to the fire giant kings. 

Fire giant crafters work through insight and 
experience rather than writing or arithmetic. Though 
most fire giants place little worth on such frivolousness, 
they sometimes keep slaves at court who are versed 
in such skills. Serfs not destined for court or the 
fields (especially dwarves) are taken to the fire giants’ 
mountainous realms to mine ore and gemstones from 
deep within the earth. 

Fire giants low in the ordning manage the mine 
tunnels and the slaves that toil there, few of which 
survive the difficult and dangerous work for long. 
Though fire giants are skilled in the engineering of 
mine tunnels and the gathering of ore, they place 
less importance on the safety of their slaves than on 
smelting and working the bounty those slaves produce. 

Skilled Artisans. Fire giants have a fearsome 
reputation as soldiers and conquerors, and for their 
ability to burn, plunder, and destroy. Yet among the 
giants, fire giants produce the greatest crafters and 
artists. They excel at smelting and smith work, as they 
do at the engineering of metal and stone, and the quality 
of their artistry shows even in their implements of 
destruction and their weapons of war. 

Fire giants strive to build the strongest fortresses and 
most potent siege weapons. They experiment with alloys 
to create the hardest armor, then forge the swords that 
can pierce it. Such work requires brawn and brains in 
equal measure, and fire giants high in the ordning tend 
to be the smartest and strongest of their kind. 


Tey 


FROST GIANT 


Gigantic reavers from the freezing lands beyond 
civilization, frost giants are fierce, hardy warriors 
that survive on the spoils of their raids and pillaging. 
They respect only brute strength and skill in battle, 
demonstrating both with their scars and the grisly” 
trophies they take from their enemies. 

Hearts of Ice. Frost giants are creatures of ice and 
snow. Their hair and beards are pale white or light blue, 
matted with frost and clattering with icicles. Their flesh 
is as blue as glacial ice. 

Frost giants dwell in high peaks and glacial. Silts® 
where the sun hides its golden head by winter. Crops 
don’t grow in their frozen homelands, and they kedp 
little livestock beyond what they capture in theit- raids 
against civilized lands. They hunt the wild game of the 
tundra and mountains but don’t cook it, since meat from 
a fresh kill tastes sufficiently hot to their palate. 

Reavers of the Storm. The war horns of the frost 
giants howl as they march from their ice fortresses 
and glacial rifts amid the howling blizzard. When that 
storm clears, villages and steadings lay in ruins, ravens 
descending to feed on the corpses of any creatures 
foolish or unlucky enough to stand in the giants’ path. 

Inns and taverns suffer the brunt of the damage, aa 
their cellars gutted and their casks of ale and mead volt 
gone. Smithies are likewise toppled, their iron and 
steel claimed. Curiously undisturbed are the houses 
of moneylenders and wealthy citizens, for the reavers Mt 
have little use for coins or baubles. Frost giants prize 
gems and jewelry large enough to be worn and noticed. 
However, even those treasures are most often saved for 
trading opportunities with other giants more adept at 
crafting metal weapons and armor. 

Rulers by Might. Frost giants respect brute strength 
above all else, and a frost giant’s place in the ordning 
depends on evidence of physical might, such as superior 
musculature, scars from battles of renown, or trophies 
fashioned from the bodies of slain enemies. Tasks such 
as hunting, childrearing, and crafting are given to giants 
based on their physical strength and hardiness. 

When frost giants of different clans meet and their 
status is unclear, they wrestle for dominance. Such tag 
meetings might resemble festivals where giants cheer 
on their champions, making bold boasts and challenges. 
At other times, the informal ceremony can become a 
chaotic free-for-all where both clans rush into a melee 
that fells trees, shatters the ice on frozen lakes, and 
causes avalanches on the snowy mountainsides. 

Make War, Not Goods. Though frost giants consider 
the menial crafting of goods beneath them, carving and 
leatherwork are valued skills. They make their clothing ah 
from the skins and bones of beasts, and carve bone or 
ivory into jewelry and the handles of weapons and tools. ies) 
They reuse the weapons and armor of their smaller foes, 
stringing shields into scale armor and lashing sword 
blades to wooden hafts to make giant-sized spears. The 
greatest battle trophies come from conquered dragons} ea 


ad = 


hy 
IO HERE js WHERE 


SRE by ARBARIAN FELL AGAINST THE GIANT and the greatest frost giant jarls wear armor of ie ve 


LDER OVER THERE." scales or wield picks and mauls made of a dragon's || ») ae y” 
~Evoer ZeLANe oF IstiVIN, RECOUNTING THE GIANT Wars tego Claws, : < 


ANGERROTH THE B 
1S BONES ARE UNDER THAT BoU 


De Oe ee eee + ‘ 


= = = si ==. 3 
eT = > i = ——— TE <a = 
r 


= rT 1 
7 Pi 1 i, ” 7 his 
ru h 1 F ‘ie al i fama C 
eg fy 
i Line | , 3 


0) A) ear et) 
y Prats ne ie ol al Alera 1e fe iy Yue 4 al : 


— | 


HILL GIANT 


Hill giants are selfish, dimwitted brutes that hunt, 
forage, and raid in constant search of food. They blunder 
through hills and forests devouring what they can, 
bullying smaller creatures into feeding them. Their 
laziness and dullness would long ago have spelled their 
end if not for their formidable size and strength. 

Primitive. Hill giants dwell in hills and mountain 
valleys across the world, congregating in steadings built 
of rough timber or in clusters of well-defended mud- 
and-wattle huts. Their skins are tan from lives spent 
lumbering up and down the hilly slopes and dozing 
beneath the sun. Their weapons are uprooted trees and 
rocks pulled from the earth. The sweat of their bodies 
adds to the reek of the crude animal skins they wear, 
poorly stitched together with hair and leather thongs. 

Bigger Means Better. In a hill giant’s world, 
humanoids and animals are easy prey that can be 
hunted with impunity. Creatures such as dragons and 
other giants are tough adversaries. Hill giants equate 
size with power. 

Hill giants don’t realize they follow an ordning. They 
know only that other giants are larger and stronger than 
they are, which means they are to be obeyed. A hill giant 
tribe’s chief is usually the tallest and fattest giant that 
can still move about. Only on rare occasion does a hill 
giant with more brains than bulk use its cunning to gain 
the favor of giants of higher status, cleverly subverting 
the social order. 

Voracious Eaters. With nothing else to occupy them, 
hill giants eat as often as possible. A hill giant hunts and 
forages alone or with a dire wolf companion, so as to not 
have to share with other tribe members. The giant eats 
anything that isn’t obviously deadly, such as creatures 
known to be poisonous. Rotten meat is fair game, 
though, as are decaying plants and even mud. 

Farmers fear and loathe hill giants. Where a predator 
such as an ankheg might burrow through fields and 
consume a cow or two before being driven off, a hill 
giant will consume a whole herd of cattle before moving 
on to sheep, goats, and chickens, then tearing into fruits, 
vegetables, and grain. If a farm family is at hand, the 
giant might snack on them too. 

Stupid and Deadly. The hill giants’ ability to digest 
nearly anything has allowed them to survive for eons as 
savages, eating and breeding in the hills like animals. 
They have never needed to adapt and change, so their 
minds and emotions remain simple and undeveloped. 

With no culture of their own, hill giants ape the 
traditions of creatures they manage to observe for 
a time before eating them. They don’t think about 
their own size and strength, however. Tribes of hill 
giants attempting to imitate elves have been known to 
topple entire forests by trying to live in trees. Others 
attempting to take over humanoid towns or villages 
get only as far as the doors and windows of a building, 
taking out its walls and roof as they attempt to enter. 

In conversation, hill giants are blunt and direct, and 
they have little concept of deception. A hill giant might 
be fooled into running from another giant if a number of 
villagers cover themselves in blankets and stand on one 


—- —— res = re Se mer a.re 


Sear ¥ i Ba, ha 
another's, shoplders holding a giarit'painted puttipkin 
head. Reasoning with a hill giant is futile, although 
clever creatures can sometimes encourage a giant to 
take actions that benefit them. 

Raging Bullies. A hill giant that feels as though it 
has been deceived, insulted, or made into a fool vents 
its terrible wrath on anything it encounters. Even after 
smashing those who offended it into pulp, the giant 
rampages until its rage abates, it notices something 
more interesting, or it grows hungry. 

If a hill giant proclaims itself king over a territory 
where other humanoids live, it rules strictly by terror 
and tyranny. Its decisions shift with its mood, and if it 
forgets the title it bestowed upon itself, it might eat its 
subjects on a whim. 


STONE GIANT 


Stone giants are reclusive, quiet, and peaceful as long 
as they are left alone. Their granite-gray skin, gaunt 
features, and black, sunken eyes endow stone giants 
with a stern countenance. They are private creatures, 
hiding their lives and art away from the world. 

Inhabitants of a Stone World. Secluded caves are 
the homes of the stone giants. Cavern networks are 
their towns, rocky tunnels their roads, and underground 
streams their waterways. Isolated mountain ranges are 
their continents, with the vast spans of land between 
seen as oceans that the stone giants only rarely cross. 

In their dark, quiet caves, stone giants wordlessly 
chip away at elaborate carvings, measuring time in 
the echoing drip of water into cavern pools. In the 
deepest chambers of a stone giant settlement, far from 
the chittering of bats or the patrols paced out by the 
giants’ cave bear companions, are holy places where 
silence and darkness are complete. Stone takes on its 
most sacred quality in these cavern cathedrals, their 
buttresses and columns carved with a beauty that ‘ 
shames the legendary stonecraft of the dwarves. 

Carvers and Seers. Among stone giants, artistry 
ranks as the greatest virtue. They create intricate 
murals, paint sprawling murals across cavern walls, and 
indulge in a wide variety of other artistic disciplines. 
They esteem stone carving as the greatest of skills. 

- Stone giants strive to draw shapes out of raw stone, 
which they believe reveal meaning inspired by their god, 
Skoraeus Stonebones. The giants appoint the tribe’s 
best carvers as their leaders, shamans, and prophets. 
The holy hands of such giants become the hands of the 
god as they work. 

Graceful Athletes. Despite their great size and 
musculature, stone giants are lithe and graceful. Skilled 
rock throwers are granted positions of high rank in the 
giants’ ordning, testing and demonstrating their ability 
to hurl and catch enormous boulders. Such giants take 
the front ranks when a tribe has cause to defend its 
home or attack its enemies. However, even in combat, 
artistry is key. A stone giant hurling a rock performs 
not just a feat of brute strength but also one of stunning 
athleticism and poise. 

Dreamers under Sky. Stone giants view the world 
outside their underground homes as a realm of dreams 
where nothing is entirely true or real. They behave in 


eyes. They are benevolent and wise unless angered, in A 
response to which the fury of a storm giant canaffect. 5 |) 1) 
the fate of thousands. ib in 
Distant Prophet-Kings. Storm giants liveinisolaed = = =| 
refuges so far above the surface of the world or below iy 
the sea that they are beyond the reach of most other 4 
creatures. Some make their abodes in cloud-top 4 
castles so high that flying dragons appear as specks ha 
below. Others live atop mountain peaks that pierce'the A 
clouds. Some occupy palaces covered with algae and 
coral at the bottom of the ocean, or grim fortresses in it 
undersea rifts. , 
Detached Oracles. Storm giants recall the glory of 
ancient giant empires forged by the god Annam. They tub 
seek to restore what was lost when those empires fell. 
They don’t compete for status in the ordning but live 
out the centuries of their existence in contemplative aan 
seclusion, watching the starry heavens and the ocean’s 
depths for signs, symbols, and omens of Annam’s favor. 
Storm giants see the events of the world in a wide 


purple-gray skin and hair, and glittering emerald eyes. perspective. They can foretell the rise and fall of kings 
and empires, see the beginnings and ends of fortune 


Some rare storm giants are violet-skinned, with deep ‘ a : 
violet or blue-black hair and silvery gray or purple and disaster, and find the patterns within seemingly | 


unrelated events. By reading omens and prophesying, 
. * | 
eh. storm giants learn of vast secrets previously unknown ‘| 
GIANT Gops 


bh ag : and troves of lore utterly forgotten. 
When the giants ancient empires fell, Annam, father of all Kings will rise and fall, wars will be won and lost, 
giants, forsook his children and the world. He swore never to 


look upon either again until the giants had returned to their a ~ i iy wil ee et esnee ae ea 
glory and reclaimed their birthright as rulers of the world. As Ce ee eee 


the surface world the way humanoids might behave 
in their own dreams, making little account for their 
actions and never fully trusting what they see or hear. A 
promise made above ground need not be kept. Insults 
can be made without apology. Killing prey or sentient 
beings is no cause for guilt in the dreaming world 
beneath the sky. 

Stone giants lacking in athletic grace or artistic skill 
dwell at the fringes of their society, serving as the tribe’s 
outlying guardians and far-wandering hunters. When 
trespassers stray too far into the mountain territory of a 
stone giant clan, those guardians greet them with hurled 
rocks and showers of splintered stone. Survivors of such 
encounters spread tales of stone giant violence, never 
realizing how little those brutes dwelling in the unreal 
dreaming world resemble their quiet and artistic kin. 


STORM GIANT 


Storm giants are contemplative seers that live in places 
far removed from mortal civilization. Most have pale 


a result, giants pray not to Annam but to his divine children, gods over many lifetimes, and they know it is pointless 


along with a host of hero-deities and godly villains that make to intervene. Even so, a storm giant might willingly 
_ up the giants’ pantheon. disclose certain secrets to benevolent beings that visit 


its remote domain with specific purpose. Such creatures 
must speak and act respectfully, however, for a storm 
giant roused to anger is a force of utter destruction. 
Solitary Lives. Storm giants communicate 
infrequently with others of their kind. They do so 
usually to compare signs and omens or engage in a rare 
courtship. Storm giant parents stay together to raise a 
child to maturity, then return to the solitary isolation 
they cherish. 
Some humanoid cultures worship storm giants as 
they would worship lesser gods, creating myths and 


Chief among these gods are the children of Annam, whose 
| sons represent each type of giant: Stronmaus for storm 
| giants, Memnor for cloud giants, Skoraeus Stonebones for 
_ stone giants, Thrym for frost giants, Surtur for fire giants, 
_ and Grolantor for hill giants. Not all giants automatically 
| revere their kind’s primary deity, however. Many good cloud 
. _ giants refuse to worship the deceitful Memnor, and a storm 
_ giant dwelling in the icy mountains of the north might pay 
more homage to Thrym than Stronmaus. Other giants feel 
a stronger connection to Annam's daughters, who include 
Hiatea, the huntress and home warden; lallanis, goddess 
of love and peace; and Diancastra, an impetuous and 


arrogant trickster. 

Some giants abandon their own gods and fall prey to 
demon cults, paying homage to Baphomet or Kostchtchie. 
To worship them or any other non-giant deity is a great 
sin against the ordning, and almost certain to make a 
giant an outcast. 


Stove Giant 
se “1 Pye 


rhe Giant. Fig GIANT 
16” TALL 2B 


eee TAMA 


ah 


Frost Giant 
a. TALL 


stories around the giants’ exploits and vast knowledge. 
A storm giant is governed by the dictates of its 
conscience, however, and not by any culture’s laws or 
codes of honor. As such, a storm giant that bends its 
mind toward greed or gains a taste for petty power can 
easily become a terrible threat. 


Criouo Giant 
ist TALL 


STORM Ruasy) Vat 
26! Malin ene 


CLouD GIANT 
Huge giant, neutral good (50%) or neutral evil (50%) 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 200 (16d12 + 96) 
Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
27 (+8) 10(+0) 22(+6) 12(41) 16(4+3) 16 (43) 


Saving Throws Con +9, Wis +7, Cha +7 
Skills Insight +7, Perception +7 
Senses passive Perception 17 
Languages Common, Giant 
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 


ee ee —_ —— 


Keen Smell. The giant has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on smell. 


Innate Spellcasting. The giant’s innate spellcasting ability is 
Charisma. It can innately cast the following spells, requiring no 
material components: 


At will: detect magic, fog cloud, light 

3/day each: feather fall, fly, misty step, telekinesis 
1/day each: control weather, gaseous form 
ACTIONS _ 


Multiattack. The giant makes two morningstar attacks. 


Morningstar. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 21 (3d8 + 8) piercing damage. 


Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, range 60/240 ft., one 
target. Hit: 30 (4d10 + 8) bludgeoning damage. 
ae 


SSeS eS See 


4 


= we 


FIRE GIANT 
Huge giant, lawful evil 
Se — 
Armor Class 18 (plate) 

Hit Points 162 (13d12 + 78) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 


25 (+7) 
Saving Throws Dex +3, Con +10, Cha +5 
Skills Athletics +11, Perception +6 
Damage Immunities fire 
Senses passive Perception 16 
Languages Giant 
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 


emia aa 


9(-1) 23 (+6) 10(+0) 14(42) 13 (+1) 


ACTIONS ak 


Multiattack. The giant makes two greatsword attacks. 


Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 28 (6d6 + 7) slashing damage. 


Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, range 60/240 ft., one 
target. Hit: 29 (4d10 + 7) bludgeoning damage. 


Frost GIANT 
Huge giant, neutral evil 
—_— $$ 
Armor Class 15 (patchwork armor) 

Hit Points 138 (12d12 + 60) 


Speed 40 ft. 
————=—————E— — = <a — 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
23 (+6) 9 (-1) 


21 (+5) 9(-1) 10(40) 12 (+1) 


_ Saving Throws Con +8, Wis +3, Cha +4 
| Skills Athletics +9, Perception +3 

| Damage Immunities cold 

| Senses passive Perception 13 

| Languages Giant 

| Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


= = . ‘ = = — 


i 
| ACTIONS 


| Multiattack. The giant makes two greataxe attacks. 


j Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
| target. Hit: 25 (3d12 + 6) slashing damage. 


1 Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, range 60/240 ft., one 
| target. Hit: 28 (4d10 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 


HILL GIANT 

Huge giant, chaotic evil 

Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 105 (10d12 + 40) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
21 (+5) 8 (-1) 19 (+4) 5 (-3) 9 (-1) 6 (-2) 
a enemas 


Skills Perception +2 
Senses passive Perception 12 
Languages Giant 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


es 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The giant makes two greatclub attacks. 


Greatclub, Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 18 (3d8 + 5) bludgeoning damage. 


Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, range 60/240 ft., one 


| target. Hit: 21 (3d10 + 5) bludgeoning damage. 


CLAMS 


x fa 


h Huge giant, ‘neutral 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 


_ Hit Points 126 (11d12 + 55) 


_ Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
23 (+6) 15(+2) 20(+5) 10(40) 12(41) 9(-1) 


Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +8, Wis +4 


} Skills Athletics +12, Perception +4 


| 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 


Languages Giant 


| 


Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


Stone Camouflage. The giant has advantage on Dexterity 


| (Stealth) checks made to hide in rocky terrain. 


| 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The giant makes two greatclub attacks. 


Greatclub. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 15 ft., one 
target. Hit: 19 (3d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 


Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, range 60/240 ft., one 
target. Hit: 28 (4d10 + 6) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a 
creature, it must succeed on a DC 17 Strength saving throw or 
be knocked prone. 


REACTIONS 


Rock Catching. \f a rock or similar object is hurled at the giant, 
the giant can, with a successful DC 10 Dexterity saving throw, 
catch the missile and take no bludgeoning damage from it. 


Era s GIANT 


‘Huge giant; Mhdetgod 


_ Armor Class 16 (scale mail) 
Hit Points 230 (20d12 + 100) 
Speed 50 ft., swim 50 ft. 


| - STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

29 (+9) 14(+2) 20(45) 16(43) 18(44) 18 (+4) 

rr rrp 

Saving Throws Str +14, Con +10, Wis +9, Cha +9 

Skills Arcana +8, Athletics +14, History +8, Perception +9 

Damage Resistances cold 

Damage Immunities lightning, thunder 

Senses passive Perception 19 

Languages Common, Giant 

Challenge 13 (10,000 XP) 

reg 


Amphibious. The giant can breathe air and water. 


Innate Spelicasting. The giant's innate spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 17). It can innately cast the following 
spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: detect magic, feather fall, levitate, light 
3/day each: control weather, water breathing 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The giant makes two greatsword attacks. 


Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 30 (6d6 + 9) slashing damage. 


Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +14 to hit, range 60/240 ft., one 
target. Hit: 35 (4d12 + 9) bludgeoning damage. 


Lightning Strike (Recharge 5~6). The giant hurls a magical 
lightning bolt at a point it can see within 500 feet of it. Each 
creature within 10 feet of that point must make a DC 17 
Dexterity saving throw, taking 54 (12d8) lightning damage ona 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


GIBBERING MOUTHER 


Of all the terrors created by foul sorcery, gibbering 
mouthers are among the most wicked and depraved. 
This creature is the composite eyes, mouths, and 
liquefied matter of its former victims. Driven to insanity 
by the destruction of their bodies and absorption into 
the mouther, those victims gibber incoherent madness, 
forced to consume everything in reach. 

Amoeboid Form. The gibbering mouther's body is 
an amorphous mass of mouths and eyes that propels 
itself by oozing forward, fastening several mouths 
to the ground and pulling its bulk behind. Though 
it moves slowly, it swims through water, mud, and 
quicksand with ease. 

Mouths of Madness. When a gibbering mouther 
senses prey, its mouths begin to murmur and chatter, 
each with a different voice: deep or shrill, wailing 
or ululating, crying out in agony or ecstasy. This 
cacophonous gibbering overcomes the senses of any 
creature that hears it, causing most to flee in terror. 
Others are overcome with madness or stand paralyzed, 
fixated on the horrific creature as it oozes forward to 
consume them. 

All-Consuming. Driven to devour any creature it can 
reach, a gibbering mouther flows over victims transfixed 
by its mad ranting, its multitudinous voices temporarily 
silenced as it gnaws and swallows living flesh. The 
monster liquefies stone with which it comes into contact, 
hindering creatures that overcome its gibbering and et A 
attempt to flee. ; /; ' 

A gibbering mouther leaves nothing of its prey 
behind. However, even as the last of a victim's body is 
consumed, its eyes and mouth boil to the surface, ready 
to join the chorus of tormented gibbering that welcomes 
the monster’s next meal. 


GIBBERING MOUTHER ‘Ona failure, the creature can’t take reactions until-the start of 


Medism aberration nedtral its next turn and rolls a d8 to determine what it does during 
‘ its turn. Ona 1 to 4, the creature does.nothing. On a 5 or 6, 
the creature takes no action of bonus action and uses all its 


a = —_ so tt —E—EE 


Armor Class 9 


Hit Points 67 (9d8 + 27) movement to move in a randomly determined direction. Ona 
Speed 10 ft., swim 10 ft. 7 or 8, the creature makes a melee attack against a randomly 
a ee = i determined creature within its reach or does nothing if it can’t 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA make such an attack. | : 
10 (40) 8(-1) 1643) 3(-4) 10(40) 6 (-2) nN 
an! iii = ACTIONS . 
Condition Immunities prone Multiattack. The gibbering mouther makes one bite attack 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 and, if it can, uses its Blinding Spittle. 
Languages — ; ; 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) Bites. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 4 
a = Hit: 17 (5d6) piercing damage. If the target is Medium or 
smaller, it must succeed on a DC 10 Strength saving throw or | i 
| Aberrant Ground. The ground in a 10-foot radius around the be knocked prone. If the target is killed by this damage, it is \ 
mouther is doughlike difficult terrain. Each creature that starts absorbed into the mouther. a 
its turn in that area must succeed on a DC 10 Strength saving ey ‘ ; 
throw or have its speed reduced to 0 until the start of its Blinding Spittle (Recharge 5-6). The mouther spits a chemical | 
next turn. glob at a point it can see within 15 feet of it. The glob explodes 
in a blinding flash of light on impact. Each creature within 5 
Gibbering. The mouther babbles incoherently while it can feet of the flash must succeed on a DC 13 Dexterity saving 
| See any creature and isn’t incapacitated. Each creature that throw or be blinded until the end of the mouther’s next turn. 


starts its turn within 20 feet of the mouther and can hear the 
P| gibbering must succeed on a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw. i. 


GIBBERING MOUTMER 


GITH 

The warlike githyanki and the contemplative githzerai 
are a sundered people—two cultures that utterly despise 
one another. Before there were githyanki or githzerai, 
these creatures were a single race enslaved by the mind 
flayers. Although they attempted to overthrow their 
masters many times, their rebellions were repeatedly 
crushed until a great leader named Gith arose. 

After much bloodshed, Gith and her followers threw 
off the yoke of their illithid masters, but another leader 
named Zerthimon emerged in the aftermath of battle. 
Zerthimon challenged Gith’s motives, claiming that 
her strict martial leadership and desire for vengeance 
amounted to little more than another form of slavery 
for her people. A rift erupted between followers of each 
leader, and they eventually became the two races whose 
enmity endures to this day. 

Whether these tall, gaunt creatures were peaceful or 
savage, cultured or primitive before the mind flayers 
enslaved and changed them, none can say. Not even 
the original name of their race remains from that 
distant time. 


GITHYANKI 


The githyanki plunder countless worlds from the decks 
of their astral vessels and the backs of red dragons. 
Feathers, beads, gems, and precious metals decorate 
their armor and weapons—the legendary silver swords 
with which they cut through their foes. Since winning 
their freedom from the mind flayers, the githyanki have 
become ruthless conquerors under the rulership of their 
dread lich-queen, Vlaakith. 

Astral Raiders. The githyanki despise all other races, 
undertaking devastating raids that take them from their 
strongholds in the Astral Plane to the farflung corners 
of the multiverse. War is the ultimate expression of 
githyanki culture, and their pitiless black eyes know 
no mercy. After a raid, they leave shattered survivors 
enough food and resources to weakly endure. Later, the 
githyanki return to their conquered foes, plundering 
them again and again. 

Followers of Gith. In their own language, githyanki 

‘means “followers of Gith.” Under the guidance of Gith, 
the githyanki stratified into a militaristic society, with 
a strict caste system, dedicated to the ongoing fight 
against the victims and sworn enemies of their race. 
When their leader Gith perished, she was replaced by 
her undead adviser, Vlaakith. The lich-queen forbade 
worship of all beings except herself. 

Of all their enemies, the githyanki most hate their 
former masters, the mind flayers. Their close kin, 
the githzerai, are second in their enmity. All other 
creatures are treated with simple contempt by the 
githyanki, whose xenophobic pride defines their view of 
inferior races. 

Silver Swords. In ancient times, gith knights created 
special weapons to combat their mind flayer masters. 
These silver swords channel the force of the wielder’s 
will, dealing psychic as well as physical damage. A 
githyanki can’t become a knight until it masters the 
singular discipline needed to will such a blade into 


SC his A ——— 
= t i} seu ri Tie ee! 7 ae ay f 
Tak PUL irs baal { 1 
ya oe Me 


Thora 
i We 
t 


existence. A silver sword is equivalent to a greatsword, 
and takes on the properties of a +3 greatsword in the 
hands of its creator. 

In the eyes of the githyanki, each silver sword is a 
priceless relic and a work of art. Githyanki knights 
will hunt down and destroy any non-githyanki that 
dares to carry or wield a silver sword, reclaiming it for 
their people. 

Red Dragon Riders. In the uprising against the 
illithids, Gith sought allies. Her adviser Vlaakith 
appealed to Tiamat, the goddess of evil dragonkind, and 
Gith ventured into the Nine Hells to meet with her. Only 
Tiamat now knows what passed between them, but Gith 
returned to the Astral Plane with the Dragon Queen’s 
red dragon consort Ephelomon, who proclaimed that his 
kind would forever act as allies to the githyanki. Not all 
red dragons honor the alliance kindled so long ago, but 
most at least don’t consider the githyanki their enemies. 

Outposts in the Mortal Realm. Since creatures 
that dwell on the Astral Plane don't age, the githyanki 
establish creches in remote areas of the Material Plane 
to raise their young. Doubling as military academies, 
these creches train young githyanki to harness their 
psychic and combat abilities. When a githyanki grows 
to adulthood and slays a mind flayer as part of a sacred 
’ rite of passage, it is permitted to rejoin its people on the 
Astral Plane. 


GITHZERAI 


Focused philosophers and austere ascetics, the 
githzerai pursue lives of rigid order. Lean and muscular, 
they wear unadorned clothing free of ornamentation, 
keeping their own counsel and trusting few creatures 
outside of their own kind. Having turned their backs 
on their warlike githyanki kin, the githzerai maintain a 
strict monastic lifestyle, dwelling on islands of order in 
the vast sea of chaos that is the plane of Limbo. 

Psionic Adepts. The progenitors of the githzerai 
adapted to—and were transformed by—the psychic 
environment imposed on them by their illithid 
overlords. Under the teachings of Zerthimon, who 
called on his people to abandon the warlike ambitions 
of Gith, the githzerai focused their mental energy 
on creating physical and psychic barriers to protect 
them from attack, psychic or otherwise. Fighting is 
personal to a githzerai, which uses its mind to daze 
and incapacitate opponents, leaving them vulnerable to 
physical punishment. 

Order amid Chaos. The githzerai willingly dwell in 
the heart of utter chaos in Limbo—a twisting, mercurial 
plane prone to manipulation and subjugation by 
githzerai minds strong enough to master it. Limbo is 
a maelstrom of primal matter and energy, its terrain a 
storm of rock and earth swept up in torrents of murky 
liquid, buffeted by strong winds, blasted by fire, and 
chilled by crushing walls of ice. 

The forces of Limbo react to sentience, however. 
Using the power of their minds, the githzerai tame the 
plane’s chaotic elements, causing them to settle into 
fixed and survivable forms and creating oases and 
sanctuaries within the maelstrom. 


Githzerai fortress-monasteries stand resolute against- ae es 


the chaos that surrounds them, virtually impervious 

to the turmoil of their surroundings, because the 
githzerai will it. Each monastery is overseen by monks 
that impose a strict schedule of chants, meals, martial 
arts training, and devotions according to their own 
philosophy. Behind their psionically fortified walls, the 
githzerai embrace thought, learning, psionic power, 
order, and discipline above all other things. 

The social hierarchy of the githzerai is based on merit, 
and those githzerai who are the wisest teachers and 
the most skilled at physical and mental combat become 
leaders. The githzerai revere great heroes and teachers 
of the past, emulating those figures’ virtues in théir 
everyday lives. 

Disciples of Zerthimon. Githzerai revere Zerthimon, 
the founder of their race. Although Gith won their 
people’s freedom, Zerthimon saw her as unfit to lead. 
He believed that her warmongering would soon make 
her a tyrant no better than the mind flayers. 

Skilled githzerai monks that best exemplify the 
teachings and principles of Zerthimon are called zerths. 
These powerful and disciplined monks can shift their 
bodies from one plane to another using only the power 
of their minds. 

Beyond Limbo. Though githzerai rarely deal with 
the realms beyond Limbo, advanced monks of other 
races sometimes seek out a githzerai monastery and 
attempt to gain admittance as students. More rarely, a 
githzerai master establishes a hidden monastery on the 
Material Plane to train young githzerai or to spread the 
philosophy and teachings of Zerthimon. 

As disciplined as they are, the githzerai have never 
forgotten their long imprisonment by the mind flayers. 
As a special devotion, they organize a rrakkma—an 
illithid hunting party—to other planes, not returning 
to their monasteries until they slay at least as many 
illithids as there are hunters in the party. 


AND THE GITHTERA! 


t 
an ie: NOLY 5 CARREO BY 
THE! 
FLAYERS TH 
ONE RACE, YNITED, > 
FREECOM, THEY WAGE WA , an 

OTHER WITH A HATRED NON 


“ 
COMPREHEND. 


LLY 


HE YELLOW, 


~ARISTUL T 
a ORE 


ANAR L 
MASTER OF PL 


enti = 


— 


'THYANKI WARRIOR 


Medium humanoid (gith), lawful evil 


_ Armor Class 17 (half plate) 
Hit Points 49 (9d8 + 9) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
15 (42) 14(42) 12(41) 13(41) 13(41) — 10 (+0) 
gr 
Saving Throws Con +3, Int +3, Wis +3 
Senses passive Perception 11 
Languages Gith 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


ssi 


Innate Spelicasting (Psionics). The githyanki’s innate 
spellcasting ability is Intelligence. It can innately cast the 
following spells, requiring no components: 


At will: mage hand (the hand is invisible) 

3/day each: jump, misty step, nondetection (self only) 
ACTIONS 

Multiattack. The githyanki makes two greatsword attacks. 
Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., 


one target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) slashing damage plus 7 (2d6) 
psychic damage. 


IYANKI KNIGHT 
humanoid (gith), lawful evil 


i 
a 


g Vil 
| Mea um 


Armor Class 18 (plate) 
Hit Points 91 (14d8 + 28) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 14 (42) 15 (42) 14(42) 14 (42) 15 (42) 


Saving Throws Con +5, Int +5, Wis +5 
Senses passive Perception 12 
Languages Gith 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


Innate Spellicasting (Psionics). The githyanki's innate 
spelicasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 13, +5 to hit 
with spell attacks). It can innately cast the following spells, 
requiring no components: 


At will: mage hand (the hand is invisible) 
3/day each: jump, misty step, nondetection (self only), tongues 
1/day each: plane shift, telekinesis 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The githyanki makes two silver greatsword attacks. | 


Silver Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 

5 ft., one target. Hit: 13 (2d6 + 6) slashing damage plus 
10 (3d6) psychic damage. This is a magic weapon attack. 
On a critical hit against a target in an astral body (as with 
the astral projection spell), the githyanki can cut the silvery 
cord that tethers the target to its material body, instead of 
dealing damage. 


GITHZERAI MONK 


Medium humanoid (gith), lawful neutral + 

Armor Class 14 : y 

Hit Points 38 (7d8 + 7) -» 

Speed 30 ft. mm, > 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 


1241) 15(42) 12@1) 1341) 1442) 10 (40) 


Saving Throws Str +3, Dex +4, Int +3, Wis +4 
Skills Insight +4, Perception +4 

Senses passive Perception 14 

Languages Gith 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The githzerai’s innate 
spellcasting ability is Wisdom. It can innately cast the following 
spells, requiring no components: 


At will: mage hand (the hand is invisible) 

3/day each: feather fall, jump, see invisibility, shield 

Psychic Defense. While the githzerai is wearing no armor and 
wielding no shield, its AC includes its Wisdom modifier. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The githzerai makes two unarmed strikes. 


Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) bludgeoning damage plus 9 (2d8) 
psychic damage. This is a magic weapon attack. 
a ~ 3 3 ane Se ES 
GITHZERAI ZERTH 


Medium humanoid (gith), lawful néutral 


Armor Class 17 
Hit Points 84 (13d8 + 26) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (+1) 18 (+4) 15(42) 16 (43) 17043) 12441 


Saving Throws Str +4, Dex +7, Int +6, Wis +6 
Skills Arcana +6, Insight +6, Perception +6 
Senses passive Perception 16 

Languages Gith 

Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The githzerai’s spellcasting 
ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 14, +6 to hit with spell 
attacks). It can innately cast the following spells, requiring no 
components: 


At will: mage hand (the hand is invisible) 
3/day each: feather fall, jump, see invisibility, shield 
1/day each: phantasmal killer, plane shift 


Psychic Defense. While the githzerai is wearing no armor and 
wielding no shield, its AC includes its Wisdom modifier. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The githzerai makes two unarmed strikes. 


Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage plus 13 (3d) 
psychic damage. This is a magic weapon attack. 


OTe 16% 


GNOLLS 

Gnolls are feral humanoids that attack settlements 
along the frontiers and borderlands of civilization 
without warning, slaughtering their victims and 
devouring their flesh. 

Demonic Origin. The origin of the gnolls traces back 
to a time when the demon lord Yeenoghu found his way 
to the Material Plane and ran amok. Packs of ordinary 
hyenas followed in his wake, scavenging the demon 
lord’s kills. Those hyenas were transformed into the first 
gnolls, parading after Yeenoghu until he was banished 
back to the Abyss. The gnolls then scattered across the 
face of the world, a dire reminder of demonic power. 

Nomadic Destroyers. Gnolls are dangerous 
because they strike at random. They emerge from 
the wilderness, plunder and slaughter, then move 
elsewhere. They attack like a plague of locusts, 
pillaging settlements and leaving little behind but razed 
buildings, gnawed corpses, and befouled land. Gnolls 
choose easy targets for their raids. Armored warriors 
holed up in a fortified castle will survive a rampaging ' 
gnoll horde unscathed, even as the towns, villages, and \ 
farms that surround the castle are ablaze, their people 
slaughtered and devoured. 

Gnolls rarely build permanent structures or 
craft anything of lasting value. They don’t make 
weapons or armor, but scavenge such items from the 
corpses of their fallen victims, stringing ears, teeth, 
scalps, and other trophies from their foes onto their 
patchwork armor. 

Thirst for Blood. No goodness or compassion 
resides in the heart of a gnoll. Like a demon, it lacks 
anything resembling a conscience, and can’t be taught 
or coerced to put aside its destructive tendencies. The 
gnolls’ frenzied bloodlust makes them an enemy to all, 
and when they lack a common foe, they fight among 
themselves. Even the most savage orcs avoid allying 
with gnolls. 


GNOLL PACK LORD 


The alpha of a gnoll pack is the pack lord, ruling by 
might and cunning. A pack lord earns the best of a gnoll 
‘ pack’s spoils, food, valuable trinkets, and magic items. It 
ornaments its body with brutal piercings and grotesque 
trophies, dyeing its fur with demonic sigils, hoping 
Yeenoghu will make it invulnerable. 


GNOLL FANG OF YEENOGHU 


Gnolls celebrate their victories by performing demonic 
rituals and making blood offerings to Yeenoghu. 
Sometimes the demon lord rewards his worshipers 

by allowing one of them to be possessed by a demonic 
spirit. Marked as Yeenoghu’s favorite, the lucky recipient 
becomes a fang of Yeenoghu, the chosen of the Gnoll 
Lord. In much the same way Yeenoghu created the 

first gnolls, a hyena that feasts on a fang’s slain foe 
undergoes a horrible transformation, becoming a full- 
grown adult gnoll. Depending on the number of hyenas 
in.a region, a fang of Yeenoghu can lead to a startling 
increase in the gnoll population. Finding and killing the 
fang is the only way to keep that population in check. 


GNOLL 


} Medium humanoid (gnoll), chaotic evil 


| Armor Class 15 (hide armor, shield) 
_ Hit Points 22 (5d8) 


| Speed 30 ft. 
| STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
14 (42) -12(41) 1140) 6(-2) 100) 7(-2) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Gnoll 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Rampage. When the gnoll reduces a creature to 0 hit points 
with a melee attack on its turn, the gnoll can take a bonus 
action to move up to half its speed and make a bite attack. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 


| Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage, or 
6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a 
melee attack. 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range 150/600 ft., 
one target. Hit: 5 (1d8 + 1) piercing damage. 


-Gnott Pack Lorp | | 


| Medium humanoid (gnoll), chaotic evil 


| Armor Class 15 (chain shirt) 
Hit Points 49 (9d8 + 9) 

| Speed 30 ft. 

| 


_ . STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
16 (43) 14(42) 1341) = 8-1), 1140) 9 (-1) 
"Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Gnoll 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Rampage. When the gnoll reduces a creature to 0 hit points 
with a melee attack on its turn, the gnoll can take a bonus 
action to move up to half its speed and make a bite attack. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The gnoll makes two attacks, either with its glaive 
or its longbow, and uses its Incite Rampage if it can. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage. 

Glaive. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (1d10 + 3) slashing damage. 

Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 150/600 ft., 
One target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage. 


Incite Rampage (Recharge 5-6). One creature the gnoll can see 
within 30 feet of it can use its reaction to make a melee attack 
if it can hear the gnoll and has the Rampage trait. 


Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage. i 


-GNOLL FANG OF YEENOGHU 
| Medium fiend (groll), chaotic evil 


‘Armor Class 14 (hide armor) 
Hit Points 65 (10d8 + 20) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIs CHA 
17 (+3) 15 (+2) 15 (42) 10 (+0) 11 (40) 13 (+1) 


Saving Throws Con +4, Wis +2, Cha +3 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Abyssal, Gnoll 

Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Rampage. When the gnoll reduces a creature to 0 hit points 
with a melee attack on its turn, the gnoll can take a bonus 
action to move up to half its speed and make a bite attack. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The gnoll makes three attacks: one with its bite 
and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage, and the target must 
succeed on a DC 12 Constitution saving throw or take 7 (2d6) 
poison damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. | 


ee Pale 


ee a 163 
a 


GNOME, DEEP (SVIRFNEBLIN) 


Deep gnomes, or svirfneblin, live far below the world’s 
surface in twisting warrens and sculpted caverns. 

They survive by virtue of their stealth, cleverness, and 
tenacity. Their gray skin allows them to blend in with 
surrounding stonework. They are also surprisingly 
heavy and strong for their size. An average adult weighs 
100 to 120 pounds and stands 3 feet tall. 

A typical svirfneblin enclave contains several hundred 
deep gnomes and is strongly fortified. Secret tunnels 
lead to and from the settlement, and the deep gnomes 
use these as evacuation routes when the enclave comes 
under attack. 

Established Gender Roles. Male svirfneblin 
are bald, while females have stringy gray hair. 
Traditionally, females run the enclaves while males 
scour the outskirts in search of enemies and deposits of 
precious gemstones. 

Gemstone Harvesters. Svirfneblin cherish fine 
gemstones, especially rubies, which they harvest from 
mines deep in the Underdark. The hunt for gems often 
brings them into conflict with beholders, drow, kuo-toa, 
duergar, and mind flayers. Of all their natural enemies, 
deep gnomes fear and despise the murderous, demon- 
worshiping drow the most. 

Earth Friends. Deep gnomes are often encountered 
$ in the company of creatures from the Elemental Plane 
‘of Earth. Some svirfneblin can summon such creatures. 

Earth creatures guard svirfneblin settlements, 
especially xorn enticed to service with the promise of 
gems to feed on. 


r 
GNOME, DEEP. (SYIRFNEBLIN) 


Tr ostaanamiadamanl 
1 


JNOME (SVIRFNEBLIN) 


i humanoid (gnome), neutral good 


Sma 


at} 


Arinor’ | sé'15 (chain shirt) 
Hit Poinits 16 (3d6 + 6), 
Speed 20 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (+2) 14(42) 14(+2) 12(41) 10440) 9(-1) 


Skills Investigation +3, Perception +2, Stealth +4 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages Gnomish, Terran, Undercommon 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Stone Camouflage. The gnome has advantage on Dexterity 
(Stealth) checks made to hide in rocky terrain. 


‘Gnome Cunning. The gnome has advantage on Intelligence, 
Wisdom, and Charisma saving throws against magic. 


Innate Spellcasting. The gnome's innate spellcasting ability is 
Intelligence (spell save DC 11). It can innately cast the following | 
spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: nondetection (self only) 
1/day each: blindness/deafness, blur, disguise self 


ACTIONS | 


War Pick. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage. 


Poisoned Dart. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120 

ft., one creature. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage, and the 

target must succeed on a DC 12 Constitution saving throwor 

be poisoned for 1 minute. The target can repeat the saving 

throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect onitself 
| ona success. 


GOBLINS 


Goblins are small, black-hearted, selfish humanoids that 
lair in caves, abandoned mines, despoiled dungeons, 
and other dismal settings. Individually weak, goblins 
gather in large—sometimes overwhelming—numbers. 
They crave power and regularly abuse whatever 
authority they obtain. 

Goblinoids. Goblins belong to a family of creatures 
called goblinoids. Their larger cousins, hobgoblins and 
bugbears, like to bully goblins into submission. Goblins 
are lazy and undisciplined, making them poor servants, 
laborers, and guards. 

Malicious Glee. Motivated by greed and malice, 
goblins can’t help but celebrate the few times they have 
the upper hand. They dance, caper with sheer joy when 
victory is theirs. Once their revels have ended, goblins 
delight in the torment of other creatures and embrace 
all manner of wickedness. 

Leaders and Followers. Goblins are ruled by the 
strongest or smartest among them. A goblin boss might 
command a single lair, while a goblin king or queen 
(who is nothing more than a glorified goblin boss) 
rules hundreds of goblins, spread out among multiple 
lairs to ensure the tribe’s survival. Goblin bosses are 
easily ousted, and many goblin tribes are taken over by 
hobgoblin warlords or bugbear chiefs. 

Challenging Lairs. Goblins festoon their lairs with 
alarms designed to signal the arrival of intruders. Those 
lairs are also riddled with narrow tunnels and bolt-holes 
that human-sized creatures can’t navigate, but which 
goblins can crawl through with ease, allowing them to 
flee or to circle around and surprise their enemies. 

Rat Keepers and Wolf Riders. Goblins have an 
affinity for rats and wolves, raising them to serve as 
companions and mounts, respectively. Like rats, goblins 
shun sunlight and sleep underground during the day. 
Like wolves, they are pack hunters, made bolder by their 
numbers. When they hunt from the backs of wolves, 
goblins use hit-and-run attacks. 

Worshipers of Maglubiyet. Maglubiyet the Mighty 
One, the Lord of Depths and Darkness, is the greater 
god of goblinoids. Envisioned by most goblins as an 
eleven-foot-tall battle-scarred goblin with black skin and 
fire erupting from his eyes, he is worshiped not out of 
adoration but fear. Goblins believe that when they die in 
battle, their spirits join the ranks of Maglubiyet’s army 
on the plane of Acheron. This is a “privilege” that most 
goblins dread, fearing the Mighty One’s eternal tyranny 
even more than death. 


“B 
R EE-Ya RK 4a 
~ GOBLIN FOR "We SURRENDER!” 


(oR SO THEY SAY) 


GoBLIN Boss 


Small humanoid (goblinoid), neutral evil 


Armor Class 17 (chain shirt, shield) 
Hit Points 21 (6d6) 
Speed 30 ft. 


Fp oe 
is at 


SS a STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
[ae 7 =a 10. (+0) 14(42) 10(40) 10(+0) 8(-1) 10(+0) 
GOBLIN sii Ee ee eee 

Small humanoid (goblinoid), neutral evil Skills Stealth +6 
| . Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 
_ Armor Class 15 (leather armor, shield) Languages Common, Goblin 
_ Hit Points 7 (2d6) Challenge 1 (200 XP) 
| STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA me a The ce, te or Hide 
action as a bonus ac its turns. 
8(-1) 14(42) 10(40) 10(4+0) 8(-1) 8(-1) 
eee i i — -—™ 
| "Skills Stealth +6 hetians 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 Multiattack. The goblin makes two attacks with its scimitar. 
| Languages Common, Goblin The second attack has disadvantage. 


Greene 1/4 (50.XP) Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 


target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) slashing damage. 


Nimble Escape. The goblin can take the Disengage or Hide 
achOrie a at ee on ceeeciveturne Ba8 Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 


range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 
| ACTIONS | 


Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) slashing damage. 


REACTIONS 


_ Redirect Attack. When a creature the goblin can see targets 
it with an attack, the goblin chooses another goblin within 5 
Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 80/320 ft., _ feet of it. The two goblins swap places, and the chosen goblin 
_ one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. becomes the target instead. 


Se ESS 6 ESS ee 


EE 


ite 
| GOBLINS 


Golems are made from humble materials—clay, flesh 
and bones, iron, or stone—but they possess astonishing 
power and durability. A golem has no ambitions, 

needs no sustenance, feels no pain, and knows no 
remorse. An unstoppable juggernaut, it exists to follow 
its creator’s orders, and it protects or attacks as that 
creator demands. 

To create a golem, one requires a manual of golems 
(see the Dungeon Master’s Guide). The comprehensive 
illustrations and instructions in a manual detail the 
process for creating a golem of a particular type. 

Elemental Spirit in Material Form. The construction 
of a golem begins with the building of its body, requiring 
great command of the craft of sculpting, stonecutting, 
ironworking, or surgery. Sometimes a golem’s creator 
is the master of the art, but often the individual 
who desires a golem must enlist master artisans to 
do the work. 

After constructing the body from clay, flesh, iron, or 
stone, the golem’s creator infuses it with a spirit from 
the Elemental Plane of Earth. This tiny spark of life 
has no memory, personality, or history. It is simply the 
impetus to move and obey. This process binds the spirit 
to the artificial body and subjects it to the will of the 
golem’s creator. 

Ageless Guardians. Golems can guard sacred sites, 
tombs, and treasure vaults long after the deaths of 
their creators, carrying out their appointed tasks for 
all eternity while brushing off physical damage and 
ignoring all but the most potent spells. 

A golems can be created with a special amulet or 
other item that allows the possessor of the item to 
control the golem. Golems whose creators are long dead 
can thus be harnessed to serve a new master. 

Blind Obedience. When its creator or possessor is 
on hand to command it, a golem performs flawlessly. If 
the golem is left without instructions or is incapacitated, 
it continues to follow its last orders to the best of its 
ability. When it can’t fulfill its orders, a golem might 
react violently—or stand and do nothing. A golem that 
has been given conflicting orders sometimes alternates 
between them. 

A golem can’t think or act for itself. Though it 
understands its commands perfectly, it has no grasp 
of language beyond that understanding, and can’t be 
reasoned with or tricked with words. 

Constructed Nature. A golem doesn’t require air, 
food, drink, or sleep. 


poors LAY A GRAND 
sTONE THRONE, 
TALLER ANO 
UTCHED 


OND THE UNOPENABLE 
BEFORE A TOWERING 
ON STATUE 
—£ HAND IT CL 
A FEATHER WHIP. 


“Bey 

HALL ENDING 

UPON WHICH SAT AN IR N 

THAN TWO MEN. In © 

IN THE OTHER, ‘, * 
Ww . 

ED a THE ARCHMAGE, 


RROWING 


WIDER 
AN IRON sworRD, 
We sHouLod HAVE 


CHRONICLING 
EXPLOITS 


TURN 
MoRDENKAIN ! 
HIS PARTYSS HA 
IN THE DUNGEONS BELOW 

Maure CASTLE 


CLAY GOLEM Dain wis 


Sculpted from clay, this bulky golem stands head and. any 
shoulders taller than most human-sized creatures. Itis 
human shaped, but its proportions are off. 

Clay golems are often divinely endowed with purpose 
by priests of great faith. However, clay is a weak vessel 
for life force. If the golem is damaged, the elemental 
spirit bound into it can break free. Such a golem « 
runs amok, smashing everything around it until it'is 
destroyed or completely repaired. 


FLESH GOLEM i) Se og 


A flesh golem is a grisly assortment of humanoid:body» : Wy ’ 
parts stitched and bolted together into a muscled brute a 
imbued with formidable strength. Its brain is capable- ‘ 


of simple reason, though its thoughts are no more 
sophisticated than those of a young child. The golem’s a 
muscle tissue responds to the power of lightning, Th 
invigorating the creature with vitality and strength. | 
Powerful enchantments protect the golem’s skin, 
deflecting spells and all but the most potent weapons. 

A flesh golem lurches with a stiff-jointed gait, as if not 
in complete control of its body. Its dead flesh isn’t an 
ideal container for an elemental spirit, which sometimes 
howls incoherently to vent its outrage. If the spirit 1 
breaks free of its creator’s will, the golem goes berserk ae 
until calmed, or until its shell of flesh is destroyed or a 
completely healed. 


IRON GOLEM jis 


The mightiest of the golems, the iron golem is a on 
massive, towering giant wrought of heavy metal. An ! 
iron golem’s shape can be worked into any form, though 
most are fashioned to look like giant suits of armor. Its 
fist can destroy creatures with a single blow, and its 
clanging steps shake the earth beneath its feet. Iron 
golems wield enormous blades to extend their reach, 
and all can belch clouds of deadly poison. 

An iron golem’s body is smelted with rare tinctures 
and admixtures. Though other golems bear weaknesses 
inherent in their materials or the power of the elemental 
spirit bound within them, iron golems were designed 
to be nearly invulnerable. Their iron bodies imprison 
the spirits that drive them, and are susceptible only 
to weapons imbued with magic or the strength 
of adamantine. 


STONE GOLEM 


Stone golems display great variety in shape and form, 

cut and chiseled from stone to appear as tall, impressive 

statues. Though most bear humanoid features, stone 

golems can be carved in any form the sculptor can 

imagine. Ancient stone golems found in sealed tombs 

or flanking the gates of lost cities sometimes take the te 

forms of giant beasts. bl 
Like other golems, stone golems are nearly wf 

impervious to spells and ordinary weapons. Creatures |, “Ny 

that fight a stone golem can feel the ebb and flowoftime = 

slow down around them, almost as though they were; | | | jezaeee 

made of stone themselves. << 


“THE 


MORE RIGIONTS PM 


ss 
ysical FORM, THE LE 

F 

S SENSE ie a 


wiTcry. 
THE 


oven SO OR 5 
ones CAN BE A Fas 
Words OF WARNING 


S 
MANUAL OF CLAY GOLEM 


CLAY GOLEM 


Large construct, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 133 (14d10 + 56) 


_ Speed 20 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
20 (+5) 9 (-1) 18 (+4) 3 (-4) 8 (-1) T (-5) 


Damage Immunities acid, poison, psychic; bludgeoning, 
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons that aren't 
adamantine 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 

Languages understands the languages of its creator but 
can’t speak 

Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 


EE ——————————————— ————————————Ot——™ 


Acid Absorption. Whenever the golem is subjected to acid 
damage, it takes no damage and instead regains a number of 
hit points equal to the acid damage dealt. 


Berserk, Whenever the golem starts its turn with 60 hit points 
or fewer, roll a d6. On a 6, the golem goes berserk. On each of 


_ GOLEMS 


: — Seaplane 
its turns while berserk, the golem attacks the nearest creature 


it can see. If no creature is near enough to move to and attack, 
the golem attacks an object, with preference for an object 
smaller than itself. Once the golem goes berserk, it continues 
to do so until it is destroyed or regains all its hit points. 


Immutable Form. The golem is immune to any spell or effect 
that would alter its form. 


Magic Resistance. The golem has advantage on saving throws © 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Magic Weapons. The golem’s weapon attacks are magical. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The golem makes two slam attacks. 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 16 (2d10 + 5) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a 
creature, it must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw 
or have its hit point maximum reduced by an amount equal to 
the damage taken. The target dies if this attack reduces its hit 
point maximum to 0. The reduction lasts until removed by the 
greater restoration spell or other magic. 


Haste (Recharge 5—6). Until the end of its next turn, the 
golem magically gains a +2 bonus to its AC, has advantage 
on Dexterity saving throws, and can use its slam attack as a 
bonus action. 


CAUGHT ANO HANGEO a 
’ STANOABLY RELYUCTA 


ein CONCERNS 
€ 
eonpees. AND VE Taam 
tal 


a 
EA0- 
HEIRS INST 
e, Put USE ThE AANCER 
LAVAIN, NECRO 


YESTEROAY) 


BUMPKIN 


_ 
FLESH GOLEM 


Medium construct, neutral 
— : : ll , a a : 
Armor Class 9 L le! al 
Hit Points 93 (11d8 + 44) ys hh 
Speed 30 ft. 
—— SSS ss 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA a 
19 (+4) 9(-1) 18(44) 6(-2) 10(40) 5 (-3) 
= on ————— 
Damage Immunities lightning, poison; bludgeoning, piercing, 
and slashing from nonmagical weapons that aren’t 
adamantine 
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages understands the languages of its creator but 
can’t speak 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


SE 


Berserk. Whenever the golem starts its turn with 40 hit points 
or fewer, roll a d6. On a 6, the golem goes berserk. On each of 
its turns while berserk, the golem attacks the nearest creature 
it can see. If no creature is near enough to move to and attack, 
the golem attacks an object, with preference for an object 
smaller than itself. Once the golem goes berserk, it continues 
to do so until it is destroyed or regains all its hit points. 

The golem’s creator, if within 60 feet of the berserk golem, 
can try to calm it by speaking firmly and persuasively. The 
golem must be able to hear its creator, who must take an 
action to make a DC 15 Charisma (Persuasion) check. If the 
check succeeds, the golem ceases being berserk. If it takes 
_ damage while still at 40 hit points or fewer, the golem might go 
_ berserk again. 


Aversion of Fire. \f the golem takes fire damage, it has 
disadvantage on attack rolls and ability checks until the end of 
its next turn. 


Immutable Form. The golem is immune to any spell or effect 
_ that would alter its form. 


_ Lightning Absorption. Whenever the golem is subjected to 
lightning damage, it takes no damage and instead regains a 
number of hit points equal to the lightning damage dealt. 


| Magic Resistance. The golem has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Magic Weapons. The golem’s weapon attacks are magical. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The golem makes two slam attacks. 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


SS 


a . SEES" — F 


} 


| 


Tro 
| Larg 


rge ON unaligned 


Armor Class 20 (natural armor) 
"Hit Points 210 (20d10 + 100) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
24 (+7) 9(-1) 20(45) 3(-4) 11(40)  1(-5) 


Se —————————————————— 

Damage Immunities fire, poison, psychic; bludgeoning, 
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons that aren't 
adamantine 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages understands the languages of its creator but 
can't speak 

Challenge 16 (15,000 XP) 


SS ——————————————————————————————Xoeee—— lOO —™ 


Fire Absorption. Whenever the golem is subjected to fire 
damage, it takes no damage and instead regains a number of 


| hit points equal to the fire damage dealt. 


| Immutable Form. The golem is immune to any spell or effect 
| that would alter its form. 


Magic Resistance. The golem has advantage on saving throws 


against spells and other magical effects. 

Magic Weapons. The golem’s weapon attacks are magical. 
ACTIONS 

Multiattack. The golem makes two melee attacks. 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 20 (3d8 + 7) bludgeoning damage. 


| Sword. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 


170 


| GOLEMs 


target. Hit: 23 (3d10 + 7) slashing damage. 


Poison Breath (Recharge 6). The golem exhales poisonous gas 
in a 15-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 19 
Constitution saving throw, taking 45 (10d8) poison damage on 
a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


5 


| Armor Class 17. (natural armor) 
| Hit Points 178 (17d10 + 85) 


Speed 30 ft. 
a 
“STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
W22,(+6) 841) 2045) 3(-4) 11440) 1(-5) © | 


1 ee... Ee 


Damage Immunities poison, psychic; bludgeoning, piercing, 
and slashing from nonmagical weapons that aren't 
adamantine 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages understands the languages of its creator but | 
can't speak 

Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) 


————————————————————— Se -—r— 


Immutable Form. The golem is immune to any spell or effect | 


that would alter its form. 


Magic Resistance. The golem has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Magic Weapons. The golem’s weapon attacks are magical. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The golem makes two slam attacks. 


| Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


Hit: 19 (3d8 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 


Slow (Recharge 5-6). The golem targets one or more creatures 


_ it can see within 10 feet of it. Each target must make a DC 17 


a 


Wisdom saving throw against this magic. On a failed save, a 
target can't use reactions, its speed is halved, and it can’t make | 
more than one attack on its turn. In addition, the target can 

take either an action or a bonus action on its turn, not both. 
These effects last for 1 minute. A target can repeat the saving 
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself | 
on a success. 


GoRGO 


Large monstrosity, unaligned 


== 
& 


* 
My 


q 


Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 114 (12d10 + 48) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
20 (+5) 11(40) 1844) 2(-4) 12(4) 7(-2) 


Skills Perception +4 

Condition Immunities petrified 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages — 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Trampling Charge. |f the gorgon moves at least 20 feet straight 
toward a creature and then hits it with a gore attack on the 
same turn, that target must succeed on a DC 16 Strength 
saving throw or be knocked prone. If the target is prone, the 
gorgon can make one attack with its hooves against it as a 
bonus action. 


ACTIONS 


| Gore. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 18 (2d12 + 5) piercing damage. 


_ Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 16 (2d10 + 5) bludgeoning damage. 


_ Petrifying Breath (Recharge 5-6). The gorgon exhales 

_ petrifying gas in a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area 
must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw. Ona 
failed save, a target begins to turn to stone and is restrained. 

_ The restrained target must repeat the saving throw at the end 
of its next turn. On a success, the effect ends on the target. 
On a failure, the target is petrified until freed by the greater 

| restoration spell or other magic. 


Zee ey 


Ct | 


F k 
} | 1 


- 
q fr. 7 


GORGON 


Few creatures that encounter a gorgon live to tell about 
it. Its body is covered in iron plates, and its nostrils fume 
with green vapor. 

Horrific Structure. A gorgon’s iron plates range from 
steely black to gleaming silver, but this natural armor 
in no way hinders its movement or mobility. The oils of 
its body lubricate the armor. A sick or inactive gorgon 
gathers rust like fungus or mange. When a rusty gorgon 
moves, its plates squeal as they rub together. 

Monstrous Predator. When a gorgon spots potential 
prey, it charges with a hideous clamor of metal on 
metal. When the gorgon hits, it pulverizes the foe and 
sends its sprawling, then tramples it to death with its 
cruel hooves. Faced with multiple foes, the gorgon 
exhales its deadly vapor to overcome the creatures 
it touches by turning them to stone. When it grows 
hungry, it smashes its petrified prey to rubble and uses 
its strong teeth to grind the stone into a powder that 
provides nourishment. The crisscrossing network of 
trampled trails and splintered trees that surrounds a 
gorgon lair is strewn with the uneaten fragments of its 
shattered foes. 


“l, Wh Hy ie. 


“Our INTREPID ROGUE CLIMBED UP THE SHAFT 
TO SECURE A ROPE, THERE WAS A GASP, AND THE 


a 
ROPE FELL. WE NEVER SAW HER AGAIN. 
- AN ADVENTURER’S ACCOUNT OF A 


GRELL ATTACK IN KHYBER, PUBLISHED 
in THE KORRANBERG CHRONICLE 


GRELL 


A grell resembles a bulbous floating brain with a wide, 
sharp beak. Its ten long tentacles are made of hundreds 
of ring-shaped muscles sheathed in tough fibrous 
hide. Sharp barbs line the tip each tentacle and inject 
paralytic venom. The grell can partially retract its barbs 
into its tentacles to handle or manipulate objects it 
doesn’t want to pierce or tear. 

Grells have no eyes and floats by means of a sort of 
levitation. They have keen hearing, however, and their 
skin is sensitive to vibrations and electrical fields, 


allowing them to detect the presence of creatures and 
objects in their immediate vicinity. The creature’s ability 
to manipulate electricity to sense and move also allow it 
to absorb lightning without harm. 

Although solitary by nature, grells sometimes gather 
in small groups called covens. 

Floating Ambushers. A grell prefers to ambush 
lone creatures or stragglers, hovering silently near the 
ceiling of a passage or cavern until a suitable target 
passes below, whereupon it descends quickly and wraps 
its tentacles around its prey. It then floats away to its lair 
with the paralyzed creature in its clutches. 

Alien Devourers. Grell are alien predators that group 
other creatures into three categories: edibles, inedibles, 
and Great Eaters (those rare creatures that might prey 
on a grell). Grells have no compunction about attacking 
creatures they classify as edible, including humanoids. 
They tend to avoid bigger creatures that they have little 
hope of carrying away. 

A grell will sometimes allow adventurers to wage 
war on the other monstrous inhabitants of the dungeon 
complex it calls home, staying out of the adventurers’ 
way as they dispose of larger threats while waiting for 
the right time to strike. 


— = my 
Medium aberration, neutral evil 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 55 (10d8 + 10) 
Speed 10 ft., fly 30 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (#2) 14.42) «13 (+1) «12 @1))s11 (40) ~—s 9 (-1) 


_ Skills Perception +4, Stealth +6 


Damage Immunities lightning 
Condition Immunities blinded, prone 
Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
passive Perception 14 
Languages Grell 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 
rr errr 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The grell makes two attacks: one with its tentacles 
and one with its beak. 


Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 7 (1d10 + 2) piercing damage, and the target 
must succeed on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw or be 
poisoned for 1 minute. The poisoned target is paralyzed, and 
it can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, 
ending the effect on a success. 

The target is also grappled (escape DC 15). If the target is 
Medium or smaller, it is also restrained until this grapple ends. 
While grappling the target, the grell has advantage on attack 
rolls against it and can’t use this attack against other targets. 
When the grell moves, any Medium or smaller target it is 
grappling moves with it. 


Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


GrRICK 

Medium monstrosity, neutral 

Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 

Hit Points 27 (6d8) 

Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 

= ta Sea — —* 

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14 (+2) =: 14 (+2) ~—s«'11 (+0) 3(-4) 14(42) = 5 (-3) 


= = — =— = —— _— - 


Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing 
damage from nonmagical weapons 
| Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages — 
| Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


——— eee — 


Stone Camouflage. The grick has advantage on Dexterity 


(Stealth) checks made to hide in rocky terrain. 


| ACTIONS 


| Multiattack. The grick makes one attack with its tentacles. If 
| that attack hits, the grick can make one beak attack against the 


1 
same target. 
| 


| Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
| target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) slashing damage. 


| Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


: ‘ 


GriIcK ALPHA 


Large monstrosity, neutral 


| [a 


Armor Class 18 (natural! armor) 

Hit Points 75 (10d10 + 20) 

Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

18 (+4) 16(43) 15(42) 4(-3) 1442) 9(-1) 

_ [Res ts i — = 

Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing 
damage from nonmagical weapons 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 

Languages — 

Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


a —— = — a —a 


Stone Camouflage. The grick has advantage on Dexterity 
(Stealth) checks made to hide in rocky terrain. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The grick makes two attacks: one with its tail and 


one with its tentacles. If it hits with its tentacles, the grick can 
make one beak attack against the same target. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 22 (4d8 + 4) slashing damage. 


Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage. 


GRICK 


The wormlike grick waits unseen, blending in with the 
rock of the caves and caverns it haunts. Only when prey 
comes near does it rear up, its four barbed tentacles 
unfurling to reveal its hungry, snapping beak. 

Passive Predators. Gricks rarely hunt. Instead, they 
drag their rubbery bodies to places where creatures 
regularly pass, lurking out of sight amid rocky rubble 
and debris, squeezing into burrows, holes, or crevices, 
climbing up to ledges, or coiling around stalactites 
to drop on unwary prey. A grick consumes virtually 
anything that moves except for other gricks. It targets 
the nearest prey, grabbing a fallen creature with its 
tentacles and dragging it off to eat alone. 

Roving Ambushers. Gricks remain in an area until 
the food supply dwindles, often because sentient 
creatures become aware of their presence and plot 
alternate routes around their lairs. When prey is scarce 
in the Underdark, gricks venture aboveground to hunt 
in the wilderness, lurking in trees or on cliff-side ledges. 
A grick pack is often led by a single well-fed, oversized 
alpha around which the others congregate. 

Spoils of Slaughter. Over time, grick lairs accumulate 
the cast-off possessions of intelligent prey, and expert 
guides know to look out for these telltale signs. 
Underdark explorers sometimes seal off the routes 
leading to and from a grick lair to starve them, then 
claim the wealth of the foul creatures’ victims. 


} Armor Class 12 
] Hit Points 59 (7d10 + 21) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 80 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT. WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 15(+2) 16 (#3) 2(-4) 1341) 8(-1) 


Skills Perception +5 
| Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15 
| Languages —_ 
Pp Shallenge 2 (450 XP) 


Keen Sight. The griffon has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) _ 
| checks that rely on sight. 


| ACTIONS 


| Multiattack. The griffon makes two attacks: one with its beak 


| and one with its claws. 


I Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) piercing damage. 


=a. 


} Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., onetarget. | 


Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage. 
) | 


GRIFFON (\ 
Griffons are ferocious avian carnivores with the 
tmuscular bodies of lions and the head, forelegs, and 


5 swings of eagles. When they attack, griffons are as swift 
= pand deadly as eagles, even as they strike with a lion’s 


savage might and grace. 

Horse Eaters. Griffons hunt in small prides, flying 
high over plains and forests near their rocky cliff-side 
aeries. Herd animals and horses are the prey they 
crave above all others, though they also hunt and kill 
hippogriffs. When it spots horses, a griffon screeches 
to alert its pride mates, which descend quickly 
toward their prey. 

Those riding or herding horses dread the griffon’s 
piercing cry, preparing themselves for the bloody fight 
that inevitably follows. A griffon ignores a horse’s rider 
when possible, and a rider that abandons its mount, or 
a herder that releases one or two horses, can escape 
unharmed while the griffon targets its chosen prey. 
Riders who attempt to protect their horses attract the 
full fury of an attacking griffon. 

Sky Dwellers. Griffons lair in high rocky clifftop __ 
aeries, building their nests from sticks, leaves, and the 
bones of their prey. Once griffons establish a territory, 
they remain in that area until the food supply has 
been exhausted. 

Aggressive and territorial, griffons engage in brutal 
aerial combat to defend their aeries, tearing and 
shredding the wings of flying intruders to send them 
spiraling to the ground. Creatures that climb to a 
griffon’s lair are plucked from the cliffs and eaten, or are 
knocked from the heights to go tumbling to their deaths. 

Trained Mounts. A griffon raised from an egg can be 
trained to serve as a mount. However, such training is 
time consuming, expensive (mostly for the ample food 
the creature requires), and dangerous. Expert trainers 
well versed in the griffon’s legendary ferocity are typically 
the only ones able to raise these creatures safely. 

Once trained, a griffon is a fierce and loyal steed. It 
bonds with one master for life, fighting to the death to 
protect that rider. A griffon mount retains its ravenous 
appetite for horseflesh, and a wise master ensures that 
a griffon remains satiated with other prey when passing 
through civilized lands. 


GRIMLOCK 


The degenerate subterranean grimlocks were once 
human, but their worship of the mind flayers over 
generations of prowling the Underdark transformed 
them into blind, monstrous cannibals long ago. 

Debased Cultists. The empire of the mind flayers 
once spread across many worlds, enslaving countless 
races. Among those were human cultures whose high 
priests the mind flayers subverted using their insidious 
powers of thought control. Those leaders gradually 
turned the faiths of their followers toward the illithids, 
which they worshiped as blasphemous deities. 

Ovet time, the rituals of these enslaved humans 
created fervent cannibal cults that regarded the brain 
eating of the mind flayers as a holy sacrament. The 
illithids commanded their worshipers to abduct other 
sentient creatures to be sacrificed. After the victims’ 
brains had been consumed, the mind flayers gave the 
lifeless bodies to the cultists. 

Blind Hunters. When the rule of the mind flayers 
crumbled, their cults faced constant warfare from their 
enemies, the same creatures that had once been their 
victims. The cults fled into the Underdark domains of 
their illithid gods. Over generations in that lightless 
realm, the cultists learned to rely on their other senses 
for survival. In time, their eyes withered away and 
eyelids sealed, leaving only covered eye sockets behind. 

A grimlock’s ears prick up at the faintest footfall or 
whisper echoing down stone passageways. It can speak 
in tones too low for most other humanoids to hear. The 
odors of sweat, flesh, and blood awaken its hunger, 
and it can track by such scents like a bloodhound. To 
enhance their senses, grimlocks leave trails of blood, 
piles of dung, or the viscera of slain prey in places far 
from their lairs. When intruders pass through those 
areas, they carry the foul scents with them, warning the 
grimlocks of their approach. 

For most creatures, blindness is an enormous 
hindrance. For a grimlock with its other heightened 
senses, sightlessness is a boon. A grimlock isn’t fooled 
by visual illusions or misperceptions. It is fearless as it 
stalks prey. 

Endless War. Grimlocks still venerate the mind 
flayers, serving them whenever possible. Grimlocks also 
recall the war in which they were driven underground. 
To them, it has never ended, They continue to return 
to the surface world to abduct captives for their 
illithid masters. 


GRIMLOCK 


»Medium humanoid (grimlock), neutral evil 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2) 


Speed 30 ft. 
es ——= — — ~ 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 


16 (443) 12(41) = 12 (+1) 9 (-1) 8 (-1) 6 (-2) 

Skills Athletics +5, Perception +3, Stealth +3 

Condition Immunities blinded 

Senses blindsight 30 ft. or 10 ft. while deafened (blind beyond 
this radius), passive Perception 13 

Languages Undercommon 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


a ee 


Blind Senses. The grimlock can’t use its blindsight while 
deafened and unable to smell. 


Keen Hearing and Smell. The grimlock has advantage on 
Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell. 


Stone Camouflage. The grimlock has advantage on Dexterity 
(Stealth) checks made to hide in rocky terrain. 


ACTIONS . 1 ~ 
Spiked Bone Club. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., 


| one target. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) bludgeoning damage plus 2 (1d4) 


piercing damage. 


GREK 


# 
Ohne 


ah HAGS 

Hags represent all that is evil and cruel. Though they 
resemble withered crones, there is nothing mortal about 
these monstrous creatures, whose forms reflect only the 
wickedness in their hearts. 

Faces of Evil. Ancient beings with origins in the 
Feywild, hags are cankers on the mortal world. Their 
withered faces are framed by long, frayed hair, horrid 
moles and warts dot their blotchy skin, and their long, 
skinny fingers are tipped by claws that can slice open 
flesh with a touch. Their simple clothes are always 
tattered and filthy. 

All hags possess magical powers, and some have an 
affinity for spelicasting. They can alter their forms or 
curse their foes, and their arrogance inspires them to 
view their magic as a challenge to the magic of the gods, 
te whom they blaspheme at every opportunity. 

0 4 bh 
rad Hac Covens 

When hags must work together, they form covens, in spite of 

their selfish natures. A coven is made up of hags of any type, 
_ all of whom are equals within the group. However, each of 
' the hags continues to desire more personal power. 

A coven consists of three hags so that any arguments 
| between two hags can be settled by the third. If more than 
three hags ever come together, as might happen if two 
_ covens come into conflict, the result is usually chaos. 

Shared Spelicasting. While all three members of a hag 
coven are within 30 feet of one another, they can each cast 
the following spells from the wizard’s spell list but must 
share the spell slots among themselves: 


Ist level (4 slots): identify, ray of sickness 

| 2nd level (3 slots): hold person, locate object 

q 3rd level (3 slots): bestow curse, counterspell, lightning bolt 
’ | 4th level (3 slots): phantasmal killer, polymorph 

5th level (2 slots): contact other plane, scrying 

6th level (1 slot): eyebite 


For casting these spells, each hag is a 12th-level spellcaster 
that uses Intelligence as her spellcasting ability. The spell 
save DC is 12 + the hag’s Intelligence modifier, and the spell 
attack bonus is 4 + the hag’s Intelligence modifier. 
1 Hag Eye. A hag coven can craft a magic item called a 
| hag eye, which is made from a real eye coated in varnish 
and often fitted to a pendant or other wearable item. The 
hag eye is usually entrusted to a minion for safekeeping 
and transport. A hag in the coven can take an action to see 
what the hag eye sees if the hag eye is on the same plane of 
existence. A hag eye has AC 10, 1 hit point, and darkvision 
} with a radius of 60 feet. If it is destroyed, each coven member 
takes 3d10 psychic damage and is blinded for 24 hours. 

A hag coven can have only one hag eye at a time, and 
creating a new one requires all three members of the coven 
to perform a ritual. The ritual takes 1 hour, and the hags can’t 
perform it while blinded. During the ritual, if the hags take any 
action other than performing the ritual, they must start over. 


Hags name themselves in darkly whimsical ways, 
claiming monikers such as Black Morwen, Peggy 
Pigknuckle, Grandmother Titchwillow, Nanna Shug, 
Rotten Ethel, or Auntie Wormtooth. 

Monstrous Motherhood. Hags propagate by 
snatching and devouring human infants. After stealing 
a baby from its cradle or its mother’s womb, the 
hag consumes the poor child. A week later, the hag 
gives birth to a daughter who looks human until her 
thirteenth birthday, whereupon the child transforms into 
the spitting image of her hag mother. 

Hags sometimes raise the daughters they spawn, 
creating covens. A hag might also return the child to its 
grieving parents, only to watch from the shadows as the 
child grows up to become a horror. 

Dark Bargains. Arrogant to a fault, hags believe 
themselves to be the most cunning of creatures, and 
they treat all others as inferior. Even so, a hag is open 
to dealing with mortals as long as those mortals show 
the proper respect and deference. Over their long lives, 
hags accumulate much knowledge of local lore, dark 
creatures, and magic, which they are pleased to sell. 

Hags enjoy watching mortals bring about their own 
downfall, and a bargain with a hag is always dangerous. 
The terms of such bargains typically involve demands 
to compromise principles or give up something dear— 
especially if the thing lost diminishes or negates the 
knowledge gained through the bargain. 

A Foul Nature. Hags love the macabre and festoon 
their garb with dead things and accentuate their 
appearance with bones, bits of flesh, and filth. They 
nurture blemishes and pick at wounds to produce 
weeping, suppurating flesh. Attractive creatures evoke 
disgust in a hag, which might “help” such creatures by 
disfiguring or transforming them. 

This embrace of the disturbing and unpleasant 
extends to all aspects of a hag’s life. A hag might fly in 


-a magical giant’s skull, landing it on a tree shaped to 


resemble an enormous headless body. Another might 
travel with a menagerie of monsters and slaves kept 
in cages, and disguised by illusions to lure unwary 
creatures close. Hags sharpen their teeth on millstones 
and spin cloth from the intestines of their victims, 
reacting with glee to the horror their actions invoke. 
Dark Sorority. Hags maintain contact with each 
other and share knowledge. Through such contacts, it 
is likely that any given hag knows of every other hag 
in existence. Hags don’t like each other, but they abide 
by an ageless code of conduct. Hags announce their 
presence before crossing into another hag’s territory, 
bring gifts when entering another hag’s dwelling, and 
break no oaths given to other hags—as long as the oath 
isn’t given with the fingers crossed. 


le SPE ie Tb a 
Rae et it ie 


i 


Some humanoids make the mistake of thinking that 
the hags’ rules of conduct apply to all creatures. When 
confronted by such an individual, a hag might find it 
amusing to string the fool along for a while before 
teaching it a permanent lesson. 

Dark Lairs. Hags dwell in dark and twisted 
woods, bleak moors, storm-lashed seacoasts, wy\ 
and gloomy swamps. In time, the landscape 
around a hag’s lair reflects the creature’s 
noxiousness, such that the land itself can 
attack and kill trespassers. Trees twisted by 
darkness attack passersby, while vines snake 
through the undergrowth to snare and drag off 
creatures one at a time. Foul stinking fogs turn 
the air to poison, and conceal pools of quicksand and 
sinkholes that consume unwary wanderers. 


GREEN Hac 


The wretched and hateful green hags dwell in dying 
forests, lonely swamps, and misty moors, making 
their homes in caves. Green hags love to manipulate 
other creatures into doing their bidding, masking their 
intentions behind layers of deception. They lure victims 
to them by mimicking voices calling out for help, or 
drive unwanted visitors away by imitating the cries of 
fierce beasts. 

Obsession with Tragedy. Green hags revel in 
the failings and tragedies of other creatures. They 
derive joy from bringing people low and seeing hope 
turn into despair, not just for individuals but also for 
whole nations. 

Covens. A green hag that is part of a coven (see 
the “Hag Covens” sidebar) has a challenge rating of 
5 (1,800 XP). 


| rol ov > , ra 
GREEN Hac © a 


| Medium fey, neutral evil ; ‘ 
) Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 82 (11d8 + 33) 
Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 


| 1844) 1241) 16(43) 1341) 1442) 14 (42) 


_ Skills Arcana +3, Deception +4, Perception +4, Stealth +3 
| Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 

| Languages Common, Draconic, Sylvan 

_ Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


1 


Amphibious. The hag can breathe air and water. 


| Innate Spellcasting. The hag’s innate spellcasting ability 
_ is Charisma (spell save DC 12). She can innately cast the 
| following spells, requiring no material components: 


| At will: dancing lights, minor illusion, vicious mockery 


Mintiery The hag can mimic animal so unde add humanoid 
voices. A creature that hears the sounc can tell they are 
imitations with a successful DC 14 Wisdom (Insight) check. \ 


ACTIONS 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) slashing damage. 


Illusory Appearance. The hag covers herself and anything she is 
wearing or carrying with a magical illusion that makes her look 
like another creature of her general size and humanoid shape. 
The illusion ends if the hag takes a bonus action to end it or 

if she dies. 

The changes wrought by this effect fail to hold up to physical 
inspection. For example, the hag could appear to have smooth 
skin, but someone touching her would feel her rough flesh. 
Otherwise, a creature must take an action to visually inspect 
the illusion and succeed on a DC 20 Intelligence (Investigation) 
check to discern that the hag is disguised. 


Invisible Passage. The hag magically turns invisible until she 
attacks or casts a spell, or until her concentration ends (as 
if concentrating on a spell). While invisible, she leaves no 
physical evidence of her passage, so she can be tracked only by | 
magic. Any equipment she wears or carries is invisible with her. 


‘Nicut Hac — 


Medium fiend, neutral evil 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
j Hit Points 112 (15d8 + 45) 
| Speed 30 ft. 


STR 
18 (+4) 


DEX 
15 (+2) 


CON 
16 (+3) 


INT 
16 (+3) 


WIS 
14 (+2) 


CHA 
16 (+3) 


Skills Deception +7, Insight +6, Perception +6, Stealth +6 
| Damage Resistances cold, fire; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered 
Condition Immunities charmed 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16 
Languages Abyssal, Common, Infernal, Primordial 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


| 


Innate Spellcasting. The hag’s innate spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 13, +5 to hit with spell attacks). She 
can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material 
components: 


At will: detect magic, magic missile 
2/day each: plane shift (self only), ray of enfeeblement, sleep 


O_o 


£ OS 
RY < 
S A Katee NN *% a y 
\ : \ f=. } 
\ \ ‘7 > 
~ £ \ \ 
\ — \\\ 


INN 
~\ 


NIGHT HAG 


Sly and subversive, night hags want to see the virtuous 
turn to villainy: love turned into obsession, kindness 
turned to hate, devotion to disregard, and generosity 
to selfishness. Night hags take perverse joy in 
corrupting mortals. 

Night hags were once creatures of the Feywild, but 
their foulness saw them exiled to Hades long ago, where 
they degenerated into fiends. The night hags have long 
since spread across the Lower Planes. 

Soulmongers. While a humanoid sleeps, a night hag 
can straddle the person ethereally and intrude upon its 
dreams. Any creature with truesight can see the hag’s 
spectral form straddling its prey. The ethereal hag fills 
her victim’s head with doubts and fears, in the hope of 
tricking it into performing evil acts in the waking world. 
The hag continues her nightly visitations until the victim 
finally expires in its sleep. If the hag has driven her 
victim to commit evil deeds, she traps its corrupted soul 
in her soul bag (see the “Night Hag Items” sidebar) for 
transport to Hades. 

Covens. A night hag that is part of a coven (see 
the “Hag Covens” sidebar) has a challenge rating of 
7 (2,900 XP). 


Magic Resistance. The hag has advantage on saving throws “i 
against spells and other magical effects. 
ACTIONS a “xe 


= 


Claws (Hag Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 
5 ft., one target. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) slashing damage. 


Change Shape. The hag magically polymorphs into a Small or 
Medium female humanoid, or back into her true form. Her 
statistics are the same in each form. Any equipment she is 
wearing or carrying isn’t transformed. She reverts to her true 
form if she dies. 


Etherealness. The hag magically enters the Ethereal Plane from 
the Material Plane, or vice versa. To do so, the hag must have a 
heartstone in her possession. 


Nightmare Haunting (1/Day). While on the Ethereal Plane, the 
hag magically touches a sleeping humanoid on the Material 
Plane. A protection from evil and good spell cast on the target 
prevents this contact, as does a magic circle. As long as the 
contact persists, the target has dreadful visions. If these visions 
last for at least 1 hour, the target gains no benefit from its rest, 
and its hit point maximum is reduced by 5 (1d10). If this effect 
reduces the target’s hit point maximum to 0, the target dies, 
and if the target was evil, its soul is trapped in the hag’s soul 
bag. The reduction to the target’s hit point maximum lasts until 
removed by the greater restoration spell or similar magic. 


NiGHT Hac ITEms 

A night hag carries two very rare magic items that she must 
craft for herself. If either object is lost, the night hag will go 
to great lengths to retrieve it, as creating a new tool takes 
time and effort. 

Heartstone. This lustrous black gem allows a night hag 
to become ethereal while it is in her possession. The touch 
of a heartstone also cures any disease. Crafting a heartstone 
takes 30 days. 

Soul Bag. When an evil humanoid dies as a result of a 
night hag’s Nightmare Haunting, the hag catches the soul 
in this black sack made of stitched flesh. A soul bag can hold 
only one evil soul at a time, and only the night hag who 
crafted the bag can catch a soul with it. Crafting a soul bag 
takes 7 days and a humanoid sacrifice (whose flesh is used 
to make the bag). 

Be sil 


SEA HAG 


Sea hags live in dismal and polluted underwater lairs, 
surrounded by merrow and other aquatic monsters. 

Beauty drives a sea hag to fits of anger. When 
confronted with something beautiful, the hag might 
simply attack it or. deface it. If something beautiful gives 
hope, a sea hag wants it to cause despair. If it inspires 
courage, the sea hag wants it to cause fear. 

Ugly Inside and Out. Sea hags are by far the ugliest 
of all hags, with slimy scales covering their pallid skin. 
A sea hag’s hair resembles seaweed and covers her 
emaciated body, and her glassy eyes seem as lifeless 
as a doll’s, Although a sea hag can hide her true form 
under a veil of illusion, the hag is cursed to forever 
appear ugly. Her illusory form appears haggard at best. 

Covens. A sea hag that is part of a coven (see the “Hag 
Covens” sidebar) has a challenge rating of 4 (1,100 XP). 


a 


Unless the target is surprised or thé revelation of the hag's 
true form is sudden, the target can avert its eyes and avoid 

making the initial saving throw. Until the start of its next turn, 
Armor Class 14 (natural armor) a creature that averts its eyes has disadvantage on attack rolls 


Hit Points 52 (7d8 + 21) against the hag. 


“SEA Hac 


Medium fey, chaotic evil 


7 


d 30 ft., swim 40 ft. 

| Speed 30 ft., swim 4 ACTIONS 

STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
16 (+3) 3913 (41) 16(+3) 12(41) 12441) 13) Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage. 


_ nn ee UU TE Earn ne 
, Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 

| Languages Aquan, Common, Giant 

| Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


——————————e———————— 


Death Glare. The hag targets one frightened creature she can 
see within 30 feet of her. If the target can see the hag, it must 
succeed on a DC 11 Wisdom saving throw against this magic or 
drop to 0 hit points. 


Illusory Appearance. The hag covers herself and anything she 


Amphibious. The hag can breathe air and water. bie 
is wearing or carrying with a magical illusion that makes her 


Horrific Appearance. Any humanoid that starts its turn within look like an ugly creature of her general size and humanoid 
30 feet of the hag and can see the hag’s true form must make shape. The effect ends if the hag takes a bonus action to end it | 
a DC 11 Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the creature is or if she dies. 
| frightened for 1 minute. A creature can repeat the saving throw The changes wrought by this effect fail to hold up to physical 
| at the end of each of its turns, with disadvantage if the hag is inspection. For example, the hag could appear to have no 
_ within line of sight, ending the effect on itself on a success. If claws, but someone touching her hand might feel the claws. P| 
| acreature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, Otherwise, a creature must take an action to visually inspect | 1 
» | the creature is immune to the hag’s Horrific Appearance for the the illusion and succeed on a DC 16 Intelligence (Investigation) |, 
| next 24 hours. check to discern that the hag is disguised. yt 


CA ELA Cs 


be iT 1 
_ 4 | 


179 


HALF-DRAGON 
When a dragon in polymorphed form mates with 
another creature, the union sometimes produces half- 
dragon offspring. A creature might also transform into 
a half-dragon as a result of a mad wizard’s spell or a 
ritual bath in dragon’s blood. In all these cases, the 
result is a creature that combines the 
essence of a dragon with the form of its 
original race. Regardless of their origins, 
all half-dragons have similar features and 
appearance, gaining special senses, resistance to 
destructive energy, and a breath weapon. 
Draconic Nature. Half-dragons are incapable 
of having natural born offspring. Those that wish 
to propagate must find other ways to do so, almost 
always involving magic. By way of compensation, half- 
dragons are blessed with long life. Barring unforeseen 
misfortune, a typical half-dragon’s life expectancy is 
twice that of its nondraconic line, so that a half-dragon 
human might live more than a century and a half. 
Half-dragons inherit personality traits common to 
their draconic heritage, so that half-gold dragons are 
often shy and secretive, while half-copper dragons are 
-RE Daan impish and playful. Half-green dragons are deceitful, 
lium hun sanoid (human any a lig lar i # while half-white dragons are often dim-witted brutes. 
These traits are tempered by a half-dragon’s other 
lineage, but greed, arrogance, and paranoia are qualities 


Amor Class 18 (plate) 
7 


Hit Points 65 (10d8 + 20) that even good-aligned half-dragons often possess. 
‘Speed : 30 ft. 
HALF-DRAGON TEMPLATE 
' STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 


A beast, humanoid, giant, or monstrosity can become a 
half-dragon. When a creature becomes a half-dragon, it 
retains all its statistics except as noted below. 


16 (+3) 13 (+1) 14(42) 10(40) 117 (+0) 10 (+0) 
rn 
Saving Throws Str +5, Con +4 


) Skills Athletics +5, Perception +2 Senses. The half-dragon gains blindsight with a 

| Damage Resistances fire radius of 10 feet and darkvision with a radius of 60 feet. 
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 Resistances. The half-dragon gains resistance to a 
Languages Common, Draconic type of damage based on its color. 


’ Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Color Damage Resistance 
ACTIONS Black or copper Asid . 
Decree Blue or bronze Lightning 
_ Multiattack. The veteran makes two longsword attacks. If it Brass, gold,orred Fire 
| has a shortsword drawn, it can also make a shortsword attack. ; 
Green Poison 
| Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one Silver or white Cold 


target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage, or 8 (1d10 + 3) 


_ Slashing damage if used with two hands. Languages. The half-dragon speaks Draconic in 


| Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one addition to any other languages it knows. 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. New Action: Breath Weapon. The half-dragon has 


| ; the breath weapon of its dragon half. The half-dragon’s 
Heavy Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range sisecletenmnmes how thisaccdalt tumenens. 
100/400 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d10 + 1) piercing damage. 


Fire Breath (Recharge 5-6). The veteran exhales fire in a 15-foot Size Breath Weapon 
cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 15 Dexterity Large or smaller As awyrmling 
saving throw, taking 24 (7d6) fire damage on a failed save, or Huge As a young dragon 


half as much damage on a successful one. Gargantuan As an adult dragon 


4 | REACTIONS 
| rr a a SAMPLE HALF-DRAGON 


Parry. The veteran adds 3 to its AC against one melee attack Here the half-dragon template has been applied to a 
that would hit it. To do so, the veteran must see the attacker =| Maman voice lo crexieetnc mentee concen 


gl De Wieldige a melee weapon. Splint armor has been replaced with plate. 
——— SS ee 


) 
HALF-DRAGON 


a peeengienigsive eames _— = —— _ = ——— 


180 


7 


ee ae er ded r 
ke ae ete shail GePorioe ie 


a eee 


Taking glee in suffering and death, the sadistic harpy 
is always on the hunt for prey. Its sweet song has lured 
countless adventurers to their deaths, drawing them in 
close for the harpy to kill and then consuthe. 

A harpy combines the body, legs, and wings of a 
vulture with the torso, arms, and head of a human. 

Its wicked talons and bone club make it a formidable 
threat in combat, and its eyes reflect the absolute evil 
of its soul. 

Divine Curse. Long ago, an elf wandering a forest 
heard birdsong so pure and wholesome that she was 
moved to tears. Following the music, she came upon 
a clearing where stood a handsome elf youth who had 
also paused to hear the bird’s song. This was Fenmarel 
Mestarine, a reclusive elf god. His divine presence stole 
her heart as he fled, vanishing into the woods as if he 
was never there, ¢ 

Though the elf searched the woods and called for her 
stranger, she found no sign of his passage. Driven to 
despair by her longing, she begged the gods to help her. 
Aerdrie Faenya, elf goddess of the sky, heard the elf’s 
cries and was moved to her aid. She appeared as the 
bird whose song had entranced the outcast god, then 
taught that song of beauty and seduction to the elf. 

_When her singing failed to draw Fenmarel Mestarine 
to her side, the elf cursed the gods, invoking a dreadful 
power and transforming her into the first harpy. The 
curse worked its magic on the elf’s spirit as well as 
her body, turning her desire for love into a hunger for§ 
flesh, even as her beautiful song continued to draw 
creatures to her deadly embrace. 


it Po ts 38 pis “ 7) 9 
Ea ft., fly 40 ft. 


4 “STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
i 121) 13(41) 121) 7(-2) 1040) 1341) 
| Senses passive Perception 10 
| Languages Common 


Harpy Song. To hear a harpy’s song is to hear music Challenge 1 (200 XP) t 
more beautiful than anything else in the world. A CO ee ee | 
traveler that succumbs to the entrancing effect of that | 
singing is compelled to blunder toward its source. A | ACTIONS | 
harpy sometimes charms victims before it attacks, but | Multiattack. The harpy makes two attacks: one with its claws 


a more effective use of its song is to lure prey over cliffs, and one with its club. 
into bogs and quicksand, or into deadly pits. Creatures 
trapped or incapacitated then become easy targets for 
the harpy’s wrath. 

Sadistic Cowards. Harpies haunt bleak coastal cliffs Club. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
and other places hazardous to non-flying creatures. Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) bludgeoning damage. 
Harpies have no interest in a fair fight, and they 
never attack unless they have a clear advantage. If 
a fight turns against a harpy, it lacks the cunning to 
adapt and will flee and go hungry rather than risk 
straight-up combat. 

When they attack, harpies play with their food, 
delighting in the “music” their victims make as they 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit; 6 (2d4 + 1) slashing damage. 


Luring Song. The harpy sings a magical melody. Every | 
, humanoid and giant within 300 feet of the harpy that can hear 
the song must succeed on a DC 11 Wisdom saving throw or 
be charmed until the song ends. The harpy must take a bonus 
action on its subsequent turns to continue singing. It can stop 
singing at any time. The song ends if the harpy is incapacitated. | 
While charmed by the harpy, a target is incapacitated and 


scream. A harpy takes its time dismembering a helpless ignores the songs of other harpies. If the charmed target is 
foe and can spend days torturing a victim before the more than 5 feet away from the harpy, the target can take 
merciful end. the Dash action on its turn to move toward the harpy by the 

Gruesome Collectors. Harpies take shiny baubles, most direct route. It doesn’t avoid opportunity attacks, but | 
valuable objects, and other trophies from their victims, before moving into damaging terrain, such as lava ora pit, and | 
sometimes fighting with each other for the right to claim _ whenever it takes damage from a source other than the harpy, 1H 
the choicest prizes. When no valuable objects can be _ a target can repeat the saving throw. A creature can also repeat || mi 
found, a harpy takes hair, bones, or body parts to line the saving throw at the end of each of its turns. Ifacreature’s | i 


saving throw is successful, the effect ends on it. 
A target that successfully saves is immune to this harpy’s 
song for the next 24 hours. 


its nest. A harpy’s lair is usually hidden in ‘remote ruins, 
where adventurers can discover valuable treasure and 
magic hidden beneath foul piles of offal. 


HELL HOUND 


Monstrous, fire-breathing fiends that take the form of 


powerful dogs, hell hounds are found on the battlefields 


of Acheron and throughout the Lower Planes. On the 
Material Plane, hell hounds are most commonly seen 
in service to devils, fire giants, and other evil creatures 
that use them as guard animals and companions. 

Burning Hunger. Hell hounds hunt in packs, feeding 
on any creature that appears edible. They avoid 
potentially dangerous foes in favor of targeting the 
weakest prey with their savage bite and fiery breath, 
demonstrating a relentless determination as they pursue 
that prey to the bitter end. 

When hell hounds feed, the flesh they consume stokes 
the infernal fires that burn within them. When a hell 
hound dies, that fire consumes the creature’s remains 
in a billowing eruption of smoke and blazing embers, 
leaving nothing behind but scorched tufts of black fur. 

Evil to the Core. Hell hounds are smarter than 
mundane beasts, and their lawful nature makes them 
good at following orders. However, a hell hound’s evil 
disposition means that the creature can’t be trained to 
be anything other than a ruthless killer. If a hell hound 
isn't allowed to indulge its malevolent hunger, it quickly 
abandons or turns against its master. 


HELE Hou NT 


HELL HOUND 
Medium fiend, lawful evil 


—— 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 45 (7d8 + 14) 
Speed 50 ft. 


SSS a SS = 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
17 (#3) 1241) 1442) 6(-2) 13(41) 6 (-2) 


a 


ea —_ 


Skills Perception +5 
Damage Immunities fire 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15 
Languages understands Infernal but can’t speak it 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Keen Hearing and Smell. The hound has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell. 


Pack Tactics. The hound has advantage on an attack roll 
against a creature if at least one of the hound’s allies is within 5 
feet of the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) fire damage. 


Fire Breath (Recharge 5-6). The hound exhales fire in a 15-foot 
cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 12 Dexterity 
saving throw, taking 21 (6d6) fire damage on a failed save, or 
half as much damage on a successful one. 


HELMED HORROR 


This construct possesses intelligence, the ability 
to reason and adjust its tactics, and an unswerving 
devotion to its maker that persists even after its 
maker’s demise. Resembling an animated suit of 
empty plate armor, a helmed horror serves without 
ambition or emotion. 

Magical Purpose. Though it takes more magical 
resources to create a helmed horror than a lesser 
suit of animated armor, the helmed horror requires 
less direction and maintenance as it carries out its 
appointed tasks. A helmed horror follows its orders 
with complete loyalty, and is intelligent enough to 
understand the difference between an order’s intent and 
its exact wording. Unlike many constructs, it seeks to 
fulfill the former rather than slavishly follow the latter. 

Tactical Cunning. A helmed horror fights with 
the cunning of a skilled warrior, taking to the air as 
it attacks weaker characters and spellcasters first. 
However, a helmed horror lacks the insight to change 
its environment, fortify it, or otherwise take active 
measures to improve its defensive position. 

Constructed Nature. A helmed horror doesn’t 
require air, food, drink, or sleep. 


HELMED Horror 


Medium construct, neutral 


Armor Class 20 (plate, shield) 
Hit Points 60 (8d8 + 24) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft. 
‘= ee 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 1341) 16 (43) 10(+0) 10(+0) 10 (+0) 
——_——— —————_ ————————— a — = 
_ Skills Perception +4 
» Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
| nonmagical weapons that aren't adamantine 
Damage Immunities force, necrotic, poison 
| Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, stunned 
Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
| passive Perception 14 
| Languages understands the languages of its creator but 
| can’t speak 
| Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


SSS. a | ~ — 


| Magic Resistance. The helmed horror has advantage on saving 
' r 
' throws against spells and other magical effects. 


Spell immunity. The helmed horror is immune to three spells 
| chosen by its creator. Typical immunities include fireball, heat 
_ metal, and lightning bolt. 


| ACTIONS 
) Multiattack. The helmed horror makes two longsword attacks. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
} target. Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) slashing damage, or 9 (1d10 + 4) 
slashing damage if used with two hands. 


HIPPOGRIFF 


A beast whose magical origins are lost to history, a 
hippogriff possesses the wings and forelimbs of an 
eagle, the hindquarters of a horse, and a head that 
combines the features of both animals. 

Reclusive and omnivorous, hippogriffs mate for life 
and seldom venture more than a few miles from their 
nest, When defending its mate or its young, a hippogriff 
fights to the death. Hippogriffs don’t lay eggs but give 
birth to live young. 

Dragons, griffons, and wyverns have a taste for 
hippogriff meat and frequently prey on these creatures. 

Flying Mounts. A hippogriff raised in captivity can be 
trained to be a faithful companion and mount. Of all the 
creatures that can serve as flying mounts, hippogriffs 
are among the easiest to train and the most loyal once 
trained properly. 


| aiPPackirE 
184 * a - 


-HIPPOGRIFF 


Large monstrosity, unaligned 


Hit Points 19 (3d10 + 3) 


' Armor Class 1] 
{ Speed 40 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX 
17 (+3) 13: (41) 


CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (41) 2(-4) 1241) 8(-1) 


Skills Perception +5 
Senses passive Perception 15 
Languages — 

| Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Keen Sight. The hippogriff has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight. 
ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The hippogriff makes two attacks: one with its 
beak and one with its claws. 


_ Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit; 8 (1d10 + 3) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage. 
See : TERE Se 


eae SS 


HOBGOBLINS 


War horns sound, stones fly from catapults, and the 
thunder of a thousand booted feet echoes across 

the land as hobgoblins march to battle. Across the 
borderlands of civilization, settlements and settlers 
must contend with these aggressive humanoids, whose 
thirst for conquest is never satisfied. 

Hobgoblins have dark orange or red-orange skin, and 
hair ranging from dark red-brown to dark gray. Yellow 
or dark brown eyes peer out beneath their beetling 
brows, and their wide mouths sport sharp and yellowed 
teeth. A male hobgoblin might have a large blue or red 
nose, which symbolizes virility and power among 
goblinkin. Hobgoblins can live as long as humans, 
though their love of warfare and battle means 
that few do. 

Goblinoids. Hobgoblins belong to a family of 
creatures called goblinoids. They are often found 
lording over their cousins, the smaller goblins and the 
ferocious bugbears. 

Martial Might. A hobgoblin measures virtue by 
physical strength and martial prowess, caring about 
‘nothing except the opportunity to demonstrate skill 

“and cunning in battle. Hobgoblins of high military 
rank attain their positions by force, then hold those 
positions by imposing their authority through 
draconian measures. 

Hobgoblins train to fight with a variety of weapons, 
and have great skill at crafting arms, armor, siege 
engines, and other military devices. Organized and 
disciplined, they take exceptional care of their weapons, 
armor, and personal possessions. They favor the bold 
colors associated with their tribes, and trim their 
often-elaborate uniforms with blood-red piping and 
leather dyed black. 

Military Legions. Hobgoblins organize themselves 
into tribal bands known as legions. In their martial 
society, every hobgoblin has a rank, from the powerful 
leaders and champions, to the rank-and-file foot 
soldiers, to the goblins that find themselves driven 
into the front lines at spear point. A legion is headed 
by a warlord with several captains serving under its 
command. A hobgoblin warlord is a ruthless tyrant 
more interested in strategy, victory, glory, reputation, 
and dominion than leading troops into battle. 

As loyal and disciplined as hobgoblins are in their 
own legion, rival legions compete constantly for 
reputation and status. Meetings between legions 
erupt in violence if troops aren't restrained, and only 
exceptionally powerful leaders can force legions to 
cooperate on the battlefield. 

Strategic Thinkers. Hobgoblins have a strong grasp 
of tactics and discipline, and can carry out sophisticated 
battle plans under the direction of a strategically 
minded leader. However, they hate elves and attack 
them first in battle over any other opponents, even if 
doing so would be a tactical error. ‘ 

Legions often supplement their ranks with less 
reliable and more expendable troops, including goblins, 
bugbears, orcs, evil humans, ogres, and giants. 


Beast Trainers. Hobgoblins have a long history of 
training animals to service. Like the more civilized 
races, they use oxen and horses to transport goods 
and weaponry over long distances. They communicate 
with each other using trained ravens, and keep vicious 
Il. ‘wolves to guard prisoners and protect hobgoblin camps. 

: Nani Hobgoblin cavalry use trained worgs as steeds, in the 

, same way that goblins ride wolves. Some tribes even 
keep carnivorous apes as fighting beasts. 

Conquer and Control. Hobgoblins claim lands 
with abundant resources, and they can be found in 
forests and mountains, near mines and humanoid 
settlements, and anywhere else that wood, metal, and 
potential slaves can be found. They build and conquer 


LDS 
THEY BREAK BEFORE ouR SHIE ' 


Trey FALL BENEATH OUR pe 
THEIR HOME 15 ours TO CONQUER, 
THEIR CHILOREN OUR SLAVES. 

Y yr 


ACHERON.- 


Vic TORY 15 ours! TRANSLATION OF A 


hy, r, 
arn CHANT 


‘a 


i 
be, i gt \ 


Hoscoaitin W 


a | a \B ae fel Na 
Me dun h i ! | ¥# 
ag Medit a a a ea 


a eR. os Clas 


s 18 ( hain mail, shield) 
s 11 (2d ie 


" sends ae 


DEX 
12 (+1) 


CON 
12 (+1) 


INT 
10 (+0) 


wis 
10 (+0) 


CHA 


a (#1) 9 (-1) 


| Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 | 
Languages Common, Goblin 
} Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


<7 | Martial Advantage. Once per turn, the hobgoblin can deal an 
ia | extra 7 (2d6) damage to a creature it hits with a weapon attack 
ot | if that creature is within 5 feet of an ally of the hobgoblin that 
isn’t incapacitated. 


mi) 6 ACTIONS 


| Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 5 (1d8 + 1) slashing damage, or 6 (1d10 + 1) 
slashing damage if used with two hands. 


oe . 


! 
/ 
| Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range 150/600 ft., 
, one target. Hit: 5 (1d8 + 1) piercing damage. I 


a 
“ _HORGORLINS 


puluebr=" SF al 


‘ut Sanh ed bs _ 

nh, Ou a 3 
strongholds i in strategically advantageous’ locations, 
which they then use as Staging areas to expand 
theif territory. 

Hobgoblin warlords never tire of combat, but 
they don’t take up arms lightly. Before they attack, 
hobgoblins conduct thorough reconnaissance to gauge 
the strengths and weaknesses of their foes. When 
assaulting a stronghold, they surround it first to cut off 
escape routes and supply lines, then slowly starve their 
enemies out. 

Hobgoblins fortify their own holdings, bolstering 
existing defenses with innovations of their own. 
Whether they lair in cavern complexes, dungeons, 
ruins, or forests, they protect their strongholds with 
ditches, fences, gates, guard towers, pit traps, and crude 
catapults or ballistas. 

Legion of Maglubiyet. Hobgoblins worship 
Maglubiyet the Mighty One, the greater god of 
goblinoids. As terrifying as this figure is, hobgoblins 
don’t fear death, believing that when they die in battle, 
their spirits join the honored ranks of Maglubiyet’s army 
on the plane of Acheron. 


*" “ 


‘Armor auth 7 "han plate)” 


it Points 39 (6d8 + 12) _ | 

_ Speed 30 ft. | 
" “STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA | 
15 (+2) 14 (42) 14 (42), 12 (+1), 10 (40) 13 (#1) | 


_ Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
/ Languages Common, Goblin 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Martial Advantage. Once per turn, the hobgoblin can deal 
an extra 10 (3d6) damage to a creature it hits with a weapon 
| attack if that creature is within 5 feet of an ally of the hobgoblin 
_ that isn’t incapacitated. 


ee ee 


_ ACTIONS | 
| Multiattack. The hobgoblin makes two greatsword attacks. | 
} 


_ Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
_ target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


, Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
| range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


_ Leadership (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). For 1 

_ minute, the hobgoblin can utter a special command or warning 

_ whenever a nonhostile creature that it can see within 30 feet 

of it makes an attack roll or a saving throw. The creature can 

add a d4 to its roll provided it can hear and understand the 
hobgoblin. A creature can benefit from only one Leadership die 
at a time. This effect ends if the hobgoblin is incapacitated. [ 


| | Slee 


a 


a. 
—k 


i HOBGOBLIN WARLORD Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft.,.one 
I) Medium humanoid (goblinoid), lawful evi target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage, or 8 (1d]0 + 3) 
yi - slashing damage if used with two hands. 


: Armor Class 20 (plate, shield) Shield Bash. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
} Hit Points 97 (13d8 + 39) creature. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) bludgeoning damage. If the target is 
) Speed 30 ft. Large or smaller, it must succeed on a DC 14 Strength saving 
a —- —aii -—h . throw or be knocked prone. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 14(42) 16643) 14(42) 1140) 15 (+2) Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft. or | 
a range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


Saving Throws int +5, Wis +3, Cha +5 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Common, Goblin 

Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


fm — — = — —= —eeeae _ ee 


Leadership (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). For 1 
minute, the hobgoblin can utter a special command or warning 
whenever a nonhostile creature that it can see within 30 feet 

of it makes an attack roll or a saving throw. The creature can 
add a d4 to its roll provided it can hear and understand the 


Martial Advantage. Once per turn, the hobgoblin can deal an hobgoblin. A creature can benefit from only one Leadership die 
extra 14 (4d6) damage to a creature it hits with a weapon attack at a time. This effect ends if the hobgoblin is incapacitated. 
if that creature is within 5 feet of an ally of the hobgoblin that 

| isn’t incapacitated. REACTIONS 


Parry. The hobgoblin adds 3 to its AC against one melee attack 
that would hit it. To do so, the hobgoblin must see the attacker | 
and be wielding a melee weapon. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The hobgoblin makes three melee attacks. 
Alternatively, it can make two ranged attacks with its javelins. 


_—. = ——————<— a St Die be ae | sake eS ——=——— 
= i i ( é‘ ie | 1 


‘an = . a 
Se Se ———— ——— 


i) HOMUNCULUS 


I. 4), Tiny construct, neutral 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
" Hit Points 5 (2d4) 


EE 


| . Speed 20 ft., fly 40 ft. 
Ra STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
ae 4(-3) 15(+2) 11 (+0) 10(+0) 10(+0) 7 (-2) 
L mT ee 
Damage Immunities poison 
) Condition Immunities charmed, poisoned 
Hom UNCULUS | Senses darkvision 60 ft., vasehie PRCSBLON 10 
% Shaping a mixture of clay, ash, mandrake root, and | Languages understands the languages of its creator but | 
= blood, one can channel rare ritual magic to create a | can’t speak | 
le faithful, squirrel-sized companion. Challenge 0 (10 XP) 
A homunculus is a construct that acts as an extension 

of its creator, with the two sharing thoughts, senses, Telepathic Bond. While the homunculus is on the same 

and language through a mystical bond. A master can plane of existence as its master, it can magically convey 

have only one homunculus at a time (attempts to create _ what it senses to its master, and the two can communicate 
! another one always fail), and when its master dies, the _ telepathically. 
fe homunculus also dies. 
le Shared Mind. A homunculus knows everything its _ ACTIONS 
we creator knows, including all the languages the creator Bite. Melee Weapon Aitack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
7 can speak and read. Likewise, everything the construct Hit: 1 piercing damage, and the target must succeed on 

senses is known to its master, even over great distances, a DC 10 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned for 1 | 
provided both are on the same plane. Functioning as a minute. If the saving throw fails by 5 or more, the target is 
Spy, a Scout, an emissary, or a messenger, a homunculus _ instead poisoned for 5 (1d10) minutes and unconscious while 

is an invaluable servant for a spellcaster engaged in poisoned in this way. 

secret experimentation or adventuring. ————————— 


Z 
HOMUACULUS 
188 —_— = 


parnor Class 15 (natural armor) 

f it Points 75 (10d10 + 20) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 

. ! 


STR. +=DEX CON INT wis 


18 (+4) 10(40) 15(42) 6(-2) 12(4+1) = 7/(-2) 


Skills Perception +3 


| Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 10 ft., passive Perception 13 | 


_ Languages Hook Horror 
| Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


| Echolocation, The hook horror can’t use its blindsight 
a while deafened. 


| Keen Hearing. The hook horror has advantage on Wisdom 


, 1 (Perception) checks that rely on hearing. 


4 ACTIONS 


{ Multiattack. The hook horror makes two hook attacks. 


Hook. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage. 
0 SS eee 


2 —— 


HookK HORROR 


A fierce predator of the Underdark, the hook horror 
aggressively defends its hunting grounds. The 
subterranean caverns where these creatures dwell echo 
with the constant clacking and scraping of their hooks 
as they wend their way up cliffs and along cavern walls. 

The monstrous hook horror has a head resembling a 
vulture’s and the torso of an enormous beetle, with an 
exoskeleton studded by sharp, bony protuberances. It 
gains its name from its long, powerfully built arms and 
legs, which end in wickedly curved hooked claws. 

Echoes in the Dark. Hook horrors comiunicate by 
striking their hooks against their exoskeletons or the 
stone surfaces around them. What sounds to others like 
random clacking noise is actually a complex language 
that only hook horrors understand, and which carries 
for miles through the echoing Underdark. 

Pack Predators. The omnivorous hook horrors eat 
lichens, fungi, plants, and any creature they can catch. 
A hook horror’s hooked limbs give it excellent purchase 
on rock surfaces, and these creatures use their 
climbing skills to ambush prey from above. They hunt 
in packs, working together against the largest and most 
dangerous opponents. If a battle goes poorly, a hook 
horror quickly climbs a cavern wall to flee. 

Dedicated Clans. Hook horrors live in extended 
family groups or clans. Each clan is ruled by the eldest 
female, who typically places her mate in charge of 
the clan’s hunters. Hook horrors lay eggs, which are: 
clustered in a central, well-defended area of a clan’s 
home caverns. 


eae S 


eee > 


— 


HYDRA 


The hydra is a reptilian horror with a crocodilian body 
and multiple heads on long, serpentine necks. Although 
its heads can be severed, the hydra magically regrows 
them in short order. A typical specimen has five heads. 

At the dawn of time, Tiamat, the Queen of Evil 
Dragons, slew a rival dragon god named Lernaea and 
cast her blood across the multiverse. Each drop that fell 
upon a world spawned a multi-headed hydra consumed 
by a hunger as great as the fallen god’s hatred. Great 
champions are known to test their mettle against these 
fearsome creatures. 

Everlasting Hunger. A rapacious and gluttonous 
monster, a hydra snatches and tears apart its prey ina 
frenzy of feeding. When a hydra has cleared a territory 
of food and driven off any creatures smart enough to 
avoid it, it moves on to seek its meals elsewhere. A 
hydra’s hunger is so great that if it can’t feed, it might 
turn against itself, its heads attacking each other as the 
creature eats itself alive. 

Hardy Water Dwellers. Hydras are natural 
swimmers, dwelling in rivers, along lakeshores, in 
ocean shallows, and in wetland bogs. A hydra rarely 
requires shelter from the elements, so it doesn’t 
normally have a lair. Only in colder climes are hydras 
drawn to the protection of sheltered caverns and ruins. 

When a hydra sleeps, at least one of its heads remains 
awake and alert, making the creature difficult to catch 
by surprise. 


_ HYDRA 


“ 


HYDRA 


Huge monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 15: (natural armor) 
Hit Points 172 (15d12 + 75) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
20 (+5) 1241) 2045) 2(-4) 1040) 7(2) 


Skills Perception +6 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 16 
Languages — 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


Hold Breath. The hydra can hold its breath for 1 hour. 


Multiple Heads. The hydra has five heads. While it has more 
than one head, the hydra has advantage on saving throws 
against being blinded, charmed, deafened, frightened, 
stunned, and knocked unconscious. 

Whenever the hydra takes 25 or more damage in a single 
turn, one of its heads dies. If all its heads die, the hydra dies. 

At the end of its turn, it grows two heads for each of its heads 
that died since its last turn, unless it has taken fire damage 
since its last turn. The hydra regains 10 hit points for each head 
regrown in this way. 


Reactive Heads. For each head the hydra has beyond 
one, it gets an extra reaction that can be used only for 
opportunity attacks. 


Wakeful. While the hydra sleeps, at least one of its 
heads is awake. 


ACTIONS 


MN , Multiattack. The hydra makes as many bite attacks as it 
ii has heads. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 10 (1d10 + 5) piercing damage. 


— NO INTENTION OF 
*yOUR -_ 
MIND Pavet i 


_Qorik EL-SLURRK: 


INTELLECT DEVOURER 


An intellect devourer resembles a walking brain «>: - ri 
protected by a crusty covering and set on bestial clawed: 
legs. This foul aberration feeds on the intelligence of 
sentient creatures, taking over a victim’s body on behalf 
of its mind flayer masters. ; 

Illithid Creations. Mind flayers breed intellect: 
devourers to serve as roaming hunters of the 
Underdark, creating an intellect devourer by taking the 
brain of a thrall and subjecting it to a horrible ritual. As 
it sprouts legs, the brain becomes an intelligent predator 
as twisted and evil as its masters. 

Deadly Puppet Masters. An intellect devourer 
consumes a creature’s mind and memories, then turns 
the host body into a puppet under its control. An intellect 
devourer typically uses its puppet host to lure others 
into the domain of the mind flayers to be enthralled 
or consumed. 


Why 
INTELLECT D EVOURER ai, Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: $4 to hit reach 5 fs one e target. | 
Tiny aberration, lawful evil Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) slashing damage. 
Devour Intellect. The intellect devourer targets one creatu re 
, Armor Class 12 it can see within 10 feet of it that has a brain. The target must 
| Hit Points 21 (6d4 + 6) succeed on a DC 12 Intelligence saving throw against this 
“Speed 40 ft. magic or take 11 (2d10) psychic damage. Also on a failure, 
| roll 3d6: If the total equals or exceeds the target’s Intelligence 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA score, that score is reduced to 0. The target is stunned until it 
6(-2) 1442) 13 (FI) 12 1) 1 0) 10 (+0) regains at least one point of Intelligence. 
(I _ E IN 
Skills Perception +2, Stealth +4 Body Thief. The intellect devourer initiates an Intelligence 
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from contest with an incapacitated humanoid within 5 feet of it. If 
)/ nonmagical weapons it wins the contest, the intellect devourer magically consumes 
| Condition Immunities blinded the target's brain, teleports into the target’s skull, and takes 
Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), control of the target’s body. While inside a creature, the 
| passive Perception 12 intellect devourer has total cover against attacks and other 
») Languages understands Deep Speech but can’t speak, effects originating outside its host. The intellect devourer 
telepathy 60 ft. retains its Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, as 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) well as its understanding of Deep Speech, its telepathy, and 
i its traits. It otherwise adopts the target’s statistics. It knows 
} Detect Sentience. The intellect devourer can sense the everything the creature knew, including spells and languages. 
"| presence and location of any creature within 300 feet of it that If the host body drops to 0 hit points, the intellect devourer | 
| has an Intelligence of 3 or higher, regardless of interposing must leave it. A protection from evil and good spell cast on the 
barriers, unless the creature is protected by a mind blank spell. body drives the intellect devourer out. The intellect devourer 
| is also forced out if the target regains its devoured brain by | 
ACTIONS means of a wish. By spending 5 feet of its movement, the : 


| Multiattack. The intellect devourer makes one attack with its 
- 4 claws and uses Devour Intellect. 


intellect devourer can voluntarily leave the body, teleporting to | 
the nearest unoccupied space within 5 feet of it. The body then 
dies, unless its brain is restored within 1 round. 


Armor Class 14 . 
| Hit Points 104 (16d8 + 32) 
Speed 50 ft., fly 50 ft. (hover) 


_ STR INT WIs CHA 

| 16 (+3) 10 (+0) 15 (+2) 11 (40) 

hee 
{ Skills Perception +8, Stealth +10 

| Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and siashing from 
| nonmagical weapons 

_ Damage Immunities poison 

| Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed, 

] petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained, unconscious 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 18 

Languages Auran, understands Common but doesn’t speak it 
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 

I ———————————————————————————— 


DEX 
19 (+4) 


CON 
14 (+2) 


\y Invisibility. The stalker is invisible. 


_ Faultless Tracker. The stalker is given a quarry by its 

» summoner. The stalker knows the direction and distance to 

its quarry as long as the two of them are on the same plane of 
existence. The stalker also knows the location of its summoner. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The stalker makes two slam attacks. 


| Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
|| Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage. 


INVISIBLE STALKER aa 


Es. segubes 


.and slaying a specific creature or recovering an object, 


INVISIBLE STALKER 


An invisible stalker is an air elemental that has been 
summoned from its native plane and transformed 
by powerful magic. Its sole purpose is to hunt down 
creatures and retrieve objects for its summoner. When 
it is defeated or the magic that binds it expires, an 
invisible stalker vanishes in a gust of wind. 

Directed Hunter. When an invisible stalker is created, 
it stays at its summoner’s side until it is given a task to 
perform. If an assignment doesn’t involve hunting down 


the magic that created the invisible stalker ends and 

the elemental is released. Otherwise, it completes the 
task, then returns to its summoner for more commands, 
forced to serve until the magic that binds it expires. If 
its summoner dies in the interim, the invisible stalker 
vanishes after completing its task. 

An invisible stalker is an unwilling servant at best. 

It resents any undertaking assigned to it. A mission 
that requires significant time might drive the invisible 
stalker to pervert the intent of acommand unless it is 
worded carefully. 

Unseen Threat. Invisible stalkers are composed of ait 
and are naturally invisible. A creature might hear and 
feel an invisible stalker in passing, but the elemental 
remains invisible even when it attacks. A spell that 
allows someone to see the invisible reveals only the 
invisible stalker’s vague outline, 

Elemental Nature. An invisible stalker requires no 
air, food, drink, or sleep. 


venelag eS me tyre Sat neem 
ame ig a sca eS ot 
2%. L 


JACKALWERE 


| Medium humanoid (shapechanger), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 12 
| Hit Points 18 (4d8) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1 11 (+0) 15 (+2) 11440) 13441) 11 (40) 10 (+0) 


| 


| Skills Deception +4, Perception +2, Stealth +4 
Immunities bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing damage from 
nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered 
| Senses passive Perception 12 
Languages Common (can’t speak in jackal form) 
) Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 
] 


| Shapechanger. The jackalwere can use its action to polymorph 
} intoa specific Medium human or a jackal-humanoid hybrid, or 
| back into its true form (that of a Small jackal). Other than its 
| size, its statistics are the same in each form. Any equipment 
it is wearing or carrying isn’t transformed. It reverts to its true 
form if it dies. 


4 | Ajackalwere might also use its gaze to incapacitate a 
| deadly enemy long enough to make good its escape.. 


LS ile NT I SP ET wn 


JACKALWERE a 
Ordinary jackals tainted by demonic power, jackalweres ne 
haunt roads and trails, waylaying and ean 3 


those they meet. 4 

A jackalwere has three physical forms fies it shifts 
between. In its true form, it is indistinguishable 
from a normal jackal. It can take human form, often 
appearing gaunt and affecting a wretched demeanor to 
beg goodwill from strangers. When travelers welcome 
a jackalwere into their midst, the monster adopts its 
human-sized hybrid form, with the fur and head of a 
jackal but standing on two legs as it attacks. 

Beguilers and Cowards. The demon lord Graz’zt 
created jackalweres to serve his devoted servants, the 
lamias. Reaching out from the Abyss, he bestowed 
jackals with the gift of speech and the ability to assume 
humanoid forms. A jackalwere is born to lie, and 
perceptive creatures might notice it wincing in pain 
when it speaks the truth. 

A jackalwere prefers to fight alongside jackals and 
others of its kind. Under the direction of jackalweres, 
jackals are fierce and loyal companions. 

Supernatural Servants. Jackalweres kidnap 
humanoids for their lamia masters, condemning 
victims to a lifetime of slavery or an agonizing death, A 
jackalwere’s magical gaze renders a foe unconscious, 
allowing the monster to bind a creature or drag it away. 


Keen Hearing and Smell. The jackalwere has advantage on 
Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on hearing of smell. 


Pack Tactics. The jackalwere has advantage on an attack roll 
against a creature if at least one of the jackalwere’s allies is 
within 5 feet of the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated, 


AcTions 


; 
Bite (Jackal or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to 
hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


‘ | 

| 
Scimitar (Human or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon 
Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) | 
slashing damage. 


within 30 feet of it. The target must make a DC 10 Wisdom 

saving throw. On a failed save, the target succumbs to a | 

magical slumber, falling unconscious for 10 minutes or until | 
someone uses an action to shake the target awake. Acreature | 
that successfully saves against the effect is immune to this 
jackalwere’s gaze for the next 24 hours. Undead and creatures 
immune to being charmed aren’t affected by it. 


| 
Sleep Gaze. The jackalwere gazes at one creature it can see 
i] 


i: ea mast BRE ’ 
_ 


KENKU 


Kenku are feathered humanoids that wander the world 
as vagabonds, driven by greed. They can perfectly 
imitate any sound they hear. 

Fallen Flocks. Kenku wear ill-fitting cloaks, robes, 
and rags. These garments cover the soft, sleek feathers 
of their bodies, shrouding their bare arms and legs. 
They tread lightly when they walk, on talons made for 
grasping the branches of trees and seizing prey from the 
lofty skies. Soft as the wind they move, so as not to draw 
attention to their shameful forms. 

Once, the kenku held the wind in their wings, 
embracing the gusty sky and singing the sweet language 
of birdsong. Serving a master whose identity is now 
lost to their memory, the kenku coveted the glittering 
baubles of his household, and longed to speak so 
that they could cajole and swindle others out of such 
treasures. Stealing the secret of speech from a volume 
in their master’s library, they disguised themselves 
in rags to beg for pretty things. When their master 
learned of their greed, he stripped away their wings as 
punishment, forcing them to beg forever. 

Speech in Pantomime. Kenkti can mimic the sound 
of anything they hear. A kenku asking for money might 
make the sound of coins clinking together, and a 

kenku referring to a busy marketplace can reproduce 

the cacophony of hawking vendors, barking dogs, 

bleating sheep, and the cries of street urchins. When 
mimicking voices, they can only repeat words and 
phrases they have heard, not create new sentences. 


KENKU 


Medium humanoid (kenku), chaotic heutral 


Armor Class 13 To converse with a kenku is to witness a performance of 
_ Hit Points 13 (3d8) imitated sounds and almost nonsensical verse. 
Speed 30 ft. Kenku speak to one another in much the same 


way. Because they are adept at interpreting one 

another’s glances and gestures, the sounds they make 

to communicate complex ideas or emotions can be 

succinct. Groups of kenku also develop secret codes. 
Senses passive Perception 12 po example, a cats Bo might be the ae code for 
Languages understands Auran and Common but speaks only Prepare to attack!” or “Flee for your lives! 

~ through the use of its Mimicry trait Their talent for mimicry extends to handwriting, and 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) criminal organizations often employ kenku to forge 

documents. When a kenku commits a crime, it might 

forge evidence to implicate another creature. 

The Wistful Wingless. All kenku pine for the ability 
to fly, and thus the punishments they mete out to one 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 16(43) 1040) 11 (40) 1040) 10(+0) 


" Skills Deception +4, Perception +2, Stealth +5 


Ambusher. The kenku has advantage on attack rolls against any 
creature it has surprised. 


Mimicry. The kenku can mimic any sounds it has heard, another often involve false wings, such as heavy wings 
including voices. A creature that hears the sounds can tell they of wood borne as a mark of shame. As a final, tragic 
are imitations with a successful DC 14 Wisdom (Insight) check. reminder of the wings they once had, kenku carry 


out executions by hurling their condemned from tall 
buildings or cliffs. 


ACTIONS 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
_ target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 80/320 ft., enBy CRYING ee 
one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. syp vou He ce wer WA 
= wa aa oe 
ai ee ance 10,X0 "sy wwarce! 
‘ 'S * en 
wy ot cnonott WA vy WATEROEFP 
— KENKU pat IN 


194 
. 


KOBOLDS 


Kobolds are craven reptilian humanoids that worship 
evil dragons as demigods and serve them'as minions 
and toadies. Kobolds inhabit dragons’ lairs when they 
can but more commonly infest dungeons, gathering 
treasures and trinkets to add to their own tiny hoards. 

Strength in Numbers. Kobolds are egg-laying 
creatures. They mature quickly and can live to be 
“great wyrms” more than a century old. However, 
many kobolds perish before they reach the end of 
their first decade. Physically weak, they are easy prey 
for predators. This vulnerability forces them to band 
together. Their superior numbers can win battles 
against powerful adversaries, but often with massive 
casualties on the kobold side. 

Tunnelers and Builders. Kobolds make up for their 
physical ineptitude with a cleverness for trap making 
and tunneling. Their lairs consist of low tunnels 
through which they move easily but which hinder larger 
humanoids. Kobolds also riddle their lairs with traps. 
The most insidious kobold traps make use of natural 
hazards and other creatures. A trip wire might connect 
to a spring-loaded trap that hurls clay pots of flesh- 
eating green slime or flings crates of venomous giant 
centipedes at intruders. 

The Lost God. In addition to the dragons they revere, 
kobolds worship a lesser god named Kurtulmak. 
Legends speak of how Kurtulmak served as Tiamat’s 
vassal in the Nine Hells until Garl Glittergold, the god 
of gnomes, stole a trinket from the Dragon Queen's 
hoard. Tiamat sent Kurtulmak to retrieve the trinket, 


, oa : ‘ - i 
- Armor Class 13 

- Hit Points 7 (3d6 ~ 3) 

‘Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft. 


CHA 
ae a 


| ‘STR 


ie DEX 
7-2) 
| 


16 (+3) 


CON INT 
aC) el 


Wis 
7 (a2) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8 
) Languages Common, Draconic 
| Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


. 
. 
~ 
. 
. ~ 
. 
. . 

. ~ 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the kobold has 
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight. 


Pack Tactics. The kobold has advantage on an attack roll 
against a creature if at least one of the kobold’s allies is within 
_ 5 feet of the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


_ ACTIONS 
Dagger. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. | 
Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage. 


_ Dropped Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, 
one target directly below the kobold. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) 
bludgeoning damage. 


but Garl Glittergold played a trick on him, collapsing the 
earth and trapping the kobold god in an underground » 
maze for eternity. For this reason, kobolds hate: gnomes) 
and pranks of any kind. Kurtulmak’s most devoted — 
worshipers dedicate themselves to finding and releasing 
their lost god from his prison-maze. 

Winged Kobolds. A few kobolds are born with 
leathery wings and can fly. Known 
as urds, they like to lurk on high 
ledges and drop rocks 
on passersby. Although 
the urds’ wings are seen 
as gifts from Tiamat, the 
Dragon Queen, wingless 
kobolds are envious of 
those gifts and don’t get 
along with the urds. 


> 


ices 


hm =r A _ - ey, 
INS Ob re DB yf 
| Sma If humanoid (kobold), lawful ae 


i Armor Class 12 
_ Hit Points 5 (2d6 - 2) 


Speed 30 ft. | 
Jon ule _ i. _ ane | 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA | 

ie?) alec2)” Vial) eS Clee acl 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8 
Languages Common, Draconic 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the kobold has 
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight 


Pack Tactics. The kobold has advantage on an attack roll 
against a creature if at least one of the kobold’s allies is within ! 
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


_ ACTIONS 


Dagger. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


Sling. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120 ft., one 
target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) bludgeoning damage. 


KRAKEN 


Beneath the waves, the kraken sleeps for untold 

ages, awaiting some fell sign or calling. Land-born 
mortals who sail the open sea forget the reasons their 
ancestors dreaded the ocean, even as the races of the 
deep ignore strange gaps in their histories when their 
civilizations nearly vanished after the appearance of the 
tentacled horror. 

Leviathans of Legend. At the beginning of time, 
krakens served as fierce warriors of the gods. When the 
gods’ wars ended, the krakens shrugged free of their 
servitude, never again to be bound by other beings. 

Whole nations quake in fear when the kraken emerges 
from its dark demesne, and even in the middle of the 
deepest oceans, storms rise or abate according to its 
will. The kraken is a primeval force that obliterates 
the greatest achievements of civilization as if they 
were castles in the sand. Its devastating attacks can 
destroy ocean trade and halt communication between 
coastal cities. 

An ominous darkness presages a kraken’s attack, 
and a cloud of inky poison colors the water around it, | 
Galleons and warships vanish when its tentacles uncoil 
from the deep, the kraken breaking their masts like 
kindling before drawing down ships and crew. 

Not even landlocked surface dwellers are safe from 
a kraken’s wrath. Krakens can breathe air as easily as 
water, and some crawl up rivers to nest in freshwater 
lakes, destroying cities and towns along the way. 
Adventurers tell of these monsters lairing in the ruins of 
lakeside citadels, their tentacles twined around leaning 
towers of disintegrating stone. 

Mortal Foes. Some krakens are virtual gods, with 
cults and minions spread across sea and land. Others 
are allied with Olhydra, the evil Princess of Elemental 
Water, and use her cultists to enforce their will on land 
and sea. A kraken pleased with its worshipers can 
becalm rough seas and bring a bounteous harvest of fish 
to the faithful. However, the devious mind of a kraken is 
ancient beyond reckoning, and is ultimately bent to the 
ruination of all things. 


A KRAKEN’s LAIR 


A kraken lives in dark depths, usually a sunken rift or a 
cavern filled with detritus, treasure, and wrecked ships. 


LAIR ACTIONS 

On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the 
kraken takes a lair action to cause one of the following 
magical effects: 


- Astrong current moves through the kraken’s lair. 
Each creature within 60 feet of the kraken must suc- 
ceed on a DC 23 Strength saving throw or be pushed 
up to 60 feet away from the kraken. On a success, the 
creature is pushed 10 feet away from the kraken. 

- Creatures in the water within 60 feet of the kraken 
have vulnerability to lightning damage until initiative 
count 20 on the next round. 

« The water in the kraken’s lair becomes electrically 
charged. All creatures within 120 feet of the kraken 
must succeed on a DC 23 Constitution saving throw, 


taking 10 (3d6) lightning damage on a failed save, or 
half as much damage on a successful one. 


REGIONAL EFFECTS 

The region containing a kraken’s lair is warped by the 
creature’s blasphemous presence, creating the following 
magical effects: 


- The kraken can alter the weather at will in a 6-mile 
radius centered on its lair. The effect is identical to the 
control weather spell. 

« Water elementals coalesce within 6 miles of the lair. 
These elementals can’t leave the water and have 
Intelligence and Charisma scores of 1 (5). 

- Aquatic creatures within 6 miles of the lair that have 
an Intelligence score of 2 or lower are charmed by the 
kraken and aggressive toward intruders in the area. 


When the kraken dies, all of these regional effects fade 
immediately. 


_ | KRaKEN i a eee ee = aoe 


i Sort toe (titan), chaotic evil S i. 


— 


Sele EN ORE 
VENS 
} ft, AND AND stRaAN 
SET eg. 'TS OREAM & 
THE Occas; 
Fr 
8 FROM NI 
Matreore Se G 
we 
*h 


o “Cor stitution 5; 


ai al Peeled crea 


a) al 
: rly feet of the siting I ‘the sen dies ed create re 3 no 
Ly Aymor Class 18 (ane Btmory i ’ , a ¥ 7h longer restrained by it and can escape from the co @ using. 15 | 
‘Hit Points 472 (27420 + 189) \“F :\ , feet of movernent, exiting prone, as 1! ae. i, nM 
Speed 20 ft., swim 60 ft. Tentacle. Melee Weapdh Attack: +18 to hit, teach 30 ft,, one 
target. Hit: 20 (3d6 + 10) bludgeoning damage, and the target 
“STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA is grappled (escape DC 18). Until this grapple ends, the target 
30 (+10) 11 (+0) 25 (+7) 22 (+6) 18 (+4) 20 (+5) is restrained. The kraken has ten tentacles, each of which can 


Saving Throws Str +18, Dex +8, Con +15, Int +14, Wis +12 
Damage Immunities lightning; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical weapons 
_ Condition Immunities frightened, paralyzed 
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 14 
/] _ Languages understands Abyssal, Celestial, Infernal, and 
| Primordial but can't speak, telepathy 120 ft. 
Challenge 23 (50,000 XP) 


| 


——— 


Amphibious. The kraken can breathe air and water. 


Freedom of Movement. The kraken ignores difficult terrain, 
| and magical effects can’t reduce its speed or cause it to be 
restrained. It can spend 5 feet of movement to escape from 
nonmagical restraints or being grappled. 


oe 


P , ' 
Siege Monster. The kraken deals double damage to objects and 
| structures. 


ACTIONS 


i Multiattack. The kraken makes three tentacle attacks, each of 
| which it can replace with one use of Fling. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +18 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 23 (3d8 + 10) piercing damage. If the target is a Large 
or smaller creature grappled by the kraken, that creature 
is swallowed, and the grapple ends. While swallowed, the 
creature is blinded and restrained, it has total cover against 
| attacks and other effects outside the kraken, and it takes 42 
| (12d6) acid damage at the start of each of the kraken’s turns. 
If the kraken takes 50 damage or more on a single turn 
from a creature inside it, the kraken must succeed on a DC 25 


iat iiiew 


q 
—— ris ss aE 


wel 
Ti 


ee 
ot 

Ta i 
Fs 


hh 
ve : 


se folie re “ 
7 re ot SS aide eLon LS tol 


hecho oat pray 


grapple one target. 


Fling. One Large or smaller object held or creature grappled 
by the kraken is thrown up to 60 feet in a random direction 
and knocked prone. If a thrown target strikes a solid surface, 
the target takes 3 (1d6) bludgeoning damage for every 10 feet 
it was thrown. If the target is thrown at another creature, that 
creature must succeed on a DC 18 Dexterity saving throw or 
take the same damage and be knocked prone. 


Lightning Storm. The kraken magically creates three bolts of 
lightning, each of which can strike a target the kraken can see 
within 120 feet of it. A target must make a DC 23 Dexterity 
saving throw, taking 22 (4d10) lightning damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The kraken can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. The 
kraken regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Tentacle Attack or Fling. The kraken makes one tentacle attack 
or uses its Fling. 

Lightning Storm (Costs 2 Actions). The kraken uses 
Lightning Storm. 

Ink Cloud (Costs 3 Actions). While underwater, the kraken 
expels an ink cloud in a 60-foot radius. The cloud spreads 
around corners, and that area is heavily obscured to 
creatures other than the kraken. Each creature other than 
the kraken that ends its turn there must succeed on a DC 23 

Constitution saving throw, taking 16 (3d10) poison damage 

ona failed save, or half as much damage on a successful 

one. A strong current disperses the cloud, which otherwise 
disappears at the end of the kraken’s next turn. 


Tg a NE OO EE 


athe es veh ae 
coal rainy 


ft Vue G 
ifs i Lah ay eee 
tel nae ‘ea iy Fh vale a. I a 


KUO-TOA 

Kuo-toa are degenerate fishlike humanoids that 

once inhabited the shores and islands of the surface 
world, Long ago humans and their ilk drove the kuo- 
toa underground, where they dwell in madness and 
everlasting night. Kuo-toa can no longer abide daylight. 

Mad Slaves. At the height of the illithid empire; the 
mind flayers captured kuo-toa by the thousands and 
forced them into bondage. The kuo-toa were simple 
creatures, never meant to endure the oppressive mental 
force the illithids unleashed against them. By the 
time the mind flayers abandoned them, the prolonged 
psychic subjugation endured by the kuo-toa had 
driven them mad. 

Their minds shattered beyond repair, the kuo-toa 
adopted a religious fervor, inventing gods to protect 
them against threats. Most notable of these threats are 
the drow, which have slain the kuo-toa on sight since the 
days when the two races first met. 

God Makers. Kuo-toa worship gods of their own 
insane creation, but if enough kuo-toa believe that a god 
is real, the energy of their collective subconscious can 
cause that god to manifest as a physical entity. The form 
a kuo-toa god takes depends on the inspiration for its 
divine image, and is usually random or nonsensical. 

One of the most revered gods of the kuo-toa is 
Blibdoolpoolp the Sea Mother, who takes the form 
of a female human with a crayfish head, a crayfish’s 
claws, and an articulated shell covering her shoulders. 
Blibdoolpoolp was likely invented by a kuo-toa that a 
improved on a broken human statue by adding the 
limbs and head of a crustacean. In sudden awe of its 
handiwork, it then named the resulting form a god. 

Kuo-toa that cross paths with an aboleth often find 
themselves worshiping it as a god, their madness 
blinding them to the fact that the aboleth is merely using a 
them for its own nefarious ends. 

Theocratic Rulers. Kuo-toa archpriests are 
surrounded by fanatical devotees of their faith. The 
archpriest of a kuo-toa domain demands that all its 
subjects worship a specific god. An archpriest’s mad 
belief in its god is so fervent that it manifests the powers 
of a high cleric. The archpriest can also bestow spells 
to devout underlings called whips. One or more of 


OOO eee 
VARIANT: KUO-TOA MONITOR 
A kuo-toa monitor has a challenge rating of 3 (700 XP). It 
has the same statistics as a kuo-toa whip except that it adds 
its Wisdom modifier to its Armor Class (AC 13), loses the 
Spellcaster trait, and replaces the whip’s action options with 
the following action options. 

Multiattack. The kuo-toa makes one bite attack and two 
unarmed strikes. 

Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 

Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage plus 3 (1d6) 
lightning damage, and the target can’t take reactions until 

“7 the end of the kuo-toa’s next turn. 


thes&whips are:also the archpriest’s children, and their 
primary role in kuo-toan society is to fight to the death 
to claim the throne when the archpriest dies. If a whip 
displeases the archpriest, the archpriest can strip it of 
its spellcasting ability, if not its life. 

The archpriest’s decrees are enforced by monitors, 
devout kuo-toa that act as the archpriest’s eyes and ears. 
Monitors are deadly hand-to-hand combatants, and 
lesser kuo-toa live in fear of them. 

Kuo-toa Gear. Many weapons of the kuo-toa 
are designed to capture rather than kill. Nets are 
common, though some carry pincer staffs (also called 
mancatchers) designed to trap and immobilize foes. 
Kuo-toa warriors also treat their shields with a sticky 
goo that catches incoming weapons. 

In general, kuo-toa don’t like the weight of armor on 
their slippery bodies and rely on their natural rubbery 
hides for protection. However, they like to wear jewelry 
made from scavenged bones, shells, pearls, gems, and 
carapace fragments. 


y INVENT THEIR 
HE 


“THE 
own GOODS =~ a 
N 
EFINITIO 

VERY O Re: 
oF INSANITY. 
_SapaL MITZRYM OF 
MENZOBERRANTAN 


Kuro es 


| Medium humanoid (kuo-toa), neutral evil 
| 


i Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) piercing damage. 


, Armor Class 13 (natural armor, shield) . | 
Hit Points 18 (4d8) Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach Sft.or | 

Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft. range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage, or — 
5 (1d8 + 1) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA melee attack. 
13 (41) 10(40) 11 (40) 11 (+0) 10 (+0) 8 (-1) 
| eee 
_ Skills Perception +4 
_ Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 14 
| Languages Undercommon 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


| 
i 
"Snr 


Net. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range 5/15 ft., one Large 
or smaller creature. Hit: The target is restrained. A creature I 
can use its action to make a DC 10 Strength check to free itself ) 
or another creature in a net, ending the effect on a success. 
Dealing 5 slashing damage to the net (AC 10) frees the target 
without harming it and destroys the net. | 


| Amphibious. The kuo-toa can breathe air and water. REACTIONS | 
i} 

| Otherworldly Perception. The kuo-toa can sense the presence 
| of any creature within 30 feet of it that is invisible or on the 

' Ethereal Plane. It can pinpoint such a creature that is moving. 


Sticky Shield. When a creature misses the kuo-toa with a melee | 
weapon attack, the kuo-toa uses its sticky shield to catch 
the weapon. The attacker must succeed ona DC 11 Strength =| 
saving throw, or the weapon becomes stuck to the kuo-toa’s | 

| 


Slippery. The kuo-toa has advantage on ability checks and shield. If the weapon's wielder can’t or won't let go of the 
| saving throws made to escape a grapple. weapon, the wielder is grappled while the weapon is stuck. 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
j 
While stuck, the weapon can’t be used. A creature can pull 
the weapon free by taking an action to make a DC 11 Strength fey 
check and succeeding. — 


| 

_ Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the kuo-toa has 
_ disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom 

| (Perception) checks that rely on sight. 


i 


Kuo-ToOA ARCHPRIEST 


Medium humanoid (kuo-toa), neutral evil 


\ 


Kuo-TOA WHIP 


Medium hurnahoid (kuo-toa), neutral evil 
“Tr «a 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) an 
i) Hit Points 97 (13d8 + 39) Armor Class 11 (natural armor) 
1 Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft. Hit Points 65 (10d8 + 20) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA = 2 
16 (+3) 14442) 16(43) 13 (+1) 16 (+3) = 14 (+2) “STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
$n 14 (+2) 10(+0) 14(4+2) 1241) 1442) 1140 
Skills Perception +9, Religion +6 a 
| Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 19 Skills Perception +6, Religion +4 
Languages Undercommon Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16 
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) Languages Undercommon 


Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


eo 
i) Amphibious. The kuo-toa can breathe air and water. 


. Amphibious. The kuo-toa can breathe air and water. 
Otherworldly Perception. The kuo-toa can sense the presence 


| of any creature within 30 feet of it that is invisible or on the Otherworldly Perception. The kuo-toa can sense the presence 
Ethereal Plane. It can pinpoint such a creature that is moving. of any creature within 30 feet of it that is invisible or on the 


Ethereal Plane. It can pinpoint such a creature that is moving. 
| Slippery. The kuo-toa has advantage on ability checks and ik ‘ 


| saving throws made to escape a grapple. Slippery. The kuo-toa has advantage on ability checks and 


saving throws made to escape a grapple. 
| Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the kuo-toa has 3 a 


| disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the kuo-toa has 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight. disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom | 


Perception) checks that rely on sight. 
Spellicasting. The kuo-toa is a 10th-level spellcaster. Its ( pelo / 2 


| spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 14, +6 to hit Spellcasting. The kuo-toa is a 2nd-level spellcaster. Its 
with spell attacks). The kuo-toa has the following cleric spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 12, +4 to hit 
spells prepared: with spell attacks). The kuo-toa has the following cleric 
Cantrips (at will): guidance, sacred flame, thaumaturgy Tiga la 
Ist level (4 slots): detect magic, sanctuary, shield of faith Cantrips (at will): sacred flame, thaumaturgy 
2nd level (3 slots): hold person, spiritual weapon Ist level (3 slots): bane, shield of faith 

| 3rd level (3 slots): spirit guardians, tongues 

| 4th level (3 slots): control water, divination ACTIONS 


| 5th level (2 slots): mass cure wounds, scrying Multiattack. The kuo-toa makes two attacks: one with its bite 


ACTIONS and one with its pincer staff. 


| Multiattack. The kuo-toa makes two melee attacks. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. | 
_ Scepter. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one é 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage plus 14 (4d6) Pincer Staff. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 10 ft., . 
lightning damage. one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. If the target is 

a Medium or smaller creature, it is grappled (escape DC 14). 
| Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach Sft., | Until this grapple ends, the kuo-toa can’t use its pincer staff on 
one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) bludgeoning damage. another target. 


RE Tea 


% 
Ay 


Ruined desert cities and the tombs of forgotten 
monarchs make perfect lairs for the wicked lamias. 
These decadent monsters take what has been 

forgotten and make it the seat of their hedonistic rule, 
surrounding themselves with sycophants. Lamias rely 
of, jackalweres to perform various tasks, sending them 
across the wastes to capture slaves or steal treasures 
from caravans, encampments, or villages, concealed by 
the lamia’s magic as they attack. 

A lamia has a beautiful humanoid upper body that 
merges into a powerful four-legged leonine form. Its 
vicious black claws speak to its predatory nature, as 
does its hunger for torture and humanoid flesh. 

Tyrants of Pleasure. Lamias adorn their crumbling 
havens with finery stolen from passing caravans, then 
use magic to further accentuate their lairs, masking 
decay with illusion. A lair’s breathtaking gardens, finely 
decorated apartments, and numerous slaves seem at 
odds with its remoteness and state of ruin. 

Using its intoxicating touch, a lamia weakens the 
minds of its enemies, making them more susceptible - 
to its enchantment spells and turning them into its 
slaves. Those it beguiles with geas spells are pitted 
against each other in elaborate contests for the 
lamia’s amusement. 

Vain Predators. Always anxious to gain more wealth 
and slaves, a lamia uses a pool of water or a mirror 
in conjunction with a scrying spell to view its domain. 
A lamia uses this power to watch over trade routes 
and nearby settlements, or to seek out objects and 
creatures it fancies. 

Lamias are particularly fond of seeking out 
adventurers with pure hearts to seduce and corrupt 
to evil, savoring the destruction of their virtue. They 
use their magic to lure potential victims to their lairs, 
relying on illusion and their thralls to capture hapless 
foes. Lamias prize beauty and strength above all else, 
however. Any prisoner that falls short of their esteem 
becomes the main course in a horrible feast, or is set 
free to die while wandering the wastes. 

As long as they have slaves to face their enemies, 
lamias fight from the fringes, beguiling foes with magic 
if they can. A lamia pressed into melee never stays there 
for long, shredding flesh with claw and dagger before 
springing away to safety. 

Minions of Graz’zt. The demon lord Graz’zt creates 
lamias from his mortal servants, granting them 
immortality in return for monstrous power and an oath 
of fealty. Graz’zt sometimes tasks lamias with guarding 
locations important to him, but lamias in his service 


remain free to spread their evil as they s@¢@ fit. 
ae 


© nyNe 


— =e ; = 
LAMIA ©. ‘ 4 
5 ; _ ro 
‘Large monstrosity, chaotic evil = 
2 ee 4 +4 . F + 


i pm 
‘Afmor Class43:(natural armor) 
ea 97:(13d10 + 26) 
Speed 30 ft. 


CHA 
16 (+3) 


STR DEX 
16 (+3) 13 (+1) 


CON INT 
15 (42) = 14 (42) 


Wis 
15 (+2) 


Skills Deception +7, Insight +4, Stealth +3 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 

Languages Abyssal, Common 

Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 

EE EEE———————————————————— 


Innate Spellcasting. The lamia’s innate spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 13). It can innately cast the following 
spells, requiring no material components. 


At will: disguise self (any humanoid form), major image 
3/day each: charm person, mirror image, scrying, suggestion 
T/day: geas 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The lamia makes two attacks: one with its claws 
and one with its dagger or Intoxicating Touch. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 14 (2d10 + 3) slashing damage. 


Dagger. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage. 


Intoxicating Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one creature. Hit: The target is magically cursed for 1 hour. 
Until the curse ends, the target has disadvantage on Wisdom 


saving throws and all ability checks. 


- = 7 —, L 


+ =x 


_— 


) Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
; Hit Points 135 (18d8 + 54) 
; ) Speed 30 ft. 
" STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
4 11 (+0) 16 (+3) 16 (43) 20(+5) 14 (+2) 16 (43) 


| Saving Throws Con +10, Int +12, Wis +9 
) Skills Arcana +18, History +12, Insight +9, Perception +9 
| Damage Resistances cold, lightning, necrotic 
‘| Damage Immunities poison; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical weapons 
| Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, poisoned 
: 


Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 19 
| 
Rejuvenation. lf it has a phylactery, a destroyed lich gains 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the lich fails a saving throw, it 
can choose to succeed instead. 


Languages Common plus up to five other languages 
a new body in 1d10 days, regaining all its hit points and 


Challenge 21 (33,000 XP) 
| becoming active again. The new body appears within 5 feet of 


EE 
the phylactery. 


202 


i] 
mil 
¥E 


i 
i 


| 


i 


_ —E—_ 


. Cantrips (at will): mage hand, prestidigitation, ray of frost 


| Paralyzing Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +12 to hit, reach 5 ft., one | 


vo Ml te 
Spellcasting. The lich is an 18th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 20, +12 
to hit with spell attacks). The lich has the following wizard 
spells prepared: 


1st level (4 slots): detect magic, magic missile, shield, 
thunderwave 

2nd level (3 slots): detect thoughts, invisibility, Melf’s acid arrow, 
mirror image 

3rd level (3 slots): animate dead, counterspell, dispel 
magic, fireball 

4th level (3 slots): blight, dimension door 

5th level (3 slots): cloudkill, scrying 

6th level (1 slot): disintegrate, globe of invulnerability 

7th level (1 slot): finger of death, plane shift 

8th level (1 slot): dominate monster, power word stun 

9th level (1 slot): power word kill 


Turn Resistance. The lich has advantage on saving throws 
against any effect that turns undead. 


ACTIONS 


creature. Hit: 10 (3d6) cold damage. The target must succeed 
ona DC 18 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 
minute. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of 
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The lich can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
lich regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Cantrip. The lich casts a cantrip. 

Paralyzing Touch (Costs 2 Actions). The lich uses its 
Paralyzing Touch. 

Frightening Gaze (Costs 2 Actions). The lich fixes its gaze on 
one creature it can see within 10 feet of it. The target must 
succeed on a DC 18 Wisdom saving throw against this magic 
or become frightened for 1 minute. The frightened target can 
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending 
the effect on itself on a success. If a target’s saving throw is 
successful or the effect ends for it, the target is immune to 
the lich’s gaze for the next 24 hours. 

Disrupt Life (Costs 3 Actions). Each living creature within 20 
feet of the lich must make a DC 18 Constitution saving throw 
against this magic, taking 21 (6d6) necrotic damage on a 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


area 
i eer cane rst 


a ores in ie Tew 


Liches are the remains of great wizards who embrace 
undeath as a means of preserving themselves. They 
further their own power at any cost, having no interest 
in the affairs of the living except where those affairs 
interfere with their own. Scheming and insane, they 
hunger for long-forgotten knowledge and the most 
terrible secrets. Because the shadow of death doesn’t 
hang over them, they can conceive plans that take years, 
decades, or centuries to come to fruition. 

A lich is a gaunt and skeletal humanoid with 
withered flesh stretched tight across its bones. Its eyes 
succumbed to decay long ago, but points of light burn 
in its empty sockets. It is often garbed in the moldering 
remains of fine clothing and jewelry worn and dulled by 
the passage of time. 

Secrets of Undeath. No wizard takes up the path to 
lichdom on a whim, and the process of becoming a lich 
is a well-guarded secret. Wizards that seek lichdom 
must make bargains with fiends, evil gods, or other foul 
entities. Many turn to Orcus, Demon Prince of Undeath, 
whose power has created countless liches. However, 
those that control the power of lichdom always demand 
fealty and service for their knowledge. 

A lich is created by an arcane ritual that traps the 
wizard's soul within a phylactery. Doing so binds the 
soul to the mortal world, preventing it from traveling 
to the Outer Planes after death. A phylactery is 
traditionally an amulet in the shape of a small box, but 
it can take the form of any item possessing an interior 
space into which arcane sigils of naming, binding, 
immortality, and dark magic are scribed in silver. 

With its phylactery prepared, the future lich drinks a 
potion of transformation—a vile concoction of poison 
mixed with the blood of a sentient creature whose 
soul is sacrificed to the phylactery. The wizard falls 
dead, then rises as a lich as its soul is drawn into the 
phylactery, where it forever remains. 

Soul Sacrifices. A lich must periodically feed souls to 
its phylactery to sustain the magic preserving its body 
and consciousness. It does this using the imprisonment 
spell. Instead of choosing one of the normal options 
of the spell, the lich uses the spell to magically trap 
the target’s body and soul inside its phylactery. The 
phylactery must be on the same plane as the lich for 
the spell to work. A lich’s phylactery can hold only 
one creature at a time, and a dispel magic cast asa 
9th-level spell upon the phylactery releases any creature 
imprisoned within it. A creature imprisoned in the 
phylactery for 24 hours is consumed and destroyed 
utterly, whereupon nothing short of divine intervention 
can restore it to life. 

A lich that fails or forgets to maintain its body with 
sacrificed souls begins to physically fall apart, and 
might eventually become a demilich. 

Death and Restoration. When a lich’s body is 
broken by accident or assault, the will and mind of 
the lich drains from it, leaving only a lifeless corpse 
behind, Within days, a new body reforms next to the 
lich’s phylactery, coalescing out of glowing smoke that 
issues from the device. Because the destruction of 


its phylactery means the possibility of eternal death, 
a lich usually keeps its phylactery in a hidden, well- — 
guarded location. loa 

Destroying a lich’s phylactery is no easy task and 
often requires a special ritual, item, or weapon. Every 
phylactery is unique, and discovering the key to its: 
destruction can be a quest in and of itself. ie 

Lonely Existence. From time to time, a lich might be , 
stirred from its single-minded pursuit of power to.take 
an interest in the world around it, most often when some 
great event reminds it of the life it once led. It otherwise 
lives in isolation, engaging only with those creatiirs 
whose service helps secure its lair. ‘ 

Few liches call themselves by their former natigs,: * 
instead adopting monikers such as the Black Hand or- 
the Forgotten King. 

Magic Collectors. Liches collect spells and magic 
items. In addition to its spell repertoire, a lich has ready 
access to potions, scrolls, libraries of spellbooks, one 
or more wands, and perhaps a staff or two. It has no 
qualms about putting these treasures to use whenever 
its lair comes under attack. 

Undead Nature. A lich doesn’t require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


A LiIcn’s LAIR 


A lich often haunts the abode it favored in life, such as 
a lonely tower, a haunted ruin, or an academy of black 
magic. Alternatively, some liches construct secret tombs 
filled with powerful guardians and traps. 

Everything about a lich’s lair reflects its keen mind 
and wicked cunning, including the magic and mundane 
traps that secure it. Undead, constructs, and bound 
demons lurk in shadowy recesses, emerging to destroy 
those who dare to disturb the lich’s work. 

A lich encountered in its lair has a challenge rating of 
22 (41,000 XP). 


LAIR ACTIONS 

On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the lich 
can take a lair action to cause one of the following 
magical effects; the lich can’t use the same effect two 
rounds in a row: 


+ The lich rolls a d8 and regains a spell slot of that level 
or lower. If it has no spent spell slots of that level or 
lower, nothing happens. 

- The lich targets one creature it can see within 30 feet 
of it. A crackling cord of negative energy tethers the 
lich to the target. Whenever the lich takes damage, 
the target must make a DC 18 Constitution saving 
throw. On a failed save, the lich takes half the damage 
(rounded down), and the target takes the remaining 
damage. This tether lasts until initiative count 20 on 
the next round or until the lich or the target is no lon- 
ger in the lich’s lair. 

* The lich calls forth the spirits of creatures that died in 
its lair. These apparitions materialize and attack one 
creature that the lich can see within 60 feet of it. The 
target must succeed on a DC 18 Constitution saving 
throw, taking 52 (15d6) necrotic damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a success. The: aj An 
ritions then disappear. yd 


LIZARDFOLK 


Lizardfolk are primitive reptilian humanoids that lurk in 
the swamps and jungles of the world. Their hut villages 
thrive in forbidding grottos, half-sunken ruins, and 
watery caverns. 

Territorial Xenophobes. Lizardfolk deal and trade 
with other races only rarely. Fiercely territorial, they 
use camouflaged scouts to guard the perimeter of their 
domain. When unwelcome visitors are detected, a tribe 
sends a hunting band to harass or drive the trespassers 
off, or tricks them into blundering into the lairs of 
crocodiles and other dangerous creatures. 

Lizardfolk have no notion of traditional morality, and 
they find the concepts of good and evil utterly alien. 
Truly neutral creatures, they kill when it is expedient 
and do whatever it takes to survive. 

Lizardfolk rarely stray beyond their claimed hunting 
grounds. Any creature that enters their territory is fair 
game to be stalked, killed, and devoured. They make no 
distinction between humanoids, beasts, and monsters. 
Similarly, lizardfolk don’t like reaching too far beyond 
their borders, where they could easily become the 
hunted instead of the hunters. 

Occasions might arise when lizardfolk 
will form alliances with their neighbors. 
These lizardfolk usually learn firsthand 
that humans, dwarves, halflings, and 
elves can sometimes prove helpful or 
trustworthy. Once lizardfolk forge ties with 
outsiders, they are steadfast and fierce allies. 

Great Feasts and Sacrifices. Lizardfolk are 
omnivorous, but they have a taste for humanoid 
flesh. Prisoners are often taken back to their camps 

“to become the centerpieces of great feasts and rites 
involving dancing, storytelling, and ritual combat. 


DFOLK _ 


| dium hohe (lizardfol 


k), bi 


“Armor Class 15 (natural armor, shield) 


‘Victims are either cooked and eaten by the tribe, or are Hit Poi nts 22 (4d8 + 4) 

sacrificed to Semuanya, the lizardfolk god. Speed. 30 ft., swim 30 ft. | 
Canny Crafters. Though they aren't skilled artisans, i 

lizardfolk craft tools and ornamental jewelry out of the STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

bones of their kills, and they use the hides and shells of 15 (+2) 10(40) 13(41) 7(-2)) 1241) 7(-2) | 

dead monsters to create shields. er 
Lizardfolk Leaders. Lizardfolk respect and fear Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4, Survival +5 

magic with a religious awe. Lizardfolk shamans lead Senses passive Perception 13 


Languages Draconic 


their tribes, overseeing rites and ceremonies performed 
: ne : Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


to honor Semuanya. From time to time, however, a 
lizardfolk tribe produces a powerful figure touched not 


1] 


by Semuanya but by Sess’inek—a reptilian demon lord Hold Breath. The lizardfolk can hold its breath for 15 minutes. 
who seeks to corrupt and control the lizardfolk. 

Lizardfolk born in Sess’inek’s image are larger and ao) | a ee ee 
more cunning than other lizardfolk, and are thoroughly Multiattack. The lizardfolk makes two melee attacks, each one | 
evil. These lizard kings and queens dominate lizardfolk with a different weapon. 


tribes, usurping a shaman’s authority and inspiring 
uncharacteristic aggression among their subjects. 
Dragon Worshipers. Lizardfolk speak Draconic, 
which they are thought to have learned from dragons in Heavy Club. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one } 
ancient times. A tribe that wanders into the territory of a target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage. 
dragon will offer it tribute to win its favor. An evil dragon 
might exploit lizardfolk for its own vile ends, turning 
them into raiders and plunderers. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Spiked Shield. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
| target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


— WZARDFOLE 


oe, | F 
at 


ih: HP s, eee fa fa 
{ . it ee ' ie | 
i ‘ isceiail We i. 7 


Miia 


LIZARDFOLK SHAMAN 
Medium humanoid (lizqrdfolk), neutral 


2 = 


Armor Class 13, (natural armor) 
Hit Points 27 (5d8 + 5) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft. 


f = _ si NN — -——— - 


STR DEX CON INT WIS 
15 (+2) 10(+0) 13(41) 10(40) 15 (+2) 


Le ee So - ms 


CHA 
8 (-1) 


Skills Perception +4, Stealth +4, Survival +6 
Senses passive Perception 14 

Languages Draconic 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


TT ee a —__ 


Hold Breath. The lizardfolk can hold its breath for 15 minutes. 


Spellcasting (Lizardfolk Form Only). The lizardfolk is a Sth-level 
spellcaster. Its spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 
12, +4 to hit with spell attacks). The lizardfolk has the following 
druid spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): druidcraft, produce flame, thorn whip 

Ist Level (4 slots): entangle, fog cloud 

2nd Level (3 slots): heat metal, spike growth 

3rd Level (2 slots): conjure animals (reptiles only), plant growth 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack (Lizardfolk Form Only). The lizardfolk makes two 


attacks: one with its bite and one with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage, or 7 (1d10 + 2) piercing 
damage in crocodile form. If the lizardfolk is in crocodile form 

1 and the target is a Large or smaller creature, the target is 
grappled (escape DC 12). Until this grapple ends, the target is 
restrained, and the lizardfolk can’t bite another target. If the 
lizardfolk reverts to its true form, the grapple ends. 


Claws (Lizardfolk Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, 
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) slashing damage. 


Change Shape (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). The 
lizardfolk magically polymorphs into a crocodile, remaining 
in that form for up to 1 hour. It can revert to its true form as 
a bonus action. Its statistics, other than its size, are the same 
in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying isn’t 
transformed. It reverts to its true form if it dies. . 


“IN ALL MY DEALINGS WITH THE 
LIZAROFOLK, I WAS NEVER ABLE To 
TELL WHAT THEY WERE THINKING. 
THEIR REPTILIAN EYES BELIED NO 
HINT OF THEIR INTENTIONS. I GAVE 
THEM SUPPLIES. THEY GAVE ME 

THE WILLIES,” 

=) MERCHANT'S ACCOUNT OF HIS 
EXPERIENCE WITH THE 
LIZARDFOLK TRIBES OF THE 
LizaRD MARSH 


be 

LIZARD KING/QUEEN 
Medium humanoid (lizardfolk), chactic evil 
Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 78 (12d8 + 24) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft. 


a 


INT 


STR DEX CHA 


CON Wis 
17 (43) 12(41) 1542) 11 (40) 110) 15 (42) 
a_i a a — - 
Saving Throws Con +4, Wis +2 a 
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +5, Survival +4 oo 


Condition Immunities frightened 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages Abyssal, Draconic 

Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


—————— 


Hold Breath. The lizardfolk can hold its breath for 15 minutes. 


Skewer. Once per turn, when the lizardfolk makes a melee 
attack with its trident and hits, the target takes an extra 10 
(3d6) damage, and the lizardfolk gains temporary hit points 
equal to the extra damage dealt. 


ACTIONS | 


Multiattack. The lizardfolk makes two attacks: one with its 
bite and one with its claws or trident or two melee attacks with 
its trident, 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) slashing damage. 


Trident. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or | | 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage, or | 
7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a 
melee attack. 


= 


LIAR ERO LE 


LYCANTHROPES 

One of the most ancient and feared of all curses, 
lycanthropy can transform the most civilized humanoid 
into a ravening beast. In its natural humanoid form, a 
creature cursed by lycanthropy appears as its normal 
self. Over time, however, many lycanthropes acquire 
features suggestive of their animal form. In that animal 
form, a lycanthrope resembles a powerful version of 

a normal animal. On close inspection, its eyes show a 
faint spark of unnatural intelligence and might glow red 
in the dark. 

Evil lycanthropes hide among normal folk, emerging 
in animal form at night to spread terror and bloodshed, 
especially under a full moon. Good lycanthropes are 
reclusive and uncomfortable around other civilized 
creatures, often living alone in wilderness areas far 
from villages and towns. 

Curse of Lycanthropy. A humanoid creature can 
be afflicted with the curse of lycanthropy after being 
wounded by a lycanthrope, or if one or both of its 
parents are lycanthropes. A remove curse spell can rid 
an afflicted lycanthrope of the curse, but a natural born 
lycanthrope can be freed of the curse only with a wish. 

A lycanthrope can either resist its curse or embrace 
it. By resisting the curse, a lycanthrope retains its 
normal alignment and personality while in humanoid 
form. It lives its life as it always has, burying deep the 
bestial urges raging inside it. However, when the full 
moon rises, the curse becomes too strong to resist, 
transforming the individual into its beast form—or 

, into a horrible hybrid form that combines animal and 
humanoid traits. When the moon wanes, the beast 
within can be controlled once again. Especially if the 
cursed creature is unaware of its condition, it might not 
remember the events of its transformation, though those 
memories often haunt a lycanthrope as bloody dreams. 

Some individuals see little point in fighting the curse 
and accept what they are. With time and experience, 
they learn to master their shapechanging ability and 
can assume beast form or hybrid form at will. Most 
lycanthropes that embrace their bestial natures 
succumb to bloodlust, becoming evil, opportunistic 
creatures that prey on the weak. 


WEREBEAR 


Werebears are powerful lycanthropes with the ability to 
temper their monstrous natures and reject their violent 
impulses. In humanoid form, they are large, muscular, 
and covered in hair matching the color of their ursine 
form’s fur. A werebear is a loner by nature, fearing what 
might happen to innocent creatures around it when its 
bestial nature takes over. 
eee 

VARIANT: NONHUMAN LYCANTHROPES 

The statistics presented in this section assume a base 

creature of human. However, you can also use the statistics 

to represent nonhuman lycanthropes, adding verisimilitude 

by allowing a nonhuman lycanthrope to retain one or more of 

its humanoid racial traits. For example, an elf werewolf might | 

have the Fey Ancestry trait. 


med 


When a'werebear transforms, it grows to enormous 
size, lashing out with weapons or claws. It fights with 
the ferocity of a bear, though even in its bestial forms, 
it avoids biting so as to not pass on its curse. Typically, 
a werebear passes on its lycanthropy only to chosen 
companions or apprentices, spending the time that 
follows helping the new lycanthrope accept the curse in 
order to control it. 

Solitary creatures, werebears act as wardens over 
their territory, protecting flora and fauna alike from 
humanoid or monstrous intrusion. Though most 
werebears are of good alignment, some are every bit as 
evil as other lycanthropes. 


WEREBOAR 


Wereboars are ill-tempered and vulgar brutes. As 
humanoids, they are stocky and muscular, with short, 
stiff hair. In their humanoid and hybrid forms, they use 
heavy weapons, while in hybrid or animal form, they 
gain a devastating goring attack through which their 
curse is spread. A wereboar infects other creatures 
indiscriminately, relishing the fact that the more its 
victims resist the curse, the more savage and bestial 
they become. 

Wereboars live in small family groups in remote forest 
areas, building ramshackle huts or dwelling in caves. 
They are suspicious of strangers but sometimes ally 
themselves with orcs. 


Wererats are cunning lycanthropes with sly, avaricious 
personalities. They are wiry and twitchy in humanoid 
form, with thin hair and darting eyes. In their humanoid 
and hybrid forms, wererats prefer light weapons and use 
ambush tactics rather than fighting as a pack. Although 
a wererat can deliver a nasty bite in its rat form, it favors 
that form for stealthy infiltration and escape rather 

than combat. 

A wererat clan operates much like a thieves’ guild, 
with wererats transmitting their curse only to creatures 
they want to induct into the clan. Wererats that are 
accidentally cursed or break loose from the clan’s 
control are quickly hunted down and killed. 

Wererat clans are found throughout urban civilization, 
often dwelling in cellars and catacombs. These 
creatures are common in the sewers beneath major 
cities, viewing those subterranean areas as their 
hunting grounds. Rats and giant rats are commonly 
found living among wererats. 


WERETIGER 


Weretigers are ferocious hunters and warriors with 

a haughty and fastidious nature. Lithe and sleekly 
muscular in humanoid form, they are taller than 
average and meticulously groomed. Weretigers grow to 
enormous size in animal and hybrid form, but they fight 
in their more refined humanoid form when they can. 
They don’t like to pass on their curse, because every 
new weretiger means competition for territory and prey. 


| Strength modifier. 


Weretigers live in jungles on the fringes of humanoid me a Lee 
civilization, traveling to isolated settlements to trade or |) 
revel. They live and hunt alone or in small family groups: 


WEREWOLF 


A werewolf is a savage predator. In its humanoid form, 
a werewolf has heightened senses, a fiery temper, and 
a tendency to eat rare meat. Its wolf form is a fearsome 
predator, but its hybrid form is more terrifying by fat—a 
furred and well-muscled humanoid body topped by a 
ravening wolf’s head. A werewolf can wield weapons in, 
hybrid form, though it prefers to tear foes apartwith its 
powerful claws and bite. 

Most werewolves flee civilized lands not long’ after 
becoming afflicted. Those that reject the curse fear. 
what will happen if they remain among their friends and 
family. Those that embrace the curse fear discovery and 
the consequences of their murderous acts. In the wild, 
werewolves form packs that also include wolves and 
dire wolves. 


eee 


PLAYER CHARACTERS AS LYCANTHROPES 


A character who becomes a lycanthrope retains his or 
her statistics except as specified by lycanthrope type. The 
character gains the lycanthrope’s speeds in nonhumanoid 
form, damage immunities, traits, and actions that don’t 
involve equipment. The character is proficient with the 
lycanthrope’s natural attacks, such as its bite or claws, which 
deal damage as shown in the lycanthrope’s statistics. The 
character can’t speak while in animal form. 

A humanoid hit by an attack that carries the curse 
of lycanthropy must succeed on a Constitution saving 
throw (DC 8 + the lycanthrope’s proficiency bonus + the 
lycanthrope’s Constitution modifier) or be cursed. If the 
character embraces the curse, his or her alignment becomes 
the one defined for the lycanthrope. The DM is free to decide 
that a change in alignment places the character under DM 
control until the curse of lycanthropy is removed. 

The following information applies to specific lycanthropes. 

Werebear. The character gains a Strength of 19 if his or her 
score isn’t already higher, and a +1 bonus to AC while in bear 
or hybrid form (from natural armor). Attack and damage rolls 
for the natural weapons are based on Strength. 

Wereboar. The character gains a Strength of 17 if his or 
her score isn’t already higher, and a +1 bonus to AC while 
in boar or hybrid form (from natural armor). Attack and 
damage rolls for the tusks are based on Strength. For the 
Charge trait, the DC is 8 + the character’s proficiency bonus + | | | 


ft wi 


Wererat. The character gains a Dexterity of 15 if his or 
her score isn’t already higher. Attack and damage rolls for 
the bite are based on whichever is higher of the character's 
Strength and Dexterity. 

Weretiger. The character gains a Strength of 17 if his or 
her score isn’t already higher. Attack and damage rolls for 
the natural weapons are based on Strength. For the Pounce 
trait, the DC is 8 + the character’s proficiency bonus + 
Strength modifier. 

Werewolf. The character gains a Strength of 15 if his or her 
score isn't already higher, and a +1 bonus to AC while in wolf 
or hybrid form (from natural armor). Attack and damage rolls | 
for the natural Weapon? are PSoske on etrengt 


WEREBEAR 


and hybrid form 
Hit Points 135 (18d8 + 54) 


STR DEX CON INT WIS 


Skills Perception +7 


Senses passive Perception 17 
Languages Common (can’t speak in bear form) 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


3 
Medium humanoid (human, shapechanger), neutral good 


Armor Class 10 in humanoid form, 11 (natural armor) in bear 


Speed 30 ft. (40 ft., climb 30 ft. in bear or hybrid form) 


19 (+4) 10(40) 17(+3) 11(40) 12 (+1) 


Damage Immunities bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing 
damage from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered 


a gs 


Shapechanger. The werebear can use its action to polymorph 
into a Large bear-humanoid hybrid or into a Large bear, or back 


> into its true form, which is humanoid. Its statistics, other than 


a ‘ 
= = a I EES Oo 


its size and AC, are the’same in each‘fotm. Any equipment it is 
wearing or carrying ish’t transformed. It reverts to its true form 
if it dies. 

Keen Smell. The werebear-has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on smell. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. In bear form, the werebear makes two claw 
attacks. In humanoid form, it makes two greataxe attacks. In 
hybrid form, it can attack like a bear or a humanoid. 


Bite (Bear or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +7 
to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 15 (2d10 + 4) piercing 
damage. If the target is a humanoid, it must succeed ona 
DC 14 Constitution saving throw or be cursed with werebear 
lycanthropy. 


Claw (Bear or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to 
hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) slashing damage. 


Greataxe (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon 
Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 10 (1d12 + 4) 
slashing damage. 


NE 
J 


_ Armor Class 10 in humanoid form, 11 (natural armor) inboar | [je 
or hybrid form | WERER AT 

_ Hit Points 78 (12d8 + 24) | Medium tiumanoid (human, shapechanger), lawful evil 

_ Speed 30 ft. (40 ft. in boar form) _ - 


| 


- oa ‘Armor Class 12 


| STR DEX CON INT wis CHA | Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6) 

= 17 (43) «10 (40) «15 (42) = 10 (+0) = 11 (+0) = 8 (-1) | Speed 30 ft. 

Te EETEETEELEEETanEEEEEEEE EERE NT 
Skills Perception +2 » STR DEX CON INT WIs CHA 
Damage Immunities bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing Py 1040) 15 (42) 12(+1) 11(+0) 10(40) 8(-1) 


_ damage from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered 


| Senses passive Perception 12 Skills Perception +2, Stealth +4 


_ Languages Common (can’t speak in boar form) J”) Damage Immunities bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) ; | damage from nonmagical weapons that aren’t silvered 
| nn Senses darkvision 60 ft. (rat form only), passive Perception 12 


| 


Languages Common (can’t speak in rat form) 


| 
Shapechanger. The wereboar can use its action to polymorph | Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


| into a boar-humanoid hybrid or into a boar, or back into its true 
| form, which is humanoid. Its statistics, other than its AC, are 

_ the same in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying Shapechanger. The wererat can use its action to polymorph 

| isn’t transformed. It reverts to its true form if it dies. into a rat-humanoid hybrid or into a giant rat, or back into its 
true form, which is humanoid. Its statistics, other than its 

size, are the same in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or 
carrying isn’t transformed. It reverts to its true form if it dies. 


;_ rrr sssasssasa#.. Ee 


| Charge (Boar or Hybrid Form Only). \f the wereboar moves 
, at least 15 feet straight toward a target and then hits it with 
| its tusks on the same turn, the target takes an extra 7 (2d6) 


| slashing damage. If the target is a creature, it must succeed on Keen Smell. The wererat has advantage on Wisdom | 
| a DC 13 Strength saving throw or be knocked prone. (Perception) checks that rely on smell. i 
| Relentless (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). |f the ACTIONS i 


_ wereboar takes 14 damage or less that would reduce it to 0 hit 


| points, it is reduced to 1 hit point instead. Multiattack (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). The wererat 


makes two attacks, only one of which can be a bite. 


I 
| Multiattack (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). The wereboar +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing | | 


| (CT i ee Bite (Rat or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: 
| makes two attacks, only one of which can be with its tusks. damage. If the target is a humanoid, it must succeed on a 
DC 11 tituti ing th ith t 

| Maul (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon ee ie allies tremor be cursedwitn Meee 

| Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) y PY: 

_ bludgeoning damage. Shortsword (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon 

| k: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1 py l 

_ Tusks (Boar or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: wee i i ‘ ieee one talget. Fits (1db + 2) 4 ( 

| +5 tohit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing P 6 ot i) 

4} damage. If the target is a humanoid, it must succeed on a | Hand Crossbow (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). Ranged 

| DC 12 Constitution saving throw or be cursed with wereboar | Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 5 


| lycanthropy. | (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


LYGANT 


ei == - —- irs 2 = = J ee Seas at 


- 


a 


WERETIGER 


Medium humanoid (human, shapechanger), neutral 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 120 (16d8 + 48) 
|) Speed 30 ft. (40 ft. in tiger form) 


CHA 
11 (+0) 


- 


STR 
17 (+3) 


DEX 
15 (+2) 


CON 
16 (+3) 


INT WIS 
10 (+0) 13 (+1) 
ey TTD 
| Skills Perception +5, Stealth +4 
) Damage Immunities bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing 
damage from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered 
} Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15 
Languages Common (can’t speak in tiger form) 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Dir 


) Shapechanger. The weretiger can use its action to polymorph 

| into a tiger-humanoid hybrid or into a tiger, or back into its true 

| form, which is humanoid. Its statistics, other than its size, are 

’ the same in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying 
isn’t transformed. It reverts to its true form if it dies. 


_ Keen Hearing and Smell. The weretiger has advantage on 
| Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell. 


at 


Pounce (Tiger ar Hybrid Form Only). |f the weretiger moves at 
least 15 feet straight toward a creature and then hits it with a 
claw attack on the same turn, that.target must succeed on a 
DC 14 Strength saving throw or be knocked prone. If the target 
is prone, the weretiger can make one bite attack against it as a 
bonus action. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). In humanoid 
form, the weretiger makes two scimitar attacks or two longbow 
attacks. In hybrid form, it can attack like a humanoid or make 
two claw attacks. 


Bite (Tiger or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: 

+5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 8 (1d10 + 3) piercing 
damage. If the target is a humanoid, it must succeed ona 
DC 13 Constitution saving throw or be cursed with weretiger 
lycanthropy. 


Claw (Tiger or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to 
hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage. 


Scimitar (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon 
Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) 
slashing damage. 


Longbow (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only}. Ranged Weapon 
Attack: +4 to hit, range 150/600 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) 
piercing damage. 


WEREWOLF 


Medium humanoid (human, shapechanger), chaétic évil 


_ Armor Class 11 in humanoid form, 12 (natural armor) in wolf or 


hybrid form 
Hit Points 58 (9d8 + 18) 
Speed 30 ft. (40 ft. in wolf form) 
ee 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (+2) 13(+1) 14(42) 10(40) 1140) 10 (40) 
ve 
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +3 
Damage Immunities bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing 
damage from nonmagical weapons that aren’t silvered 
Senses passive Perception 14 
Languages Common (can't speak in wolf form) 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Gn ————————————————— 


Shapechanger. The werewolf can use its action to polymorph 
into a wolf-humanoid hybrid or into a wolf, or back into its true 
form, which is humanoid. Its statistics, other than its AC, are 


a a USED TO BE 
YENTURERS LOYAL 


TO THE REALM. 


AS ’ HAVE No | 
suc al NY 
-H REWARDS.” 


~ THORNS TAFE, ELF Druip 


the same in each form. Any equipment it is: wearing or carrying 
isn’t transformed. It reverts to its true form ifitdies, 


Keen Hearing and Smell. The werewolf has advantage on 
Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). The werewolf 
makes two attacks: one with its bite and one with its 
claws or spear. 


Bite (Wolf or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: 

+4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing 
damage. If the target is a humanoid, it must succeed on a 
DC 12 Constitution saving throw or be cursed with werewolf 
lycanthropy. 


Claws (Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, 
reach 5 ft., one creature. Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) slashing damage. 


Spear (Humanoid Form Only). Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: 
+4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or range 20/60 ft., one creature. Hit: 5 (1d6 
+ 2) piercing damage, or 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage if used 
with two hands to make a melee attack. 


, Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
| Hit Points 9 (246 + 2) 
; Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
R(-2) « 18 (+2) 1201) 8(-1) 110) 10(20) 


~ MAGMIN 


A grinning, mischievous magmin resembles a stumpy 
~ humanoid sculpted from a black shell of magma. Even Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
_ when it isn’t ablaze and radiating heat like a bonfire, nonmagical weapons 
~~ small jets of flame erupt from its porous skin. Damage Immunities fire 
Summoned Pyromaniacs. Magmins are fire Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
elemental spirits bound into physical forms by magic, Fanguages |gnan 
: : Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 
and they appear in the Material Plane only when 
summoned. They view flammable objects as kindling 


otansnet unas tana sieeaihaceaameaicaameaiioaned 


EP 


for a grand conflagration, and only the magical control Death Burst. When the magmin dies, it explodes in a burst of 
exerted by their summoners keeps them from setting fire and magma. Each creature within 10 feet of it must make 
everything they touch ablaze. Their propensity for fire a DC 11 Dexterity saving throw, taking 7 (2d6) firedamage on | 
~vand havoc makes them ideal for spreading chaos and a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 
She _ ‘destruction. A mob of magmins summoned inside a Flammable objects that aren’t being worn or carried in that ) 
castle can reduce it to a burning shell within minutes. area are ignited. ‘ 
Fiery Destruction. Although its flame is potent, the ignited Illumination. As a bonus action, the magmin can set 
magmin's hard magma shell prevents it from instantly itself ablaze or extinguish its flames. While ablaze, the magmin | 
‘igniting everything it comes into contact with. However, sheds bright light in a 10-foot radius and dim light for an 
like the fires inside them, magmins are capricious and additional 10 feet. 

unpredictable. Moreover, as simple elemental creations, 
they are oblivious to the harm their native element ACTIONS 
causes creatures of the Material Plane. ' Touch. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 

If it has the opportunity while in service to its master, ' target. Hit: 7 (2d6) fire damage. If the target is a creature ora 
a magmin seeks out areas of great heat, such as forest _ flammable object, it ignites. Until a creature takes an action to : 
fires or the bubbling magma of an active volcano. At , douse the fire, the creature takes 3 (1d6) fire damage at the end | 

» other times, a magmin compulsively looses fire from its of each of its turns. 

' fingertips, delighting in setting objects ablaze. (SS 


it 


MAGMIN 


ane = + 3 a 
ey Sino ater ge eialpon rane ATRMTR 6M epee SH eens ee eS ES te a ee = r Seen eee a =—« eee ela bepbedieenpenll payhpicingeh-ncrhiedea a ate eee eee sory 
: rae hn IE pets weiner eet ea Se —- — ~ vrmrens ean Peper op aN EE oe 


% 


MANTICORE 


Large monstrosity, lawful evil 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 68 (8d10 + 24) 
{ Speed 30 ft., fly 50 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
Wes) 16@3) 1703) wen, M121) Bel 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages Common 
_ Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


| Tail Spike Regrowth. The manticore has twenty-four tail spikes. 
_ Used spikes regrow when the manticore finishes a long rest. 
ACTIONS 


_ Multiattack. The manticore makes three attacks: one with its 
bite and two with its claws or three with its tail spikes. 


| Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage. 

| Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 

, Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) slashing damage. 

Tail Spike. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 100/200 ft., 

} one target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage. 

SRS ARPT ESA SS EE SS RS B= > 


CORES LOVE THE TASTE 


. NTI 
Ma H, THAT'S 


oF HUMAN FLES 
ON TRIPS THROU : 
MOUNTAINS: 1 ALWAYS TRAVE 
wit HUMAN GUARDS. 
—MaARTHOK 
RFE COPPER MERCHANT 


i Fis 
[Paes a 
“Shpall aes? 


GH THE 
wri; 


ULoaRR, 
i\ he OWA 


MANTICORE 


A monster in every sense of the word, a manticore has 
a vaguely humanoid head, the body of a lion, and the 
wings of a dragon. A bristling mane stretches down 
the creature’s back, and its long tail ends in a cluster of 
deadly spikes that can impale prey at impressive range. 

Evil Predators. Manticores are fierce killers that hunt 
far and wide for prey. They work together to take down 
particularly large or dangerous creatures, sharing the 
meal once a kill is made. A manticore begins its attack 
with a volley of tail spikes, then lands and uses its claws 
and bite. When outdoors and outnumbered, it uses its 
wings to stay aloft, attacking from a distance until its 
spikes are depleted. 

A manticore isn’t particularly bright, but it possesses 
a malevolent nature and the ability to converse. In the 
course of attacking, it denigrates its foes and offers to 
kill them swiftly if they beg for their lives. If a manticore 
sees an advantage to be gained by sparing a creature’s 
life, it does so, asking for a tribute or sacrifice equal to 
its loss of food. 

Monstrous Relationships. Manticores serve wicked 
masters that treat them well and provide regular prey. A 
manticore might provide aerial support for an orc horde 
or a hobgoblin army. Another could serve as a hunting 
companion for a hill giant chief, or guard the entrance to 
a lamia’s lair. 

The manticores’ greatest territorial rivals include 
chimeras, griffons, perytons, and wyverns. Manticores 
hunting as a pack often have the advantage of greater. 
numbers. In addition to these creatures, manticores fear ag 
dragons and avoid them. Wye 


hi WEY Aorta 


= r at th fit i 


MEDUSA 


As deadly as they are ravishing, the serpent-haired 
medusas suffer an immortal curse brought on by their 
vanity. They lurk in quiet exile among the tumbled 
ruins of their former lives, surrounded by the petrified 
remains of past admirers and would-be heroes. 

Immortal Splendor. Men and women who desire 
eternal youth, beauty, and adoration might pray to 
malicious gods, beg dragons for ancient magic, or seek 
out powerful archmages to fulfill their wishes. Others 
make sacrifices to demon lords or archdevils, offering 
all in exchange for this gift, oblivious to the curse that 
accompanies it. Those who strike such bargains gain 
physical beauty, restored youth, immortality, and the 
adoration of all who behold them, granting them the 
influence and power they so desire. However, after years 
of the living like a demigod among mortals, the price for 
their vanity and hubris is exacted, and they are forever 
transformed into medusas. A medusa’s hair turns into a 
tiest of venomous serpents, and all who gaze upon the 
medusa are petrified, becoming stone monuments to 
its corruption. 


' MEDUSA 


Medusa Lairs. Medusas live forever in seclusion, 
alienated from the world around them by their 
monstrous form and caprice. Their homes gradually fall 
into disrepair until they are little more than shadowy 
ruins covered with thorns and creepers, riddled with 
obstructions and hiding places. Foolhardy looters 
and adventurers who enter are often unaware of the 
medusa’s presence until the creature is among them. 

A medusa is subject to its own curse. By looking vainly 
on its reflection, it turns to stone as surely as any living 
mortal. As a result, a medusa destroys or removes any 
mirrors or reflective surfaces in its lair. 


\ i ad 3 , - L HS 
Medium monstrosity, lawful epil | 
Oe 
_ Armor Class 15. (natural armor) | 
Hit Points 127 (17d8 + 51) 
Speed 30 ft. 
t 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 15(+2) 16 (43) 12(41) 131) 15 (42) 


Skills Deception +5, Insight +4, Perception +4, Stealth +5 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages Common 

Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


ee 


Petrifying Gaze. When a creature that can see the medusa’s | 
eyes starts its turn within 30 feet of the medusa, the medusa 
can force it to make a DC 14 Constitution saving throw if 
the medusa isn’t incapacitated and can see the creature. If 

, the saving throw fails by 5 or more, the creature is instantly 
petrified. Otherwise, a creature that fails the save begins to 
turn to stone and is restrained. The restrained creature must 
repeat the saving throw at the end of its next turn, becoming 
petrified on a failure or ending the effect on a success. The 
petrification lasts until the creature is freed by the greater 
restoration spell or other magic. 

Unless surprised, a creature can avert its eyes to avoid the 
saving throw at the start of its turn. If the creature does so, it 
can’t see the medusa until the start of its next turn, when it can 
avert its eyes again. If the creature looks at the medusa in the 
meantime, it must immediately make the save. 

if the medusa sees itself reflected on a polished surface 
within 30 feet of it and in an area of bright light, the medusa is, 
due to its curse, affected by its own gaze. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The medusa makes either three melee attacks— 
- one with its snake hair and two with its shortsword—or two 
ranged attacks with its longbow. 


Snake Hair. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage plus 14 (4d6) 
poison damage. 


 Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


NS Ee eee eee —v— SS 


| Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 150/600 
| ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) 
poison damage. 


MEPHITS 


Mephits are capricious, imp-like creatures native to the 
elemental planes. They come in six varietiés, each one€ 
representing the mixture of two elements. 

Ageless tricksters, mephits gather in large numbers 
on the Elemental Planes and in the Elemental Chaos. — 
They also find their way to the Material Plane, whe 
they prefer to dwell in places where their base elements’: 
are abundant. For example, a magma mephit is 
composed of earth and fire, and it favors volcanic lairs, 
while an ice mephit, which is composed of air and water, 
favors frigid locales. 

Elemental Nature. A mephit doesn’t require food, 
drink, or sleep. 


Dust MEPHIT 


Composed of earth and air, dust mephits are drawn to 
catacombs and find death morbidly fascinating. 


Tce MEPHIT. . 


Comprising frigid air and water, ice mephits are aloof 
and cold, surpassing all other mephits in pitiless cruelty. 


_ Small way neutral evil 
I creer ress eee / 
Armor Class 12 } 
Hit Points 17 (5d6) : 
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft. 


CON 
10 (+0) 


INT WIS CHA 
9(-1) 11 (40) 10 (+0) 
—E————eEe—ee————————— 
| Skills Perception +2, Stealth +4 
Damage Vulnerabilities fire 
| 


STR 


. DEX 
5 (-3) 


14 (+2) 


Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

| Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages Auran, Terran 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Fe ssssasesassseséseousssEEne 


t 


a 


_ Death Burst. When the mephit dies, it explodes in a burst of 
| dust. Each creature within 5 feet of it must then succeed ona 
_ DC 10 Constitution saving throw or be blinded for 1 minute. 

| A blinded creature can repeat the saving throw on each of its 
| turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


; 


Innate Spellcasting (1/Day). The mephit can innately cast sleep, 
| requiring no material components. Its innate spellcasting 
| ability is Charisma. 


ACTIONS 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) slashing damage. 


Blinding Breath (Recharge 6). The mephit exhales a 15-foot 

, cone of blinding dust. Each creature in that area must succeed 
ona DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or be blinded for 1 minute. 
A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each ofits 
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


| 
| | STR 
j W7,{-2) 


ine inal, | neutral evil 


f “Armor Class 11 
"Hit Points 21 (6d6) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft. 
— enn 
DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (+1) 10(+0) 9(-1) 11(40) 12 (+1) 
Qa ge a 
"Skills Perception +2, Stealth +3 
| Damage Vulnerabilities bludgeoning, fire 
Damage Immunities cold, poison 
Condition Immunities poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 
_ Languages Aquan, Auran 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Cs sasaebesBeBBeBeB..=esseeeee 


Death Burst. When the mephit dies, it explodes in a burst of 
jagged ice. Each creature within 5 feet of it must make a DC 10 
Dexterity saving throw, taking 4 (1d8) slashing damage on a 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


False Appearance. While the mephit remains motionless, it is 
indistinguishable from an ordinary shard of ice. 


Innate Spellcasting (1/Day). The mephit can innately cast 
fog cloud, requiring no material components. Its innate 
| spellcasting ability is Charisma. 


_ ACTIONS 


_ Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 


| Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) slashing damage plus 2 (1d4) cold damage. 


_ Frost Breath (Recharge 6). The mephit exhales a 15-foot cone 
| of cold air. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 10 
| Dexterity saving throw, taking 5 (2d4) cold damage on a failed 


_ save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


Cinta 


i 


un 


| 


te he 


{ 


“Smal Binantal neutral evil 


Macma MEpPnuiIt 


MAGMA MEPHIT 


Composed of earth and fire, 
magma mephits glow a dull 

red color as they perspire beads 
of molten lava. They are slow to 
comprehend the meaning of others’ 
words and actions. 


Mub MEPHIT 


Mud mephits are slow, unctuous creatures of earth 


and water. They drone their complaints to all who will 
listen, and beg incessantly for attention and treasure. 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 22 (5d6 + 5) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
8(-1) 12 (+1) 12 (+1) 7 (-2) 10 (+0) 10 (+0) 
a 


Skills Stealth +3 


} Damage Vulnerabilities cold 


Damage Immunities fire, poison 
Condition Immunities poisoned 


} Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
| Languages Ignan, Terran 


Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


aaa eenEnEnEEEEESEIEEEEEEEEENEEEIEETDIEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE 


| Death Burst. When the mephit dies, it explodes in a burst 


of lava. Each creature within 5 feet of it must make a DC 11 
Dexterity saving throw, taking 7 (2d6) fire damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


| False Appearance. While the mephit remains motionless, it is 
indistinguishable from an ordinary mound of magma. 


Innate Spellcasting (1/Day). The mephit can innately cast heat 
metal (spell save DC 10), requiring no material components. 
Its innate spellcasting ability is Charisma. 


ACTIONS 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 


Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) slashing damage plus 2 (1d4) fire damage. 


Fire Breath (Recharge 6). The mephit exhales a 15-foot cone 


| of fire. Each creature in that area must make a DC 11 Dexterity 


saving throw, taking 7 (2d6) fire damage on a failed save, or 
half as much damage on a successful one. 


Small elemental, neutral evil. 


Mup Mepuit 


“Mup h MEPHIT 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 27 (6d6 + 6) 
Speed 20 ft., fly 20 ft., swim 20 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
8(-1) W2(+1) 1241) 9(-1) 1140) 7 (-2) 
ee 
Skills Stealth +3 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Aquan, Terran 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


(epee rpeses Sate 


Death Burst. When the mephit dies, it explodes in a burst of 
sticky mud. Each Medium or smaller creature within 5 feet 
of it must succeed on a DC 11 Dexterity saving throw or be 
restrained until the end of the creature’s next turn. 


False Appearance. While the mephit remains motionless, it is 
indistinguishable from an ordinary mound of mud. 


ACTIONS 


Fists. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. | 
Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) bludgeoning damage. 


Mud Breath (Recharge 6). The mephit belches viscid mud 

onto one creature within 5 feet of it. If the target is Medium 

or smaller, it must succeed on a DC 11 Dexterity saving throw 

or be restrained for 1 minute. A creature can repeat the saving | 
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself 
On a success. | 


SMOKE MEPHIT 


Smoke mephits are crude, lazy creatures of air 
and fire that billow smoke constantly. They 
rarely speak the truth and love to mock and 
mislead other creatures. 


STEAM MEPHIT 


Composed of fire and water, steam 
mephits leave trails of hot water 
wherever they go, and they hiss 
with tendrils of steam. Bossy and 
hypersensitive, they are the self- 
appointed overlords of all mephits. 


_ VARIANT: MEPHIT SUMMONING 
| Some mephits can have an action option that allows them to 
summon other mephits. 

Summon Mephits (1/Day). The mephit has a 25 percent 
chance of summoning 1d4 mephits of its kind. A summoned 
mephit appears in an unoccupied space within 60 feet of 

its summoner, acts as an ally of its summoner, and can’t 
| summon other mephits. It remains for 1 minute, until it 
_ or its summoner dies, or until its summoner dismisses it 

as an action 


OKE Mapaire 


“Small elemental, neutral evil 


vArinoy Clas 12 
Hit Points 22 (5d6 + 5) 
“Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
6(-2) 14 (+2) 12(+1) 10(+0) 10(+0) 11 (+0) 
Deine 

| Skills Perception +2, Stealth +4 
- | Damage Immunities fire, poison 
| Condition Immunities poisoned 
| Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages Auran, Ignan 
' Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


| ee 


i 


| Death Burst. When the mephit dies, it leaves behind a cloud 


_ of smoke that fills a 5-foot-radius sphere centered on its space. 


| The sphere is heavily obscured. Wind disperses the cloud, 
| which otherwise lasts for 1 minute. 


_ Innate Spellcasting (1/Day). The mephit can innately cast 
dancing lights, requiring no material components. Its innate 
| spellcasting ability is Charisma. 


ACTIONS 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
' creature. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) slashing damage. 


| Cinder Breath (Recharge 6). The mephit exhales a 15-foot cone 

of smoldering ash. Each creature in that area must succeed on 
a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or be blinded until the end of 
| the mephit’s next turn. 


a 
vere rs 


% a . L 
,  SMoke MepHit é. 


STEAM MEPHIT 


STEAM MEPHIT 


Small elemental, neutral evil 


a 


_ Armor Class 10 
_ Hit Points 21 (6d6) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

5(-3) 110) = 10(+0) 11 (+0) 1040) 12 (+1) 
EES T—™ 
Damage Immunities fire, poison 
Condition Immunities poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Aquan, Ignan 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


[=e ee—e 


Death Burst. When the mephit dies,.it explodes in a cloud of 
steam. Each creature within 5 feet of the mephit must succeed 
ona DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or take 4 (1d8) fire damage. 


Innate Spellcasting (1/Day). The mephit can innately cast blur, 
requiring no material components. Its innate spellcasting 
ability is Charisma. 


ACTIONS 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 


Hit: 2 (1d4) slashing damage plus 2 (1d4) fire damage. 
Steam Breath (Recharge 6). The mephit exhales a 15-foot cone 


_ of scalding steam. Each creature in that area must succeed on 
a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw, taking 4 (1d8) fire damage ona 
| failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


Se eee 


ee — 


S MERFOLK 
218 2 i 


=" 


MERFOLK 


Aquatic humanoids with the upper body of a human and 
the lower body of a fish, merfolk adorn their skin and 
scales with shell decorations. 

Merfolk tribes and kingdoms span the world, and 
their people are as varied in color, culture, and outlook 
as the human races of the surface. Land folk and 
merfolk rarely meet except by chance, though star-eyed 
mariners tell tales of romance with these creatures 
along the shoals of faraway islands. 

Merfolk lack the materials and practical means to 
forge weapons beneath the waves, to write books and 
keep lore, or to shape stone to raise buildings and 
cities. As a result, most live in small hunter-gatherer 
tribes, each of which holds unique values and creeds. 
Only occasionally do merfolk unite under the rule of a 
single leader. They do so to face a common threat or 
to complete a conquest. Such unifications can be the 
beginning of undersea kingdoms with dynasties lasting 
hundreds of years. 

Merfolk Settlements. Merfolk build their settlements 
in vast undersea caverns, mazes of coral, the ruins of 
sunken cities, or structures they carve from the rocky 
seabed. They live in water shallow enough that the 
passage of time can be marked by the gleam and fade 
of sunlight through the water. In the reefs and trenches 
near their settlements, merfolk harvest coral and farm 
the seabed, shepherding schools of fish as land-based 
farmers tend sheep. Only rarely do merfolk venture into 
the darkest depths of the ocean. In such depths and 
in their undersea caverns, merfolk rely on the light of 
bioluminescent flora and fauna, such as jellyfish, whose 
slow pulsing movements lend merfolk settlements an 
otherworldly aesthetic. 

Merfolk defend their communities with spears 
crafted from whatever materials they can salvage from 
shipwrecks, beaches, and dead undersea creatures. 


MERFOLK 
Medium humanoid (merfolk), neutral 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2) 
Speed 10 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 13(+1) 12(1) 1140) 1140) 12 (41) 


Skills Perception +2 

Senses passive Perception 12 
Languages Aquan, Common 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Amphibious. The merfolk can breathe air and water. 


ACTIONS 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft. 
or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 3 (1d6) piercing damage, 
or 4 (1d8) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a 
melee attack. 


MERROW 


Merrow haunt coastal waters, preying on fisherfolk, 
merfolk, and any other edible creature that crosses their 
path. These savage monsters snatch and devour unwary 
prey, hauling drowned corpses back to their underwater 
grottoes to feed. 

Transformed Merfolk. Long ago, a tribe of merfolk 
found an idol of Demogorgon at the bottom of the sea. 
Not knowing what it was, they brought the artifact 
to their king. Everyone who touched the idol became 
afflicted with madness, including the king, who decreed 
that a sacrificial ritual be performed to open a gateway 
to the Abyss. The ocean turned red with the blood of 
slaughtered merfolk, but the ritual worked, and the 
king led the survivors through the underwater gate 
to Demogorgon’s layer of the Abyss. The merfolk 
remained there for generations, fighting for their lives 
as the Abyss warped them completely, transforming 
them into hulking, evil monstrosities. Thus, the first 
merrow were born. 

Coastal Bullies. Whenever an opportunity presents 
itself, the Prince of Demons sends merrow back to 
the Material Plane to wreak havoc in the oceans. The 
merrow are bullies, attacking all creatures smaller and 
weaker than themselves. 

Merrow dwell in undersea caves filled with treasures 
and trophies, taken from their victims and sunken 
ships. They tie the rotting corpses of dead enemies and 
drowned sailors to strands of kelp to mark the borders 
of their territory. 


MERROW 


Large monstrosity, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 45 (6d10 + 12) 
Speed 10 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 10(+0) 15(4+2) 8(-1) 1040) 9(-1) 
a —™ 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 
, Languages Abyssal, Aquan 
| Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Amphibious. The merrow can breathe air and water. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The merrow makes two attacks: one with its bite 
and one with its claws or harpoon. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 9 (2d4 + 4) slashing damage. 


Harpoon. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 
| 5 ft. or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing 
| damage. If the target is a Huge or smaller creature, it must 
1 succeed ona Strength contest against the merrow or be pulled 
| up to 20 feet toward the merrow. 


ES EE 


i 


) 
| 


| 


eet ee! , 
Medium monstrosity (shapechanger), neutral 
amr rrr 
Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 

Hit Points 58 (9d8 + 18) 


Speed 15 ft. 
a 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
17 (+3) 312441) 15 (42) 5 (-3) 1341) 8(-]) 


a nn 


Skills Stealth +5 
Damage Immunities acid 


| Condition Immunities prone 
_ Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 


Languages — 


| Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


deen err re ee ee ee eT 


Shapechanger. The mimic can use its action to polymorph into 


an object or back into its true, amorphous form. Its statistics 


are the same in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or 
carrying isn’t transformed. It reverts to its true form if it dies. 


Adhesive (Object Form Only). The mimic adheres to anything 
that touches it. A Huge or smaller creature adhered to the 
mimic is also grappled by it (escape DC 13). Ability checks 


_ made to escape this grapple have disadvantage. 


_ False Appearance (Object Form Only). While the mimic 
) remains motionless, it is indistinguishable from an 
| ordinary object. 


Grappler. The mimic has advantage on attack rolls against any 
creature grappled by it. 


ACTIONS 


| Pseudopod. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
| target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) bludgeoning damage. If the mimic is in 


object form, the target is subjected to its Adhesive trait. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage plus 4 (1d8) acid damage. 


MIMIC 


Mimics are shapeshifting predators able to take on 
the form of inanimate objects to lure creatures to their 
doom. In dungeons, these cunning creatures most often 
take the form of doors and chests, having learned that 
such forms attract a steady stream of prey. 

Imitative Predators. Mimics can alter their 
outward texture to resemble wood, stone, and other 
basic materials, and they have evolved to assume the 
appearance of objects that other creatures are likely to 
come into contact with. A mimic in its altered form is 
nearly unrecognizable until potential prey blunders into 
its reach, whereupon the monster sprouts pseudopods 
and attacks. 

When it changes shape, a mimic excretes an adhesive 
that helps it seize prey and weapons that touch it. 
The adhesive is absorbed when the mimic assumes 
its amorphous form and on parts the mimic uses to 
move itself. 

‘Cunning Hunters. Mimics live and hunt alone, though 
they occasionally share their feeding grounds with other 
creatures. Although most mimics have only predatory 
intelligence, a rare few evolve greater cunning and the 
ability to carry on simple conversations in Common or 
Undercommon. Such mimics might allow safe passage 
through their domains or provide useful information in 
exchange for food. 


MIND FLAYER 

Mind flayers, also called illithids, are the scourge of 
sentient creatures across countless worlds. Psionic 
tyrants, slavers, and interdimensional voyagers, they 
are insidious masterminds that harvest entire races for 
their own twisted ends. Four tentacles snake from their 
octopus-like heads, flexing in hungry anticipation when 
sentient creatures come near. 

In eons past, illithids controlled empires that spanned 
many worlds. They subjugated and consequently warped 
whole races of humanoid slaves, including the githyanki 
and githzerai, the grimlocks, and the kuo-toa. Conjoined 
by a collective consciousness, the illithids hatch plots 
as far-reaching and evil as their fathomless minds 
can conceive. 

Since the fall of their empires, illithid collectives on 
thé Material Plane have resided in the Underdark. 

Psionic Commanders. Mind flayers possess psionic 
powers that enable them to control the minds of 
creatures such as troglodytes, grimlocks, quaggoths, 
and ogres. Illithids prefer to communicate via telepathy 
and use their telepathy when issuing commands to 
their thralls. 

When an illithid meets strong resistance, it avoids 
initial combat as it orders its thralls to attack. Like 
physical extensions of the illithid’s thoughts, these 
thralls interpose themselves between the mind 
flayer and its foes, sacrificing their lives so that their 
master can escape. 

Hive Mind Colonies. Solitary mind flayers are likely 
rogues and outcasts. Most illithids belong to a colony 
of sibling mind flayers devoted to an elder brain—a 
massive brain-like being that resides in a briny pool 
near the center of a mind flayer community. From its 
pool, an elder brain telepathically dictates its desires to 
each individual mind flayer within 5 miles of it, for it is 
able to hold multiple mental conversations at once. 

Hunger of the Mind. Illithids subsist on the brains 
of humanoids. The brains provide enzymes, hormones, 
and psychic energy necessary for their survival. An 
illithid healthy from a brain-rich diet secretes a thin 
glaze of mucus that coats its mauve skin. 

An illithid experiences euphoria as it devours 
the brain of a humanoid, along with its memories, 
personality, and innermost fears. Mind flayers will 
sometimes harvest a brain rather than devour it, using it 
as part of some alien experiment or transforming it into 
an intellect devourer. 


EEE 
QUALITH 
On the rare occasion that mind flayers need to write 
something down, they do so in Qualith. This system of 
tactile writing (similar to braille) is read by an illithid’s 
tentacles. Qualith is written in four-line stanzas and is so 
alien in construction that non-illithids must resort to magic 
to discern its meaning. Though Qualith can be used to keep 
records, illithids most often use it to mark portals or other 
surfaces with warnings or instructions. 


Pm 


MIND FLAYER 


Medium aberration, lawful evil 


Armor Class 15 (breastplate) 
Hit Points 71 (13d8 + 13) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
11 (+0) 12 (41) «12 (41), 19. (44) «17 (43)——«17 (43) 
ee 
Saving Throws Int +7, Wis +6, Cha +6 
Skills Arcana +7, Deception +6, Insight +6, Perception +6, 
Persuasion +6, Stealth +4 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16 
Languages Deep Speech, Undercommon, telepathy 120 ft. 
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


aro —te 


Magic Resistance. The mind flayer has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The mind flayer's innate 
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 15). It can 
innately cast the following spells, requiring no components: 


At will: detect thoughts, levitate 
1/day each: dominate monster, plane shift (self only) 


ACTIONS 


Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 15 (2d10 + 4) psychic damage. If the target is 
Medium or smaller, it is grappled (escape DC 15) and must 
succeed on a DC 15 Intelligence saving throw or be stunned 
until this grapple ends. 


Extract Brain. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one incapacitated humanoid grappled by the mind flayer. Hit: 
The target takes 55 (10d10) piercing damage. If this damage 
reduces the target to 0 hit points, the mind flayer kills the 

| target by extracting and devouring its brain. 


Mind Blast (Recharge 5-6). The mind flayer magically emits 

| psychic energy in a 60-foot cone. Each creature in that area 

must succeed on a DC 15 Intelligence saving throw or take 
22 (4d8 + 4) psychic damage and be stunned for 1 minute. A 

| creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 

turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


ye a aaa 
VARIANT: MIND FLAYER ARCANIST 
A few mind flayers supplement their psionic power with 
arcane spells. However, they are regarded as deviants by their 
illithid peers and usually shunned. A mind flayer arcanist has 
a challenge rating of 8 (3,900 XP) and the following trait. 
Spellcasting. The mind flayer is a 10th-level spellcaster. 
Its spellcasting ability is Intelligence (save DC 15, +7 to hit 
with spell attacks). The mind flayer has the following wizard 
spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): blade ward, dancing lights, mage hand, 
shocking grasp 

Ist level (4 slots): detect magic, disguise self, shield, sleep 

2nd level (3 slots): blur, invisibility, ray of enfeeblement 

3rd level (3 slots): clairvoyance, lightning bolt, sending 

4th level (3 slots): confusion, hallucinatory terrain 

5th level (2 slots): telekinesis, wall of force 

So 


MIND’ FLAYER 


222 


MiNOTAUR 


A minotaur’s roar is a savage battle cry that most 
civilized creatures fear. Born into the mortal realm by 
demonic rites, minotaurs are savage conquerors and 
carnivores that live for the hunt. Their brown or black 
fur is stained with the blood of fallen foes, and they 
carry the stench of death. 

The Beast Within. Most minotaurs are solitary 
carnivores that roam labyrinthine dungeons, twisting 
caves, primeval woods, and the maze-like streets and 
passages of desolate ruins. A minotaur can visualize 
every route it might take to close the distance to its prey. 

The scent of blood, the tearing of flesh, and the 
cracking of bones spur a minotaur’s lust for carnage, 
overwhelming all thought and reason. In a blood rage, 

a minotaur charges anything it sees, butting and goring 
like a battering ram, then chopping the fallen in twain. 

Apart from ambushing creatures that wander into its 
labyrinth, a minotaur cares little for strategy or tactics. 
Minotaurs seldom organize, they don’t respect authority 
or hierarchy, and they are notoriously difficult to enslave, 
let alone control. 

Cults of the Horned King. Minotaurs are the dark 
descendants of humanoids transformed by the rituals of 
cults that reject the oppression of authority by returning 
to nature. Inductees often mistake these cults for 
druidic circles or totemic religions whose ceremonies 
involve entering a labyrinth while wearing a ceremonial 


MINOTAUR 


animal mask. 

Within these bounded environments, cultists hunt, _ Large monstrosity, chaotic evil " 
kill, and eat wild beasts, indulging their basest primal 
urges. In the end, however, sacrificial animals are | Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
exchanged for humanoid sacrifice—sometimes an Hit Points 76 (9d10 + 27) 
inductee that tried to escape the cult after learning its _ Speed 40 ft. 
secrets. These labyrinths become blood-soaked halls of 

STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 


slaughter, echoing to the cultists’ savagery. | 
Unknown to all but their highest-ranking leaders, 
these mystery cults are creations of the demon lord 
Bap en the Horned King, whose layer of the Abyss Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 17 
is a gigantic labyrinth. Some of his followers are fervent Languages Abyssal 
supplicants that plead for strength and power. Others | Challenge 3 (700 XP) 
come to the cult seeking a life free from authority's 
chains—and are liberated of their humanity instead as 
Baphomet transforms them into the minotaurs that echo 
his own savage form. 
Although they begin as creations of the Horned King, 
minotaurs can breed true with one another, giving rise 
to an independent race of Baphomet'’s savage children 


in the world. 
—_ 
Ra A ae 
a OSS —< 


18 (+4) 1140) 16(43) 6(-2) 16(+3) 9(-1) 
Skills Perception +7 


_ Charge. |f the minotaur moves at least 10 feet straight toward a 
target and then hits it with a gore attack on the same turn, the 
target takes an extra 9 (2d8) piercing damage. If the target is a 
creature, it must succeed on a DC 14 Strength saving throw or 
be pushed up to 10 feet away and knocked prone. 


Labyrinthine Recall. The minotaur can perfectly recall any path 
it has traveled. 


Reckless. At the start of its turn, the minotaur can gain 
advantage on all melee weapon attack rolls it makes during 
that turn, but attack rolls against it have advantage until the 
start of its next turn. 


Ay alt 
AS FS 


ACTIONS 


Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 17 (2d12 + 4) slashing damage. 


Gore. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage. 


bolle tt hee ——— 
Ta Po ~ 


MopDRONS 


Modrons are beings of absolute law that adhere to a 
hive-like hierarchy. They inhabit the plane of Mechanus 
afid tend its eternally revolving gears, their existence a 
‘clockwork routine of perfect order. 
Absolute Law and Order. Under the direction 

of their leader, Primus, modrons increase order in 

the multiverse in accordance with laws beyond the 
comprehension of mortal minds. Their own minds 

are networked in a hierarchal pyramid, in which 

each modron receives commands from superiors and 
/ / delegates orders to underlings. A modron carries out 
commands with total obedience, utmost efficiency, and 


an absence of morality or ego. 
lt Modrons have no sense of self beyond what is 
necessary to fulfill their duties. They exist as a unified 
collective, divided by ranks, yet they always refer to 
themselves collectively. To a modron, there is no “J,” but 
only “we” or “us.” 

Absolute Hierarchy. Modrons communicate only 
with their own rank and the ranks immediately above 
and below them. Modrons more than one rank away are 
either too advanced or too simple to understand. 

Cogs of the Great Machine. If a modron is destroyed, 
its remains disintegrate. A replacement from the next 
vn lowest rank then transforms in a flash of light, gaining 
| the physical form of its new rank. The promoted modron 
\ is replaced by one of its underlings in the same manner, 
a all the way to the lowest levels of the hierarchy. There, a 
new modron is created by Primus, with a steady stream 
of monodrones leaving the Great Modron Cathedral on 
Mechanus as a result. 

The Great Modron March. When the gears of 
pha _ Mechanus complete seventeen cycles once every 289 

| years, Primus sends a vast army of modrons across the 
ae ‘Outer Planes, ostensibly on a reconnaissance mission. 
| The march is long and dangerous, and only a small 
‘| number of modrons returns to Mechanus. 


MONODRONE 


A monodrone can perform one simple task at a time and 
can relay a single message of up to forty-eight words. 


‘DUODRONE 


‘The blocky duodrones supervise units of monodrones 
and can perform up to two tasks at a time. 


‘TRIDRONE 


Ttidrones are shaped like inverted pyramids. They lead 
lesser modrons in battle. 


in, ~QUADRONE 
‘eu Ta Astute combatants, quadrones serve as artillery and 
field officers in the regiments of modron armies. 


PENTADRONE 


Pentadrones oversee Mechanus’s worker populace and 
can improvise in response to new situations. 


rere 


4) 


+ ee 


VARIANT: ROGUE MODRONS 
A modron unit sometimes becomes defective, either through 
natural decay or exposure to chaotic forces. Rogue modrons 
don’t act in accordance with Primus’s wishes and directives, 
breaking laws, disobeying orders, and even engaging in 
violence. Other modrons hunt down such rogues. 

A rogue modron loses the Axiomatic Mind trait and can 
have any alignment other than lawful neutral. Otherwise, it 
has the same statistics as a regular modron of its rank. 


-MONODRONE 


Medium construct, lawful neutral 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
| Hit Points 5 (1d8 + 1) 
| Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft. 
| 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (40) 1341) 1241) 4(-3) 1040) 5 (-3) 


Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Modron 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 

— a a 
Axiomatic Mind. The monodrone can’t be compelled to actina | 
manner contrary to its nature or its instructions, 


| Disintegration. |f the monodrone dies, its body disintegrates 
into dust, leaving behind its weapons and anything else it 
_ was carrying. 


ACTIONS 


_ Dagger. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. | 
Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) piercing damage. 


| Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage. 


TEVERY 289 
Goes MAE : 


P| 
| 


fy 


Jyrsr Rs 
ns, THE ENTIRE MULTIVE 
YEA 1) t % ; 
Ke d 
ont \ f peLLowi 
Wc? uint STORM 


ER. 
ock GNOME novENTUR 
. 


DUODRONE 


Medium construct, lawful neutral 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2) 


Medium construct, lawful neutral 


_ Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 16 (3d8 + 3) 


Speed 30 ft. Speed 30 ft. 
| 

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

11 (+0) =—-13. G1): 12 1) 6 (-2) 10(4+0) 7 (-2) 12 (+1) 13 (41) =: 12 1) 9(-1) 10(440) 9(-1) 


Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Modron 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Axiomatic Mind. The duodrone can’t be compelled to act ina 
manner contrary to its nature or its instructions. 


Disintegration. |f the duodrone dies, its body disintegrates 
into dust, leaving behind its weapons and anything else it 
was Carrying. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The duodrone makes two fist attacks or two 
javelin attacks. 


Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Modron 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Axiomatic Mind. The tridrone can’t be compelled to act ina 
manner contrary to its nature or its instructions. 


Disintegration. |f the tridrone dies, its body disintegrates 
into dust, leaving behind its weapons and anything else it 
was Carrying. 

ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The tridrone makes three fist attacks or three 


javelin attacks. 


Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: | 
2 (1d4) bludgeoning damage. 


Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 
3 (1d4 + 1) bludgeoning damage. 


Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage. 


Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
_ range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage. 


MGbRons, 
eo 


a Sa 


226 


/ QUADRONE 
| Medium construct, lawful neutral 
i 
| Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4) 


| Speed 30 ft., fly 30 ft. 


STR DEX 
12 (41) 14 (42) 


CON INT wis 
12 (41) 10 (40) 10 (+0) 


CHA 
11 (+0) 


S 
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages Modron 


| 
: 
kills Perception +2 
| 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 
j 
| 


| Axiomatic Mind. The quadrone can’t be compelled to act in a 
/ manner contrary to its nature or its instructions. 

| 

| 


Disintegration. |f the quadrone dies, its body disintegrates 
| into dust, leaving behind its weapons and anything else it 
| was carrying. 


_ ACTIONS 


| Multiattack. The quadrone makes two fist attacks or four 
shortbow attacks. 


| Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: | 


| 3 (1d4 + 1) bludgeoning damage. 


J 
7 


| Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 80/320 ft., 
‘| one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


hon, 


— MODRONS 


- a 


i 


t 


p 
t 


Large construct, lawful neutral 


_ Acreature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 


PENTADRONE 


Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 

Hit Points 32 (5d10 + 5) 

Speed 40 ft. . 

a 

F6OwSTR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
| 15 (42) 1442) 1241) 10440) 1040) 13 (1) 


Skills Perception +4 

Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages Modron 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Axiomatic Mind. The pentadrone can’t be compelled to act ina 
manner contrary to its nature or its instructions. 


Disintegration. |f the pentadrone dies, its body disintegrates 
into dust, leaving behind its weapons and anything else it 
was carrying. 

ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The pentadrone makes five arm attacks. 


Arm. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage. 


Paralysis Gas (Recharge 5-6). The pentadrone exhales a 30- 
foot cone of gas. Each creature in that area must succeed ona 
DC 11 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. 


turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


MUMMIES 
Raised by dark funerary rituals, amummy shambles 
from the shrouded stillness of a time-lost temple or 
tomb. Having been awoken from its rest, it punishes 
transgressors with the power of its unholy curse. 

Preserved Wrath. The long burial rituals that 
accompany a mummy’s entombment help protect 
its body from rot. In the embalming process, the 
newly dead creature’s organs are removed and 
placed in special jars, and its corpse is treated with 
preserving oils, herbs, and wrappings. After the body 
has been prepared, the corpse is typically wrapped in 
linen bandages. 

The Will of Dark Gods. An undead mummy is created 
when the priest of a death god or other dark deity 
ritually imbues a prepared corpse with necromantic 
magic. The mummy’s linen wrappings are inscribed 
with necromantic markings before the burial ritual 
concludes with an invocation to darkness. Asa 
mummy endures in undeath, it animates in response 
to conditions specified by the ritual. Most commonly, 

a transgression against its tomb, treasures, lands, or 
former loved ones will cause a mummy to rise. 

The Punished. Once deceased, an individual has no 
say in whether or not its body is made into a mummy. 
Some mummies were powerful individuals who 
displeased a high priest or pharaoh, or who committed 
crimes of treason, adultery, or murder. As punishment, 
they were cursed with eternal undeath, embalmed, 
mummified, and sealed away. Other times, mummies 
acting as tomb guardians are created from slaves put to 
death specifically to serve a greater purpose. 

Creature of Ritual. A mummy obeys the conditions 
and parameters laid down by the rituals that created it, 
driven only to punish transgressors. The overwhelming 
terror that foreshadows a mummy’s attack can leave 
the intended victim paralyzed with fright. In the days 
following a mummy’s touch, a victim’s body rots from 
the outside in, until nothing but dust remains. 

Ending a Mummy’s Curse. Rare magic can undo or 
dispel the ritual that gave rise to a mummy, allowing it 
to truly die. More commonly, a mummy can be sent back 
to its endless rest by undoing the transgression that 
caused it to rise. A sacred idol might be replaced in its 
niche, a stolen treasure could be returned to its tomb, or 
a temple might be purified of despoiling bloodshed. 

More ephemeral or permanent offenses, such as 
revealing a secret the mummy wished kept or killing 
an individual the mummy loved, can’t be so easily 
remedied. In such cases, a mummy might slaughter all 
the creatures responsible and still not sate its wrath. 

Undead Archives. Though they seldom bother to 
do so, mummies can speak. As a result, some serve as 
undead repositories of lost lore, and can be consulted by 
the descendants of those who created them. Powerful 
individuals sometimes intentionally sequester mummies 
away for occasional consultation. 

Undead Nature. A mummy doesn’t require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


Mummy LorD 


In the tombs of the ancients, tyrannical monarchs and ‘if 


the high priests of dark gods lie in dreamless rest, 
waiting for the time when they might reclaim their 
thrones and reforge their ancient empires. The regalia 
of their terrible rule still adorns their linen-wrapped 
bodies, their moldering robes stitched with evil symbols 
and bronze armor etched with devices of dynasties that 
fell a thousand years before. { 

Under the direction of the most powerful priests, 
the ritual that creates a mummy can be increased in 
potency. The mummy lord that rises from such aritual 
retains the memories and personality of its former 
life, and is gifted with supernatural resilience. Dead 
emperors wield the same infamous rune-marked 
blades that they did in legend. Sorcerer lords work 
the forbidden magic that once controlled a terrified 
populace, and the dark gods reward dead priest-kings’ 
prayers by imparting divine spells. 

Heart of the Mummy Lord. As part of the ritual that 
creates a mummy lord, the creature’s heart and viscera 
are removed from the corpse and placed in canopic jars. 
These jars are usually carved from limestone or made of 
pottery, etched or painted with religious hieroglyphs. 

As long as its shriveled heart remains intact, a 
mummy lord can’t be permanently destroyed. When 
it drops to 0 hit points, the mummy lord turns to dust 
and re-forms at full strength 24 hours later, rising out 
of dust in close proximity to the canopic jar containing 
its heart. A mummy lord can be destroyed or prevented 
from re-forming by burning its heart to ashes. For this 
reason, a mummy lord usually keeps its heart and 
viscera in a hidden tomb or vault. 

The mummy lord’s heart has AC 5, 25 hit points, and 
immunity to all damage except fire. 


Berore opeNnine a SARCOPHAGUS, LIGHT A TORCH.” 


KR THE Mystic'@9ty RULE OF DUNGEON SURVIVAL 


A MuMMY Lorp’s LAIR 


A mummy lord watches over an ancient temple or tomb 


that is protected by lesser undead and rigged with 
traps. Hidden in this temple is the sarcophagus where a 
mummy lord keeps its greatest treasures. 

A mummy lord encountered in its lair has a challenge 
rating of 16 (15,000 XP). 


LAIR ACTIONS 

On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the mummy 
lord takes a lair action to cause one of the following 
effects; the mummy lord can’t use the same effect two 
rounds in a row. 


« Each undead creature in the lair can pinpoint the loca- 
tion of each living creature within 120 feet of it until 
initiative count 20 on the next round. 


MUMMY 


Medium undead, lawful evil 


Armor Class 11 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 58 (9d8 + 18) 


Speed 20 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (#3) = =8(-1) 1542) 6(-2) 10(40) 12 (41) 
EEE ———————— 
Saving Throws Wis +2 


Damage Vulnerabilities fire 

Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical weapons 

Damage Immunities necrotic, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages the languages it knew in life 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


ACTIONS = 


Multiattack. The mummy can use its Dreadful Glare and 
makes one attack with its rotting fist. 


Rotting Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage plus 10 (3d6) 
necrotic damage. If the target is a creature, it must succeed on 
a DC 12 Constitution saving throw or be cursed with mummy 
rot. The cursed target can’t regain hit points, and its hit point 
maximum decreases by 10 (3d6) for every 24 hours that elapse. 
If the curse reduces the target’s hit point maximum to 0, the 


| target dies, and its body turns to dust. The curse lasts until 


_ removed by the remove curse spell or other magic. 


Dreadful Glare. Tne mummy targets one creature it can see 
within 60 feet of it. If the target can see the mummy, it must 


| succeed on a DC 11 Wisdom saving throw against this magic 


or become frightened until the end of the mummy's next 

turn. If the target fails the saving throw by 5 or more, it is also 
paralyzed for the same duration. A target that succeeds on the 
saving throw is immune to the Dreadful Glare of all mummies 
(but not mummy lords) for the next 24 hours. 


throws against effects that turn undead until initiative 
count 20 on the next round. 

Until initiative count 20 on the next round, any 
non-undead creature that tries to cast a spell of 4th 
level or lower in the mummy lord's lair is wracked 
with pain. The creature can choose another action, 
but if it tries to cast the spell, it must make a DC 16 
Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, it takes 
1d6 necrotic damage per level of the spell, and the 
spell has no effect and is wasted. 


REGIONAL EFFECTS 
A mummy lord’s temple or tomb is warped in any of the 
following ways by the creature’s dark presence: 


Mummy Lorp te aan Te 


i 
il undead, lawful evil - *. “Ee 


, Armor Class 7 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 97 (13d8 + 39) 
| Speed 20 ft. 


| 

STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 

) 18(44) 10(40) 17(+3) 1 (40) 18(4+4) 16 (+3) 
SE ——————E Ee —————————— 

_ Saving Throws Con +8, Int +5, Wis +9, Cha +8 

| Skills History +5, Religion +5 

| Damage Vulnerabilities fire 

| Damage Immunities necrotic, poison; bludgeoning, piercing, 

_ and slashing from nonmagical weapons 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 

Languages the languages it knew in life 

Challenge 15 (13,000 XP) 


LO 


Magic Resistance. The mummy lord has advantage on saving 
| throws against spells and other magical effects. 


Rejuvenation. A destroyed mummy lord gains a new body in 
| 24 hours if its heart is intact, regaining all its hit points and 
becoming active again. The new body appears within 5 feet of 
_ the mummy lord’s heart. 


| Spellcasting. The mummy lord is a 10th-level spellcaster. Its 
- spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 17, +9 to hit 

with spell attacks). The mummy lord has the following cleric 
| spells prepared: 


| Cantrips (at will): sacred flame, thaumaturgy 

| Ist level (4 slots): command, guiding bolt, shield of faith 
| 2nd level (3 slots): hold person, silence, spiritual weapon 
| 3rd level (3 slots): animate dead, dispel magic 

- Ath level (3 slots): divination, guardian of faith 

| 5th level (2 slots): contagion, insect plague 

| 6th level (1 slot): harm 


/ ACTIONS 


| Multiattack. The mummy can use its Dreadful Glare and 
| makes one attack with its rotting fist. 


Rotting Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 14 (3d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage plus 21 (6d6) 


————_———— 


. i necrotic damage. 
St Constitution saving throw or be 


when brought into the lair. Other nonmagical drinks 
are spoiled—wine turning to vinegar, for instance. | 

- Divination spells cast within the lair by creatures 
other than the mummy lord have a 25 percent chance 
to provide misleading results, as determined by the 
DM. If a divination spell already has a chance to fail 
or become unreliable when cast multiple times, ‘that 
chance increases by 25 percent. air 

« Acreature that takes treasure from the lair is cursed. 
until the treasure is returned. The cursed target has 
disadvantage on all saving throws. The curselasts 
until removed by a remove curse spell or other magic. 


If the mummy lord is destroyed, these regional effects 
end immediately. 


.. If the target is ¢ re fh e itmust succeed 
‘rot. The cursed target can “hisealniy hit | points, and its hit point 
~ maximum decreases by 10 (3d6) for e\ every 24 hours that elapse. 
If the curse reduces the target’ s hit point maximum to 0, the | 
target dies, and its body turns to dust. The curse lasts until 


removed by the remove curse spell or other magic. 


Dreadful Glare. Tne mummy lord targets one creature it can 
see within 60 feet of it. If the target can see the mummy lord, 

it must succeed on a DC 16 Wisdom saving throw against this 
magic or become frightened until the end of the mummy's next 
turn. If the target fails the saving throw by 5 or more, it is also 
paralyzed for the same duration. A target that succeeds on the 
saving throw is immune to the Dreadful Glare of all mummies 
and mummy lords for the next 24 hours. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The mummy lord can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from 
the options below. Only one legendary action option can be 
used at a time and only at the end of another creature's turn. 
The mummy lord regains spent legendary actions at the start 
of its turn. 


Attack. The mummy lord makes one attack with its rotting fist 
or uses its Dreadful Glare. 

Blinding Dust. Blinding dust and sand swirls magically around 
the mummy lord. Each creature within 5 feet of the mummy 
lord must succeed on a DC 16 Constitution saving throw or 
be blinded until the end of the creature's next turn. 

Blasphemous Word (Costs 2 Actions). The mummy lord utters 
a blasphemous word. Each non-undead creature within 10 
feet of the mummy lord that can hear the magical utterance 
must succeed on a DC 16 Constitution saving throw or be 
stunned until the end of the mummy lord’s next turn. 

Channel Negative Energy (Costs 2 Actions). The mummy lord 
magically unleashes negative energy. Creatures within 60 
feet of the mummy lord, including ones behind barriers and 
around corners, can’t regain hit points until the end of the 
mummy lord’s next turn. 

Whirlwind of Sand (Costs 2 Actions), The mummy lord 
magically transforms into a whirlwind of sand, moves up to 
60 feet, and reverts to its normal form. While in whirlwind 
form, the mummy lord is immune to all damage, and it 
can’t be grappled, petrified, knocked prone, restrained, or 
stunned. Equipment worn or carried by the mummy lord 
remain in its possession. 


oP eT eee ey a 


cursed) ‘withemuphiy 4 


— 


t 
| 
| 


| 
| 


ae 
fae Le! 


oe i, 10sec al Ue ‘huh co alee all ——————— hi Tote ae vi 

Sa enn a ste Vall es i = = £ = : = mt LG as a, Hi i 
‘ 7 ee = ——— Fe 5 ong! my 

“i em | 
Each undead in the Jair has advantage on saving « Food instantly molders and water instantly evaporates. a tye rt 


MYCONIDS 


Myconids are intelligent, ambulatory fungi that live 
in the Underdark, seek enlightenment, and deplore 
violence. If approached peacefully, myconids gladly 
provide shelter or allow safe passage through 

their colonies. 

Circles and Melds. The largest myconid in a colony 
is its sovereign, which presides over one or more social 
groups called circles. A circle consists of twenty or more 
myconids that work, live, and meld together. 

A meld is a form of communal meditation that 
allows myconids to transcend their dull subterranean 
existence. The myconids’ rapport spores bind the 
participants into a group consciousness. Hallucination 
spores then induce a shared dream that provides 
entertainment and social interaction. Myconids consider 
melding to be the purpose of their existence. They use 
it in the pursuit of higher consciousness, collective 
union, and spiritual apotheosis. Myconids also use their 
rapport spores to communicate telepathically with other 
sentient creatures. 

Myconid Reproduction. Like other fungi, myconids 


1 pot ay ey = - 
tt ey gee od ee = oe 
pe ae ee ei a 


b caqee 


a ee 

to begin with (such as a construct, damental: 00Ze, 
plant, or undead) can't be turned into a spore servant. 
The following characteristics change or are added to a 
creature that becomes a spore servant. 

Retained Characteristics. The servant retains its 
Armor Class, hit points, Hit Dice, Strength, Dexterity, 
Constitution, vulnerabilities, resistances, and immunities. 

Lost Characteristics. The servant loses its original 
saving throw and skill bonuses, special senses, and 
special traits. It loses any action that isn’t Multiattack or 
a melee weapon attack that deals bludgeoning, piercing, 
or slashing damage. If it has an action or a melee weapon 
attack that deals some other type of damage, it loses the 
ability to deal damage of that type, unless the damage 
comes from a piece of equipment, such as a magic item. 

Type. The servant’s type is plant, and it loses any tags. 

Alignment. The servant is unaligned. 

Speed. Reduce all the servant’s speeds by 10 feet, toa 
minimum of 5 feet. 

Ability Scores. The servant's ability scores change as 
follows: Int 2 (-4), Wis 6 (-2), Cha 1 (5). 

Senses. The servant has blindsight with a radius of 
30 feet, and it is blind beyond this radius. 


reproduce by mundane sporing. They carefully control Condition Immunities. The servant can’t be blinded, 
their spores’ release to avoid overpopulation. charmed, frightened, or paralyzed. 

Languages. The servant loses all known languages, 
SPORE SERVANT TEMPLATE but it responds to orders given to it by myconids using 


rapport spores. The servant gives highest priority to 
orders received from the most powerful myconid. 
Attacks. If the servant has no other means of dealing 
damage, it can use its fists or limbs to make unarmed 
strikes. On a hit, an unarmed strike deals bludgeoning 


back to life by the animating spores of a myconid 


| 

| 

| A spore servant is any Large or smaller creature brought 
; sovereign. A creature that was never flesh and blood 


j My 10} 7 D SPROUT | damage equal to 1d4 + the servant’s Strength modifier, 
* Small plant, lawful neutral | of, if the servant is Large, 2d4 + its Strength modifier. 
i a = 1% —- 5 

: aay Class 10 SAMPLE SPORE SERVANT 

| Hit Points 7 (2d6) This spore servant statistics presented here use a 


Speed 10 ft. quaggoth as the base creature. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA eae Tyelwes = 
8(-1) 10(+0) 10(+0) 8(-1) (40) 5(-3) QOUAGGOTH SPORE SERVANT 


j Medium plant, unaligned 


SE SS ee ee 


? Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10 \- pager 
" Languages — Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 


Challenge 0 (10 XP) _ Hit Points 45 (6d8 + 18) 
——7 ee —_————— Speed 20 ft., climb 20 ft. 
f | 
Distress Spores. When the myconid takes damage, all other hn" STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
myconids within 240 feet of it can sense its pain. Ho 17(+3) «12 (41) 16 (43) 8224) «366 2)— «16¢5) 
] 


| Sun Sickness, While in sunlight, the myconid has disadvantage 
on ability checks, attack rolls, and saving throws. The myconid 
dies if it spends more than 1 hour in direct sunlight. 


Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, frightened, 
paralyzed, poisoned 


i 
| 
i _ Senses blindsight 30 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
i 


aren’t undead, constructs, or elementals. Affected creatures 
| can communicate telepathically with one another while they are | | Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
j within 30 feet of each other. The effect lasts for 1 hour. | Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) slashing damage. 


SSSA SEPT WTR TRE RESP REY Ee | 


. | ACTIONS 
bal se ETL EELEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE EERE passive Perception 8 
Pr Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +1 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: Languages — 
if 1 (1d4 - 1) bludgeoning damage plus 2 (1d4) poison damage. _ Challenge 1 (200 XP) 
a Rapport Spores (3/Day). A 10-foot radius of spores extends 
| from the myconid. These spores can go around corners and ACTIONS 
i | affect only creatures with an Intelligence of 2 or higher that | | Multiattack, The spore servant makes two claw attacks. 


ss 


Oo O—e—eeeEe : = —- a _ — —— n a" ly 
ere i ; — -_——— = = = a 


i of 
Aa 4. 
1 ‘see ay , 
al : =] 
o 


MYCONID ADULT 


Medium plant, lawful neutral 


Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4) 


Speed 20 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 10(+0) 12(+1) 1040) 134) 7(-2) 


Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Distress Spores. When the myconid takes damage, all other 
myconids within 240 feet of it can sense its pain. 


Sun Sickness. While in sunlight, the myconid has disadvantage 
on ability checks, attack rolls, and saving throws. The myconid 
dies if it spends more than 1 hour in direct sunlight. 


ACTIONS 


| Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 


5 (2d4) bludgeoning damage plus 5 (2d4) poison damage. 
Pacifying Spores (3/Day). The myconid ejects spores at one 


_ creature it can see within 5 feet of it. The target must succeed 


ona DC 11 Constitution saving throw or be stunned for 1 
minute. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of 


' each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


each other. The effect lasts for 1 hour. 


Rapport Spores. A 20-foot radius of spores extends from the 
myconid. These spores can go around corners and affect only 
creatures with an Intelligence of 2 or higher that aren’t undead, 
constructs, or elementals. Affected creatures can communicate 
telepathically with one another while they are within 30 feet of 


bee | ~<Myconip SovEREIGN 


= x = —— Se 


Large plant, lawful neutral 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 60 (8d10 + 16) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIs CHA 
12(#1) 1040) 1442) 1341) 15(42) 10(40) 


Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages — 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Distress Spores. When the myconid takes damage, all other 
myconids within 240 feet of it can sense its pain. 


Sun Sickness. While in sunlight, the myconid has disadvantage 
on ability checks, attack rolls, and saving throws. The myconid 
dies if it spends more than 1 hour in direct sunlight. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The myconid uses either its Hallucination Spores 
or its Pacifying Spores, then makes a fist attack. 


Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 
8 (3d4 + 1) bludgeoning damage plus 7 (3d4) poison damage. 


Animating Spores (3/Day). The myconid targets one corpse of 
a humanoid or a Large or smaller beast within 5 feet of it and 
releases spores at the corpse. In 24 hours, the corpse rises as a 
spore servant. The corpse stays animated for 1d4 + 1 weeks or 
until destroyed, and it can’t be animated again in this way. 


Hallucination Spores. The myconid ejects spores at one 
creature it can see within 5 feet of it. The target must succeed 
ona DC 12 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned for 

1 minute. The poisoned target is incapacitated while it 
hallucinates. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end 
of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Pacifying Spores. The myconid ejects spores at one creature 
it can see within 5 feet of it. The target must succeed on a DC 
12 Constitution saving throw or be stunned for 1 minute. The 
target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 
turns, ending the condition on itself on a success. 


Rapport Spores. A 30-foot radius of spores extends from the 
myconid. These spores can go around corners and affect only 
creatures with an Intelligence of 2 or higher that aren't undead, | 
constructs, or elementals. Affected creatures can communicate 


| telepathically with one another while they are within 30 feet of 


each other. The effect lasts for 1 hour. 


¥, iv is By a 
Met As na ted 


= ras rt oes fa 


NAGAS 


Nagas are intelligent serpents that inhabit the ruins of 
the past, amassing arcane treasures and knowledge. 

The first nagas were created as immortal guardians 
by a humanoid race long lost to history. When this race 
died out, the nagas deemed themselves the rightful 
inheritors of their masters’ treasures and magical lore. 
Industrious and driven, nagas occasionally venture 
out from their lairs to track down magic items or 
rare spellbooks. 

Nagas never feel the ravages of time or succumb to 
sickness. Even if it is struck down, a naga’s immortal 
spirit reforms in a new body in a matter of days, ready to 
continue its eternal work. 

Benevolent Dictators and Brutal Tyrants. A naga 
rules its domain with absolute authority. Whether it 
rules with compassion or by terrorizing its subjects, the 
naga believes itself the master of all other creatures that 
inhabit its domain. 

Rivalry. Nagas have a long-standing enmity with the 
yuan-ti, with each race seeing itself as the epitome of 
serpentine evolution. Though cooperation between 
them is rare, nagas and yuan-ti sometimes set aside 
their differences to work toward common objectives. 
However, yuan-ti always chafe under a naga’s authority. 

Immortal Nature. A naga doesn’t require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


Bonk NaGa 
In response to the long history of conflict between the 
yuan-ti and the nagas, yuan-ti created a necromantic 
ritual that could halt a naga’s resurrection by 
transforming the living naga into a skeletal undead 
servitor. A bone naga retains only a few of the spells it 
knew in life. 


eo 


GUARDIAN NAGA 


Wise and good, the beautiful guardian nagas protect 
sacred places and items of magical power from falling 
into evil hands. In their hidden redoubts, they research 
spells and hatch convoluted plots to thwart the evil 
designs of their enemies. 

A guardian naga doesn’t seek out violence, warning off 
intruders rather than attacking. Only if its foes persist 
does the naga attack, accosting enemies with its spells 
and poisonous spittle. 


SPIRIT NAGA 


Spirit nagas live in gloom and spitefulness, constantly 
plotting vengeance against creatures that have wronged 
them—or that they believe have wronged them. Lairing 
in dismal caverns and ruins, they devote their time to 
developing new spells and enslaving the mortals with 
which they surround themselves. A spirit naga likes to 
charm its foes, drawing them close so that it can sink its 
‘poisonous fangs into their flesh. 


& 


ee ay 


iB BONE NAGA 


| _ Large undead, lawful evil 


_ Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
_ Hit Points 58 (9d70 + 9) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (+2) 16 (+3) 121) 1542) 15(42) 16443) | 


ee 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, 
paralyzed, poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 
| Languages Common plus one other language 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


a rrr tS 


Spellcasting. The naga is a 5th-level spellcaster (spell save 
DC 12, +4 to hit with spell attacks) that needs only verbal 
components to cast its spells. 

If the naga was a guardian naga in life, its spellcasting ability 
is Wisdom, and it has the following cleric spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): mending, sacred flame, thaumaturgy 
_ Ist level (4 slots): command, shield of faith 
| 2nd level (3 slots): calm emotions, hold person 
| 3rd level (2 slots): bestow curse 


_ If the naga was a spirit naga in life, its spellcasting ability is 
_ Intelligence, and it has the following wizard spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): mage hand, minor illusion, ray of frost ' 
|, Ist level (4 slots): charm person, sleep ; 
2nd level (3 slots): detect thoughts, hold person 
3rd level (2 slots): lightning bolt 


ACTIONS 


| Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 10 ft., one creature. 
| Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) poison damage. 


acne 


ste 


pestRrov ME: 
ANO EVERYONE 
viLk 
pout ‘ 
vy CARE 
yo e 


DeFrius: 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
| Hit Points 75 (10d10 + 20) 
| Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 17 (43) 14 (+2) 16 (+3) 15.42) ‘16 (+3) 
__ ll ian 
Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +5, Wis +5, Cha +6 
} Damage Immunities poison 
| Condition Immunities charmed, poisoned 
| Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 
| Languages Abyssal, Common 
| Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


(i app 


Rejuvenation. If it dies, the naga returns to life in 1d6 days and 
regains all its hit points. Only a wish spell can prevent this trait 
from functioning. 


Spellcasting. The naga is a 10th-level spellcaster. Its 

| spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 14, +6 to hit 
with spell attacks), and it needs only verbal components to cast 
its spells. It has the following wizard spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): mage hand, minor illusion, ray of frost 
Ist level (4 slots): charm person, detect magic, sleep 
2nd level (3 slots): detect thoughts, hold person 

3rd level (3 slots): lightning bolt, water breathing 

4th level (3 slots): blight, dimension door 

| Sth level (2 slots): dominate person 


ACTIONS 


| Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) piercing damage, and the target must make 

a DC 13 Constitution saving throw, taking 31 (7d8) poison 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage ona 

_ successful one. 


_ SAGAS 


834 


R . 
2 aie 


pinit NAGA 


Wr alcaay ~ Uae 
Gu: 


ARDI! ‘AN Naca 


Mor monstrosity, awful good 


. Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 


or half as much damage on a successful one. 


Hit Points 127 (15d10 + 45) 


Me coh (Wi Speed 40 ft. 
| Sprit Naca Ke ae 
Lave. a La chaotic evil STR DEX CON iNT WIS CHA 
| 19 (+4) 18(+4) 16(43) 16 (+3) 19(44) 18 (+4) 


 —————————— 
Saving Throws Dex +8, Con +7, Int +7, Wis +8, Cha +8 
Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 

Languages Celestial, Common 

Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) 


Rejuvenation. lf it dies, the naga returns to life in 1d6 days and 
regains all its hit points. Only a wish spell can prevent this trait 
from functioning. 


Spellcasting. The naga is an 11th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 16, +8 to hit with 
spell attacks), and it needs only verbal components to cast its 
spells. It has the following cleric spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): mending, sacred flame, thaumaturgy 
Ist level (4 slots): command, cure wounds, shield of faith 
2nd level (3 slots): calm emotions, hold person 

3rd level (3 slots): bestow curse, clairvoyance 

Ath level (3 slots): banishment, freedom of movement 
5th level (2 slots): flame strike, geas 

6th level (1 slot): true seeing 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) piercing damage, and the target must make 

a DC 15 Constitution saving throw, taking 45 (10d8) poison 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage ona 
successful one. 


Spit Poison. Ranged Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, range 15/30 ft., 
one creature. Hit: The target must make a DC 15 Constitution 
saving throw, taking 45 (10d8) poison damage on a failed save, 


=. we 
NIGHTMARE 
Large fiend, neutral evil 


, 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 68 (8d10 + 24) 
| Speed 60 ft., fly 90 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 15 (+2) 16 (+3) 10(40) 13(1) 15 (42) 


Damage Immunities fire 

Senses passive Perception 11 

Languages understands Abyssal, Common, and Infernal but 
can’t speak 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Confer Fire Resistance. The nightmare can grant resistance to 
fire damage to anyone riding it. 


Illumination. The nightmare sheds bright light in a 10-foot 
radius and dim light for an additional 10 feet. 


ACTIONS 


Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage plus 7 (2d6) 
fire damage. 


within 5 feet of it magically enter the Ethereal Plane from the 
Material Plane, or vice versa. 


Ethereal Stride. The nightmare and up to three willing creatures 


NIGHTMARE 


A nightmare appears in a cloud of roiling smoke, its 
mane, tail, and hooves wreathed in flame. The creature’s 
unearthly black form moves with supernatural speed, 
vanishing in a cloud of brimstone as quickly as 

it appeared. 

Dread Steed. Also called a “demon horse” or “hell 
horse,” the nightmare serves as a steed for creatures of 
exceptional evil, carrying demons, devils, death knights, 
liches, night hags, and other vile monsters. It resembles 
a fiendish horse, and a nightmare’s fiery red eyes betray 
its malevolent intelligence. 

A nightmare can be summoned from the Lower 
Planes, but unless a worthy sacrifice is offered to it as 
food upon its arrival, the nightmare displays no special 
loyalty to the creature it serves. 

Creating a Nightmare. Nightmares don’t appear 
naturally in the multiverse. They must be created from 
pegasi. The ritual that creates a nightmare requires the! 
torturous removal of a pegasus’s wings, driving that 
noble creature to evil as it is transformed by dark magic. 


-_ 
ts | 


\ 


i 


- 


Medium aberration, néutral evil 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 45 (6d8 + 18) 


L | Speed 30 ft. 

Aly 

re STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
1°14 (+2) 16(43) 16443) 131) 1040) 8(-1) 

| ee 


Skills Arcana +3, Insight +4, Perception +2, Stealth +5 
| Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 12 

Languages Undercommon 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


i | Keen Sight. The nothic has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
_ checks that rely on sight. 


\ ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The nothic makes two claw attacks. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) slashing damage. 


Rotting Gaze. The nothic targets one creature it can see 
within 30 feet of it. The target must succeed on a DC 12 
Constitution saving throw against this magic or take 10 (3d6) 
necrotic damage. 


| Weird Insight. The nothic targets one creature it can see within 
;, | 30 feet of it. The target must contest its Charisma (Deception) 
check against the nothic’s Wisdom (Insight) check. If the 
nothic wins, it magically learns one fact or secret about 
the target. The target automatically wins if it is immune to 


| being charmed. 


) NOWHIO)| 


) 


NOTHICG 


A baleful eye peers out from the darkness, its 
gleam hinting at a weird intelligence and unnerving 
malevolence. Most times, a nothic is content to watch, 
weighing and assessing the creatures it encounters. 
When driven to violence, it uses its horrific gaze to rot 
the flesh from its enemies’ bones. 

Cursed Arcanists. Rather than gaining the godlike 
supremacy they crave, some wizards who devote 
their lives to unearthing arcane secrets are reduced 
to creeping, tormented monsters by a dark curse left 
behind by Vecna, a powerful lich who, in some worlds, 
has transcended his undead existence to become a god 
of secrets. Nothics retain no awareness of their former 
selves, skulking amid the shadows and haunting places 
rich in magical knowledge, drawn by memories and 
impulses they can’t quite understand. 

Dark Oracles. Nothics possess a strange magical 
insight that allows them to extract knowledge from 
other creatures. This grants them unique understanding 
of secret and forbidden lore, which they share for a 
price. A nothic covets magic items, greedily accepting 
such gifts from creatures that seek out its knowledge. 

Lurkers in Magical Places. Nothics are notorious 
for infiltrating arcane academies and other places 
rich in magical learning. They are driven by the vague 
knowledge that there exists a method to reverse their 
condition. This isn’t a clear sense of purpose, but rather 
an obsessive tug at the end of the mind. Some nothics 
are clever enough to realize that this is merely part of 
the strange lesson for their folly, a false hope to drive 
them to seek out more arcane Secrets. 


OGRE 


Large giant, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 11 (hide armor) 
Hit Points 59 (7d10 + 21) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4) 8(-1) 16 (+3) 7 (-2) 


5 (-3) 7 (-2) 
——SSE—E———SESESES = = 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8 
/ Languages Common, Giant 


Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Greatclub. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


| Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage. 


— =~ = = > — i : _ Son 


Ogres are as lazy of mind as they are strong of body. 
They live by raiding, scavenging, and killing for food and 
pleasure. The average adult specimen stands between 9 
and 10 feet tall and weighs close to a thousand pounds. 

Furious Tempers. Ogres are notorious for their quick 
tempers, which flare at the smallest perceived offense. 
Insults and name-calling can rouse an ogre's wrath in 
an instant—as can stealing from it, bumping, jabbing, or 
prodding it, laughing, making faces, or simply looking at 
it the wrong way. When its rage is incited, an ogre lashes 
out in a frustrated tantrum until it runs out of objects or 
creatures to smash. 

Gruesome Gluttons. Ogres eat almost anything, but 
they especially enjoy the taste of dwarves, halflings, 
and elves. When they can, they combine dinner with 
pleasure, chasing scurrying victims around before 
eating them raw. If enough of its victim remains 
after the ogre has gorged itself, it might make a 
loincloth from its quarry’s skin and a necklace from its 
leftover bones. This macabre crafting is the height of 
ogre culture. 

Greedy Collectors. An ogre’s eyes glitter with 
avarice when it sees the possessions of others. Ogres 
carry rough sacks on their raids, which they fill with 
fabulous “treasure” taken from their victims. This might 
include a collection of battered helmets, a moldy wheel 
of cheese, a rough patch of animal fur fastened like a 
cloak, or a squealing, mud-spattered pig. Ogres also 
delight in the gleam of gold and silver, and they will 
fight one another over small handfuls of coins. Smarter 
creatures can earn an ogre’s trust by offering it gold ora 
weapon forged for a creature of its size. 

Legendary Stupidity. Few ogres can count to ten, 
even with their fingers in front of them. Most speak only 
a rudimentary form of Giant and know a smattering of 
Common words. Ogres believe what they are told and 
are easy to fool or confuse, but they break things they 
don’t understand. Silver-tongued tricksters who test 
their talents on these savages typically end up eating 
their eloquent words—and then being eaten in turn. 

Primitive Wanderers. Ogres clothe themselves in 
animal pelts and uproot trees for use as crude tools 
and weapons. They create stone-tipped javelins for 
hunting. When they establish lairs, they settle near 
the rural edges of civilized lands, taking advantage of - 
poorly protected livestock, undefended larders, and 
unwary farmers. 

An ogre sleeps in caves, animal dens, or under trees 
until it finds a cabin or isolated farmhouse, whereupon 
it kills the inhabitants and lairs there. Whenever it is 
bored or hungry, an ogre ventures out from its lair, 
attacking anything that crosses its path. Only after an 
ogre has depleted an area of food does it move on. 


7) DG RES 


> 


a 
CERS. Ever. 


ON OGRES 
_RioDLeriopt ue 


* Worst. DAN gE THE SATY 


Ogre Gangs. Ogres sometimes band together in 
small, nomadic groups, but they lack a true sense of 


tribalism. When bands of ogres meet, one might attempt 


to capture the members of the other group to increase 
its numbers. However, ogre bands are just as likely to 
trade members freely, especially if the welcoming band 
is temporarily flush with food and weapons. 

Whenever possible, ogres gang up with other 
monsters to bully or prey on creatures weaker than 
themselves. They associate freely with goblinoids, orcs, 
and trolls, and practically worship giants. In the giants’ 
complex social structure (known as the ordning), ogres 
rank beneath the lowest giants in status. As a result, an 
ogre will do nearly anything a giant asks, 


HALF-OGRE (OGRILLON) 


When an ogre mates with a human, hobgoblin, bugbear, 
or orc, the result is always a half-ogre. (Ogres don’t 
mate with dwarves, halflings, or elves. They eat them.) 
Human mothers rarely survive the birth of a half- 
ogre offspring. 

™ The half-ogre offspring of an ogre and an orc is also 
called an ogrillon. An adult half-ogre or ogrillon stands 
8 feet tall and weighs 450 pounds on average. 


~ OGRES 


_ Armor Class 12 (hide armor) 
Hit Points 30 (4d10 + 8) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
17 (+3) 10(+0) 14(4+2) 7 (-2) 9/(-1) 10 (40) 
a 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 
Languages Common, Giant 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Battleaxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 12 (2d8 + 3) slashing damage, or 14 (2d10 + 3) 
slashing damage if used with two hands. 


| Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
| range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


Ont a 
In nursery rhymes, oni are fearsome bogeymen that ahh ey 
haunt the nightmares of children and adults alike, yet 
they are very real and always hungry. They find human 
babies especially delicious. Oni look like demonic ogres 
with blue or green skin, dark hair, and a pair of short 
ivory horns protruding from their foreheads. Their eyes 
are dark with strikingly white pupils, and their teeth and 
claws are jet black. 

Night Haunters. By the light of day, an oni hides 
its true form with magic, gaining the trust of those 
it intends to betray when darkness descends. These 
creatures can change their size as well as their shape, 
appearing as humanoids as they pass through towns, 
pretending to be travelers, woodcutters, or frontier folk. 
In such a form, an oni takes stock of the selection of 
humanoids in a settlement and devises ways to abduct 
and devour some of them. 

Magical Ogres. Oni are sometimes called ogre mages 
because of their innate magical ability. Though they 
are only distantly related to true ogres, they share the 
ogres’ habit of joining forces with other evil creatures. 
An oni serves a master if doing so proves lucrative or 
provides it with a luxurious, well-defended home. Oni 
covet magic, and they work for evil wizards and hags in 
exchange for useful magic items. 


BLOW our THE LIGHT; 
HAUNTS THE NiGHy. 
©, Littte ONE; 

HAVE SOME FUN. 


ONI a Magic Weapons. The oni’s weapon attacks are magical. 


| Large giant, lawful evil Regeneration. The oni regains 10 hit points at the start of its 
turn if it has at least 1 hit point. 


) Armor Class 16 (chain mail) 


Hit Points 110 (13d10 + 39) ACTIONS 
Speed 30 ft, fly 30 ft. Multiattack. The oni makes two attacks, either with its claws 


Of STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA or its glaive. 


} 19(+4) 11 (40) 16 (+3) 14.42) 12 (1)_—15 (+2) Claw (Oni Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 
ft., one target. Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) slashing damage. 


Saving Throws Dex +3, Con +6, Wis +4, Cha +5 
Skills Arcana +5, Deception +8, Perception +4 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages Common, Giant 

Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


Glaive. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. | 
Hit: 15 (2d10 + 4) slashing damage, or 9 (1d10 + 4) slashing 
damage in Small or Medium form. 


Change Shape. The oni magically polymorphs into a Small or j 
Medium humanoid, into a Large giant, or back into its true 


| Innate Spelicasting. The oni’s innate spellcasting ability is form. Other than its size, its statistics are the same in each | ei 
Charisma (spell save DC 13). The oni can innately cast the form. The only equipment that is transformed is its glaive, at 
following spells, requiring no material components: which shrinks so that it can be wielded in humanoid form. If 


the oni dies, it reverts to its true form, and its glaive reverts to 


} At will: darkness, invisibility pa aenretens 


1/day each: charm person, cone of cold, gaseous form, sleep 


OOZES 


Oozes thrive in the dark, shunning areas of bright light 
and extreme temperatures. They flow through the damp 
underground, feeding on any creature or object that 
can be dissolved, slinking along the ground, dripping 
from walls and ceilings, spreading across the edges 

of underground pools, and squeezing through cracks. 
The first warning an adventurer receives of an ooze’s 
presence is often the searing pain of its acidic touch. 
Oozes are drawn to movement and warmth. Organic 
material nourishes them, and when prey is scarce they 
feed on grime, fungus, and offal. Veteran explorers know 
that an immaculately clean passageway is a likely sign 
that an ooze lairs nearby. 

Slow Death. An ooze kills its prey slowly. Some 
varieties, such as black puddings and gelatinous cubes, 
engulf creatures to prevent escape. The only upside 

of this torturous death is that a victim’s comrades can 
come to the rescue before it is too late. 

Since not every ooze digests every type of substance, 
some have coins, metal gear, bones, and other debris 
suspended within their quivering bodies. A slain ooze 
can be a rich source of treasure for its killers. 
Unwitting Servants. Although an ooze lacks the 
intelligence to ally itself with other creatures, others that 
understand an ooze’s need to feed might lure it into a 
location where it can be of use to them. Clever monsters 
keep oozes around to defend passageways or consume 
refuse. Likewise, an ooze can be enticed into a pit trap, 
where its captors feed it often enough to prevent it from 
coming after them. Crafty creatures place torches and 
flaming braziers in strategic areas to dissuade an ooze 
from leaving a particular tunnel or room. 

Spawn of Juiblex. According to the Demonomicon 
of Iggwilv and other sources, oozes are scattered 
fragments or offspring of the demon lord Juiblex. 
Whether this is true or not, the Faceless Lord is one 

of the few beings that can control oozes and imbue 
\them with a modicum of intelligence. Most of the time, 
/oozes have no sense of tactics or self-preservation. 
They are direct and predictable, attacking and eating 
without cunning. Under the control of Juiblex, they 
exhibit glimmers of sentience and malevolent intent. 
Ooze Nature. An ooze doesn’t require sleep. 


ii nn 
VARIANT: PsycHIc GRAY OOZE 


A gray ooze that lives a long time can evolve to become 
more intelligent and develop limited psionic ability. Such 
occurrences are more common in gray oozes that live near 
psionic creatures such as mind flayers, suggesting that the 
ooze can sense and mimic psionic ability. 

A psionic gray ooze has an Intelligence score of 6 (-2), as 
well as the following additional action. 

Psychic Crush (Recharge 5-6). The ooze targets one 
creature that it can sense within 60 feet of it. The target must 
make a DC 10 Intelligence saving throw, taking 10 (3d6) 
psychic damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on 
a successful one. 


BLACK PUDDING 
A black pudding resembles a heaving mound of sticky 


black sludge. In dim passageways, the pudding appears 


to be little more than a blot of shadow. 

Flesh, wood, metal, and bone dissolve when the 
pudding ebbs over them. Stone remains behind, 
wiped clean. 


GELATINOUS CUBE 


Gelatinous cubes scour dungeon passages in silent, 
predictable patterns, leaving perfectly clean paths in 
their wake. They consume living tissue while leaving 
bones and other materials undissolved. 

_A gelatinous cube is all but transparent, making 
it hard to spot until it attacks. A cube that is well 
fed can be easier to spot, since its victims’ bones, 
coins, and other objects can be seen suspended 
inside the creature. 


GRAY OOZE | 


A gray ooze is stone hifned to liquid by 
chaos. When it moves, it slithers 
like a liquid snake, rising to strike. 


OCHRE JELLY 


Ochre jellies are yellowish blobs that can 
slide under doors and through narrow 
cracks in pursuit of creatures to devour. 
They have enough bestial cunning to 
avoid large groups of enemies. 

An ochre jelly follows at a safe distance 
as it pursues its meal. Its digestive enzymes 
dissolve flesh quickly but have no effect on other 
substances such as bone, wood, and metal. 


BLACK PUDDING 
Large ooze, unaligned 
Pee Class 7 
Hit Points 85 (10d10 + 30) 
_ Speed 20 ft., climb 20 ft. 


ge eee 


_ 


STR a CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3)  5(-3) 16(+3) 1(-5) 6 2) 1 (-5) 
= a no a = 


Damage Immunities acid, cold, lightning, washine 


Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 


frightened, prone 
Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
passive Perception 8 


| Languages — 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Amorphous. The pudding can move through a space as narrow 
as 1 inch wide without squeezing. 


Corrosive Form. A creature that touches the pudding or hits it 
| with a melee attack while within 5 feet of it takes 4 (1d8) acid 
| damage. Any nonmagical weapon made of metal or wood that 
| hits the pudding corrodes. After dealing damage, the weapon 


takes a permanent and cumulative h penalty to damage rolls, 
Ifits penalty drops to -5, the weapon:is destroyed. Nonmagical 
ammunition made of metal or wood that hits the pudding is 
destroyed after dealing damage. 

The pudding can eat through 2-inch-thick, nonmagical wood 
or metal in 1 round. 


Spider Climb. The pudding can climb difficult surfaces, 
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 
ability check. 


ACTIONS 


Pseudopod. ve Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage plus 18 (4d8) acid | 
damage. In addition, nonmagical armor worn by the target 

is partly dissolved and takes a permanent and cumulative -1 
penalty to the AC it offers. The armor is destroyed if the penalty | 
reduces its AC to 10. 


{ 
; 


REACTIONS 


Split. When a pudding that is Medium or larger is subjected to 
lightning or slashing damage, it splits into two new puddings ii 
if it has at least 10 hit points. Each new pudding has hit points 
equal to half the original pudding’s, rounded down. New | 

i 


puddings are one size smaller than the original pudding. 


eval 


Aa es wk : 5 "yj 


GuLarinous CUBE 6%) Tanion 


, 


yl 
‘int 


Tei 


) Armor Class 6 
Hit Points 84 (8d10 + 40) 


| Speed 15 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14 (+2) 3 (-4) 20 (+5) 1 (-5) 6 (-2) 1 (-5) 
‘= tie 


| Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 
frightened, prone 

Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 

: passive Perception 8 

halls | Languages — 

) | Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


RB =~ pm cee 


A Ooze Cube. The cube takes up its entire space. Other creatures 
ene | can enter the space, but a creature that does so is subjected to 
we | the cube’s Engulf and has disadvantage on the saving throw. 
i Creatures inside the cube can be seen but have total cover. 
| A creature within 5 feet of the cube can take an action to 
r | pull a creature or object out of the cube. Doing so requires a 
i successful DC 12 Strength check, and the creature making the 
} attempt takes 10 (3d6) acid damage. 
The cube can hold only one Large creature or up to four 
Medium or smaller creatures inside it at a time 


ete Se eee = 


Ltn “successful DC 15 Wisdom. (Perception) check t to spot a ‘cube, ¥ 


art 


"Transparent. ‘Evenwhen the cube is s in plain sight, it takes a. us 


that has neither moved nor attacked. A creature that tries to. 


enter the cube’s space while unaware of the cube is ‘surprised _ 


by the cube. 


ACTIONS 


Pseudopod. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 10 (3d6) acid damage. 


Engulf. The cube moves up to its speed. While doing so, it can 
enter Large or smaller creatures’ spaces. Whenever the cube 
enters a creature’s space, the creature must make a DC 12 
Dexterity saving throw. 

On a successful save, the creature can choose to be pushed 5 
feet back or to the side of the cube. A creature that chooses not 


to be pushed suffers the consequences of a failed saving throw. 


On a failed save, the cube enters the creature's space, and 
the creature takes 10 (3d6) acid damage and is engulfed. The 
engulfed creature can’t breathe, is restrained, and takes 21 
(6d6) acid damage at the start of each of the cube’s turns. 
When the cube moves, the engulfed creature moves with it. 

An engulfed creature can try to escape by taking an action 
to make a DC 12 Strength check. On a success, the creature 
escapes and enters a space of its choice within 5 feet 
of the cube. 


pl —— ee pes aaeapes bel 


———— — a ciel ee 
——— SS eee 


reid 


Ee 


! 


(vSeaer @oze 


‘Medium ooze, unaligned 


Armor Class 8 
Hit Points 22 (3d8 + 9) 
Speed 10 ft., climb 10 ft. 


CHA ‘ 
2 (-4) 


STR 
12 (+1) 


DEX 
6 (-2) 


CON 
16 (+3) 


INT 
1 (-5) 


wis 
6 (-2) 


| Skills Stealth +2 


Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire 

Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 
frightened, prone 

Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
passive Perception 8 

Languages — 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


(re eee—™ 


Amorphous. The ooze can move through a space as narrow as 
1 inch wide without squeezing. 


\ Corrode Metal. Any nonmagical weapon made of metal that 


hits the ooze corrodes. After dealing damage, the weapon 
takes a permanent and cumulative -1 penalty to damage rolls. 

_ Ifits penalty drops to —5, the weapon is destroyed. Nonmagical 
| ammunition made of metal that hits the ooze is destroyed after 


| dealing damage. 


The ooze can eat through 2-inch-thick, nonmagical metal 
in 7 round. 


False Appearance. While the ooze remains motionless, it is 
indistinguishable from an oily pool or wet rock. 


ACTIONS 


Pseudopod. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) bludgeoning damage plus 7 (2d6) 
acid damage, and if the target is wearing nonmagical metal 
armor, its armor is partly corroded and takes a permanent 
and cumulative -1 penalty to the AC it offers. The armor is 
pesboved | if the penalty reduces its AC to 10. 

SOS ee = 


OcHRE ELLY 


Large ooze, unaligned 


’ Armor Class 8 


| 


Hit Points 45 (6d10 + 12) 
Speed 10 ft., climb 10 ft. 


CHA 
1 (-5) 


STR 
15 (+2) 


DEX 
6 (-2) 


CON 
14 (+2) 


INT 
2 (-4) 


WIS 
6 (-2) 


| Damage Resistances acid 
’ Damage Immunities lightning, slashing 
| Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 


| 
| 


frightened, prone 

Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
passive Perception 8 

Languages — 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


 —————————————— 


Amorphous. The jelly can move through a space as narrow as 1 
inch wide without squeezing. 


Spider Climb. The jelly can climb difficult surfaces, including 
upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 
ability check. 


ACTIONS 


Pseudopod. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 


target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage plus 3 (1d6) 
acid damage. 


REACTIONS 


Split. When a jelly that is Medium or larger is subjected to 
lightning or slashing damage, it splits into two new jellies if it 
has at least 10 hit points. Each new jelly has hit points equal to 


_ half the original jelly’s, rounded down. New jellies are one size 


smaller than the agen jelly. 


a ae 


ORCS 

Orcs are savage raiders and pillagers with stooped 
postures, low foreheads, and piggish faces with 
prominent lower canines that resemble tusks. 

Gruumsh One-Eye. Orcs worship Gruumsh, the 
mightiest of the orc deities and their creator. The orcs 
believe that in ancient days, the gods gathered to divide 
the world among their followers. When Gruumsh 
claimed the mountains, he learned they had been taken 
by the dwarves. He laid claim to the forests, but those 
had been settled by the elves. Each place that Gruumsh 
wanted had already been claimed. The other gods 
laughed at Gruumsh, but he responded with a furious 
bellow. Grasping his mighty spear, he laid waste to the 
mountains, set the forests aflame, and carved great 
furrows in the fields. Such was the role of the orcs, he 
proclaimed, to take and destroy all that the other races 
would deny them. To this day, the orcs wage an endless 
war on humans, elves, dwarves, and other folk. 

Orcs hold a particular hatred for elves. The elven god 
Corellon Larethian half-blinded Gruumsh with a well- 
placed arrow to the orc god’s eye. Since then, the orcs 
have taken particular joy in slaughtering elves. Turning 
his injury into a baleful gift, Gruumsh grants divine 
might to any champion who willingly plucks out one of 
its eyes in his honor. 

Tribes like Plagues. Orcs gather in tribes that 
exert their dominance and satisfy their bloodlust by 
plundering villages, devouring or driving off roaming 
herds, and slaying any humanoids that stand against 
them. After savaging a settlement, orcs pick it clean of 
wealth and items usable in their own lands. They set 
the remains of villages and camps ablaze, then retreat 
whence they came, their bloodlust satisfied. 

Ranging Scavengers. Their lust for slaughter 
demands that orcs dwell always within striking 
distance of new targets. As such, they seldom settle 
permanently, instead converting ruins, cavern 
z complexes, and defeated foes’ villages into fortified 
camps and strongholds. Orcs build only for defense, 
making no innovation or improvement to their lairs 
beyond mounting the severed body parts of their victims 
on spiked stockade walls or pikes jutting up from moats 
and trenches. 

When an existing territory is depleted of food, an orc 
tribe divides into roving bands that scout for choice 
hunting grounds. When each party returns, it brings 
back trophies and news of targets ripe for attack, the 
richest of which is chosen. The tribe then sets out en 
masse to carve a bloody path to its new territory. 

On rare occasions, a tribe’s leader chooses to hold 
onto a particularly defensible lair for decades. The orcs 
of such a tribe must range far across the countryside to 
sate their appetites. 

Leadership and Might. Orc tribes are mostly 
patriarchal, flaunting such vivid or grotesque titles 
as Many-Arrows, Screaming Eye, and Elf Ripper. 
Occasionally, a powerful war chief unites scattered 
orc tribes into a single rampaging horde, which 
runs roughshod over other orc tribes and humanoid 
settlements from a position of overwhelming strength. 


' si) i 
SS a eS oh 


Strength ath power are the greatest of orcish virtues, 
and orcs embrace all manner of mighty creatures in 
their tribes. Rejecting notions of racial purity, they 
proudly welcome ogres, trolls, half-orcs, and orogs into 
their ranks. As well, orcs respect and fear the size and 
power of evil giants, and often serve them as guards 
and soldiers. 

Orc Crossbreeds. Luthic, the orc goddess of fertility 
and wife of Gruumsh, demands that orcs procreate often 
and indiscriminately so that orc hordes swell generation 
after generation. The orcs’ drive to reproduce runs 
stronger than any other humanoid race, and they readily 
crossbreed with other races. When an orc procreates 
with a non-orc humanoid of similar size and stature 
(such as a human or a dwarf), the resulting child is 
either an orc or a half-orc. When an orc produces young 
with an ogre, the child is a half-ogre of intimidating 
strength and brutish features called an ogrillon. 


Orc WAR CHIEF 


The war chief of an orc tribe is its strongest and most 
cunning member. The reign of a war chief lasts only as 
long as it commands the fear and respect of other tribe 
members, whose bloodlust must be regularly satisfied 
lest the chief appear weak. 

Scions of Slaughter. Gruumsh bestows special 
blessings upon war chiefs who prove themselves in 
battle time and again, imbuing them with slivers of his 
savagery. A war chief so blessed finds that his weapons 
cut deeper into his enemies, allowing him to inflict 
more carnage. 


EE Ee el ee a 
KING OBOULD MANyY-ARROWS 


King Obould of the Many-Arrows tribe is a legend among the 
orc war chiefs of the Forgotten Realms, and he is the most 
famous orc chief in the history of the D&D game. 

Smarter and more intuitive than most of his kind, Obould 
slew his chieftain to take control of his tribe. Skilled in the 
arts of war and renowned for his violent temper, Obould 

proved himself a fierce opponent in battle time and again. 
Over the years, he subsumed other orc tribes into his own, 
until he commanded a horde of thousands. 

Obould leveraged his strength and influence to carve out 
a kingdom for himself in the Spine of the World, a mountain 
range overlooking numerous dwarven, human, and elven 
strongholds. 

After years of bloody conflict with his more civilized 
neighbors, Obould did the unthinkable and brokered a 
peace treaty with his enemies. This treaty confused many 
of the orcs under Obould's command. !t was either a clever 
ploy by Obould to buy time while he strengthened his army 
for a final, decisive sweep across the Savage Frontier, or it 
was a troubling sign that Obould had forsaken the ways of 
Gruumsh and needed to be destroyed. 


THE 
inc!O 
E 
GEL a ns. 14 
e SAVA £6} 
eRRATeo Lone provat FR ping THE aN 
sth = AP WE 
go HIS wis O 6 ore tT 
woRke He BO \ € 
He Won eRONTTON IME cqe THERE: OOO’ Oy ewe 
KING * ous ORE arinaee UIT re BRUTALITY 
ool’. Eke T 
Fe AN forty YE LoERS: Crier Saas coro VaAte 
pack _jte BHOMEREE + OF 1Le OF 
ARE KINGS ~ An accoun 5 
A wt AFTERMATH 9° 


When an orc slays an elf in Gruumsh’s name: am om 
the corpse of its foe as a sacrifice to the god of slaughter, 
an aspect of the god might appear. This aspect demands 
an. additional sacrifice: one of the orc’s eyes, symbolizing 
the loss Gruumsh suffered at the hands of his greatest 
enemy, Corellon Larethian. 

If the orc plucks out one of its eyes, Gruumsh might 
grant the orc spellcasting ability and special favor, “along 
with the right to call itself an Eye of Gruumsh. When 
not using their auguries to advise their war chiefs, these 
savage devotees of the god of slaughter hurl themselves 
into battle, their weapons stained with blood. | 


OROG 


Orogs are orcs blessed with a surprisingly keen intellect 
that ordinary orcs believe is a gift from the orc goddess 
Luthic. Like Luthic, orogs prefer to live underground, 
although the scarcity of food often brings them to 

the surface to hunt. Orcs respect an orog’s strength 

and cunning, and a lone orog might command an 

ore war band. 

Stronger and Smarter. An orog uses its strength to 
bully other orcs and its intelligence to surprise enemies 
on the battlefield. Many an overconfident elf, human, or 
dwarf commander has watched a “simple” orc warlord 
execute a clever maneuver to outflank and destroy an 
opposing force, not realizing the orc is an orog. 

When encountered in great numbers, orogs form their 
own detachments within much larger orc hordes, and 
they are always at the forefront of any attack, relying on 
their superior strength and tactical insight to overcome 
anything that stands in their way. 

Few orc tribes actively seek out orogs to bolster their 
ranks. The orogs’ superiority makes them ideal leaders, 
and thus deadly rivals to orc war chiefs, who must be 
wary of orog treachery. 

Detached Killers. Wanting nothing more than to hack 
their enemies to pieces, orogs are a terrifying presence 
on the battlefield. They form no attachments, even to 
their parents and siblings, and have no concept of love 
or dedication. They worship the orc pantheon of gods— 
Gruumsh and Luthic foremost—because they believe 
that the gods have strength beyond reason, and physical 
might is all they respect. 

Servants of Darkness. Mistrusted by orcs, some 
orogs form independent mercenary war bands that 
sell themselves to the highest bidder. As long as they 
are rewarded, orog mercenaries gladly serve as elite 
warriors and shock troops for evil wizards, depraved 
giants, and other villains. 


Typicat Orc 


Oro 


s 
Medium humanoid (orc), chaotic evil 


| Armor Class 13 (hide armor) 
Hit Points 15 (2d8 + 6) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (43) 12(41) 16(43) 7(-2) 11440) 10 (+0) 
— I TT 
Skills Intimidation +2 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Common, Orc 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


(iE ee eeeeees—te 


Aggressive. As a bonus action, the orc can move up to its speed 
toward a hostile creature that it can see. 
ACTIONS 


| Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
| target. Hit: 9 (1d12 + 3) slashing damage. 


Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or | 
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. | 


‘Oro War Curer 


— : ——— —--- 


Mediur-Huhanaid fore), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 16 (chain mail) 
Hit Points 93 (11d8 + 44) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (44) 12(+1) 18(4) 1140) 11640) 16 (43) 


Saving Throws Str +6, Con +6, Wis +2 

Skills intimidation +5 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Common, Orc 

Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Aggressive. As a bonus action, the orc can move up to its speed 
toward a hostile creature that it can see. 


Gruumsh’s Fury. The orc deals an extra 4 (1d8) damage when it 
hits with a weapon attack (included in the attacks). 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The orc makes two attacks with its greataxe or 
its spear. 


Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 14 (1d12 + 4 plus 1d8) slashing damage. 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 12 (1d6 + 4 plus 1d8) piercing 
damage, or 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage if used with two 
hands to make a melee attack. 


Baitle Cry (1/Day). Each creature of the war chief's choice that 
is within 30 feet of it, can hear it, and not already affected by 


| Battle Cry gain advantage on attack rolls until the start of the 


war chief’s next turn. The war chief can then make one attack 
as a bonus action. 


Typicat OroG 


5 


Orc EYE oF GRUUMSH 


Medium humanoid (orc), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 16 (ring mail, shield) 
Hit Points 45 (6d8 + 18) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 12(41) 1643) 9(-1) 1341) 124) 


Skills Intimidation +3, Religion +1 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages Common, Orc 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Aggressive. As a bonus action, the orc can move up to its speed 
toward a hostile creature that it can see. 


Gruumsh’s Fury. The orc deals an extra 4 (1d8) damage when it 
hits with a weapon attack (included in the attack). 


Spellcasting. The orc is a 3rd-level spellcaster. Its spellcasting 
ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 11, +3 to hit with spell attacks). 
The orc has the following cleric spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at-will): guidance, resistance, thaumaturgy 
Ist level (4 slots): bless, command 
2nd level (2 slots): augury, spiritual weapon (spear) 


ACTIONS 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (1d6 + 3 plus 1d8) piercing 
damage, or 12 (2d8 + 3) piercing damage if used with two 
hands to make a melee attack. 


range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) piercing damage. 
RAE DO TE : z Sr eas =e = = oMSP 


OrOoG 


Medium humanoid (orc), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 18 (plate) 
Hit Points 42 (5d8 + 20) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
18 (+4) 12441) 1844) 1241) 1140) 12(41) 


Skills Intimidation +5, Survival +2 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Common, Orc 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Aggressive. As a bonus action, the orog can move up to its 
speed toward a hostile creature that it can see. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The orog makes two greataxe attacks. 


Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 10 (1d12 + 4) slashing damage. 


Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft. or | 


ES a eS Bag SET Oe EES. 


TAROT rete eee ber nan ae rte en tee 
“2 


Voth elle times ny began waren man 
ee er 
ten Ae : 


‘Large:aberra . tral 
barges perrailor, neutra 
7 Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 114 (12410 + 48) 
- Speed 30 ft. 
z= 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 


OTYUGH 


An otyugh is a grotesque, bulbous creature borne along 

on three sturdy legs, its eyes and nose set along a vine- 

like stalk that snakes from the top of its bloated body. 

Two rubbery tentacles end in spiky, leaf-like appendages 

that the otyugh uses to shovel food into its gaping maw. 
An otyugh buries itself under mounds of offal and 


_ carrion, leaving only its sensory stalk exposed. When an 
edible creature happens by, the otyugh’s tentacles erupt 
'~from the filth and grab hold of it. 


Otyughs make the most of any opportunity to ambush 
and devour prey. They use a limited form of telepathy to 
urge sentient creatures toward their lairs, sometimes by 
pretending to be something else. 

Dwellers in Darkness. Otyughs tolerate bright light 
only when considerable stores of carrion or garbage lie 
within reach. In the wilderness, they dwell in stagnant 
swamps, scum-filled ponds, and damp forest dells. 

The scent of graveyards, city sewers, village middens, 
and manure-filled animal pens attracts them to 
civilized areas. 

Since otyughs lack concern for anything but food, 
their nests sometimes accumulate a variety of treasures 
shed from their victims and mixed among the junk. 

Symbiotic Guardians. Sentient subterranean beings 
can coexist with otyughs, employing them as garbage 

disposals. With such plentiful sustenance, otyughs 
grow fat in their wallows, unmoved by any other drive 
or desire. This sedentary gluttony makes them reliable 
guardians. As long as it is fed, an otyugh refrains from 
attacking other creatures. However, would-be otyugh 
masters can easily underestimate the quantity of waste, 
carrion, and meat necessary to keep an otyugh from 
wandering off in search of food. More than one “trained” 
otyugh has eaten its keeper after devouring all the waste 
in its wallow. 


16 (+3) 11(+0) 19(+4) 6(-2) 131) 6(-2) 


Saving Throws Con +7 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages Otyugh 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Limited Telepathy. The otyugh can magically transmit simple 
messages and images to any creature within 120 feet of it that 
can understand a language. This form of telepathy doesn’t 


_ allow the receiving creature to telepathically respond. 


| maximum lasts until the disease is cured. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The otyugh makes three attacks: one with its bite 
and two with its tentacles. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 
12 (2d8 + 3) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, it must 
succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw against disease 
or become poisoned until the disease is cured. Every 24 hours 
that elapse, the target must repeat the saving throw, reducing 
its hit point maximum by 5 (1d10) on a failure. The disease is 
cured on a success. The target dies if the disease reduces its 

hit point maximum to 0. This reduction to the target’s hit point 


Tentacle. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) bludgeoning damage plus 4 (1d8) 
piercing damage. Ifthe target is Medium or smaller, it is 
grappled (escape DC 13) and restrained until the grapple 
ends. The otyugh has two tentacles, each of which can grapple 


_ one target. 


_ Tentacle Slam. The otyugh slams creatures grappled by it into 

_ each other or a solid surface. Each creature must succeed ona 
| DC 14 Strength saving throw or take 10 (2d6 + 3) bludgeoning 

_ damage and be stunned until the end of the otyugh’s next turn. 
_ Ona successful save, the target takes half the bludgeoning 


damage and isn’t stunned. 


OWLBEAR 

An owlbear's screech echoes through dark valleys and 
benighted forests, piercing the quiet night to announce 
the death of its prey. Feathers cover the thick, shaggy 
coat of its bearlike body, and the limpid pupils of its 
great round eyes stare furiously from its owlish head. A. 

Deadly Ferocity. The owlbear's reputation for ferocity, | 
aggression, stubbornness, and sheer ill temper makes 
it one of the most feared predators of the wild. There 
is little, if anything, that a hungry owlbear fears. Even 
monsters that outmatch an owlbear in size and strength 
avoid tangling with it, for this creature cares nothing 
about a foe’s superior strength as it attacks without 
provocation. 

Consummate Predators. An owlbear emerges 
from its den around sunset and hunts into the darkest 
hours of the night, hooting or screeching to declare its 
territory, to search for a mate, or to flush prey into its 
hunting grounds. These are typically forests familiar 
to the owlbear, and dense enough to limit its quarry's 
escape routes. 

An owlbear makes its den in a cave or ruin littered 
with the bones of its prey. It drags partially devoured 
kills back to its den, storing portions of the carcass 
among the surrounding rocks, bushes, and trees. 

The scent of blood and rotting flesh hangs heavy 
near an owlbear’s lair, attracting scavengers and thus 
luring more prey. 

Owlbears hunt alone or in mated pairs. If quarry is 
plentiful, a family of owlbears might remain together 
for longer than is required to rear offspring. Otherwise, 
they part ways as soon as the young are ready to hunt. 

Savage Companions. Although they are more 
intelligent than most animals, owlbears are difficult to 
tame. However, with enough time, food, and luck, an Se 
intelligent creature can train an owlbear to recognize it OwWLBE AR 
as a master, making it an unflinching guard or a fast and 
hardy mount. People of remote frontier settlements have 


‘Large monstrosity, unaligned 


even succeeded at racing owlbears, but spectators bet as Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
often on which owlbear will attack its handler as they do Hit Points 59 (7410 + 21) 
on which will reach the finish line first. Speed 40 ft. 
Elven communities encourage owlbears to den 
beneath their treetop villages, using the beasts as a STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
natural defense during the night. Hobgoblins favor 20 (+5) 1261) 1763) 3(-4) 12¢1) 7(-2 | 
owlbears as war beasts, and hill giants and frost ————— > CO 


giants sometimes keep owlbears as pets. A starved Skills Perception +3 
owlbear might show up in a gladiatorial arena, Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
ruthlessly eviscerating and devouring its foes before a ll a mn 
bloodthirsty audience. Challenge 3 (700 XP) 
Owlbear Origins. Scholars have long debated the 


origins of the owlbear. The most common theory is Keen Sight and Smell. The owlbear has advantage on Wisdom 
that a demented wizard created the first specimen by (Perception) checks that rely on sight or smell. 

crossing a giant owl with a bear. However, venerable 

elves claim to have known these creatures for thousands Vo a — | - 
of years, and some fey insist that owlbears have always Multiattack. The owlbear makes two attacks: one with its beak | 
existed in the Feywild. and one with its claws. 


Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 10 (1d10 + 5) piercing damage. | 


apoUT OWLBEARS 
C 


“THE ONLY GOOD THING TEO THEM IS 
HE WITARO WHC a Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
1s THAT T 
= cagseood wsHavow, GNOME Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) slashing damage. 
pRO _KARSHEL es we SCIENCE AT 
ANSMU 
PROFESSOR OF Tr oncRal UNIVERSITY 


OW uel 


. : ‘etl —— 249 


ie 


EN, 
LLenwANe opel 


y STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 


18 (+4) 15 (+2) 16 (43) 10 (40) 15(42) 13 (+1) 


Saving Throws Dex +4, Wis +4, Cha +3 
Skills Perception +6 
Senses passive Perception 16 
Languages understands Celestial, Common, Elvish, and Sylvan 
but can’t speak 


| 
| Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


PEGASUS 


The white winged horses known as pegasi soar 
through the skies, a vision of grace and majesty. When 
they touch down on solid ground, they linger only 

for a moment, drinking from mountain springs and 
pristine lakes. Any sound or sign of another creature 
startles them, sending them off to fly once more 

among the clouds. 

Noble Mounts. Pegasi are highly prized as swift and 
reliable steeds, being faster and less temperamental 
than griffons, hippogriffs, and wyverns. However, these 
wild and shy creatures are as intelligent as humanoids, 
and so can’t be traditionally broken and tamed. A 
pegasus must be persuaded to serve a good-aligned 
creature as a mount, but when it does so, it forges a life- 
long bond with its new companion. 

Born of the Planes. Pegasi trace their origins to the 
Olympian Glades of Arborea, where they soar through 
the skies of that plane and serve as faithful mounts to 
the Seldarine, the pantheon of elven gods. These gods 
have been known to send pegasi to the Material Plane to 
aid those in need. 

Pegasi Nests. Pegasi mate for life, build their nests in 
hard-to-reach locations, and give birth to live young. 


PERYTON 


Although this monstrous carnivore feeds on 
any creature, it prefers humanoids, especially 
elves, half-elves, and humans. When it kills a 
humanoid, a peryton rips out its prey’s heart and 
takes it back to its nest to be devoured. 

The peryton is a bizarre creature that blends the 
body and wings of a bird of prey with the head of a 
stag. Its strangest feature is its shadow, which appears 
humanoid rather than reflecting the creature’s physical 
form. Sages postulate that the first perytons were 
humans transformed by a hideous curse or magical 
experiment, but bards tell a different tale of a man 
whose infidelity caused his scorned wife to cut out the 
heart of her younger, more beautiful rival and consume 
it in a ritual intended to forever win her husband's 
heart. The ritual succeeded until the woman’s villainy 
was exposed. She was hanged for her crime, but the 
lingering magic of her foul ritual caused the carrion 
birds that feasted on her corpse to transform into the 
first perytons. 

Unnatural Hunger. A peryton’s reproductive cycle 
depends on the heart of a freshly killed humanoid. The 
organ must be consumed by a female peryton before 
she can reproduce. When a peryton consumes a heart, 
its shadow changes for a brief time to reflect its true 
monstrous form. 

When attacking a humanoid, a peryton is single- 
minded and relentless, fighting until it or its prey dies. 
If a peryton is somehow driven away, it stalks lost prey 
from afar, attacking again when the opportunity arises. 

Bane of the Mountains. Perytons roost atop 
mountain ridges and lair in high caves. They prey on 
creatures living or wandering in the vales below, and 
travelers on lonely mountain roads learn to keep a 
wary eye on the sky. Because normal weapons are less 
effective against perytons, the folk of the mountains 
know to avoid confrontations with these monsters 
at all costs. 

Established settlements are attractive to perytons 
as a renewable food source. As such, village councils 
and local nobles often hire adventurers to eliminate 
‘peryton nests. 


PERYTON 


y A . 
Medium monstrosity, chadtic evil 


Armor Class 13. (natural armor) 
Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6) 
Speed 20 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 12(+1) 13@1) 9(-1) 12(41)_ 10 (+0) 


Skills Perception +5 

Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical weapons 

Senses passive Perception 15 

Languages understands Common and Elvish but can't speak 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Dive Attack. If the peryton is flying and dives at least 30 feet 
straight toward a target and then hits it with a melee weapon 
attack, the attack deals an extra 9 (2d8) damage to the target. 


\ 


Flyby. The peryton doesn’t provoke an opportunity attack when 


it flies out of an enemy’s reach. 

Keen Sight and Smell. The peryton has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight or smell. 

ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The peryton makes one gore attack and one 
talon attack. 

Gore. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage. 


Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) piercing damage. 


i 
Pool: 


fF * 


Tid 


Ry Toh 
what eta) 


| Medium monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 22 (3d8 + 9) 
~. 1) Speed 5 ft., climb 5 ft. 


CHA 
3 (-4) 


STR 
10 (+0) 


DEX 
13 (+1) 


CON 
16 (+3) 


INT 
1 (-5) 


Wis 
7 (-2) 


} Skills Stealth +5 

Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8 
Languages — 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


False Appearance. While the piercer remains motionless on the 
ceiling, it is indistinguishable from a normal stalactite. 


} Spider Climb. The piercer can climb difficult surfaces, 
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 
ability check. 


- 
-- 
i 
a 


| ACTIONS 


| Drop. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, one creature directly 
| underneath the piercer. Hit: 3 (1d6) piercing damage per 10 
— , feet fallen, up to 21 (6d6). Miss: The piercer takes half the 
_ normal falling damage for the distance fallen. 


SER RS ees Ey ES 


a 


D dec 
252 _ Se —— Se 


RES i Sh er 


- 
} 


ia Lia ty | Fal 
1 L 


PIERCER 


Clinging to the ceilings of caverns and large 
subterranean passages, piercers blend in perfectly with 
natural rock, dropping in silence to impale unsuspecting 
foes on the ground below. 

A piercer is the larval form of a roper, and the two 
creatures often attack in tandem. A rock-like shell 
encases a piercer’s body, giving it the look and texture 
of a stalactite. That shell protects a soft, slug-like upper 
body that lets the piercer move across cavern walls 
and ceilings to position itself for prey. With its eye and 
mouth closed, the piercer is difficult to distinguish from 
ordinary rock formations. 

Patient Hunters. Piercers can see, but they can also 
respond to noise and heat, waiting for living creatures to 
pass beneath them, then falling to attack. A piercer that 
misses its chance to kill must make its slow way back 
to the ceiling. A fallen piercer excretes a foul-smelling 
slime when attacked, making most predators think 
twice about eating it. 

Piercers gather in colonies to maximize the 
effectiveness of their attacks, dropping simultaneously 
to increase the odds of striking prey. After a piercer 
successfully slays a creature, the others slowly creep 
toward the corpse to join in the feast. 


PIXIE 


Standing barely a foot tall, pixies resemble 
diminutive elves with gossamer wings like 
those of dragonflies or butterflies, bright as the 
clear dawn and as luminous as the full moonrise. 
Curious as cats and shy as deer, pixies go where 
they please. They like to spy on other creatures 
and can barely contain their excitement around 
them. The urge to introduce themselves and 
strike up a friendship is almost overwhelming; 
only a pixie’s fear of being captured or attacked 
stays its hand. Those who wander through a 
pixie’s glade might never see the creatures, yet 
hear the occasional giggle, gasp, or sigh. 

Pixies array themselves like princes and 
princesses of the fey, wearing flowing 
gowns and doublets of silk that sparkle 
like moonlight on a pond. Some dress 
in acorns, leaves, bark, and the pelts of 
tiny woodland beasts. They take great pride 
in their regalia and beam with joy when they are 
complimented on their ensembles. 

Magical Faerie Folk. With their innate power of 
invisibility, pixies rarely appear unless they wish to be 
seen. In the Feywild and on the Material Plane, pixies 
etch patterns of frost on winter ponds and rouse the 
buds in springtime. They cause flowers to sparkle with 
summer dew, and color the leaves with the blazing 
hues of autumn. 

Pixie Dust. When pixies fly visibly, a shower of 
sparkling dust follows in their wake like the glittering 
tail of a shooting star. A mere sprinkle of pixie dust is 
said to be able to grant the power of flight, confuse a 
creature hopelessly, or send foes into a magical slumber. 
Only pixies can use their dust to its full potential, 
but these fey are constantly sought out by mages and 
monsters seeking to study or master their power. 

Tiny Tricksters. While the arrival of visitors piques 
their curiosity, pixies are too shy to reveal themselves 
at first. They study the visitors from afar to gauge 
their temperament or play harmless tricks on them to 
measure their reactions. For example, pixies might 
tie a dwarf’s boots together, create illusions of strange 
creatures or treasures, or use dancing lights to lead 
interlopers astray. If the visitors respond with hostility, 
the pixies give them a wide berth. If the visitors are 
good natured, the pixies are likely to be emboldened 
and more friendly. The fey might even emerge and offer 
to guide their “guests” along a safe route or invite them 
to a tiny yet satisfying feast prepared in their honor. 

Opposed to Violence. Unlike their fey cousins, the 
sprites, pixies abhor weapons and would sooner flee 
than get into a physical altercation with any enemy. 


PIXIE 
Tiny fey, neutral good 


Armor Class 15 
Hit Points 1 (1d4 ~ 1) 
Speed 10 ft., fly 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
2(-4) 20 (+5) 8(-1) 10 (+0) 14 (42) 15 (+2) 
Skills Perception +4, Stealth +7 
Senses passive Perception 14 
Languages Sylvan 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


De 


Magic Resistance. The pixie has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Innate Speilcasting. The pixie’s innate spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 12). It can innately cast the following 
spells, requiring only its pixie dust as a component: 


At will: druidcraft 

1/day each: confusion, dancing lights, detect evil and good, 
detect thoughts, dispel magic, entangle, fly, phantasmal force, 
polymorph, sleep 


ACTIONS 


Superior Invisibility. The pixie magically turns invisible until 
its concentration ends (as if concentrating on a spell). Any 
equipment the pixie wears or carries is invisible with it. 


| 
| 
} 
| 


tT 1M y 
' e 


Dh a | ad ‘ 


PSEUDODRAGON 

The elusive pseudodragon dwells in the quiet places of 
the world, making its home in the hollows of trees and 
small caves. With its red-brown scales, horns, and a 
maw filled with sharp teeth, a pseudodragon resembles 
a tiny red dragon but its disposition is playful. 

Quiet and Defensive. Pseudodragons have little 
interest in other creatures, and they avoid them 
whenever possible. If it is attacked, a pseudodragon 

fights back using the poisonous stinger at the tip of its 
tail, one jab of which can put a creature into a catatonic 
state that can last for hours. 

Draconic Familiars. Mages often seek out 
pseudodragons, whose agreeable disposition, telepathic 
ability, and resistance to magic make them superior 
familiars. Pseudodragons are selective when it comes 
to choosing companions, but they can sometimes 
be won over with gifts of food or treasure. When 
a pseudodragon finds an agreeable companion, it 
bonds with that person as long as it is treated fairly. 

A pseudodragon puts up with no ill treatment, and 
it abandons a manipulative or abusive companion 
without warning. 


_ PREUBOOURAGON 
— 5 n ers LEP = 


] a a = 


Pra e t 


Language of Emotion. Pseudodragons can't speak, 
but they communicate using a limited form of telepathy 
that allows them to share basic ideas such as hunger, 
curiosity, or affection. When it bonds with a companion, 
a pseudodragon can communicate what it sees and 
hears even over long distances. 

A pseudodragon often vocalizes animal noises. A 
rasping purr indicates pleasure, while a hiss means 
unpleasant surprise. A bird-like chirping represents 
desire, and a growl always means anger or discontent. 


> —————————— Ss. 
VARIANT: PSEUDODRAGON FAMILIAR 


Some pseudodragons are willing to serve spellcasters as a 
familiar. Such pseudodragons have the following trait. 
Familiar. The pseudodragon can serve another creature as 
a familiar, forming a magic, telepathic bond with that willing 
companion. While the two are bonded, the companion 
can sense what the pseudodragon senses as long as they 
are within 1 mile of each other. While the pseudodragon is 
within 10 feet of its companion, the companion shares the 
pseudodragon’s Magic Resistance trait. At any time and 
for any reason, the pseudodragon can end its service as a 
familiar, ending the telepathic bond. 


PSEUDODRAGON 


Tiny dragon, neutral good 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 7 (2d4 + 2) 
Speed 15 ft., fly 60 ft. 


CON 
13 (+1) 


WIS CHA 
12 +41) 10 (+0) 


STR 
6 (-2) 


DEX 
15 (+2) 


INT 
10 (+0) 


Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4 
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages understands Common and Draconic but 
can’t speak 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


RRR tre rer 


Keen Senses. The pseudodragon has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight, hearing, or smell. 


_ Magic Resistance. The pseudodragon has advantage on saving 
_ throws against spells and other magical effects. 


communicate simple ideas, emotions, and images 


_ understand a language. 


_ Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


| Sting. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
| Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage, and the target must succeed 
ona DC 11 Constitution saving throw or become poisoned for 
1 hour. If the saving throw fails by 5 or more, the target falls 
unconscious for the same duration, or until it takes damage or 
another creature uses an action to shake it awake. 


i 
j 


Limited Telepathy. The pseudodragon can magically 


telepathically with any creature within 100 feet of it that can 


ACTIONS 


Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


Scamadeneniadl 


REN TEESE EY NTN TEN TERI A TN NE TEER eT a Te 


: eS elene teen Ga aca hae Lalani akeloeente cae ahdiameemeen ieaeiedpieineormimmrieemmammems aie 


PURPLE WORM 


The massive burrowing monster known as the purple 
worm terrorizes the creatures of the Underdark as 

it chews through solid rock in pursuit of prey. A dim- 
witted, ravenous force of nature, this creature regards 
anything it encounters as food. 

Ravenous Hunters. Loud noise attracts purple 
worms, which have been known to interrupt 
underground battles and tear through subterranean 
cities seeking prey. The underground civilizations of the 
drow, the duergar, and the mind flayers maintain special 
wards around their settlements to deter these monsters. 

Though most common in the Underdark, purple 
worms are frequently seen on the surface world in rocky 
and mountainous lands. The maw of a purple worm is 
large enough to swallow a horse whole, and no creature 
is safe from its hunger. It lunges forward by rhythmically 
compressing and expanding its body, catching other 
Underdark dwellers by surprise with the speed of 
its advance. 

Boons of the Worm. When a purple worm burrows 
through the ground, it consumes earth and rock, which 
it breaks down and constantly excretes. Precious metals 
and gems can thus be found within the bodies of purple 
worms, which are targeted by particularly brave and 
foolhardy treasure hunters. 

A burrowing purple worm constantly creates new 
tunnels throughout the Underdark, which are quickly 
made use of by other creatures as corridors and 
highways. Because a purple worm rarely returns to 
its own tunnels, such passageways are a good place to 
avoid these monsters. Areas rich in prey quickly become 
interlaced with complex tunnel systems resulting from 
several worms hunting together. 


PURPLE WORM 


a aan 


Stee 5 a es 


Gargantuan mohsttosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 247 (15d20 + 90) 
Speed 50 ft., burrow 30 ft. 


CHA 
22 (+6) 1(-5) 8(-1) 4(-3 


STR DEX CON INT  ~—WIS 
28 (+9) 7 (~2) 


Saving Throws Con +11, Wis +4 

Senses blindsight 30 ft., tremorsense 60 ft., 
passive Perception 9 

Languages — 

Challenge 15 (13,000 XP) 


| rr 


Tunneler. The worm can burrow through solid rock at half its 
burrow speed and leaves a 10-foot-diameter tunnel in its wake. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The worm makes two attacks: one with its bite 
and one with its stinger. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 22 (3d8 + 9) piercing damage. If the target is a Large or 
smaller creature, it must succeed on a DC 19 Dexterity saving 
throw or be swallowed by the worm. A swallowed creature is 
blinded and restrained, it has total cover against attacks and 
other effects outside the worm, and it takes 21 (6d6) acid 
damage at the start of each of the worm’s turns. 

If the worm takes 30 damage or more on a single turn 
from a creature inside it, the worm must succeed on a DC 21 
Constitution saving throw at the end of that turn or regurgitate 
all swallowed creatures, which fall prone in a space within 10 
feet of the worm. Ifthe worm dies, a swallowed creature is no 
longer restrained by it and can escape from the corpse by using 
20 feet of movement, exiting prone. 


Tail Stinger. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 19 (3d6 + 9) piercing damage, and the target 


must make a DC 19 Constitution saving throw, taking 42 (12d6) | 
| poison damage on a failed save, or half as much damage ona 


successful one. 


ee 


TS eA 


‘poReie worm: © 
ee ig 
skal 


| 
f 
) 


a 
255 


| Medium humanoid (quaggoth), chaotic neutral . 


' Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
| Hit Points 45 (6d8 + 18) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


"Skills Athletics +5 
Damage Immunities poison 

| Condition Immunities poisoned 

) Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Undercommon 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Wounded Fury. While it has 10 hit points or fewer, the 
_ quaggoth has advantage on attack rolls. In addition, it deals an 
| extra 7 (2d6) damage to any target it hits with a melee attack. 


| Multiattack. The quaggoth makes two claw attacks. 


} Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) slashing damage. 


QUAGGOTH 


Savage and territorial, quaggoths climb the chasms 
of the Underdark. They maul their foes in a frenzy, 
becoming even more murderous in the face of death. 

Quaggoth Origins. Quaggoths were never an 
enlightened species, but they were not always the brutal 
Underdark denizens they are today. In a distant age, 
quaggoth tribes dwelled upon the surface as nocturnal 
arboreal hunters, possessing their own language and 
culture. When elves appeared in the mortal realm, they 
clashed with the quaggoths, eventually driving them to 
near extinction. Only by fleeing deep into the Underdark 
did the quaggoths survive. 

As they passed the ages deep beneath the world, the 
quaggoths’ fur lost its color and their vision adapted to 
the darkness, even as the constant danger and weird 
magic of their new realm transformed them. Turning 
increasingly brutal and savage, they ate whatever food 
they could find—and when they could not find it, they 
preyed on each other. As cannibalism became part of 
their culture, their past was abandoned. 

Servants of the Drow. The ancient enmity between 
quaggoths and surface elves makes them easy converts 
to the dark elf cause. In recent years, the drow have 
taken an interest in breeding quaggoths, encouraging 
their ferocity while strengthening their obedience. 
Wealthy drow houses have legions of quaggoths at 
their command. Even worse, the drow cultivate the 
quaggoths’ hatred of the elves by leading them on 
surface raids against known elven enclaves. 

Thonots. Some quaggoths absorb psionic energy that 
suffuses certain parts of the Underdark. When a tribe 
discovers that one of its own has inherited such powers, 
they press it into the role of tribal shaman, or thonot. 

A thonot keep a tribe’s lore and ensures its superiority 
against enemies. A thonot that fails the tribe is slain and 
devoured in a cannibalistic ritual, in the hope that its 
power passes to another more worthy quaggoth. 

Poison Immunity. Generations of hunting venomous 
subterranean creatures and perpetual exposure to the 
molds and fungi that grow in the depths have forced 
quaggoths to adapt immunities to poisons of all kinds. 


CO 
VARIANT: QUAGGOTH THONOT | 
A quaggoth thonot is a normal quaggoth with a challenge | 
rating of 3 (700 XP) and the following additional trait. l, 

Innate Spellicasting (Psionics). The quaggoth’s innate 
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 11). The 
quaggoth can innately cast the following spells, requiring 
no components: 


At will: feather fall, mage hand (the hand is invisible) 
1/day each: cure wounds, enlarge /reduce, heat metal, 
mirror image 


Se 


RAKSHASA 


The rakshasa employs delicacy and misdirection in its 
pursuit of dominion over others. Few creatures ever see 
the fiend in its true form, for it can take on any guise it 
wants, although it prefers to masquerade as someone 
powerful or influential: a noble, cardinal, or rich 
merchant, for example. A rakshasa’s true form combines 
the features of a human and a tiger, with one noteworthy 
deformity: its palms are where the backs of the hands 
would be on a human. 

Evil Spirits in Mortal Flesh. Rakshasas originated 
long ago in the Nine Hells, when powerful devils 
created a dark ritual to free their essence from their 
fiendish bodies in order to escape the Lower Planes. A 
rakshasa enters the Material Plane to feed its appetite 
for humanoid flesh and evil schemes. It selects its prey 
with Gare, taking pains to keep its presence in the 
world a secret. 

Evil Reborn. For a rakshasa, death on the Material 
Plane means an agonizing and torturous return to the 
Nine Hells, where its essence remains trapped until its 
body reforms—a process that can take months or years. 
When the rakshasa is reborn, it has all the memories 
and knowledge of its former life, and it seeks retribution 
against the one who slew it. If the target has somehow 
slipped through its grasp, the rakshasa might punish its 
killer’s family, friends, or descendants. 

Like devils, rakshasas killed in the Nine Hells are 
forever destroyed. 


RAKSHASA 
Medium fiend, lawful evil 


Ee Se ee a —_— -_ | 

Armor Class 16 (natura! armor) 

Hit Points 110 (13d8 + 52) 

Speed 40 ft. 

EE = Tests <= a = 

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

14 (+2) 17 (43) «18 (#4) «13. (41) 16 (43) ~—-20 (45) 

RL Ee as ——— —— 

Skills Deception +10, Insight +8 

Damage Vulnerabilities piercing from magic weapons wielded 
by good creatures 

Damage Immunities bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical weapons 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 

Languages Common, Infernal 

Challenge 13 (10,000 XP) 


a Sn r= ——- — 


Limited Magic Immunity. The rakshasa is immune to spells 
of 6th level or lower unless it wishes to be affected. It has 


magical effects. 


Innate Spellcasting. The rakshasa’s innate spellcasting ability is | 
Charisma (spell save DC 18, +10 to hit with spell attacks). The 
rakshasa can innately cast the following spells, requiring no 
material components: 


At will: detect thoughts, disguise self, mage hand, minor illusion 


3/day each: charm person, detect magic, invisibility, major image, | ; 


suggestion 
1/day each: dominate person, fly, plane shift, true seeing 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The rakshasa makes two claw attacks. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 

Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) slashing damage, and the target is cursed if 

it is a creature. The magical curse takes effect whenever the 
target takes a short or long rest, filling the target’s thoughts 

with horrible images and dreams. The cursed target gains no 
benefit from finishing a short or long rest. The curse lasts until | 


advantage on saving throws against all other spells and | 


it is lifted by a remove curse spell or similar magic. I 


REMORHAZES 

From beneath the snow and ice bursts a remorhaz in 

a cloud of steam, its body pulsing with internal fire. 
Winglike fins flare from the back of the creature’s head, 
and its wide mouth brims with jagged teeth. 

Arctic Predators. Remorhazes live in arctic climes, 
preying on elk, polar bears, and other creatures sharing 
their territory. They can’t tolerate warm weather, having 
adapted to the cold by generating a furnace-like heat 
within their bodies. When hunting, a remorhaz burrows 
deep below the snow and ice and lies in wait for the faint 
vibrations created by a creature moving above it. While 
hidden under the ice and snow, it can lower its body 
temperature so that it doesn’t melt its cover. 

Young Ones. Frost giant hunters scour the icy wastes 
for remorhaz nests and eggs. The giants prize young 

poe remorhazes, which can be trained from hatching to obey 
i commands and guard the giants’ icy citadels. Unlike 
fully grown specimens, young remorhazes gnaw on 
their victims instead of swallowing them whole. 


Huge’ ‘monstrosity, unaligned 
2c 
Armor Class’ 17;(natural armor) 

"Hit Points 195 (1712 + 85) 

| Speed 30 ft., burrow 20 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
P47), Wiel) 2165) 4(-3) 10(0) 54-3) 


Damage Immunities cold, fire 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft., 
passive Perception 10 

Languages — 

Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) 


Heated Body. A creature that touches the remorhaz or hits 
it with a melee attack while within 5 feet of it takes 10 (3d6) 
fire damage. 


2EMORHAZ _ = 


: Hy, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 0 
Hit Points 93 (11d10 + 33) | Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Speed 30 ft., burrow 20 ft. Hit: 40 (6d10 + 7) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) fire damage. 
If the target is a creature, it is grappled (escape DC 17). Until 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA this grapple ends, the target is restrained, and the remorhaz 
18 (+4) =13(41) 17 (+3) 3(-4) 100) 4 (-3) can’t bite another target. 


Swallow. The remorhaz makes one bite attack against a 
Medium or smaller creature it is grappling. If the attack hits, 

passive Perception 10 that creature takes the bite’s damage and is swallowed, and 
Languages — the grapple ends. While swallowed, the creature is blinded and 
| Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) restrained, it has total cover against attacks and other effects 
outside the remorhaz, and it takes 21 (6d6) acid damage at the 
start of each of the remorhaz’s turns. 


| Damage Immunities cold, fire 
) Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft., 


y" Heated Body. A creature that touches the remorhaz or hits If the remorhaz takes 30 damage or more ona single turn 
| it with a melee attack while within 5 feet of it takes 7 (2d6) from a creature inside it, the remorhaz must succeed on a 
fire damage. _ DC 15 Constitution saving throw at the end of that turn or 


regurgitate all swallowed creatures, which fall prone ina 


1 a a ee | | space within 10 feet of the remorhaz. Ifthe remorhazdies,a =| 
_ Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. swallowed creature is no longer restrained by it and can escape | 
Ait 20 (3d10 + 4) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) fire damage. | from the corpse using 15 feet of movement, exiting prone. 

: 


’ REMORHAZES| , — —__ - = a 


4 - — a — — 


—_ 


REVENANT 


A revenant forms from the soul of a mortal who met a 
cruel and undeserving fate. It claws its way back into the 
world to seek revenge against the one who wronged it. 
The revenant reclaims its mortal body and superficially 
resembles a zombie. However, instead of lifeless eyes, 
a revenant’s eyes burn with resolve and flare in the 
presence of its adversary. If the revenant's original 
body was destroyed or is otherwise unavailable, the 
spirit of the revenant enters another humanoid corpse. 
Regardless of the body the revenant uses as a vessel, 
its adversary always recognizes the revenant for what 
it truly is. 

Hunger for Revenge. A revenant has only one year to 
exact revenge. When its adversary dies, or if the revenant 
fails to kill its adversary before its time runs out, it 
crumbles to dust and its soul fades into the afterlife. If its 
foe-is too powerful for the revenant to destroy on its own, 
it seeks worthy allies to help it fulfill its quest. 

Divine Justice. No magic can hide a creature pursued 


by a revenant, which always knows the direction and 
distance between it and the target of its vengeance. In 
cases where the revenant seeks revenge against more 
than one adversary, it pursues them one at a time, 
starting with the creature that dealt it the killing blow. 
If the revenant’s body is destroyed, its soul flies forth to 
seek out a new corpse in which to resume its hunt. 

Undead Nature. A revenant doesn’t require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


REVENANT 


| Medium undead, neutral 


_ Armor Class 13 (leather armor) 
Hit Points 136 (16d8 + 64) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
18 (+4) 14 (42) 18 (44) «13 41)—-16 (43)_—«18 (+4) 
{aan 
Saving Throws Str +7, Con +7, Wis +6, Cha +7 
Damage Resistances necrotic, psychic 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, poisoned, stunned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages the languages it knew in life 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 
LLL LL 


Regeneration. The revenant regains 10 hit points at the start 
of its turn. If the revenant takes fire or radiant damage, this 
trait doesn’t function at the start of the revenant's next turn. 
The revenant’s body is destroyed only if it starts its turn with 
0 hit points and doesn’t regenerate. 


Rejuvenation. When the revenant’s body is destroyed, its soul 
lingers. After 24 hours, the soul inhabits and animates another 
corpse on the same plane of existence and regains all its hit 

) points. While the soul is bodiless, a wish spell can be used to 

| force the soul to go to the afterlife and not return. 


—— 


en 


VARIANT: REVENANTS WITH SPELLS AND WEAPONS 


Revenants that were spellcasters before they died might 
retain some or all of their spellcasting capabilities. Similarly, 
revenants that wore armor and wielded weapons in life might 
continue to do so. 


Turn immunity. The reveriant is immune to effects that 
turn undead. 

Vengeful Tracker. The revenant knows the distance to and 
direction of any creature against which it seeks revenge, even 
if the creature and the revenant are on different planes of 
existence. If the creature being tracked by the revenant dies, 
the revenant knows. 


=i 
EO 3 


ee 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The revenant makes two fist attacks. 


Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 
11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a creature 
against which the revenant has sworn vengeance, the target 
takes an extra 14 (4d6) bludgeoning damage. Instead of dealing 
damage, the revenant can grapple the target (escape DC 14) 
provided the target is Large or smaller. 


Ee —EEE Eee 


—_— 


Vengeful Glare. The revenant targets one creature it can see 
within 30 feet of it and against which it has sworn vengeance. 
The target must make a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw. Ona 
failure, the target is paralyzed until the revenant deals damage 
to it, or until the end of the revenant’s next turn. When the 
paralysis ends, the target is frightened of the revenant for 1 
minute. The frightened target can repeat the saving throw at — | 
the end of each of its turns, with disadvantage if it can see 

the revenant, ending the frightened condition on itself on a 
a success. os 


—— 


REVENAMT 


260 


Roc 


At first sight, a roc’s silhouette looks much like any other 
bird of prey. As it descends, however, its unearthly size 
becomes terrifyingly clear. In flight, a roc’s wingspan 
spreads two hundred feet or more. At rest, perched upon 


{he mountain peaks that are its home, this monstrous 


bird rivals the oldest dragons in size. 

Sky Titans. In the ancient days when giants battled 
dragons for control of the world, Annam, the father of 
the giant gods, created the rocs so that his worshipers 
might challenge the dragons’ dominance of the air. 
When the war ended, the rocs were freed from giant 
domination and spread throughout the world. 

Though cloud giants and storm giants sometimes 
tame these great birds, rocs treat even giants as 
potential prey. They fly great distances in search of food, 
soaring high above the clouds to reach their favored 
hunting grounds. A roc seldom hunts swift or small 
creatures, and it ignores towns and forests where prey 
can easily take cover. When it locates a large and slow- 
moving target such as a giant, a whale, or an elephant, a 
roc dives down to snatch its prey in its massive talons. 

Remote and Alone. Rocs are solitary creatures 
that can live for centuries. They lair in nests made 
from trees, tents, broken ships, and the remains of 
caravans they carry off, placing these massive tangles in 
mountain clefts out of the reach of lesser creatures. 

Sometimes a roc’s nest contains treasures from the 
caravans or ships they raid, but these creatures are 
heedless of such baubles. More rarely, a nest holds eggs 
that are taller than a human, produced by the rocs’ 
infrequent mating. 


Gargantuan monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 15;(natural armor) 
Hit Points 248 (16d20 + 80) 
Speed 20 ft., fly 120 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
28 (+9) 10(+0) 20(4+5) 3(-4) 10(40) 9(-1) 


Saving Throws Dex +4, Con +9, Wis +4, Cha +3 
Skills Perception +4 

Senses passive Perception 14 

Languages — 

Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) 


Keen Sight. The roc has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The roc makes two attacks: one with its beak and 


one with its talons. 


Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 27 (4d8 + 9) piercing damage. 


Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +13 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 

target. Hit: 23 (4d6 + 9) slashing damage, and the target is 
grappled (escape DC 19). Until this grapple ends, the target is 
restrained, and the roc can’t use its talons on another target. 


f 
t 


' 


) Skills Perception +6, Stealth +5 
) Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 16 


Languages — Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
} Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) Hit: 22 (4d8 + 4) piercing damage. 


) False Appearance. While the roper remains motionless, it is 


| Grasping Tendrils. The roper can have up to six tendrils at can’t use the same tendril on another target. 


| immunity to poison and psychic damage). Destroying a tendril 
| 


ROPER as Cpe a 
Living in caves and caverns throughout the Underdark, Fe fiat W's OP ee rh 
voracious ropers feast on whatever they can catch and ii id Joh ae . : ) 
seize. A roper eats any creature, from Underdark beasts Libel EAL ALON oti | 
to adventurers and their gear. WON 

A roper has the appearance of a stalagmite or 
stalactite, which often allows it to attack with surprise. wh ia ak | 
The creature can move slowly using thousands of oN 5 
sticky cilia beneath its base. It creeps up cave walls Wy 
and along stone ceilings, finding the best position from - 
which to attack. 

Underdark Hunters. The roper is an evolved, 
mature form of piercer, with which it shares its rock- 
like appearance and hunting tactics. A roper can hold 
still for long hours, shutting its single eye to look like 
nothing more than a mundane formation of rock. 
Creatures that come too close are surprised when 
that eye snaps open and sticky tendrils shoot out 
to seize them. The roper then makes horrible 
guttural sounds as it reels in its struggling 
victims, drawing them close for the fatal bite of 
its stony teeth. 

A:roper can digest anything it eats with the 
exception of platinum, gemstones, and magic 
items, which can sometimes be retrieved from the 
creature’s gizzard after death. A roper’s digestive juices 
are also valuable, fetching a high price from alchemists 
who use them as a solvent. ; 

Weakening Tendrils. A roper has six nubs set 
along its body, through which it extrudes sticky 
tendrils that bond to whatever they touch. Each 
tendril sends out hair-like growths that penetrate 
a creature’s flesh and sap its strength, so the 
victim can struggle only weakly as the roper 
reels it in. If a tendril is cut through or broken, 
the roper produces a new one to replace it. 


' ww. we edleals no damage to the ete which cz can an extrude replacement | 
tendril on its next turn. A tendril can also be broken ifa > . 4 
creature takes an action and succeeds on a DC 15 Strength 


check against it. 


“ROPER 


"Large monstrosity, neutral evil 


\ Armor Class 20 (natural armor) 


| Hit Points 93 (11d10 + 33) Spider Climb. The roper can climb difficult surfaces, including 
| Speed 10 ft., climb 10 ft. upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 
| ability check. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
| 18(+4)  8(-1) 173) 7 (-2) 16 (+3) 6 (-2) ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The roper makes four attacks with its tendrils, 
uses Reel, and makes one attack with its bite. 


Tendril. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 50 ft., one 
creature. Hit: The target is grappled (escape DC 15). Until the 
grapple ends, the target is restrained and has disadvantage 
on Strength checks and Strength saving throws, and the roper 


Fe 


indistinguishable from a normal cave formation, such as a 
stalagmite. 


a time. Each tendril can be attacked (AC 20; 10 hit points; Reel. The roper pulls each creature grappled by it up to 25 feet 


straight toward it. 


2 
RUST hMOS TER 
362 be — 


Rust MONSTER 


Most dwarves would rather face a squad of orcs than 
confront a single rust monster. These strange, normally 
docile creatures corrode ferrous metals, then gobble up 
the rust they create. In doing so, they have ruined the 
armor, shields, and weapons of countless adventurers. 
A rust monster’s body is covered in thick, lumpy 
armor, its long tail ends in a bony protrusion, and two 
feathery antennae sprout from its insectile head. 
Underground Scavengers. Rust monsters roam 
subterranean passages in search of ferrous metals such 


.as.iron, steel, adamantine, and mithral to consume. 


They ignore creatures not carrying such metals, but can 
become aggressive toward those bearing steel weapons 
and armor. A rust monster can smell its food at a 
distance, immediately dashing toward the scent’s source 
to corrode and consume the object. 

Arust monster doesn’t care if the rust it consumes 
comes from a spike or a sword. Adventurers can distract 
the creature by dropping ferrous objects behind them. 

Subterranean Wanderers. Rust monsters are rarely 
found in large numbers, preferring to hunt alone or in 
small groups. They meander along tunnels, moving 
from cave to cave in their tireless search for ferrous 
metals to consume. Their wanderings often bring them 
into contact with other Underdark denizens that find 
them harmless or unappetizing. Thus, rust monsters 
may be found in close proximity to other subterranean 
monsters. If they are well treated and well fed, they can 
also become friendly companions or pets. 


5 é; ion 
= - 4 ae - ie 


Rust MONSTER 


"hie 


Medium mohstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 14. (natural armor) 
Hit Points 27 (5d8 + 5) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (+1) 12441) 130441) 2(-4) 13(41) — 6 (-2) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


fron Scent. The rust monster can pinpoint, by scent, the 
location of ferrous metal within 30 feet of it. 


Rust Metal, Any nonmagical weapon made of metal that hits 
the rust monster corrodes. After dealing damage, the weapon 
takes a permanent and cumulative -1 penalty to damage rolls. 


If its penalty drops to —5, the weapon is destroyed. Nonmagical | 


ammunition made of metal that hits the rust monster is 


_ destroyed after dealing damage. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (1d8 + 1) piercing damage. 


Antennae. The rust monster corrodes a nonmagical ferrous 
metal object it can see within 5 feet of it. If the object isn’t 
being worn or carried, the touch destroys a 1-foot cube of it. If 
the object is being worn or carried by a creature, the creature 
can make a DC 11 Dexterity saving throw to avoid the rust 
monster’s touch. 

If the object touched is either metal armor or a metal shield 
being worn or carried, its takes a permanent and cumulative 
-1 penalty to the AC it offers. Armor reduced to an AC of 10 
or a shield that drops to a +0 bonus is destroyed. If the object 
touched is a held metal weapon, it rusts as described in the 


Rust Metal trait. 


ee 


| 
| 
| 


mor 


SAHUAGIN 


Across fog-shrouded coasts or endless ocean swells, 

an ominous drone sounded on a conch shell chills 

the blood of all who hear it. This is the sound of the 
sahuagin hunting horn—a call to raid and battle. Coastal 
settlers refer to sahuagin as “sea devils,” for sahuagin 
have no compassion in them, slaughtering the crews of 
ships and decimating coastal villages. 

Devils of the Deep. Sahuagin are a predatory, piscine 
race that ventures from the ocean’s black depths to 
hunt the creatures of the shallows and shore. 
Though they dwell in the deepest trenches of 
the ocean, sahuagin view the entire aquatic 
realm as their kingdom and the creatures 
in it as blood sport for their 
hunting parties, 

The self-styled rulers of 
sahuagin ocean domains are massive mutant 
males that grow second sets of arms. They are 
terrible foes in battle, and all sahuagin bow down before 
these powerful barons. 

Way of the Shark. Sahuagin worship the shark god i" 
Sekolah. Only female sahuagin are deemed worthy Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 
of channeling the god’s power, and priestesses hold Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4) 
tremendous sway in sahuagin communities. Speed 30 ft., swim 40 ft. 

Sahuagin are driven into a frenzy by the smell of 
fresh blood. As worshipers of Sekolah, they also have a 
special kinship with sharks, which they train as attack 
animals. Even untrained sharks recognize sahuagin as Skill 4 

ills Perception +5 


allies and don’t prey on them. Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15 


IN 


edi 4 hu anoid (sahuagin), lawful ay 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13(41) 11(40) 1241) 1241) 1341) 9(-1) 


Elven Enmity. The sahuagin might control the ocea Languages Sahuagin 
if not for the presence of their mortal enemies, the Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 
aquatic elves. Wars between the two races have raged ———————————E—————— 
for centuries across the coasts and seas of the world, . 


disrupting maritime trade and drawing other races into Blood Frenzy. The sahuagin has advantage on melee attack 


rolls against any creature that doesn’t have all its hit points. 


elf community can enter the world as a malenti—a 
sahuagin that physically resembles an aquatic elf in 
every way. Sahuagin are prone to mutation, but whether 
this rare phenomenon is a result of the wars between ACTIONS 
ee co asd the-actiatic ea Buethey # Multiattack. The sahuagin makes two melee attacks: one with i] 
preceded or even began the conflict—none can say. an ie 
‘ e : its bite and one with its claws or spear. | 
The sahuagin put the malenti to good use as spies 
and assassins in aquatic elf cities and the societies of Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. iH 
other creatures that pose a threat to sahuagin. The Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) piercing damage. 10 
mere shadow of the malenti threat incites paranoia 
and suspicion among aquatic elves, whose resilience is 
weakened as the prelude to an actual sahuagin invasion. 


the bloody conflict. 

So intense is sahuagin hatred for the aquatic elves Limited Amphibiousness. The sahuagin can breathe air and : 
that the sea devils have adapted to combat their ancient water, but it needs to be submerged at least once every 4 hours 
foes. A sahuagin born near enough to an aquatic to avoid suffocating. | 

| 


Shark Telepathy. The sahuagin can magically command any ; ! | 
shark within 120 feet of it, using a limited telepathy. A 
I 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) slashing damage. 
Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage, or 
_ 5 (1d8 + 1) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a F, i 
“THE VILLAGE was EMPTY, THE SEAGULLS WERE meleegiaie 4 | 
STRANGELY QUIET, AND ALL WE COULD HEAR Was - — - = " 


THE SURGE OF THE SEA,” il 


| 
| 
i 


— on 


—a OF A SAHUAGIN RAIo - —— = > aah 
*, cr 


Thee i ‘I ‘i 
Ff oe ]= 


—AN ACCOUNT OF THE AFTERMAT ire HA LUA 1) 
2 . Arle 


263 f 


‘SA UAGIN PRIESTESS 
Medium humanoid (sahuagin), lawful evil 

Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 

_ Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6) 

) ‘Speed 30 ft., swim 40 ft. 

0 i i a 

°° STR DEX CON INT WIS 

13 (41) 11(40) 12(41) 1241) 14 (42) 


13 (+1) 


| Skills Perception +6, Religion +3 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16 
Languages Sahuagin 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


(ip 


_ Blood Frenzy. The sahuagin has advantage on melee attack 
rolls against any creature that doesn’t have all its hit points. 


| Limited Amphibiousness. The sahuagin can breathe air and 
| water, but she needs to be submerged at least once every 4 
hours to avoid suffocating. 


| Shark Telepathy. The sahuagin can magically command any 
shark within 120 feet of her, using a limited telepathy. 


_ Spellcasting. The sahuagin is a 6th-level spellcaster. Her 
| spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 12, +4 to hit with 
spell attacks). She has the following cleric spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): guidance, thaumaturgy 

1st level (4 slots): bless, detect magic, guiding bolt 

2nd level (3 slots): hold person, spiritual weapon (trident) 
3rd level (3 slots): mass healing word, tongues 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The sahuagin makes two attacks: one with her 
_ bite and one with her claws. 
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
_ Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) piercing damage. 
| Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. | 


Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) slashing damage. 


| 
. SAH UAGIA 


CHA 


UAGIN BARON 
: Large vin ibe (sahuagin), lawful-evil 
ae 
Armor Class 16 (breastplate) 
Hit Points 76 (9d10 + 27) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 50 ft. 


aL 1 lie 

wl Wat bs 
i'w H 
Li ly 


oh 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4) 15 (42) 16 (43) 14(42) 13(41) 17 (43) | 
Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +6, Int +5, Wis +4 
Skills Perception +7 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 17 
Languages Sahuagin 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


(Ee 


Blood Frenzy. The sahuagin has advantage on melee attack 
rolls against any creature that doesn’t have all its hit points. 


Limited Amphibiousness. The sahuagin can breathe air and | 
water, but he needs to be submerged at least once every 4 
hours to avoid suffocating. 


Shark Telepathy. The sahuagin can magically command any | 
shark within 120 feet of him, using a limited telepathy. 


ACTIONS | 


Multiattack. The sahuagin makes three attacks: one with his 
bite and two with his claws or trident. | 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. | 
Hit: 9 (2d4 + 4) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. | 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage. 


| Trident. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 

| range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage, 
or 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage if used with two hands to 
make a melee attack. 


SALAMANDERS 


Salamanders slither across the Sea of Ash on the 
Elemental Plane of Fire, their sinuous coils and jagged 
spines smoldering. Intense heat washes off their bodies, 
while their yellow eyes glow like candles in the deep-set 
hollows of their hawkish faces. 
Salamanders adore power, and they delight in setting 


fire to things. Outside their home plane, they play among 


the burning skeletons of charred trees as forest fires 


rage around them, or slither down the slopes of erupting 


volcanoes to linger in fire pits and magma floes. 

Fire Snakes. Salamanders hatch from eggs that 
are two-foot-diameter spheres of smoldering obsidian. 
When a salamander is ready to hatch, it melts its way 
through the egg’s thick shell and emerges as a fire 
snake. A fire snake matures into a salamander adult 
within a year. 

Slaves of the Efreet. Long ago, the efreet hired azers 
to build the fabled City of Brass, but then failed in their 
attempt to enslave that mystical race when the azers’ 
work was done. Turning instead to strike against the 
salamanders, the efreet had better luck in establishing 
a slave race, which they use to unleash war and 
destruction across the planes. 

Salamanders despise the azers, believing that if 
the efreet had succeeded in dominating that race of 
elemental crafters, the salamanders would still be free. 
The efreet use this enmity to their own advantage, 
stoking the salamanders’ hatred and pitting them 
against the efreets’ former servants. 

The efreet suffer salamanders to serve no other 
master; when efreet encounter salamanders dedicated 
to the cults of Elemental Evil, they slay them rather than 
taking them as slaves. 

Domineering Nobles. Although salamanders follow 
the destructive impulses of their fiery nature, slavery 
under the efreet has impacted the culture of free 
salamanders. They rule their own societies according 
to the efreet model, in which larger and stronger 
salamanders claim dominion over their lesser kin. 

As salamanders age, they increase in size and status, 

. rising to positions of power as cruel nobles among their 
kind. Nobles rule wandering bands of salamanders, 
which move across the Elemental Plane of Fire like 
desert nomads, raiding other communities for treasure. 

Living Forges. Salamanders generate intense heat, 
and when they fight, their weapons glow red and 
sear the bodies of their enemies on contact. Even 
approaching a salamander is dangerous, since flesh 
blisters and burns in its proximity. 

This inherent heat is an asset to salamanders’ skill 
as smiths, allowing them to soften and shape iron and 
steel with their bare hands. Although not as meticulous 
as azers, salamanders number among the greatest 
metalsmiths in all the planes. Powerful creatures 
summon them as warriors, but others enlist the 
salamanders for their crafting skills, or bind them to 
forges and ovens to generate litnitless heat. 


Medium elemental, neutral evil 


3 (1d4 + 1) bludgeoning damage plus 3 (1d6) fire damage. 
: 


er! Ls 
| iit ft 
aeerl |i! 

i, 


y 


0k 


FIRE SNAKE Tal | 


Hit Points 22 (5d8) 


Armor Class 14. (natural armor) | 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
atl) glate2)’ 1140) 72) 100) 8 (1) 
rr 
Damage Vulnerabilities cold 
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical weapons 
Damage Immunities fire 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages understands Ignan but can’t speak 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Heated Body. A creature that touches the snake or hits it witha | 
melee attack while within 5 feet of it takes 3 (1d6) fire damage. | 

| 
ACTIONS | 


Multiattack. The snake makes two attacks: one with its bite 
and one with its tail. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. | 
Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) piercing damage plus 3 (1d6) fire damage. 
i 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 


SALAMANDER © b 
——" a tra. —— v . a 265 


SALAMANDER 


Large elemental, neutral evil 


, Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 


| Hit Points 90 (12d10 + 24) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 14(42) 15 (+2) 11 (+0) 


10 (+0) 12 (+1) 


aa ee 


_ Damage Vulnerabilities cold 
| Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 


nonmagical weapons 


_ Damage immunities fire 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Ignan 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


RR er i 


Heated Body. A creature that touches the salamander or hits 
it with a melee attack while within 5 feet of it takes 7 (2d6) 
fire damage. 


SALAMANDERS 


| 


} a 


Heated Weapons. Any metal melee weapon the salamander 
wields deals an extra 3 (1d6) fire damage on a hit (included in 
the attack). 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The salamander makes two attacks: one with its 
spear and one with its tail. 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft. 
or range 20 ft./60 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing 
damage, or 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage if used with two 
hands to make a melee attack, plus 3 (1d6) fire damage. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage plus 7 (2d6) fire 
damage, and the target is grappled (escape DC 14). Until this 
grapple ends, the target is restrained, the salamander can 
automatically hit the target with its tail, and the salamander 
can’t make tail attacks against other targets. 


SATYR 


Satyrs are raucous fey that frolic in wild forests, driven 
by curiosity and hedonism in equal measure. 

Satyrs resemble stout male humans with the furry 
lower bodies and cloven hooves of goats. Horns sprout 
from their heads, ranging in shape from a pair of small 
nubs to large, curling rams’ horns. They typically sport 
facial hair. 

Hedonistic Revelers. Satyrs crave the strongest 
drink, the most fragrant spices, and the most dizzying 
dances. A satyr feels starved when it can’t indulge 
itself, and it goes to great lengths to sate its desires. It 
might kidnap a fine minstrel to hear lovely songs, sneak 
through a well-defended garden to gaze upon a beautiful 
lad or lass, or infiltrate a palace to taste the finest food in 
the land. Satyrs allow no festivity to pass them by. They 
partake in any holiday they’ve heard of. Civilizations of 
the world have enough festivals and holy days among 
them to justify nonstop celebration. 

Inebriated on drink and pleasure, satyrs give no 
thought to the consequences of the hedonism they incite 
in others. They leave such creatures mystified at their 
own behavior. Such revelers might have to scrounge 
for excuses to explain their disordered state to parents, 
employers, family, or friends. 


ON ON ph, ST 
VARIANT: SATYR PIPES 

_ Asatyr might carry panpipes that it can play to create 
magical effects. Usually, only one satyr in a group carries 
such pipes. If a satyr has pipes, it gains the following 
additional action option. 

Panpipes. The satyr plays its pipes and chooses one 
of the following magical effects: a charming melody, a 
frightening strain, or a gentle lullaby. Any creature within 60 
feet of the satyr that can hear the pipes must succeed on 
a DC 13 Wisdom saving throw or be affected as described 
below. Other satyrs and creatures that can’t be charmed are 
unaffected. 

__ An affected creature can repeat the saving throw at the end 
of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 
If a creature’s saving throw is successful or the effect ends 
for it, the creature is immune to these panpipes for the 
next 24 hours. 

Charming Melody. The creature is charmed by the satyr for 
1 minute. If the satyr or any of its companions harms the 
creature, the effect on it ends immediately. 
Frightening Strain. The creature is frightened for 1 minute. 
Gentle Lullaby, The creature falls asleep and is unconscious 
for 1 minute. The effect ends if the creature takes damage or 
| if someone takes an action to shake the creature awake. 


IGHT THE SPIRITS GOAD ME ON 

EN HEARTS WERE PURE 
Y SEEM UNSURE 

EARS ANON. 


Twixt DAY ANON 
THEY PINE FOR AGES PAST WH 
L REASON NOW THE 
INE 
THEY LAUGH AND SCREAM BETWEEN M _.. 
Now FILL MY CUP NOT ONCE, NOT TWICE, B 
cE 
WITH FLAGON’S BRIM UPON MY LIPS 1 OAN - 
GOWNS ASK 
1€5 TOSS THEIR 
LET UNSEEN PIX ‘i 
Wuie 1, THE CARNAL KING, INOULGE MY ener 
WITH FOLDED BOUGHS, THE TREANTS TAKE 
DONE 
As MERRY DAMSELS’ CORSETS COME UNDO an 
TIR THEM LIKE A SUMMER BR 
THOUT REPRIEVE. 
HE SUN 


AGAINST AL 


My SONG DOTH 5 
THEY FILL MINE EMPTY CUP WI ~ 
M 
THE SUN BECOMES THE MOON BECO 
se. 
J WHILE AWAY THE HouRS AS] PLEA 


~SONNET OF A NauGHty SATYR 


h 
'h 


~ 
Medium fey, chaotic neutral 


_ Armor Class 14 (leather armor) 
Hit Points 31 (748) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX 
12 (+1) 16 (+3) 


CON INT WIS CHA 
1140) 12(41) 1040) 14 42) 


Skills Perception +2, Performance +6, Stealth +5 
Senses passive Perception 12 
Languages Common, Elvish, Sylvan 


| Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Magic Resistance. The satyr has advantage on saving throws 
| against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (2d4 + 1) bludgeoning damage. 


| Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
_ target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


_ Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 80/320 ft., 


one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


At harvest time, when death revisits the twilit world and 
siimmier's blossoms bow their withered heads, eerie 
scarecrows loom in silent vigil over empty fields. With 
immortal patience, these stoic sentinels hold their posts 
through wind, storm, and flood, bound to their master’s 
command, eager to terrify prey with its sackcloth visage 
and rend victims with its razor-sharp claws. 

Spirit-Powered Constructs. A scarecrow is animated 
by the bound spirit of a slain evil creature, granting it 
purpose and mobility. It is this uncanny presence from 
beyond death that allows a scarecrow to inspire fear 
in those it gazes upon. Hags and witches often bind 
scarecrows with the spirits of demons, but any evil spirit 
will do. Although aspects of the spirit’s personality 
might surface, a scarecrow’s spirit doesn’t recall the 
memories it had as a creature, and its will is focused 
solely on serving its creator. If its creator dies, the spirit 
inhabiting a scarecrow either continues to follow its 
last commands, seeks revenge for its creator’s death, or 
destroys itself. 

Construct Nature. A scarecrow doesn't require air, 
food, drink, or sleep. 

SCARECROW 


Medium construct, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 36 (8d8) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIs CHA 
11 (+0) 1341) 11(40) 10(+0) 10(40) 13 (+1) 
ss : —_ = 

Damage Vulnerabilities fire 

Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical weapons 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
paralyzed, poisoned, unconscious 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages understands the languages of its creator but 
can’t speak 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


False Appearance. While the scarecrow remains motionless, it 
| is indistinguishable from an ordinary, inanimate scarecrow. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The scarecrow makes two claw attacks. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 

Hit: 6 (2d4 + 1) slashing damage. If the target is a creature, 

it must succeed on a DC 11 Wisdom saving throw or be 
frightened until the end of the scarecrow’s next turn. 


| Terrifying Glare. The scarecrow targets one creature it can 

see within 30 feet of it. If the target can see the scarecrow, the 
target must succeed on a DC 11 Wisdom saving throw or be 
magically frightened until the end of the scarecrow’s next turn. 
The frightened target is paralyzed. 


SHADOW 


SHADOW 


Shadows are undead that resemble dark exaggerations 
of humanoid shadows. 

Dark Disposition. From the darkness, the shadow 
reaches out to feed on living creatures’ vitality. They 
can consume any living creature, but they are especially 
drawn to creatures untainted by evil. A creature that 
lives a life of goodness and piety consigns its basest 
impulses and strongest temptations to the darkness 
where the shadows hunger. As a shadow drains its 
victim’s strength and physical form, the victim's shadow 
darkens and begins to move of its own volition. In death, 
the creature’s shadow breaks free, becoming a new 
undead shadow hungry for more life to consume. 

If a creature from which a shadow has been created 
somehow returns to life, its undead shadow senses 
the return. The shadow might seek its “parent” to 
vex or slay. Whether the shadow pursues its living 
counterpart, the creature that birthed the shadow no 
longer casts one until the monster is destroyed. 

Undead Nature. A shadow doesn’t require air, 
food, drink, or sleep. 


Medium undead, chaotic évil 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 16 (3d8 + 3) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
6(-2) 14(+2) 1341) 6(-2) 10440) 8(-1 
rr 
Skills Stealth +4 (+6 in dim light or darkness) 
Damage Vulnerabilities radiant 
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning, 
thunder; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical weapons 
Damage Immunities necrotic, poison 
Condition Immunities exhaustion, frightened, grappled, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


(ar —— 


Amorphous. The shadow can move through a space as narrow 
as 1 inch wide without squeezing. 


Shadow Stealth. While in dim light or darkness, the shadow 
can take the Hide action as a bonus action. 


Sunlight Weakness. While in sunlight, the shadow has 
disadvantage on attack rolls, ability checks, and saving throws. 


ACTIONS 


Strength Drain. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., h 
one creature. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) necrotic damage, and the target’s | 
Strength score is reduced by 1d4. The target dies if this reduces 
its Strength to 0. Otherwise, the reduction lasts until the target 
finishes a short or long rest. 

If a non-evil humanoid dies from this attack, a new shadow 
rises from the corpse 1d4 hours later. 


SHAMBLING MOUND 


A shambling mound, sometimes called a shambler, 
trudges ponderously through bleak swamps, dismal 
marshes, and rain forests, consuming any organic 
matter in its path. This rotting heap of animated 
vegetation looms up half again as tall as a human, 
tapering into a faceless “head” at its top. 

All-Consuming Devourers. A shambling mound 
feeds on any organic material, tirelessly consuming 
plants as it moves and devouring animals that can’t 
escape it. Only the shambling mounds’ rarity and 
plodding speed prevent them from overwhelming entire 
ecosystems. Even so, their presence leeches natural 
environments of plant and animal life, and an unsettling 
quiet pervades the swamps and woods haunted by these 
ever-hungry horrors. 

Unseen Hunters. Composed of decaying leaves, 


vines, roots, and other natural swamp and forest . 

compost, shamblers can blend into their environs. = — = — 
Because they move slowly, they rarely attempt to Ss TA LING Mou \s 

pursue and catch creatures. Rather, they remain in , Large plant, unaligned ‘ ~ 


place, sustaining themselves by absorbing nutrients 


from their surroundings as they wait for prey tocome @ Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 


to them. When a creature passes near or alights upon Hit Points 136 (16d10 + 48) 

a shambling mound, the monster comes to life, seizing Speed 20 ft., swim 20 ft. 

and absorbing the unwary prey. i 
Spawned by Lightning. A shambling mound results STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

from a phenomenon in which lightning or fey magic 18(+4) 8 (-1) 1643) 5-3) 10 (+0) 5 (-3) 


RR ee 
Skills Stealth +2 

Damage Resistances cold, fire 

Damage Immunities lightning 

Condition Immunities blinded, deafened, exhaustion 


invigorates an otherwise ordinary swamp plant. As the 
plant is reborn into its second life, it chokes the life from 
plants and animals around it, mulching their corpses 

in a heap around its roots. Those roots eventually give 


up their reliance on the soil, directing the shambling Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
mound to seek out new sources of food. passive Perception 10 

The Weed that Walks. The instinct that drives Languages — 
a shambling mound is its central root-stem, buried Chatlenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


somewhere inside its ponderous form. The rest  crreensnesesaasseeeanaeeneaaste ens gnneeeeaR 
of a shambler consists of the rotting heap that it 
simultaneously accumulates and feeds on, which 
protects the root-stem and animates to smash and 
smother the life from any creature. 

The dense mass of a shambling mound’s body shrugs ACTIONS 
off the effects of cold and fire. Lightning reinvigorates 
the root-stem, strengthening the shambling mound and 
bolstering its consumptive drive. 


Lightning Absorption. Whenever the shambling mound is 
subjected to lightning damage, it takes no damage and regains 
a number of hit points equal to the lightning damage dealt. 


Multiattack. The shambling mound makes two slam attacks. 
If both attacks hit a Medium or smaller target, the target is 
grappled (escape DC 14), and the shambling mound uses its 


Despite its monstrous form, the shambling mound is a Engulf on it. 
living plant that requires air and nourishment. Although 
it doesn’t sleep the way an animal does, it can lie Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
dormant for days on end before rising to hunt for food. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 

A Resurgent Menace. If a shambling mound faces Engulf. The shambling mound engulfs a Medium or smaller 
defeat before an overwhelming foe, the root-stem can creature grappled by it. The engulfed target is blinded, 
feign death, collapsing the remains of its mound. If not restrained, and unable to breathe, and it must succeed ona 
subsequently killed, the root-stem beds down in the DC 14 Constitution saving throw at the start of each of the 
shambler’s remains to slowly regrow its full body, then mound’s turns or take 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage. If the 
once again sets out to consume all it can. In this way, mound moves, the engulfed target moves with it. The mound 
shambling mound infestations long thought destroyed can have only one creature engulfed at a time. 
can recur time and again. a 


| SHAMBLING MOUNT 


| Large construct, unaligned 


| Armor Class 17 (natural armor) start of its turn if it has at least 1 hit. point. 
Hit Points 142 (15d10 + 60) 
Speed 30 ft. Spell Storing. A spellcaster who wears the shield guardian’s 
amulet can cause the guardian to store one spell of 4th level or 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA lower. To do so, the wearer must cast the spell on the guardian. 
18 (+4) 8(-1) 18(+4) 7(-2) 100) 3(-4 The spell has no effect but is stored within the guardian. When 
ee commanded to do so by the wearer or when a situation arises 
Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 that was predefined by the spelicaster, the guardian casts the 
_ Damage Immunities poison stored spell with any parameters set by the original caster, 
| Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, requiring no components. When the spell is cast or a new spell 
paralyzed, poisoned is stored, any previously stored spell is lost. 
Languages understands commands given in any language but 
can’t speak ACTIONS 


the guardian's amulet, the guardian grants a +2 bonus to the 


SHIELD GUARDIAN 


Wizards and other spellcasters create shield guardians 
for protection. A shield guardian treads beside its 
master, absorbing damage to keep its master alive as 
long as possible. 

Master’s Amulet. Every shield guardian has an 
amulet magically linked to it. A shield guardian can 
have only one corresponding amulet, and if that amulet 
is destroyed, the shield guardian is incapacitated until 
a replacement amulet is created. A shield guardian’s 
amulet is subject to direct attack if it isn’t being worn 
or carried. It has AC 10, 10 hit points, and immunity to 
poison and psychic damage. Crafting an amulet requires 
1 week and costs 1,000 gp in components. 

A shield guardian’s solitary focus is to protect the 
amulet’s wearer. The amulet’s wearer can command the 
guardian to attack its enemies or to guard the wielder 
against attack. If an attack threatens to injure the 
wearer, the construct can magically absorb the blow into 
its own body, even at a distance. 

A spellcaster can store a single spell within a shield 
guardian, which can then cast the spell on command 
or under specific conditions. Many a wizard has 
been rendered helpless by enemies, only to surprise 
those foes when its shield guardian unleashes potent 
magical power. 

Magnificent Treasure. Because a shield guardian’s 
ownership can be transferred by giving its matching 
amulet to another creature, some wizards collect 
exorbitant sums from princes, nobles, and.crime lords 
to create shield guardians for them. At the same time, 

a shield guardian makes a mighty prize for anyone who 
slays its master and claims its amulet. 

, Construct Nature. A shield guardian doesn’t require 
air, food, drink, or sleep. 

of the amulet’s wearer, half of any damage the wearer takes 
(rounded up) is transferred to the guardian. 


‘SHIELD GUARDIAN 


Regeneration. The shield guardian regains 10 hit pojnts at the 


Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) Multiattack. The guardian makes two fist attacks. h 
qual er  eT—™ fl 


—_ Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 
Bound. The shield guardian is magically bound to an amulet. 11 (2d6-+4) bludgeoning damage. 


As long as the guardian and its amulet are on the same plane | 
of existence, the amulet’s wearer can telepathically call the REACTIONS 4 
guardian to travel to it, and the guardian knows the distance 


and direction to the amulet. {f the guardian is within 60 feet Shield. When a creature makes an attack against the wearer of 


wearer’s AC if the guardian is within 5 feet of the wearer. 


4 or ‘ 
SHEED GUABDLAN 


i 
| SKELETON 


il Medium undead, lawful evil 

rt EPPS entree 
_ Armor Class 13 (armor scraps) 

Hit Points 13 (2d8 + 4) 

| Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (40) 14(+2) 15(42) 6(-2) 8(-1) 5 (-3) 
Gl eee 
Damage Vulnerabilities bludgeoning 
Damage Immunities poison 
_ Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 
Languages understands all languages it knew in life but 
_ can’t speak 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


| ACTIONS 


| Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


_ Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 80/320 ft., 
_ one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


a 
|) SRELETONS 


| 
| 
| 


SKELETONS 


Skeletons arise when animated by dark magic. They 
heed the summons of spellcasters who call them from 
their stony tombs and ancient battlefields, or rise of their 
own accord in places saturated with death and loss, 
awakened by stirrings of necromantic energy or the 
presence of corrupting evil. 

Animated Dead. Whatever sinister force awakens a 
skeleton infuses its bones with a dark vitality, adhering 
joint to joint and reassembling dismantled limbs. This 
energy motivates a skeleton to move and thinkin a 
rudimentary fashion, though only as a pale imitation of 
the way it behaved in life. An animated skeleton retains 
no connection to its past, although resurrecting a 
skeleton restores it body and soul, banishing the hateful 
undead spirit that empowers it. 

While most skeletons are the animated remains of 
dead humans and other humanoids, skeletal undead can 
be created from the bones of other creatures besides 
humanoids, giving rise to a host of terrifying and 
unique forms. 

Obedient Servants. Skeletons raised by spell 
are bound to the will of their creator. They follow 
orders to the letter, never questioning the tasks their 
masters give them, regardless of the consequences. 
Because of their literal interpretation of commands 
and unwavering obedience, skeletons adapt poorly to 
changing circumstances. They can’t read, speak, emote, 
or communicate in any way except to nod, shake their 
heads, or point. Still, skeletons are able to accomplish a 
variety of relatively complex tasks. 

Askeleton can fight with weapons and wear armor, 
can load and fire a catapult or trebuchet, scale a siege 
ladder, form a shield wall, or dump boiling oil. However, 
it must receive careful instructions explaining how such 
tasks are accomplished. 

Although they lack the intellect they possessed in 
life, skeletons aren’t mindless. Rather than break its 
limbs attempting to batter its way through an iron 
door, a skeleton tries the handle first. If that doesn’t 
work, it searches for another way through or around 
the obstacle. 

Habitual Behaviors. Independent skeletons 
temporarily or permanently free of a master’s control 
sometimes pantomime actions from their past lives, 
their bones echoing the rote behaviors of their former 
living selves. The skeleton of a miner might lift a pick 
and start chipping away at stone walls. The skeleton of 
a guard might strike up a post at a random doorway. 
The skeleton of a dragon might lie down on a pile of 
treasure, while the skeleton of a horse crops grass it 
can’t eat. Left alone in a ballroom, the skeletons of 
nobles might continue an eternally unfinished dance. 

When skeletons encounter living creatures, the 
necromantic energy that drives them compels them 
to kill unless they are commanded by their masters to 
refrain from doing so. They attack without mercy and 
fight until destroyed, for skeletons possess little sense of 
self and even less sense of self-preservation. 

Undead Nature. A skeleton doesn’t require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


M II 7 t/ 
-arge undead, 


eX 


‘i ful evil 


_ Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 67 (9d10 + 18) ees F 

| Speed 40 ft. he - 

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA — — — 

| 18 (4) 1140) 15 (42) 6-2) 8-1) 5-3) ORSE SKELETON 


arge undead, lawful evil — y | 


_ Damage Vulnerabilities bludgeoning 

- Damage Immunities poison ; ; 
Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned Pe aeeyatb e sqaPs) | 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 Speed 60 ft 

| Languages understands Abyssal but can't speak ee el 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
OL ——— 18 (+4) 12 (+1) 15 (42) 2(-4) 8 (-1)~— 5 (-3) 
Charge. If the skeleton moves at least 10 feet straight toward a (ns ennsescesesmeunneenneensnreemnn 
target and then hits it with a gore attack on the same turn, the Damage Vulnerabilities bludgeoning 
| target takes an extra 9 (2d8) piercing damage. If the target is a Damage Immunities poison 

creature, it must succeed on a DC 14 Strength saving throw or Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned | 
be pushed up to 10 feet away and knocked prone. Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 

Languages — | 
ACTIONS " | Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) P| 


ieee 


Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 


_ target. Hit: 17 (2d12 + 4) slashing damage. ACTIONS 
—_— ee 
Gore. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. | 
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. "i 


MELO ty as 
| 


SLAADI 


In the Ever-Changing Chaos of Limbo, bits of forest 
and meadow, ruined castles, and isolated islands drift 
uy through a tumult of fire, water, earth, and wind. The 
itis foremost inhabitants of this inhospitable plane are the 
a toad-like slaadi. Slaadi are undisciplined and have no 
ha formal hierarchy, although weaker slaadi obey stronger 
ones under threat of annihilation. 

The Spawning Stone. Long ago, Primus, overlord of 
| the modrons, created a gigantic, geometrically complex 
stone imbued with the power of law. He then cast it 
adrift in Limbo, believing that the stone would bring 
order to the chaos of that plane and halt the spread 

of chaos to other planes. As the stone’s power grew, 

it became possible for creatures with ordered minds, 
such as modrons and githzerai, to create enclaves in 


Limbo. However, Primus’s creation had an unforeseen 
side effect: the chaotic energy absorbed by the stone 
spawned the horrors that came to be known as slaadi. 
Sages refer to Primus’s massive creation as the 
Spawning Stone for this reason. 
The slaadi wiped out every last modron enclave 
in Limbo. As creatures of utter chaos, slaadi loathe 
modrons and attack them on sight. Nonetheless, Primus 
Hen stands by his creation and either doesn’t perceive the 
slaadi as threats or chooses to ignore them. 
Birth and Transformation. Slaadi have horrific 

i cycles of reproduction. Slaadi reproduce either by 
a implanting humanoid hosts with eggs or by infecting 
them with a transformative disease called chaos phage. 
Each color of slaad reproduces or transforms in a 
different way, with red slaadi spawning blue and green 
ae a ; slaadi, and blue slaadi spawning red and green. Each 
ah ‘green slaad undergoes a lifelong cycle of transformation 

into the more powerful gray and death slaadi. With each 
transformation, the slaad retains its memories. 

Shapechangers. Some slaadi can transform into the 

humanoid creatures from which they were originally 
‘spawned. These slaadi return to the Material Plane to 
sow discord in the guise of their former selves. 


RED SLAAD 


When a red slaad claws a humanoid creature, it can 
inject an egg from a gland under one of its claws. The 
egg works its way into its host and gestates, eventually 
forming a slaad tadpole. Such a tadpole then eats its way 
out of the host’s body, feeds on the host’s remains, and 
then seeks any other fresh meat it can find. The tadpole 
transforms into a fully grown blue slaad—or green 
slaad if the host had the ability to cast 3rd level spells or 
higher—within 2d12 hours. 


| San BLUE SLAAD 


The bone hooks that protrude from the back of a blue 
slaad’s hands inflict a terrible transformative disease 

on humanoids wounded by them. This infection, called 
chaos phage, transforms its victim into a fully grown red 
slaad—or green slaad if the host was a spellcaster able 
to cast 3rd level spells or higher. 


Sole ee aly ao ee 


a a a 


GREEN SLAAD FP wl 

Green slaadi are surprisingly intelligent and possess 

innate spellcasting ability. A green slaad can change 

its shape to appear as a humanoid. If it was born of a 

humanoid host, the slaad usually adopts its host’s form. 
At some unpredictable point in its existence, a 

green slaad unlocks the means to magically, instantly, 

and permanently transform itself into a gray slaad. 

Unlocking this knowledge can take years, even decades. 


GRAY SLAAD 


Outside of Limbo, gray slaadi act as living extensions of 
the will of their masters, the death slaadi. A gray slaad 
journeys to the Material Plane on errands of doom, 
often taking humanoid form. A gray slaad learns how 
to master the use of a greatsword and imbue it with its 
own innate magic. 

A gray slaad that eats the entire corpse of a dead 
death slaad instantly transforms into a death slaad. 


DEATH SLAAD 


Death slaadi are suffused with energy from the Negative 
Energy Plane and exemplify evil’s corruption of chaos, 
and they take sadistic pleasure in bringing harm 

to others. They propagate their race by dragooning 
mobs of red and blue slaadi and invading other 

planes. Humanoids who survive the incursion become 
incubators for new slaadi. 


, ee ee ee a 
VARIANT: SLAAD CONTROL GEMS 


As a slaad emerges from the Spawning Stone, the stone 
magically implants a fragment of itself in the slaad’s brain. 
This fragment takes the form of a magic gem roughly the size 
and shape of a human child’s fist. The gem is the same color 
as the slaad. Another creature can use magic to draw forth 

a slaad’s gem and use it to subjugate the slaad. The slaad 
must obey whoever possesses its gem. If a slaad’s gem is 
destroyed, the slaad can no longer be controlled in this way. 

A slaad born from something other than the Spawning 
Stone has no gem in its brain, but it gains one if it ever 
comes into contact with the Spawning Stone. Slaadi on 
Limbo are attracted to the Spawning Stone, so most end up 
with a gem. A slaad with a control gem in its brain has the 
following additional trait. 

Control Gem. |mplanted in the slaad’s brain is a magic 
control gem. The slaad must obey whoever possesses the 
gem and is immune to being charmed while so controlled. 

Certain spells can be used to acquire the gem. If the slaad 
fails its saving throw against imprisonment, the spell can 
transfer the gem to the spellcaster’s open hand, instead 
of imprisoning the slaad. A wish spell, if cast in the slaad’s 
presence, can be worded to acquire the gem. 

A greater restoration spell cast on the slaad destroys the 
gem without harming the slaad. 

Someone who is proficient in Wisdom (Medicine) can 
remove the gem from an incapacitated slaad. Each try 
requires 1 minute of uninterrupted work and a successful DC 
20 Wisdom (Medicine) check. Each failed attempt deals 22 
(4d10) psychic damage to the slaad. 


Reo Siaao 


Bruce Staao 


GREEN SLAAD 


hi 


| 


Armor Class 14 Aataral armor) 


Hit Points 93\(11d10 + 33) 
| Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 


16.(+3) 12 (+1) 16 (43) 6 (=2) 6 (=2) 7 (-2) 


Skills Perception +1 

Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning, thunder 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages Slaad, telepathy 60 ft. 


| Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Magic Resistance. The slaad has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


| Regeneration. The slaad regains 10 hit points at the start of its 
_ turn if it has at least 1 hit point. 


Multiattack. The slaad makes three attacks: one with its bite 
and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. | 
Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. | 
Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage. If the target is a humanoid, 
it must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution saving throw or be 


_ infected with a disease—a minuscule slaad egg. 


A humanoid host can carry only one slaad egg to term at a 
time, Over three months, the egg moves to the chest cavity, 
gestates, and forms a slaad tadpole. In the 24-hour period | 
before giving birth, the host starts to feel unwell, its speed is | 
halved, and it has disadvantage on attack rolls, ability checks, 
and saving throws. At birth, the tadpole chews its way through | 
vital organs and out of the host’s chest in 1 round, killing the | 
host in the process. 

If the disease is cured before the tadpole’s emergence, the 
unborn slaad is disintegrated 


para. it Class 12. 
It Points 10 (4d4) 
\ Speed 30 ft. 
a 
" STR DEX CON iNT Wis CHA 

7 (-2) 15 (+2) 10 (+0) = 3 (=4) 5 (-3) = 3 (-4) 
‘i el 
Skills Stealth +4 
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning, thunder 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 7 
Languages understands Slaad but can't speak 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) | 
I mn 
| Magic Resistance. The slaad has advantage on saving throws | 
against spells and other magical effects. | 

| 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


LU. 


+ rire i 


hn 
Armor Class 15 (natural armor) | 
Hit Polnts 123 (13d10 + 52) 
Speed 30 ft, | 
| ggasi 
| 0 STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
5-20 (45) 15 (42) 18 (44) 7 (-2) 7 (-2) 9 (1) 
mesmo Ea 
| Skills Perception +1 
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning, thunder 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages Slaad, telepathy 60 ft. 
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 
| 
| 


«RBM een nee 


Magic Resistance. The slaad has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Regeneration. The slaad regains 10 hit points at the start of its 
_ turn if it has at least 1 hit point. 


ACTIONS 


_ Multiattack. The slaad makes three attacks: one with its bite 
and two with its claws. 


| 

| Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
| Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) piercing damage. E 
| 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage. If the target is a humanoid, 
it must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or be 
infected with a disease called chaos phage. While infected, 

the target can’t regain hit points, and its hit point maximum is 
reduced by 10 (3d6) every 24 hours. If the disease reduces the 
target's hit point maximum to 0, the target instantly transforms 
into a red slaad or, if it has the ability to cast spells of 3rd 

level or higher, a green slaad. Only a wish spell can reverse the 
transformation. 


eee 


EMBEDDED INA SLAAD'S 
BRAIN 1S A MAGIC GEM. 

AcQuiRe IT, AND THE SL 
1s YOURS TO COMMAND, 


AAD 


Large aberrati ion (shapechanger), chaotic heutral 


— r— Sa 
( GR y. AY Ss >) TA AAD ' P th i. ‘ vg 


ite 
ed lum, aberrati ion (shapechanger); chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
4 Hit Points 127 (15d10 + 45) 


| 


Speed 30 ft. iy ARHOE Class 18 Atratoral armor) 
Hit Points 127 (17d8 + 51) 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA "Speed 30 ft. 
18 (+4) 15(42) 16 (43) 11(40) 8 (-1) 1241) Sr 
| STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
Skills Arcana +3, Perception +2 17 (+3) «17 (43) 16 (#3) 13 (+1) = 8 (-1) ‘714 (42) 


Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning, thunder 
Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 Skills Arcana +5, Perception +6 


| Languages Slaad, telepathy 60 ft. Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning, thunder 
Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) __ Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 16 
) | | Languages Slaad, telepathy 60 ft. 


Shapechanger. The slaad can use its action to polymorph into | Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 


| a Small or Medium humanoid, or back into its true form. Its 
statistics, other than its size, are the same in each form. Any _ Shapechanger. The slaad can use its action to polymorph into 
equipment it is wearing or carrying isn’t transformed. It reverts p ta Small or Medium humanoid, or back into its true form. Its 
} 


to its true form if it dies. statistics, other than its size, are the same in each form. Any 


| Innate Spellcasting. The slaad’s innate spellcasting ability is ORT Te ee ee orm? (Gages 
_ to its true form if it dies. 


| Charisma (spell save DC 12). The slaad can innately cast the | 
| following spells, requiring no material components: Innate Spelicasting. The slaad’s innate spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 14). The slaad can innately cast the 


| At will: detect magic, detect thoughts, mage hand , a 
following spells, requiring no material components: 


2/day each: fear, invisibility (self only) 
| Vday: fireball At will: detect magic, detect thoughts, invisibility (self only), 

mage hand, major image 
2/day each: fear, fly, fireball, tongues 
1/day: plane shift (self only) 


Magic Resistance. The slaad has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Magic Resistance. The slaad has advantage on saving throws | 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Regeneration. The slaad regains 10 hit points at the start of its 
| turn if it has at least 1 hit point. 


Multiattack. The slaad makes three attacks: one with its bite 
‘ and two with its claws or staff. Alternatively, it uses its Hurl 
Flame twice. 


al. = —- i? >> f= Magic Weapons. The slaad's weapon attacks are magical. 


Regeneration. The slaad regains 10 hit points at the start of its 
turn if it has at least 1 hit point. 

Bite (Slaad Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ACTIONS 
| ft., one target. Hit: 1] (2d6 + 4) piercing damage. 


Multiattack. The slaad makes three attacks: one with its bite 
and two with its claws or greatsword. 


Claw (Slaad Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 
5 ft., one target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) slashing damage. Bite (Slaad Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 


{ 
| ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing dam 
Staff. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. yOne lareeiaiaty, 6 ( ) piercing damage. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. Claws (Slaad Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach | 
| 


Hurl Flame. Ranged Spell Attack: +4 to hit, range 60 ft., one 5 ft,, one target. Hit: 8 (1d10 + 3) slashing damage. 


target. Hit: 10 (3d6) fire damage. The fire ignites flammable 
| objects that aren't being worn or carried. 


Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
_ target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage. 


en a et 


DEATH SLAAD 


Medium aberration (shapechanger), chaotic evil 


= Ss 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 170 (20d8 + 80) 


St 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
20 (+5) 15 (+2) 19(+4) 15 (+2) 10(+0) 16 (+3) 
| = ST ————— ~~ 


Skills Arcana +6, Perception +8 


| Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning, thunder 


——_— 


Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 18 
Languages Slaad, telepathy 60 ft. 
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) 


Ee — SS — 


Shapechanger. The slaad can use its action to polymorph into 
a Small or Medium humanoid, or back into its true form. Its 
statistics, other than its size, are the same in each form. Any 
equipment it is wearing or carrying isn’t transformed. It reverts 
to its true form if it dies. 


Innate Spellcasting. The slaad’s innate spellcasting ability 

is Charisma (spell save DC 15, +7 to hit with spell attacks). 
The slaad can innately cast the following spells, requiring no 
material components: 


SAAT | 


At will: detect magic, detect thoughts, Invisibility (self only); 

mage hand, major image y 
2/day each: fear, fireball, fly, tongues 
1/day each: cloudkill, plane shift 


Magic Resistance. The slaad has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


Magic Weapons. The slaad’s weapon attacks are magical. 


Regeneration. The slaad regains 10 hit points at the start of its 
turn if it has at least 1 hit point. 


ACTIONS _ 


Multiattack. The slaad makes three attacks: one with its bite 
and two with its claws or greatsword. 


Bite (Slaad Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 
5 ft., one target. Hit: 9 (1d8 + 5) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) 
necrotic damage. 


Claws (Slaad Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, 
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 10 (1d10 + 5) slashing damage plus 
7 (2d6) necrotic damage. 


Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one target. Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage plus 7 (2d6) 
necrotic damage. 


——— ee 


SPECTER 


A specter is the angry, unfettered spirit of a humanoid 
that has been prevented from passing to the afterlife. 
Specters no longer possess connections to who or what 
they were, yet are condemned to walk the world forever. 
Some are spawned when dark magic or the touch of a 
wraith rips a soul from a living body. 

Beyond Redemption. When a ghost’s unfinished 
business is completed, it can rest at last. No such rest 
or redemption awaits a specter. It is doomed to the 
Material Plane, its only end the oblivion that comes 
with the destruction of its soul. Until then, it bears out 
its lonely life in forlorn places, carrying on forgotten 
through the ages of the world. 

Undying Hatred. Living creatures remind the specter 
that life is beyond its grasp. The mere sight of the living 
overwhelms a specter with sorrow and wrath, which 
can be abated only by destroying said life. A specter kills 
quickly and mercilessly, for only by depriving others 
of life can it gain the slightest satisfaction. However, 
no matter how many lives it extinguishes, a specter 
always succumbs to its hatred and sorrow. 

Dwellers in Darkness. Sunlight represents a 
source of life that no specter can ever hope to douse, 
and it pains them. When night falls, they leave their 
final resting places in search of living creatures to slay, 
knowing that few weapons can harm them in return. 

At the first light of dawn, they retreat back into the 
darkness, where they remain until night falls again. 

Undead Nature. A specter doesn't require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. . 


RR “ _ EE ———EEEEE—ESESS 

VARIANT: POLTERGEIST 
A poltergeist is a different kind of specter—the confused, 
invisible spirit of an individual with no sense of how he or 
she died. A poltergeist expresses its rage by hurling creatures 
and objects using the power of its shattered psyche. 

A poltergeist has a challenge rating of 2 (450 XP) and gains 
the following additional trait: 


Invisibility. The poltergeist is invisible. 


The poltergeist has the following action options in place of 
the specter’s Life Drain: 


Forceful Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., 
one creature. Hit: 10 (3d6) force damage. 


Telekinetic Thrust. The poltergeist targets a creature or 
unattended object within 30 feet of it. A creature must be 
Medium or smaller to be affected by this magic, and an 
object can weigh up to 150 pounds. 

If the target is a creature, the poltergeist makes a 
Charisma check contested by the target's Strength check. 
If the poltergeist wins the contest, the poltergeist hurls 
the target up to 30 feet in any direction, including upward. 
If the target then comes into contact with a hard surface 
or heavy object, the target takes 1d6 damage per 10 
feet moved. 

If the target is an object that isn’t being worn or carried, 
the poltergeist hurls it up to 30 feet in any direction. 
The poltergeist can use the object as a ranged weapon, 
attacking one creature along the object's path (+4 to hit) 
and dealing 5 (2d4) bludgeoning damage on a hit. 


a 


(Qa | 


as if «nel 
SPECTER 


Medium undead, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 22 (5d8) 
Speed 0 ft., fly 50 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1(-5) 14 (42) 11. (40)-—- 1040): 10 (40) ~—11 (+0) 
sesso. sssenenemenennenennennnenmnanaas 
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning, 

thunder; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical weapons 
Damage Immunities necrotic, poison 
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, grappled, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained, 
unconscious 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages understands all languages it knew in life but 
can’t speak 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


(Uuntenemngpepeprpepepppmmmnteccceree ce 


Incorporeal Movement. The specter can move through other 
creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It takes 5 
(1d10) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object. 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the specter has 
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Life Drain. Melee Spell Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 10 (3d6) necrotic damage. The target must 
succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw or its hit point 
maximum is reduced by an amount equal to the damage taken. 
This reduction lasts until the creature finishes a long rest. The 
target dies if this effect reduces its hit point maximum to 0. 


4 SPHINXES 


SPHINXES 


In sacred isolation, a sphinx guards the secrets and 
treasures of the gods. As it calmly regards each new 
party that comes before it, the bones of supplicants and 
quest seekers that failed to pass its tests lie scattered 
around its lair. Its great wings sweep along its flanks, its 
tawny leonine body rippling with muscle and possessed 
of forepaws powerful enough to tear a humanoid in half. 

Divine Guardians. Sphinxes test the worth of those 
who seek the treasures of the gods, whether forgotten 
secrets or mighty spells, artifacts or magical gateways. 
Creatures that choose to face a sphinx’s test are bound 
to that test unto death, and only those worthy will 
survive it. The rest the sphinx destroys. 

Some sphinxes are high priests of the gods that 
create them, but most are simply embodied spirits, 
brought into the mortal realm by devout prayer or direct 
intervention. A sphinx maintains its vigil tirelessly, not 
needing to sleep or eat. It rarely engages with others of 
its kind, knowing no other life except its sacred mission. 

Magical Tests. The secrets and treasures a sphinx 
guards remain under divine protection, so that when 
a creature fails a sphinx’s test, the path to the object 
or knowledge it guards vanishes. Even if a sphinx is 
attacked and defeated, a quester will still fail to gain the 
secret it sought—and will make an enemy of the god that 
placed the sphinx as a guardian. 

Benign deities sometimes grant a sphinx the power 
to remove supplicants that fail their tests, transporting 
them away and ensuring that they never encounter the 
sphinx again. However, those who fail a sphinx’s test 
typically meet a gruesome end beneath its claws. 

Extraplanar Beings. Mortals that encounter sphinxes 
do so most often in ancient tombs and ruins, but some 
sphinxes can access extraplanar realms. A conversation 
with a sphinx that begins between tumbled stone 
walls might suddenly shift to an alien locale, such as a 
life-sized game board or a daunting cliff that must be 
climbed in a howling storm. Sometimes a sphinx must 
be summoned from such an extradimensional space, 
with supplicants calling it from its empty lair. Only those 
the sphinx deems worthy gain admittance to its realm. 

Fallen Sphinxes. Whether through the weariness of 
the ages, regret at the slaughter of innocents, or dreams 
of worship by supplicants that attempt to bargain their 
way to knowledge, some sphinxes break free of their 
divine command. However, even if a sphinx’s alignment 
and loyalties drift in this way, it never leaves the place 
it guards or grants its secrets to any except creatures it 


; deems worthy. 


ROUND sue Is, 
ALTAR OF THE 
JEWEL ON BLA 
UNCHANGED B 


YET FLAT AS A BOARD 
Lupine Loros 
CK VELVET, PEARL iN THE SEA 
UT E'ERCHANGING, ETERNALLY 
—RiodLe o- THE EoNeEPitinx 
OF Wuite PLume Mountain 


‘ay 7 = 


eae —-r+ 


ANDROSPHINX 


An androsphinx bears the head of a humanoid male 
on its lion’s body. Outwardly gruff and downcast, it 
often begins conversations with insults or negative 
observations. Beneath this gruff exterior, however, an 
androsphinx has a noble heart. It has no wish to lie or 
deceive, but it doesn’t give away information readily, 
choosing its words as wisely as it guards its secrets. 
An androsphinx tests the courage and valor of 
supplicants, not only by forcing them to complete quests 
but also with its terrible roar, which echoes for miles 
as it terrifies and deafens nearby creatures. Those who 
pass its tests may be rewarded with a heroes’ feast. 


GYNOSPHINX 


A gynosphinx bears the head of a humanoid female. 
Many have the regal countenances of worldly queens, 
but some are marked with wild, leonine features. A 
gynosphinx’s eyes see beyond the present time and 
place, and penetrate veils of invisibility and magic. 
Supplicants who look deep into those eyes might find 
themselves magically displaced, banished to some far- 
flung plane where a difficult trial awaits them. 

Gynosphinxes are virtual libraries of knowledge 
and lore. They ask riddles and present puzzles to test 
the wit of supplicants that come to learn their secrets. 
Some are willing to bargain with such supplicants for 
treasure or service. 


A SPHINX’s LAIR 


A sphinx presides over an ancient temple, sepulcher, 
or vault, within which are hidden divine secrets and 
treasures beyond the reach of mortals. 


LAIR ACTIONS 

On initiative count 20 (losing initiative ties), the sphinx 
can take a lair action to cause one of the following 
magical effects; the sphinx can’t use an effect again until 
it finishes a short or long rest: 


- The flow of time is altered such that every creature in 
the lair must reroll initiative. The sphinx can choose 
not to reroll. 

« The effects of time are altered such that every crea- 
ture in the lair must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution 
saving throw or become 1d20 years older or younger 
(the sphinx’s choice), but never any younger than 1 
year old. A greater restoration spell can restore a crea- 
ture’s age to normal. 

« The flow of time within the lair is altered such that 
everything within moves up to 10 years forward or 
backward (sphinx’s choice). Only the sphinx is imme- 
diately aware of the time change. A wish spell can 
return the caster and up to seven other creatures des- 
ignated by the caster to their normal time. 

« The sphinx shifts itself and up to seven other crea- 
tures it can see within in its lair to another plane of 
existence. Once outside its lair, the sphinx can’t use 
lair actions, but it can return to its lair as a bonus 
action on its turn, taking up to seven creatures with it. 


_ANDROSPHINX 


| Large monstrosity, lawful neutral 


‘Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
| Hit Points 199 (1970 + 95) 
| Speed 40 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
| 22 (+6) 10 (+0) 20 (+5) 16 (43) 18 (+4) 23 (+6) 
ee ——— 
| Saving Throws Dex +6, Con +11, Int +9, Wis +10 
| Skills Arcana +9, Perception +10, Religion +15 

Damage Immunities psychic; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
| slashing from nonmagical weapons 
| Condition Immunities charmed, frightened 
| Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 20 
_ Languages Common, Sphinx 
_ Challenge 17 (18,000 XP) 


EL 
| 


| Inscrutable. The sphinx is immune to any effect that would 

|" sense its emotions or read its thoughts, as well as any 
divination spell that it refuses. Wisdom (Insight) checks 

| made to ascertain the sphinx’s intentions or sincerity have 

| disadvantage. 


| Magic Weapons. The sphinx’s weapon attacks are magical. 


| Spellcasting. The sphinx is a 12th-level spellcaster. Its 

| Spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 18, +10 to hit with 
_ spell attacks). It requires no material components to cast its 
spells. The sphinx has the following cleric spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): sacred flame, spare the dying, thaumaturgy 
/ Ist level (4 slots): command, detect evil and good, detect magic 
_ 2nd level (3 slots): lesser restoration, zone of truth 
| 3rd level (3 slots): dispel magic, tongues 
4th level (3 slots): banishment, freedom of movement 
| 5th level (2 slots): flame strike, greater restoration 


] 
| 


ee, 


Tl 


q je — 


=f 


ACTIONS. Ja) Tee ai 


Multiattack. The sphinx makes two claw attacks, — 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +12 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (2d10 + 6) slashing damage. 


Roar (3/Day). The sphinx emits a magical roar. Each time it | 
roars before finishing a long rest, the roar is louder and the 

effect is different, as detailed below. Each creature within 
500 feet of the sphinx and able to hear the roar must make a 


saving throw. 


_First Roar. Each creature that fails a DC 18 Wisdom saving 
throw is frightened for 1 minute. A frightened creature can | 
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending 
the effect on itself on a success. 

Second Roar. Each creature that fails aDC 18 Wisdom saving | 
throw is deafened and frightened for 1 minute. A frightened | 
creature is paralyzed and can repeat the saving throw at | 
the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on 
a success. 

Third Roar..Each creature makes a DC 18 Constitution saving | 
throw. On a failed save, a creature takes 44 (8d10) thunder 
damage and is knocked prone. On a successful save, the ' 
creature takes half as much damage and isn’t knocked prone. | 


i 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS | 
} 
ft 


The sphinx can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
sphinx regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Claw Attack. The sphinx makes one claw attack. 

Teleport (Costs 2 Actions). The sphinx magically teleports, 
along with any equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 120 
feet to an unoccupied space it can see. } 

Cast a Spell (Costs 3 Actions). The sphinx casts a spell from its _ 
list of prepared spells, using a spell slot as normal. 


Le 


] 


] 


GYNOSPHINX 


Large monstrosity, lawful neutral 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 136 (16d10 + 48) 


Speed 40 ft., fly 60 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 15 (+2) 16 (+3) 18 (+4) 18 (+4) 18 (+4) 


sD Magy ng tt ae TE TT Rt: 


) 
i 
| 

if 
if 
| 
i 
| 
| 


Skills Arcana +14, History +14, Perception +9, Religion +9 

Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical weapons 

Damage Immunities psychic 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened 

Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 19 

Languages Common, Sphinx 

Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) 

aa ee nt 


| Inscrutable. The sphinx is immune to any effect that would 


| 
| 
| 


} 


. SPHTAXES 


spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 17, +9 to hit 


sense its emotions or read its thoughts, as well as any 
divination spell that it refuses. Wisdom (Insight) checks 


| made to ascertain the sphinx’s intentions or sincerity have 


disadvantage. 
Magic Weapons. The sphinx’s weapon attacks are magical. 


Spellcasting. The sphinx is a 9th-level spellcaster. Its 


a 


with spell attacks). It requires no material components to cast 
its spells. The sphinx has the following wizard spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): mage hand, minor illusion, prestidigitation 
Ist level (4 slots): detect magic, identify, shield 

2nd level (3 slots): darkness, locate object, suggestion 

3rd level (3 slots): dispel magic, remove curse, tongues 

Ath level (3 slots): banishment, greater invisibility 

5th level (1 slot): legend lore 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The sphinx makes two claw attacks. 
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) slashing damage. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS  _— 


The sphinx can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
sphinx regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Claw Attack. The sphinx makes one claw attack. 

Teleport (Costs 2 Actions). The sphinx magically teleports, 
along with any equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 12 
feet to an unoccupied space it can see. 

Cast a Spell (Costs 3 Actions). The sphinx casts a spell from its 
list of prepared spells, using a spell slot as normal. 


Fe ee meee Lorre ——_—e 


SPRITE \ 
In secret groves and shaded glens, tiny sprites with 
dragonfly wings flutter. For all their fey splendor, 

however, sprites lack warmth and compassion. They are 
aggressive and hardy warriors, taking severe measures 
to ward strangers away from their homes. Interlopers 
that come too close have their moral character judged, 
then are put to sleep or frightened off. 

Forest Protectors. Sprites build little villages in the 
boughs of trees and willing treants, in verdant glades 
brightened by moss, wild flowers, and toadstools. Wild 4 
nature thrives, and the sprites allow no trespassers. P= 4 
When intruders are spotted, the sprites lead them astray _— a 
with ominous rustling from the bushes and distant 
snapping twigs. Creatures foolish enough to persist in 
intruding on a sprite’s territory are stung with poisoned 
arrows and lulled into a senseless sleep. While they 
slumber, the sprites make good their escape, retreating 
to an even more secluded area of the forest. 

Heart Seers. Sprites can sense whether a creature 
is good or evil by the sound and feeling of its beating 
heart. Weighing the balance of a creature’s past actions, 
a sprite can tell whether its heart beats rapidly in love 
or flags in sorrow, or whether it is darkened by hate or 
greed. The sprite’s power to perceive the heart always 
shows the truth, because the heart can’t lie. >a 

Poison Brewers. In their forest domains, sprites brew vw RITE 
toxins, unguents, antidotes, and poisons, including the Tiny fey, ae al good 
sleep poison with which they coat their arrows. They 
venture far into the woods to harvest rare flowers, 
mosses, and fungi, sometimes crossing dangerous 
territory to do so. If desperate, sprites even steal their 


_ Armor Class 15: (leather armor) ! " 
_ Hit Points 2 (144) at 
_ Speed 10 ft., fly 40 ft. | ' 


ingredients from the gardens of hags. STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 

Good-Hearted. Because they are judges of the heart 3(-4) 18 (44) 10 (40) 14(+2) 13 (41) 11 (40) i 
and favor good creatures, sprites oppose the will of evil i. = 
fey and pledge to thwart evil archfey at every turn. If Skills Perception +3, Stealth +8 
they encounter adventurers on a quest to rid their forest Senses passive Perception 13 | 
of an evil fey creature or goblinoid menace, they will Languages Common, Elvish, Sylvan 


the adventurers least expect it. 
Unlike pixies, sprites rarely indulge in frivolous 


merriment and fun. They are firm warriors, protectors, ACTIONS 
and judges, and their stern bent causes other fey to Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
consider them overly dour and serious. However, fey target. Hit: 1 slashing damage. 


| 

pledge their support and even come to their aid when Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) | ) 
| 
| 

that respect the sprites’ territory find them staunch | 


— Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, range 40/160 
allies in times of trouble. ft., one target. Hit: 1 piercing damage, and the target must 
succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw or become 
poisoned for ? minute. If its saving throw result is 5 or lower, 
the poisoned target falls unconscious for the same duration, 
“THE TREE HAD A WEE VILLAGE NESTLED IN ITS BOUGH _ or until it takes damage or another creature takes an action to 


f 
s, 1 SWEAR. | 
i My : 
NEXT THING 1 KNEW, I WAS ving FACE-DOWN IN THE DIRT, ateke it awake. | 
| 
| 
| 
| 


: MEAD WAS FULL OF STARS, ANAYHEN I STOOD UP AN’ LOOKEO 
i — ROUND, BOTH THE TREE AN’ THE WEE VILLAGE WERE GONE.” Heart Sight. The sprite touches a creature and magically knows | 
iN —TALE OF AHALF-ORC RANGER — the creature’s current emotional state. If the target fails a DC 

iW | | 10 Charisma saving throw, the sprite also knows the creature’s 


Bi, q —: ™) alignment. Celestials, fiends, and undead automatically fail the | 


= a al q 
ik — saving throw. | 
a. > i, i ul 
: Ni vs. a eo, oop ope - . . uae Tho , tet il 
Nhs pao a Invisibility. The sprite magically turns invisible until it el 
a : eee eau attacks or casts a spell, or until its concentration ends (as if ' 


ae , = : , , 
— se ‘ concentrating on a spell). Any equipment the sprite wears or 
Sh “~~, carries is invisible with it. 


STIRGE 


This horrid flying creature looks like a cross between 
a large bat and an oversized mosquito. Its legs end 

in sharp pincers, and its long, needle-like proboscis 
slashes the air as it seeks its next meal. 

Stirges feed on the blood of living creatures, attaching 
and draining them slowly. Although they pose little 
danger in small numbers, packs of stirges can be 
a formidable threat, reattaching as quickly as their 
weakening prey can pluck them off. 

Blood Drain. A stirge attacks by landing on a victim, 
finding a vulnerable spot, and plunging its proboscis 
into the flesh while using its pincer legs to latch on to the 
victim. Once the stirge has sated itself, it detaches and 
flies off to digest its meal. 


\or Class 14 (natural armor) 


) s2 (1d4) 
me ft., fly 40 ft. 
4-3) 


Hit 
tee 


wis 
8 (-1) 


DEX 
16 (+3) 


CON 
TI (+0) 


INT 
2 (-4) 


CHA 
6 (-2) 


' Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 
» Languages — 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


| ACTIONS 


Blood Drain. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage, and the stirge 

| attaches to the target. While attached, the stirge doesn’t 
attack. Instead, at the start of each of the stirge’s turns, the 

| target loses 5 (1d4 + 3) hit points due to blood loss. 

The stirge can detach itself by spending 5 feet of its 

') movement. It does so after it drains 10 hit points of blood from 
| the target or the target dies. A creature, including the target, 
can use its action to detach the stirge. 


| 
| 


Vee, eee! 0) 0 a aaa 
hae 


“= ula " ete 


re ke see rs : ~—- i Pisa ed ies 


| bias ah yr 
SiH tebe, INCUBUS > 


Succubi and incubi inhabit all of the Lower Planes, 

and the lascivious dark-winged fiends can be found in 
service to devils, demons, night hags, rakshasas, and 
yugoloths. Asmodeus, ruler of the Nine Hells, uses 
these fiends to tempt mortals to perform evil acts. The 
demon lord Graz’zt keeps succubi and incubi as advisers 
and consorts. 

Though legend speaks of them separately, any 
succubus can become an incubus, and vice versa. Most 
of these fiends do have a preference for one form or the 
other. Mortals only rarely see a succubus or incubus in 
its true form, however, for the fiend typically begins its 
corruption in veiled, insidious ways. 

Beautiful Corrupters. A succubus or incubus first 
appears in ethereal form, passing through walls like 
a ghost to lurk next to a mortal’s bedside and whisper 
forbidden pleasures. Sleeping victims are tempted to 
give in to their darkest desires, indulge in taboos, and 
feed forbidden appetites. As the fiend fills the victim’s 
dreams with debauched images, the victim becomes 
more susceptible to temptation in everyday life. 

Inevitably, the fiend enters the mortal realm in 
tempting form to directly influence a creature's 
actions. Appearing in the guise of a humanoid who has 
previously appeared only in the victim’s dreams, the 
succubus or incubus seduces or befriends its victim, 
indulging all its desires so that it performs evil acts of its 
own free will. 

A mortal bequeaths its soul to the fiend not by formal 
pledge or contract. Instead, when a succubus or incubus 
has corrupted a creature completely—some say by 
causing the victim to commit the three betrayals of 
thought, word, and deed—the victim’s soul belongs 
to the fiend. The more virtuous the fiend’s prey, the 
longer the corruption takes, but the more rewarding 
the downfall. After successfully corrupting a victim, 
the succubus or incubus kills it, and the tainted soul 
descends into the Lower Planes. 

The succubus or incubus resorts to charming a victim 
magically only when necessary, usually as a form of 
self-defense. A charmed creature isn’t responsible 
for its actions, so forcing it to behave against its will 
won't bring the fiend closer to the ultimate prize: the 
victim's soul. 

Deadly Kiss. The kiss of a succubus or incubus is an 
echo of the emptiness that is the fiend’s longing for a 
corrupted soul. Likewise, the recipient of the fiend’s kiss 
gains no Satisfaction from it, experiencing only pain and 
the profound emptiness that the fiend imparts. The kiss 
is nothing short of an attack, usually delivered as a final 
farewell before the fiend escapes. 

Fiendish Offspring. Succubi and incubi can 
reproduce with one another to spawn more of their kind. 
Less commonly, a succubus or incubus reproduces with 
a humanoid. From this unholy union, a cambion child is 
conceived. Invariably, the fiendish offspring is as wicked 
as its fiendish parent. 


—_—_—_———— 


SuccUBUS/INCUBUS 
Medium fiend (shapechanger), neutral evil 
Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 66 (12d8 + 12) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
8(-1) = 17 (+3) = 13 (+1) = 15 (42) 9-12 (+1) ~—.20 (45) 


Skills Deception +9, Insight +5, Perception +5, Persuasion +9, 
Stealth +7 

Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning, poison; bludgeoning, 
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15 

Languages Abyssal, Common, Infernal, telepathy 60 ft. 

Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


ger aa 


Telepathic Bond. The fiend ignores the range restriction on its 
telepathy when communicating with a creature it has charmed. 
The two don’t even need to be on the same plane of existence. 


Shapechanger. The fiend can use its action to polymorph 

into a Small or Medium humanoid, or back into its true form. 
Without wings, the fiend loses its flying speed. Other than its 
size and speed, its statistics are the same in each form. Any 
equipment it is wearing or carrying isn't transformed. It reverts 
to its true form if it dies. 


ACTIONS 


Claw (Fiend Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 


5 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) slashing damage. 


Charm. One humanoid the fiend can see within 30 feet of it 
must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or be magically 
charmed for 1 day. The charmed target obeys the fiend’s verbal 
or telepathic commanas. If the target suffers any harm or 
receives a suicidal command, it can repeat the saving throw, 
ending the effect on a success. If the target successfully saves 
against the effect, or if the effect on it ends, the target is 
immune to this fiend’s Charm for the next 24 hours. 

The fiend can have only one target charmed at a time. If it 
charms another, the effect on the previous target ends. 


Draining Kiss. The fiend kisses a creature charmed by it ora 
willing creature. The target must make a DC 15 Constitution 
saving throw against this magic, taking 32 (5d10 + 5) psychic 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. The target's hit point maximum is reduced by 
an amount equal to the damage taken. This reduction lasts 


until the target finishes a long rest. The target dies if this effect | 


reduces its hit point maximum to 0. 


Etherealness. The fiend magically enters the Ethereal Plane 
from the Material Plane, or vice versa. 


AVOCA Ce 


_ ‘TARRASQUE 


The legendary tarrasque is possibly the most dreaded 
monster of the Material Plane. It is widely believed that 
only one of these creatures exists, though no one can 

i ae predict where and when it will strike. 

A scaly biped, the tarrasque is fifty feet tall and 
seventy feet long, weighing hundreds of tons. It carries 
a itself like a bird of prey, leaning forward and using its 
es” powerful lashing tail for balance. Its cavernous maw 
i" yawns wide enough to swallow all but the largest 


j Armor Class 25 (natural armor) 
| Hit Points 676 (33d20 + 330) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
30 (+10) 11 (+0) 30(+10) 3(-4) 11440) 11 (40) 


| Saving Throws Int +5, Wis +9, Cha +9 
} Damage Immunities fire, poison; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical weapons 
Condition immunities charmed, frightened, 
r paralyzed, poisoned 
|| 4 Senses blindsight 120 ft., passive Perception 10 
| | Languages — 
Challenge 30 (155,000 XP) 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). \f the tarrasque fails a saving 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


|| Magic Resistance. The tarrasque has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


“) Reflective Carapace. Any time the tarrasque is targeted by a 
magic missile spell, a line spell, or a spell that requires a ranged 
4 attack roll, rolla d6. Ona 1 to 5, the tarrasque is unaffected. 

| On a 6, the tarrasque is unaffected, and the effect is reflected 

! back at the caster as though it originated from the tarrasque, 

i turning the caster into the target. 


pen. Siege Monster. The tarrasque deals double damage to objects 
» © and structures. 


i) | ACTIONS 

oe Multiattack. The tarrasque can use its Frightful Presence. It 
then makes five attacks: one with its bite, two with its claws, 
One with its horns, and one with its tail. It can use its Swallow 

» instead of its bite. 


) Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +19 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 36 (4d12 + 10) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, 


SSS a —— Le re, = 


er a 


creatures, and so great is its hunger that it can devour 
the populations of whole towns. 

Legendary Destruction. The destructive potential of 
the tarrasque is so vast that some cultures incorporate 
the monster into religious doctrine, weaving its sporadic 
appearance into stories of divine judgment and wrath. 
Legends tell how the tarrasque slumbers in its secret 
lair beneath the earth, remaining in a dormant state for 
decades or centuries. When it awakens in answer to 
some inscrutable cosmic call, it rises from the depths to 
obliterate everything in its path. 


Horns. Meleé Deana Attack: +19 to ya each 10 ft, one 

target. Hit: 32 (4d10 + 10) piercing damage. earn 
rY a 

Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +19 to hit, feuth 20 ft., one tatget. 

Hit: 24 (4d6 + 10) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a | 

creature, it must succeed on a DC 20 Strength saving throw or 


be knocked prone. 


Frightful Presence. Each creature of the tarrasque’s choice 

within 120 feet of it and aware of it must succeed on a DC 

17 Wisdom saving throw or become frightened for 1 minute. 
A creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of 
its turns, with disadvantage if the tarrasque is within line of 
sight, ending the effect on itself on a success. If a creature’s | 
saving throw is successful or the effect ends for it, the creature | 
is immune to the tarrasque's Frightful Presence for the 
next 24 hours. 


Swallow. The tarrasque makes one bite attack against a Large 
or smaller creature it is grappling. If the attack hits, the target | 
takes the bite’s damage, the target is swallowed, and the ) 
grapple ends. While swallowed, the creature is blinded and | 
restrained, it has total cover against attacks and other effects | 
outside the tarrasque, and it takes 56 (16d6) acid damage at 
the start of each of the tarrasque’s turns. 
If the tarrasque takes 60 damage or more on a single turn ! 
from a creature inside it, the tarrasque must succeed ona h 
DC 20 Constitution saving throw at the end of that turn or | 
regurgitate all swallowed creatures, which fall prone in a 
space within 10 feet of the tarrasque. If the tarrasque dies, a | 
swallowed creature is no longer restrained by itand can escape | 
from the corpse by using 30 feet of movement, exiting prone. _| 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The tarrasque can take 3 legendary actions, choosing fromthe | 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 

at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
tarrasque regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Attack. The tarrasque makes one claw attack or tail attack. b 
Move. The tarrasque moves up to half its speed. | 
; 
t 


-—— 
rE 


be be 


28% 


THRI-KREEN —_—* 


| 
Thri-kreen wander the deserts and savannas of the 
world, avoiding all other races. 

Thri-Kreen Communication. Thri-kreen employ 
a language without words. To show emotion and 
reaction, a thri-kreen clacks its mandibles and waves its 

antennae, giving other thri-kreen a sense of what it is 
thinking and feeling. Other creatures find this manner 
of communication difficult to interpret and impossible 
to duplicate. 

When forced to interact with creatures of other 
intelligent species, thri-kreen employ alternative 
methods of communication, such as drawing pictures in 
sand or making pictures out of twigs or blades of grass. 

. Limited Emotions. Thri-kreen experience the full 
range of emotions but aren't as prone to emotional 
outbursts as humans. Thri-kreen with psionic 
ability often demonstrate a wider range of emotions, 
particularly if they live near or interact with humans or 
other highly emotional creatures. 

Isolationists and Wanderers. Thri-kreen consider 
all other living creatures as potential nourishment, and 
they love the taste of elf flesh in particular. If a creature 

might be useful for something other than food, the thri- 

kreen aren’t likely to attack it on sight. Thri-kreen kill to 
survive, never for sport. 

Sleepless. Thri-kreen don’t require sleep and can rest 
while remaining alert and performing light tasks. Their 
inability to sleep is thought to be the reason why thri- 
kreen have such short lifespans, the average thri-kreen 
life expectancy being only thirty years. 


’ WHRIFKREEN 


VARIANT: THRI-KREEN WEAPONS AND PSIONICS 
Some thri-kreen employ special martial weapons. A gythka is 
a two-handed polearm with a blade at each end. A chatkcha 
is a flat, triangular wedge with three serrated blades (a light 
thrown weapon). 

A thri-kreen armed with a gythka and chatkchas gains the 
following action options: 


Multiattack. The thri-kreen makes two gythka attacks or 
two chatkcha attacks. 


Gythka. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 5 (1d8 + 1) slashing damage. 


Chatkcha. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120 
ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) slashing damage. 


A few thri-kreen manifest psionic abilities, using their powers 
to aid the hunt and communicate more easily with outsiders. 

A psionic thri-kreen has telepathy out to a range of 60 feet 
and gains the following additional trait: 


Innate Spellcasting (Psionics). The thri-kreen’s innate 
spellcasting ability is Wisdom. The thri-kreen can innately 
cast the following spells, requiring no components: 


At will: mage hand (the hand is invisible) 
2/day each: blur, magic weapon 
1/day: invisibility (self only) 


HIRI-KREEN 
Medium humanoid (thri-kreen), chaotic neutral 


_ Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6) 
Speed 40 ft. 
u — | 


' STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA — 
12(+1) 15 (+2) 13 (#1) «8 (1), 1241), 7 (-2)— 


Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4, Survival +3 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages Thri-kreen 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


(MRI nnn tt 


Chameleon Carapace. The thri-kreen can change the color of | 
its carapace to match the color and texture of its surroundings. | 
As a result, it has advantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks 

made to hide. 


Standing Leap. The thri-kreen’s long jump is up to 30 feet and 
its high jump is up to 15 feet, with or without a running start. | 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The thri-kreen makes two attacks: one with its 
bite and one with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage, and the target must succeed 
on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned for 1 
minute. If the saving throw fails by 5 or more, the target is also : 
paralyzed while poisoned in this way. The poisoned target can 
repeat the saving throw on each of its turns, ending the effect 

on itself on a success. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (2d4 + 1) slashing damage. 


TREANT 


Treants are awakened trees that dwell in ancient 
forests. Although treants prefer to while away the days, 
months, and years in quiet contemplation, they fiercely 
protect their woodland demesnes from outside threats. 
The Sleeping Tree Awakens. A tree destined to 
become a treant meditates through a long cycle of 
seasons, living normally for decades or centuries before 
realizing its potential. Trees that awaken do so only 
under special circumstances and in places steeped 
with nature’s magic. Treants and powerful druids can 
sense when a tree has the spark of potential, and they 
protect such trees in secret groves as they draw near the 
moment of their awakening. During the long process of 
awakening, a tree acquires face-like features in its bark, 
a division of the lower trunk into legs, and long branches 


er 


oe 


—_ 


——— 


bending downward to serve as its arms. When it is 
ready, the tree pulls its legs free from the clutching earth 
and joins its fellows in protecting its woodland home. 

Legendary Guardians. After a treant awakens, it 
continues to grow exactly as it did when it was a tree. 
Treants created from the mightiest trees can reach great 
sizes while developing an innate magical power over 
plants and animals. Such treants can animate plants, 
using.them to ensnare and trap intruders. They can call 
wild creatures to aid them or carry messages across 
great distances. 

Protectors of the Wild. Even after awakening, 

a treant spends much of its time living as a tree. 
While rooted in place, a treant remains aware of 
its surroundings, and can perceive the effects of 
events taking place miles away based on subtle 
changes nearby. 

Woodcutters who avoid culling healthy living trees 
and hunters who take only what they need of the forest’s 
bounty are unlikely to arouse a treant’s ire. Creatures 
careless with fire, those who poison the forest, and 
those who destroy great trees, especially a tree close to 
awakening, face the treant’s wrath. 


BE FARE ST ay ee EE SE Re Sat TS a ae; 
¢ ’ 


TREANT 


| Huge plant, chaotic good 


™ Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
© Hit Points 138 (12d12 + 60) 
| Speed 30 ft. | 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
23 (+6) 8(-1) 21 (+5) 12(41) 16(43) 12 (+1) 


rr eeeeeeeeseste 


=) Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing 


Damage Vulnerabilities fire 
Senses passive Perception 13 


| Languages Common, Druidic, Elvish, Sylvan 
f) Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 


False Appearance. While the treant remains motionless, it is 
indistinguishable from a normal tree. 


Siege Monster. The treant deals double damage to objects and 
structures. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The treant makes two slam attacks. 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 16 (3d6 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 


Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, range 60/180 ft., one 
target. Hit: 28 (4d10 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 


Animate Trees (1/Day). The treant magically animates one or 

two trees it can see within 60 feet of it. These trees have the 
same Statistics as a treant, except they have Intelligence and 
Charisma scores of 1, they can’t speak, and they have only the 
Slam action option. An animated tree acts as an ally of the 
treant. The tree remains animate for 1 day or until it dies; until 
the treant dies or is more than 120 feet from the tree; or until 

the treant takes a bonus action to turn it back into an inanimate | 
tree. The tree then takes root if possible. 


290 


<< 


‘TROGLODYTE 


The savage, degenerate troglodytes squat in the shallow 
depths of the Underdark in a constant state of war 
against their neighbors and one another. They mark 
the borders of their territories with cracked bones and 
skulls, or with pictographs painted in blood or dung. 

Perhaps the most loathsome of all humanoids, 
troglodytes eat anything they can stomach. They dwell 
in filth. The walls of their cavern homes are smeared 
with grime, oily secretions, and the debris of their 
foul feasting. 

Simpleminded Brutes. Troglodytes have a simple, 
communal culture devoted almost entirely to procuring 
food. Too simple to plan more than a few days into the 
future, troglodytes rely on constant raids and hunting 
to survive. They take sadistic pleasure in hunting 


TROGLODYTE 


3 tl ae yoge # my Por 8 ca BLN RCE TE a 


i} 
{! 


iG 


intelligent creatures weaker than themselves and show 
no mercy toward those they capture and drag back to 
their lairs to be devoured. The largest and toughest 
troglodytes lead the hunt and become the leaders of 
their tribes. However, if a leader shows any weakness or 
hesitation, other troglodytes attack and eat it in a frenzy. 

Troglodytes make little and build less, scavenging 
their possessions from their prey. They understand 
the value of metal weapons and armor, and fight 
among one another for the right to have such items. A 
troglodyte tribe might be torn apart by battles over a 
single longsword. 

Devotees of Laogzed. Some troglodytes venerate 
Laogzed, a demonic, monstrously fat toad-lizard that 
slumbers in the Abyss. Laogzed offers the troglodytes 
nothing in return except aspiration, for it is the dream of 
his troglodyte worshipers to become as fat, well-fed, and 
wearily content as he seems to be. 


ROGLODYTE 


dium humanoid (troglodyte), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 11 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 13 (2d8 + 4) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14 (42) 10(40) 14442) 6(-2) 10(+0) 6(-2) 


Skills Stealth +2 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Troglodyte 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Chameleon Skin. The troglodyte has advantage on Dexterity 
(Stealth) checks made to hide. 


Stench. Any creature other than a troglodyte that starts its 
turn within 5 feet of the troglodyte must succeed on a DC 12 
Constitution saving throw or be poisoned until the start of the 


creature's next turn. On a successful saving throw, the creature | 


is immune to the stench of all troglodytes for 1 hour. 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the troglodyte 
has disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The troglodyte makes three attacks: one with its 


bite and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) slashing damage. 


‘TROLL 


Born with horrific appetites, trolls eat anything they 
can catch and devour. They have no society to speak 
of, but they do serve as mercenaries to orcs, ogres, 
ettins, hags, and giants. As payment, trolls demand food 
and treasure. Trolls are difficult to control, however, 
doing as they please even when working with more 
powerful creatures. 

Regeneration. Smashing a troll’s bones and slashing 
through its rubbery hide only makes it angry. A troll’s 
wounds close quickly. If the monster loses an arm, a 
leg, or even its head, those dismembered parts can 
sometimes act with a life of their own. A troll can 
even reattach severed body parts, untroubled by its 
momentary disability. Only acid and fire can arrest 
the regenerative properties of a troll’s flesh. The trolls, 
enraged, will attack individuals making acid and fire 
attacks against them above all other prey. 

Troll Freaks. Their regenerative capabilities make 
trolls especially susceptible to mutation. Although 
uncommon, such transformations can result from 
what the troll has done or what has been done to it. A 
decapitated troll might grow two heads from the stump 
of its neck, while a troll that eats a fey creature might 
gain one or more of that creature’s traits. 


Ao rr ee 
VARIANT: LOATHSOME LIMBS 


Some trolls have the following trait. 

Loathsome Limbs. Whenever the troll takes at least 15 
slashing damage at one time, roll a d20 to determine what 
else happens to it: 


7 aap 
TROLL 
F Large giant, chaotic evil 


1-10: Nothing else happens. 
11-14: One leg is severed from the troll if it has any legs left. 


15-18: One arm is severed from the troll if it has Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
any arms left. Hit Points 84 (8d10 + 40) 
19-20: The troll is decapitated, but the troll dies only if it Speed 30 ft. | 


can’t regenerate. If it dies, so does the severed head. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA ; 
If the troll finishes a short or long rest without reattaching 18 (+4) 13(41) 20(45) 7(-2) 9(-1) 7 (-2) 


a severed limb or head, the part regrows. At that point, 
the severed part dies. Until then, a severed part acts on 


h ea ee q Skills Perception +1 i 
the troll’s initiative and has its own action and movement. Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 | | 


A severed part has AC 173, 10 hit points, and the troll's Languages Giant 
Regeneration trait. Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 
A severed leg is unable to attack and has a speed of 5 feet. 

A severed arm has a speed of 5 feet and can make one claw 


attack on its turn, with disadvantage on the attack roll unless Keen Smell. The troll has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) | 
the troll can see the arm and its target. Each time the troll checks that rely on smell. 
loses an arm, it loses a claw attack. ; — i 

If its head is severed, the troll loses its bite attack and its Regeneration. The troll regains 10 hit points at the start of its 
body is blinded unless the head can see it. The severed head turn. If the troll takes acid or fire damage, this trait doesn’t 
has a speed of 0 feet and the troll’s Keen Smell trait. It can function at the start of the troll’s next turn. The troll dies only if | 
make a bite attack but only against a target in its space. it starts its turn with 0 hit points and doesn’t regenerate. : 

The troll’s speed is halved if it's missing a leg. If it loses ; 
both legs, it falls prone. If it has both arms, it can crawl. ACTIONS ’ 
With only one arm, it can still crawl, but its speed is halved. Multiattack. The troll makes three attacks: one with its bite =| 


With no arms or legs, its speed is 0, and it can't benefit from aidiiwowith iteclaws. . 
bonuses to speed. | 


a Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. | 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage. 


’ 
L CAVED IN. Trat's 
REMEMBER. 
1 OF 


“Tre WAL 
THE LAST THING : m 
A survivor's ACCOU 


AN UMBER HULK ATTACK 


wh UMBER HULK 

ii An abominable horror from deep beneath the earth, an 
umber hulk burrows into cave complexes, dungeons, or 
Underdark settlements in search of food. Those lucky 
enough to survive an umber hulk attack often remember 
precious little of the incident, thanks to the umber hulk’s 
mind-scrambling gaze. 

Devious Delvers. Umber hulks can burrow through 
solid rock, forming new tunnels in their wake. The 
steel-hard chitin of its body can withstand the cave-ins, 
tunnel collapses, and rock falls that commonly follow it. 

Burrowing into the wall of a cavern or passageway, 
an umber hulk lies in wait for creatures to pass by 
on the other side, its hair-like feelers sensing any 
movement around it. When it explodes out in a shower 
of earth and rock, its unsuspecting quarry turns to face 
the oncoming threat—and is entranced by the umber 
hulk’s bewildering eyes, forced to stand helpless as its 
mandibles snap shut. 

Mind Scrambler. Many survivors of an umber hulk 
encounter recollect little about the attack, because the 
monster’s confusing gaze scrambles their memory of 
the event. Those who have fought and killed umber 
hulks recognize the signs. For other denizens of 
the Underdark, grisly tales of vanished explorers 
and wanton destruction speak of an unknown 

foe. Umber hulks take on supernatural status 
in these harrowing stories, many of which 
convey the same warning: once an umber 

hulk has been spotted, it is already too late 
to escape it. 


_ 


- nothing. On a 5 or 6, the creature takes no action but uses all 
its movement to move {na random direction. On a 7 or 8, the 
creature makes one melee attack against a random creature, or 
it does nothing if no creature is within reach. 


Umer Hux 


Large monstrosity, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 


F Hit Points 93 (11d10 + 33) Unless surprised, a creature can avert its eyes to avoid the 
Speed 30 ft., burrow 20 ft. pave throw at the start ofits turn. If the creature does so, it 
\" : can’t see the umber hulk until the start of its next turn, when it 
| STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA can avert its eyes again. If the creature looks at the umber hulk 
— L 20 (45) 1341) 16 (43) 9(-1) 10(+0) 10 (40) in the meantime, it must immediately make the save. 
me =e "<1 = “Re ee Tunneler. The umber hulk can burrow through solid rock at 
i Senses darkvision 120 ft., tremorsense 60 ft., half its burrowing speed and leaves a 5 foot-wide, 8-foot-high 
passive Perception 10 tunnel in its wake 
i ) Languages Umber Hulk 
i | Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) ACTIONS 
-. mcm 
~ | Multiattack. The umber hulk makes three attacks: two with its 
| Confusing Gaze. When a creature starts its turn within 30 feet claws and one with its mandibles. 
of the umber hulk and is able to see the umber hulk’s eyes, the 


| umber hulk can magically force it to make a DC 15 Charisma Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 9 (1d8 + 5) slashing damage. 


"saving throw, unless the umber hulk is incapacitated. 

} Ona failed saving throw, the creature can’t take r eactions Mandibles. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
until the start ofits next turn and rolls a d8 to determine target. Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) slashing damage. 

_ what it does during that turn. On a 1 to 4, the creature does 


UMBER HULK _ .. 


—=— “a i el Se 


horses it resembles, a unicorn is a celestial creature 
that wanders sylvan realms, its white form glimmering 
like starlight. 
A unicorn’s brow sports a single spiraling horn 
of ivory whose magical touch can heal the sick and 
the injured. Its ears catch the words and whispers 
of the creatures that share its domain, and it knows 
7 the tongues of elves and sylvan folk. Unicorns allow 
f good-hearted creatures to enter their woods to hunt or 
gather food, but they hold evil ever at bay. Foul-hearted 
creatures seldom leave a unicorn’s domain alive. 

Divine Guardians. Good deities placed unicorns on 
the Material Plane to ward away evil and preserve and 
protect sacred places. Most unicorns protect a bounded 
realm such as an enchanted forest. However, the gods 
sometimes send a unicorn to guard sacred artifacts or 
protect specific creatures. When the forces of darkness 
strike against an individual the gods wish to protect, 
they might send that individual to a unicorn’s forest, 
where evil creatures pursue at their peril. 

Unicorns most often serve deities of the forest and 
woodlands, including the gods of benevolent fey. 
Although all unicorns have natural healing power, 
some serve the gods in greater capacities, performing 
miracles normally reserved for high priests. 

Forest Lords. A unicorn’s forest is a celestial realm 
where nothing that occurs beneath the sun-dappled 
leaves escapes the creature’s notice. A unicorn hears 
each breathy tune sung by the elves that reside amid 
the treetops. It senses where every caterpillar spins 
its cocoon, each leaf and branch upon which a bright 
butterfly rests its tired wings. 

In a unicorn’s forest, a sense of calm pervades. From 
wolves and foxes to birds, squirrels, and tiny insects, 
the creatures of a unicorn’s domain seem quite tame. 
Pixies, sprites, satyrs, dryads, and other normally 
mercurial fey loyally serve a unicorn when they 
dwell within its woods. Under a unicorn’s protection, 
creatures feel safe from the threat of encroaching 
civilization and the insidious spread of evil. 
| A unicorn roams its domain constantly, moving ever 
| so carefully so as not to disturb other denizens. A 

creature might catch a passing glimpse of the unicorn 
| then suddenly see nothing but the wild woods. 


Sacred Horns. A unicorn’s horn is the focus of its 
power, a shard of divine magic wrought in spiraling 
ivory. Wands of unicorn horn channel powerful magic, — 
while unicorn horn weapons strike with divine force. 
Wizards can work powdered unicorn horn into potent 
potions and scroll ink, or use it as a component in 
eldritch rituals. However, any creature that takes a role, 
no matter how small, in slaying a unicorn is likely to 
become the target of divine retribution. 

Blessed Mounts. When darkness and evil threaten 
to overwhelm the mortal world, the gods sometimes 
see fit to pair a unicorn mount with a champion, A, 
paladin astride a unicorn is a sign of the gods’ direct 
intervention in the affairs of the mortal realm, It is a 
holy alliance made to cleave the heads from demons and 
banish devils back to the Nine Hells. 

As long as the troubled times of darkness persist, 
the unicorn stays by the champion, its horn shining 
brightly to drive back the night. However, if the gods’ 
champion falls from grace or turns from the cause ™ 
of righteousness and good, the unicorn departs, 
never to return. 


A UNICORN’S LAIR 


A unicorn’s lair might be an ancient ruin overgrown 

with vines, a misty clearing surrounded by mighty oaks, 
a flower-covered hilltop alive with butterflies, or some bd 
other serene woodland location. 


REGIONAL EFFECTS 

Transformed by the creature’s celestial presence, the F 
domain of a unicorn might include any of the following am 
magical effects: hs 


» Open flames of a nonmagical nature are extinguished 
within the unicorn’s domain. Torches and campfires 
refuse to burn, but closed lanterns are unaffected. 

- Creatures native to the unicorn’s domain have an eas- 
ier time hiding; they have advantage on all Dexterity 
(Stealth) checks made to hide. 

« When a good-aligned creature casts a spell or uses 
a magical effect that causes another good-aligned 
creature to regain hit points, the target regains the 
maximum number of hit points possible for the 
spell or effect. 

- Curses affecting any good-aligned creature 
are suppressed. 


If the unicorn dies, these effects end immediately. 


UNICORN 


Large celestial, lawful good 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 67 (9d10 + 18) 
Speed 50 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 14(42) 15 (42) 11 (40) «17 (43) _~—*16 (43) 


Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities charmed, paralyzed, poisoned 
' Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
| Languages Celestial, Elvish, Sylvan, telepathy 60 ft. 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Charge. If the unicorn moves at least 20 feet straight toward a 
target and then hits it with a horn attack on the same turn, the 
target takes an extra 9 (2d8) piercing damage. If the target is a 
creature, it must succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or 
be knocked prone. 


| Innate Spellcasting. The unicorn’s innate spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 14). The unicorn can innately cast the 
_ following spells, requiring no components: 


At will: detect evil and good, druidcraft, pass without trace 
1/day each: calm emotions, dispel evil and good, entangle 


Magic Resistance. The unicorn has advantage on saving throws 
_ against spells and other magical effects. 


Magic Weapons. The unicorn’s weapon attacks are magical. 


i 
= oN 


» UNIGORN 


‘* 


294 


ACTIONS _ 


Multiattack. The unicorn makes two attacks: one with its 
hooves and one with its horn. 


Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


Horn. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) piercing damage. 


Healing Touch (3/Day). The unicorn touches another creature 
with its horn. The target magically regains 11 (2d8 + 2) hit 
points. In addition, the touch removes all diseases and 
neutralizes all poisons afflicting the target. 


Teleport (1/Day). The unicorn magically teleports itself and up 
to three willing creatures it can see within 5 feet of it, along 
with any equipment they are wearing or carrying, to a location 
the unicorn is familiar with, up to 1 mile away. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The unicorn can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
unicorn regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn. 


Hooves. The unicorn makes one attack with its hooves. 

Shimmering Shield (Costs 2 Actions). The unicorn creates a 
shimmering, magical field around itself or another creature it 
can see within 60 feet of it. The target gains a +2 bonus to AC 
until the end of the unicorn’s next turn. 

Heal Self (Costs 3 Actions). The unicorn magically regains 11 
(2d8 + 2) hit points. 


VAMPIRES 


Awakened to an endless night, vampires hunger for 

the life they have lost and sate that hunger by drinking 
the blood of the living. Vampires abhor sunlight, for 

its touch burns them. They never cast shadows or 
reflections, and any vampire wishing to move unnoticed 
among the living keeps to the darkness and far from 
reflective surfaces. 

Dark Desires. Whether or not a vampire retains 
any memories from its former life, its emotional 
attachments wither as once-pure feelings become 
twisted by undeath. Love turns into hungry 
obsession, while friendship becomes bitter 
jealousy. In place of emotion, vampires pursue 
physical symbols of what they crave, so that a 
vampire seeking love might fixate on a young beauty. 

A child might become an object of fascination for a 
vampire obsessed with youth and potential. Others 
surround themselves with art, books, or sinister items 
such as torture devices or trophies from creatures 
they have killed. 

Born from Death. Most of a vampire’s victims 
become vampire spawn—ravenous creatures with a 
vampire’s hunger for blood, but under the control of 
the vampire that created them. If a true vampire allows 
a spawn to draw blood from its own body, the spawn 
transforms into a true vampire no longer under its 
master’s control. Few vampires are willing to relinquish 
their control in this manner. Vampire spawn become 
free-willed when their creator dies. 

Chained to the Grave. Every vampire remains bound 
to its coffin, crypt, or grave site, where it must rest by 
day. If a vampire didn’t receive a formal burial, it must 
lie beneath a foot of earth at the place of its transition 
to undeath. A vampire can move its place of burial by 
transporting its coffin or a significant amount of grave 
dirt to another location. Some vampires set up multiple 
resting places this way. 

Undead Nature. Neither a vampire nor a vampire 
spawn requires air. 


PLAYER CHARACTERS AS VAMPIRES 


The game statistics of a player character 
transformed into a vampire spawn and then a 


wycients LAM THE a or THE vampire don’t change, except that the character’s Strength, 
Lam THe A « Losman THE DARKN ano Just. Dexterity, and Constitution scores become 18 if they aren’t 
BecinNe” ae WARRIOR: } WAS goood — higher. In addition, the character gains the vampire’s damage 
past. L was T™ cross THE LANO LIKE e a resistances, darkvision, traits, and actions. Attack and 
1 THUNDEREO 4 put THE WAR yEARS A ¢ THE WIND damage rolls for the vampire’s attacks are based on Strength. 
of A JUST a ere pown MY ‘a . The save DC for Charm is 8 + the vampire’s proficiency 
KILLING YEARS TONE INTO SAND: nu ZAROVICH bonus + the vampire’s Charisma modifier. The character’s | 
wears OOWN $ Count TRANG Zo alignment becomes lawful evil, and the DM might take | 


contro! of the character until the vampirism is reversed with 
a wish spell or the character is killed and brought back to life. 


ee 


WARE TS 


295 


> 


296 


—-_ zi = = 


1 STRAHD VON ZAROVICH 


aT Re 4, 


A brilliant thinker and capable warrior in life, Strahd von 
Zarovich fought in countless battles for his people. When war 
and killing finally stripped him of his youth and strength, he 
settled in the remote valley of Barovia and built a castle on 

a towering pinnacle, from which he could survey his lands. 
His brother Sergei came to live with him in Castle Ravenloft, 
becoming Strahd’s adviser and constant companion. 

In his brother, Strahd saw everything he had lost. Sergei 
was handsome and young, while Strahd had become old and 
scarred. Resentment colored their relationship, eventually 
turning into hatred. Strahd’s beloved, Tatyana, spurned him 
for Sergei, whom she pledged to marry. 

In a desperate attempt to win Tatyana’'s heart, Strahd 
forged a pact with dark powers that made him immortal. 

At the wedding of Sergei and Tatyana, he confronted his 
brother and killed him. Tatyana fled and flung herself from 
Ravenloft's walls. Strahd’s guards, seeing him for a monster, 
shot him with arrows. But he did not die. He became a 
vampire—the first vampire, according to many sages. 

In the centuries since his transformation, Strahd’s lust for 
life and youth have only grown. He broods in his dark castle, 
cursing the living for stealing away what he lost, and never 
admitting his hand in the tragedy he created. 


VAMPIRES 


we 


A VAMPIRE’S LAIR 


A vampire chooses a grand yet defensible location for its 
lair, such as a castle, fortified manor, or walled abbey. It 
hides its coffin in an underground crypt or vault guarded 
by vampire spawn or other loyal creatures of the night. 


REGIONAL EFFECTS 

The region surrounding a vampire’s lair is warped by 
the creature’s unnatural presence, creating any of the 
following effects: 


There’s a noticeable increase in the populations of 
bats, rats, and wolves in the region. 

Plants within 500 feet of the lair wither, and their 
stems and branches become twisted and thorny. 
Shadows cast within 500 feet of the lair seem abnor- 
mally gaunt and sometimes move as though alive. 

A creeping fog clings to the ground within 500 feet 
of the vampire’s lair. The fog occasionally takes eerie 
forms, such as grasping claws and writhing serpents. 


If the vampire is destroyed, these effects end 
after 2d6 days. 


Medium undead (shapechanger), lawful evil 


Armor Class 16 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 144 (17d8 + 68) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 18 (+4) 18(+4) 17(43) 15 (42) 18 (+4) 


 —{£{£*_$_=Z&{=__ OOo 

Saving Throws Dex +9, Wis +7, Cha +9 

Skills Perception +7, Stealth +9 

Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical weapons 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 17 

Languages the languages it knew in life 

Challenge 13 (10,000 XP) 


Fess EEE 


Shapechanger. If the vampire isn’t in sunlight or running water, 
it can use its action to polymorph into a Tiny bat or a Medium 
cloud of mist, or back into its true form. 

While in bat form, the vampire can’t speak, its walking speed 
is 5 feet, and it has a flying speed of 30 feet. Its statistics, other 
than its size and speed, are unchanged. Anything it is wearing 
transforms with it, but nothing it is carrying does. It reverts to 
its true form if it dies. 

While in mist form, the vampire can’t take any actions, speak, 
or manipulate objects. It is weightless, has a flying speed of 20 
| feet, can hover, and can enter a hostile creature’s space and 
' stop there. In addition, if air can pass through a space, the mist 
can do so without squeezing, and it can’t pass through water. It 
has advantage on Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution saving 
throws, and it is immune to all nonmagical damage, except the 
damage it takes from sunlight. 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). |f the vampire fails a saving 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


Misty Escape. When it drops to 0 hit points outside its resting 
place, the vampire transforms into a cloud of mist (as in the 
Shapechanger trait) instead of falling unconscious, provided 
that it isn’t in sunlight or running water. If it can’t transform, it 
is destroyed. 

While it has 0 hit points in mist form, it can’t revert to its 
vampire form, and it must reach its resting place within 2 
hours or be destroyed. Once in its resting place, it reverts to 
its vampire form. It is then paralyzed until it regains at least 1 
hit point. After spending 1 hour in its resting place with 0 hit 
points, it regains 1 hit point. 


_ Regeneration. The vampire regains 20 hit points at the start 

| of its turn if it has at least 1 hit point and isn’t in sunlight or 
running water, If the vampire takes radiant damage or damage 
from holy water, this trait doesn’t function at the start of the 
vampire’s next turn. 


Spider Climb. The vampire can climb difficult surfaces, 
/ including pee down on ceilings, without needing to make an 


| | ability check. ” 
| “Yam ire W aknesses. The vampire has the following flaws: 
: ty For iddan The vampire can't. enters fesidence without. an. 


ju frome Ne, of the occupants. ‘by Ves 


if it ends its turn in running water. 

Stake to the Heart. |f a piercing weapon made of wood 
is driven into the vampire’s heart while the vampire is 
incapacitated in its resting place, the vampire is paralyzed until 
the stake is removed. 

Sunlight Hypersensitivity. The vampire takes 20 radiant 
damage when it starts its turn in sunlight. While in sunlight, it 
has disadvantage on attack rolls and ability checks. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack (Vampire Form Only). The vampire makes two 
attacks, only one of which can be a bite attack. 


Unarmed Strike (Vampire Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: 
+9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) bludgeoning 
damage. Instead of dealing damage, the vampire can grapple 
the target (escape DC 18). 


Bite (Bat or Vampire Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +9 

to hit, reach 5 ft., one willing creature, or a creature that is 
grappled by the vampire, incapacitated, or restrained. Hit: 7 
(1d6 + 4) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) necrotic damage. The 
target’s hit point maximum is reduced by an amount equal to 
the necrotic damage taken, and the vampire regains hit points 
equal to that amount. The reduction lasts until the target 
finishes a long rest. The target dies if this effect reduces its hit 
point maximum to 0. A humanoid slain in this way and then 
buried in the ground rises the following night as a vampire 
spawn under the vampire’s control. 


Charm. The vampire targets one humanoid it can see within 
30 feet of it. If the target can see the vampire, the target must 
succeed on a DC 17 Wisdom saving throw against this magic 
or be charmed by the vampire. The charmed target regards 
the vampire as a trusted friend to be heeded and protected. 
Although the target isn’t under the vampire’s control, it takes 
the vampire’s requests or actions in the most favorable way it 
can, and it is a willing target for the vampire’s bite attack. 
Each time the vampire or the vampire’s companions do 
anything harmful to the target, it can repeat the saving throw, 
ending the effect on itself on a success. Otherwise, the 
effect lasts 24 hours or until the vampire is destroyed, is on a 
different plane of existence than the target, or takes a bonus 
action to end the effect. 


Children of the Night (1/Day). The vampire magically calls 2d4 
swarms of bats or rats, provided that the sun isn’t up. While 
outdoors, the vampire can call 3d6 wolves instead. The called 
creatures arrive in 1d4 rounds, acting as allies of the vampire 
and obeying its spoken commands. The beasts remain for 1 
hour, until the vampire dies, or until the vampire dismisses 
them as a bonus action. 


LEGENDARY ACTIONS 


The vampire can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the 
options below. Only one legendary action option can be used — 
at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The 
yartiplrs regains: pant cena aqtions at tae ey ae its) turn, 


ae 


Harmed by Running Water. The vampire takes 20 acid damage 


t 


J 
1 


| Medium undead, néutral evil 


| 


) Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
| | Hit Points 82 (11d8 + 33) 

1 Speed 30 ft. 

Ni 

Pe | 
1 \y STR 

| 16 (43) 


ate 
Nf Saving Throws Dex +6, Wis +3 
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +6 
Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from nonmagical weapons 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages the languages it knew in life 
| Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


EE 


DEX 
16 (+3) 


CON INT 
16 (+3) 11 (+0) 


WIS 
10 (+0) 


CHA 
12 (+1) 


Regeneration. The vampire regains 10 hit points at the start 
of its turn if it has at least 1 hit point and isn’t in sunlight or 

_ running water. If the vampire takes radiant damage or damage 
from holy water, this trait doesn’t function at the start of the 
vampire’s next turn. 


Spider Climb. The vampire can climb difficult surfaces, 
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 
ability check. 


i 


VAMPIRES 
298 Cee : : 


_ VARIANTS: VAMPIRE WARRIORS AND SPELLCASTERS 
_ Some vampires have martial training and battlefield 

_ experience. A warrior vampire wearing plate armor (AC 

18) and wielding a greatsword has a challenge rating of 15 
(13,000 XP) and the following additional action options: 


| Multiattack. The vampire makes two greatsword attacks. 


- Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
yi creature. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage. 


_ Some vampires are practitioners of the arcane arts. A 

| spellcaster vampire spellcaster has a challenge rating of 15 

| (13,000 XP) and the following trait: 

| Spellcasting. The vampire is a 9th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 15, +7 

_ to hit with spell attacks). The vampire has the following 

| wizard spells prepared: 


|  Cantrips (at will): mage hand, prestidigitation, ray of frost 


. | Ist level (4 slots): comprehend languages, fog cloud, sleep 


2nd level (3 slots): detect thoughts, gust of wind, 
mirror image 
3rd level (3 slots): animate dead, bestow curse, nondetection 
4th level (3 slots): blight, greater invisibility 
5th level (1 slot): dominate person 


Vampire Weaknesses. The vampire has the'féllowing flaws: 

Forbiddance. The vampire can’t enter a residence without an 
invitation from one of the occupants. 

Harmed by Running Water. The vampire takes 20 acid damage 
when it ends its turn in running water. 

Stake to the Heart. The vampire is destroyed if a piercing 
weapon made of wood is driven into its heart while it is 
incapacitated in its resting place. 

Sunlight Hypersensitivity. The vampire takes 20 radiant 
damage when it starts its turn in sunlight. While in sunlight, it 
has disadvantage on attack rolls and ability checks. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The vampire makes two attacks, only one of which 


can be a bite attack. 


if 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. | 


Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) slashing damage. Instead of dealing damage, 
the vampire can grapple the target (escape DC 13). 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one willing 
creature, or a creature that is grappled by the vampire, 
incapacitated, or restrained. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage 
plus 7 (2d6) necrotic damage. The target’s hit point maximum 
is reduced by an amount equal to the necrotic damage taken, 
and the vampire regains hit points equal to that amount. The 
reduction lasts until the target finishes a long rest. The target 
dies if this effect reduces its hit point maximum to 0. 


UNTAIN OF 


AFO 
RINK FROM 0 It. bt A 


— ai rue MYSTICS secu WATER WEIRD 
ov 


A water weird is an elemental guardian bound to a, 
f specific water-filled location, such as a pool or fountain, 
Invisible while immersed in water, its serpentiné shape. 
becomes clear only when it emerges to attack; ‘using its 
coils to crush any creature other than its summ@iter and. 
those its summoner declares as off limits. When slain, a 
water weird becomes an inanimate pool of water. ~ 

Good and Evil Weirds. Like most elementals, a 
water weird has no concept of good or evil. However, 

a water weird bound to a sacred or befouled source of 
water begins to take on the nature of that site, becoming 
neutral good or neutral evil. 

A neutral good water weird tries to frighten away 
interlopers rather than kill them, while a neutral evil 
water weird kills its victims for pleasure and might 
turn against its summoner. A water weird loses its evil 
alignment if its waters are cleansed with a purify food 
and drink spell. 

Elemental! Nature. A water weird doesn’t require air, 
food, drink, or sleep. 


rmor Class 13 
Hit Points 58 (9d10 + 9) 
Speed 0 ft., swim 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

17 (+3) «16 (43) «13 1) —s- 11. (40) )—s- 10 (+0) ~—- 10 (+0) 

(Rr nr 

Damage Resistances fire; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing 
from nonmagical weapons 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed, 
poisoned, restrained, prone, unconscious 

Senses blindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages understands Aquan but doesn’t speak 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


——— ee 


Invisible in Water. The water weird is invisible while fully 
immersed in water. 


Water Bound. The water weird dies if it leaves the water to 
which it is bound or if that water is destroyed. 


ACTIONS 


Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 13 (3d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage. If the target is 
Medium or smaller, it is grappled (escape DC 13) and pulled 5 
feet toward the water weird. Until this grapple ends, the target 
_ is restrained, the water weird tries to drown it, and the water 
weird can’t constrict another target. 


WIGHT 


The word “wight” meant “person” in days of yore, but 
the name now refers to evil undead who were once 
mortals driven by dark desire and great vanity. When 
death stills such a creature’s heart and snuffs its living 
breath, its spirit cries out to the demon lord Orcus or 
some vile god of the underworld for a reprieve: undeath 
in return for eternal war on the living. If a dark power 
answers the call, the spirit is granted undeath so that it 
can pursue its own malevolent agenda. 

Wights possess the memories and drives of their 
formerly living selves. They will heed the call of 
whatever dark entity transformed them into undead, 
swearing oaths to appease their new lord while 
retaining their autonomy. Never tiring, a wight can 
pursue its goals relentlessly and without distraction. 

Life Eaters. Neither dead nor alive, a wight exists in a 
transitional state between one world and the next. The 
bright spark it possessed in life is gone, and in its place 
is a yearning to consume that spark in all living things. 
When a wight attacks, this life essence glows like white- 
hot embers to its dark eyes, and the wight’s cold touch 
can drain the spark through flesh, clothing, and armor. 


350 a : - 


Shadow of the Grave. Wights flee from the world 
by day, away from the light of the sun, which they hate. 
They retreat to barrow mounds, crypts, and tombs 
where they dwell. Their lairs are silent, desolate places, 
surrounded by dead plants, noticeably blackened, and 
avoided by bird and beast. 

Humanoids slain by a wight can rise as zombies 
under its control. Motivated by hunger for living souls 
and driven by the same desire for power that awakened 
them in undeath, some wights serve as shock troops 
for evil leaders, including wraiths. As soldiers, they are 
able to plan but seldom do so, relying on their hunger 
for destruction to overwhelm any creature that stands 
before them. 

Undead Nature. A wight doesn’t require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


TC , 
ndead, neutral evil 


Armor Class 14 (studded leather) 
Hit Points 45 (6d8 + 18) 


Speed 30 ft. 

CR gpa 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (42) 14(42) 16 (+3) 10(+0) 13(+1) 15 (+2) 


nnn nance 
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4 

Damage Resistances necrotic; bludgeoning, piercing, and 

slashing from nonmagical weapons that aren't silvered 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities exhaustion, poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 

Languages the languages it knew in life 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the wight has 
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The wight makes two longsword attacks or 
two longbow attacks. It can use its Life Drain in place of one 
longsword attack. 


Life Drain. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) necrotic damage. The target must 
succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or its hit point 
maximum is reduced by an amount equal to the damage taken. 
This reduction lasts until the target finishes a long rest. The 
target dies if this effect reduces its hit point maximum to 0. 

A humanoid slain by this attack rises 24 hours later as a 
zombie under the wight’s control, unless the humanoid is 
restored to life or its body is destroyed. The wight can have no 
more than twelve zombies under its control at one time. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) slashing damage, or 7 (1d10 + 2) 
slashing damage if used with two hands. 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 150/600 ft., 
one target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage. 
CSL) 


“| WILL-O'-WISP 


Tiny undead, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 19 
Hit Points 22 (9d4) 
Speed 0 ft., fly 50 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
1(-5) 28 (49) 10(40) 13(41) 14(42) 11 (40) 
Rar 
Damage Immunities lightning, poison 
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, necrotic, 
thunder; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical weapons 
Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed, 
poisoned, prone, restrained, unconscious 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages the languages it knew in life 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


ir” 


Consume Life. As a bonus action, the will-o’-wisp can target 
one creature it can see within 5 feet of it that has 0 hit 
points and is still alive. The target must succeed on a DC 10 
Constitution saving throw against this magic or die. If the 
target dies, the will-o’-wisp regains 10 (3d6) hit points. 


Ephemeral. The will-o’-wisp can’t wear or carry anything. 
Incorporeal Movement. The will-o’-wisp can move through 


other creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It 
takes 5 (1d10) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object. 


Variable illumination. The will-o’-wisp sheds bright light in a 5- 
to 20-foot radius and dim light for an additional number of feet 
equal to the chosen radius. The will-o’-wisp can alter the radius 
as a bonus action. 


ACTIONS 


Shock. Melee Spell Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 


Hit: 9 (2d8) lightning damage. 


Invisibility. The will-o’-wisp and its light magically become 
invisible until it attacks or uses its Life Drain, or until its 
concentration ends (as if concentrating on a spell). 


WILL-O’-WISP 


Will-o-wisps are malevolent, wispy balls of light that 
haunt lonely places and battlefields, bound by dark fate 
or dark magic to feed on fear and despair. 

Hope and Doom. Will-o’-wisps look like bobbing 
lantern lights in the distance, although they can choose 
to alter their colors, or wink out completely. When they 
activate their lights, will-o’-wisps offer hope, hinting of 
safety to creatures that follow them. 

Will-o’-wisps lure unwary creatures into quicksand 
pits, monster lairs, and other dangerous places so 
that they can feed on the suffering of their prey and 
revel in their death screams. An evil being that falls 
prey to a will-o’-wisp might become a wisp itself, its 
woeful spirit coalescing above its lifeless corpse like a 
flickering flame. 

Consumed by Despair. Will-o'-wisps are the souls of 
evil beings that perished in anguish or misery as they 
wandered forsaken lands permeated with powerful 
magic. They thrive in swampy bogs and bone-strewn 
battlefields where the oppressive weight of sorrow 
stoops even heavier than the low-hanging mist and 
fog. Trapped in these desolate places of lost hope and 
memory, will-o’-wisps lure other creatures toward 
dismal fates and feed on their misery. 

Agents of Evil. Will-o’-wisps rarely speak, but when 
they do, their voices sound like faint or distant whispers. 
In the miserable domains they haunt, will-o’-wisps 
sometimes form symbiotic relationships with their 
wicked neighbors. Hags, oni, black dragons, and evil 
cultists work with will-o’-wisps to draw creatures into 
ambush. As their evil allies surround and slaughter 
creatures, the wisps hover above them, drinking the 
agony of a last breath and savoring the sensation as the 
light of life goes out in a creature's eyes. 

Undead Nature. A will-o’-wisp doesn’t require air, 
drink, or sleep. 


WRAITH 


A wraith is malice incarnate, concentrated into an 
incorporeal form that seeks to quench all life. The 
creature is suffused with negative energy, and its 

mere passage through the world leaves nearby plants 
blackened and withered. Animals flee from its presence. 
Even small fires can be extinguished by the sucking 
oblivion of the wraith’s horrifying existence. 

Vile Oblivion. When a mortal humanoid lives a 
debased life or enters into a fiendish pact, it consigns 
its soul to eternal damnation in the Lower Planes. 
However, sometimes the soul becomes so suffused with 
negative energy that it collapses in on itself and ceases 
to exist the instant before it can shuffle off to some 
horrible afterlife. When this occurs, the spirit becomes a 
soulless wraith—a malevolent void trapped on the plane 
where it died. Almost nothing of the wraith’s former 
existence is preserved; in this new form, it exists only to 
annihilate other life. 

Bereft of Body. A wraith can move through solid 
creatures and objects as easily as a mortal creature 
moves through fog. 

Awraith might retain a few memories of its mortal life 
as shadowy echoes. However, even the strongest events 


and emotions become little more than faint impressions, 
fleeting as half-remembered dreams. A wraith might 
pause to stare at something that fascinated it in life, 

or it might curb its wrath in acknowledgment of a 

past friendship. Such moments come rarely, however, 
because most wraiths despise what they were as a 
reminder of what they have become. 

Undead Commanders. A wraith can make an undead 
servant from the spirit of a humanoid creature that has 
recently suffered a violent death. Such a fragment of 
woe becomes a specter, spiteful of all that lives. 

Wraiths sometimes rule the legions of the dead, 
plotting the doom of living creatures. When they emerge 
from their tombs to do battle, life and hope shrivel 
before them. Even if a wraith’s armies are forced to 
retreat, the lands its forces occupied are so blasted and 
withered that those who live there often starve and die. 

Undead Nature. A wraith doesn’t require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


éad, neutral evil 


"Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 67 (9d8 + 27) 
_ Speed 0 ft., fly 60 ft. (hover) 


_ STR DEX CON INT — WIS CHA 
6(-2) 16 (+3) 16 (43) 12(41) 14(42) 15 (42) 
a 
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, lightning, thunder; 
bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from nonmagical 
weapons that aren’t silvered 
Damage Immunities necrotic, poison 
Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, grappled, 
paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages the languages it knew in life 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Rr a rrr yr 


Incorporeal Movement. The wraith can move through other 
creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. it takes 5 
(1d10) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object. 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the wraith has 
disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Life Drain. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature, Hit: 21 (4d8 + 3) necrotic damage. The target must 
succeed on a DC 14 Constitution saving throw or its hit point 
maximum is reduced by an amount equal to the damage taken. | 
This reduction lasts until the target finishes a long rest. The 
target dies if this effect reduces its hit point maximum to 0. 


i 


_ Create Specter. The wraith targets a humanoid within 10 feet 
_ of it that has been dead for no longer than 1 minute and died 
_ violently. The target's spirit rises as a specter in the space of 
_ its corpse or in the nearest unoccupied space. The specter is 
, under the wraith’s control. The wraith can have no more than | 
_ seven specters under its control at one time. 


WYVERN 


Travelers in the wild sometimes look to the skies 

to see the dark-winged shape of a wyvern carrying 
its prey. These cousins to the great dragons hunt 

the same tangled forests and caverns as their kin. 
Their appearance sends ripples of alarm through the 
borderlands of civilization. 

A wyvern has two scaly legs, leathery wings, and a 
sinewy tail topped with its most potent weapon: a poison 
stinger. The poison in a wyvern’s stinger can killa 
creaiure in seconds. Extremely potent, wyvern poison 
burns through its victim’s bloodstream, disintegrating 
veins and arteries on its way to the heart. As deadly 
as wyverns can be, however, hunters and adventurers 
often track them to claim the venom, which is used in 
alchemical compounds and to coat weapons. 

Aerial Hunters. A wyvern doesn’t fight on the ground 
unless it can’t reach its prey by any other means, or 
if it has been fooled into a position from which aerial 
combat isn’t an option. If forced into a confrontation on 
the ground, a wyvern crouches low, keeping its stinger 
poised above its head as it hisses and growls. 

Aggressive and Reckless. A wyvern intent on its prey 
backs down only if it sustains serious injury, or if its 
prey eludes it long enough for another easier potential 
meal to wander along. If it corners a fleeing creature in 
an enclosure too small to enter, a wyvern guards where 
the quarry hides, lashing with its stinger whenever 
opportunity allows. 

Although they possess more cunning than ordinary 
beasts, wyverns lack the intelligence of their draconic 
cousins. As such, creatures that maintain their 
composure as a wyvern hunts them from the air can 
often elude or trick it. Wyverns follow a direct path to 
their prey, with no thought given to possible ambushes. 

Tamed Wyverns. A wyvern can be tamed for use as 
a mount, but doing so presents a difficult and deadly 
challenge. Raising one as a hatchling offers the best 
results. However, a wyvern’s violent temperament has 


-_ cost the life of many a would-be master. 


ae 
eth tae ary 


L 


arge dragon, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 110 (13d10 + 39) 
Speed 20 ft., fly 80 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4) 10 (+0) 16 (+3) 5(-3) 12(41) 6 (-2) 


Skills Perception +4 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages — 

Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The wyvern makes two attacks: one with its bite 
and one with its stinger. While flying, it can use its claws in 
place of one other attack. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Aitack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 1] (2d6 + 4) piercing damage. 

Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) slashing damage. 


Stinger. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage. The target must 
_ make a DC 15 Constitution saving throw, taking 24 (7d6) 


——— —_—— 


+ poison damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. \s 


304 


XORN 


Bizarre creatures native to the Elemental Plane of 
Earth, xorn sniff out gemstones and precious metals, 
then tunnel through earth and rock to consume 
those treasures. On the Material Plane, xorn must 
range far and wide through the Underdark to sustain 
themselves, becoming aggressive toward miners and 
treasure hunters when the valuable minerals of their 
diet are scarce. 

A xorn’s unnatural origins are suggested by its 
unusually heavy body and the large, powerful mouth 
sitting atop its head. Its three long arms are each tipped 
with sharp talons, and its three large, stone-lidded eyes 
see in all directions. 

Elemental Travelers. Possessed of the power of 
elemental earth, a xorn glides through stone and dirt as 
easily as a fish swims through water. It doesn’t displace 
earth or stone when it moves, but merges with and flows 
through it, leaving no tunnel, hole, or hint of its passage. 


XORN 


Xorn prefer not to leave their home plane, where they 
easily eat their fill of gemstones and precious metals. 
When a xorn winds up on the Material Plane, whether 
by accident or from curiosity, it seeks sustenance 
and a way home. 

Beggars and Thieves. Xorn scour the depths of the 
earth for precious metal and stones. Because they 
are unable to consume organic material, they ignore 
most other creatures. However, a xorn’s ability to sniff 
out metals and stones often draws its attention to 
adventurers carrying coins and gems. Because a xorn 
isn’t evil, it pleads or bargains in the hope of convincing 
owners to give up their treasure, offering up information 
it has learned from its travels in exchange. A xorn 
whose requests are ignored might resort to threats and 
bullying. If starving or angered, it resorts to force. 


LORN 
7: : 
Medium elemental, neutral 


Armor Class 19 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 73 (7d8 + 42) 
Speed 20 ft., burrow 20 ft. 


; sss. 
STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 

17 (+3) 10 (40) 22(4+6) 11 (40) 10(+0) 11 (+0) 

a 

Skills Perception +6, Stealth +3 

Damage Resistances piercing and slashing from nonmagical 
weapons that aren’t adamantine 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft., 
passive Perception 16 

Languages Terran 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


rrr i 


Earth Glide. The xorn can burrow through nonmagical, 
unworked earth and stone. While doing so, the xorn doesn’t 
disturb the material it moves through. 


Stone Camouflage. The xorn has advantage on Dexterity 
(Stealth) checks made to hide in rocky terrain. 


Treasure Sense. The xorn can pinpoint, by scent, the location of 
precious metals and stones, such as coins and gems, within 60 
feet of it. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The xorn makes three claw attacks and one 
bite attack. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) slashing damage. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (3d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


ie 
_ Armor Class 12 (natural armor) — 

Hit Points 51 (6d10 + 18) 
| Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
Tes) yor Teer S)ee ee (-1) 12 (+1) 7 (2) 


j ' 


Skills Perception +3, Stealth +3 

Damage Immunities cold 

| Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages Yeti 

| Challenge 3 (700 XP) 

_— een 

m | 

_ Fear of Fire. \f the yeti takes fire damage, it has disadvantage 

| on attack rolls and ability checks until the end of its next turn. 


Keen Smell. The yeti has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
\ checks that rely on smell. 


HE MER 


™ s Snow % Carouge The yeti yet 1as advan 


oan checks ma ade to hide ipa owy te rair ‘ 


Multiattack. The yeti can use it its Chilling Gaze and Wianes ioe 
claw attacks. 


Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) slashing damage plus 3 (1d6) cold damage. 


Chilling Gaze. The yeti targets one creature it can see within 30 
feet of it. If the target can see the yeti, the target must succeed 
ona DC 13 Constitution saving throw against this magic or 
take 10 (3d6) cold damage and then be paralyzed for 1 minute, 
unless it is immune to cold damage. The target can repeat the 
saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect 
on itself on a success. If the target’s saving throw is successful, 
or if the effect ends on it, the target is immune to the Chilling 
Gaze of all yetis (but not abominable yetis) for 1 hour. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. S 


p ENCLAVE 


Armor Class 5 frac armor) 
Hit Points 137 (11d12 + 66) 


Pas “Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft. 
i 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
24 (+7) 10(+0) 22 (+6) 9(-1) 13(+1) 9(-1) 
\ nn 
At Skills Perception +5, Stealth +4 


Os ’ Damage Immunities cold 


| Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15 
Languages Yeti 
| Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 


une 


Fear of Fire. \f the yeti takes fire damage, it has disadvantage 
on attack rolls and ability checks until the end of its next turn. 


Keen Smell. The yeti has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on smell. 


| Snow Camouflage. The yeti has advantage on Dexterity 
(Stealth) checks made to hide in snowy terrain. 


— 


c | ACTIONS 


claw attacks. 


{ Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +11 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 14 (2d6 + 7) slashing damage plus 7 (2d6) cold damage. 


t 


Chilling Gaze. The yeti targets one creature it can see within 30 
feet of it. If the target can see the yeti, the target must succeed 
on a DC 18 Constitution saving throw against this magic or 
take 21 (6d6) cold damage and then be paralyzed for 1 minute, 
unless it is immune to cold damage. The target can repeat the 
saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect 
on itself on a success. If the target’s saving throw is successful, 
or if the effect ends on it, the target is immune to this yeti’s 
gaze for 1 hour. 


Cold Breath (Recharge 6). The yeti exhales a 30-foot cone 

of frigid air. Each creature in that area must make a DC 18 
Constitution saving throw, taking 45 (10d8) cold damage ona 
| failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


F) Multiattack. The yeti can use its Chilling Gaze and makes two 


{ 


YETI 


A yeti’s windborne howl sounds out across remote 
mountains, striking fear into the hearts of the scattered 
miners and herders that dwell there. These hulking 
creatures stalk alpine peaks in a ceaseless hunt for 
food. Their snow-white fur lets them move like ghosts 
against the frozen landscape. A yeti’s icy simian eyes 
can freeze its prey in place. 

Keen Hunters. Folk of the high peaks travel in groups 
and go armed, knowing that yetis can smell living 
flesh from miles away. When it finds prey, a yeti moves 
quickly over ice and stone to claim its meal, howling to 
the thrill of the hunt. Even in a blizzard, the scent of its 
quarry draws the yeti through the cold and snow. 

Yetis hunt in solitude or in small family groups. When 
creatures flee from a yeti or engage it in battle, other 
yetis might catch the scent of blood and close in. The 
territorial yetis fight one another for the spoils of such 
battles, and yetis slain in the fight are also eaten, amid 
euphoric howls. 

Terrifying Howlers. Before an avalanche, a blizzard, 
or a deadly frost, the yetis’ howls sweep down the 
mountain slopes on the icy wind. Some people of the 
alpine peaks believe that the voices of loved ones killed 
in avalanches and blizzards sound out in the wails of 
the yetis, crying warnings of ill omen. More pragmatic 
folk attest that the yeti’s howl is a reminder that, despite 
the great accomplishments of civilization, the civilized 
become the hunted in nature’s untamed domain. 

Brutal Rampagers. When mountain herds are 
abundant, yetis stay clear of humanoid realms. Driven 
by hunger, they attack humanoid settlements in 
waves, breaking down gates and stockade walls that 
once might have daunted them, then devouring the 
creatures within. 

Devious mountain folk sometimes use the yetis 
as unwitting weapons. A warlord might lay down 
slaughtered sheep or goats to draw yetis into an enemy’s 
camp, sowing chaos and thinning the ranks before 
battle. Mountain clan chiefs, wanting to expand their 
territory, overhunt local game to diminish the yetis’ food 
supplies, inspiring attacks on humanoid settlements 
that are swiftly annexed in the aftermath. 

Abominable Yetis. An abominable yeti is larger 
than a normal yeti, standing three times as tall asa 
human. It typically lives and hunts alone, though a pair 
of abominable yetis might live together long enough to 
raise young. These towering yetis are highly territorial 
and savage, attacking and devouring any warm-blooded 
creatures they encounter, then scattering the bones 
across the ice and snow. 


YUAN-TI 


Yuan-tiaré devious serpent folk devoid of compassion. 
From remote temples in jungles, swamps, and deserts, 
the yuan-ti plot to supplant and dominate all other races 
and to make themselves gods. 

Forsaken Humanity. The yuan-ti were once humans 
who thrived in the earliest days of civilization and 
worshiped serpents as totem animals. They lauded the 
serpent’s sinuous flexibility, its calculated poise, and 
its deadly strike. Their advanced philosophy taught 
the virtue of detachment from emotion and of clear, 
focused thought. 

Yuan-ti culture was among the richest in the mortal 
world. Their warriors were legendary, their empires 
always expanding. Yuan-ti temples stood at the 
centers of ancient metropolises, reaching ever higher 
in prayer to the gods they longed to emulate. In time, 
the serpent gods heard those prayers, their sibilant 
voices responding from the darkness as they told the 
yuan-ti what they must do. The yuan-ti religion grew 
more fanatical in its devotion. Cults bound themselves 
to the worship of the serpent gods and imitated their 
ways, indulging in cannibalism and humanoid sacrifice. 
Through foul sorcery, the yuan-ti bred with snakes, 
utterly sacrificing their humanity to become like the 
serpent gods in form, as well as in thought and emotion. 

Serpent Kings of Fallen Empires. The yuan-ti view 
their physical transformation as a transcendent moment 
for their race, allowing them to shed their frail humanity 
like dead skin. Those that did not transform eventually 
became slaves or food for the blessed of the serpent 
gods. The yuan-ti empires withered or were defeated by 
those who fought against their cannibalism and slavery, 
and the serpent folk were left in the ruins of their great 
capitals, far removed from other races. 

Cold of Heart. Humanoid emotions are foreign to 
most yuan-ti, which understand sentiment only as an 
exploitable weakness. A yuan-ti views the world and 
the events of its own life with such extreme pragmatism 
that it is nearly impossible to manipulate, influence, or 
control by nonmagical means, even as it seeks to control 
other creatures through terror, pleasure, and awe. 

Yuan-ti know that the world they hope to rule can't be 
bound for long by brute force, and that many creatures 
will refuse to serve. As a result, yuan-ti first influence 
other creatures with the promise of wealth and power. 
Time and again, humanoid cultures make the fatal 
mistake of trusting the yuan-ti. They forget that a yuan-ti 
that acts honorably or lends aid in a time of trouble does 
so only as part of a grander design. 

Yuan-ti leaders are cunning and ruthless tacticians 
who readily sacrifice lesser yuan-ti if potential victory 
justifies such losses. They have no sense of honorable 
combat and strike first in decisive ambush if they can. 

False Worship. Yuan-ti life revolves around their 
temples, yet yuan-ti don’t love the gods they worship. 
Instead, they see worship as a means to attain power. A 
yuan-ti believes an individual who attains enough power 
can deyour and replace one of the yuan-ti gods. The 
yuan-ti strive for ascension and are willing to commit 
the darkest atrocities to achieve it. 


308 


YUAN-TI ABOMINATION 


Monstrous serpents with burly humanoid torsos and 
arms, abominations form the highest caste of yuan-ti 
society, and they most closely resemble the race as the 
serpent gods intended it. They mastermind elaborate 
schemes and perform dark rites in the hope of one day 
ruling the world. 


| YUANLTI 


My | 


“THE YUAN-T! 
NtTy -O 
HUMAN! : 


R SANITY: 
THE! From MAS 


FORBI 


cast OFF T 
NG AGO, AND With 
WW 


pDEN CITY ex.G8 


HEIR 
17, 


TERS OF THE 
fa) ViDAK 


YUAN-TI ABOMINATION 


Large monstrosity (shapechanger, yuan-ti), neutral evil 


— = — ————— 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 127 (15d10 + 45) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4)  16(+3) 17 (+3) 


17 (+3) «15 (+2) ~—-18 (+4) 


——————————— Se 
Skills Perception +5, Stealth +6 
Damage Immunities poison 
Condition Immunities poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 15 
Languages Abyssal, Common, Draconic 
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


ie 


Shapechanger. The yuan-ti can use its action to polymorph 
into a Large snake, or back into its true form. Its statistics are 
the same in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying 
isn’t transformed. It doesn’t change form if it dies. 


Innate Spellcasting (Abomination Form Only). The yuan-ti’s 
innate spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 15). The 
yuan-ti can innately cast the following spells, requiring no 
material components: 


At will: animal friendship (snakes only) 

3/day: suggestion 

I/day: fear 

Magic Resistance. The yuan-ti has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack (Abomination Form Only). The yuan-ti makes two 
ranged attacks or three melee attacks, but can use its bite and 
constrict attacks only once each. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) piercing damage plus 10 (3d6) poison damage. 


Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage, and the target is 
grappled (escape DC 14). Until this grapple ends, the target is 
restrained, and the yuan-ti can’t constrict another target. 


Scimitar (Abomination Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to 
hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage. 


Longbow (Abomination Form Only). Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 
to hit, range 150/600 ft,, one target. Hit: 12 (2d8 + 3) piercing 
damage plus 10 (3d6) poison damage. 


YUAN-TI MALISON 


A malison is a hideous blend of human and serpentine 


features. Three different types of malisons are known 
to exist, and other types are possible. Malisons form 


the middle caste of yuan-ti society and hunt'with arrows 


tipped with their own venom. They use their magical 
powers of sumpestion to force their enemies’ surrender. 


Medium mor dtfosity Chatechingen yuan- ti), mer evil 
Noo 
Armor Class 12 

| Hit Points 66 (12d8 + 12) 


‘Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 14(+2) 1341) 1442) 12(41) 16 (43) 


RR rrr errr 
| Skills Deception +5, Stealth +4 

Damage Immunities poison 
| Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 

Languages Abyssal, Common, Draconic 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


[RR em pe ca 


Shapechanger. The yuan-ti can use its action to polymorph into 


a Medium snake, or back into its true form. Its statistics are 


the same in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or carrying 


isn’t transformed. It doesn’t change form if it dies. 


Innate Spellcasting (Yuan-ti Form Only). The yuan-ti’s innate 

| spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 13). The yuan-ti 
can innately cast the following spells, requiring no material 

| components: 


, At will: animal friendship (snakes only) 
3/day: suggestion 


Magic Resistance. The yuan-ti has advantage on saving throws 
against spells and other magical effects. 


| Malison Type. The yuan-ti has one of the following types: 


Type 1: Human body with snake head 
| Type 2: Human head and body with snakes for arms 
Type 3: Human head and upper body with a serpentine lower 
body instead of legs 


ACTIONS FOR TYPE 1 

_ Multiattack (Yuan-ti Form Only). The yuan-ti makes two 
ranged attacks or two melee attacks, but can use its bite 
only once. 


| Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) poison damage. 


Scimitar (Yuan-ti Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, 
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) slashing damage. 


Longbow (Yuan-ti Form Only). Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to 
hit, range 150/600 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing 
damage plus 7 (2d6) poison damage. 


ACTIONS FOR TYPE 2 


_ Multiattack (Yuan-ti Form Only). The yuan-ti makes two bite 
attacks using its snake arms. 


piercing damage. f 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) poison damage. 


ACTIONS FOR TYPE 3 


Multiattack (Yuan-ti Form Only). The yuan-ti makes two 
ranged attacks or two melee attacks, but can constrict 
only once. 


| 
Bite (Snake Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach | 1 
5 ft., one creature. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage plus 7 
(2d6) poison damage. | 
| 


Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage, and the target is 
grappled (escape DC 13). Until this grapple ends, the target is 
restrained, and the yuan-ti can’t constrict another target. 


Scimitar (Yuan-ti Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, 
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) slashing damage. he 


Longbow (Yuan-ti Form Only). Ranged Weapon Attack: 
+4 to hit, range 150/600 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) | 


SERPENT Gops 


The yuan-ti revere a number of powerful entities as gods, 
including the following. 

Dendar, the Night Serpent. Dendar’s followers say that 
one day she will grow so large from feasting on the fears and 
nightmares of the world that she will devour it whole. Yuan-ti 
that serve Dendar terrorize other creatures in any way they 
can, growing and nurturing the fears of humanoids to feed 
the Night Serpent. 

Merrshaulk, Master of the Pit. Merrshaulk is the long- 
slumbering chief deity of the yuan-ti. As worship of 
Merrshaulk waned, he went into slumber. Merrshaulk’s 
priests are yuan-ti abominations that maintain traditions of 
living sacrifice and cause suffering in the god’s name. With 
enough vile acts, the abominations believe that Merrshaulk 
will reawaken and restore the yuan-ti to their rightful place. 

Sseth, the Sibilant Death. Sseth appeared to the yuan-ti 
of antiquity in the form of a winged yuan-ti claiming to be 
an avatar of Merrshaulk. Speaking with Merrshaulk’s voice, 
Sseth vowed to pull the yuan-ti out of decline and build a 
new empire. Many of Merrshaulk’s devout turned to the 
worship of Sseth. Some yuan-ti have long suspected Sseth 
as an usurper taking advantage of Merrshaulk’s slumber 
to make himself a god. They believe that Sseth might even 
have devoured Merrshaulk, and now answers the prayers of 
Merrshaulk’s followers, as his priests convert or consume 
Merrshaulk’s more stubborn adherents. 


_— — 7 = 
YUAN-TI PUREBLOOD 


Medium humanoid (yuan-ti), neutral evil 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 40 (9d8) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 

/ 11 (40) «12 (+1), 1140) s13 (41) 12 1) 14 (42) 

EEE —————————L 

Skills Deception +6, Perception +3, Stealth +3 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
/ Languages Abyssal, Common, Draconic 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


eee EE 


Innate Spelicasting. The yuan-ti’s spellcasting ability is 
Charisma (spell save DC 12). The yuan-ti can innately cast the 
following spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: animal friendship (snakes only) 
3/day each: poison spray, suggestion 


a Magic Resistance. The yuan-ti has advantage on saving throws 
YUAN-TIPUREBLOOD against spells and other magical effects. 


Purebloods form the lowest caste of yuan-ti society. 
They closely resemble humans, yet a pureblood ACTIONS ee 
can’t pass for human under close scrutiny because Multiattack. The yuan-ti makes two melee attacks. 
there’s always some hint of its true nature, such as 
scaly patches of skin, serpentine eyes, pointed teeth, 
or a forked tongue. Wearing cloaks and cowls, they 


Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) slashing damage. 


masquerade as humans and infiltrate civilized lands to Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range 80/320 
gather information, kidnap prisoners for interrogation ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) 


and sacrifice, and trade with anyone who has something _ poison damage. 
that can further their myriad plots. SS ES 


YUANSTL 


g10 


a ee 


Yugoloths are fickle fiends that inhabit the planes 

of Acheron, Gehenna, Hades, and Carceri. They act 

as mercenaries and are notorious for their shifting 
loyalties. They are the embodiments of avarite. Before 
serving under anyone’s banner, a yugoloth asks the only 
question on its mind: What’s in it for me? 

Spawn of Gehenna. The first yugoloths were 
created by a sisterhood of night hags on Gehenna. It 
is widely believed that Asmodeus, Lord of the Nine 
Hells, commissioned the work, in the hope of creating 
an army of fiends that were not bound to the Nine 
Hells. In the course of making this new army, the hags 
crafted four magic tomes and recorded the true names 
of every yugoloth they created, save one, the General 
of Gehenna. These tomes were called the Books of 
Keeping. Since knowing a fiend’s true name grants 
power over it, the hags used the books to ensure the 
yugoloths’ loyalty. They also used the books to capture 
the true names of other fiends that crossed them. It is 
rumored that the Books of Keeping contain the true 
names of a few demon lords and archdevils as well. 

Petty jealousies and endless bickering caused 
the sisterhood to dissolve, and in the ensuing power 
grab, the Books of Keeping were lost or stolen. No 
longer indentured to anyone, the yugoloths gained 
independence, and they now offer their services to the 
highest bidder. 

Fiendish Mercenaries. Summoned yugoloths 
demand much for their time and loyalty. Whatever 
promises a yugoloth makes are quickly broken when 
a better opportunity presents itself. Unlike demons, 
yugoloths can be reasoned with, but unlike devils, they 
are rarely true to their word. 

Yugoloths can be found anywhere, but the high cost of 
maintaining a yugoloth army’s loyalty typically exceeds 
what any warlord on the Material Plane can pay. 

Being self-serving creatures, yugoloths quarrel 
among themselves constantly. A yugoloth army is more 
organized than a ravening horde of demons, but far less 
orderly and regimented than a legion of devils. Without 
a powerful leader to keep them in line, yugoloths fight 
simply to indulge their violent predilections, and only as 
long as it benefits them to do so. 

Back to Gehenna. When a yugoloth dies, it dissolves 
into a pool of ichor and reforms at full strength on the 
Bleak Eternity of Gehenna. Only on its native plane 
can a yugoloth be destroyed permanently. A yugoloth 
knows this and acts accordingly. When summoned to 
other planes, a yugoloth fights without concern for its 
own well-being. On Gehenna, it is more apt to retreat or 
plead for mercy if its demise seems imminent. 

When a yugoloth is permanently destroyed, its name 
vanishes from every Book of Keeping. If a yugoloth 
is re-created by way of an unholy ritual requiring the 
expenditure of souls, its name reappears in the books. 

The Books of Keeping. When all four copies of the 
Books of Keeping disappeared, Asmodeus and the night 
hags lost control of their yugoloth creations. Each Book 
of Keeping still exists, drifting from plane to plane, 
where the brave and the foolish occasionally stumble 


as itiecribed'! in the Books of Keeplhntt is s forced to setve | 
its summoner obediently. The yugoloth hates being ‘ ii) ht 
controlled in this manner and isn’t shy about making = 
its displeasure known. Like a petulant child, it will 
follow its instructions to the letter while looking for 
opportunities to misinterpret them. 

The General of Gehenna. Somewhere in the 
brimstone wastes of Gehenna, there roams an ultraloth, 
so strong that none contests his power: the General of 
Gehenna. Many yugoloths search for this great general 
in the hope of serving with him. They believe tl ati, 
service with the General of Gehenna grants Poy er “and” 
prestige among lower planar entities. |... » ete Fs SS 

Whatever the case, no fiend finds the General dinless ” fs 
the General desires it. His personal name is unknown, ay 
and even the Books of Keeping contain no mention of’ 
this powerful, thoroughly evil entity. 


oe? 


ARCANALOTH 


Arcanaloths are sly, jackal-headed beings with 
humanoid bodies, but they can employ magic to take any 
humanoid form. They do so to gain the trust of creatures 
with whom they negotiate, replacing jackal snarls with 
winsome smiles. 

Regardless of its chosen form, an arcanaloth appears 
well groomed, clothing itself in fine robes. Highly 
intelligent spellcasters who hunger for knowledge and 
power, arcanaloths command units of lesser yugoloths 
and maintain the contracts, records, and accounts 
of their kind. 

Arcanaloths speak and write all languages, making : 
them cunning diplomats and negotiators. An arcanaloth 
properly paid can broker treaties or alliances with 
subtlety and finesse, just as an arcanaloth who changes 
sides can easily turn the best-laid peace talks into all-out e, me i 
war. What the fiend demands in exchange for its time i 
and talent is information, as well as powerful magic Vile | 
items that it can trade for even more information. Boel { | 

| ~ ‘A i 
VARIANT: YUGOLOTH SUMMONING a 
Some yugoloths have an action option that allows them to 
summon other yugoloths. 

Summon Yugoloth (1 /Day). The yugoloth chooses what to 
summon and attempts a magical summoning. 


‘ae 


¢ An arcanaloth has a 40 percent chance of summoning 
one arcanaloth. 

« Amezzoloth has a 30 percent chance of summoning 
one mezzoloth. 

« A nycaloth has a 50 percent chance of summoning 1d4 
mezzoloths or one nycaloth. 

+ An ultroloth has a 50 percent chance of summoning 1d6 
mezzoloths, 1d4 nycaloths, or one ultroloth. 


A summoned yugoloth appears in an unoccupied space | 
within 60 feet of its summoner, does as it pleases (unless gt 
its summoner is an ultroloth, in which case it acts as anally | “eh 
of its summoner), and can’t summon other yugoloths. The . . 
summoned yugoloth remains for 1 minute, until it or its 
summoner dies, or until its summoner takes a bonus action | 
to dismiss it. u 


MEZZOLOTH 


The bulk of the yugoloth population is made up of 
mezzoloths, which are human-sized insect creatures 
covered in dense chitinous plates. Mezzoloths serve 
as foot soldiers in yugoloth armies, their wide-set eyes 
glowing red as the mezzoloths bear down on their foes. 
Violence and reward are the fundamental drives of 
a mezzoloth, and powerful beings that promise one or 
the other can easily attract them into service. Although 
“it has lethal claws on its four arms, a mezzoloth 
typically wields a trident in two of them. If surrounded 
by enemies, a mezzoloth exhales toxic fumes that can 
choke and kill whole groups of creatures. 


NYCALOTH 


The elite airborne shock troops of the yugoloths, 
nycaloths look like muscular gargoyles. Powerful bat 
wings bear them swiftly aloft in battle, and the razor- 
sharp claws of their hands and feet cut through flesh 
and bone with ease. A nightmarish foe, a nycaloth 
strikes hard and fast without warning, then teleports 
away. It uses its innate magic to turn invisible or 
create illusory doubles of itself, further confounding 
its enemies. 

Nycaloths are the most loyal of the yugoloths. When J 22 
they find an evil master that treats them well, they are 
unlikely to break their agreement unless the reward for . 


doing so is extreme. 4 r v/ : 
ULTROLOTH hae: 


ARCANALOTH "ne 


wy 
/ 3 
‘ 
- 


; Uttr6tiorn 
Ultroloths command the yugoloth armies of the Blood 


War. An ultroloth looks like a slender gray-skinned 
humanoid with an elongated head. Its face bears no 
features except for two ovoid eyes. These eyes can 
become sparkling pools of light that can transfix other 
creatures and leave them reeling and helpless. 
Frequently at one another’s throats, ultroloths 
continually scheme to enhance their own 
power. When not employed to fight in the 
Blood War, ultroloths lead yugoloth 
forces throughout the planes, acting 
as crime bosses or commanders of 
evil mercenary companies. 
With a reputation for cruelty, 
ultroloths command their 
minions to fight while the 
ultroloths stay removed 
from combat themselves. 
Lesser yugoloths know 
their place when facing an 
ultroloth and respond to its 
summons without demand 
for payment. 


NYcaALoTH 


*p 
OWER. WE ALL CRAVE IT, BUT ONLY A 
SELECT FEW OF Us DESERVE jr7.”" 
~ SHEMESHKA THE MarRauvER 
‘ ' 
ARCANALOTH IN Sigit 


© 
GOLOTHS 
312 Meg VC OEOT __ rr | ' — > ae | 


i aC 7 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 104 (16d8 + 32) 
wer 30 ft., fly 30 ft. 

CON 
14 (+2) 


CHA 
17 (+3) 


STR 
17 (+3) 


DEX 
12 (+1) 


INT 
20 (+5) 


WIS 
16 (+3) 


, Saving Throws Dex +5, int +9, Wis +7, Cha +7 
Skills Arcana +13, Deception +9, Insight +9, Perception +7 
Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, 

| piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons 

' Damage Immunities acid, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, poisoned 

Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 17 

Languages all, telepathy 120 ft. 

Challenge 12 (8,400 XP) 


eee 


| Innate Spelicasting. The arcanaloth’s innate spellcasting ability 
_ is Charisma (spell save DC 15). The arcanaloth can innately 
cast the following spells, requiring no material components: 


_ At will: alter self, darkness, heat metal, invisibility (self only), 
magic missile 


Magic Resistance. The arcanaloth has advantage on saving 
_ throws against spells and other magical effects. 


Magic Weapons. The arcanaloth’s weapon attacks are magical. 


Spellcasting. The arcanaloth is a 16th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 17, +9 to hit 
with spell attacks). The arcanaloth has the following wizard 
spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): fire bolt, mage hand, minor illusion, 
prestidigitation 

Ist level (4 slots): detect magic, identify, shield, Tenser’s 
floating disk 

2nd level (3 slots): detect thoughts, mirror image, phantasmal 
force, suggestion 

3rd level (3 slots): counterspell, fear, fireball 

4th level (3 slots): banishment, dimension door 

5th level (2 slots): contact other plane, hold monster 

6th level (1 slot): chain lightning 

7th level (1 slot): finger of death 

8th level (1 slot): mind blank 


ACTIONS 


Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) slashing damage. The target must make a DC 
14 Constitution saving throw, taking 10 (3d6) poison damage 
ona failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


any equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 60 feet to an 


| Teleport. The arcanaloth magically teleports, along with 
| unoccupied space it can see. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


SS eg ————— 


tie) 


22 D LOTH 4 
Medan fiend (yugoloth), Narra evi 


1 REE Class 18 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 75 (10d8 + 30) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 11 (40) 16(+3) 7 (-2) 10 (40) 11 (40) 


_ Skills Perception +3 

_ Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, 
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons 

Damage Immunities acid, poison 


_ Condition Immunities poisoned 


Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 60 ft., 
passive Perception 13 

Languages Abyssal, Infernal, telepathy 60 ft. 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


(Racer 


Innate Spelicasting. The mezzoloth’s innate spellcasting ability 


is Charisma (spell save DC 11). The mezzoloth can innately 
cast the following spells, requiring no material components: 


2/day each: darkness, dispel magic 
1/day: cloudkill 


Magic Resistance. The mezzoloth has advantage on saving 


| throws against spells and other magical effects. 


Magic Weapons. The mezzoloth’s weapon attacks are magical. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The mezzoloth makes two attacks: one with its 
claws and one with its trident. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 9 (2d4 + 4) slashing damage. 


Trident. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft. 


or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) piercing damage, | 


or 8 (1d8 + 4) piercing damage when held with two claws and 
used to make a melee attack. 


Teleport. The mezzoloth magically teleports, along with 
any equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 60 feet to an 
unoccupied space it can see. 


YCALOTH 
a Large fiend (yugoloth), neutral evil 


"Armor Class 18 (natural armor) 
‘Hit Points 123 (13d10 + 52) 
‘Speed 40 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX 
20 (+5) 11 (+0) 


CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4) 12(41) 10 (40) 15 (42) 


| Skills Intimidation +6, Perception +4, Stealth +4 

| Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, 
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons 

Damage Immunities acid, poison 

Condition Immunities poisoned 

| Senses blindsight 60 ft., darkvision 60 ft., } 
passive Perception 14 

Languages Abyssal, Infernal, telepathy 60 ft. 

Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) | 


rrr rrr 


Innate Spellcasting. The nycaloth’s innate spellcasting ability is | 
Charisma. The nycaloth can innately cast the following spells, 
requiring no material components: 


i ea ieee A AT ae RE alt i wei gag eC ee aE he 


4 At will: darkness, detect magic, dispel magic, invisibility (self 
only), mirror image 


Magic Resistance. The nycaloth has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


| Magic Weapons. The nycaloth’s weapon attacks are magical. | 


1 ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The nycaloth makes two melee attacks, or 
it makes one melee attack and teleports before or after 
the attack. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage. If the target is acreature, | 
it must succeed on a DC 16 Constitution saving throw ortake | 
5 (2d4) slashing damage at the start of each of its turns due | 

' 


to a fiendish wound. Each time the nycaloth hits the wounded 
target with this attack, the damage dealt by the wound 
increases by 5 (2d4). Any creature can take an action to stanch 
the wound with a successful DC 13 Wisdom (Medicine) check. 
| The wound also closes if the target receives magical healing. 


= 
a prearle knee kiana iad om see ie oy scale fanaa 


Sa 


Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
5 | target. Hit: 18 (2d12 + 5) slashing damage. 
; 


Teleport. The nycaloth magically teleports, along with any 
/ | equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 60 feet to an 
unoccupied space it can see. 


; YUGOLOT HS 


en Class 19 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 153 (18d8 + 72) 


ee 


- Skills Intimidation +9, Perception +7, Stealth +8 
_ Damage Resistances cold, fire, lightning; bludgeoning, 


Challenge 13 (10,000 XP) 


; a er 


At will: alter self, clairvoyance, darkness, detect magic, detect 


, 3/day each: dimension door, fear, wall of fire 
, Ifday each: fire storm, mass suggestion 


1 

} 

| 

} 

{ 

{ 

| 

_ Innate Spellcasting. The ultroloth’s innate spellcasting ability is 
. Magic Weapons. The ultroloth’s weapon attacks are magical. 
t 


ACTIONS 


, makes three melee attacks. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 


_ Slashing damage if used with two hands. 


_ Hypnotic Gaze. The ultroloth’s eyes sparkle with opalescent 
' light as it targets one creature it can see within 30 feet of it. If 
’ the target can see the ultroloth, the target must succeed on a 


FF teas a ob i new ee 


UL TR OI LOTH Sy 
M ediuim fiend (yugolot, neutral evil 


fu 


| Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX 
16 (+3) 16 (+3) 


CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 18 (+4) 15 (+2) 19 (+4) 


a a tat ss 


piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons 
Damage Immunities acid, poison 
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, poisoned 
Senses truesight 120 ft., passive Perception 17 
Languages Abyssal, Infernal, telepathy 120 ft. 


Charisma (spell save DC 17). The ultroloth can innately cast the 
following spells, requiring no material components: 


thoughts, dispel magic, invisibility (self only), suggestion 


Magic Resistance. The ultroloth has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


Multiattack, The ultroloth can use its Hypnotic Gaze and 


target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage, or 8 (1d10 + 3) 


DC 17 Wisdom saving throw against this magic or be charmed 
until the end of the ultroloth’s next turn. The charmed target is 
stunned. If the target’s saving throw is successful, the target is 
immune to the ultroloth’s gaze for the next 24 hours. 


Teleport. The ultroloth magically teleports, along with any 
equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 60 feet to an 
unoccupied space it can see. 


i 
~~ a 2 
= i 


ZOMBIES 


From somewhere in the darkness, a gurgling moan 
is heard. A form lurches into view, dragging one foot 
as it raises bloated arms and broken hands. The 
zombie advances, driven to kill anyone too slow to 
escape its grasp. 

Dark Servants. Sinister necromantic magic infuses 
the remains of the dead, causing them to rise as 
zombies that do their creator’s bidding without fear or 
hesitation. They move with a jerky, uneven gait, clad 
in the moldering apparel they wore when put to 
rest, and carrying the stench of decay. 

Most zombies are made from humanoid 
remains, though the flesh and bones of any 
formerly living creature can be imbued with 
a semblance of life. Necromantic magic, 
usually from spells, animates a zombie. Some 
zombies rise spontaneously when dark magic 
saturates an area. Once turned into a zombie, 
a creature can’t be restored to life except by 
powerful magic, such as a resurrection spell. 

A zombie retains no vestiges of its former self, 
its mind devoid of thought and imagination. A 
zombie left without orders simply stands in place 
and rots unless something comes along that it 
can kill. The magic animating a zombie imbues 
it with evil, so left without purpose, it attacks any living 
creature it encounters. 

Hideous Forms. Zombies appear as they did in life, 
showing the wounds that killed them. However, the 
magic that creates these vile creatures often takes 
time to run its course. Dead warriors might rise from a 
battlefield, eviscerated and bloated after days in the sun. 
The muddy cadaver of a peasant could claw its way from 
the ground, riddled with maggots and worms. A zombie 
might wash ashore or rise from a marsh, swollen and 
reeking after weeks in the water. 

Mindless Soldiers. Zombies take the most direct 
route to any foe, unable to comprehend obstacles, 
tactics, or dangerous terrain. A zombie might stumble 
into a fast-flowing river to reach foes on a far shore, 
clawing at the surface as it is battered against rocks 
and destroyed. To reach a foe below it, a zombie might 
step out of an open window. Zombies stumble through 
roaring infernos, into pools of acid, and across fields 
littered with caltrops without hesitation. 

A zombie can follow simple orders and distinguish 
friends from foes, but its ability to reason is limited 
to shambling in whatever direction it is pointed, 
pummeling any enemy in its path. A zombie armed 
with a weapon uses it, but the zombie won't retrieve a 
dropped weapon or other tool until told to do so. 

Undead Nature. A zombie doesn’t require air, food, 
drink, or sleep. 


LOMBIE 


Ogee. fOMRIE 


BEHOLDER 
ZOMBIE 


4 = rv ’ 2014 AT RE 315 


Wee 


DEAD SPELL 


se. lt WAS FUN FOR A WHILE, 
L BAD, $O WE DOUSED 
o'vE FOUND 


ON HIS CORP 
LOMBIE STARTED TO SMELL REA ' 
IT IN OIL AND SET it on Fire, BEEK WOUL 


y 
THAT HILARIOUS. 
~ FONKIN HOODYPEAK, 


ON FRIENDSHIP 


TT ama a 

7 

LOM BIE. : 
di V4 LYS . , 


Medium undead, neutral evil 


Oi te ed 


_ Armor Class 8 i, 


"Hit Points 22 (348 + 9) vy) 
_ Speed 20 ft. > TA, ae MOM © ete 
| : 7 OI A DER ZOMBI an i! ; hy 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA rge undead, neutralevil = : ni ~ 
1341), 6 (-2) 163) 3(-4)  6(-2) 5(-3) —— a 
_—anamamannnnnasnmenem Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 

Asi _ Saving Throws Wis +0 Hit Points 93 (11d10 + 33) 


’ Damage Immunities poison i Speed 0 ft., fly 20 ft. (hover) 
_ Condition Immunities poisoned | 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8 


—_—_—~— 


* «STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 


| Languages understands the languages it knew in life but — 1040) «8 (-1) = 16 (43) 38-4) 8-1) 5 (-3) 
can’t speak gman A 
_ Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) _, Saving Throws Wis +2 

| NLL) Damage Immunities poison 


Condition Immunities poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 
, Languages understands Deep Speech and Undercommon but 


can’t speak 
from a critical hit. On a success, the zombie drops to 1 hit ! Chlichae 5 (1,800 XP) 


| point instead. ; 


_ Undead Fortitude. |f damage reduces the zombie to 0 hit 
points, it must make a Constitution saving throw with a DC 
of 5 + the damage taken, unless the damage is radiant or 


(Rr tt 


points, it must make a Constitution saving throw with a DC 
of 5 + the damage taken, unless the damage is radiant or 

| from a critical hit. On a success, the zombie drops to 1 hit 

. point instead. 


| Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


j 
ACTIONS _ Undead Fortitude. |\f damage reduces the zombie to 0 hit 
| Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) bludgeoning damage. 


- OGRE Zon ACTIONS 
em “i a 7 \ . - : — ee” ee ee a 
Large undead, Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 

a Hit: 14 (4d6) piercing damage. 


Eye Ray. The zombie uses a random magical eye ray, choosing 
a target that it can see within 60 feet of it. 


1. Paralyzing Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a 
DC 14 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. 
The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 


+ STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19(44) 6(-2) 18(+4) 3(-4) 6 (-2) 5 (-3) 


' turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


Saving Throws Wis +0 

Damage Immunities poison 

| Condition Immunities poisoned 

, Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8 


2. Fear Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 14 
Wisdom saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. The target 
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, 
ending the effect on itself on a success. 


| Languages understands Common and Giant but can’t speak 


Pe | Challenge 2 (450 XP) 3. Enervation Ray. The targeted creature must make a DC 14 
yh ——eeE——E—E—— ae Constitution saving throw, taking 36 (8d8) necrotic damage on 
row a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 
biome Undead Fortitude. \f damage reduces the zombie to 0 hit 4, Disintegration Ray. \f the target is a creature, it must 

on } points, it must make a Constitution saving throw with a DC succeed on a DC 14 Dexterity saving throw or take 45 (10d8) 
abl | | of 5 + the damage taken, unless the damage is radiant or force damage. If this damage reduces the creature to 0 hit 

th iy! | from a critical hit. On a success, the zombie drops to 1 hit | points, its body becomes a pile of fine gray dust. 

a | point instead. | If the target is a Large or smaller nonmagical object or 


creation of magical force, it is disintegrated without a saving 
, throw. If the target is a Huge or larger nonmagical object 

or creation of magical force, this ray disintegrates a 10-foot 
cube of it. 


ae j 
<a } ASTIONS 
on ' Morningstar. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
| target. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


aie 


en 


ea: lee ae. r 


This appendix contains statistics for various animals, 
vermin, and other critters. The stat blocks are organized 
alphabetically by creature name. 


APE 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 19 (3d8 + 6) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 Gala l4 G2)) 1402) 8-2 Tal) 7(2) 


Skills Athletics +5, Perception +3 
Senses passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The ape makes two fist attacks. 


Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 
6.(1d6+ 3) bludgeoning damage. 


Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 25/50 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage. 


AWAKENED SHRUB 


Small plant; unaligned 


Armor Class 9 
Hit Points 10 (3d6) 
Speed 20 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
3 (-4) 8(-1) 11440) 10(40) 100) = 6(-2) 


Damage Vulnerabilities fire 

Damage Resistances piercing 

Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages one language known by its creator 
Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


False Appearance. While the shrub remains motionless, it is 
indistinguishable from a normal shrub. 


ACTIONS 
Rake. Melee Weapon Attack: +1 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 1 (1d4 - 1) slashing damage. 


An awakened shrub is an ordinary shrub given 
sentience and mobility by the awaken spell or 
similar magic. 


ys Ne MISCELLANEOUS CREATURES 


AWAKENED TREE 
Huge plant, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 59 (7d12 + 14) 
Speed 20 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT. WIS. CHA 
1944) 6 (-2) 15(42) 10(40) 10(40) 7 (-2) 


Damage Vulnerabilities fire 

Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing 
Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages one language known by its creator 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


False Appearance, While the tree remains motionless, it is ‘i 
indistinguishable from a normal tree. ee | 
ACTIONS a 
Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. Tah 
Hit: 14 (3d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


An awakened tree is an ordinary tree given sentience 
and mobility by the awaken spell or similar magic. 


AXE BEAK 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 19 (3d10 + 3) 
Speed 50 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14442) 1241) 1241) 2(-4) 10@0) 5(-3) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages — i” 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) a 


ACTIONS oni 
Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) slashing damage. 


An axe beak is a tall flightless bird with strong legs and i a 
a heavy, wedge-shaped beak. It has a nasty disposition BA. 
and tends to attack any unfamiliar creature that | 
wanders too close. 


OTHER ANIMALS if 
A book of this size can’t contain statistics for every animal in 
inhabiting your D&D campaign world. However, you can 
use the stat block of one animal to represent another easily 
enough. For example, you can use the panther statistics to 
represent a jaguar, the giant goat statistics to represent a 
buffalo, and the hawk statistics to represent a falcon. 


APPENDIX A: MISC SLLANEOUS 6 LEAS 


BABOON 


Small beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 3 (1d6) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
Ri). 1442) 1 0)= 463) 121) 62) 


Senses passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


Pack Tactics. The baboon has advantage on an attack roll 
against a creature if at least one of the baboon’s allies is within 
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


ACTIONS | 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +1 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 1 (1d4 - 1) piercing damage. 


BADGER 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
4 (-3) 11 (40) =: 12 (+1) 2(-4) 12(41) = 5 (-3) 


Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


Keen Smell. The badger has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on smell. 
ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 1 piercing damage. 


ee) 


AT 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 1 (1d4 - 1) 
Speed 5 ft., fly 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA. 
24) = 15(42) Bl) 24) 1241) 463) 


Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


Echolocation. The bat can’t use its blindsight while deafened. 


Keen Hearing. The bat has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that-rely on hearing. 


APPENDIX A; MISGELLANEOUS OREATURES 


———— —— 
—— 


: hand 
Fe SARS eS Le ES ene 
Sea as Ban ST 


a = - - re tee ee 


Hit: 1 piercing damage. 


BLACK BEAR 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 19 (3d8 + 6) 
Speed 40 ft., climb 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (+2) 10(40) 14(42) 2(-4) 121) 7(-2) 


Skills Perception +3 

Senses passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Keen Smell. The bear has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on smell. 
ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The bear makes two attacks: one with its bite and 
one with its claws. 

Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) slashing damage. 


BLINK Doc : es 


Medium fey, lawful good 
Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12 (+1) 17 (43) «12 (41)_—«10 (40)--13 1): 40) 


Skills Perception +3, Stealth +5 

Senses passive Perception 13 

Languages Blink Dog, understands Sylvan but can’t speak it 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Keen Hearing and Smell. The dog has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage. 


Teleport (Recharge 4-6). The dog magically teleports, along 
with any equipment it is wearing or carrying, up to 40 feet to 
an unoccupied space it can see. Before or after teleporting, the 
dog can make one bite attack. 


A blink dog takes its name from its ability to blink in 
and out of existence, a talent it uses to aid its attacks 
and to avoid harm. Blink dogs harbor a long-standing 
hatred for displacer beasts and attack them on sight. 


’ iy 
af a ah 


a es ob a 
a a ae re ere ary 


BLtoop HAWK 
Small beast, unaligned 


‘Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 7 (2d6) 
Speed 10 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
6 (-2) 14 (+2) 10(+0) 3(-4) 14(+2) 5 (-3) 


Skills Perception +4 

Senses passive Perception 14 
Languages — 

Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Keen Sight. The hawk has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on sight. 


Pack Tactics. The hawk has advantage on an attack roll against 
a creature if at least one of the hawk’s allies is within 5 feet of 
the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


ACTIONS _ 
Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


Taking its name from its crimson feathers and 
aggressive nature, the blood hawk fearlessly attacks 
almost any animal, stabbing it with its daggerlike beak. 
Blood hawks flock together in large numbers, attacking 
as a pack to take down prey. 


nm an 


See 


BOAR 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
31 WO) 21) 2(-4) 9-1) pcafes) 
Senses passive Perception 9 

Languages — 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Charge. If the boar moves at least 20 feet cement tow c 
target and then hits it with a tusk attack on the same ‘turn? ‘the 
target takes an extra 3 (1d6) slashing damage. If the target is a". 

creature, it must succeed on a DC 11 Strength saving throw or 
be knocked prone. 


Relentless (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). |f the boar 
takes 7 damage or less that would reduce it to 0 hit points, it is 
reduced to 1 hit point instead. 


ACTIONS 


Tusk. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) slashing damage. 


BROWN BEAR 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 34 (4d10 + 12) 
Speed 40 ft., climb 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4) 10(+0) 16(+3) 2(-4) 13 (41) 7 (-2) 
ee ———— 
Skills Perception +3 
Senses passive Perception 13 
Languages — 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Keen Smell. The bear has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on smell. 
ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The bear makes two attacks: one with its bite and 
one with its claws. 

Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage. 


APPER DLE hil alba El ibe Aso, opr SUES. 


Se oS a ae 


‘ J a 
aa : Ae) pee aes 
OAD be Eas ere OS td pene groans ge tll 
: ? 


CAMEL 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 9 
Hit Points 15 (2d10 +4) 


“Speed 50 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
16 (+3) 8(-1) 14(442) 2(-4) 8 (-1) 5 (~3) 


Senses passive Perception 9 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 2 (1d4) bludgeoning damage. 


CAT 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 2 (1d4) 
Speed 40 ft., climb 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
3(-4) 15(+2) 10(40) 3(-4) 12@1) 7(-2) 


Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4 
Senses passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


Keen Smell. The cat has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 


“checks that rely on smell. 


ACTIONS 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 1 slashing damage. 


CONSTRICTOR SNAKE 


Large beast, unaligned 


! 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (+2) 14 (42) 12 (41) 1(-5) 10(+0) 3 (-4) 


Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 10 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 


Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


APPENDIX A: MISCELLANEOUS CREATURES 


Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 6 (]d8 + 2) bludgeoning damage, and the 
target is grappled (escape DC 14). Until this grapple ends, 
the creature is restrained, and the snake can’t constrict 
another target. 


CRAB 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 2 (1d4) 
Speed 20 ft., swim 20 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
2(-4) = =11 (40) 10(+0) 1(-5) 8(-1) 2 (-4) 


Skills Stealth +2 

Senses blindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 9 
Languages — 

Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


Amphibious. The crab can breathe air and water. 


ACTIONS 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 1 bludgeoning damage. 


CROCODILE 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 19 (3d10 + 3) 
Speed 20 ft., swim 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (+2) 10(40) 131) 2(-4) 10(40) 5 (-3) 


Skills Stealth +2 

Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages — 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Hold Breath. The crocodile can hold its breath for 15 minutes. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 7 (1d10 + 2) piercing damage, and the target is 
grappled (escape DC 12). Until this grapple ends, the target is 
restrained, and the crocodile can’t bite another target. 


7 -3u, ” ’ ho 
ant 


SS 


DEATH DOG 


Medium monstrosity, neutral evil 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 39 (6d8 + 12) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (+2) 14(42) 14(42) 3(-4) 1341) 6(-2) 


Skills Perception +5, Stealth +4 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15 
Languages — 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Two-Headed. The dog has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks and on saving throws against being blinded, charmed, 
deafened, frightened, stunned, or knocked unconscious. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The dog makes two bite attacks. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, it 
must succeed on a DC 12 Constitution saving throw against 
disease or become poisoned until the disease is cured. Every 24 
hours that elapse, the creature must repeat the saving throw, 
reducing its hit point maximum by 5 (1d10) ona failure. This 
reduction lasts until the disease is cured. The creature dies if 
the disease reduces its hit point maximum to 0. 


A death dog is an ugly two-headed hound that roams 
plains, deserts, and the Underdark. Hate burns in a 
death dog’s heart, and a taste for humanoid flesh drives 
it to attack travelers and explorers. Death dog saliva 
carries a foul disease that causes a victim’s flesh to 
slowly rot off the bone. 


fe 
= DeatH-Dis 


DEER 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 4 (1d8) 
Speed 50 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
1140) 16 (43) 1140) = 2(-4) 1442) 5,(43) 


Senses passive Perception 12 
Languages — 
Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


ACTIONS G65 RE ny 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft; ohestaret. a HT 
Hit: 2 (1d4) piercing damage. i 


DIRE WOLF 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 37 (5d10 + 10) | 
Speed 50 ft. i] 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA | 
Be) Wey By) 34 lel) 7 : 


Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4 
Senses passive Perception 13 


Keen Hearing and Smell. The wolf has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell. 


Pack Tactics. The wolf has advantage on an attack roll against a 
creature if at least one of the wolf’s allies is within 5 feet of the 
creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 
10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, it must 
succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or be knocked prone. 


Hit Points 19 (3d10 + 3) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA i 
18 (+4) 10 (+0) 12(41) 2(-4) G0) 7(2) | 


Senses passive Perception 10 


Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


ACTIONS wd 


Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft,, one target. 
Hit: 9 (2d4 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


APPENDIX. At MISCELLANEOUS CREATURES 


a gar 


ieee 


EAGLE 


Small beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 3 (1d6) 
Speed 10 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA : 
6 (-2) 15 (+2) 10(+0) 2(-4) 14(42) = 7 (-2) 


Skills Perception +4 

Senses passive Perception 14 
Languages — 

Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


Keen Sight. The eagle has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) slashing damage. 


ELEPHANT 


Huge beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 76 (8d12 + 24) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
22 (+6) 9(-1) 17(43) 3(-4) 11 (40) 6 (-2) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Trampling Charge. |f the elephant moves at least 20 feet 
straight toward a creature and then hits it with a gore attack 
on the same turn, that target must succeed on a DC 12 
Strength saving throw or be knocked prone. If the target is 
prone, the elephant can make one stomp attack against it as a 
bonus action. 


ACTIONS 
Gore. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 18 (3d8 + 5) piercing damage. 


Stomp. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one prone 
creature. Hit: 21 (3d10 + 5) bludgeoning damage. 


ELK 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 10 
Hit Points 13 (2d10 + 2) 


Speed 50 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 10(40) 12(41) 2(-4) 10440) 6(-2) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


APPENDIX we MIS SELLAN poss CREATURES. 


a _ — —- — 


Charge: ft thé elk moves at least 20 reaver toward-a 
target and ‘then hits it with a ram attack on the same turn, the 
target takes an extra 7 (2d6) damage. If the target is a creature, 
it must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or be 
knocked prone. 


ACTIONS 


Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage. 


Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one prone 
creature. Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) bludgeoning damage. 


FLYING SNAKE 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 
Hit Points 5 (2d4) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 60 ft., swim 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 7 
4 (-3) 18 (+4) «11 (+0) 2 (-4))— 1241) ~—s 5 (-3) 


Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Flyby. The snake doesn’t provoke opportunity attacks when it 
flies out of an enemy’s reach. 


ACTIONS 

Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 1 piercing damage plus 7 (3d4) poison damage. 

A flying snake is a brightly colored, winged serpent 
found in remote jungles. Tribespeople and cultists 


sometimes domesticate flying snakes to serve as 
messengers that deliver scrolls wrapped in their coils. 


FROG 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 1 (1d4 - 1) 
Speed 20 ft., swim 20 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1 (-5) 13 (+41) = 8 (-1) 1(-5) 8 (-1) 3 (-4) 


Skills Perception +1, Stealth +3 

Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages — 

Challenge 0 (0 XP) 


Amphibious. The frog can breathe air and water. 


Standing Leap. The frog’s long jump is up to 10 feet and its 
high jump is up to 5 feet, with or without a running start. 


A frog has no effective attacks. It feeds on small 
insects and typically dwells near water, in trees, or 
underground. The frog’s statistics can also be used to 
represent a toad. 


= Salieri 


——T TSS 


——- rE _ 
Sits ans [en re rear ner 


CuENT Roe 


Huge beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 ' 
Hit Points 157 (15d12 + 60) , 
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
23 (+6) 14(+2) 18 (+4) 7(-2) 12(1) 7(-2) 


Skills Athletics +9, Perception +4 
Senses passive Perception 14 
Languages — 

Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The ape makes two fist attacks. 


Fist. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 22 (3d10 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 


Rock. Ranged Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, range 50/100 ft., one 
target. Hit: 30 (7d6 + 6) bludgeoning damage. 


GIANT BADGER 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 10 
Hit Points 13 (2d8 + 4) 
Speed 30 ft., burrow 10 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (41) 1040) 115 (42) 2(-4) 121) 5 (-3) 


Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Keen Smell. The badger has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on smell. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The badger makes two attacks: one with its bite 


and one with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (2d4 + 1) slashing damage. 


GIANT BAT 


Large beast, unaligned 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (+2) 16 (43) 11440) 2(-4) 12(41) 6 (-2) 


4) 


enses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 11 


Ne ne a — Ee 
es et —— ST he 


Echolocation. The bat can’t use its blindsight while: deafened.’ 
Keen Hearing. The bat has advantage on Wisdom (Perce ption) 
checks that rely on hearing. 

ACTIONS a 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. one creature, 
Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


GIANT BOAR 


Large beast, unaligned 


Sry 7% mari 
Armor Class 12 (natural armor) i: a stot FE 
Hit Points 42 (5d10 + 13) 
Speed 40 ft. Toe” Ree rae 
e Sa , f 4) 


CHA PN : 


STR DEX CON INT. Wis - 
17 (43) 10(40) 16(+3) 2(-4) 2(-2) 5 (-3) 


Senses passive Perception 8 
Languages — 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Charge. If the boar moves at least 20 feet straight toward a 

target and then hits it with a tusk attack on the same turn, the 
target takes an extra 7 (2d6) slashing damage. If the target is a 
creature, it must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or 
be knocked prone. 


Relentless (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). If the boar 
takes 10 damage or less that would reduce it to 0 hit points, it iL 
is reduced to 1 hit point instead. i 


ACTIONS 


Tusk. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage. 


GIANT CENTIPEDE 


Small beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 4 (1d6 + 1) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


a — 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
5 (-3) 14 (+2) =: 12 (+1) 1(-5) 7 (-2) 3 (-4) 


i 


Senses blindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 8 Bi 
Languages — a 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) ; 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage, and the target must succeed 
ona DC 11 Constitution saving throw or take 10 (3d6) poison 
damage. If the poison damage reduces the target to 0 hit 
points, the target is stable but poisoned for 1 hour, even 

after regaining hit points, and is paralyzed while poisoned 

in this way. 


APPENDIX A: MIsci BLLANRO: vsiaeE 


GIANT CONSTRICTOR SNAKE 


Huge beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 60 (8d12 + 8) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA” 
19 (+4) 14(42) 1241) 1(-5) 10(40) 3 (-4) 


Skills Perception +2 

Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages — 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one creature. 


Hit: 11 (2d6 +-4) piercing damage. 


Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage, and the 
target is grappled (escape DC 16). Until this grapple ends, 
the creature is restrained, and the snake can’t constrict 
another target. 


GIANT CRAB 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 13 (3d8) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (41) 915 (+2) ~—-11 (+0) 1(-5) 9(-1) 3 (-4) 


Skills Stealth +4 

Senses blindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 9 
Languages — 

Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Amphibious. The crab can breathe air and water. 


ACTIONS 
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) bludgeoning damage, and the target is 
grappled (escape DC 11). The crab has two claws, each of 


which can grapple only one target. 


Giant EaGte 


APPENDIX A: MISGELLANEO 


/ ? \ ~ a 7 Ly; ‘ 
— —. a ES a teres 


GIANT CROCODILE 
Huge beast, unaligned 
Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 85 (9d12 + 27) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 50 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 


21 (5) 9(-1) 1743) 24) 100) 7,(-2) 


Skills Stealth +5 

Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages — 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Hold Breath. The crocodile can hold its breath for 30 minutes. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The crocodile makes two attacks: one with its bite 


and one with its tail. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 21 (3d10 + 5) piercing damage, and the target is grappled 
(escape DC 16). Until this grapple ends, the target is 
restrained, and the crocodile can’t bite another target. 


Tail. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target 
not grappled by the crocodile. Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) bludgeoning 
damage. If the target is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 16 
Strength saving throw or be knocked prone. 


GIANT EAGLE 


Large beast, neutral good 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 26 (4d10 + 4) 
Speed 10 ft., fly 80 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 17 (43) ~— 13 (+1) 8(-1) 14(42) 10 (40) 


Skills Perception +4 

Senses passive Perception 14 

Languages Giant Eagle, understands Common and Auran but 
can’t speak them 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Keen Sight. The eagle has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The eagle makes two attacks: one with its beak 
and one with its talons. 


Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage. 


A giant eagle is a noble creature that speaks its own 
language and understands speech in the Common 
tongue. A mated pair of giant eagles typically has up 
to four eggs or young in their nest (treat the young as 
normal eagles). 


ee Se Ae OD ee es ee oe. 
Wier es ee a ie 
a 


PP Se yt. 
i, sn 


ee ee ee 


a Nel ert - - 
ids as a 


Pel—eek 
Se ar ee 
1 


GIANT ELK 


Huge beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 42 (5d12 + 10) 


Speed 60 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4) 16 (+3) =—-14 (+2) 7 (-2) 14(2) 10 (+0) 


Skills Perception +4 

Senses passive Perception 14 

Languages Giant Elk, understands Common, Elvish, and Sylvan 
but can’t speak them 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Charge. lf the elk moves at least 20 feet straight toward a 
target and then hits it with a ram attack on the same turn, the 
target takes an extra 7 (2d6) damage. If the target is a creature, 
it must succeed on a DC 14 Strength saving throw or be 
knocked prone. 


ACTIONS 


Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one prone 
creature, Hit: 22 (4d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


The majestic giant elk is rare to the point that its 
appearance is often taken as a foreshadowing of an 
important event, such as the birth of a king. Legends tell 
of gods that take the form of giant elk when visiting the 
Material Plane. Many cultures therefore believe that to 
hunt these creatures is to invite divine wrath. 


GIANT FIRE BEETLE 


Small beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 4 (1d6 + 1) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

8 (-1) 10 (+0) = 12 (+1) 1 (-5) 7 (-2) 3 (-4) 
Oe ee ee 
Senses blindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 8 
Languages — 
Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


iHumination. The beetle sheds bright light in a 10-foot radius 
and dim light for an additional 10 feet. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +1 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 2 (1d6 - 1) slashing damage. 


A giant fire beetle is a nocturnal creature that takes its 
name from a pair of glowing glands that give off light. 
Miners and adventurers prize these creatures, for a 
giant fire beetle’s glands continue to shed light for 1d6 
days after the beetle dies. Giant fire beetles are most 
commonly found underground and in dark forests. 


GIANT FROG 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 18 (48) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12 (+]) 1341) 11 (0) 2 (-4) 10 (+0) — 3 (+4) 


Skills Perception +2, Stealth +3 

Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages — 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Amphibious. The frog can breathe air and water. 


Standing Leap. The frog’s long jump is up to 20 feet and its 
high jump is up to 10 feet, with or without a running start. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage, and the target is grappled 
(escape DC 11). Until this grapple ends, the target is restrained, 
and the frog can’t bite another target. 


Swallow. The frog makes one bite attack against a Small or 
smaller target it is grappling. If the attack hits, the target is 
swallowed, and the grapple ends. The swallowed target is 
blinded and restrained, it has total cover against attacks and 
other effects outside the frog, and it takes 5 (2d4) acid damage 
at the start of each of the frog’s turns. The frog can have only 
one target swallowed at a time. 

if the frog dies, a swallowed creature is no longer restrained 
by it and can escape from the corpse using 5 feet of movement, 
exiting prone. 


vw 
ot 


GIANT GOAT 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 (natural armor) 


_Hit Points 19 (3d10 + 3) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
17 (43) 11440) 12441) «3 (-4), 12 (41)_—s« 6 (-2 


Senses passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Charge. |f the goat moves at least 20 feet straight toward a 
target and then hits it with a ram attack on the same turn, the 
target takes an extra 5 (2d4) bludgeoning damage. If the target 
is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw 
or be knocked prone. . 


Sure-Footed. The goat has advantage on Strength and Dexterity 
saving throws made against effects that would knock it prone. 
ACTIONS 


Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) bludgeoning damage. 


GIANT HYENA 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 45 (6d10 + 12) 


Speed 50 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 14(42) 14(42) 2(-4) 12(+1) 7 (-2) 
nan neem meena emnanemnmmnaaenenneneee 
Skills Perception +3 
Senses passive Perception 13 
Languages — 


Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Rampage. When the hyena reduces a creature to 0 hit points 
with a melee attack on its turn, the hyena can take a bonus 
action to move up to half its speed and make a bite attack. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


GIANT LIZARD 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 19 (3d10 + 3) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA” 
15 (+2) 12(41) 1341) 2(-4) 10440) 5 (-3) 


Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


ABPHNDIX.A; MISGELLANEOUS CREATURES 


i, ae a 
' 


| : 
’ 


he oy -— -~- ee 


ACTIONS adi ill ictal 
Bite, Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one. target: 
Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage. 


A giant lizard can be ridden or used as a draft animal. 
Lizardfolk also keep them as pets, and subterranean 
giant lizards are used as mounts and pack animals by 
drow, duergar, and other Underdark dwellers. 
ON eeeeEEeE—Eeeeeee 
VARIANT: GIANT LIZARD TRAITS 
Some giant lizards have one or both of the following traits. 
Hold Breath. The lizard can hold its breath for 15 minutes. 
(A lizard that has this trait also has a swimming speed 
of 30 feet.) 
Spider Climb. The lizard can climb difficult surfaces, 
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make 
an ability check. 


GIANT OCTOPUS 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 52 (8d10 + 8) 
Speed 10 ft., swim 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
17 (+3) 13 (41) «13. 41) 4-3): 1040) 4 (-3) 


Skills Perception +4, Stealth +5 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages — 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Hold Breath. While out of water, the octopus can hold its 
breath for 1 hour. 


Underwater Camouflage. The octopus has advantage on 
Dexterity (Stealth) checks made while underwater. 


Water Breathing. The octopus can breathe only underwater. 


ACTIONS 


Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 15 ft., one 
target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage. If the target is a 
creature, it is grappled (escape DC 16). Until this grapple ends, 
the target is restrained, and the octopus can’t use its tentacles 
on another target. 


Ink Cloud (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). A 20-foot- 
radius cloud of ink extends all! around the 
octopus if it is underwater. The area is 
heavily obscured for 1 minute, although a 
significant current can disperse the ink. 
After releasing the ink, the octopus can 
use the Dash action as a bonus action. 


Octopus TENTACLE 


a ee el 
a el Elen 
cj “1y 


boat. tart 


GIANT OWL 


- Large beast, neutral 


“Armor Class 12 


Hit Points 19 (3d10 + 3) 
Speed 5 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (41) 15(+2)  12(41) 8 (-1)_—- 13 (41)_—-:10 40) 


Skills Perception +5, Stealth +4 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15 

Languages Giant Owl, understands Common, Elvish, and 
Sylvan but can’t speak them 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Flyby. The owl doesn’t provoke opportunity attacks when it 
flies out of an enemy’s reach. 


Keen Hearing and Sight. The owl has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or sight. 
ACTIONS 


Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (2d6 + 1) slashing damage. 


Giant owls often befriend fey and other sylvan creatures 
and are guardians of their woodland realms. 


GIANT POISONOUS SNAKE 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+40) 18 (+4) 13(41) 2(-4) 10(0) 3 (-4) 


Skills Perception +2 

Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages — 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d4 + 4) piercing damage, and the target must make 
a DC 1] Constitution saving throw, taking 10 (3d6) poison 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. 


, VARIANT: DISEASED GIANT RATS 


Some giant rats carry vile diseases that they spread with their 
bites. A diseased giant rat has a challenge rating of 1/8 (25 

| XP) and the following action instead of its normal bite attack. 

Bite, Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 

Hit: 3: (1d4 + 1) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, 
it must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw or 
contract a disease. Until the disease is cured, the target can’t 
regain hit points except by magical means, and the target's 
hit point maximum decreases by 3 (1d6) every 24 hours. If 

| the target's hit point maximum drops to 0 as a result of this 

| disease, the target dies. 


NOTICE 


0 1H 
NT RAT SHOUL 


QuT THE 
EN SIGHTE ieee ATA 
ve BE a o vist 
nN BY AG 


NANO PRAYER. 


GIANT RATS HA 

CITY. ANVONE BITTE 

TEMPLE FOR MINISTRAT! 

3 EACH 
COIN FOR 

HEREBY oFFERS A SILVER 

THe citY¥ 

GIANT RAT SLAIN with - 

PAYMENT, EVIDENCE MUS 


H 
BETWEEN 
THE DOCKS 
CAPTAIN AT 


cH 
ny 

DELIVERE 

IGHSUN AND DUSK. 


GIANT RAT 


Small beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 7 (2d6) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
7 (-2) 15 (+2) 11 (40) 2(-4) 10(4+0) 4 (-3) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Keen Smell. The rat has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on smell. 


Pack Tactics. The rat has advantage on an attack roll against a 
creature if at least one of the rat’s allies is within 5 feet of the 
creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


GIANT SCORPION 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 52 (7d10 + 14) 
Speed 40 ft. 


} 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (+2) = 13 (41) «15 (+2) 3=1(-5) 99 (-1) 3 (-4) 


Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 9 
Languages — 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The scorpion makes three attacks: two with its 
claws and one with its sting. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) bludgeoning damage, and the target is 
grappled (escape DC 12). The scorpion has two claws, each of 
which can grapple only one target. 


Sting. Melee Weapon Attack; +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature, 


Hit: 7 (1d10 + 2) piercing damage, and the target must make | 


a DC 12 Constitution saving throw, taking 22 (4d10) poison” 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. 


APPENDIX A: MISC 


A 
A 


GIANT SEA HorRSE 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 16 (3d10) 
Speed 0 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR 
12 (+1) 


DEX 
15 (+2) 


CON 
11 (+0) 


INT 
2 (-4) 


WIs 
12 (+1) 


CHA 
5 (-3) 


Senses passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Charge. If the sea horse moves at least 20 feet straight toward 
a target and then hits it with a ram attack on the same turn, the 
target takes an extra 7 (2d6) bludgeoning damage. It the target 
is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 11 Strength saving throw 
or be knocked prone. 


Water Breathing. The sea horse can breathe only underwater. 


ACTIONS 


Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) bludgeoning damage. 


Like their smaller kin, giant sea horses are shy, colorful 
fish with elongated bodies and curled tails. Aquatic elves 
train them as mounts. 


GIANT SHARK 


Huge beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 126 (11d12 + 55) 
Speed 0 ft., swim 50 ft. 


STR 
23 (+6) 


DEX 
11 (+0) 


CON 
21 (+5) 


INT 
1 (-5) 


WIS 
10 (+0) 


CHA 
5 (-3) 


Skills Perception +3 

Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Blood Frenzy. The shark has advantage on melee attack rolls 
against any creature that doesn’t have all its hit points. 


Water Breathing. The shark can breathe only underwater. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 22 (3d10 + 6) piercing damage. 


A giant shark is 30 feet long and normally found in 
deep oceans. Utterly fearless, it preys on anything 
that crosses its path, including whales and ships. 


GIANT SPIDER 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 26 (4d10 + 4) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


STR 
14 (+2) 


DEX 
16 (+3) 


CON 
12 (+1) 


INT 
2 (-4) 


WIs 
11 (+0) 


CHA 
4 (-3) 


Skills Stealth +7 

Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages — 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Spider Climb. The spider can climb difficult surfaces, including 
upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 
ability check. 


Web Sense. While in contact with a web, the spider knows the 
exact location of any other creature in contact with the same web. 


Web Walker. The spider ignores movement restrictions caused 
by webbing. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 


Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage, and the target must make a 
DC 11 Constitution saving throw, taking 9 (2d8) poison damage 
on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 
Ifthe poison damage reduces the target to 0 hit points, the 
target is stable but poisoned for 1 hour, even after regaining hit 
points, and is paralyzed while poisoned in this way. 


Web (Recharge 5-6). Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, 

range 30/60 ft., one creature. Hit: The target is restrained by 
webbing. As an action, the restrained target can make a DC 

12 Strength check, bursting the webbing on a success. The 
webbing can also be attacked and destroyed (AC 10; hp 5; 
vulnerability to fire damage; immunity to bludgeoning, poison, 
and psychic damage). 


To snare its prey, a giant spider spins elaborate webs 
or shoots sticky strands of webbing from its abdomen. 
Giant spiders are most commonly found underground, 
making their lairs on ceilings or in dark, web-filled 
crevices. Such lairs are often festooned with web 
cocoons holding past victims. 


GIANT SPIDER 


i 


GIANT TOAD 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 39 (6d10 + 6) | 
Speed 20 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (42) 13 (41) 13 (+1) 2(-4) 10(+0) 3 (-4) 


Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Amphibious. The toad can breathe air and water. 


Standing Leap. The toad’s long jump is up to 20 feet and its 
high jump is up to 10 feet, with or without a running start. 


ACTIONS 


Hit: 7 (1d10 + 2) piercing damage plus 5 (1d10) poison 
damage, and the target is grappled (escape DC 13). Until this 
grapple ends, the target is restrained, and the toad can’t bite 
another target. 


Swallow. The toad makes one bite attack against a Medium 
or smaller target it is grappling. If the attack hits, the target 
is swallowed, and the grapple ends. The swallowed target 
is blinded and restrained, it has total cover against attacks 
and other effects outside the toad, and it takes 10 (3d6) acid 
damage at the start of each of the toad’s turns. The toad can 
have only one target swallowed at a time. 

If the toad dies, a swallowed creature is no longer restrained 
by it and can escape from the corpse using 5 feet of movement, 
exiting prone. 


GIANT VULTURE 


Large beast, neutral evil 


Armor Class 10 
Hit Points 22 (3d10 + 6) 
Speed 10 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
ist2) 1040) Be Ge Rey) 72 


Skills Perception +3 

Senses passive Perception 13 

Languages understands Common but can’t speak 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Keen Sight and Smell. The vulture has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight or smell. 


Pack Tactics. The vulture has advantage on an attack roll 
against a creature if at least one of the vulture’s allies is within 
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The vulture makes two attacks: one with its beak 
and one with its talons. 


Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


vee ty : 
: i 
ea ere St ere oe a Fev Fe ; nik au . 
——— —mat ¢ = males beh —_ —— a 
Ly ¥ 4 ‘ a5 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Ra | “i 
Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) slashing damage. ES Eng 


A giant vulture has advanced intelligence and a 


° . . « . 7 ie F a 
malevolent bent. Unlike its smaller kin, it will attack a reine a 
wounded creature to hasten its end. Giant vultures have ar 
been known to haunt a thirsty, starving creature for a xe! 


days to enjoy its suffering. 


GIANT WASP 

Medium beast, unaligned 

Armor Class 12 iit tg! Py", 

Hit Points 13 (348) | re 

Speed 10 ft., fly 50 ft. Wet 
STR DEX CON INT WIS. CHA an 


10 (+0) 14(42) 10(+0) 1(-5) 10(+0) 3 (-4) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Sting. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 

Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage, and the target must make 

a DC 11 Constitution saving throw, taking 10 (3d6) poison 

damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 

successful one. If the poison damage reduces the target to 0 

hit points, the target is stable but poisoned for 1 hour, even 

after regaining hit points, and is paralyzed while poisoned ie 
in this way. ay 


GIANT WEASEL 


Medium beast, unaligned a 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 9 (2d8) | 
Speed 40 ft. i 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
11 (+0) «16 (43) 10(40) 4(-3) 12(41) = 5(-3) 


Skills Perception +3, Stealth +5 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Keen Hearing and Smell. The weasel has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Nate 
Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage. ae 


APPENDIX A; MISCELLANEOUS GRE A 
ee er Se 


GIANT WOLF SPIDER 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2) 
Speed 40 ft., climb 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12G1)) 16(3) 131) 3-4 Rey 463) 


Skills Perception +3, Stealth +7 

Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Spider Climb. The spider can climb difficult surfaces, including 
upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 
ability check. 


Web Sense. While in contact with a web, the spider knows 
the exact location of any other creature in contact with 
the same web. 


Web Walker. The spider ignores movement restrictions caused 
by webbing. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage, and the target must make a 
DC 11 Constitution saving throw, taking 7 (2d6) poison damage 
on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 
if the poison damage reduces the target to 0 hit points, the 
target is stable but poisoned for 1 hour, even after regaining hit 
points, and is paralyzed while poisoned in this way. 


hy Smaller than a giant spider, a giant wolf spider hunts 
prey across open ground or hides in a burrow or crevice, 
or in a hidden cavity beneath debris. 


| GOAT 


iy Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 10 
Hit Points 4 (1d8) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA. 
12(+1) 10(+0) 11 (40) 2(-4) 10(40) 5 (-3) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


Charge. \f the goat moves at least 20 feet straight toward a 
target and then hits it with a ram attack on the same turn, the 
target takes an extra 2 (1d4) bludgeoning damage. If the target 
is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 10 Strength saving throw 
or be knocked prone. 


Sure-Footed. The goat has advantage on Strength and Dexterity 
saving throws made against effects that would knock it prone. 
ACTIONS 


Ram. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) bludgeoning damage. 


APPENDIX A: MISGELLANEOUS CREATURES 


HAwK 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 1 (1d4 - 1) 
Speed 10 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
5(-3) 16(43) 8(-1) 2(-4) 14(42) 6(-2) 


Skills Perception +4 

Senses passive Perception 14 
Languages — 

Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


Keen Sight. The hawk has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on sight. 
ACTIONS 


Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 1 slashing damage. 


HUNTER SHARK 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 45 (6d10 + 12) 
Speed 0 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA. 
18 (+4) 13 (41) 15 (42) 1-5) 10 (+0) 4 (-3) 


Skills Perception +2 

Senses blindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages — 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Blood Frenzy. The shark has advantage on melee attack rolls 
against any creature that doesn’t have all its hit points. 


Water Breathing. The shark can breathe only underwater. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage. 


Smaller than a giant shark but larger and fiercer than 
a reef shark, a hunter shark haunts deep waters. It 
usually hunts alone, but multiple hunter sharks might 
feed in the same area. A fully grown hunter shark is 15 
to 20 feet long. 


— +. ere ee 


HYENA 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 5 (1d8 + 1) 
Speed 50 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
(40) «13 G1) «12 (41) 2 (-4))— 12 I) 5 (3) 


Skills Perception +3 

Senses passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


Pack Tactics. The hyena has advantage on an attack roll against 
a creature if at least one of the hyena’s allies is within 5 feet of 
the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 3 (1d6) piercing damage. 


JACKAL 


Small beast, unaligned. 


Aria? Class 12 
Hit Points 3 (1d6) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
8 (-1) 15 (+2) 311 (40) 3(-4) 12(41) ~~ 6 (-2) 


Skills Perception +3 

Senses passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


Keen Hearing and Smell. The jackal has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell. 


Pack Tactics. The jackal has advantage on an attack roll against 
a creature if at least one of the jackal’s allies is within 5 feet of 
the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +1 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 1 (1d4—1) piercing damage. 


HYENA 


KILLER WHALE 


Huge beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 90 (12d12 + 12) 
Speed 0 ft., swim 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
19 (+4) 10(40) 13641) 3(-4) 12 (4) 7.(%2) 


Skills Perception +3 

Senses blindsight 120 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Echolocation. The whale can’t use its blindsight 
while deafened. 


Hold Breath. The whale can hold its breath for 30 minutes. 


Keen Hearing. The whale has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing. 
ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 21 (5d6 + 4) piercing damage. 


LION 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 26 (4d10 + 4) 
Speed 50 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
17 (43) 1542) «13 (441) 3 (-4)) «12 (41) _— 8 (-1) 


Skills Perception +3, Stealth +6 
Senses passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Keen Smell. The lion has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on smell. 


Pack Tactics. The lion has advantage on an attack roll against a 
creature if at least one of the lion’s allies is within 5 feet of the 
creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


Pounce. If the lion moves at least 20 feet straight toward a 
creature and then hits it with a claw attack on the same turn, 
that target must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or 
be knocked prone. If the target is prone, the lion can make one 
bite attack against it as a bonus action. 


Running Leap. With a 10-foot running start, the lion can long 
jump up to 25 feet. 


ACTIONS 
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) slashing damage. 


LIZARD 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 10 
Hit Points 2 (1d4) 
Speed 20 ft., climb 20 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
2(-4) 11 (40) 10(40) 1 (-5) 8 (-1) 3 (-4) 


Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 9 
Languages — 
Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 1 piercing damage. 


MAMMOTH 


Huge beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 126 (11d12 + 55) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
24 (+7) 9(-1) = 21 (+5) 3(-4) 11440) 6(-2) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


Trampling Charge. If the mammoth moves at least 20 feet 
straight toward a creature and then hits it with a gore attack on 
the same turn, that target must succeed on a DC 18 Strength 
saving throw or be knocked prone. If the target is prone, 

the mammoth can make one stomp attack against it as a 
bonus action. 


ACTIONS 


Gore. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 


Hit: 25 (4d8 + 7) piercing damage. 


Stomp. Melee Weapon Attack: +10 to hit, reach 5 ft., one prone 
creature. Hit: 29 (4d10 + 7) bludgeoning damage. 


A mammoth is an elephantine creature with thick 
fur and long tusks. Stockier and fiercer than normal 
elephants, mammoths inhabit a wide range of climes, 
from subarctic to subtropical. 


MastTIFFE 
- 


MASTIFF 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 5 (1d8 + 1) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (+1) 142) 1201) 3-4) Wen 7-2 


Skills Perception +3 

Senses passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Keen Hearing and Smell. The mastiff has advantage on 
Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 
4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, it must 
succeed on a DC 11 Strength saving throw or be knocked prone. 


Mastiffs are impressive hounds prized by humanoids 
for their loyalty and keen senses. Mastiffs can be trained 
as guard dogs, hunting dogs, and war dogs. Halflings 
and other Small humanoids ride them as mounts. 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 10 
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2) { 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14 (+2) 10(+0) 13(41) 2(-4) 1040) 5(-3) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Beast of Burden. The mule is considered to be a Large animal 
for the purpose of determining its carrying capacity. 


Sure-Footed. The mule has advantage on Strength and 
Dexterity saving throws made against effects that would 
knock it prone. 


ACTIONS 


Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) bludgeoning damage. 


OcTOPUS 


Small beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 3 (1d6) 
Speed 5 ft., swim 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA | 
4(-3) 15(+2) 11440) 3(-4) 10(+0) 4 (-3) 


Skills Perception +2, Stealth +4 

Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages — 

Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


Hold Breath. While out of water, the octopus can hold its 
breath for 30 minutes. 


Underwater Camouflage. The octopus has advantage on 
Dexterity (Stealth) checks made while underwater. 


Water Breathing. The octopus can breathe only underwater. 


ACTIONS 


Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 1 bludgeoning damage, and the target is grappled 
(escape DC 10). Until this grapple ends, the octopus can’t use 
its tentacles on another target. 


Ink Cloud (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). A 5-foot- 
radius cloud of ink extends all around the octopus if it is 
underwater. The area is heavily obscured for 1 minute, 
although a significant current can disperse the ink. After 
releasing the ink, the octopus can use the Dash action as a 
bonus action. 


OwL 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 1 (1d4 - 1) 
Speed 5 ft., fly 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
3(-4) 1341) 8-1) 24) 1241) 7,42) 


Skills Perception +3, Stealth +3 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


= 
~*~ 
. 

‘ 


Flyby. The owl doesn’t provoke opportunity attacks wheh it 
flies out of an enemy's reach. 


Keen Hearing and Sight. The owl has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or sight. 
ACTIONS i 


Talons. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 1 slashing damage. 


PANTHER 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 13 (3d8) 
Speed 50 ft., climb 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14 (42) 15 (42) 1040) 3(-4) 14(42) 7(-2) 


Skills Perception +4, Stealth +6 
Senses passive Perception 14 
Languages — 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Keen Smell. The panther has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on smell. 


Pounce. If the panther moves at least 20 feet straight toward a 
creature and then hits it with a claw attack on the same turn, | 
that target must succeed on a DC 12 Strength saving throw or fj 
be knocked prone. If the target is prone, the panther can make 


one bite attack against it as a bonus action. dé 

hi 
ACTIONS | , 
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. H 
Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. - 
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. , 
Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) slashing damage. 


it 


PHASE SPIDER 


Large monstrosity, unaligned 


? 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 


Hit Points 32 (5d10 + 5) 


Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (+2) 15(+2) 12(41) 6(-2) 1040) 6(-2) 


Skills Stealth +6 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages — 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Ethereal Jaunt. As a bonus action, the spider can magically 
shift from the Material Plane to the Ethereal Plane, or 
vice versa. 


Spider Climb. The spider can climb difficult surfaces, including 
upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 
ability check. 


Web Walker. The spider ignores movement restrictions caused 
by webbing. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 7 (1d10 + 2) piercing damage, and the target must make 
a DC 11 Constitution saving throw, taking 18 (4d8) poison 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. If the poison damage reduces the target to 0 
hit points, the target is stable but poisoned for 1 hour, even 
after regaining hit points, and is paralyzed while poisoned 

in this way. 


A phase spider possesses the magical ability to phase 
in and out of the Ethereal Plane. It seems to appear 

out of nowhere and quickly vanishes after attacking. Its 
movement on the Ethereal Plane before coming back to 
the Material Plane makes it seem like it can teleport. 


: Led rel ss : = 3 

type oe ee 2 J 
——= i—.— = ee. —————— 
i —— ee CS —————— - a 


iv 


POISONOUS SNAKE | 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 2 (1d4) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
2(-4) 16(+3) 11(40) 1(-5) 10(40) 3 (-4) 


Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 1 piercing damage, and the target must make a DC 10 
Constitution saving throw, taking 5 (2d4) poison damage on a 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


POLAR BEAR 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 42 (5d10 + 15) 
Speed 40 ft., swim 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
20 (+5) 10(+0) 16(43) 2(-4) 13441) 7 (-2) 


Skills Perception +3 

Senses passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Keen Smell. The bear has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on smell. 


ACTIONS 

Multiattack. The bear makes two attacks: one with its bite and 
one with its claws. 

Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 9 (1d8 + 5) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage. 


VARIANT: CAVE BEAR 

Some bears have adapted to life underground, feeding on 
subterranean lichen and blind fish. Known as cave bears, 
these ill-tempered behemoths have coarse, dark hair and 


| darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. Otherwise, they have the 


same statistics as a polar bear. 


4 APPENDIX A: MISGEL 


PONY 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 10 
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA | 
15 (+2) 10 (+0) 13(+1) 2(-4) 11 (40) 7 (-2) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) bludgeoning damage. 


QUIPPER 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 1 (1d4 - 1) 
Speed 0 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA | 
2(-44 16(+3) 9 (-1) 1(-5) 7 (-2) 2 (-4) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8 
Languages — 
Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


Blood Frenzy. The quipper has advantage on melee attack rolls 
against any creature that doesn’t have all its hit points. 


Water Breathing. The quipper can breathe only underwater. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 1 piercing damage. 


A quipper is a carnivorous fish with sharp teeth. 
Quippers can adapt to any aquatic environment, 
including cold subterranean lakes. They frequently 
gather in swarms; the statistics for a swarm of quippers 
appear later in this appendix. 


RAT 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 10 
Hit Points 1 (1d4 - 1) 
Speed 20 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
2(-4) (40) 9-1) 2-4) 1040) 4(-3) 


Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 10 


Keen Smell. The rat has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on smell. 
ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 1 piercing damage. 


RAVEN 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 1 (1d4 - 1) 
Speed 10 ft., fly 50 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
2(-4) = 14(+2) = 8 (-1) 2(-4) 12(41) ~~ 6 (-2) 


Skills Perception +3 

Senses passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


Mimicry. The raven can mimic simple sounds it has heard, 
such as a person whispering, a baby crying, or an animal 
chittering. A creature that hears the sounds can tell they are 
imitations with a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Insight) check. 


ACTIONS 


Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 1 piercing damage. 


Quippers 


APPENDIX, 4) MIS 


_ APPENDIX A: MISGELLANEOUS CREATURES 


REEF SHARK 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4) 
Speed 0 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14 (42) 1341) 13(1) 1(-5) 10(4+0) 4 (-3) 


Skills Perception +2 

Senses blindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages — 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Pack Tactics. The shark has advantage on an attack roll against 
a creature if at least one of the shark’s allies is within 5 feet of 
the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


Water Breathing. The shark can breathe only underwater. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage. 


Smaller than giant sharks and hunter sharks, reef 
sharks inhabit shallow waters and coral reefs, gathering 
in small packs to hunt. A full-grown specimen measures 
6 to 10 feet long. 


RHINOCEROS 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 45 (6d10 + 12) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
65) 81) 3862) 264 IZM), 62 


Senses passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Charge. |f the rhinoceros moves at least 20 feet straight toward 
a target and then hits it with a gore attack on the same turn, 
the target takes an extra 9 (2d8) bludgeoning damage. If the 
target is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving 
throw or be knocked prone. 


ACTIONS 


Gore. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) bludgeoning damage. 


=f = r = St 


RIDING HorsE 


Large beast, unalighed 


Armor Class 10 
Hit Points 13 (2d10 + 2) 
Speed 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 10(40) 12(41) 2(-4) (40) 7(-2) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) bludgeoning damage. 


SABER-ILOOTHED TIGER 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 52 (7d10 + 14) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 14(42) 15 (42) 3-4) 1241) 8 (-1) 


Skills Perception +3, Stealth +6 
Senses passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Keen Smell. The tiger has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on smeil. 


Pounce. |f the tiger moves at least 20 feet straight toward a 
creature and then hits it with a claw attack on the same turn, 
that target must succeed on a DC 14 Strength saving throw or 
be knocked prone. If the target is prone, the tiger can make one 
bite attack against it as a bonus action. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 10 (1d10 + 5) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage. 


SCORPION 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 1 (1d4 - 1) 
Speed 10 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
2(-4) 11 (+0) = 8 (-1) 1 (-5) 8 (-1) 2 (-4) 


Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 9 
Languages — 
Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Sting. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 


Hit: 1 piercing damage, and the target must make a DC 9 
Constitution saving throw, taking 4 (1d8) poison damage ona 
failed save, or halfas much damage on a successful one. 


SEA HORSE 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 1 (1d4 - 1) 
Speed 0 ft., swim 20 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA | 
1 (-5) 12 (41) 8 (-1) 1(-5) 10 (+0) 2 (-4) 


Senses passive Perception 10 


Water Breathing. The sea horse can breathe only underwater. 


SPIDER 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 1 (1d4 - 1) 
Speed 20 ft., climb 20 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
2(-4) 14442) 8(-1) 1-5) 1040) 2 (-4) 


Skills Stealth +4 

Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages — 

Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


Spider Climb. The spider can climb difficult surfaces, including 
upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 
ability check. 


Web Sense. While in contact with a web, the spider knows 
the exact location of any other creature in contact with 
the same web. 


Web Walker. The spider ignores movement restrictions caused 
by webbing. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 1 piercing damage, and the target must succeed on a DC 9 
Constitution saving throw or take 2 (1d4) poison damage. 


SWARM OF BATS 


Medium swarm of Tiny beasts, unaligned 


{ 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 22 (5d8) 
Speed 0 ft., fly 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
5 (-3) 15 (+2) 10(+0) 2(-4) 12(+1) 4(-3) 


— 


Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, slashing 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, paralyzed, 
petrified, prone, restrained, stunned 

Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 11 

Languages — 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Echolocation. The swarm can’t use its blindsight 
while deafened. 


Keen Hearing. The swarm has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing. 


Swarm. The swarm can occupy another creature’s space and 
vice versa, and the swarm can move through any opening large 
enough for a Tiny bat. The swarm can’t regain hit points or 
gain temporary hit points. 


ACTIONS 


Bites. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 0 ft., one creature 
in the swarm’s space. Hit: 5 (2d4) piercing damage, or 2 (1d4) 
piercing damage if the swarm has half of its hit points or fewer. 


THE NATURE OF SWARMS 


The swarms presented here aren’t ordinary or benign 
assemblies of little creatures. They form as a result of some 
sinister or unwholesome influence. A vampire can summon 
swarms of bats and rats from the darkest corners of the 
night, while the very presence of a mummy lord can cause 
scarab beetles to boil up from the sand-filled depths of its 
tomb. A hag might have the power to turn swarms of ravens 
against her enemies, while a yuan-ti abomination might have 
swarms of poisonous snakes slithering in its wake. Even 
druids can’t charm these swarms, and their aggressiveness 
is borderline unnatural. 


a ea 


CREATURE) = 


a SWARM OF INSECTS 


Medium swarm of Tiny beasts, unaligned 


t m Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 

aM Hit Points 22 (5d8) 

a Speed 20 ft., climb 20 ft. 

fo | : ms 

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
3(-4) 13(41) 10(40) 1(-5) 7 (-2) 1 (-5) 
EH SS 
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, slashing 
Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, paralyzed, 
petrified, prone, restrained, stunned 

Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 8 
Languages — 

i Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 

I ————————————LL— SS ee 

| Swarm. The swarm can occupy another creature’s space and 

} vice versa, and the swarm can move through any opening large 

enough for a Tiny insect. The swarm can’t regain hit points or 

{ gain temporary hit points. 

| ACTIONS 
Bites. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 0 ft., one target in 
the swarm’s space. Hit: 10 (4d4) piercing damage, or 5 (2d4) 
piercing damage if the swarm has half of its hit points or fewer. 
SWARM OF POISONOUS SNAKES 

q Medium swarm of Tiny beasts, unaligned 

t 

ih Armor Class 14 

9 Hit Points 36 (8d8) 

m7. Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft. 

Bi 

a STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 


ey 8(-1) 18(+4) 11(440) 1(-5) 10(40) 3 (-4) 


Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, slashing 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, paralyzed, 
petrified, prone, restrained, stunned 

Senses blindsight 10 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages — 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Swarm. The swarm can occupy another creature’s space and 
vice versa, and the swarm can move through any opening large 
enough for a Tiny snake. The swarm can’t regain hit points or 
gain temporary hit points. 


ACTIONS 


in the swarm’s space. Hit: 7 (2d6) piercing damage, or 3 (1d6) 
Bh piercing damage if the swarm has half of its hit points or fewer. 
The target must make a DC 10 Constitution saving throw, 

it taking 14 (4d6) poison damage on a failed save, or half as 
much damage on a successful one. 


ade §. APPENDIX)A: MISCELLANEOUS CREATURES. 


n€ 


Bites. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 0 ft., one creature 


—-- . ee 


VARIANT: INSECT SWARMS 
Different kinds of insects can gather in swarms, and each 
swarm has the special characteristics described below. 

Swarm of Beetles. A swarm of beetles gains a burrowing 
speed of 5 feet. 

Swarm of Centipedes. A creature reduced to 0 hit points 
by a swarm of centipedes is stable but poisoned for 1 
hour, even after regaining hit points, and paralyzed while 
poisoned in this way. 

Swarm of Spiders. A swarm of spiders has the following 
additional traits. 

Spider Climb. The swarm can climb difficult surfaces, 
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make 
an ability check. 

Web Sense. While in contact with a web, the swarm knows 
the exact location of any other creature in contact with 
the same web. 

Web Walker. The swarm ignores movement restrictions 
caused by webbing. 

Swarm of Wasps. A swarm of wasps has a walking speed of 
5 feet, a flying speed of 30 feet, and no climbing speed. 


SWARM OF QUIPPERS 


Medium swarm of Tiny beasts, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 28 (8d8 ~ 8) 
Speed 0 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (41) 1643) 9(-1) 1-5) 7(-2) 2(¢-4) 


Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, slashing 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, paralyzed, 
petrified, prone, restrained, stunned 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8 

Languages — 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Blood Frenzy. The swarm has advantage on melee attack rolls 
against any creature that doesn’t have all its hit points. 


Swarm. The swarm can occupy another creature’s space and 
vice versa, and the swarm can move through any opening large 
enough for a Tiny quipper. The swarm can’t regain hit points or 
gain temporary hit points. 


Water Breathing. The swarm can breathe only underwater. 


ACTIONS 


Bites. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 0 ft., one creature 
in the swarm’s space. Hit: 14 (4d6) piercing damage, or 7 (2d6) 
piercing damage if the swarm has half of its hit points or fewer. 


Medium swarm of Tiny beasts, unaligned 


Armor Class 10 
Hit Points 24 (7d8 - 7) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
9(-1) (0) 9(-1) 2(-4) 1040) 3(-4) 


Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, slashing 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, paralyzed, 
petrified, prone, restrained, stunned 

Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages — 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Keen Smell. The swarm has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on smell. 


Swarm. The swarm can occupy another creature’s space and 
vice versa, and the swarm can move through any opening large 
enough for a Tiny rat. The swarm can’t regain hit points or gain 
temporary hit points. 


ACTIONS '¥ 
Bites. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 0 ft., one target in 


the swarm’s space. Hit: 7 (2d6) piercing damage, or 3 (1d6) 
piercing damage if the swarm has half of its hit points or fewer. 


SWARM OF RAVENS 


Medium swarm of Tiny beasts, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 24 {7d - 7) 
Speed 10 ft., fly 50 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
6(-2) 1442) 8tl) 34 12@1) 6(2) 


Skills Perception +5 

Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, slashing 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, paralyzed, 
petrified, prone, restrained, stunned 

Senses passive Perception 15 

Languages — 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Swarm. The swarm can occupy another creature’s space and 
vice versa, and the swarm can move through any opening large 
enough for a Tiny raven. The swarm can't regain hit points or 
gain temporary hit points. 


ACTIONS 


Beaks. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target 


in the swarm’s space. Hit: 7 (2d6) piercing damage, or 3 (1d6) 
piercing damage if the swarm has half of its hit points or fewer. 


TIGER 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 37 (5d10 + 10) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
17 (43) 15 (42) 14(42) 3-4) 1241) 8 (1) 


Skills Perception +3, Stealth +6 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages — : 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Bir c 


Keen Smell. The tiger has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on smell. 


Pounce. |f the tiger moves at least 20 feet straight toward a 
creature and then hits it with a claw attack on the same turn, 
that target must succeed on a DC 73 Strength saving throw or 
be knocked prone. If the target is prone, the tiger can make one 
bite attack against it as a bonus action. 


ACTIONS 
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (1d10 + 3) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage. 


VULTURE 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 10 
Hit Points 5 (1d8 + 1) 
Speed 10 ft., fly 50 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
7(-2) 1040) 1341) 2(-4 12@1)) 4 (43) 


Skills Perception +3 

Senses passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


Keen Sight and Smell. The vulture has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight or smell. 


Pack Tactics. The vulture has advantage on an attack roll 
against a creature if at least one of the vulture’s allies is within 
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


ACTIONS 


Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 2 (1d4) piercing damage. 


APPENDIX 3: SUS CELLAN! Our 


= 


340 


WARHORSE 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 19 (3d10 + 3) 


Speed 60 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
ine. 2G) Bey #64 wel) 7A 


Senses passive Perception 11 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Trampling Charge. |f the horse moves at least 20 feet straight 
toward a creature and then hits it with a hooves attack on 

the same turn, that target must succeed on a DC 14 Strength 
saving throw or be knocked prone. if the target is prone, the 
horse can make another attack with its hooves against it as a 
bonus action. 


ACTIONS 


Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


° ah 
NINTER WoLF 


ABPENDIX A: MISGELLANEOUS OREATURES 


‘“ 


VARIANT: WARHORSE ARMOR 

An armored warhorse has an AC based on the type of barding 
worn (see the Player’s Handbook for more information on 
barding). The horse’s AC includes its Dexterity modifier, 
where applicable. Barding doesn’t alter the horse’s 

challenge rating. 


AC Barding AC Barding 

12 Leather 16 Chain mail 
13 Studded leather Wi Splint 

14 Ring mail 18 Plate 


15 Scale mail 


WEASEL 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 1 (1d4 - 1) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
g(4) 3) (C1) 2e4) Bray BCH 


Skills Perception +3, Stealth +5 
Senses passive Perception 13 


Keen Hearing and Smell. The weasel has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell. 
ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 1 piercing damage. 


WINTER WOLF 


Large monstrosity, neutral evil 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 75 (10d10 + 20) 


Speed 50 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
we) Wel) Woe 7G) ey eC 


Skills Perception +5, Stealth +3 

Damage Immunities cold 

Senses passive Perception 15 

Languages Common, Giant, Winter Wolf 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Keen Hearing and Smell. The wolf has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell. 


Pack Tactics. The wolf has advantage on an attack roll against a 
creature if at least one of the wolf's allies is within 5 feet of the 
creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


Snow Camouflage. The wolf has advantage on Dexterity 
(Stealth) checks made to hide in snowy terrain. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, 
it must succeed on a DC 14 Strength saving throw or be 
knocked prone. ( 


Cold Breath (Recharge 5-6). The wolf exhales a blast of freezing 
wind in a 15-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a 
DC 12 Dexterity saving throw, taking 18 (4d8) cold damage on 
a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


The arctic-dwelling winter wolf is as large as a dire 
wolf but has snow-white fur and pale blue eyes. Frost 
giants use these evil creatures as guards and hunting 
companions, putting the wolves’ deadly breath weapon 
to use against their foes. Winter wolves communicate 
with one another using growls and barks, but they 
speak Common and Giant well enough to follow simple 
conversations. 


WOLF 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12 (+1) 15(42) 12(41) =3(-4) 12(41)— 6 (-2) 


Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4 
Senses passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Keen Hearing and Smell. The wolf has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell. 


Pack Tactics. The wolf has advantage on attack rolls against a 
creature if at least one of the wolf’s allies is within 5 feet of the 
creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, 
it must succeed on a DC 11 Strength saving throw or be 
knocked prone. 


= 


WorG 


Large monstrosity, neutral evil 


Armor Class 13 (natural arrnor) 
Hit Points 26 (4d10 + 4) 
Speed 50 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 13(41) 134) 7(¢-2) 10) 8(+1) 


Skills Perception +4 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 14 
Languages Goblin, Worg 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Keen Hearing and Smell. The worg has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smell. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, 
it must succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or be 
knocked prone. 


A worg is an evil predator that delights in hunting and 
devouring creatures weaker than itself. Cunning and 
malevolent, worgs roam across the remote wilderness 
or are raised by goblins and hobgoblins. Those 
creatures use worgs as mounts, but a worg will turn on 
its rider if it feels mistreated or malnourished. Worgs 
speak in their own language and Goblin, and a few learn 
to speak Common as well. 


anh . 
APPENDIX B; NONPLAYER CHARACTERS 
: ee = — 


APPENDIX B: NONPLAYER 


This appendix contains statistics for various humanoid 
nonplayer characters (NPCs) that adventurers might 
encounter during a D&D campaign, including lowly 
commoners and mighty archmages. These stat 

blocks can be used to represent both human and 
nonhuman NPCs. 


CUSTOMIZING NPCs 


There are many easy ways to customize the NPCs in 
this appendix for your home campaign. 

Racial Traits. You can add racial traits to an NPC. 
For example, a halfling druid might have a speed of 25 
feet and the Lucky trait. Adding racial traits to an NPC 
doesn’t alter its challenge rating. For more on racial 
traits, see the Player's Handbook. 

Spell Swaps. One way to customize an NPC 
spellcaster is to replace one or more of its spells. You 
can substitute any spell on the NPC's spell list with a 
different spell of the same level from the same spell list. 
Swapping spells in this manner doesn’t alter an NPC’s 
challenge rating. 

Armor and Weapon Swaps. You can upgrade or 
downgrade an NPC’s armor, or add or switch weapons. 
Adjustments to Armor Class and damage can change 
an NPC’s challenge rating, as explained in the Dungeon 
Master's Guide. 

Magic Items. The more powerful an NPC, the more 
likely it has one or more magic items in its possession. 
An archmage, for example, might have a magic staff or 
wand, as well as one or more potions and scrolls. Giving 
an NPC a potent damage-dealing magic item could alter 
its challenge rating. Magic items, as well as adjusting 


» acreature's challenge rating, are described in the 
* Dungeon Master's Guide. 


- ACOLYTE 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


- 


Armor Class 10 
Hit Points 9 (2d8) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 10(+0) 10(+0) 10(+0) 14 (+2) 


11 (+0) 


Skills Medicine +4, Religion +2 

Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Spellcasting. The acolyte is a 1st-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 12, +4 to hit with 
spell attacks). The acolyte has following cleric spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): light, sacred flame, thaumaturgy 
Ist level (3 slots): bless, cure wounds, sanctuary 


ee 
— 


a 


ri ee 


i ha be Pass i ‘Le i] 
Pr di bs - i pert oh a ee ee 
a * Se ed EEE 
1 =, ity ae, I 1 7 


CHARACTERS 


ACTIONS 


Club. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 2 (1d4) bludgeoning damage. 


Acolytes are junior members of a clergy, usually 
answerable to a priest. They perform a variety of 
functions in a temple and are granted minor spellcasting 
power by their deities. 


ARCHMAGE 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 12 (15 with mage armor) 
Hit Points 99 (18d8 + 18) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (40) 14(42) 12(41) 20645) 15(42) 16 (+3) 


Saving Throws Int +9, Wis +6 

Skills Arcana +13, History +13 

Damage Resistance damage from spells; nonmagical 
bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing (from stoneskin) 

Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages any six languages 

Challenge 12 (8,400 XP) 


a rg 


Magic Resistance, The archmage has advantage on saving 
throws against spells and other magical effects. 


Spelicasting. The archmage is an 18th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 17, +9 to hit 
with spell attacks). The archmage can cast disguise self and 
invisibility at will and has the following wizard spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): fire bolt, light, mage hand, prestidigitation, 
shocking grasp 

Ist level (4 slots): detect magic, identify, mage armor,* 
magic missile 

2nd level (3 slots): detect thoughts, mirror image, misty step 

3rd level (3 slots): counterspell, fly, lightning bolt 

Ath level (3 slots): banishment, fire shield, stoneskin* 

5th level (3 slots): cone of cold, scrying, wall of force 

6th level (1 slot): globe of invulnerability 

7th level (1 slot): teleport 

8th level (1 slot): mind blank* 

9th level (1 slot): time stop 


*The archmage casts these spells on itself before combat. 


ACTIONS 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft. 
or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


Archmages are powerful (and usually quite old) 
spellcasters dedicated to the study of the arcane arts. 
Benevolent ones counsel kings and queens, while evil 
ones rule as tyrants and pursue lichdom. Those who are 
neither good nor evil sequester themselves in remote 
towers to practice their magic without interruption. 

An archmage typically has one or more apprentice 
mages, and an archmage’s abode has numerous magical 
wards and guardians to discourage interlopers. 


ASSASSIN 


Medium humanoid (any race), any non-good alignment 


Armor Class 15 (studded leather) 
Hit Points 78 (12d8 + 24) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON ‘INT WIS CHA 
11 (40) 16(43) 14(42) + 13(41) 11440) 10(40) 


Saving Throws Dex +7, Int +5 

Skills Acrobatics +7, Deception +4, Perception +4, Stealth +11 
Damage Resistances poison 

Senses passive Perception 14 

Languages Thieves’ cant plus any two languages 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 
El ————— 


Assassinate. During its first turn, the assassin has advantage 
on attack rolls against any creature that hasn't taken a turn. 
Any hit the assassin scores against a surprised creature 

is a critical hit. 


Evasion. lf the assassin is subjected to an effect that allows it 
to make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, the 
assassin instead takes no damage if it succeeds on the saving 
throw, and only half damage if it fails. 


Sneak Attack (1/Turn). The assassin deals an extra 13 (4d6) 
damage when it hits a target with a weapon attack and has 
advantage on the attack roll, or when the target is within 5 
feet of an ally of the assassin that isn’t incapacitated and the 
assassin doesn’t have disadvantage on the attack roll. 


ACTIONS | 
Multiattack. The assassin makes two shortsword attacks. 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage, and the target must 
make a DC 15 Constitution saving throw, taking 24 (7d6) 
poison damage on a failed save, or half as much damage ona 
successful one. 


Light Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, range 80/320 


ft., one target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage, and the target 
must make a DC 15 Constitution saving throw, taking 24 (7d6) 
poison damage on a failed save, or half as much damage ona 

successful one. 


Trained in the use of poison, assassins are remorseless 


killers who work for nobles, guildmasters, sovereigns, 
and anyone else who can afford them. 


BANDIT 


Medium humanoid (any race), any non-lawful alignment 


Armor Class 12 (leather armor) 
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
11 (0) «12 (41) =12(41) 10440) 10(4+0) 10 (+0) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


ACTIONS | 


Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one” 
target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) slashing damage. 


Light Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range 80 
ft./320 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d8 + 1) piercing damage. 


ARCHMAGE 


| acral ae Re 
sa | 


yr. 


Bandits rove in gangs and are sometimes led by thugs, 
veterans, or spellcasters. Not all bandits are evil. 
Oppression, drought, disease, or famine can often drive 
otherwise honest folk to a life of banditry. 

Pirates are bandits of the high seas. They might be 
freebooters interested only in treasure and murder, or 
they might be privateers sanctioned by the crown to 
attack and plunder an enemy nation’s vessels. 


BANDIT CAPTAIN 


Medium humanoid (any race), any non-lawful alignment 


Armor Class 15 (studded leather) 
Hit Points 65 (10d8 + 20) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (+2) 16 (+3) 1442) 14(+2) 1140) 14 (42) 


Saving Throws Str +4, Dex +5, Wis +2 
Skills Athletics +4, Deception +4 
Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages any two languages 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The captain makes three melee attacks: two with 


its scimitar and one with its dagger. Or the captain makes two 
ranged attacks with its daggers. 


Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) slashing damage. 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. 


or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage. 


REACTIONS 


Parry. The captain adds 2 to its AC against one melee attack 
that would hit it. To do so, the captain must see the attacker 
and be wielding a melee weapon. 


It takes a strong personality, ruthless 
cunning, and a silver tongue to keep a gang 
of bandits in line. The bandit captain has 
these qualities in spades. 

In addition to managing a crew of selfish 
malcontents, the pirate captain is a variation 
of the bandit captain, with a ship to protect and 
command. To keep the crew in line, the captain must 
mete out rewards and punishment on a regular basis. 

More than treasure, a bandit captain or pirate captain 
craves infamy. A prisoner who appeals to the captain's 
vanity or ego is more likely to be treated fairly than a 
prisoner who does not or claims not to know anything 
of the captain’s colorful reputation. 


BERSERKER 


Medium humanoid (any race), any chaotic alignment 


Armor Class 13 (hide armor) 
Hit Points 67 (9d8 + 27) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
16 (43) 121) 1743) 9(-1) 11@0) 9(-1) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Reckless. At the start of its turn, the berserker can gain 
advantage on all melee weapon attack rolls during that turn, 
but attack rolls against it have advantage until the start of 
its next turn. 


ACTIONS 


Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 9 (1d12 + 3) slashing damage. 


Hailing from uncivilized lands, unpredictable 
berserkers come together in war parties and seek 
conflict wherever they can find it. 


Banotr Captain 


| APPENDIX BY NONPLAYER CHARAGTERS ~ 


~—— = oe 


COMMONER 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 10 
Hit Points 4 (1d8) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 10(+0) 10(40) 10(+0) 10(40) 10 (+0) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


ACTIONS 
Club. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit? 2 (1d4) bludgeoning damage. 


Commoners include peasants, serfs, slaves, servants, 
pilgrims, merchants, artisans, and hermits. 


CULTIST 


Medium humanoid (any race), any non-good alignment 


Armor Class 12 (leather armor) 
Hit Points 9 (2d8) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
11 (40) 1241) 1040) 10(40) 1140) 10(40) 


Skills Deception +2, Religion +2 

Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Dark Devotion. The cultist has advantage on saving throws 
against being charmed or frightened. 


ACTIONS 


Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) slashing damage. 


Cultists swear allegiance to dark powers such as 
elemental princes, demon lords, or archdevils. Most 
conceal their loyalties to avoid being ostracized, 
imprisoned, or executed for their beliefs. Unlike evil 
acolytes, cultists often show signs of insanity in their 
beliefs and practices. 


a 


Cutt Fanatic 


CULT FANATIC ain 


Medium humanoid (any race), any non-good alignment 


Armor Class 13 (leather armor) 
Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIs CHA 
11 (+0) = 14 (42) 12 (441) 10 (40) «13 (41) ~—s-14 (#2) 


Skills Deception +4, Persuasion +4, Religion +2 
Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Dark Devotion. The fanatic has advantage on saving throws 
against being charmed or frightened. 


Spellcasting. The fanatic is a 4th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 11, +3 to hit 
with spell attacks). The fanatic has the following cleric 
spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): light, sacred flame, thaumaturgy 

Ist level (4 slots): command, inflict wounds, shield of faith 
2nd level (3 slots): hold person, spiritual weapon 
ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The fanatic makes two melee attacks. 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to 
hit, reach 5 ft. or range 20/60 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


Fanatics are often part of a cult’s 
leadership, using their 
charisma and dogma to 
influence and prey on 
those of weak will. 
Most are interested 
in personal power 
above all else. 


DRUID 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 11 (16 with barkskin) 
Hit Points 27 (5d8 + 5) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
loo) «912G1), 134) ie) 15.642) Thee) 


Skills Medicine +4, Nature +3, Perception +4 
Senses passive Perception 14 

Languages Druidic plus any two languages 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Spellcasting. The druid is a 4th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 12, +4 to hit with 
spell attacks). It has the following druid spells prepared: 


Cantrips {at will): druidcraft, produce flame, shillelagh 

1st level (4 slots): entangle, longstrider, speak with 
animals, thunderwave 

2nd level (3 slots): animal messenger, barkskin 


ACTIONS 


Quarterstaff. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit (+4 to hit with 
shillelagh), reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 3 (1d6) bludgeoning 
damage, or 4 (1d8) bludgeoning damage with shillelagh or if 
wielded with two hands. 


Druids dwell in forests and other secluded wilderness 
locations, where they protect the natural world from 
monsters and the encroachment of civilization. Some 
are tribal shamans who heal the sick, pray to animal 
spirits, and provide spiritual guidance. 


GLADIATOR 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 16 (studded leather, shield) 
Hit Points 112 (15d8 + 45) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 15 (42) 16(+3) 10(40) 12(41) 15 42) 
Saving Throws Str +7, Dex +5, Con +6 
Skills Athletics +10, Intimidation +5 
Senses passive Perception 11 
Languages any one language (usually Common) 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Brave. The gladiator has advantage on saving throws against 
being frightened. 


Brute. A melee weapon deals one extra die of its damage when the 
gladiator hits with it (included in the attack). 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The gladiator makes three melee attacks or two 
ranged attacks. 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft. and 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage, 
or 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage if used with two hands to 
make a melee attack. 


Shield Bash. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 9 (2d4 + 4) bludgeoning damage. If the target 

is a Medium or smaller creature, it must succeed on a DC 15 
Strength saving throw or be knocked prone. 


REACTIONS 


Parry. The gladiator adds 3 to its AC against one melee attack 
that would hit it. To.do so, the gladiator must see the attacker 
and be wielding a melee weapon. 


i 
- 


ci. pe reed 
Fair Seay 
t 4 


a eg Ramm LS rl lb Lm 


Er oF TS es 


Gladiators battle for the entertainment of raucous 
crowds. Some gladiators are brutal pit fighters who treat 
each match as a life-or-death struggle, while others are 
professional duelists who command huge fees but rarely 
fight to the death. 


i 


GUARD 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 16 (chain shirt, shield) 
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (41) 121) 1241) 100) 11 G0) 


10 (+0) 


Skills Perception +2 

Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


ACTIONS 
Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage. 


Guards include members of a city watch, sentries 
in a citadel or fortified town, and the bodyguards of 
merchants and nobles. 


KNIGHT 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 18 (plate) 
Hit Points 52 (8d8 + 16) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 11 (40) -14(42) «11 (40) 11 40) 15 (42) 


Saving Throws Con +4, Wis +2 

Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Brave. The knight has advantage on saving throws against 
being frightened. 


ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The knight makes two melee attacks. 


Greatsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage. 


Heavy Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, range 
100/400 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d10) piercing damage. 


Leadership (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). For 1 
minute, the knight can utter a special command or warning 
whenever a nonhostile creature that it can see within 30 feet of 
it makes an attack roll or a saving throw. The creature can add 
a d4 to its roll provided it can hear and understand the knight. 
A creature can benefit from only one Leadership die at a time. 
This effect ends if the knight is incapacitated. 


REACTIONS 


Parry. The knight adds 2 to its AC against one melee attack that. et 
would hit it. To do so, the knight must see the attacker and be | 


wielding a melee weapon. 


Knights are warriors who pledge service to rulers, 
religious orders, and noble causes. A knight’s alignment 
determines the extent to which a pledge is honored. 
Whether undertaking a quest or patrolling a realmja 
knight often travels with an entourage that includes 
squires and hirelings who are commoners. 


MAGE 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 12 (15 with mage armor) 
Hit Points 40 (9d8) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
9(-1) 14(42) 1140) 1743) 1241) 11 (40) 


Saving Throws Int +6, Wis +4 
Skills Arcana +6, History +6 
Senses passive Perception 11 
Languages any four languages 
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


Spellcasting. The mage is a 9th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 14, +6 to 
hit with spell attacks). The mage has the following wizard 
spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): fire bolt, light, mage hand, prestidigitation 
Ist level (4 slots): detect magic, mage armor, magic 
missile, shield 
2nd level (3 slots): misty step, suggestion 
3rd level (3 slots): counterspell, fireball, fly 
4th level (3 slots): greater invisibility, ice storm 
5th level (1 slot): cone of cold 


ACTIONS 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


Mages spend their lives in the study and practice of 
magic. Good-aligned mages offer counsel to nobles 
and others in power, while evil mages dwell in isolated 
sites to perform unspeakable experiments without 
interference. 


VARIANT: FAMILIARS 

Any spellcaster that can cast the find familiar spell (such as 
an archmage or mage) is likely to have a familiar. The familiar 
can be one of the creatures described in the spell (see the 
Player’s Handbook) or some other Tiny monster, such as a 
crawling claw, imp, pseudodragon, or quasit. 


| APRENDIR 8: Bi noni WER CHARAGT 


NOBLE 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 15 (breastplate) 
Hit Points 9 (2d8) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
11 (40) 12(41) «11 (40) 12 (#1) 14 (42)_—s*16 43) 


Skills Deception +5, Insight +4, Persuasion +5 
Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages any two languages 

Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Rapier. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


Hit: 5 (1d8 + 1) piercing damage. . 


Nopeé 


REACTIONS, ee 
Parry. The noble'adds 2 to its AC against one melee attack that 
would hit it. To do so, the noble must see the attacker and be 
wielding a melee weapon. 


Nobles wield great authority and influence as members 
of the upper class, possessing wealth and connections 
that can make them as powerful as monarchs and 
generals. A noble often travels in the company of guards, 
as well as servants who are commoners. 

The noble’s statistics can also be used to represent 
courtiers who aren't of noble birth. 


PRIEST 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 13 (chain shirt) 
Hit Points 27 (5d8 + 5) 
Speed 25 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 10(+0) 12(1) 13(41) 16(43) 13 (41) 


Skills Medicine +7, Persuasion +3, Religion +4 
Senses passive Perception 13 

Languages any two languages 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Divine Eminence. As a bonus action, the priest can expend a 
spell slot to cause its melee weapon attacks to magically deal 
an extra 10 (3d6) radiant damage to a target on a hit. This 
benefit lasts until the end of the turn. If the priest expends a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the extra damage increases by 
1d6 for each level above Ist. 


Spellcasting. The priest is a 5th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 13, +5 to 
hit with spell attacks). The priest has the following cleric 
spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): light, sacred flame, thaumaturgy 
Ist level (4 slots): cure wounds, guiding bolt, sanctuary 
2nd level (3 slots): lesser restoration, 
spiritual weapon 
3rd level (2 slots): dispel magic, spirit guardians 


ACTIONS 


Mace. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, 
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 3 (1d6) 
bludgeoning damage. 


Priests bring the teachings of their 
gods to the common folk. They are 
the spiritual leaders of temples and shrines 

and often hold positions of influence in their 
communities. Evil priests might work openly 
under a tyrant, or they might be the leaders of 
religious sects hidden in the shadows of good 
society, overseeing depraved rites. 
A priest typically has one or more acolytes 
to help with religious ceremonies and other 
sacred duties. 


SCOUT 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 13 (leather armor) 
Hit Points 16 (3d8 + 3) ' 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
11 (40) 14(+2)) 12 (+1) = 11 40): 13 (41) ~~‘: 40) 


Skills Nature +4, Perception +5, Stealth +6, Survival +5 
Senses passive Perception 15 

Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Keen Hearing and Sight. The scout has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or sight. 
ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The scout makes two melee attacks or two 
ranged attacks. 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, ranged 
150/600 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage. 


Scouts are skilled hunters and trackers who offer 
their services for a fee. Most hunt wild game, but 
a few work as bounty hunters, serve as guides, or 
provide military reconnaissance. 


SPY 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 27 (6d8) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR 
10 (+0) 


DEX 
15 (+2) 


CON 
10 (+0) 


INT 
12 (+1) 


wis 
14 (+2) 


CHA 
16 (+3) 


Skills Deception +5, Insight +4, Investigation +5, Perception +6, 


Persuasion +5, Sleight of Hand +4, Stealth +4 
Senses passive Perception 16 
Languages any two languages 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Cunning Action. On each of its turns, the spy can use a bonus 


action to take the Dash, Disengage, or Hide action. 
% 


damage when it hits a target with a weapon attack and 
has advantage on the attack roll, or when the target is 
within 5 feet of an ally of the spy that isn’t incapacitated 
and the spy doesn’t have disadvantage on the 

attack roll. 


Sneak Attack (1/Turn). The spy deals an extra 7 (2d6) “atm oe ——— q J 
. (ee fai oie 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The spy makes two melee attacks. 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Hand Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120 
ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Rulers, nobles, merchants, guildmasters, and other 
wealthy individuals use spies to gain the upper hand in 
a world of cutthroat politics. A spy is trained to secretly 
gather information. Loyal spies would rather die than 
divulge information that could compromise them or 
their employers. 


4 


ie, 


Sn 


THUG 


Medium humanoid (any race), any non-good alignment 


Armor Class 11 (leather armor) 
Hit Points 32 (5d8 + 10) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (+2) 11(40) 1442) 1040) 10(+0) 11 (+0) 


Skills Intimidation +2 

Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Pack Tactics. The thug has advantage on an attack roll against 
a creature if at least one of the thug’s allies is within 5 feet of 
the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 

ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The thug makes two melee attacks. 


Mace. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage. 


Heavy Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, range 
100/400 fts; one target. Hit: 5 (1d10) piercing damage. 


Thugs are ruthless enforcers skilled at intimidation and 
violence. They work for money and have few scruples. 


TRIBAL WARRIOR 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 12 (hide armor) 
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
13 (+41) «17 (40) ~—s12 (+1) 8(-1) 11(40) 8(-1) 
Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages any one language 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Pack Tactics. The warrior has advantage on an attack roll 
against a creature if at least one of the warrior’s allies is within 
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


ACTIONS 


Spear. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) piercing damage, or 
5 (1d8 + 1) piercing damage if used with two hands to make a 
melee attack. 


Tribal warriors live beyond civilization, most often 
subsisting on fishing and hunting. Each tribe acts in 
accordance with the wishes of its chief, who is the 
greatest or oldest warrior of the tribe or a tribe member 
blessed by the gods. 


VETERAN 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 17 (splint) 
Hit Points 58 (9d8 + 18) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 13(41) 14(42) 10(0) 1140) 10 (+0) 


Skills Athletics +5, Perception +2 

Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The veteran makes two longsword attacks. If it 
has a shortsword drawn, it can also make a shortsword attack. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage, or 8 (1d10 + 3) 
slashing damage if used with two hands. 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


Heavy Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range 
100/400 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d10) piercing damage. 


Veterans are professional fighters that take up arms 
for pay or to protect something they believe in or value. 
Their ranks include soldiers retired from long service 
and warriors who never served anyone but themselves. 


1 
4 


IND 


A 


Aarakocra, 12 

Aboleth, 13 

Abominable Yeti, 306 
Acererak, 49 

Acolyte, 342 

Adult Black Dragon, 88 
Adult Blue Dracolich, 84 
Adult Blue Dragon, 91 
Adult Brass Dragon, 105 
Adult Bronze Dragon, 108 
Adult Copper Dragon, 111 
Adult Gold Dragon, 114 
Adult Green Dragon, 94 
Adult Red Dragon, 98 
Adult Silver Dragon, 117 
Adult White Dragon, 101 
Air Elemental, 124 
Allosaurus, 79 

Ancient Black Dragon, 87 
Ancient Blue Dragon, 90 
Ancient Brass Dragon, 104 
Ancient Bronze Dragon, 107 
Ancient Copper Dragon, 110 
Ancient Gold Dragon, 113 
Ancient Green Dragon, 93 
Ancient Red Dragon, 97 
Ancient Silver Dragon, 116 
Ancient White Dragon, 100 
Androsphinx, 281 
Animated Armor, 19 
Ankheg, 21 

Ankylosaurus, 79 

Ape, 317 

Arcanaloth, 313 
Archmage, 342 

Assassin, 343 

Awakened Shrub, 317 
Awakened Tree, 317 

Axe Beak, 317 

Azer, 22 


B 


Baboon, 318 

Badger, 318 

Balor, 55 

Bandit, 343 

Bandit Captain, 344 
Banshee, 23 

Barbed Devil, 70 
Barlgura, 56 

Basilisk, 24 

Bat, 318 

Bearded Devil, 70 

Behir, 25 

Beholder, 28 

Beholder Zombie, 316 
Berserker, 344 

Black Bear, 318 

Black Dragon Wyrmling, 88 
Black Pudding, 241 

Blink Dog, 318 

Blood Hawk, 319 

Blue Dragon Wyrmiling, 91 
Blue Slaad, 276 

Boar, 319 

Bone Devil, 71 

Bone Naga, 233 

Brass Dragon Wyrmling, 106 
Bronze Dragon Wyrmling, 109 
Brown Bear, 319 

Bugbear, 33 

Bugbear Chief, 33 

Bulette, 34 

Bullywug, 35 


C 


Cambion, 36 
Camel, 320 
Carrion Crawler, 37 
Cat, 320 

Cave Bear, 334 
Centaur, 38 

Chain Devil, 72 
Chasme, 57 
Chimera, 39 

Chuul, 40 

Clay Golem, 168 
Cloaker, 41 

Cloud Giant, 154 
Cockatrice, 42 
Commoner, 345 


X OF STAT BLOCKS 


Use this index to find a specific monster stat block. 


Constrictor Snake, 320 
Copper Dragon Wyfmling, 112 
Couatl, 43 

Courtier. See Noble. 

Crab, 320 

Crawling Claw, 44 

Crocodile, 320 

Cult Fanatic, 345 

Cultist, 345 

Cyclops, 45 


D 


Dao, 143 

Darkmantle, 46 

Death Dog, 321 

Death Knight, 47 

Death Slaad, 278 

Death Tyrant, 29 

Deep Gnome (Svirfneblin), 164 
Deer, 321 

Demilich, 48 

Deva, 16 

Dire Wolf, 321 

Diseased Giant Rat, 327 
Displacer Beast, 81 
Djinni, 144 
Doppelganger, 82 
Dracolich (template), 83 
Draft Horse, 321 
Dragon Turtle, 119 
Dretch, 57 

Drider, 120 

Drow, 128 

Drow Elite Warrior, 128 
Drow Mage, 129 

Drow Priestess of Lolth, 129 
Druid, 346 

Dryad, 121 

Duergar, 122 

Duodrone, 225 

Dust Mephit, 215 


E 


Eagle, 322 

Earth Elemental, 124 
Efreeti, 145 
Elephant, 322 

Elk, 322 

Empyrean, 130 
Erinyes, 73 

Ettercap, 131 

Ettin, 132 


r 


Faerie Dragon, 133 
Fire Elemental, 125 
Fire Giant, 154 
Fire Snake, 265 
Flameskull, 134 
Flesh Golem, 169 
Flumph, 135 
Flying Snake, 322 
Flying Sword, 20 
Fomorian, 136 
Frog, 322 

Frost Giant, 155 


G 


Galeb Duhr, 139 
Gargoyle, 140 

Gas Spore, 138 
Gelatinous Cube, 242 
Ghast, 148 

Ghost, 147 

Ghoul, 148 

Giant Ape, 323 

Giant Badger, 323 
Giant Bat, 323 

Giant Boar, 323 
Giant Centipede, 323 
Giant Constrictor Snake, 324 
Giant Crab, 324 

Giant Crocodile, 324 
Giant Eagle, 324 
Giant Elk, 325 

Giant Fire Beetle, 325 


Giant Frog, 325 
Giant Goat, 326 
Giant Hyena, 326 
Giant Lizard, 326 
Giant Octopus, 326 
Giant Owl, 327 
Giant Poisonous Snake, 327 
Giant Rat, 327 * 
Giant Scorpion, 327 
Giant Sea Horse, 328 
Giant Shark, 328 
Giant Spider, 328 
Giant Toad, 329 

Giant Vulture, 329 
Giant Wasp, 329 

Giant Weasel, 329 
Giant Wolf Spider, 330 
Gibbering Mouther, 157 
Githyanki Knight, 160 
Githyanki Warrior, 160 
Githzerai Monk, 161 
Githzerai Zerth, 161 
Glabrezu, 58 

Gladiator, 346 

Gnoll, 163 

Gnoil Fang of Yeenoghu, 163 
Gnoll Pack Lord, 163 

Goat, 330 

Goblin, 166 

Goblin Boss, 166 

Gold Dragon Wyrmling, 115 
Gorgon, 171 

Goristro, 59 

Gray Ooze, 243 

Gray Slaad, 277 

Green Dragon Wyrmling, 95 
Green Hag, 177 
Green Slaad, 277 
Grell, 172 

Grick, 173 

Grick Alpha, 173 
Griffon, 174 
Grimlock, 175 
Guard, 347 
Guardian Naga, 234 
Gynosphinx, 282 


H 


Half-Dragon (temptate), 180 
Half-Ogre, 238 

Half-Red Dragon Veteran, 180 
Harpy, 181 

Hawk, 330 

Hell Hound, 182 

Helmed Horror, 183 
Hezrou, 60 

Hill Giant, 155 

Hippogriff, 184 

Hobgoblin, 186 

Hobgoblin Captain, 186 
Hobgoblin Warlord, 187 
Homunculus, 188 

Hook Horror, 189 

Horned Devil, 74 

Hunter Shark, 330 

Hydra, 190 

Hyena, 331 


I 


Ice Devil, 75 

Ice Mephit, 215 

Imp, 76 

Incubus, 284 

Intellect Devourer, 191 
Invisible Stalker, 192 
Iron Golem, 170 


Jackal, 331 
Jackalwere, 193 


‘x OF STAT BLOCKS 


Kenku, 194 

Killer Whale, 331 
Knight, 347 

Kobold, 195 

Kraken, 197 

Kuo-toa, 199 

Kuo-toa Archpriest, 200 
Kuo-toa Whip, 200 


L 


Lamia, 201 

Lemure, 76 

Lich, 202 

Lion, 331 

Lizard, 332 

Lizard King/Queen, 205 
Lizardfolk, 204 
Lizardfolk Shaman, 205 


M 


Mage. 347 

Magma Mephit, 216 
Magmin, 212 
Mammoth, 332 

Manes, 60 

Manticore, 213 

Marid, 146 

Marilith, 61 

Mastiff, 332 

Medusa, 214 

Merfolk, 218 

Merrow, 219 
Mezzoloth, 313 

Mimic, 220 

Mind Flayer, 222 

Mind Flayer Arcanist, 222 
Minotaur, 223 
Minotaur Skeleton, 273 
Monodrone, 224 

Mud Mephit, 216 

Mule, 333 

Mummy, 228 

Mummy Lord, 229 
Myconid Adult, 232 
Myconid Sovereign, 232 
Myconid Sprout, 230 


N 


Nalfeshnee, 62 
Needle Blight, 32 
Night Hag, 178 
Nightmare, 235 
Noble, 348 
Nothic, 236 
Nycaloth, 314 


O 


Ochre Jelly, 243 
Octopus, 333 
Ogre, 237 

Ogre Zombie, 316 
Oni, 239 

Orc, 246 

Orc Eye of Gruumsh, 247 
Orc War Chief, 246 
Orog, 247 

Otyugh, 248 

Owl, 333 

Owlbear, 249 


P 


Panther, 333 
Pegasus, 250 
Pentadrone, 226 
Peryton, 251 
Phase Spider, 334 
Piercer, 252 
Pirate. See Bandit. 
Pirate Captain. 

See Bandit Captain. 


npnet ’ 
- "Pit Fieid, 77 


Pixié, 253 

Planetar, 17. 
Plesiosaurus, 80 
Poisonous Snake, 334 
Polar Bear, 334 
Poltergeist, 279 

Pony, 335 

Priest, 348 
Pseudodragon, 254 
Psychic Gray Ooze, 240 
Pteranodon, 80 
Purple Worm, 255 


Quadrone, 226 

Quaggoth, 256 

Quaggoth Spore Servant, 230 
Quaggoth Thonot, 256 
Quasit, 63 

Quipper, 335 


R 


Rakshasa, 257 

Rat, 335 

Raven. 335 

Red Dragon Wyrmiing, 98 
Red Slaad, 276 

Reef Shark, 336 
Remorhaz, 258 
Revenant, 259 
Rhinoceros, 336 
Riding Horse, 336 
Roc, 260 

Rogue Modron, 224 
Roper, 261 

Rug of Smothering, 20 
Rust Monster, 262 


S 


Saber-toothed Tiger, 336 
Sahuagin, 263 
Sahuagin Baron, 264 
Sahuagin Priestess, 264 
Salamander, 266 
Satyr, 267 
Scarecrow, 268 
Scorpion, 337 
Scout, 349 
Sea Hag, 179 
Sea Horse, 337 
Shadow, 269 
Shadow Demon, 64 
Shadow Dragon (template), 84 
Shambling Mound, 270 
Shield Guardian, 271 
Shrieker, 138 
Silver Dragon Wyrmling, 118 
Skeleton, 272 
Slaad Tadpole, 276 
Smoke Mephit, 217 
Solar, 18 
Spectator, 30 
Specter, 279 
Spider, 337 
Spined Devil, 78 
Spirit Naga, 234 
Spore Servant (template), 230 
Sprite, 283 
Spy, 349 
Steam Mephit, 217 
Stirge. 284 
Stone Giant, 156 
Stone Golem, 170 
Storm Giant, 156 
Succubus, 285 
Svirfneblin. See Deep Gnome. 
Swarm of Bats, 337 
Swarm of Beetles, 338 
Swarm of Centipedes, 338 
Swarm of Insects, 338 
Swarm of 

Poisonous Snakes, 338 
Swarm of Quippers, 338 
Swarm of Rats, 339 
Swarm of Ravens, 339 
Swarm of Spiders, 338 
Swarm of Wasps, 338 


Tarrasque, 286 
Thri-kreen, 288 

Thug, 350 

Tiger, 339 

Toad. See Frog. 
Treant, 289 

Tribal Shaman. See Druid. 
Tribal Warrior, 350 
Triceratops. 80 
Tridrone, 225 
Troglodyte, 290 

Troll, 291 

Twig Blight, 32 
Tyrannosaurus Rex, 80 


U 


Ultroloth, 314 

Umber Hulk, 292 
Unicorn, 294 

Urd. See Winged Kobold. 


V 


Vampire, 297 
Vampire Spawn, 298 
Veteran, 350 

Vine Blight, 32 
Violet Fungus, 138 
Vrock, 64 

Vulture, 339 


W 


Warhorse, 340 
Warhorse Skeleton, 273 
Water Elemental, 125 
Water Weird, 299 
Weasel, 340 

Werebear, 208 
Wereboar, 209 
Wererat, 209 
Weretiger, 210 
Werewolf, 211 

White Dragon Wyrmiing, 102 
Wight, 300 
Will-o’-Wisp, 301 
Winged Kobold, 195 
Winter Wolf, 340 

Wolf, 341 

Worg, 341 

Wraith, 302 

Wyvern. 303 


X 


Xorn, 304 


Y 


Yeti, 305 

Yochlol, 65 

Young Black Dragon, 88 
Young Blue Dragon, 91 
Young Brass Dragon, 105 
Young Bronze Dragon, 108 
Young Copper Dragon, 111 
Young Gold Dragon, 115 
Young Green Dragon, 94 
Young Red Dragon, 98 
Young Red Shadow Dragon, 85 
Young Remorhaz, 258 
Young Silver Dragon, 118 
Young White Dragon, 101 
Yuan-ti Abomination, 308 
Yuan-ti Malison, 309 
Yuan-ti Pureblood, 310 


Z, 


Zombie, 316 


THEA TOZ 
FANTASY BESTIARY 


The Monster Manual’ presents a horde of 
classic DUNGEONS & DRAGONS’ creatures, 
including dragons, giants, mind flayers, and 
beholders—a monstrous feast for Dungeon 
Masters ready to challenge their players and 
populate their adventures. 


The monsters contained herein are culled from 
the D&D* game's illustrious history, with easy- 
to-use game Statistics and thrilling stories to 
feed your imagination. 


When you're ready for even more, expand 
your adventures with the fifth edition Player's 
Handbook’ and Dungeon Master's Guide’. 


DUNGEONSANDDRAGONS.COM 


ISBN: 978-0-7869-6561-3 


mn 


9"780786"965618 
Sug. Retail: US $49.95 CAN $53.00 


Printed in USA A92180000 


Pe ae) 


