@iw 


CS 


XANATHAR ’S ENEMIES 
AND ALLIES | 


Find new threats to foil and steadfast allies to share victories in 
this supplement for the world's greatest roleplaying game 


XANATHAR'S ENEMIES 
AND ALLIES 


CREDITS 


Lead Designer: Shawn Merwin 

Designers: Robert Adducci, Lysa Chen, Will Doyle, 
Cindy Moore 

Editor: Shawn Merwin 

Proofreader: Aurora Merwin 


Art Director and Graphic Designer: Rich Lescouflair 
Interior Art: Provided by Wizards of the Coast and used 
with permission 


FOR USE WITH 
XANATHAR'S GUIDE TO 


Special Thanks: Chris Lindsay 
EVERY THING” 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, Forgotten Realms, Ravenloft, the dragon ampersand, and all other Wizards of the Coast 
product names, and their respective logos are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast in the USA and other countries. 


This work contains material that is copyright Wizards of the Coast and/or other authors. Such material is used with permission under the 
Community Content Agreement for Dungeon Masters Guild. 


All other original material in this work is ©2019 and published under the Community Content Agreement for Dungeon Masters Guild. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Aglarond Foresters (Monster Slayers)... 
EorestenGuardiamkik ne 
Forester Slayer... 


Bards of the Summer Court t College of flamour 
SUMMENCONKHJEStEN S Ween mn ccna 
Summer Court Maestro... 


Blades of Wonder (College of Senda) | 
Blade of Wonder Apprentice cscs 
Blade of Wonder Master... 


Blingdenstone Badgers (Gloom Stalkers). 
ERC RSC SOE |). a ied 
Badger Veteran 


OOo wowowo naoa ha 


Children of Stronmaus an ee 10 
Colet Sra r setesnsnnoncininnnnnonnel O 
Storm Oracle. a. accuse E e O 


Church of Bane (Oath of AR A me L 
Banite Conqueror 11 


Bamitebyranth a e r EL 


Cormanthor Guard (Arcane ae ers) 12 
Arcane Archer Fletchling aL 2 
Arcane Archer Captain, cen 


Council of Dreamers (Circle of LA. o 14 
OOS AS ee 
High Dreamer... 


Creel Demonbloods (Patho of the E Zealot). Sh, __ 16 


Demonblood Initiate 16 
Demonblood Savage en 6 


Eldreth Veluuthra 

(Circle of the Shepherd & Scout) 17 
[PRG Teo ETS) Ts 18 
Ayenging SSO] OY AVS Re [eee 
Eldreth Veluuthra Scout 


Hammers of Moradin (Way of the Kensei) 20 
Runehammer of Moradin occu &O 
Arsenal of Moradin, e 20 


Kozakura Shogunate (S ta AEE T O | 
SAMmUnANOVICE AE a L 
Samurai Ronin.. atel 


Order of Saint Dionysus Drinken Maleri) a22 
inebriate PR T EE a nrc a 2 
Drunken Master 22 


Purple Dragons O a ee 
Cavalier Initiate 23 


Revenant Blades (Hexblades) ss .................. 
Shadow Blade e M S 


Revenant Assassin ' A 


Saviors of Peace (Oath of Redemption.. 
Eldathyn Redeemer 
Eldathyn Guardian 


Servants of Discord (Celestial Warlock) | 


Discordian Warlock cen 


Malkizid Discordian. 


Shadow Resistance (Shadow Magic). 
Shadow Born. 
Shadow Prime... 


Shadow Thieves (Mastermind and d Inquisitive 
Masked Inquisitive... 
Shadow Thief Mastermind _ 


The Shadows of Bregan D’aerthe (collha of 

Whispers) | y 
Bregan D’aerthe Spy.. 
Bregan D’aerthe Shadowmaster 


Sparks of Mystery (Divine Souls) | 
Mystra’s Beacon... 
Mystra’s Vessel oo... 


Sun Souls (Way of the Sun Soul) Sn ae 


Sun Soul Monk 


Ships of Luskan (Swashbucklers) 0. 
Luskan Swashbuckler 


Luskan Captain __ ee 
Spirit Protectors of Ubtao 


(Path of the Ancestral Guardian) ss 


Spirit Talker 


SpiritLord eee 


Stormborn of Ruathym 
(Path of the Storm Herald) 


Northlander Stormrider Sas 4 A 3 paon 


Northlander Stormrager 00... 
Tel'Teukiira Horizon Walker (Horizon Walkers). 


Tel’ Teukiira Walker oc cesumummnsnsnnnnees 


Tel’Teukiira Ranger. 


War Wizards of Cormyr (War Magic) _ Meret a 
Battle-Mage. ee ee eee 
Alarphon r A 


Creatures by OR 0... eo A 


30 
gga 


INTRODUCTION 


N THE WIDE WORLDS OF D&D, GUARDS ARE RARELY 
just guards, bandits rarely just bandits, and cultists 
never just cultists. Even if they bear the same 
weapons and don the same armor, each has their 
own stories—and quite possibly some tricks up 
their sleeves, in combat and in life. 

Xanathar’s Enemies and Allies illustrates those 
differences to help DMs create more interesting stories 
and campaigns. This supplement provides stat blocks 
for all of the archetypes detailed in Xanathar’s Guide to 
Everything. You can now move beyond the simple knight 
stat block, and use the Banite conqueror or cavalier 
charger instead. Tired of using the bandit captain yet 
again? How about presenting your players with a more 
unique challenge, like the Luskan swashbuckler or the 
shadow thief mastermind? 

In addition to the 60 new stat blocks to challenge and 
delight your players, this product presents Forgotten 
Realms power groups and organizations for their 
characters to fight, join, or puzzle over. 


UsING THIS PRODUCT 


The content of this product is similar to that of the 
Monster Manual. The backgrounds of each of the 

NPC types can be altered to fit your campaign’s needs. 
For example, the stormriders and stormragers of the 
Stormborn can just as easily hold sway along the Sword 
Coast or in the Moonsea as they do in the Trackless 
Sea, serving demon lords or elemental princes instead 
of Umberlee or Talos. The Blingdenstone Badgers can 
be used for any underground or Underdark community. 
Each group holds limitless potential as allies, enemies, 
or mysterious strangers playing a role in an ongoing 
campaign. 

Also, the NPCs here can be altered with racial traits 
without changing the Challenge Rating (CR) of the 
creature. Some of them already have races, based on their 
position within the lore of their groups. This can be easily 
changed to fit the needs or your campaigns. 


A NOTE ON SPELLS AND CHALLENGE 
RATING 


Most of the spells in the stat blocks come from the 
Player’s Handbook. A few of the spells, however, come 
from other official sources. You can’t have a cleric of the 
Grave domain without them using toll the dead as one of 
their cantrips! If you do not have access to these spells, 
simply replace them with similar spells. 

One caveat with spell replacement and Challenge 
Ratings: CRs are calculated based on the spells that 
spellcasting monsters and NPCs use. Replacing fireball 
with feign death, for example, drastically changes 
the CR for a creature if fireball was their most potent 
offensive ability. 


AGLAROND FORESTERS (MONSTER SLAYERS) 


To the west of Thay is the magocracy of Aglarond. The 
history of Aglarond is indelibly tied to that of Thay, as 
the former has been forced to withstand decades of 
Thayan attacks and aggression. The monstrous and 
undead incursions from Thay have led to the creation 
of a special branch of the Aglarond army called the 
Foresters. These specially trained monster slayers 
hide in the Yuirwood Forest and wage war against the 
terrible troops fielded by Thay. 

Shoot First. The attacks against Aglarond by Thay 
have been cruel and relentless, leaving the members 
of the Foresters unwilling to take risks. Anyone found 
wandering through the Yuirwood who does not belong 
there—especially heavily armed or magic-wielding 
creatures—are attacked on sight. The Foresters know 
that friends are quick to back down and drop weapons, so 
apologies can be made later. 

Ask Questions Later. While the members of the 
Foresters are some of the most skilled warriors in the 
lands, they are also students of their foes. With the Red 
Wizards as their main enemy, all Foresters are taught 
the fundamentals of the arcane. That is not to say they 
practice magic; however, they certainly understand its 
effects, how to recognize it, and how to resist it. 


FORESTER GUARDIAN 


Medium humanoid (any race), neutral 


Armor Class 15 (chain shirt) 
Hit Points 65 (10d8 + 20) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
Me 3) mld G2) IAG). 11 (40). 12%) 11740) 


Skills Arcana +3, Perception+3, Stealth +4, Survival +3 
Senses passive Perception 13 

Languages Common 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Know the Foe. A weapon deals one extra die of its damage when 
the Forester slayer hits with it (included in the attack). 


Slayer’s Prey. As a bonus action, the Forester guardian can 
designate one creature as its prey. That prey’s attacks against 
the Forester guardian are made with disadvantage, and saving 
throws against that creature are made with advantage. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The Forester guardian makes two melee or 
ranged attacks. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 12 (2d8 + 3) slashing damage. 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 150/600 ft., 
one target. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Ln eee Lw————<———=<$———— 


They also understand the abilities and tactics of the 
undead and demonic creatures employed by Thay against 
them over the years. Even the newest recruits to the 
Foresters knows the differences between a demon and 
a devil, what resistances those creatures have, and how 
to do the most damage. Silver and magical weapons are 
kept on hand to use when more powerful creatures are 
reported in the area. 

Regimentation. The Foresters live a hard life patrolling 
the Yuirwood, and they rely on themselves and each 
other. More experienced members might be asked to 
patrol lesser travelled areas on their own. In regions 
of Aglarond where Thayan activity is most prevalent, a 
group of 3 scouts and 3 Forester guardians are led by 
a Forester slayer. They may also be accompanied by a 
mage if the situation is deemed necessary. 


FORESTER SLAYER 


Medium humanoid (any race), neutral 


Armor Class 16 (scale mail) 
Hit Points 104 (16d8 + 32) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 11 (+0) 15 (+2) 11 (+0) 


Skills Arcana +3, Perception+5, Stealth +6, Survival +5 
Senses passive Perception 15 

Languages Common 

Challenge 8 (3,900 XP) 


Know the Foe. A weapon deals two extra dice of its damage 
when the Forester slayer hits with it (included in the attack). 


Slayer’s Prey. As a bonus action, the Forester slayer can 
designate one creature as its prey. That prey’s attacks against 
the Forester slayer are made with disadvantage, and saving 
throws against that creature are made with advantage. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The Forester slayer makes three melee or two 
ranged attacks. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 17 (3d8 + 4) slashing damage. 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, range 150/600 ft., 
one target. Hit: 13 (3d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


REACTIONS 


Counterattack. When the creature designated as the 
slayer’s prey targets the Forester slayer with an attack, the 
Forester slayer can use a reaction to make a weapon attack 
against the creature. If the Forester slayer hits, and the 
original attack requires a saving throw, that saving throw 
automatically succeeds. 


¢ 


BARDS OF THE SUMMER COURT (COLLEGE OF GLAMOUR) 


Gifted bards who weave magic with their words must 
beware lest some “benefactors of the arts,” wandering 
from the Feywild, might revel too deeply in the legends 
of our realm. Every so often a talented teller of tales 
disappears, stolen away to entertain the fancies of fey. 
They return changed. 

Legendary Performers. Having studied under the 
tutelage of satyrs, eladrin, and other fey, the bards of 
the Summer Court are renowned for their otherworldly 
talent and charm. Their performances are said to be so 
spectacular they imbue any audience with inspiration and 
vigor. 

Otherworldly Charm. The bards of the Summer Court 
charge their words with powerful, seductive fey magic. 
Those who witness a bard of the Summer Court sing, 
recite poetry, or even dance become enthralled with the 
enchanting performance. 

Evil and Good. Many bards of the Summer Court 
channel their supernatural talent for good. However, 
returning among mortals, some find the temptation of 
power too great, and turn their hosts into thralls. 


BARDS OF THE SUMMER COURT (COLLEGE OF GLAMOUR) 


SUMMER COURT JESTER 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 13 (leather armor) 
Hit Points 44 (8d8 + 8) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
(+0) 14(+2) 12(+1) 10(+0) 13(+1) 14 (+2) 


Saving Throws Dex +4, Wis +3 

Skills Acrobatics +4, Perception +5, Performance +6 
Senses passive Perception 15 

Languages any two languages 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Spellcasting. The Summer Court jester is a 4th-level spellcaster. 
Its spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 12, +4 to hit 
with spell attacks). It has the following bard spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): friends, mage hand, vicious mockery 

Ist level (4 slots): charm person, disguise self, faerie fire, healing 
word, thunderwave 

2nd level (3 slots): invisibility, shatter 


Tempo Change (2/Day). The Summer Court jester can use a 
bonus action on its turn to target up to two creatures within 60 
feet that it can see and that can see it. Each of the targets gain 5 
temporary hit points and can immediately use their reactions to 
move up to their speed without provoking opportunity attacks. 


ACTIONS 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 80/320 ft., 
one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Enthralling Performance (Recharge 6). The Summer Court jester 
targets up to two humanoids within 60 feet that can hear it. 
Each target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw (DC 12) or 
be charmed by the Summer Court jester. While charmed in this 
way, the target idolizes the Summer Court jester and hinders 


E 


orifit pene ay damage. i 


E 


„anyone who opposes it. This effect ends on a me! anter 1 hour 


SUMMER CouRT MAESTRO 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 14 (studded leather) 
Hit Points 88 (16d8 + 16) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
AGO) 04 (42) 12 Tyga (Oy 131) ey 
ee 
Saving Throws Dex +5, Wis +4 
Skills Acrobatics +5, Perception +7, Performance +9 
Senses passive Perception 17 
Languages any two languages 
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


Spellcasting. The Summer Court maestro is a 9th-level 
spellcaster. Its spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save 
DC 14, +6 to hit with spell attacks). It has the following bard 
spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): friends, mage hand, vicious mockery 

Ist level (4 slots): charm person, disguise self, faerie fire, healing 
word, thunderwave 

2nd level (3 slots): shatter, see invisibility 

3rd level (3 slots): dispel magic, hypnotic pattern 

4th level (3 slots): dimension door, greater invisibility 

5th level (1 slot): dominate person 


Tempo Change (3/Day). The Summer Court maestro can use a 
bonus action on its turn to target up to three creatures within 60 
feet that it can see and that can see it. Each of the targets gain 8 
temporary hit points and can immediately use their reactions to 
move up to their speed, without provoking opportunity attacks. 


Commanding Coda (1/Day). The Summer Court maestro can 
use a bonus action to cast command, without expending a 
spell slot. Any creature charmed by the Summer Court maestro 
automatically fails its saving throw against the command cast 
with this feature. 


ACTIONS 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 80/320 ft., 
one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Enthralling Performance (Recharge 6). The Summer Court 
maestro targets up to three humanoids within 60 feet that can 
hear it. Each target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw 
(DC 14) or be charmed by the Summer Court maestro. While 
charmed in this way, the target idolizes the Summer Court 
“maestro and jester and hinders anyone who opposes it. This 

_ effect: enc s on a target after 1 hour or if it takes any damage. 


BLADES OF WONDER (COLLEGE OF SWORDS) 


Come one, come all, to Corvus Nightfeather’s Circus of 
Wonders! This travelling band of entertainers and misfits 
roves the southern reaches of Faerfin. Among the most 
daring acts are the Blades, who perform stunts of weapon 
prowess such as sword swallowing, knife throwing and 
juggling, and mock combats. 

Acrobatic Wonders. Blades of Wonder are attuned 
to every tiny movement, knowing the smallest mistake 
can send a performance terribly awry. The Blades move 
swiftly and deftly. 

Elite Fighters. The Circus of Wonders is a house 
of laughs and entertainment, as well as an agency 
undertaking covert faction spying. Masters of merriment, 
the circus’ Blades can swallow scimitars, but they are also 
trained to fight with them. 

Always Entertaining. Even when their audience is made 
up of enemy combatants, the Blades seek to entertain, 
striking with a fanciful flourish. Their regular displays 
of weapon daring-do serve them well, allowing them to 
distract, defend, or overwhelm with a flick of their blade. 


BLADE OF WONDER APPRENTICE 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 15 (chain shirt) 
Hit Points 44 (8d8 + 8) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
11 (+0) 14 (+2) 12(+1) 10 (+0) 13 (+1) 14 (+2) 


Saving Throws Dex +4, Wis +3 

Skills Acrobatics +4, Perception +3, Performance +4 
Senses passive Perception 13 

Languages any two languages 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Spellcasting. The Blade of Wonder apprentice is a 4th-level 
spellcaster. Its spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save 
DC 12, +4 to hit with spell attacks). It has the following bard 
spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): friends, mage hand, vicious mockery 

Ist level (4 slots): bane, charm person, healing word, 
longstrider, thunderwave 

2nd level (3 slots): cloud of daggers, invisibility 


Blade Flourish (3/Day). Whenever the Blade of Wonder 
apprentice hits a creature with a melee weapon attack, it can 
choose to deal 3 (1d6) extra damage to the target, and also deal 
that same amount of extra damage to another target within 5 
feet of the Blade of Wonder apprentice. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The Blade of Wonder apprentice makes two 
melee attacks. 


Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) slashing damage. 


Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 80/320 ft., 
one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


BLADE OF WONDER MASTER 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 16 (breastplate) 
Hit Points 88 (16d8 + 16) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
EO 917 E 12 Gage 10 G0) = 13-1) ers) 


Saving Throws Dex +6, Wis +4 

Skills Acrobatics +6, Perception +4, Performance +6 
Senses passive Perception 14 

Languages any two languages 

Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


Spellcasting. The Blade of Wonder master is a 9th-level 
spellcaster. Its spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save 
DC 14, +6 to hit with spell attacks). It has the following bard 
spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): friends, mage hand, vicious mockery 

Ist level (4 slots): bane, charm person, healing word, 
longstrider, thunderwave 

2nd level (3 slots): cloud of daggers, see invisibility 

3rd level (3 slots): dispel magic, hypnotic pattern 

Ath level (3 slots): dimension door, greater invisibility 

5th level (1 slot): animate objects 


Blade Flourish. Whenever the Blade of Wonder master hits 

a creature with a melee weapon attack, it can choose to deal 
7 (2d6) extra damage to the target, and also deal that same 
amount of extra damage to another target within 5 feet of the 
Blade of Wonder apprentice. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The Blade of Wonder master makes three 
melee attacks. 


Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) slashing damage. 


Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, range 80/320 ft., 
one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


BLINGDENSTONE BADGERS (GLOOM STALKERS) 


Blingdenstone, also known on the surface world as The 
City of Speaking Stones, rests in the Underdark, not far 
from the drow city of Menzoberranzan. As one of the few 
bastions of goodness in an otherwise evil-infested area, 
the city is a meeting place of any dedicated to keeping 
the Underdark safe. And none are better at that then the 
greatest gloom stalkers: the Blingdenstone Badgers. 

First Line of Defense. The city of Blingdenstone is 
guarded by many defense: illusionary terrain, mechanical 
and magical traps, and maze-like passages to name a 
few. But before potential invaders ever approach these 
defenses, they are probably spied upon by one of the 
Blingdenstone Badgers. A Badger may not confront the 
invader, but they certainly scout and reconnoiter the 
situation thoroughly. 

The Last Hope of the Lost. While the Badgers’ main 
directive is to protect the city, they are also often called 


BADGER SCOUT 


Small humanoid (gnome), neutral good 


Armor Class 15 (chain shirt) 
Hit Points 33 (6d6 + 12) 
Speed 25 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (+2) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 14(42) 10(+0) 9(-1) 


Skills Investigation +4, Perception +2, Stealth +4, Survival +2 
Senses darkvision 150 ft., passive Perception 12 

Languages Gnomish, Terran, Undercommon 

Challenge 1 (450 XP) 


Dread Ambusher. The Badger scout has advantage on initiative 
checks. Any weapon attacks made to a target that has not 
acted in the combat deals an additional 4 (1d8) damage of the 
weapon’s type. 

Stone Camouflage. The Badger scout has advantage on 
Dexterity (Stealth) checks made to hide in rocky terrain. 


Gnome Cunning. The Badger scout has advantage on 
Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma saving throws 
against magic. 


Innate Spellcasting. The Badger scout’s innate spellcasting 
ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 12). It can innately cast the 
following spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: nondetection (self only) 
1/day each: blindness/deafness, blur, disguise self 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The Badger scout makes two war pick attacks. 


War Pick. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage. 


Poisoned Dart. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120 
ft., one creature. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage, and the 
target must succeed on a DC 12 Constitution saving throw or 
take an additional 5 (2d4) poison damage and be poisoned for 
1 minute. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of 
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


upon to delve further into the Underdark for a variety 

of missions: rescuing lost souls, attacking drow slave 
caravans, slaying deadly monsters, and more. For those lost 
in the vast, dangerous caverns and passages of the realm 
below, there's no more welcome sight than a Blingdenstone 
Badger offering safe passage back to the city. 

Stealth and Power. Most members of the 
Blingdenstone Badgers are deep gnomes. Many different 
races, however, make up the group. Even those without 
native darkvision learn to navigate the dark maze. They 
really on their stealth to remain out of danger while 
gathering information, and they build a resistance to the 
mind-controlling powers of dangerous foes like illithids 
and aboleths. 


BADGER VETERAN 


Small humanoid (gnome), neutral good 


Armor Class 17 (splint armor) 
Hit Points 78 (12d6 + 36) 
Speed 25 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 16 (+3) 16 (+3) 16 (+3) 10 (+0)  9(-1) 


Skills Investigation +6, Perception +3, Stealth +6, Survival +3 
Senses darkvision 150 ft., passive Perception 13 

Languages Gnomish, Terran, Undercommon 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Dread Ambusher. The Badger veteran has advantage on 
initiative checks. Any weapon attacks made to a target that has 
not acted in the combat deals an additional 18 (4d8) damage of 
the weapon’s type. 


Stone Camouflage. The Badger veteran has advantage on 
Dexterity (Stealth) checks made to hide in rocky terrain. 


Gnome Cunning. The Badger veteran has advantage 
on Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma saving throws 
against magic. 


Innate Spellcasting. The Badger veteran’s innate spellcasting 
ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 14). It can innately cast the 
following spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: nondetection (self only) 
3/day each: blindness/deafness, blur, disguise self, 
1/day each: fear, greater invisibility, rope trick 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The Badger veteran makes two war pick attacks. 
If both attacks miss, reroll both attacks. This can only be done 
once per round. 


War Pick. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 


Hit: 12 (2d8 + 3) piercing damage. 


Poisoned Dart. Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, range 30/120 
ft., one creature. Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) piercing damage, and the 
target must succeed on a DC 14 Constitution saving throw or 
take an additional 9 (2d8) poison damage and be poisoned for 
1 minute. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of 
each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 


BLINGDENSTONE BADGERS (GLOOM STALKERS) 


CHILDREN OF STRONMAUS (STORM SORCERER) 


High in the mountains, clans of goliaths 
pledge fealty to storm giant lords despite the 
storm giants’ aloofness. These goliaths claim 
to have the blood of Stronmaus in them, 

and their acceptance by the storm giants 
lends credence to their claim. Even if their 
lords remain silent, the goliath clans see 
prophecy in the raging of storms and 

act based on the perceived wills of their 
lieges. 

Tranquility and Fury. Like the storm 
giants that they base their culture on, 
the Children of Stronmaus maintain a 
detached tranquility in most aspects of 
their lives; however, their fury is quick to 
rise when their will is directed by the oracles. 

Detached Oracles. The Children of 
Stronmaus who most strongly feel a call as a 
Storm Soul often have oracular visions. These 
sorcerers are ritually shunned from their tribes 
to take on the burden of the storm. 

Storm Soul. Goliath Storm Souls are moody 
creatures at best and fury-driven beasts at worst. 
Destructive Storm Souls often set out on their 
own, renouncing Stronmaus to pick up reverence of 
Umberlee or other destructive gods. 


GOLIATH SORCERER 


Medium humanoid (goliath), neutral 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 65 (10d8 + 20) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 10 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
17 (+3)  12(+1) 14 (+2) 9 (-1) 12 (+1) 14 (+2) 


Skills Athletics +5, Insight +3, Religion +1 
Senses darkvision 150 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages Common, Giant, Primordial 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Spellcasting. The Goliath Sorcerer is a 4th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 14, +4 to hit with 
spell attacks). He knows the following sorcerer spells: 


Cantrips (at will): blade ward, booming blade, gust, shocking grasp 
Ist level (4 slots): catapult, thunderwave 
2nd level (2 slots): Maximilian’s earthen grasp, warding wind 


ACTIONS 


STORM ORACLE 


Staff. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 
6 (1d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage, or 7 (1d8 + 3) bludgeoning 
damage when used with two hands. 


REACTIONS 


Stone’s Endurance (1/Day). When the Goliath Sorcerer takes 
damage, it can use a reaction to reduce the damage by 
9 (d12 + 3). 


Medium humanoid (goliath), neutral 


Armor Class 16 (mage armor) 
Hit Points 97 (15d8 + 30) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 10 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
ees) 12, (4) 1A G2 (1) 1261) GE) 


Skills Athletics +6, Insight +4, Religion +2 
Damage Resistances lightning, thunder 

Senses darkvision 150 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages Common, Giant, Primordial 
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


Heart of the Storm. All spells cast by the Storm Oracle that deal 
lightning or under damage deal an extra 5 (1d10) damage of 
the same type. 


Legendary Resistance (3/Day). If the Storm Oracle fails a saving 
throw, it can choose to succeed instead. 


Spellcasting. The Storm Oracle is an 8th-level spellcaster. His 
spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 16, +6 to hit with 
spell attacks). It knows the following sorcerer spells: 


Cantrips (at will): blade ward, booming blade, gust, shocking grasp 
Ist level (4 slots): catapult, mage armor, thunderwave 

2nd level (3 slots): Maximilian’s earthen grasp, warding wind 

3rd level (3 slots): elemental weapon, lightning bolt, thunder step 
4th level (2 slots): elemental bane, storm sphere 


ACTIONS 


Staff. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 
6 (1d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage, or 7 (1d8 + 3) bludgeoning 
damage when used with two hands. 


REACTIONS 


Stone’s Endurance (1/Day). When the Storm Oracle takes 
damage, it can use a reaction to reduce the damage by 
9 (d12 + 3). 


CHURCH OF BANE (OATH OF CONQUEST) 


Bane the Black Hand, dead yet now returned, strengthens 
his cruel grip on the land. Where might rules and 
civilization lies lawless, the clerics of the Black Hand 
seize power. Temples to Bane have sprung up across the 
Moonsea and the magocracy of Thay, bolstering their god 
with sacrifice and bloodshed. 

Convert or Die! Bane’s doctrine demands that his 
subjects convert to his worship or die. There can be 
no other god but Bane, so his followers are zealous in 
undermining temples of other faiths. Banite priests don’t 
dispute the existence of other divine powers: they just 
know they'll all kneel before Bane in time. 

Martial Power. As god of tyranny, Bane demands 
that his worshippers conquer and control his domains. 
Banite clerics are warlords above all else, with paladins 
as divine shock troops. They practice shock-and-awe 
tactics, striking with overwhelming force to spread terror 


BANITE CONQUEROR 


Medium humanoid (any race), lawful evil 


Armor Class 18 (plate) 
Hit Points 90 (12d8 + 36) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 11 (+0) 16 (+3) 11(+0) 12(+1) 16 (+3) 


Saving Throws Wis +4, Cha +5 

Skills Athletics +6, Deception +6, Intimidation +6 
Senses passive Perception 11 

Languages any one language 

Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


Aura of Conquest. Any frightened creature hostile to the 
conqueror that starts its turn within 30 feet of the conqueror has 
its speed reduced to 0 and takes 5 psychic damage. 


Spellcasting. The conqueror is an 8th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 14, +6 to hit with 
spell attacks). It has the following paladin spells prepared: 


1st level (4 slots): armor of Agathys, command, cure wounds, 
compelled duel, protection from evil and good, sanctuary, shield 
of faith, sleep, wrathful smite 

2nd level (3 slots): calm emotions, hold person, spiritual weapon, 
zone of truth 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The conqueror makes three melee attacks. 


Morningstar. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage. 


Heavy Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range 
100/400 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d10) piercing damage. 


Conquering Presence (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). The 
conqueror exudes a terrifying presence. Each enemy within 30 
feet of the conqueror must succeed on a DC 14 Wisdom saving 
throw or be frightened for 1 minute. A frightened creature can 
repeat this saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending 
the effect on itself on a success. 


among enemy ranks. Banite warriors adorn their armor 
and weapons with decorations designed to strike fear into 
their enemies. 

Dark Rites. People go missing in cities where Bane 
rules unopposed. Scholars disappear in the dead of 
night, and dissenters are dragged down blind alleys, 
never to be seen again. It’s an open secret that most 
of these unfortunates end up sprawled on the altars to 
the Black Hand, where they’re sacrificed in return for 
profane boons. 


BANITE TYRANT 


Medium humanoid (any race), lawful evil 


Armor Class 18 (plate, shield) 
Hit Points 255 (30d8 + 120) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 11 (+0) 19(+4) 11 (+0) 12(+1) 18 (+4) 


Saving Throws Wis +6, Cha +9 

Skills Athletics +9, Deception +9, Intimidation +9 
Senses passive Perception 11 

Languages any one language 

Challenge 13 (10,000 XP) 


Aura of Conquest. Any frightened creature hostile to the tyrant 
that starts its turn within 30 feet of the conqueror has its speed 
reduced to 0 and takes 10 psychic damage. 


Scornful Rebuke. When a creature hits the tyrant with an attack, 
that creature takes 5 psychic damage as long as the Banite tyrant 
is not incapacitated. 


Spellcasting. The tyrant is a 15th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 17, +9 to hit with 
spell attacks). It has the following paladin spells prepared: 


Ist level (4 slots): armor of Agathys, command, cure wounds, 
compelled duel, protection from evil and good, sanctuary, shield 
of faith, sleep, wrathful smite 

2nd level (3 slots): calm emotions, crusader’s mangle, hold person, 
spiritual weapon, zone of truth 

3rd level (3 slots): bestow curse, blinding smite, dispel magic, 
fear, revivify 

And level (2 slots): banishment, death ward, dominate beast, 
staggering smite, stoneskin 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The tyrant makes three melee attacks. 


Morningstar. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) piercing damage. 


Heavy Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 
100/400 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d10) piercing damage. 


Conquering Presence (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). The 
tyrant exudes a terrifying presence. Each enemy within 30 feet of 
the conqueror must succeed on a DC 17 Wisdom saving throw 
or be frightened for 1 minute. A frightened creature can repeat 
this saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the 
effect on itself on a success. 


CORMANTHOR GUARD (ARCANE ARCHERS) 


Among the warriors of the elven world, few are as Stealth and Power. While the Cormanthor Guard has 
feared and respected as the arcane archers. Continuing experienced scouts and powerful wizards in its ranks, 

a tradition that began as far back as the formation of few can traverse the forest and eliminate the enemies as 
the Cormanthyr Empire, the arcane archers guard their well as the arcane archers. Their ability to shoot expertly 
magical secrets closely. Only the most talented and through cover and around trees makes them formidable 

dedicated elves are taught the ways of the arcane archer, in guerilla warfare. 


and they would rather die than reveals their secrets. 
Protectors of Cormanthor. One of the largest 
contingents of arcane archers on Faerûn belongs to the 


Cormanthor Guard. This group patrols the length and ARCANE ARCHER FLETCHLING 
breadth of the Cormanthor Forest, guarding against Medium humanoid (elf), neutral 
intrusion from monsters, hostile humanoids, and anyone 
else straying too close to elven communities nestled in the Armor Class 16 (studded leather armor) 
great forest. Hit Points 71 (11d8 + 22) 

Merciless and Vigilant. The first principle of the Speed 35 ft. 
Cormanthor Guard is to make sure no harm comes to 
the elven communities of the large forest that gives them STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
their name. With the history of war in the forest and 1241) 18 (44) 1442) 121) 1542) 12 G1) 
the surrounding areas, the Guard does not risk being EE ee Pe 


too merciful with potential enemies. The arcane archer Saving Throws Con +5, Dex +7, Wis +5 
companies of the Cormanthor Guard are specifically 
known for a “shoot first, ask questions to the corpses 
later” attitude that has served them well. 


Skills Arcana +4, Perception +5, Stealth +7 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 15 
Languages Common, Elf 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Combat Archer. The arcane archer fletchling does not attack at 
disadvantage when firing while within 5 feet of an enemy. The 
fletchling also ignores cover, except for total cover. 


Fey Ancestry. The arcane archer fletchling has advantage on 
saving throws against being charmed, and magic can’t put the 
fletchling to sleep. 


Arcane Shot. As a bonus action, the arcane archer fletchling can 
infuse an arrow with a magical effect. The arrow loses its energy 
at the start of the fletchling’s next turn. The fletchling can 
choose any of the effects below: 


e Energy Arrow: The attack does an additional 18 (4d8) damage, 
and all of the damage done with that arrow can be acid, cold, 
fire, force, lightning, poison, or thunder damage. 

e Bursting Arrow: The attack does an additional 7 (2d6) damage 
to the target, and all creatures within 5 feet of the target takes 
7 (2d6) piercing damage. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The arcane archer fletchling makes two attacks 
with its longbow. 


Longbow. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, range 150/600 ft., one 
target. Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) piercing damage. 


Short Sword. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) piercing damage. 
EEEE SN OO EA 


ARCANE ARCHER CAPTAIN 


Medium humanoid (elf), neutral 


Armor Class 17 (studded leather armor) 
Hit Points 117 (18d8 + 36) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
PED . 20,(45) 14 G22 Gaye 187-4) aay 


Saving Throws Con +6, Dex +9, Wis +8 

Skills Arcana +5, Perception +8, Stealth +9 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 18 
Languages Common, Elf 

Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 


Combat Archer. The arcane archer captain does not attack at 
disadvantage when firing while within 5 feet of an enemy. The 
captain also ignores cover, except for total cover. 


Fey Ancestry. The arcane archer captain has advantage on 
saving throws against being charmed, and magic can’t put the 
captain to sleep. 


Arcane Shot. As a bonus action, the arcane archer captain can 
infuse two arrows with a magical effect. The captain can choose 
any of the effects below: 


« Energy Arrow: The attack does an additional 21 (6d6) damage, 
and all of the damage done with that arrow can be acid, cold, 
fire, force, lightning, poison, or thunder damage. 

e Bursting Arrow: The attack does an additional 10 (3d6) dam- 
age, and all creatures within 5 feet of the target takes 10 (3d6) 
piercing damage. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The arcane archer makes three attacks with 
its longbow. 


Longbow. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, range 150/600 ft., one 
target. Hit: 9 (1d8 + 5) piercing damage. 


Short Sword. Melee Weapon Attack: +9 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 8 (1d6 + 5) piercing damage. 


REACTIONS 


Give Me Room. When an enemy moves adjacent to the arcane 
archer captain, the captain can make a longbow attack against 
that enemy. On a hit the target must make a DC 15 Strength 
saving throw or be pushed 10 feet and knocked prone. 
sO DOO EE) 


COUNCIL OF DREAMERS (CIRCLE OF DREAMS) 


The High Forest boasts some of the oldest and most 
extensive areas of natural forested beauty in all the 
Realms. An area as old as time, the forest is protected 

by an elven population unfriendly to those lacking good 
intentions and pure hearts. Many druidic guardians of the 
High Forest belong to a loose affiliation called the Council 
of Dreamers, members of the Circle of Dreams. 

The Council of the Wood. A wood elf known as 
Morgwais hopes to unite the many tribes of elves in the 
High Forest into an empire. The first steps in this plan 
involves bringing tribal leaders together for regular 
meetings of a group called the Council of the Wood. This 
congress discusses threats to the area, shares information 
on intruders, fights together against larger threats, and 
attempts to strengthen bonds. The Council of Dreamers 
are a subset of that larger council, consisting of School of 
Dreams druids from the different tribes. 


The Fey Pact. In a place like the High Forest, the 
barriers between the mortal world and the Feywild are 
thin and permeable. If one considers elves a capricious 
and fickle lot, the fey creatures of the High Forest are a 
tenfold more inscrutable. The Council of Dreamers’ main 
goal is to maintain cordial relations between the elven 
tribes of the High Forest, as well as the human occupants, 
and the fey creatures there. 

Wardens of Karse. The lower-ranking members of 
the Council of Dreamers, known as acolyte dreamers, 
are also tasked with making sure that the cursed ruins 
of Karse, former home of the Netherese wizard Karsus, 
do not spew forth shadowy nightmare creatures into 
the forest. The leader of the Dreamers, known as the 
High Dreamer, makes frequent forays into the area 
surrounding the ruins as a show of his or her dedication 
to the cause. 


ACOLYTE DREAMER 


Medium humanoid (any race), neutral 


Armor Class 12 (16 with barkskin) 
Hit Points 44 (8d8 + 8) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10°40) 14 G2)" 13 (41g 12 GI) 16 3) 17) 


Skills Medicine +5, Nature +3, Perception +5 
Senses passive Perception 15 

Languages Common, Druidic, Sylvan 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Summer Balm. The acolyte dreamer can use a bonus action to 
heal an ally within 120 feet for 10 (3d6) hit points. The acolyte 
dreamer can do this 3 times before needing a long rest to 
recharge the ability. 


Spellcasting. The acolyte dreamer is a 7th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 13, +5 to hit with 
spell attacks). It has the following druid spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): druidcraft, produce flame, shillelagh 
Ist level (4 slots): charm person, entangle, speak with 

animals, thunderwave 
2nd level (3 slots): animal messenger, barkskin, spike growth 
3rd level (3 slots): call lightning, dispel magic, speak with plants 
4th level (1 slots): ice storm 


ACTIONS 


Quarterstaff. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit (+5 to hit with 
shillelagh), reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 3 (1d6) bludgeoning 
damage, or 7 (1d8+3) bludgeoning damage with shillelagh or if 
wielded with two hands. 

a E OO | 


HIGH DREAMER 
Medium humanoid (any race), neutral 


= ————<< = — 


Armor Class 12 (16 with barkskin) 
Hit Points 156 (24d8 + 48) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 


10 (+0) 


14 (42) 15 (+2) 12 (+1) 19 (+4) 15 (+2) 


Saving Throws Con +6, Dex +6, Wis +8 
Skills Medicine +8, Nature +5, Perception +8 
Senses passive Perception 18 

Languages Common, Druidic, Sylvan 
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) 


= => =< 


Hidden Paths. The High Dreamer can use a bonus action to 
teleport up to 60 feet to an unoccupied space it can see. Until 
the end of its next turn, all attacks against the High Dreamer are 
made at disadvantage. The High Dreamer can do this four times 
before needing a long rest to recharge the ability. 


Summer Balm. The High Dreamer can use a bonus action to 
heal an ally within 120 feet for 27 (6d8) hit points. The High 
Dreamer can do this four times before needing a long rest to 
recharge the ability. 


Spellcasting. The High Dreamer is a 13th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 16, +8 to hit with 
spell attacks). It has the following druid spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): druidcraft, guidance, produce flame, shillelagh 
Ist level (4 slots): charm person, entangle, speak with 

animals, thunderwave 
2nd level (3 slots): animal messenger, barkskin, spike growth 
3rd level (3 slots): call lightning, dispel magic, speak with plants 
4th level (3 slots): conjure woodland beings, dominate 

beast, ice storm 
5th level (2 slots): awaken, scrying 
6th level (1 slot): wind walk 
7th level (1 slot): fire storm 


ACTIONS 


Quarterstaff. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit (+8 to hit with 
shillelagh), reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 3 (1d6) bludgeoning 
damage, or 8 (1d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage with shillelagh or if 
wielded with two hands. 


Change Shape (2/Day). The High Dreamer magically 
polymorphs into a beast or elemental with a challenge rating 
of 6 or less, and can remain in this form for up to 9 hours. The 
High Dreamer can choose whether its equipment falls to the 
ground, melds with its new form, or is worn by the new form. 
The High Dreamer reverts to its true form if it dies or falls 
unconscious. The High Dreamer can revert to its true form 
using a bonus action on its turn. 

While in a new form, the High Dreamer retains its game 
statistics and ability to speak, but its AC, movement modes, 
Strength, and Dexterity are replaced by those of the new form, 
and it gains any special senses, proficiencies, traits, actions, 
and reactions (except class features, legendary actions, and lair 
actions) that the new form has but that it lacks. It can cast its 
spells with verbal or somatic components in its new form. 

The new form’s attacks count as magical for the purpose of 
overcoming resistances and immunity to nonmagical attacks. 


EI III AOI A | 


YG 


CREEL DEMONBLOODS (PATH OF THE ZEALOT) 


Of the tribes of Nar roaming the lands of the north, few 
are as infamous as the Creel. Narfell’s nomadic tribes’ 
survival relied on savagery and martial prowess. The 
Creel went one step further: consorting with demons. 
Through these infernal ties, the Creel demonblood zealots 
draw strength and ferocity from the fiendish power 
channeled into them. 

A Demonic Culture. The Creel’s association with 
demons has taken many forms: binding them in service, 
serving them as minions, drawing upon their powers, 
and worshipping them. Within the last few years, demons 
working with the Creel have offered them a new boon: 
demon blood. The Creel are now using that substance to 
empower and transform their greatest warriors into new 
and terrible creatures called demonbloods. 

Demon Blood Transfusions. Those selected to 
become one of the Creel demonbloods are put through 
rigorous testing to weed out the weak. When they have 
proven themselves, the initiates are given demon blood 
to drink. Almost immediately the changes begin: the skin 


DEMONBLOOD INITIATE 


Medium humanoid, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 60 (8d8 + 24) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
17 (+3) 14 (42) 17 (+3) 9 (-1) 14 (+2) 11 (+0) 


Skills Intimidation +2, Survival +4 
Senses passive Perception 12 
Languages Common 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Demon Fury. While a demonblood initiate is at less than full hit 
points, it has advantage on saving throws. 


Hellish Claws. When a demonblood initiate hits with a claw 
attack and rolls a 1 on any damage die, reroll that die. The reroll 
must be kept. (This is figured into the average damage.) 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The demonblood initiate makes two claw attacks 
or two longbow attacks. If both attacks hit, the demonblood 
initiate gains 5 temporary hit points. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 
11 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage. 


Longbow. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 150/600 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage. 
a a E A 


hardens, fingernails grow into claws, and muscles bulge 
with abyssal power. The longer the demonblood lives, 
the more pronounced the changes, until the demonblood 
savage gains supernatural abilities like resistances to 
acid, cold, and fire. 

Foot Soldiers and Monsters. Newly blooded initiates 
serve as foot soldiers in the Creel warbands, bringing 
death and terror to enemy tribes and travelers throughout 
Narfell. With the power provided to initiates by the 
demon blood, those warriors need no weapons, using 
their demon-bred claws to slay opponents. Demonblood 
savages are armies of one, mad zealots capable of wading 
into an enemy group and emerging practically unscathed. 


DEMONBLOOD SAVAGE 


Medium humanoid, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 119 (14d8 + 56) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4) 14 (+2) 19 (+4) 9 (-1) 14 (+2) 13 (+1) 


Skills Intimidation +5, Survival +6 

Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire; bludgeoning, piercing, and 
slashing from non-magical weapons 

Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages Common 

Challenge 11 (7,200 XP) 


eee 


Demon Fury. While a demonblood savage is at less than full hit 
points, it has advantage on saving throws. 


Hellish Claws. When a demonblood initiate hits with a claw 
attack and rolls a 1 or 2 on any damage die, reroll that die. The 
reroll must be kept. (This is figured into the average damage.) 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The demonblood initiate makes three claw attacks 
or two longbow attacks. If any attack hits, the demonblood 
initiate gains 10 temporary hit points. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 17 (2d10 + 4) slashing damage. 


Longbow. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, range 150/600 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage. 


REACTIONS 


Demonic Leadership. When an ally within 30 feet that the 

demonblood savage can see makes a melee attack roll, 

the demonblood savage can use a reaction to give the ally 

advantage on the attack roll. 
a Oe | 


ELDRETH VELUUTHRA 


(CIRCLE OF THE SHEPHERD & SCOUT) 


Deep in the unspoiled reaches of the Chondalwood 

is an enclave comprised mostly of elves. This group, 
which has been in existence for centuries, was founded 
with the idea that humans were vermin that should 

be eradicated for the good of all other creatures of the 
natural world. The zealots of this group, known as the 
Eldreth Veluuthra, have either died off or mellowed 
over the years. The group, however, still uses all means 
necessary to keep intruders, especially human ones, out 
of the Chondalwood. 

A Dying Breed. When the group was at its peak, the 
Eldreth Veluuthra had branches in most of the major 
forestlands of Toril. Many died when they waged war 
against humans and their allies, while others perished 
trying to face monstrous threats without the help of 
willing allies. The Chondalwood is the only place where 
the group contains enough powerful members to maintain 
political or military power. 

Protecting the Beasts. Most of the Eldreth Veluuthra 
are dedicated to shepherding and protecting the beasts of 
the forest. This generally means avoiding confrontation 
with foresters and hunters, keeping the beasts and 
innocent fey creatures out of harm’s way. The protecting 
shepherds comprise a bulk of the group, and they 
maintain small communities from which they can look 
after the animals: protecting the young, healing the sick 
and wounded, and providing safe habitats. 


Avenging the Innocent. When large-scale incursions 
into the forest by outsiders threaten the lives of beasts 
and fey, an elite group of Eldreth Veluuthra are called 
upon to avenge the loss and damage. These avenging 
shepherds can summon armies of beasts and fey, 
marching into battle at the vanguard of countless teeth 
and claws. The avenging shepherds are merciless and 
unforgiving in the face of an enemy that threatens the 
beasts of the forest. 

Secretive Patrons. The Eldreth Veluuthra recruit 
mostly from the poor, yet their finances extend deep into 
elven aristocracy. Their patrons privately donate gold and 
weapons to their cause while entertaining good relations 
with human allies. While the Eldreth Veluuthra are an 
abhorrence to polite elven society, they clearly have 
traction behind closed doors. 

Shunned by the Gods. The Eldreth Veluuthra’s 
genocidal agenda forced the elven gods to abandon the 
order. Blinded to their own evil, the rank and file view this 
as a test: if they prove themselves in the great slaughter, 
their gods shall crown them champions in the elven 
afterlife. 

Ties of Blood. Most cells are comprised of blood 
relatives to ensure trust and loyalty among members. 

To join, one is approached in confidence by a relative. 
Their secretive council, the Vel’Nikeryma, once restricted 
membership to just five founding clans, but they’ve 
branched out over the centuries. Even so, only elves 

of untainted blood are accepted: drow or half-elves are 
judged impure. 


PROTECTING SHEPHERD 


Medium humanoid (any race), neutral 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 66 (12d8 + 12) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 11 (+2) 13 (41) 12 (+1) 16 (+3) 11 (+0) 


Skills Nature +3, Perception +5, Survival +5 
Senses passive Perception 15 

Languages Common, Druidic, Elven, Sylvan 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Beast Summoner. When the protecting shepherd uses magic 
to summon beasts, it has advantage on Constitution saving 
throws to concentrate on maintaining the spell. In addition, the 
summoned beasts have 2 additional hit points per hit die. 


Speak with Beasts. The protecting shepherd can decipher the 


noises and motions of beasts, and beasts can under its speech. 


Will to Protect. If damage reduces the protecting shepherd 

to 0 hit points while it is adjacent to an allied beast, it must 
make a Constitution saving throw with a DC of 5 + the damage 
taken. On a success, the protecting shepherd drops to 1 hit 
point instead. 


Innate Spellcasting. The protecting shepherd’s spellcasting 


ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 13, +5 to hit with spell attacks). 


The protecting shepherd can innately cast the following spells, 
requiring no material components: 


At will: animal friendship, druidcraft, produce flame, thorn whip 
3/day each: entangle, conjure animals 
1/day: blight 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The protecting shepherd makes two 
quarterstaff attacks. 


Quarterstaff. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage, or 7 (1d8+3) 
bludgeoning damage if wielded with two hands. 


AVENGING SHEPHERD 


Medium humanoid (any race), neutral 


Armor Class 10 (16 with barkskin) 
Hit Points 143 (22d8 + 44) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 11 (+0) 15(+2) 14(+1) 19(+4) 11 (+0) 


Saving Throws Con +5, Wis +7 

Skills Athletics +7, Nature +4, Perception +7, Survival +7 
Senses passive Perception 17 

Languages Common, Druidic, Elven, Sylvan 

Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


Beast Summoner. When the avenging shepherd uses magic 
to summon beasts or fey, it does not have to concentrate to 
maintain the spell. In addition, the summoned creatures have 
2 additional hit points per hit die, and it summons 3 times the 
normal number of creatures. 


Speak with Beasts. The avenging shepherd can decipher the 
noises and motions of beasts, and beasts can understand the 
shepherd in return. 


Will to Avenge. If damage reduces the avenging shepherd to 0 
hit points while it is adjacent to an allied beast, it must make 
a Constitution saving throw with a DC equal to the damage 
taken. On a success, the avenging shepherd drops to 1 hit 
point instead. 


Innate Spellcasting. The avenging shepherd’s spellcasting 
ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 15, +7 to hit with spell attacks). 
The protecting shepherd can innately cast the following spells, 
requiring no material components: 


At will: animal friendship, barkskin, druidcraft, produce 
flame, thorn whip 

3/day each: entangle, conjure animals, blight 

1/day: conjure fey 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The avenging shepherd makes three 
quarterstaff attacks. 


Quarterstaff. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage, or 13 (2d8+4) 
bludgeoning damage if wielded with two hands. 


REACTIONS 


Nature’s Avenging Spirit. When a beast or fey ally adjacent to 
the avenging shepherd takes damage, the avenging shepherd 
can use its reaction to grant that allied beast or fey resistance to 
damage until the start of its next turn. 


ELDRETH VELUUTHRA SCOUT 


Medium humanoid (wood elf), neutral 


Armor Class 14 (leather armor) 
Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6) 
Speed 35 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12 (+1) 16 (+3) 12(+1) 10(+0) 14 (+2) 11 (+0) 


Skills Nature +4, Perception +8, Stealth +7, Survival +4 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 16 
Languages Common, Elvish 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Fey Ancestry. Magic can’t put the scout to sleep. 


Mask of the Wild. The scout can attempt to hide even when they 
are only lightly obscured by foliage, heavy rain, falling snow, 
mist, and other natural phenomena. 


Cunning Action. On each of its turns, the scout can use a bonus 
action to take the Dash, Disengage, or Hide action. 


Sneak Attack (1/Turn). The scout deals an extra 7 (2d6) damage 
when it hits a target with a weapon attack and has advantage 
on the attack roll, or when the target is within 5 feet of an ally 

of the scout that isn't incapacitated and the scout doesn't have 
disadvantage on the attack roll 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The scout makes two melee attacks or two 
ranged attacks. 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, ranged 150/600 ft., 
one target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage. 


REACTIONS 
Skirmisher. |f an enemy ends its turn within 5 feet of the scout, 
the scout can move up to half its speed. This movement doesn’t 
provoke opportunity attacks. 

EEE ITO OE AO) 


ELDRETH VELUUTHRA 
INFILTRATOR 


Medium humanoid (wood elf), neutral 


Armor Class 16 (studded leather armor) 
Hit Points 132 (24d8 + 24) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12 (+1) 18(44) 12 (41) 10 (+0) 14 (+2) 11 G0) 


Saving Throws Dex +8, Con +5, Wis +6 

Skills Nature +4, Perception +6, Stealth +8, Survival +6 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 16 
Languages Common, Elvish 

Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 


Fey Ancestry. Magic can’t put the infiltrator to sleep. 


Mask of the Wild. The infiltrator can attempt to hide even when 
they are only lightly obscured by foliage, heavy rain, falling snow, 
mist, and other natural phenomena. 


Pack Tactics. The infiltrator has advantage on an attack roll 
against a creature if at least one of the infiltrator’s allies is within 
5 feet of the creature and the ally isn’t incapacitated. 


Cunning Action. On each of its turns, the infiltrator can use a 
bonus action to take the Dash, Disengage, or Hide action. 


Sneak Attack (1/Turn). The infiltrator deals an extra 24 (7d6) 
damage when it hits a target with a weapon attack and has 
advantage on the attack roll, or when the target is within 5 
feet of an ally of the infiltrator that isn't incapacitated and the 
infiltrator doesn't have disadvantage on the attack roll 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The infiltrator makes three melee attacks or two 
ranged attacks. 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) piercing damage. 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, ranged 150/600 ft., 
one target. Hit: 9 (1d8 + 4) piercing damage. 
REACTIONS 


Skirmisher. If an enemy ends its turn within 5 feet of the 
infiltrator, the infiltrator can move up to half its speed. This 
movement doesn’t provoke opportunity attacks. A 


HAMMERS OF MORADIN (WAY OF THE KENSEI) y 


The dwarves of Citadel Adbar have long defended their 
sanctuary from armies of goblinoids, drow, and giants. 
Their greatest warriors join the Hammers of Moradin, a 
holy order trained to strike deep behind enemy lines and 
destroy their foes at the source. 

Sworn to the Forge. The Hammers of 
Moradin revere the tools their god 
used to forge the dwarves: namely 
hammers and chisels. Each dwarf 
excels in wielding the hammer as 
a weapon, and is trained in the 
complex art of carved calligraphy. 

One with the Earth. Moradin 
grants his holy champions 
magical powers that attune 
them to the rock and empower 
their weapons when fighting 
underground. The greatest among 
them can even swim through the earth as 
though it were water. 

Ancient Vendettas. The Hammers of Moradin 
swear to uphold a long list of grudges and 


vendettas. Those who've earned the dwarves’ enmity ARSENAL OF MORADIN 


Medium humanoid (dwarf), any alignment 


are mercilessly hunted and killed without quarter. 


Armor Class 18 (plate) 


RUNEHAMMER OF MORADIN A thaws pe 


Medium humanoid (dwarf), any lawful alignment 


Armor Class 18 (plate) Pa a etree notte Se an 
Hit Points 112 (15d8 + 45) 
Speed 25 ft Skills Athletics +5, Intimidation +1, Perception +2 

=o = yi Ae vic a Damage Resistances poison, bludgeoning 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 10 ft., passive 
Perception 12 


3 Languages Common, Dwarvish, Terran 
Skills Athletics +6, Intimidation +2, Perception +3 Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 


Damage Resistances poison 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 10 ft., passive 


16.43) 2e ee o Co 9G) 


Í 


Perception 13 Earth Glide. The arsenal can burrow through nonmagical, 
Languages Common, Dwarvish, Terran unworked earth and stone. While doing so, the arsenal doesn't 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) disturb the material it moves through. 

Stone’s Empowerment (1/Turn). When the arsenal successfully 
Earth Walk. Moving through difficult terrain made of earth or hits an enemy with a weapon attack or unarmed strike, they deal 
stone costs the runehammer no extra movement. an extra 24 (7d6) radiant damage. 
ACTIONS ACTIONS 
Multiattack. The runehammer makes three melee or Multiattack. The arsenal makes three melee or ranged attacks. 
ranged attacks. Warhammer. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 
Warhammer. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft. or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) bludgeoning 
5 ft. or range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) bludgeoning damage, or 8 (1d10 + 3) bludgeoning damage if used with two 
damage, or 8 (1d10 + 3) bludgeoning damage if used with two hands to make a melee attack. If used to make a ranged attack, 
hands to make a melee attack. If used to make a ranged attack, the warhammer magically returns to the arsenal’s hand after 
the warhammer magically returns to the runehammer’s hand the attack. 


after the attack. Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 


Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage. If the arsenal is 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage. If the runehammer wielding its warhammer when it makes this attack, it gains a +2 

is wielding its warhammer when it makes this attack, it gains a bonus to AC until the start of its next turn. 

+2 bonus to AC until the start of its next turn. O 


KOZAKURA SHOGUNATE (SAMURAI) 


Far to the east of the Sword Coast, past the rolling grassy 
plains of the Hordelands, past even the Kara-Turan 
mainland, is the archipelago nation of Kozakura. Ruled by 
an emperor for centuries, the samurai of Kozakura act as 
the law and the military on behalf of the empire. 

An Obedience and a Code. When samurai pledge 
their service to their emperor and their land, they 
also pledge to follow a code of conduct. This code 
changes from time to time and place to place, but it 
generally stresses some combination of honor, bravery, 
compassion, thrift, and sincerity. 

A samurai travels the length of their homeland, acting 
as the emperor’s surrogate in matters of justice, law, and 
conflict. A samurai might see battle with bandits in the 
morning, act as a judge in their trial in the afternoon, and 
carry out a sentence in the evening, then entertain the 
village with news of the realm at night. 

Sword and Wisdom. While a samurai must have a 
sharp sword, and know how to wield it with control and 
expertise, wielding a sharp and agile mind is just as 
important. The social is just as important as the martial in 
the life of the samurai. 

Wandering Samurai. When an emperor proves to be 
unworthy of service, a samurai may leave the service of its 
homeland, becoming a ronin. These samurai may travel 
the world, carrying out the code they swore themselves to 
for others. 


SAMURAI NOVICE 


Medium humanoid, any lawful 


Armor Class 18 (breastplate, shield) 
Hit Points 65 (10d8 + 20) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 12(+1) 14(+2) 12 (+1) 


Skills Insight +4, Perception +4, Performance +3 
Senses passive Perception 14 

Languages Common 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Fighting Spirit. As a bonus action, the samurai novice can 
give itself advantage on weapon attack rolls until the end of its 
current turn. It can do this twice, then must take a long rest to 
regain uses. 


Fortifying Spirit. As a bonus action, the samurai novice can give 
itself 5 temporary hit points. It can do this twice, then must take 
a long rest to regain uses. 


ACTIONS 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage. 


Longbow. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 150/600 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage. 


SAMURAI RONIN 


Medium humanoid, any lawful 


Armor Class 18 (breastplate, shield) 
Hit Points 112 (15d8 + 45) 
Speed 25 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
19 (+4) 14 (+2) 17(+3) 11 (40) 17 (+3) 15 (+2) 


Saving Throws Str +7, Con +6, Wis +6 

Skills Insight +6, Perception +6, Performance +5 
Senses passive Perception 16 

Languages Common 

Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


Fighting Spirit. As a bonus action, the samurai ronin can give 
itself advantage on weapon attack rolls until the end of its 
current turn. It can do this three times, then must take a long 
rest to regain uses. 


Fortifying Spirit. As a bonus action, the samurai ronin can give 
itself 10 temporary hit points. It can do this three times, then 
must take a long rest to regain uses. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The samurai ronin makes three melee attacks or 
two ranged attacks. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) piercing damage. 


Longbow. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, range 150/600 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage. 


REACTIONS 


Strength Before Death. When damage would reduce the samurai 
ronin to 0 hit points, it can use a reaction to immediately take an 
action. At the end of that action, if the samurai ronin is still a 0 
hit points, it falls unconscious. 


KOZAKURA SHOGUNATE (SAMURAI) 


L aN 


g 


ORDER OF SAINT DIONYSUS (DRUNKEN MASTERS) 


INEBRIATE 


Medium humanoid (any race), chaotic good 


Armor Class 15 
Hit Points 44 (8d8 + 8) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12 (+1) 16 (+3) 12(+1) 10(+0) 14 (+2) 14 (42) 


Skills Acrobatics +5, Athletics +3, Deception +4, Performance +4 
Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages Common 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


a 


Unarmored Defense. While the inebriate is wearing no armor 
and wielding no shield, its AC includes its Wisdom modifier 
(included in armor class). 


Unarmored Movement. While the inebriate is wearing no armor 
and wielding no shield, it’s walking speed increases by 10 feet 
(included in its speed). 


ACTIONS 


Drunken Flurry (Recharge 4-6). The inebriate makes three melee 
attacks. In addition, it can Disengage as a bonus action, and its 
speed increases by 10 feet until the end of its turn. 


Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) bludgeoning damage. 


Saint Dionysus was Chosen of the god Ilmater, and later 
his patron saint of wine and spirits. A temple to his name 
was raised in the Damaran city of Goliad, giving rise to 
an order of monks known for their outlandish, drunken 
fighting style. 

Foes of Tiamat. The order’s heroic founder, Friar 
Dagult, invested coin stolen from Tiamat’s own treasure 
hoard to construct the order’s first temple. Since that day, 
the cultists of the Dragon Queen have sworn vengeance 
on the so-called ‘drunken masters.’ 

Rebels with a Cause. The drunken masters oppose 
tyranny wherever it’s found. Their brethren wander 
undercover, posing as inebriates and beggars. When 
times are dark, they step from the shadows to strike back 
against the oppressors. Their cover is perfect: after all, 
who pays heed to the slurring of drunkard? 

* Sworn to Temperance. The Way of the Drunken 
Master relies on a show of intoxication to trick their 
enemies. While the drunken masters celebrate on holy 
days, they’re sworn to temperance while on the job. 


DRUNKEN MASTER 


Medium humanoid (any race), chaotic good 


Armor Class 17 
Hit Points 104 (16d8 + 32) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (+1) 18 (+4) 14 (42) 10(+0) 16(+3) 14 (42) 


Saving Throws Dex +7, Wis +6 

Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +4, Deception +5, Performance +5 
Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages Common 

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


Unarmored Defense. While the drunken master is wearing 
no armor and wielding no shield, its AC includes its Wisdom 
modifier (included in armor class). 


Unarmored Movement. While the drunken master is wearing no 
armor and wielding no shield, it’s walking speed increases by 10 
feet (included in its speed). 


ACTIONS 


Drunken Flurry. The drunken master makes four melee attacks. 
In addition, it can Disengage as a bonus action, and its speed 
increases by 10 feet until the end of its turn. 


Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


REACTIONS 


Redirect Attack (3/Day). When a creature misses the drunken 
master with a melee attack roll, as a reaction, the drunken 
master can cause that attack to hit one creature of his choice, 
other than the attacker, that he can see within 5 feet of him. 


PURPLE DRAGONS (CAVALIERS) 


Ask a military expert what is the most formidable fighting skirmishers on a larger battlefield. They are also often 
force in the Realms, and you will get different answers. tasked with patrolling troublesome areas within Cormyr, 
One of the most frequent answers, however, will be the or guarding the border in times of war. 

Purple Dragons, the military that carries out the will of Mounts. Most members of the Purple Dragon cavalry 
Cormyr. ride well-bred warhorses from the stables of long- 

The Path of a Purple Dragon. Upon joining the Purple practiced Cormyrian breeders. These steeds are like 
Dragons, a recruit goes through extensive training in the typical warhorses, but they have maximum hit points. 
basics of martial combat and warfare. Anyone showing a They are always dependent on the rider for their attacks. 
penchant for arcane power might be pushed to the War Some cavaliers may be specially trained to ride more 
Wizards for training. The others are evaluated for their exotic, independent mounts, from griffons to dragons. 
strengths and weaknesses. These riders are very rare and often the first target of 

Upon beginning active duty, assignments are made enemies during battles. 


based on the skills seen during training. Most are 
assigned to the rank-and-file infantry service. Some might 
be offered further training as officers, becoming low-level 
commanders. Highly skilled warriors, or those who have CAVALIER C HARGER 
the dedication to become a paladin might be given special Medium humanoid, any lawful 
duties. A less-traveled but highly coveted path takes 
recruits into the ranks of the Purple Dragon cavalry. 

The Purple Dragon Cavalry. The cavalry of the Purple 


Armor Class 18 (plate armor) 
Hit Points 182 (28d8 + 56) 


Dragons act as the vanguard of battalions, as well as spective 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
— - — — 18 (+4) 11 (+0) 14(+2) 11(+0) 17 (+3) 15 (42) 
CAVALIER INITIATE Saving Throws Str +8, Con +6, Wis +7 
Medium humanoid, any lawful Skills Animal Handling +7, Athletics +8, History +4, 
h Perception +7 
Armor Class 17 (splint armor) Senses passive Perception 17 
Hit Points 78 (12d8 + 24) Languages Common 
Speed 25 ft. Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 
Č 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
EC ME TAC SPO TA C A 1221) One with the Mount. The charger’s mount takes half damage 
from area attacks. 
Skills Animal Handling +4, Athletics +5, History +2 Saddlemaster. The cavalier charger has advantage on Strength 
Senses passive Perception 12 and Dexterity saving throws while mounted. The charger also 


Languages Common 


always lands on its feet when knocked from its mount. 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


ACTIONS 
Saddlemaster. The cavalier initiate has advantage on Strength Multiattack. The cavalier charger makes two lance attacks, and 
and Dexterity saving throws while mounted. The initiate always one hooves attack from the mount. 


Jane ents feet when, agg ed monis moui Lance. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 


ACTIONS Hit: 10 (1d12 + 4) piercing damage. 


Lance. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 9 (1d12 + 3) piercing damage. 


Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. A 


Charge. The cavalier initiate’s mount moves up to its speed. If Charge. The cavalier charger’s mount moves up to twice | 


the mount moves at least 20 feet, the cavalier initiate makes 
a lance attack with advantage. On a hit, the attack does 

an additional 6 (1d12) piercing damage, and the target is 
knocked prone. 


its speed, and opportunity attacks against it are made at 

disadvantage. If the mount moves at least 20 feet, the cavalier 

charger makes a lance attack with advantage. On a hit, the 

attack does an additional 26 (4d12) piercing damage, and the 

target is knocked prone. bm 


REACTIONS 


Guarding Lance. When an allied creature within 5 feet of the 
cavalier initiate, including the mount, is targeted by a melee 
weapon attack, the cavalier initiate can use a reaction and roll 
1d6. The allied creature can add that number to its AC against 
that attack. 


REACTIONS 


Guarding Lance. When an allied creature within 5 feet of the 
cavalier charger, including the mount, is targeted by a melee 
weapon attack, the cavalier charger can use a reaction and roll 
2d6. The allied creature can add that number to its AC against 
that attack. This must be decided before the attack roll is made. 


f 


PURPLE DRAGONS (CAVALIERS) 


REVENANT BLADES (HEXBLADES) 


In addition to her clerics, the drow goddess of undeath, 
Kiaransalee, offers pacts with mortals she deems worthy 
to wield her might. Through these pacts Revenant Blades 


Kiaransalee’s Vengeance. Revenant Blades who fail in 
their mission rarely rest in death. Kiaransalee often binds 
a Blade’s soul to her body as a true revenant until their 


are made, drow who serve the Revenancer as lone job is done. 
assassins or killers attached to a cell of her worshipers. 
Enemies of Undeath. A major part of any Revenant 
Blade’s life is fighting those who oppose their patron. REVENANT ASSASSIN 


Gods who oppose undeath are high on this list and 
include worshipers and the religious icons of Elistraee, 
Dumathoin, and Kelemvor. 

Undead Allies. If a Blade is tied to a cult cell, they 
are likely accompanied by summoned undead minions 
supplied by clerics. Occasionally a Blade dabbles in 
necromancy themselves and has their own specters and 
other allies. 


SHADOW BLADE 


Medium humanoid (any race), any non-good alignment 


Armor Class 15 (breastplate) 
Hit Points 39 (6d8 + 12) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

2C Ae TAE eo 2 Thee 16 (83) 
Č 
Saving Throws Wis +3, Cha +5 
Skills Arcana +2, Deception +5, History +2, Persuasion 

+5, Stealth +3 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages any two languages 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


c a s aa 


Devil’s Sight. The shadow blade can see normally in darkness, 
both magical and nonmagical, to a distance of 120 feet. 


Hexblade’s Curse. The shadow blade chooses one creature it 
can see within 30 feet. The target is cursed for 1 minute. The 
shadow blade deals 2 extra damage against the target with 
melee weapon attacks. If the cursed target is reduced to 0 hit 
points, the shadow blade gains 10 temporary hit points. 


Relentless Hex. As a bonus action the revenant blade can 
magically teleport up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space it 
can see within 5 feet of the revenant assassin’s cursed target 
that it can see. 


Spellcasting. The revenant assassin is a 6th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 13, +5 to hit with 
spell attacks). It has the following warlock spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): eldritch blast, friends, mage hand 
Ist-5th level (2 3rd-level slots): blink, blur, branding smite, 
elemental weapon, shield, staggering smite, wrathful smite 


ACTIONS 


Hexblade. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) slashing damage. 


One with Shadows. When in an area of dim light or darkness, 
the shadow blade can become invisible until it moves or takes 
an action or reaction. 


REVENANT BLADES (HEXBLADES) 


Medium humanoid (any race), any non-good alignment 


Armor Class 16 (breastplate) 
Hit Points 78 (12d8 + 24) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12 (+1) 14 (+2) 15(+2) 11 (+0) 12(+1) 18 (+4) 


Saving Throws Wis +4, Cha +7 

Skills Arcana +3, Deception +3, History +3, Persuasion 
+7, Stealth +5 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 11 

Languages any two languages 

Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


Devil’s Sight. The revenant assassin can see normally in 
darkness, both magical and nonmagical, to a distance 
of 120 feet. 


Spellcasting. The revenant assassin is a 17th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 15, +7 to hit with 
spell attacks). It has the following warlock spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): eldritch blast, fire bolt, friends, mage hand, 
minor illusion, prestidigitation, shocking grasp 


Ist-5th level (4 5th-level slots): banishing smite, blink, blur, 
branding smite, compulsion, cone of cold, elemental weapon, 
phantasmal killer, shield, staggering smite, wrathful smite 


Hexblade’s Curse. The revenant assassin chooses one creature 
it can see within 30 feet. The target is cursed for 1 minute. The 
hexblade deals 5 extra damage against the target with melee 
weapon attacks. If the cursed target is reduced to 0 hit points, 
the shadow blade gains 20 temporary hit points. 


Relentless Hex. As a bonus action, the revenant assassin can 
magically teleport up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space it 
can see within 5 feet of the revenant assassin’s cursed target 
that it can see. 


Armor of Hexes. When the revenant assassin’s hexed target 
attacks the hexblade, it has disadvantage. 


ACTIONS 


Hexblade. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) slashing damage. 


Accursed Specter. The revenant blade targets a humanoid within 
10 feet of it that it killed and has been dead for no longer than 1 
minute. The target's spirit rises as a specter in the space of its 
corpse or in the nearest unoccupied space. The specter is under 
the revenant assassin’s control. The revenant assassin can have 
no more than one specter under its control at one time. 


One with Shadows. When in an area of dim light or darkness, 
the revenant assassin can become invisible until it moves or 
takes an action or reaction. 


SAVIORS OF PEACE (OATH OF REDEMPTION) 


The goddess Eldath promotes a doctrine of pacifism 
and serenity. Her faithful eschew violence except when 
threatened, only taking up arms to defend their lives. 
Even in combat, they favor a fighting retreat over a 
staunch defense. Yet the Green Goddess is no fool: 
to protect her groves from fiends and undead, Eldath 
founded a secret martial order called the Saviors of 
Peace. Its paladins wander the wilds, seeking to redeem 
the wicked and protect the innocent from evil. 
Emissaries of Peace. Eldathyn redeemers seek a 
diplomatic solution to every conflict. They believe even 
the wicked can be absolved, and nobody is beyond 
forgiveness. They only take up arms when other peaceful 
avenues are exhausted. 


ELDATHYN REDEEMER 


Medium humanoid (any race), lawful good 


Armor Class 18 (plate) 
Hit Points 39 (6d8 + 12) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 12(1) 14(+2) 12(41) 13(+1) 15 (+2) 


Saving Throws Wis +3, Cha +4 

Skills Athletics +5, Insight +3, Medicine +3 
Senses passive Perception 11 

Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Spellcasting. The redeemer is a 4th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 12, +4 to hit with 
spell attacks). It has the following paladin spells prepared: 


Ist level (3 slots): command, cure wounds, shield of faith, sleep 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The redeemer makes two melee attacks. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage. 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, ranged 150/600 ft., 
one target. Hit: 5 (1d8 + 1) piercing damage. 


REACTIONS 


Rebuke the Violent. When an enemy within 30 feet of the 
redeemer deals damage with an attack against a creature other 
than the redeemer, the enemy must make a DC 12 Wisdom 
saving throw. On a failed save, the enemy takes damage equal 
to the damage it just dealt. On a successful save, it takes half as 
much damage. 


Trusted Companions. Redeemers often join 
adventuring companies, as they’re more likely to confront 
the dangers they’re sworn to face. If their allies prove 
wicked, the redeemers usually work harder to enlighten 
them rather than leaving the group. 

Guardians of the Weak. Redeemers show up to aid 
refugees fleeing war, defend remote villages from raiders, 
or protect citizens living under a despot. Their enemies 
soon learn to respect them, as they wield powerful magic 
that lashes back against acts of violence. 


ELDATHYN GUARDIAN 


Medium humanoid (any race), lawful good 


Armor Class 20 (plate, shield) 
Hit Points 75 (16d8 + 48) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 12(+1) 16(+3) 12(+1) 15 (+2) 17 (+3) 


Saving Throws Wis +5, Cha +6 

Skills Athletics +6, Insight +5, Medicine +5 
Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


Spellcasting. The guardian is a 10th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 14, +6 to hit with 
spell attacks). It has the following paladin spells prepared: 


Ist level (4 slots): command, cure wounds, sanctuary, shield of 
faith, sleep 

2nd level (3 slots): calm emotions, hold person 

3rd level (2 slots): counterspell, hypnotic pattern 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The guardian makes two melee attacks. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage. 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, ranged 150/600 ft., 
one target. Hit: 5 (1d8 + 1) piercing damage. 


REACTIONS 


Aura of the Guardian. When a creature within 10 feet of 
the guardian takes damage, the guardian can take the 
damage instead. 


Rebuke the Violent. When an enemy within 30 feet of the 
redeemer deals damage with an attack against a creature other 
than the redeemer, the enemy must make a DC 14 Wisdom 
saving throw. On a failed save, the enemy takes damage equal 
to the damage it just dealt. On a successful save, it takes half as 
much damage. 


SAVIORS OF PEACE (OATH OF REDEMPTION) 


f 


SERVANTS OF DISCORD (CELESTIAL WARLOCK) 


With equal hatred for elves and drow, the fallen solar- 
turned-archdevil, Malkizid, stokes the hatred within his 
scions no matter where it’s directed. Despite his hatred 
for them, Malkizid regularly corrupts elves and drow, 
forcing or luring them into infernal pacts of power to 
better allow them to wreak chaos upon their foes. 

Elven Subversion. Malkizid wants nothing more than 
the complete annihilation of all elves, including drow. He 
encourages his warlocks to cause strife and divisiveness 
where they can and occasionally has adherents on 
multiple sides of a conflict. 

Eldreth Veluuthra. Malkizid guides the human hating 
elven faction called Eldreth Veluuthra subtly through his 
warlocks. He uses the faction to sow discord between 
elves and humans, further weakening the elven people. 

Deep Schemers. Despite Malkizid’s archdevil 
status, his origins as a solar grant celestial powers to 
his warlocks. These celestial powers allow Malkizid’s 
schemers to hide in plain sight, using their powers for 
subversion. 


SERVANTS OF DISCORD (CELESTIAL WARLOCK 


DISCORDIAN WARLOCK 


Medium humanoid (any race), any evil alignment 


Armor Class 14 (studded leather) 
Hit Points 49 (11d8) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
9 (-1) 14 (+2) 11 (40) 11440) 10(+0) 18 (+4) 


———————————————————— 
Saving Throws Wis +3, Cha +7 

Skills Arcana +3, Deception +7, Religion +3, Persuasion +7 
Damage Resistances radiant 

Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages any two languages (usually Common and Elvish) 
Challenge 5 (1,800 XP) 


paaa aa 


Healing Light (3/Day). The discordian warlock heals one 
creature it can see within 60 feet of it 14 (4d6) hit points. 


Innate Spellcasting. The warlock’s innate spellcasting ability is 
Charisma. It can innately cast the following spells (spell save DC 
15), requiring no material components: 


At will: disguise self, levitate (self only), silent image, 
speak with dead 


Radiant Soul. The discordian warlock has resistance to radiant 
damage, and when it casts a spell that deals radiant or fire 
damage, it deals 5 extra fire or radiant damage to the targets. 


Spellcasting. The warlock is a 11th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 15, +7 to hit with 
spell attacks). It regains its expended spell slots when it finishes 
a short or long rest. It knows the following warlock spells: 


Cantrips (at will): green flame blade*, friends, light, mage hand, 
prestidigitation, sacred flame*, vicious mockery 

1st—5th level (3 5th-level slots): cure wounds, daylight, flame 
strike*, flaming sphere, guardian of faith, greater restoration, 
guiding bolt, hold monster, lesser restoration, revivify, wall of 
fire*, wall of light* 

* Indicate spells with radiant or fire damage that trigger 
Radiant Soul. 


ACTIONS 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


MALKIZID DISCORDIAN 


Medium humanoid (any race), any evil alignment 


—=— = — > seo 


Armor Class 15 (studded leather) 

Hit Points 110 (17d8+34) 

Speed 30 ft. 

—— mei 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
9(-1) 16 (+3) E eo 10(+0) 18 (+4) 

= ————— — 

Saving Throws Wis +4, Cha +8 

Skills Arcana +4, Deception +8, Religion +4, Persuasion +8 

Damage Resistances radiant 

Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages any two languages (usually Common and Elven) 

Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 


Sa 


Innate Spellcasting. The warlock’s innate spellcasting ability is 
Charisma. It can innately cast the following spells (spell save DC 
16), requiring no material components: 


At will: arcane eye, disguise self, levitate (self only), silent image, 
speak with dead 
1/day: conjure elemental, polymorph, plane shift 


Radiant Soul. The discordian warlock has resistance to radiant 
damage, has resistance to radiant damage, and when it casts a 
spell that deals radiant or fire damage, it deals 10 extra fire or 
radiant damage to the targets. 


Searing Vengeance (1/Day). When the warlock takes damage 
that would drop it to 0 hit points, it instead heals half of its 
maximum hit points. In addition, each creature of its choice 
within 30 feet of it takes radiant damage equal to 13 (2d8+4) and 
is blinded until the end of its next turn. 


Spellcasting. The warlock is a 17th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 16, +8 to hit with 
spell attacks). It regains its expended spell slots when it finishes 
a short or long rest. It knows the following warlock spells: 


Cantrips (at will): green flame blade*, friends, light, mage hand, 
prestidigitation, sacred flame™, vicious mockery 

1st—-5th level (4 5th-level slots): cure wounds, daylight, dominate 
monster, flame strike, flaming sphere*, guardian of faith, 
greater restoration, guiding bolt, psychic scream, revivify, wall of 
fire*, wall of light* 

* Indicate spells with radiant or fire damage that trigger 
Radiant Soul. 


ACTIONS 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage. 


SHADOW RESISTANCE (SHADOW MAGIC) 


The Netherese have long been a thorn in the side of 
the Dalelands and Cormyr. Even though the Netherese 
were buried under the sands of the Anauroch for years, 
what they left behind remained dangerous. Then the 
great flying city of Thultanthar returned from the Plane 
of Shadow, allowing the shadow people to travel a path 
toward regaining their formidable power. 

Opposition to the Netherese return assembled quickly 
once they reared their ugly heads once again. A group of 
powerful sorcerers created a group who swore to face the 
evil Shadovar. Their mastery of shadow magic rivals that 
of the Netherese. 

Effective Rivals. The Shadow Resistance rose to 
take on the returned threat of the Netherese. They used 
shadow to make themselves more resilient and develop 


traits that would help bring Netheril to its end. The 
Resistance have joined with other forces in the fight. 
Many were present when the great city of Thultanthar fell 
on Myth Drannor, destroying both cities. 

Dedicated to the Cause. The members of the Shadow 
Resistance are dedicated to keeping those that would use 
shadow magic for ill at bay. The lower-ranking members 
of the group, the shadow born, keep watch over the ruins 
of Myth Drannor to ensure the Netherese do not rise 
again. They have learned to control the shadow inside 
of them and use it as an asset in the fight against their 
enemies. The shadow born follow the directives of their 
leader, Shadow Prime. 

The Shadow Leader. Shadow Prime has a 
direct connection to the Shadowfell and knows the 
machinations of a great many of the major players in that 
realm. They use that information to direct the shadow 
born toward any oncoming trouble. 


SHADOW BORN 


Medium humanoid (any race), neutral good 


Armor Class 11 (14 with mage armor) 
Hit Points 52 (8d8 + 16) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) BE 14(42), «12 (41) 40)_~—s«i76 (43) 


Skills Arcana +3, Deception +5 

Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Common, one other 

Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Darkness (1/Day). The shadow born can cast the darkness 
spell. When cast in this way, the shadow born can see through 
the darkness. 


Grave’s Strength. When the shadow born takes damage that 
reduces it to 0 hit points, it can make a Charisma saving throw 
(DC 5 + damage taken). If the shadow born is successful it 
instead drops to 1 hit point. This cannot be used until the 
shadow born takes a long rest. 


Heightened Spell (1/Day). When casting a spell that forces a 
creature to make a saving throw to resist the spell’s effects, 
the shadow born can give that target disadvantage on its 
saving throw. 


Spellcasting. The shadow born is a 7th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 13, +5 to hit with 
spell attacks). It knows the following spells: 


Cantrips (at will): blade ward, chill touch, poison, ray of frost 
Ist level (4 slots): fog cloud, mage armor 
2nd level (3 slots): cloud of daggers, darkness, hold 
person, misty step 
3rd level (3 slots): counterspell, lightning bolt 
4th level (1 slot): greater invisibility 


ACTIONS 


Quarterstaff. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 3 (1d6) bludgeoning damage 


SHADOW PRIME 


Medium humanoid (any race), neutral good 


Armor Class 12 (15 with mage armor) 
Hit Points 104 (16d8 + 32) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 15(+2)  14(42) 12(41) 11440) 18 (44) 


Saving Throws Dex +6, Cha +8 
Skills Arcana +5, Deception +8 
Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages Common, one other 
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 


Darkness (1/Day). The Shadow Prime can cast the darkness 
spell. When cast in this way, the Shadow Prime can see through 
the darkness. 


Grave’s Strength. When the Shadow Prime takes damage that 
reduces it to 0 hit points, it can make a Charisma saving throw 
(DC 5 + damage taken). If the Shadow Prime is successful 

it instead drops to 1 hit point. This cannot be used until the 
shadow born takes a long rest. 


Heightened Spell (3/Day). When casting a spell that forces a 
creature to make a saving throw to resist the spell’s effects, the 
Shadow Prime can that target disadvantage on its saving throw. 


Spellcasting. The Shadow Prime is a 13th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 16, +8 to hit with 
spell attacks). It knows the following spells: 


Cantrips (at will): blade ward, chill touch, dancing lights, poison, 
ray of frost 

Ist level (4 slots): fog cloud, mage armor 

2nd level (3 slots): cloud of daggers, darkness, hold 
person, misty step 

3rd level (3 slots): counterspell, lightning bolt 

4th level (1 slot): greater invisibility, banishment 

5th level (2 slots): cone of cold, insect plague 

6th level (1 slot): eyebite, mass suggestion 

7th level (1 slot): prismatic spray 


ACTIONS 


Quarterstaff. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 3 (1d6) bludgeoning damage. 
RSE SD TO OI a) 


SHADOW RESISTANCE (SHADOW MAGIC) 


S 


SHADOW THIEVES (MASTERMINDS AND INQUISITIVES) 


This conglomerate of thieves’ guilds is the largest and 
most prosperous in all Faerûn, spanning the entirety 

of the Sword Coast, with tendrils extending deep into 
the continental interior. Headquartered in Amn, the 
organization exploits a highly secretive cell structure, 
ensuring individual agents have limited understanding of 
its true size or goals. 

Layers of Hierarchy. The guild has a multilayered 
hierarchy. At its heart is the Shadow Council, led by 
the Grandmaster of Shadow. The Shadow Council 
commands the Cloakmasters, a ring of thieves who 
remain blind to the identities of their counterparts. 
Below them are the Guildmasters, each of whom 
runs their own independent guild. Finally, dozens of 
Silhouettes pose as Guildmasters to dupe the law (and 
even their own rank-and-file agents). 


MASKED INQUISITIVE 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 54 (12d8) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 

10 (+0) 15(+2) 10(+0) 14 (+2) 18(+4) 16 (+3) 
—————————————————————————— | 
Skills Deception +5, Insight +6, Investigation +4, Perception +6, 

Persuasion +5, Sleight of Hand +4, Stealth +4 
Senses passive Perception 16 
Languages any one language (usually Common) plus 

Thieves Cant 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


eee 


Ear for Deceit. The inquisitive gains advantage on Wisdom 
(Insight) checks to determine if a creature is lying. 


Insightful Fighting. On each of its turns, the inquisitive can use 
a bonus action to allow its Sneak Attack against a creature that it 
doesn’t have advantage against, provided that the creature isn’t 
incapacitated and the inquisitive doesn’t have disadvantage for 
the attack. 


Sneak Attack (1/Turn). The inquisitive deals an extra 14 (4d6) 
damage when it hits a target with a weapon attack and has 
advantage on the attack roll, or when the target is within 5 
feet of an ally of the inquisitive that isn’t incapacitated and the 
inquisitive doesn’t have disadvantage on the attack roll. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The inquisitive makes three melee attacks, or two 
ranged attacks. 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


Hand Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, ranged 
30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Fanatical Secrecy. Each member knows only a handful 
of operatives and may not even be aware of the larger 
organization. Due to the presence of the Silhouettes, 
operatives often think they serve one boss when they’re 
receiving orders from another. The penalty for betraying 
the Shadow Thieves is death, with the culprit left impaled 
by the guild symbol: a dagger driven through a silk 
domino mask. 

Sworn to Conquer Waterdeep. The Shadow Thieves 
originated in the city of Waterdeep but were driven out 
and forced to relocate to Athkatla in Amn. Ever since, 
they’ve sought to reinstate their power in the City of 
Splendors. In response, the Masked Lords have deployed 
“inquisitives” to infiltrate the Shadow Thieves. Each 
night, rival operatives fight a cloak-and-dagger war 
through the streets and back alleys of the Sword Coast to 
assert control. 


SHADOW THIEF MASTERMIND 


Medium humanoid (any race), any non-good alignment 


Armor Class 16 (studded leather) 
Hit Points 121 (22d8 + 22) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 18 (+4) 13(+1) 18 (+4) 14 (+2) 16 (43) 


Saving Throws Dex +7, Int +7, Cha +6 

Skills Deception +6, Insight +5, Perception +5, Investigation +7, 
Persuasion +6, Sleight of Hand +7, Stealth +7 

Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages any two languages plus Thieves Cant 

Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


aa 


Cunning Action. On each of its turns, the mastermind can use a 
bonus action to take the Dash, Disengage or Hide action. 


Master of Tactics. When the mastermind attacks another 
creature, the mastermind’s allies have advantage against that 
target until the start of the mastermind’s next turn. 


Sneak Attack (1/Turn). The mastermind deals an extra 31 (9d6) 
damage when it hits a target with a weapon attack and has 
advantage on the attack roll, or when the target is within 5 feet 
of an ally of the mastermind that isn’t incapacitated and the 
mastermind doesn’t have disadvantage on the attack roll. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The mastermind makes three attacks with 
its rapier. 


Rapier. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage. 


Hand Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, ranged 30/120 
ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage. 


REACTIONS 


Misdirection. In response to being targeted by an attack, the 
mastermind causes the attacker to attack another creature 
adjacent to the mastermind. 


THE SHADOWS OF BREGAN D’AERTHE 


(COLLEGE OF WHISPERS) 


BREGAN D’AERTHE SPY 


Medium humanoid (drow), neutral evil 


Armor Class 14 (leather armor) 
Hit Points 44 (8d8 + 8) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
11 (+0) 16 (+3) 12(+1) 10 (+0) 13(+1) 14 (+2) 


Saving Throws Dex +5, Wis +3 

Skills Deception +4, Perception +3, Performance +4 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages Common, Elvish, Undercommon 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Fey Ancestry. The Bregan D’aerthe spy has advantage on saving 
throws against being charmed, and magic can’t put it to sleep. 


Innate Spellcasting. The Bregan D’aerthe spy’s innate 
spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 12). It can innately 
cast the following spells, requiring no material components: 


At will: dancing lights 
1/day each: darkness, faerie fire, levitate (self only) 


Psychic Blades (2/Day). When the Bregan D’aerthe spy hits a 
creature with a weapon attack, it can choose to deal an extra 7 
(2d6) psychic damage to that target. 


Spellcasting. The Bregan D’aerthe spy is a 4th-level spellcaster. 
Its spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 12, +4 to hit 
with spell attacks). It has the following bard spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): friends, mage hand, vicious mockery 

Ist level (4 slots): charm person, disguise self, dissonant whispers, 
healing word, thunderwave 

2nd level (3 slots): detect thoughts, shatter 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the Bregan D’aerthe 
spy has disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 80/320 ft., 
one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


Words of Terror (Recharge 5-6). The Bregan D’aerthe spy 
targets one humanoid within 5 feet that can hear it. The 

target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw (DC 12) or be 
frightened of the Bregan D’aerthe spy or another creature of 
the spy’s choice. This effect ends on a target after 1 hour or if it 
takes any damage. 


Eschewing the matriarchal hierarchy of drow society, 
Bregan D’aerthe is an elite drow mercenary and 
mercantile group of houseless male drow, available for 
hire to the highest bidder. 

Information for Sale. Bregan D’aerthe trades surface 
goods in Menzoberranzan and the Underdark. An elite 
group of Bregan D’aerthe agents deals solely in a more 
precious commodity: secrets. 

Mightier than the Sword. The spies of Bregan D’aerthe 
know that words can be much more damaging than 
physical wounds. These drow have mastered the ability 
to twist words, manipulate their foes, and hurt others 
through extortion and threats. 

Shadow Thieves. Bregan D’aerthe’s shadowmasters 
have taken the art of whispers to a new level and are able 
to capture the personas of their fallen enemies, wearing 
the faces of the dead to deceive others. 


> 
ar 


BREGAN D’AERTHE 
SHADOWMASTER 


Medium humanoid (drow), neutral evil 


Armor Class 15 (studded leather) 
Hit Points 88 (16d8 + 16) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
11 (+0) 16 (+3) 12 (+1) 10 (+0) 13 (+1) 17 (+3) 


Saving Throws Dex +6, Wis +4 

Skills Deception +9, Perception +7, Performance +6 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 17 
Languages Common, Elvish, Undercommon 
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


Fey Ancestry. The Bregan D’aerthe shadowmaster has 
advantage on saving throws against being charmed, and magic 
can’t put it to sleep. 


Innate Spellcasting. The Bregan D’aerthe shadowmaster’s 
innate spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 

12). It can innately cast the following spells, requiring no 
material components: 


At will: dancing lights 
1/day each: darkness, faerie fire, levitate (self only) 
Psychic Blades (2/Day). When the Bregan D’aerthe 


shadowmaster hits a creature with a weapon attack, it can 
choose to deal an extra 21 (6d6) psychic damage to that target. 


Shadow Thief (1/Day). When a humanoid dies within 30 feet 
of the Bregan D’aerthe shadowmaster, the shadowmaster 
can choose to retain the humanoid’s shadow until 


a ae a Te SE ea ee SS ES S a n 


THE SHADOWS OF BREGAN D’AERTHE (COLLEGE OF WHISPERS) 


Se T 
the shadowmaster uses it or finishes a long rest. The 
shadowmaster can use the shadow as an action, causing the 
shadow to vanish and magically transform into a disguise of 
that humanoid, healthy and alive. The disguise lasts for 1 hour 
or until ended as a bonus action. 


Spellcasting. The Bregan D’aerthe shadowmaster is a 9th- 
level spellcaster. Its spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save 
DC 14, +6 to hit with spell attacks). It has the following bard 
spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): friends, mage hand, vicious mockery 

Ist level (4 slots): charm person, disguise self, dissonant whispers, 
healing word, thunderwave 

2nd level (3 slots): detect thoughts, shatter 

3rd level (3 slots): dispel magic, speak with dead 

4th level (3 slots): dimension door, greater invisibility 

5th level (1 slot): dominate person 


Sunlight Sensitivity. While in sunlight, the Bregan D’aerthe 
shadowmaster has disadvantage on attack rolls, as well as on 
Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on sight. 


ACTIONS 


| 


Multiattack. The Bregan D’aerthe shadowmaster makes two 
melee or ranged weapon attacks. 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, range 80/320 ft., 
one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


Words of Terror (Recharge 5-6). The Bregan D’aerthe 
shadowmaster targets one humanoid within 5 feet that can 
hear it. The target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw 
(DC 14) or be frightened of the Bregan D’aerthe shadowmaster 
or another creature of the shadowmaster’s choice. This effect 
ends on a target after 1 hour or if it takes any damage. 


SPARKS OF MYSTERY (DIVINE SOULS) 


Silverymoon has been the bastion of magic in western 
Faerûn for many centuries. With that focus, it is natural that 
many in the city worship of the goddess of magic, Mystra. 
Mystra has many followers among users of the arcane 
arts. Her Chosen are rated among the most powerful 
spellcasters in Faerfin. Mastering the control of the 
Weave is an arduous task fraught with catastrophic 
mistakes, but those that survive are revered for centuries. 
Wizards are not the only arcane casters among the 
citizenry of Silverymoon. Sorcerers have increased their 
ranks and have heard the call of Mystra as well. 
Underestimated. Sorcerers are born with their power, 
and some consider them inferior to the learned wizard. 
This perception is not as prevalent as it once was, as more 
and more people are born gifted with innate magic ability. 
Mystra’s Spark. Mystra gives sorcerers she deems 
worthy a spark of the Weave at birth. As they grow, this 
spark ignites her power in these individuals. These gifted 
spellcasters put their faith in Mystra in hopes she will 
help them gain control of the power they were given. 
Sparks of Mystery. The Sparks of Mystery is a group 
of sorcerers that turned to Mystra to guide them in 


MysTRA’Ss BEACON 


Medium humanoid (any race), neutral good 


Armor Class 11 (14 with mage armor) 
Hit Points 52 (8d8 + 16) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 13 (+1) 14 (42) 12(+1) 11(+0) 16 (+3) 


Skills Arcana +3, Deception +5 
Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages Common, one other 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Mystra’s Protection. The beacon can use a bonus action to heal 
an ally within 5 feet for 10 (3d6) hit points. The beacon can do 
this 3 times before needing a long rest to recharge the ability. 


Heightened Spell (1/Day). When casting a spell that forces a 
creature to make a saving throw to resist the spell’s effects, the 
beacon can give that target disadvantage on its saving throw. 


Spellcasting. The beacon is a 7th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 13, +5 to hit with 
spell attacks). It knows the following spells: 


Cantrips (at will): acid splash, fire bolt, light, mage hand, 
ray of front 

Ist level (4 slots): chromatic orb, mage armor 

2nd level (3 slots): misty step, scorching ray, spider climb 

3rd level (3 slots): fireball, lightning bolt 

4th level (1 slots): greater invisibility 


ACTIONS 


Quarterstaff. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 3 (1d6) bludgeoning damage. 


discovering the limits of their power. They formed in 
Silverymoon because of its favor in the eyes of Mystra. 
They believe they are special to the goddess because they 
have a piece of her essence within them. 

Beacons of Mystra. The bulk of the members of the 
Sparks of Mystra are called Mystra’s Beacons. This group 
is charged with seeking out and destroying individuals 
or organizations whose primary purpose is to undermine 
Mystra’s work in Faerûn. 

Vessels of the Weave. The larger group is divided into 
smaller contingents which are assigned to various areas 
of Faerûn to protect them from Mystra’s enemies. Each 
contingent has a leader known as Mystra’s Vessel. The 
Vessel goes into a trance-like state to commune with 
Mystra and receive her directives. They then lead the 
contingent to fulfil her wishes. 


MysTRA’S VESSEL 


Medium humanoid (any race), neutral good 


Armor Class 12 (15 with mage armor) 
Hit Points 104 (16d8 + 32) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) Ee 14(42) 12(41) 11440) 18(44) 


Skills Arcana +5, Deception +8 
Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages Common, one other 
Challenge 10 (5,900 XP) 


Mystra’s Protection. The vessel can use a bonus action to heal 
an ally within 5 feet for 17 (5d6) hit points. The Mystra’s vessel 
can do this 4 times before needing a long rest to recharge 

the ability. 


Mystra’s Favor: The vessel rolls with advantage on 
saving throws. 


Heightened Spell (3/Day). When casting a spell that forces a 
creature to make a saving throw to resist the spell’s effects, the 
vessel can give that target disadvantage on its saving throw. 


Spellcasting. The vessel is a 13th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 16, +8 to hit with 
spell attacks). It knows the following spells: 


Cantrips (at will): acid splash, fire bolt, light, mage hand, ray of 
front, shocking grasp 

Ist level (4 slots): chromatic orb, mage armor 

2nd level (3 slots): misty step, scorching ray, spider climb 

3rd level (3 slots): fireball, lightning bolt 

4th level (3 slots): greater invisibility, dimension door 

5th level (2 slots): cone of cold, dominate person 

6th level (1 slot): chain lightning, mass suggestion 

7th level (1 slot): fire storm 


ACTIONS 


Quarterstaff. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 3 (1d6) bludgeoning damage. 


SPARKS OF MYSTERY (DIVINE SOULS) 


f 


‘SUN SOUL MONK 


SUN SOULS (WAY OF THE SUN SOUL) 


Medium humanoid (any race), any good alignment 


Armor Class 17 
Hit Points 60 (11d8 + 11) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12 (+1) 18 (+4) 12(+1) 10(+0) 16 (+3) 10 (+0) 


Skills Acrobatics +6, Athletics +3, Perception +5 
Senses passive Perception 15 

Languages Common 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Unarmored Defense. While the monk is wearing no armor and 
wielding no shield, its AC includes its Wisdom modifier. 


Unarmored Movement. While the monk is wearing no armor 
and wielding no shield, its walking speed increases by 10 feet 
(included in its speed). 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The monk makes three melee attacks or ranged 
spell attacks. 


Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


Radiant Sun Bolt. Ranged Spell Attack: +6 to hit, range 30 ft., 
one target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) radiant damage. 


This monastic order dates back as far as the empire of 
Netheril, yet its monasteries are still dotted across the 
wild places of Faerûn. Its followers believe that the spirits 
of all living things harbor a spark of the sun’s mystic 
energy. With the correct training, Sun Soul monks can 
unleash this power to strike down their enemies with 
radiant fire. 

The Precepts of Incandescence. Monks of this order 
follow a strict code that emphasizes three pillars: physical 
prowess, spiritual virtue, and the annihilation of darkness 
using divine light. 

Blessed by the Gods. The Sun Souls have historical 
ties to three gods: Sune, Selûne, and Lathander. Monks 
from the order worship one or more of these gods and are 
sent to aid their temples in times of need. 

Guardians of the People. The Sun Soul monks are 
sworn to defend the poor folk of Faerûn from evil. Many 
leave their monasteries to wander the Realms alone, 
fighting evil wherever it may be found. 


SUN SOUL MASTER 


Medium humanoid (any race), any good alignment 


Armor Class 18 
Hit Points 97 (15d8 + 30) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12 (+1) 18 (+4) 13 (+2) 10(+0) 18 (+4) 10 (+0) 


Saving Throws Dex +7, Wis +7 

Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +4, Perception +7 
Senses passive Perception 17 

Languages Common 

Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


Searing Arc Strike (3/Day). After attacking with unarmed strikes, 
the Sun Soul Master can use a bonus action to cast burning 
hands (DC 15 Dexterity saving throw). Each additional use ina 
day raises the damage by 2d6. 


Unarmored Defense. While the monk is wearing no armor and 
wielding no shield, its AC includes its Wisdom modifier. 


Unarmored Movement. While the monk is wearing no armor 
and wielding no shield, its walking speed increases by 10 feet 
(included in its speed). 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The monk makes three melee or ranged 
spell attacks. 


Unarmed Strike. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


Radiant Sun Bolt. Ranged Spell Attack: +7 to hit, range 30 ft., 
one target. Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) radiant damage. 


Searing Sunburst (1/Day). The Sun Soul Master tosses a sphere 
of searing radiant light within 150 feet. Each creature ina 
20-foot-radius sphere must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution 
saving throw or take 28 (8d6) radiant damage unless they are 
behind total cover that is opaque. 


SHIPS OF LUSKAN (SWASHBUCKLERS) 


The frozen port of Luskan has long waged war against 
its naval rivals, drawing buccaneers to its docks like 
galleons to the maelstrom. Once ashore, the best sailors 
are inducted into the five great “Ships”: highly-respected 
gangs who live by the codes of the Northlanders. 

One for All, All for One. Bonds of fellowship join each 
sailor to their shipmates. They fight, make merry, love, 
and die together. Such bonds are manifest in the clothing 
they wear, their tattoos, and the adornments on their 
shields: all of which share their Ship’s heraldry. 

Masterminded by Wizards. The High Captains of 
the Ships govern Luskan, yet the wizards of the Arcane 
Brotherhood control them like puppets. Few Luskars 
doubt the wizards’ power, yet their goals remain 
mysterious. When pirates are sent abroad, they’re 
often furthering the unknowable aims of the Arcane 
Brotherhood. 

Sailors of the Armada. Each Ship encompasses many 
vessels. While in port, its sailors are assigned civic duties 
such as guard duty, excise work, or laboring. On the high 
seas, they form an armada of buccaneers ready to pounce 
on any vessel that strays into their path. 


LUSKAN SWASHBUCKLER 


Medium humanoid (human), any non-good alignment 


Armor Class 15 (chain shirt) 
Hit Points 16 (3d8 + 3) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12 (+1) 16 (+3) 12(1) 11 (+0) 13(+1) 13 (+1) 


Skills Athletics +3, Intimidation +3, Perception +3, Stealth +5 
Senses passive Perception 13 

Languages Common, Thieves Cant 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Fancy Footwork. If the swashbuckler makes a melee attack 
against a target during its turn, that target can’t make 
opportunity attacks against the swashbuckler for the rest of the 
swashbuckler’s turn. 


Rakish Sneak Attack (1/Turn). The swashbuckler deals an extra 7 
(2d6) damage when it hits a target with a weapon attack and has 
advantage on the attack roll, or when the swashbuckler is within 
5 feet of the target and no other creatures are within 5 feet of the 
swashbuckler. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The swashbuckler makes two melee attacks. 


Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) slashing damage. 


Handaxe. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5ft. 
or ranged 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) slashing damage. 


LUSKAN CAPTAIN 


Medium humanoid (any race), any non-lawful alignment 


Armor Class 15 (Studded Leather) 
Hit Points 65 (10d8 + 20) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (+2) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 14 (+2) 11 (+0) 14 (+2) 


Saving Throws Str +4, Dex +5, Wis +2 

Skills Deception +4, Stealth +5 

Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages Any two languages, Thieves Cant 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Fancy Footwork. |f the Luskan captain makes a melee attack 
against a target during its turn, that target can’t make 
opportunity attacks against the Luskan captain for the rest of 
the Luskan captain’s turn. 


Panache. The Luskan captain chooses a target that can hear it 
and shares a language, who must succeed on a DC 12 Charisma 
saving throw. On a failed save, the target gains disadvantage on 
attack rolls that target creatures other than the Luskan captain, 
and it can’t make opportunity attacks against targets other than 
the Luskan captain. 


Rakish Sneak Attack (1/Turn). The Luskan captain deals an extra 
21 (6d6) damage when it hits a target with a weapon attack and 
has advantage on the attack roll, or when the Luskan captain is 
within 5 feet of the target and no other creatures are within 5 
feet of the Luskan captain. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The Luskan captain makes three melee attacks: 
two with its scimitar and one with its dagger. Or the captain 
makes two ranged attacks with its daggers. 


Scimitar. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) slashing damage. 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage. 


SPIRIT PROTECTORS OF UBTAO 
(PATH OF THE ANCESTRAL GUARDIAN) 


Within the realm of Chult, Ubtao once help sway. He 
protected his people, and in return they revered him and 
lived to serve him. One of the tenets of the faithful of 
Ubtao was a reverence for the spirits of those who came 
before. While Ubtao has been absent for Chult, some have 
not lost the faith. They guard sacred places, such as burial 
sites, and protect the spirits that rest there, waiting for 
Ubtao to return and lead them to the afterlife. 

A Calling. While most of the spirit protectors of 
Ubtao are human, any types of creatures that dedicate 
themselves to the protection of their ancestral lands can 
become protectors. These guardians vow to defend their 
lands with their lives, covering their bodies with tattoos 
and other directions to seal that covenant. 

One with the Spirits. Once dedicated to the solemn 
duty of guarding the sacred remains of their ancestors, 
the spirit protectors begin to find themselves attuning 
more and more to the spirit world. They hear voices, feel 
the presence of spirits, and even see spectral evidence of 
those who came before. 


SPIRIT TALKER 


Medium humanoid, neutral 


Armor Class 13 
Hit Points 52 (8d8 +16) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 12 (+1) 14 (+2) 9 (-1) 13 (+1) 8 (-1) 


Skills Athletics +5, Perception +3, Religion +1 
Senses passive Perception 13 

Languages Common 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Call Spirit (1/Day). As a bonus action, the spirit talker can 
summon forth an ancestral spirit for 1 minute. While the 

spirit is active, attacks against the spirit talker are made with 
disadvantage. When the spirit talker makes a melee attack, it 
can choose to unleash the spirit on the target. The melee attack 
is made with advantage and does 5 (1d10) force damage in 
addition to regular weapon damage, and the spirit is gone. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The spirit talker makes two attack with its 
greatclub. If the same target is hit with both attacks, the target is 
knocked prone. 


Greatclub. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) bludgeoning damage. 


Javelin. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 30/120 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


After spending a short amount of time defending the 
territory, the spirit protectors learn how to draw upon 
these spirits to gain wisdom, increase the effectiveness 
of their fighting, and even defend against attacks from 
outsiders. 

Revered Recluses. Because of their strange 
appearances and connections to the world of the dead, 
spirit protectors are often revered outcasts in their own 
tribes or communities. They care nothing for socializing 
with the living, and they have no time for the trivial tasks 
of life. Their communities keep them fed with gifts of 
food, understanding their important role but not wanting 
to spend any more time with them than necessary. 


SPIRIT LORD 


Medium humanoid, neutral 


Armor Class 15 
Hit Points 120 (16d8 +48) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 14 (42) 17 (43) 9 (-1) 15 (+2) 12 (+1) 


Saving Throws Con +6, Wis +5 
Senses passive Perception 15 
Languages Common 
Challenge 7 (2,900 XP) 


Call Spirit (3/Day). As a bonus action, the spirit lord can 
summon forth an ancestral spirit for 1 minute. While the 

spirit is active, attacks against the spirit lord are made with 
disadvantage. When the spirit lord makes a melee attack, it can 
choose to unleash the spirit on the target. The melee attack 

is made with advantage and does 11 (2d10) force damage in 
addition to regular weapon damage, and the spirit is gone. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The spirit lord makes three attacks with its 
greatclub. If the same target is hit with all three attacks, the 
target is stunned until the end of the spirit lord’s next turn. 


Greatclub. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


Javelin. Ranged Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, range 30/120 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) piercing damage. 


REACTIONS 


Shielding Spirit. When the spirit lord suffers a critical hit on an 
attack roll against it, it can use a reaction to summon a spirit to 
shield it. The spirit lord gains resistance to all damage until the 
end of the current turn. In addition, the attacker must succeed 
ona DC 14 Constitution saving throw or take damage equal to 
the damage taken by the spirit lord on that attack. 

EEE OE OE | 


STORMBORN OF RUATHYM 


(PATH OF THE STORM HERALD) 


The Moonshae Isles are known for their combination 
of beauty and savagery. No part of the isles exemplifies 
that dichotomy than the northernmost extension of the 
Moonshaes: the island of Ruathym. 

Home of the Northlanders. At 200 miles north of the 
main islands of the Moonshaes, Ruathym is the ancestral 
home of the hearty seafaring people known as the 
Northlanders. Over the centuries these sailors, pirates, 
and barbarians have integrated into the society of the 
Moonshaes, but there is still clans of Northlanders who 
call Ruathym their home. 

Worshippers of Tempus and Umberlee. The 
inhabitants of Ruathym eke out an existence hunting, 
fishing, and raiding the civilized areas in the northern 
Moonseas. To help them survive, they call upon the 
blessings of the gods Tempus and Umberlee, neither 
known for peace and compassion. Priests, shamans, 
and witches dedicated to these storm-gods often lead 
the clans here. The true martial power of the Ruathym 
Northlanders, however, rests with the Stormborn. 


NORTHLANDER STORMRIDER 


Medium humanoid, any chaotic 


Armor Class 14 
Hit Points 60 (8d8 +24) 
Speed 40 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
EC AE 7 Shia ORI ATO Ome. Sl) 


Skills Athletics +5 

Damage Resistances lightning 
Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages Common 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 9 (1d12 + 3) slashing damage plus 3 (1d6) 
lightning damage. 


Javelin. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 30/120 ft., 
one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage plus 3 (1d6) 
lightning damage. 


REACTIONS 


Bite of the Storm. |f there are three or more hostile creatures 
within 5 ft. of the Northlander stormrider, it can use a reaction 
to make a greataxe attack against one of them. 


Barbarians of the Sea. As raiders using the Trackless 
Sea as their means of transport, the Stormborn give 
themselves over to the savagery of their gods, as 
exemplified by crashing waves, lightning-filled storms, 
and relentless water. In their training, they learn to swim 
with the skill of a merfolk, as well as stand up to the 
terrible power of lightning, learning to harness it as they 
gain more experience. 

In addition, their wild ferocity makes them hard to tame 
or frighten, whether through pretty words, forceful acts, or 
magic. When they do get behind a leader, however, they 
show a dedication and obedience that borders on mania. 


NORTHLANDER STORMRAGER 


Medium humanoid, any chaotic 


Armor Class 14 
Hit Points 60 (8d8 +24) 
Speed 40 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 14 (+1) 19 (+4) 9 (-1) 10 (+0) 11 (+0) 


Saving Throws Dex +5, Con +7 

Skills Athletics +8 

Damage Immunities lightning 

Condition Immunities charmed, frightened, prone 
Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages Common 

Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 


Sea Legs. The Northlander stormrager cannot be 
knocked prone. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The Northlander stormrager makes two greataxe 
attacks or two javelin attacks. 


Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 10 (1d12 + 4) slashing damage plus 7 (2d6) 
lightning damage. 

Javelin. Ranged Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, range 30/120 ft., 
one target. Hit: 7 (1d6 + 4) piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) 
lightning damage. 


REACTIONS 


Eye of the Storm (Recharge 5-6). If there are three or more 
hostile creatures within 5 ft. of the Northlander stormrager, 

it can use a reaction to release a burst of lightning. All hostile 
creatures within 5 ft. of the Northlander stormrager must 
succeed on a DC 16 Dexterity saving throw or take 36 (8d8) 
lightning damage and be stunned until the end of their next 
turns. Those succeeding on the saving throw take half damage 
and are not stunned.v 


TEL'TEUKIIRA HORIZON WALKER (HORIZON WALKERS) 


The Tel’Teukiira, as they’re known among the elves, have 
a storied history. They lurk in the shadows, appearing 
when need for them is greatest. Originally formed by the 
Blackstaff as an organization that acted more directly than 
the Harpers, this new group called itself the Moonstars 
(among the non-elf population) and rose to prevent threats 
that the Blackstaff and his allies deemed worthy. 

Prophesied of Amagal. As written in Amagal’s tome, 
the Tel’Teukiira are protectors. However recent readings 
of Amagal’s Prophecy have redirected the group’s 
interests away from the Material Plane. 

Threats who Wait in Darkness. The Tel’Teukiira strive 
to protect the world against threats from other planes, 
guarding against forces that use otherworldly magic. They 
also keep watch over known planar portals, remaining 
vigilant against the opening of other portals. 


= 
-t 


-e 


TEL'TEUKIIRA HORIZON WALKER (HORIZON WALKERS) 


Dwell and Strike in Shadow. To better battle their 
otherworldly enemies, the Moonstars remain hidden and 
attack using secret rites that augment their strikes, which 
are capable of wounding the most resistant outworlder. 
They use the knowledge of secret ways through the 
multiverse to traverse short and long distances in the 
pursuit of their quarry. 


TEL TEUKIIRA WALKER 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 13 (leather armor, 16 with barkskin) 
Hit Points 49 (9d8 + 9) 
Speed 30 ft. 


CHA 
11 (+0) 


STR 
11 (+0) 


DEX 
14 (+2) 


CON 
12 (+1) 


INT 
11 (+0) 


WIS 
14 (+2) 


Skills Nature +4, Perception +4, Stealth +4, Survival +4 
Senses passive Perception 14 

| Languages Any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Ethereal Step. The Tel’Teukiira walker can step through the 
Ethereal Plane. As a bonus action, they can cast the etherealness 
spell with this feature, without expending a spell slot, but the 
spell ends at the end of their turn. 


Planar Strike. As a bonus action, the Tel’Teukiira walker chooses 
one creature they can see within 30 feet. The next time they hit 
that creature on this turn with a weapon attack, all damage dealt 
by the attack becomes force damage, and the creature takes an 
extra 4 (1d8) force damage from the attack. 


Spellcasting. The Tel’Teukiira walker is a 9th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 12, +4 to hit with 
spell attacks). The Tel’ Teukiira walker has the following ranger 
spells prepared: 
Ist level (4 slots): cure wounds, jump, protection from 

evil and good 
2nd level (3 slots): barkskin, misty step, spike growth 
3rd level (2 slots): haste, plant growth 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The Tel’ Teukiira walker makes two melee attacks or 
two ranged attacks. 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, ranged 150/600 ft., 
one target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage. 


— ~~ 


l 


TEL TEUKIIRA RANGER 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 13 (leather armor, 16 with barkskin) 
Hit Points 104 (16d8 + 32) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
11 (+0) 16 (+3) 15(+2) 11(+0) 16 (+3) 11 (+0) 


Skills Nature +3, Perception +6, Stealth +6, Survival +6 
Senses passive Perception 16 

Languages Any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


Distant Strike. The Tel’Teukiira ranger can pass between 

the planes in the blink of an eye. When they take the Attack 
action, they can teleport up to 10 feet before each attack to 

an unoccupied space they can see. If they attack at least two 
different creatures with the action, they can make one additional 
attack against a third creature. 


Ethereal Step. The Tel’Teukiira ranger can step through the 
Ethereal Plane. As a bonus action, they can cast the etherealness 
spell with this feature, without expending a spell slot, but the 
spell ends at but the spell ends at the start of their next turn. \ 


Planar Strike. As a bonus action, the Tel’Teukiira ranger chooses : 
one creature they can see within 30 feet. Each time the ranger 
hits that creature on this turn with a weapon attack, all damage 
dealt by the attack becomes force damage, and the creature 
takes an extra 9 (2d8) force damage from the attack. 


Spellcasting. The Tel’Teukiira ranger is a 13th-level spellcaster. 
Its spellcasting ability is Wisdom (spell save DC 14, +6 to hit 
with spell attacks). The Tel’ Teukiira ranger has the following 
ranger spells prepared: 


= 


Ist level (4 slots): cure wounds, jump, protection from 
evil and good 

2nd level (3 slots): barkskin, misty step, spike growth 

3rd level (2 slots): haste, plant growth 

4th level (1 slot): banishment, greater invisibility 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The Tel’Teukiira ranger makes three melee attacks 
or two ranged attacks. 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing. 


— pF 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, ranged 150/600 ft., 


$ 
one target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage. 


g 


TEL TEUKIIRA HORIZON WALKER (HORIZON WALKERS) 


WAR WIZARDS OF CORMYR (WAR Macio) 


Cormyr is well known for its Purple Dragon army and 
their War Wizards. An elite group of defenders of Cormyr, 
the War Wizards perform multiple tasks in their duties 

to protect the Land of the Purple Dragon and the royal 
house of Obarskyr. 

Purple Dragons. While most War Wizards are brought 
into the organization after studying at the College of War 
for 5 years, some come through the ranks of the Purple 
Dragon army to take their place as a battle-mage. 

Sworn Defenders. The title of War Wizard is not 
bestowed upon a recruit until the recruit swears complete 
fealty to the Crown of Cormyr. Upon doing so, the newly 
titled War Wizard is expected to serve by taking on the 
roles of soldier, bodyguard, advisor, and spy. 

Spies and Alarphons. War Wizards are known to 
maintain magical security both inside and outside of 
Cormyr, leading many to consider them spies. A secret 
department of War Wizards, known as Alarphons, even 
spy among the battle-mages themselves. 


BATTLE-MAGE 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 12 (15 with mage armor) 
Hit Points 52 (8d8+16) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
9 (-1) 14 (+2) 14(+2) 17 (+3) 10(+0) 10 (+0) 


Saving Throws Int +5, Wis +2 
Skills Arcana +6, History +6 
Senses Passive Perception 10 
Languages Any four languages 
Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Spellcasting. The battle-mage is a 5th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 13, +5 to hit 
with spell attacks). The battle-mage has the following wizard 
spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): chill touch, fire bolt, mage hand, shocking grasp 
Ist level (4 slots): ice knife, mage armor, magic missile, shield 
2nd level (3 slots): acid arrow, blur 

3rd level (3 slots): counterspell, fireball, sleet storm 


Tactical Wit. The battle-mage gains a +3 bonus to initiative rolls. 


ACTIONS 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


REACTIONS 


Arcane Deflection. When the battle-mage is hit by an attack 

or fails a saving throw, they can use their reaction to gain a 

+2 bonus to your AC against that attack or a +4 bonus to that 
saving throw. When the battle-mage uses this feature, they can’t 
cast spells other than cantrips until the end of their next turn. 


ALARPHON 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 13 (16 with mage armor) 
Hit Points 104 (16d8 + 32) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
9 (-1) 16 (+3) 14 (+2) 18 (+4) 10 (+0) 11 (+0) 


Saving Throws Int +8, Wis +4 
Skills Stealth +7, Insight +4 
Senses Passive Perception 10 
Languages any four languages 
Challenge 9 (5,000 XP) 


Power Surge (3/Day). Once per turn, when the Alarphon deals 
damage to a creature or object with a wizard spell, they can deal 
6 extra force damage to that target. 


Spellcasting. The Alarphon is a 12th-level spellcaster. Its 
spellcasting ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 16, +8 to hit 
with spell attacks). The Alarphon has the following wizard 
spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): chill touch, fire bolt, mage hand, shocking grasp 
1st level (4 slots): charm person, mage armor, magic 
missile, shield 
2nd level (3 slots): acid arrow, blur 
3rd level (3 slots): counterspell, dispel magic, fireball 
4th level (3 slots): ice storm, stoneskin 
5th level (2 slots): dominate person, scrying 
6th level (1 slot): chain lightning, true seeing 


Tactical Wit. The Alarphon gains a +4 bonus to initiative rolls. 


ACTIONS 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


REACTIONS 


Arcane Deflection. When the Alarphon is hit by an attack or fails 
a saving throw, they can use their reaction to gain a +2 bonus to 
your AC against that attack or a +4 bonus to that saving throw. 
When the Alarphon uses this feature, they can’t cast spells other 
than cantrips until the end of their next turn. 

A SS EAI ER] 


CREATURES BY CR 


Name 

Badger Scout 

Eldreth Veluuthra Scout 
Luskan Swashbuckler 
Blade of Wonder Apprentice 
Bregan D’aerthe Spy 
Goliath Sorcerer 
Inebriate 

Masked Inquisitive 
Samurai Novice 
Shadow Blade 

Summer Court Jester 
Tel’Teukiira Walker 
Acolyte Dreamer 
Cavalier Initiate 
Demonblood Initiate 
Eldathyn Redeemer 
Forester Guardian 
Might Bellows 
Northlander Stormrider 
Protecting Shepherd 
Spirit Talker 

Sun Soul Monk 

Battle Mage 

Luskan Captain 
Mystra’s Beacon 
Shadow Born 

Arcane Archer Fletchling 
Badger Veteran 
Discordian Warlock 
Drunken Master 


O 
nw 


1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
P 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
4 
4 
4 
4 
5 
5 
5 
5 


Name 

Runehammer of Moradin 
Scribe of Jergal 

Blade of Wonder Master 


Bregan D’aerthe Shadowmaster 


Samurai Novice 
Summer Court Maestro 
Tel’Teukiira Ranger 
Avenging Shepherd 
Banite Conqueror 
Eldathyn Guardian 
Revenant Assassin 
Shadow Thief Mastermind 
Storm Oracle 

Cavalier Charger 
Forester Slayer 

Sun Soul Master 
Alarphon 

Arcane Archer Captain 
Arsenal of Moradin 
Eldreth Veluuthra Infiltrator 
Malkizid Discordian 
Shadow Prime 

Spirit Lord 

Fiery Axe 

High Dreamer 

Mystra’s Vessel 
Demonblood Savage 
Northlander Stormrager 
Scythe of Jergal 

Banite Tyrant 


O 
ze] 


I o ROI o por OO o o o E a n a n a a o a o VU v1 


