= XANATHAR'S GUIDE ` 
х ў xm EVERYTHING 7 


WA E ^P 
NS - 
ak 


Т [] t s бу rae: 


B $ cp с ) Сэ) 
» x 2 * 
5 -— ип = 


Ls 
ч 
и 4 
JI \ i 
1 
a 4 
i W 3 
== \ aie Ў 
DUNGEONS G DRAGONS EA ^ =, | 
e ^ 
2 © | a а ' VS í 
- z s 


Explore a wealth of fantastic new rules options for both players and" 
Dungeon Masters inithissupplement forithe)worldis|greatest;roleplaying|game 


XANATHARS GUIDE 
TO EVERYTHING 


CREDITS 


Lead Designers: Jeremy Crawford, Mike Mearls 

Designer: Robert J. Schwalb 

Additional Design: Adam Lee, Christopher Perkins, Matt Sernett 
Development: Ben Petrisor 


Managing Editor: Jeremy Crawford 
Editor: Kim Mohan 
Additional Editing: Michele Carter, Scott Fitzgerald Gray 


Art Director: Kate Irwin 

Additional Art Direction: Shauna Narciso 

Graphic Designer: Emi Tanji 

Cover Illustrator: Jason Rainville 

Cover Illustrator (Alternative Cover): Hydro74 

Interior Illustrators: Rob Alexander, Mark Behm, Eric Belisle, 
Zoltan Boros, Christopher Bradley, Noah Bradley, Sam Burley, Jedd 
Chevrier, jD, Olga Drebas, Jesper Ejsing, Wayne England, Leesha 
Hannigan, Jon Hodgson, Ralph Horsley, Lake Hurwitz, Julian Kok, 
Raphael Lübke, Warren Mahy, Mark Molnar, Scott Murphy, Adam 
Paquette, Claudio Pozas, Vincent Proce, A.M. Sartor, Chris Seaman, 
David Sladek, Craig J Spearing, Cory Trego-Erdner, Beth Trott, Jose 
Vega, Richard Whitters, Ben Wootten, Min Yum 


Project Management: Stan!, Heather Fleming 
Production Services: Cynda Callaway, Jefferson Dunlap, David 
Gershman, Kevin Yee 


This book includes some subclasses and spells that originally 
appeared in Princes of the Apocalypse (2015) and Sword Coast 
Adventurer's Guide (2015). 


Other D&D Team Members: Bart Carroll, Trevor Kidd, Christopher 
Lindsay, Shelly Mazzanoble, Hilary Ross, Liz Schuh, Nathan 
Stewart, Greg Tito 


Playtesters: Charles Benscoter, Dan Klinestiver, Dave Kovarik, 
Davena Oaks, Kevin Engling, Teos Abadia, Robert Alaniz, Phil 
Allison, Robert Allison, Jay Anderson, Paul Aparicio, Paul Van 
Arcken, Dee Ashe, Andrew Bahls, Chris Balboni, Jason Baxter, 


ON THE COVER 


Xanathar gazes lovingly upon its pet fish. Indeed, this cover, 
painted by Jason Rainville, features a great many of Xanathar's 
treasures and secrets. Can you find them all? 
620C2215000001 EN 

ISBN: 978-0-7869-6612-7 

First Printing: November 2017 


987654321 


Jerry Behrendt, Teddy Benson, Deb Berlin, Stacy Bermes, Jim 
Berrier, Lauren Bilanko, Jordan Brass, Ken J. Breese, Robert 
"Bobby" Brown, Matthew Budde, Matt Burton, David Callander, 
Mik Calow, Richard Chamberlain, Wayne Chang, Emre Cihangir, 
Bruno Cobbi, Garrett Colén, Mark Craddock, Max Cushner, Brian 
Dahl, Derek DaSilva, Phil Davidson, Krupal Desai, Scott Deschler, 
Yorcho Diaz, Mario A. DiGirolamo, Adam Dowdy, Curt Duval, Jay 
Elmore, Russell Engel, Andrew Epps, David M. Ewalt, Justin Faris, 
Jared Fegan, Frank Foulis, Max Frutig, Travis Fuller, Kyle Garms, 
Ben Garton, Louis Gentile, Genesis Emanuale Martinez Gonzalez, 
Derek A. Gray, Richard Green, Kevin Grigsby, Christopher Hackler, 
Bryan Harris, Gregory Harris, Randall Harris, Fred Harvey, lan 
Hawthorne, Adam Hennebeck, Sterling Hershey, Justin Hicks, Will 
Hoffman, Scott Holmgren, Paul Hughes, Daniel E. Chapman Il, 
Stanislav Ivanov, Matt Jarmak, James Jorstad, Evan Jorstad, Alex 
Kammer, Joshua Kaufman, Bill Grishnak Kerney, Jake Kiefer, Chet 
King, Atis Kleinbergs, Steven Knight, David Krolnik, Yan Lacharité, 
Jon F. Lamkin, Marjorie Lamkin, Shane Leahy, Stephen Lindberg, 
Tom Lommel, Michael Long, Jonathan Longstaff, Ginny Loveday, 
Kevin D. Luebke, Michael Lydon, Matthew Maranda, Joel Marsh, 
Gleb Masaltsev, Chris McDaniel, Chris McGovern, Jim McKay, 
Mark Meredith, Mark Merida, Lou Michelli, David Middleton, Mike 
Mihalas, Mark A. Miller, Paige Miller, lan Mills, Stacy Mills, David 
Milman, Daren Mitchell, TL Frasqueri-Molina, Scott Moore, David 
Morris, Tim Mottishaw, JoDee Murch, Joshua Murdock, William 
Myers, Walter Nau, Kevin Neff, Daniel "KBlin" Oliveira, Grigory 
Parovichnikov, Alan Patrick, Russ Paulsen, Matt Petruzzelli, Zachary 
Pickett, Chris Presnall, Nel Pulanco, Jack Reid, Joe Reilly, Renout 
van Rijn, Sam Robertson, Carlos Robles, Evan Rodarte, Matthew 
Roderick, Zane Romine, Nathan Ross, Dave Rosser, David Russell, 
Ruty Rutenberg, A.C. Ryder, Arthur Saucier, Benjamin Schindewolf, 
Ken Schreur, James Schweiss, the Seer, Jonathan Connor Self, 
Nicholas Sementelli, Arthur Severance, Ben Siekert, Jimmy Spiva, 
the Dead Squad, Francois P. Lefebvre Sr., Keaton Stamps, Matthew 
Talley, Dan Taylor, Kirsten A. Thomas, Laura Thompson, Jia Jian 
Tin, Kyle Turner, Justin Turner, Alex Vine, Yoerik de Voogd, Shane 
Walker, Matthew Warwick, Chris "Waffles" Wathen, Eric Weberg, 
Werebear, Gary West, Andy Wieland, Keith Williams, David 
Williamson, Travis Woodall, Arthur Wright, Keoki Young 


ON THE ALTERNATIVE COVER 


Hydro74 takes us for a swim in this stylized dreamscape of Xanathar 
and its prized fish. 


Disclaimer: No goldfish were harmed in the making of this book. Especially not Sylgar. 
Sylgar definitely did not die because we forgot to change his water. If you see Xanathar, 
make sure it knows that. Be perfectly clear Sylgar was not harmed. And we had nothing to 
do with it. Better yet, don't bring it up, and don't mention us. 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, Forgotten Realms, the dragon ampersand, Player's Handbook, Monster Manual, Dungeon Master's Guide, Xanathar's Guide to 
Everything, all other Wizards of the Coast product names, and their respective logos are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast in the USA and other countries. All characters and their 
distinctive likenesses are property of Wizards of the Coast. This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use 
of the material or artwork contained herein is prohibited without the express written permission of Wizards of the Coast. 


Printed in the USA. ©2017 Wizards of the Coast LLC, PO Box 707, Renton, WA 98057-0707, USA. Manufactured by Hasbro SA, Rue Emile-Boéchat 31, 2800 Delémont, CH. 


4 ri 


CONTENTS 


Introduction. 
Using This Book. 
The Core Rules.. 


Ch. 1: Character Options 
Barbarian ......... 
Primal Paths 
Path of the Ancestral Guardian 
Path of the Storm Herald 


Bard Colleges ..... 
College of Glamou: 
College of Swords. 
College of Whispers. 
Cleric .. 
Divine ‘Domain 
Sidebar: Serving a Pantheon; 
Philosophy, or Force. 
Forge Domain. 
Grave Domai 


Circle of Dreams 
Circle of the Shepherd. 
Learning Beast Shapes. 


Arcane Archer 
Cavalier . 


Way of the Drunken Master 
Way of the Kensei ................ 
Way of the Sun Soul. 
Paladin .............. 
Sacred Oaths 
Oath of Conquest 
Oath of Redemption . 
Ranger.... - 
Ranger. Acchelynes 
Gloom Stalker 
Horizon Walke: 
Monster Slayer 
Rogue. 
Roguish Archetypes.. 
Inquisitive . 
Mastermin: 
Seout..........—— 
Swashbuckler . 
Sorcerers cus 
Sorcerous Origins. 
Divine Soul... 
Shadow Magic 
Storm Sorcery 
Warlock.............. 
Otherworldly Patrons 
The Celestial 
The Hexblade...... 
Eldritch Invocation: 
Мага 
Arcane Tradition 
War Magic 


This Is Your Life 
Origins. 
Personal Decision: 
Life Events............. 
ui rri Table: 

Racial Feats... 


Ch. 2: sadi Master's Tools. 
Simultaneous Effects 
Falling .............. 
Rate of Falling 
Flying Creatures and Falling 


Waking Someone. 
Sleeping in Armor 
Going without a Long Rest 
Adamantine Weapons. 
Tying Knots......... 
Tool Proficiencies..... 
Tools and Skills Together. 
Tool Descriptions.. 
Spellcasting 
Perceiving a Caster at 
Identifying a Spell... 
Invalid Spell Targets 
Areas of Effect on a Grid 
Encounter Buildin, 
Quick Matchups. 
Random Encounters: 
Possibilities......... 
Arctic Encounters 
Coastal Encounters. 
Desert Encounters... 
Forest Encounters... 
Grassland Encounters, 
Hill Encounters. 
Mountain Encounters.. 
Swamp Encounters.. 
Underdark Encounters 
Underwater Encounters 
Urban Encounters. 
Traps Revisited di 
SEI D IU DEBE, s еннен 113 
Sidebar: Making Traps 
Meaningful 
Designing Simple Traps 
Complex Traps.............. 
Designing Complex Traps 
Sidebar: Complex Traps and 
Legendary Monsters. 
Downtime Revisite: 


Buying a Magic Item 
Carousing........ 
Crafting an Item. 


Gambling. 
Pit Fighting. 
Relaxation 
Religious Service . 
Research.............. 
Scribing a Spell Scroll 
Selling a Magic Item. 
Training 
Work... 


Awarding Magic Items... 
Sidebar: Behind the Design Magic 
Item Distribution... 
Common Magic items 
Sidebar: Are Magic Items 
Necessary in a Campaign?............. 
Sidebar: Creating Additional 
Common Items. 
Magic Item Table 
Sidebar: Recharging without 


Spell Lists... 
Spell Descriptions. 


App. A: Shared Campaigns.................. 
App. B: Character Names 
Nonhuman Name: 


Dragonborn.. 
Dwarf 


Indian... 
Japanese. 
Mesoamerican. 
Niger-Congo.. 
NOr86.:. 
Polynesian. 
Roman 
Slavic. 
Spanish ... 


INTRODUCTION 


ENEATH THE BUSTLING CITY OF WATERDEEP, 
a beholder crime lord keeps tabs on everyone 
and everything—or so the beholder thinks. 
Known as Xanathar, this bizarre being be- 
lieves it can gather information on everything 
in the DUNGEONS & DRAGONS multiverse. 
The beholder desires to know it all! But no 
matter what the beholder learns and what treasures it 
acquires, its most prized possession in all the multi- 
verse remains its goldfish, Sylgar. 

The first major rules expansion to the fifth edition of 
D&D, Xanathar's Guide to Everything provides a wealth 
of new options for the game. Xanathar might not be able 
to realize its dream to know everything, but this book 
does delve into every major part of the game: adventur- 
ers, their adventures, and the magic they wield. 


UsInG THIS BOOK 


Written for both players and Dungeon Masters, this 
book offers options to enhance campaigns in any world, 
whether you're adventuring in the Forgotten Realms, 
another official D&D setting, or a world of your own 
creation. The options here build on the official rules 
contained within the Player's Handbook, the Monster 
Manual, and the Dungeon Master's Guide. Think of this 
book as the companion to those volumes. It builds on 
their foundation, exploring pathways first laid in those 
publications. Nothing herein is required for a D&D cam- 
paign—this is not a fourth core rulebook—but we hope it 
will provide you new ways to enjoy the game. 

Chapter 1 offers character options that expand on 
those offered in the Player’s Handbook. Chapter 2 is a 
toolkit for the DM that provides new resources for run- 
ning the game and designing adventures, all of it build- 
ing on the Monster Manual and the Dungeon Master's 
Guide. Chapter 3 presents new spells for player charac- 
ters and spellcasting monsters to unleash. 

Appendix A provides guidance on running a shared 
campaign, similar to the activities staged by the D&D 
Adventurers League, and appendix B contains a host of 
tables that allow you to quickly generate names for the 
characters in your D&D stories. 

As you peruse the many options herein, you'll come 
across observations from Xanathar itself. Like the 
beholder's roving mind, your reading will take you to 
places in the game familiar and new. May you enjoy 
the journey! 


ањ. 
UNEARTHED ARCANA 
Much of the material in this book originally appeared in 
Unearthed Arcana, a series of online articles we publish 
to explore rules that might officially become part of the 
game. Some Unearthed Arcana offerings don't end up 
resonating with fans and are set aside for the time being. 
The Unearthed Arcana material that inspired the options 
in the following chapters was well received and, thanks to 
feedback from thousands of you, has been refined into the 
official forms presented here. 
AA Aa 


Ж 


СЭ 


whats thet, see Ne, ven 

fish friend: hey w m 

ok Were. Pecliags «Ес uc chak а Wit. A 
\ [кА a ОШ conversation at the oss 


has Хубон iO: 


tbs с 


THE CORE RULES 


This book relies on the rules in the three core rule- 
books. The game especially makes frequent use of 

the rules in chapters 7-10 of the Player's Handbook: 
“Using Ability Scores,” “Adventuring,” “Combat,” and 
*Spellcasting." That book's appendix A is also crucial; 

it contains definitions of conditions, like invisible and 
prone. You don't need to know the rules by heart, but it's 


helpful to know where to find them when you need them. 


If you're a DM, you should also know where to look 
things up in the Dungeon Master's Guide, especially the 
rules on how magic items work (see chapter 7 of that 
book). The introduction of the Monster Manual is your 
guide on how to use a monster's stat block. 


THE DM ADJUDICATES THE RULES 


One rule overrides all others: the DM is the final author- 
ity on how the rules work in play. 

Rules are part of what makes D&D a game, rather 
than just improvised storytelling. The game's rules are 
meant to help organize, and even inspire, the action of a 
D&D campaign. The rules are a tool, and we want our 
tools to be as effective as possible. No matter how good 
those tools might be, they need a group of players to 
bring them to life and a DM to guide their use. 

The DM is key. Many unexpected events can occur in 
a D&D campaign, and no set of rules could reasonably 
account for every contingency. If the rules tried to do so, 
the game would become a slog. An alternative would be 
for the rules to severely limit what characters can do, 


which would be contrary to the open-endedness of D&D. 


Here's the path the game takes: it lays a foundation of 
rules that a DM can build on, and it embraces the DM's 
role as the bridge between the things the rules address 
and the things they don't. 


TEN RULES TO REMEMBER 


A few rules in the core rulebooks sometimes trip up a 
new player or DM. Here are ten of those rules. Keep- 
ing them in mind will help you interpret the options in 
this book. 


EXCEPTIONS SUPERSEDE GENERAL RULES 
General rules govern each part of the game. For exam- 
ple, the combat rules tell you that melee weapon attacks 
use Strength and ranged weapon attacks use Dexterity. 
That's a general rule, and a general rule is in effect as 
long as something in the game doesn't explicitly say 
otherwise. 

The game also includes elements—class features, 
spells, magic items, monster abilities, and the like—that 
sometimes contradict a general rule. When an exception 
and a general rule disagree, the exception wins. For ex- 
ample, if a feature says you can make melee weapon at- 
tacks using your Charisma, you can do so, even though 
that statement disagrees with the general rule. 


Round Down 

Whenever you divide or multiply a number in the game, 
round down if you end up with a fraction, even if the 
fraction is one-half or greater. 


ADVANTAGE AND DISADVANTAGE 

Even if more than one factor gives you advantage or 
disadvantage on a roll, you have it only once, and if you 
have advantage and disadvantage on the same roll, they 
cancel each other. 


COMBINING DIFFERENT EFFECTS 

Different game effects can affect a target at the same 
time. For example, two different benefits can give you 

a bonus to your Armor Class. But when two or more 
effects have the same proper name, only one of them 
(the most powerful one if their benefits aren’t identical) 
applies while the durations of the effects overlap. For ex- 
ample, if bless is cast on you when you're still under the 
effect of an earlier bless, you gain the benefit of only one 
casting. Similarly, if you're in the radius of more than 
one Aura of Protection, you benefit only from the one 
that grants the highest bonus. 


REACTION TIMING 
Certain game features let you take a special action, 
called a reaction, in response to some event. Making 
opportunity attacks and casting the shield spell are two 
typical uses of reactions. If you're unsure when a reac- 
tion occurs in relation to its trigger, here's the rule: the 
reaction happens after its trigger completes, unless the 
description of the reaction explicitly says otherwise. 
Once you take a reaction, you can't take another one 
until the start of your next turn. 


RESISTANCE AND VULNERABILITY 
Here's the order that you apply modifiers to damage: (1) 
any relevant damage immunity, (2) any addition or sub- 
traction to the damage, (3) one relevant damage resis- 
tance, and (4) one relevant damage vulnerability. 

Even if multiple sources give you resistance to a type 
of damage you're taking, you can apply resistance to it 
only once. The same is true of vulnerability. 


PROFICIENCY BONUS 

If your proficiency bonus applies to a roll, you can add 
the bonus only once to the roll, even if multiple things in 
the game say your bonus applies. Moreover, if more than 
one thing tells you to double or halve your bonus, you 
double it only once or halve it only once before apply- 
ing it. Whether multiplied, divided, or left at its normal 
value, the bonus can be used only once per roll. 


Bonus ACTION SPELLS 

If you want to cast a spell that has a casting time of 1 
bonus action, remember that you can’t cast any other 
spells before or after it on the same turn, except for can- 
trips with a casting time of 1 action. 


CONCENTRATION 

As soon as you Start casting a spell or using a special 
ability that requires concentration, your concentration 
on another effect ends instantly. 


TEMPORARY HIT POINTS 

Temporary hit points aren't cumulative. If you have tem- 
porary hit points and receive more of them, you don't 
add them together, unless a game feature says you can. 
Instead, you decide which temporary hit points to keep. 


INTRODUCTION 


CHAPTER 1 
CHARACTER OPTIONS 


pO, HE MAIN FIGURES IN ANY D&D CAMPAIGN 
are the characters created by the players. 
The heroics, folly, righteousness, and po- 
tential villainy of your characters are at the 
heart of the story. This chapter provides a 
variety of new options for them, focusing 
on additional subclasses for each of the 

classes in the Player's Handbook. 

Each class offers a character-defining choice at 1st, 
2nd, or 3rd level that unlocks a series of special fea- 
tures, not available to the class as a whole. That choice 
is called a subclass. Each class has a collective term 
that describes its subclasses; in the fighter, for instance, 
the subclasses are called martial archetypes, and in the 
paladin, they're sacred oaths. The table below identifies 


SUBCLASSES 
Class Subclass Level Available 
Barbarian Path of the Ancestral Guardian 3rd 
Barbarian Path of the Storm Herald 3rd 
Barbarian Path of the Zealot 3rd 
Bard College of Glamour 3rd 
Bard College of Swords 3rd 
Bard College of Whispers 3rd 
Cleric Forge Domain Ist 
Cleric Grave Domain Ist 
Druid Circle of Dreams 2nd 
Druid Circle of the Shepherd 2nd 
Fighter Arcane Archer 3rd 
Fighter Cavalier 3rd 
Fighter Samurai 3rd 
Monk Way of the Drunken Master 3rd 
Monk Way of the Kensei 3rd 
Monk Way of the Sun Soul 3rd 
Paladin Oath of Conquest 3rd 
Paladin Oath of Redemption 3rd 
Ranger Gloom Stalker 3rd 
Ranger Horizon Walker 3rd 
Ranger Monster Slayer 3rd 
Rogue Inquisitive 3rd 
Rogue Mastermind 3rd 
Rogue Scout 3rd 
Rogue Swashbuckler 3rd 
Sorcerer Divine Soul Ist 
Sorcerer Shadow Magic 151 
Ѕогсегег Storm Ѕогсегу Ist 
Warlock The Celestial Ist 
Warlock Тһе Hexblade Ist 
Wizard War Magic 2nd 


each of the subclasses in this book. In addition, the sec- 
tion for druids presents details on how the Wild Shape 
feature works, and the warlock receives a collection of 
new choices for the class's Eldritch Invocations feature. 

Each of the class presentations leads off with advice 
on how to add depth and detail to your character's per- 
sonality. You can use the tables in these sections as a 
source of inspiration, or roll a die to randomly deter- 
mine a result if desired. 

Following the subclasses, the section called "This Is 
Your Life" presents a series of tables for adding detail to 
your character's backstory. 

The chapter concludes with a selection of feats for the 
races in the Player's Handbook, offering ways to delve 
deeper into a character's racial identity. 


Description 

Calls on the spirits of honored ancestors to protect others 
Filled with a rage that channels the primal magic of the storm 
Fueled by a religious zeal that visits destruction on foes 
Wields the beguiling, glorious magic of the Feywild 

Entertains and slays with daring feats of weapon prowess 
Plants fear and doubt in the minds of others 

Clad in heavy armor, serves a god of the forge or creation 
Opposes the blight of undeath 

Mends wounds, guards the weary, and strides through dreams 
Summons nature spirits to bolster friends and harry foes 
Imbues arrows with spectacular magical effects 

Defends allies and knocks down enemies, often on horseback 
Combines resilience with courtly elegance and mighty strikes 
Confounds foes through a martial arts tradition inspired by the 
swaying of a drunkard 

Channels ki through a set of mastered weapons 

Transforms ki into bursts of fire and searing bolts of light 
Strikes terror in enemies and crushes the forces of chaos 
Offers redemption to the worthy and destruction to those who 
refuse mercy or righteousness 

Unafraid of the dark, relentlessly stalks and ambushes foes 
Finds portals to other worlds and channels planar magic 
Hunts down creatures of the night and wielders of grim magic 
Roots out secrets, akin to a masterful detective 

A master tactician, manipulates others 

Combines stealth with a knack for survival 

Delivers deadly strikes with speed and panache 

Harnesses magic bestowed by a god or other divine source 
Wields the grim magic of the Shadowfell 

Crackles with the power of the storm 

Forges a pact with a being from celestial realms 

Serves a shadowy entity that bestows dread curses 

Mixes evocation and abjuration magic to dominate the battlefield 


GHAPTER | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


BARBARIAN 


I HAVE WITNESSED THE INDOMITABLE PERFORMANCE OF 
barbarians on the field of battle, and it makes me wonder 
what force lies at the heart of their rage. 

—Seret, archwizard 


The anger felt by a normal person resembles the rage of 
a barbarian in the same way that a gentle breeze is akin 
to a furious thunderstorm. The barbarian's driving force 
comes from a place that transcends mere emotion, mak- 
ing its manifestation all the more terrible. Whether the 
impetus for the fury comes entirely from within or from 
forging a link with a spirit animal, a raging barbarian 
becomes able to perform supernatural feats of strength 
and endurance. The outburst is temporary, but while it 
lasts, it takes over body and mind, driving the barbarian 
on despite peril and injury, until the last enemy falls. 

It can be tempting to play a barbarian character that 
is a straightforward application of the classic arche- 
type—a brute, and usually a dimwitted one at that, who 
rushes in where others fear to tread. But not all the 
barbarians in the world are cut from that cloth, so you 
can certainly put your own spin on things. Either way, 
consider adding some flourishes to make your barbarian 
stand out from all others; see the following sections for 
some ideas. 


PERSONAL TOTEMS 


Barbarians tend to travel light, carrying little in the way 
of personal effects or other unnecessary gear. The few 
possessions they do carry often include small items that 
have special significance. A personal totem is significant 
because it has a mystical origin or is tied to an import- 
ant moment in the character's life—perhaps a remem- 
brance from the barbarian's past or a harbinger of what 
lies ahead. 

A personal totem of this sort might be associated with 
a barbarian's spirit animal, or might actually be the to- 
tem object for the animal, but such a connection is not 
essential. One who has a bear totem spirit, for instance, 
could still carry an eagle's feather as a personal totem. 

Consider creating one or more personal totems for 
your character—objects that hold a special link to your 
character's past or future. Think about how a totem 
might affect your character's actions. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


(Cawel (hs really anga! Funny, | 
mu fect any sEronger Maghe because 
aldagi anfa (hess always in E 


j dition. Skands Lo reason, Ye) 


PERSONAL TOTEMS 


46 Totem 

1 A tuft of fur from a solitary wolf that you be- 
friended during a hunt 

2 Three eagle feathers given to you by a wise sha- 


man, who told you they would play a role in deter- 
mining your fate 


3 A necklace made from the claws of a young cave 
bear that you slew singlehandedly as a child 
4 A small leather pouch holding three stones that 


represent your ancestors 

5 A few small bones from the first beast you killed, 
tied together with colored wool 

6 An egg-sized stone in the shape of your spirit ani- 
mal that appeared one day in your belt pouch 


TATTOOS 


The members of many barbarian clans decorate their 
bodies with tattoos, each of which represents a signif- 
icant moment in the life of the bearer or the bearer's 
ancestors, or which symbolizes a feeling or an attitude. 
As with personal totems, a barbarian’s tattoos might or 
might not be related to an animal spirit. 

Each tattoo a barbarian displays contributes to that in- 
dividual's identity. If your character wears tattoos, what 
do they look like, and what do they represent? 


Tarroos 
d6 Tattoo 
1 The wings of an eagle are spread wide across your 
upper back. 
2 Etched on the backs of your hands are the paws of 
a cave bear. 


3 The symbols of your clan are displayed in viny pat- 
terns along your arms. 


4 The antlers of an elk are inked across your back. 

5 Images of your spirit animal are tattooed along 
your weapon arm and hand. 

6 The eyes of a wolf are marked on your back to help 


you see and ward off evil spirits. 


SUPERSTITIONS 


Barbarians vary widely in how they understand life. 
Some follow gods and look for guidance from those 
deities in the cycles of nature and the animals they en- 
counter. These barbarians believe that spirits inhabit 
the plants and animals of the world, and the barbarians 
look to them for omens and power. 

Other barbarians trust only in the blood that runs in 
their veins and the steel they hold in their hands. They 
have no use for the invisible world, instead relying on 
their senses to hunt and survive like the wild beasts 
they emulate. 


Lert то RIGHT: ZeALOT, STORM HeRALO, AND ANCESTRAL GUARDIAN 


Both of these attitudes can give rise to supersti- 
tions. These beliefs are often passed down within a 
family or shared among the members of a clan or a 
hunting group. 

If your barbarian character has any superstitions, 
were they ingrained in you by your family, or are they 
the result of personal experience? 


SUPERSTITIONS 
d6 Superstition 


1 If you disturb the bones of the dead, you inherit all 
the troubles that plagued them in life. 

2 Never trust a wizard. They're all devils in disguise, 
especially the friendly ones. 

3 Dwarves have lost their spirits, and are almost like 
the undead. That's why they live underground. 

4 Magical things bring trouble. Never sleep with a 


magic object within ten feet of you. 
5 When you walk through a graveyard, be sure to 
wear silver, or a ghost might jump into your body. 
6 If an elf looks you in the eyes, she's trying to read 
your thoughts. 


PRIMAL PATHS 


At 3rd level, a barbarian gains the Primal Path feature. 


The following options are available to a barbarian, in 
addition to those offered in the Player's Handbook: the 
Path of the Ancestral Guardian, the Path of the Storm 
Herald, and the Path of the Zealot. 


HAS E ancestors аге people who did p: procreation thing lo make 


wore eoe before q Qu. were 50 Li P how vean eee 
dhat's 4 lek о of Un procreation khing, 


Éu. Youre Aisgasting Ye) ; = 


PATH OF THE ANCESTRAL GUARDIAN 


Some barbarians hail from cultures that revere their an- 
cestors. These tribes teach that the warriors of the past 
linger in the world as mighty spirits, who can guide and 
protect the living. When a barbarian who follows this 
path rages, the barbarian contacts the spirit world and 
calls on these guardian spirits for aid. 

Barbarians who draw on their ancestral guardians 
can better fight to protect their tribes and their allies. In 
order to cement ties to their ancestral guardians, bar- 
barians who follow this path cover themselves in elabo- 
rate tattoos that celebrate their ancestors’ deeds. These 
tattoos tell sagas of victories against terrible monsters 
and other fearsome rivals. 


PATH OF THE ANCESTRAL GUARDIAN FEATURES 


Barbarian 
Level Feature 
3rd Ancestral Protectors 
6th Spirit Shield (248) 
10th Consult the Spirits, Spirit Shield (3d8) 
14th Vengeful Ancestors, Spirit Shield (448) 


GHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


a 


ANCESTRAL PROTECTORS 
Starting when you choose this path at 3rd level, spectral 
warriors appear when you enter your rage. While you're 
raging, the first creature you hit with an attack on your 
turn becomes the target of the warriors, which hinder 
its attacks. Until the start of your next turn, that target 
has disadvantage on any attack roll that isn't against 
you, and when the target hits a creature other than you 
with an attack, that creature has resistance to the dam- 
age dealt by the attack. The effect on the target ends 
early if your rage ends. 


SPIRIT SHIELD 
Beginning at 6th level, the guardian spirits that aid you 
can provide supernatural protection to those you de- 
fend. If you are raging and another creature you can see 
within 30 feet of you takes damage, you can use your 
reaction to reduce that damage by 2d6. 

When you reach certain levels in this class, you can 
reduce the damage by more: by 3d6 at 10th level and by 
4d6 at 14th level. 


CONSULT THE SPIRITS 
At 10th level, you gain the ability to consult with your 
ancestral spirits. When you do so, you cast the augury or 
clairvoyance spell, without using a spell slot or material 
components. Rather than creating a spherical sensor, 
this use of clairvoyance invisibly summons one of your 
ancestral spirits to the chosen location. Wisdom is your 
spellcasting ability for these spells. 

After you cast either spell in this way, you can't use 
this feature again until you finish a short or long rest. 


VENGEFUL ANCESTORS 

At 14th level, your ancestral spirits grow powerful 
enough to retaliate. When you use your Spirit Shield to 
reduce the damage of an attack, the attacker takes an 
amount of force damage equal to the damage that your 
Spirit Shield prevents. 


PATH OF THE STORM HERALD 


All barbarians harbor a fury within. Their rage grants 
them superior strength, durability, and speed. Barbar- 
ians who follow the Path of the Storm Herald learn 

to transform that rage into a mantle of primal magic, 
which swirls around them. When in a fury, a barbarian 
of this path taps into the forces of nature to create pow- 
erful magical effects. 

Storm heralds are typically elite champions who train 
alongside druids, rangers, and others sworn to protect 
nature. Other storm heralds hone their craft in lodges in 
regions wracked by storms, in the frozen reaches at the 
world's end, or deep in the hottest deserts. 


PATH OF THE STORM HERALD FEATURES 


Barbarian 
Level Feature 
3rd Storm Aura 
6th Storm Soul 
10th Shielding Storm 
14th Raging Storm 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


You know one of Lhe (reat benefits 
of ving underground” No weather. 
Dene mesg Iis “p {or mt. 


D KX 


STORM AURA | 
Starting at 3rd level, you emanate a stormy, magical 
aura while you rage. The aura extends 10 feet from you 
in every direction, but not through total cover. 

Your aura has an effect that activates when you enter 
your rage, and you can activate the effect again on each 
of your turns as a bonus action. Choose desert, sea, or 
tundra. Your aura's effect depends on that chosen envi- 
ronment, as detailed below. You can change your envi- 
ronment choice whenever you gain a level in this class. 

If your aura's effects require a saving throw, the DC 
equals 8 + your proficiency bonus + your Constitu- 
tion modifier. 

Desert. When this effect is activated, all other crea- 
tures in your aura take 2 fire damage each. The damage 
increases when you reach certain levels in this class, in- 
creasing to 3 at 5th level, 4 at 10th level, 5 at 15th level, 
and 6 at 20th level. 

Sea. When this effect is activated, you can choose one 
other creature you can see in your aura. The target must 
make a Dexterity saving throw. The target takes 1d6 
lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much dam- 
age on a successful one. The damage increases when 
you reach certain levels in this class, increasing to 2d6 
at 10th level, 3d6 at 15th level, and 4d6 at 20th level. 

Tundra. When this effect is activated, each creature of 
your choice in your aura gains 2 temporary hit points, as 
icy spirits inure it to suffering. The temporary hit points 
increase when you reach certain levels in this class, in- 
creasing to 3 at 5th level, 4 at 10th level, 5 at 15th level, 
and 6 at 20th level. 


STORM Sour 

At 6th level, the storm grants you benefits even when 
your aura isn't active. The benefits are based on the en- 
vironment you chose for your Storm Aura. 

Desert. You gain resistance to fire damage, and you 
don't suffer the effects of extreme heat, as described in 
the Dungeon Master's Guide. Moreover, as an action, 
you can touch a flammable object that isn't being worn 
or carried by anyone else and set it on fire. 

Sea. You gain resistance to lightning damage, and 
you can breathe underwater. You also gain a swimming 
speed of 30 feet. 

Tundra. You gain resistance to cold damage, and you 
don't suffer the effects of extreme cold, as described in 
the Dungeon Master's Guide. Moreover, as an action, 
you can touch water and turn a 5-foot cube of it into ice, 
which melts after 1 minute. This action fails if a creature 
is in the cube. 


SHIELDING STORM 

At 10th level, you learn to use your mastery of the storm 
to protect others. Each creature of your choice has the 
damage resistance you gained from the Storm Soul fea- 
ture while the creature is in your Storm Aura. 


RAGING STORM 

At 14th level, the power of the storm you channel grows 
mightier, lashing out at your foes. The effect is based on 
the environment you chose for your Storm Aura. 

Desert. Immediately after a creature in your aura hits 
you with an attack, you can use your reaction to force 
that creature to make a Dexterity saving throw. On a 
failed save, the creature takes fire damage equal to half 
your barbarian level. 

Sea. When you hit a creature in your aura with an 
attack, you can use your reaction to force that creature 
to make a Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the 
creature is knocked prone, as if struck by a wave. 

Tundra. Whenever the effect of your Storm Aura is ac- 
tivated, you can choose one creature you can see in the 
aura. That creature must succeed on a Strength saving 
throw, or its speed is reduced to 0 until the start of your 
next turn, as magical frost covers it. 


PATH OF THE ZEALOT 


Some deities inspire their followers to pitch themselves 
into a ferocious battle fury. These barbarians are zeal- 
ots—warriors who channel their rage into powerful dis- 
plays of divine power. 

A variety of gods across the worlds of D&D inspire 
their followers to embrace this path. Tempus from the 
Forgotten Realms and Hextor and Erythnul of Grey- 
hawk are all prime examples. In general, the gods who 
inspire zealots are deities of combat, destruction, and 
violence. Not all are evil, but few are good. 


PATH OF THE ZEALOT FEATURES 


Barbarian 
Level Feature 
3rd Divine Fury, Warrior of the Gods 
6th Fanatical Focus 
10th Zealous Presence 
14th Rage beyond Death 


DIVINE FURY 

Starting when you choose this path at 3rd level, you can 
channel divine fury into your weapon strikes. While 
you're raging, the first creature you hit on each of your 
turns with a weapon attack takes extra damage equal 

to 1d6 + half your barbarian level. The extra damage is 
necrotic or radiant; you choose the type of damage when 
you gain this feature. 


WARRIOR OF THE GODS 

At 3rd level, your soul is marked for endless battle. If a 
spell, such as raise dead, has the sole effect of restoring 
you to life (but not undeath), the caster doesn't need ma- 
terial components to cast the spell on you. 


FANATICAL Focus 

Starting at 6th level, the divine power that fuels your 
rage can protect you. If you fail a saving throw while 
you're raging, you can reroll it, and you must use the 

new roll. You can use this ability only once per rage. 


ZEALOUS PRESENCE 
At 10th level, you learn to channel divine power to in- 
spire zealotry in others. As a bonus action, you unleash 
a battle cry infused with divine energy. Up to ten other 
creatures of your choice within 60 feet of you that can 
hear you gain advantage on attack rolls and saving 
throws until the start of your next turn. 

Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until 
you finish a long rest. 


RAGE BEYOND DEATH 
Beginning at 14th level, the divine power that fuels your 
rage allows you to shrug off fatal blows. 

While you're raging, having 0 hit points doesn't knock 
you unconscious. You still must make death saving 
throws, and you suffer the normal effects of taking 
damage while at 0 hit points. However, if you would die 
due to failing death saving throws, you don't die until 
your rage ends, and you die then only if you still have O 
hit points. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIO 


MUSIC IS THE FRUIT OF THE DIVINE TREE THAT VIBRATES 
with the Words of Creation. But the question I ask you is, 
can a bard go to the root of this tree? Can one tap into the 
source of that power? Ah, then what manner of music they 
would bring to this world! 

—Fletcher Danairia, master bard 


Bards bring levity during grave times; they impart wis- 
dom to offset ignorance; and they make the ridiculous 
seem sublime. Bards are preservers of ancient history, 
their songs and tales perpetuating the memory of great 
events down through time—knowledge so important 
that it is memorized and passed along as oral history, to 
survive even when no written record remains. 

It is also the bard's role to chronicle smaller and more 
contemporary events—the stories of today's heroes, 
including their feats of valor as well as their less than 
impressive failures. 

Of course, the world has many people who can carry 
atune or tell a good story, and there's much more to any 
adventuring bard than a glib tongue and a melodious 
voice. Yet what truly sets bards apart from others—and 
from one another—are the style and substance of their 
performances. 

To grab and hold the attention of an audience, bards 
are typically flamboyant and outgoing when they per- 
form. The most famous of them are essentially the D&D 
world's equivalent of pop stars. If you're playing a bard, 
consider using one of your favorite musicians as a role 
model for your character. 

You can add some unique aspects to your bard charac- 
ter by considering the suggestions that follow. 


DEFINING WORK 


Every successful bard is renowned for at least one piece 
of performance art, typically a song or a poem that 
is popular with everyone who hears it. These perfor- 
mances are spoken about for years by those who view 
them, and some spectators have had their lives forever 
changed because of the experience. 
3 If your character is just starting out, your ultimate de- 
fining work is likely in the future. But in order to make 
any sort of living at your profession, chances are you 
already have a piece or two in your repertoire that have 
proven to be audience pleasers. 


CHAPTER’! [|.CHARACTER OPTIONS 


DEFINING Works 
d6 Defining Work 


1 "The Three Flambinis,” a ribald song concerning 
mistaken identities and unfettered desire 

2 “Waltz of the Myconids," an upbeat tune that chil- 
dren in particular enjoy 

3 “Asmodeus's Golden Arse,” a dramatic poem 
you claim was inspired by your personal visit to 
Avernus 

4 “The Pirates of Luskan,” your firsthand account of 


being kidnapped by sea reavers as a child 

5 “A Hoop, Two Pigeons, and a Hell Hound,” a sub- 
tle parody of an incompetent noble 

6 “A Fool in the Abyss,” a comedic poem about a 


jester's travels among demons 


INSTRUMENT 


In a bard's quest for the ultimate performance and the 
highest acclaim, one's instrument is at least as import- 
ant as one's vocal ability. The instrument's quality of 
manufacture is a critical factor, of course; the best ones 
make the best music, and some bards are continually 
on the lookout for an improvement. Perhaps just as im- 
portant, though, is the instrument's own entertainment 
value; those that are bizarrely constructed or made of 
exotic materials are likely to leave a lasting impression 
on an audience. 

You might have an "off the rack" instrument, perhaps 
because it's all you can afford right now. Or, if your 
first instrument was gifted to you, it might be of a more 
elaborate sort. Are you satisfied with the instrument you 
have, or do you aspire to replace it with something truly 
distinctive? 


INSTRUMENTS 

d6 Instrument 

1 A masterfully crafted halfling fiddle 
2 A mithral horn made by elves 

3 A zither made with drow spider silk 
4 An orcish drum 

5 A wooden bullywug croak box 

6 Atinker's harp of gnomish design 


EMBARRASSMENT 


Almost every bard has suffered at least one bad experi- 
ence in front of an audience, and chances are you're no 
exception. No one becomes famous right away, after all; 
perhaps you had a few small difficulties early in your ca- 
reer, or maybe it took you a while to restore your reputa- 
tion after one agonizing night when the fates conspired 
to bring about your theatrical ruin. 


musie is skid. май. V changed “ч wina. WI 
fun. Play wert musie, Mo, V was right Khe fist dime 
is у. © А \ t M 

Music ù sog. But L чок k maim yu afker all, in 


case V change “ч хед p О: 


Lert ro RIGHT: Baros оғ THE COLLEGES OF GLAMOUR, SwOROS, AND WHISPERS 


The ways that a performance can go wrong are as 
varied as the fish in the sea. No matter what sort of 
disaster might occur, however, a bard has the courage 
and the confidence to rebound from it—either pressing 
on with the show (if possible) or promising to come back 
tomorrow with a new performance that's guaranteed 
to please. 


EMBARRASSMENTS 
d6 Embarrassment 
1 The time when your comedic song, "Big Tom's 
Hijinks"—which, by the way, you thought was bril- 
liant—did not go over well with Big Tom 


2 The matinee performance when a circus's owlbear 
got loose and terrorized the crowd 

3 When your opening song was your enthusiastic 
but universally hated rendition of "Song of the 
Froghemoth" 

4 The first and last public performance of "Mirt, Man 
about Town" 

5 The time on stage when your wig caught fire and 


you threw it down—which set fire to the stage 
6 When you sat on your lute by mistake during the 
final stanza of "Starlight Serenade" 


A BARnD's MUSE 


Naturally, every bard has a repertoire of songs and sto- 
ries. Some bards are generalists who can draw from 

a wide range of topics for each performance, and who 
take pride in their versatility. Others adopt a more per- 
sonal approach to their art, driven by their attachment to 


a muse—a particular concept that inspires much of what 
those bards do in front of an audience. 

A bard who follows a muse generally does so to gain a 
deeper understanding of what that muse represents and 
how to best convey that understanding to others through 
performance. 

If your bard character has a muse, it could be one of 
the three described here, or one of your own devising. 

Nature. You feel a kinship with the natural world, and 
its beauty and mystery inspire you. For you, a tree is 
deeply symbolic, its roots delving into the dark unknown 
to draw forth the power of the earth, while its branches 
reach toward the sun to nourish their flowers and 
fruit. Nature is the ancient witness who has seen every 
kingdom rise and fall, even those whose names have 
been forgotten and wait to be rediscovered. The gods of 
nature share their secrets with druids and sages, open- 
ing their hearts and minds to new ways of seeing, and 
as with those individuals, you find that your creativity 
blossoms while you wander in an open field of waving 
grass or walk in silent reverence through a grove of an- 
cient oaks. 

Love. You are on a quest to identify the essence of 
true love. Though you do not disdain the superficial 
love of flesh and form, the deeper form of love that can 
inspire thousands or bring joy to one’s every moment 
is what you are interested in. Love of this sort takes on 
many forms, and you can see its presence everywhere— 
from the sparkling of a beautiful gem to the song of a 
simple fisher thanking the sea for its bounty. You are 
on the trail of love, that most precious and mysterious 
of emotions, and your search fills your stories and your 
songs with vitality and passion. 


CHAPTER 1 | GHARACTER OPTIONS 


Conflict. Drama embodies conflict, and the best 
stories have conflict as a key element. From the morn- 
ing-after tale of a tavern brawl to the saga of an epic 
battle, from a lover's spat to a rift between powerful 
dynasties, conflict is what inspires tale-tellers like you to 
create your best work. Conflict can bring out the best in 
some people, causing their heroic nature to shine forth 
and transform the world, but it can cause others to grav- 
itate toward darkness and fall under the sway of evil. 
You strive to experience or witness all forms of conflict, 
great and small, so as to study this eternal aspect of life 
and immortalize it in your words and music. 


BARD COLLEGES 


At 3rd level, a bard gains the Bard College feature. The 
following options are available to a bard, in addition 

to those offered in the Player's Handbook: the College 
of Glamour, the College of Swords, and the College 

of Whispers. 


COLLEGE OF GLAMOUR 


The College of Glamour is the home of bards who mas- 
tered their craft in the vibrant realm of the Feywild or 
under the tutelage of someone who dwelled there. Tu- 
tored by satyrs, eladrin, and other fey, these bards learn 
to use their magic to delight and captivate others. 

The bards of this college are regarded with a mixture 
of awe and fear. Their performances are the stuff of leg- 
end. These bards are so eloquent that a speech or song 
that one of them performs can cause captors to release 
the bard unharmed and can lull a furious dragon into 
complacency. The same magic that allows them to quell 
beasts can also bend minds. Villainous bards of this 
college can leech off a community for weeks, misusing 
their magic to turn their hosts into thralls. Heroic bards 
of this college instead use this power to gladden the 
downtrodden and undermine oppressors. 


COLLEGE OF GLAMOUR FEATURES 


Bard Level Feature 
3rd Mantle of Inspiration, Enthralling Performance 
6th Mantle of Majesty 
14th Unbreakable Majesty 


MANTLE OF INSPIRATION 

When you join the College of Glamour at 3rd level, you 
gain the ability to weave a song of fey magic that imbues 
your allies with vigor and speed. 

As a bonus action, you can expend one use of your 
Bardic Inspiration to grant yourself a wondrous appear- 
ance. When you do so, choose a number of creatures 
you can see and that can see you within 60 feet of you, 
up to a number equal to your Charisma modifier (mini- 
mum of one). Each of them gains 5 temporary hit points. 
When a creature gains these temporary hit points, it 
can immediately use its reaction to move up to its speed, 
without provoking opportunity attacks. 

The number of temporary hit points increases when 
you reach certain levels in this class, increasing to 8 at 
5th level, 11 at 10th level, and 14 at 15th level. 


CHAPTER’! | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


Illusions? How маи 


that loks (ile d С l desk, 
Ho. ils bos ga 09 fob 


o bit Goodbye o. 


[PM vs 


make one 


wel. ) 


ENTHRALLING PERFORMANCE 
Starting at 3rd level, you can charge your performance 
with seductive, fey magic. 

If you perform for at least 1 minute, you can attempt 
to inspire wonder in your audience by singing, reciting 
a poem, or dancing. At the end of the performance, 
choose a number of humanoids within 60 feet of you | 
who watched and listened to all of it, up to a number 
equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of one). 
Each target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw 
against your spell save DC or be charmed by you. While 
charmed in this way, the target idolizes you, it speaks 
glowingly of you to anyone who talks to it, and it hinders 
anyone who opposes you, although it avoids violence 
unless it was already inclined to fight on your behalf. 
This effect ends on a target after 1 hour, if it takes any 
damage, if you attack it, or if it witnesses you attacking 
or damaging any of its allies. 

If a target succeeds on its saving throw, the target has 
no hint that you tried to charm it. 

Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until 
you finish a short or long rest. 


MANTLE OF MAJESTY 
At 6th level, you gain the ability to cloak yourself in a fey 
magic that makes others want to serve you. As a bonus 
action, you cast command, without expending a spell 
slot, and you take on an appearance of unearthly beauty 
for 1 minute or until your concentration ends (as if you 
were concentrating on a spell). During this time, you 
can cast command as a bonus action on each of your 
turns, without expending a spell slot. 

Any creature charmed by you automatically fails 
its saving throw against the command you cast with 
this feature. 

Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until 
you finish a long rest. 


UNBREAKABLE MAJESTY 

At 14th level, your appearance permanently gains an 
otherworldly aspect that makes you look more lovely 
and fierce. 

In addition, as a bonus action, you can assume a mag- 
ically majestic presence for 1 minute or until you are 
incapacitated. For the duration, whenever any creature 
tries to attack you for the first time on a turn, the at- 
tacker must make a Charisma saving throw against your 
spell save DC. On a failed save, it can't attack you on this 
turn, and it must choose a new target for its attack or the 
attack is wasted. On a successful save, it can attack you 


on this turn, but it has disadvantage on any saving throw 
it makes against your spells on your next turn. 

Once you assume this majestic presence, you can't do 
so again until you finish a short or long rest. 


COLLEGE OF SWORDS 


Bards of the College of Swords are called blades, and 
they entertain through daring feats of weapon prowess. 
Blades perform stunts such as sword swallowing, knife 
throwing and juggling, and mock combats. Though they 
use their weapons to entertain, they are also highly 
trained and skilled warriors in their own right. 

Their talent with weapons inspires many blades to 
lead double lives. One blade might use a circus troupe 
as cover for nefarious deeds such as assassination, rob- 
bery, and blackmail. Other blades strike at the wicked, 
bringing justice to bear against the cruel and powerful. 
Most troupes are happy to accept a blade's talent for the 
excitement it adds to a performance, but few entertain- 
ers fully trust a blade in their ranks. 

Blades who abandon their lives as entertainers have 
often run into trouble that makes maintaining their 
secret activities impossible. A blade caught stealing or 
engaging in vigilante justice is too great a liability for 
most troupes. With their weapon skills and magic, these 
blades either take up work as enforcers for thieves’ 
guilds or strike out on their own as adventurers. 


COLLEGE OF SWORDS FEATURES 


Bard Level Feature 
3rd Bonus Proficiencies, Fighting Style, 
Blade Flourish 
6th Extra Attack 
14th Master's Flourish 


BONUS PROFICIENCIES 

When you join the College of Swords at 3rd level, you 

gain proficiency with medium armor and the scimitar. 
If you're proficient with a simple or martial melee 

weapon, you can use it as a spellcasting focus for your 

bard spells. 


FIGHTING STYLE 

At 3rd level, you adopt a style of fighting as your spe- 
cialty. Choose one of the following options. You can't 
take a Fighting Style option more than once, even if 
something in the game lets you choose again. 

Dueling. When you are wielding a melee weapon in 
one hand and no other weapons, you gain a +2 bonus to 
damage rolls with that weapon. 

Two-Weapon Fighting. When you engage in two- 
weapon fighting, you can add your ability modifier to the 
damage of the second attack. 


BLADE FLOURISH 
At 3rd level, you learn to perform impressive displays of 
martial prowess and speed. 

Whenever you take the Attack action on your turn, 
your walking speed increases by 10 feet until the end of 
the turn, and if a weapon attack that you make as part of 
this action hits a creature, you can use one of the follow- 


B Sc 


ing Blade Flourish options of your choice. You can use 
only one Blade Flourish option per turn. 

Defensive Flourish. You can expend one use of your 
Bardic Inspiration to cause the weapon to deal extra 
damage to the target you hit. The damage equals the 
number you roll on the Bardic Inspiration die. You also 
add the number rolled to your AC until the start of your 
next turn. 

Slashing Flourish. You can expend one use of your 
Bardic Inspiration to cause the weapon to deal extra 
damage to the target you hit and to any other creature 
of your choice that you can see within 5 feet of you. The 
damage equals-the number you roll on the Bardic Inspi- 
ration die. 

Mobile Flourish. You can expend one use of your Bar- 
dic Inspiration to cause the weapon to deal extra dam- 
age to the target you hit. The damage equals the number 
you roll on the Bardic Inspiration die. You can also push 
the target up to 5 feet away from you, plus a number of 
feet equal to the number you roll on that die. You can 
then immediately use your reaction to move up to your 
walking speed to an unoccupied space within 5 feet of 
the target. 


EXTRA ATTACK 
Starting at 6th level, you can attack twice, instead of 
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


MASTER's FLOURISH 

Starting at 14th level, whenever you use a Blade Flour- 
ish option, you can roll a d6 and use it instead of expend- 
ing a Bardic Inspiration die. 


COLLEGE OF WHISPERS 


Most folk are happy to welcome a bard into their midst. 
Bards of the College of Whispers use this to their ad- 
vantage. They appear to be like other bards, sharing 
news, singing songs, and telling tales to the audiences 
they gather. In truth, the College of Whispers teaches its 
students that they are wolves among sheep. These bards 
use their knowledge and magic to uncover secrets and 
turn them against others through extortion and threats. 
Many other bards hate the College of Whispers, 
viewing it as a parasite that uses a bard's reputation to 
acquire wealth and power. For this reason, members 
of this college rarely reveal their true nature. They typ- 
ically claim to follow some other college, or they keep 
their actual calling secret in order to infiltrate and ex- 
ploit royal courts and other settings of power. 


COLLEGE OF WHISPERS FEATURES 


Bard Level Feature 
3rd Psychic Blades, Words of Terror 
6th Mantle of Whispers 


14th Shadow Lore 


PsycHIC BLADES 

When you join the College of Whispers at 3rd level, you 
gain the ability to make your weapon attacks magically 
toxic to a creature’s mind. 

When you hit a creature with a weapon attack, you 
can expend one use of your Bardic Inspiration to deal an 
extra 2d6 psychic damage to that target. You can do so 
only once per round on your turn. 

The psychic damage increases when you reach cer- 
tain levels in this class, increasing to 3d6 at 5th level, 
5d6 at 10th level, and 8d6 at 15th level. 


WORDS OF TERROR 
At 3rd level, you learn to infuse innocent-seeming words 
with an insidious magic that can inspire terror. 

If you speak to a humanoid alone for at least 1 minute, 
you can attempt to seed paranoia in its mind. At the 
end of the conversation, the target must succeed on a 
Wisdom saving throw against your spell save DC or be 
frightened of you or another creature of your choice. The 
target is frightened in this way for 1 hour, until it is at- 
tacked or damaged, or until it witnesses its allies being 
attacked or damaged. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


If the target succeeds on its saving throw, the target 
has no hint that you tried to frighten it. 

Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until 
you finish a short or long rest. 


MANTLE OF WHISPERS 

At 6th level, you gain the ability to adopt a humanoid's 
persona. When a humanoid dies within 30 feet of you, 
you can magically capture its shadow using your reac- 
tion. You retain this shadow until you use it or you finish 
a long rest. 

You can use the shadow as an action. When you do so, 
it vanishes, magically transforming into a disguise that 
appears on you. You now look like the dead person, but 
healthy and alive. This disguise lasts for 1 hour or until 
you end it as a bonus action. 

While you're in the disguise, you gain access to all 
information that the humanoid would freely share with 
a casual acquaintance. Such information includes gen- 
eral details on its background and personal life, but 
doesn't include secrets. The information is enough that 
you can pass yourself off as the person by drawing on 
its memories. 

Another creature can see through this disguise by 
succeeding on a Wisdom (Insight) check contested by 
your Charisma (Deception) check. You gain а +5 bonus 
to your check. 

Once you capture a shadow with this feature, you 
can't capture another one with it until you finish a short 
or long rest. 


SHADOW LORE 
At 14th level, you gain the ability to weave dark magic 
into your words and tap into a creature's deepest fears. 

As an action, you magically whisper a phrase that 
only one creature of your choice within 30 feet of you 
can hear. The target must make a Wisdom saving throw 
against your spell save DC. It automatically succeeds 
if it doesn't share a language with you or if it can't hear 
you. On a successful saving throw, your whisper sounds 
like unintelligible mumbling and has no effect. 

On a failed saving throw, the target is charmed by you 
for the next 8 hours or until you or your allies attack it, 
damage it, or force it to make a saving throw. It inter- 
prets the whispers as a description of its most mortify- 
ing secret. You gain no knowledge of this secret, but the 
target is convinced you know it. 

The charmed creature obeys your commands for fear 
that you will reveal its secret. It won't risk its life for 
you or fight for you, unless it was already inclined to 
do so. It grants you favors and gifts it would offer to a 
close friend. 

When the effect ends, the creature has no understand- 
ing of why it held you in such fear. 

Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until 


you finish a long rest. p" 
dpa Ave А) 
ouer 
ko Wear "P 9 
pd { : realy, qe den Wwe secat 


CLERIC 


TO BECOME A CLERIC IS TO BECOME A MESSENGER OF 
the gods. The power the divine offers is great, but it always 
comes with tremendous responsibility. 

—Riggby the patriarch 


Almost all the folk in the world who revere a deity live 
their lives without ever being directly touched by a di- 
vine being. As such, they can never know what it feels 
like to be a cleric—someone who is not only a devout 
worshiper, but who has also been invested with a mea- 
sure of a deity’s power. 

The question has long been debated: Does a mortal 
become a cleric as a consequence of deep devotion to 
one’s deity, thereby attracting the god’s favor? Or is it the 
deity who sees the potential in a person and calls that 
individual into service? Ultimately, perhaps, the answer 
doesn't matter. However clerics come into being, the 
world needs clerics as much as clerics and deities need 
each other. 

If you're playing a cleric character, the following sec- 
tions offer ways to add some detail to that character’s 
history and personality. 


TEMPLE 


Most clerics start their lives of service as priests in an 
order, then later realize that they have been blessed by 
their god with the qualities needed to become a cleric. 
To prepare for this new duty, candidates typically re- 
ceive instruction from a cleric of a temple or another 
place of study devoted to their deity. 

Some temples are cut off from the world so that their 
occupants can focus on devotions, while other temples 
open their doors to minister to and heal the masses. 
What is noteworthy about the temple you studied at? 


TEMPLES 

d6 Temple 

1 Your temple is said to be the oldest surviving struc- 
ture built to honor your god. 

2 Acolytes of several like-minded deities all received 
instruction together in your temple. 

3 You come from a temple famed for the brewery it 
operates. Some say you smell like one ofits ales. 

4 Your temple is a fortress and a proving ground that 
trains warrior-priests. 

5 Your temple is a peaceful, humble place, filled with 
vegetable gardens and simple priests. 

6 You served in a temple in the Outer Planes. 


E. 


ldon £ understand Lhe atte 
of Jods. Whe, would anyone wor: 
anything other than cA 


KEEPSAKE 


Many clerics have items among their personal gear that 
symbolize their faith, remind them of their vows, or oth- 
erwise help to keep them on their chosen paths. Even 
though such an item is not imbued with divine power, 

it is vitally important to its owner because of what it 
represents. 


KEEPSAKES 
d6 Keepsake 
1 The finger bone of a saint 


2 A metal-bound book that tells how to hunt and de- 
stroy infernal creatures 


3 A pig's whistle that reminds you of your humble 
and beloved mentor 
4 A braid of hair woven from the tail of a unicorn 
5 A scroll that describes how best to rid the world of 
necromancers 
6 A runestone said to be blessed by your god 
SECRET 


No mortal soul is entirely free of second thoughts or 
doubt. Even a cleric must grapple with dark desires or 
the forbidden attraction of turning against the teachings 
of one's deity. 

If you haven't considered this aspect of your charac- 
ter yet, see the table entries for some possibilities, or 
use them for inspiration. Your deep, dark secret might 
involve something you did (or are doing), or it could 
be rooted in the way you feel about the world and your 
role in it. 


SECRETS 
d6 Secret 
1 An imp offers you counsel. You try to ignore the 
creature, but sometimes its advice is helpful. 
2 You believe that, in the final analysis, the gods are 


nothing more than ultrapowerful mortal creatures. 

3 You acknowledge the power of the gods, but you 
think that most events are dictated by pure chance. 

4 Even though you can work divine magic, you have 
never truly felt the presence of a divine essence 
within yourself. 

5 You are plagued by nightmares that you believe are 
sent by your god as punishment for some unknown 
transgression. 

6 In times of despair, you feel that you are but a play- 
thing of the gods, and you resent their remoteness. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS | 


CLERIC or THE FORGE 


SERVING A PANTHEON, PHILOSOPHY, OR FORCE 
The typical cleric is an ordained servant of a particular god 
and chooses a Divine Domain associated with that deity. 
The cleric's magic flows from the god or the god's sacred 
realm, and often the cleric bears a holy symbol that rep- 
resents that divinity. 

Some clerics, especially in a world like Eberron, serve a 
whole pantheon, rather than a single deity. In certain cam- 
paigns, a cleric might instead serve a cosmic force, such 
as life or death, or a philosophy or concept, such as love, 
peace, or one of the nine alignments. Chapter 1 of the 
Dungeon Master’s Guide explores options like these, in the 
section “Gods of Your World.” 

Talk with your DM about the divine options available in 
your campaign, whether they're gods, pantheons, philos- 
ophies, or cosmic forces. Whatever being or thing your 
cleric ends up serving, choose a Divine Domain that is ap- 
propriate for it, and if it doesn't have a holy symbol, work 
with your DM to design one. 

The cleric’s class features often refer to your deity. If you 
are devoted to a pantheon, cosmic force, or philosophy, 
your cleric features still work for you as written. Think of 
the references to a god as references to the divine thing 
you serve that gives you your magic. 


GHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


DIVINE DOMAINS 


At Ist level, a cleric gains the Divine Domain feature. 
The following domain options are available to a cleric, 
in addition to those offered in the Player's Handbook: 
Forge and Grave. 


FORGE DOMAIN 


The gods of the forge are patrons of artisans who work 
with metal, from a humble blacksmith who keeps a 
village in horseshoes and plow blades to the mighty elf 
artisan whose diamond-tipped arrows of mithral have 
felled demon lords. The gods of the forge teach that, 
with patience and hard work, even the most intractable 
metal can be transformed from a lump of ore to a beau- 
tifully wrought object. Clerics of these deities search 
for objects lost to the forces of darkness, liberate mines 
overrun by orcs, and uncover rare and wondrous mate- 
rials necessary to create potent magic items. Followers 
of these gods take great pride in their work, and they 
are willing to craft and use heavy armor and power- 

ful weapons to protect them. Deities of this domain 
include Gond, Reorx, Onatar, Moradin, Hephaestus, 
and Goibhniu. 


Force DOMAIN FEATURES 


Cleric Level Feature 


Ist Domain Spells, Bonus Proficiencies, 
Blessing of the Forge 

2nd Channel Divinity: Artisan's Blessing 

6th Soul of the Forge 

8th Divine Strike (148) 

14th Divine Strike (248) 

17th Saint of Forge and Fire 


DOMAIN SPELLS 

You gain domain spells at the cleric levels listed in the 
Forge Domain Spells table. See the Divine Domain 
class feature for how domain spells work. 


Force DOMAIN SPELLS 
Cleric Level Spells 


Ist identify, searing smite 

3rd heat metal, magic weapon 

Sth elemental weapon, protection from energy 
7th fabricate, wall of fire 

9th animate objects, creation 


BONUS PROFICIENCIES 
When you choose this domain at 1st level, you gain pro- 
ficiency with heavy armor and smith's tools. 


BLESSING OF THE FORGE 
At 1st level, you gain the ability to imbue magic into 
a weapon or armor. At the end of a long rest, you can 
touch one nonmagical object that is a suit of armor or 
a simple or martial weapon. Until the end of your next 
long rest or until you die, the object becomes a magic 
item, granting a +1 bonus to AC if it's armor or a +1 bo- 
nus to attack and damage rolls if it's a weapon. 

Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until 
you finish a long rest. 


CHANNEL DIVINITY: ARTISAN'S BLESSING 
Starting at 2nd level, you can use your Channel Divinity 
to create simple items. 

You conduct an hour-long ritual that crafts a nonmagi- 
cal item that must include some metal: a simple or mar- 
tial weapon, a suit of armor, ten pieces of ammunition, 
a set of tools, or another metal object (see chapter 5, 
“Equipment,” in the Player's Handbook for examples of 
these items). The creation is completed at the end of the 
hour, coalescing in an unoccupied space of your choice 
on a surface within 5 feet of you. 

The thing you create can be something that is worth 
no more than 100 gp. As part of this ritual, you must lay 
out metal, which can include coins, with a value equal 
to the creation. The metal irretrievably coalesces and 
transforms into the creation at the ritual's end, magi- 
cally forming even nonmetal parts of the creation. 

The ritual can create a duplicate of a nonmagical item 
that contains metal, such as a key, if you possess the 
original during the ritual. 


SOUL or THE FORGE 
Starting at 6th level, your mastery of the forge grants 
you special abilities: 


* You gain resistance to fire damage. 
+ While wearing heavy armor, you gain a +1 
bonus to AC. 


DIVINE STRIKE 

At 8th level, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon 
strikes with the fiery power of the forge. Once on each 
of your turns when you hit a creature with a weapon 
attack, you can cause the attack to deal an extra 1d8 fire 
damage to the target. When you reach 14th level, the ex- 
tra damage increases to 2d8. 


pe if qeu cant 
disintegrate Ща. ог eal 
Ue, barging dead bodies 
makes qs much sense Gs 


anything else, 


CLERIC OF THE GRAVE 


SAINT OF FORGE AND FIRE 
At 17th level, your blessed affinity with fire and metal 
becomes more powerful: 


* You gain immunity to fire damage. 

+ While wearing heavy armor, you have resistance to 
bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing damage from non- 
magical attacks. 


GRAVE DOMAIN 


Gods of the gràve watch over the line between life and 
death. To these deities, death and the afterlife are a 
foundational part of the multiverse. To desecrate the 
peace of the dead is an abomination. Deities of the grave 
include Kelemvor, Wee Jas, the ancestral spirits of the 
Undying Court, Hades, Anubis, and Osiris. Followers 

of these deities seek to put wandering spirits to rest, 
destroy the undead, and ease the suffering of the dying. 
Their magic also allows them to stave off death for a 
time, particularly for a person who still has some great 
work to accomplish in the world. This is a delay of death, 
not a denial of it, for death will eventually get its due. 


GHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


GRAVE DOMAIN FEATURES 


Cleric Level 


Ist 


2nd 
6th 
8th 
17th 


Ist 
3rd 
5th 
7th 
9th 


Cleric Level 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


Feature 

Domain Spells, Circle of Mortality, 
Eyes of the Grave 

Channel Divinity: Path to the Grave 
Sentinel at Death’s Door 

Potent Spellcasting 

Keeper of Souls 


DOMAIN SPELLS 

You gain domain spells at the cleric levels listed in the 
Grave Domain Spells table. See the Divine Domain 
class feature for how domain spells work. 


Grave DOMAIN SPELLS 


Spells 

bane, false life 

gentle repose, ray of enfeeblement 
revivify, vampiric touch 

blight, death ward 

antilife shell, raise dead 


CIRCLE OF MORTALITY 

At 1st level, you gain the ability to manipulate the line 
between life and death. When you would normally roll 
one or more dice to restore hit points with a spell to 

a creature at 0 hit points, you instead use the highest 
number possible for each die. 

In addition, you learn the spare the dying cantrip, 
which doesn't count against the number of cleric can- 
trips you know. For you, it has a range of 30 feet, and 
you can cast it as a bonus action. 


EYES OF THE GRAVE 
At Ist level, you gain the ability to occasionally sense the 
presence of the undead, whose existence is an insult to 
the natural cycle of life. As an action, you can open your 
awareness to magically detect undead. Until the end 
of your next turn, you know the location of any undead 
within 60 feet of you that isn't behind total cover and 
that isn't protected from divination magic. This sense 
doesn't tell you anything about a creature's capabilities 
or identity. 

You can use this feature a number of times equal to 
your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once). You regain 
all expended uses when you finish a long rest. 


CHANNEL DIVINITY: PATH TO THE GRAVE 
Starting at 2nd level, you can use your Channel Divinity 
to mark another creature's life force for termination. 

As an action, you choose one creature you can see 
within 30 feet of you, cursing it until the end of your 
next turn. The next time you or an ally of yours hits 
the cursed creature with an attack, the creature has 
vulnerability to all of that attack's damage, and then the 
curse ends. 


SENTINEL AT DEATH’s DOOR 
At 6th level, you gain the ability to impede death's prog- 
ress. As a reaction when you or a creature you can see 
within 30 feet of you suffers a critical hit, you can turn 
that hit into a normal hit. Any effects triggered by a criti- 
cal hit are canceled. 

You can use this feature a number of times equal to 
your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once). You regain 
all expended uses when you finish a long rest. 


PoTENT SPELLCASTING 
Starting at 8th level, you add your Wisdom modifier to 
the damage you deal with any cleric cantrip. 


KEEPER OF SOULS 

Starting at 17th level, you can seize a trace of vitality 
from a parting soul and use it to heal the living. When 
an enemy you can see dies within 60 feet of you, you or 
one creature of your choice that is within 60 feet of you 
regains hit points equal to the enemy's number of Hit 
Dice. You can use this feature only if you aren't incapac- 
itated. Once you use it, you can't do so again until the 
start of your next turn. 


DRUID 


EVEN IN DEATH, EACH CREATURE PLAYS ITS PART IN 
maintaining the Great Balance. But now an imbalance 
grows, a force that seeks to hold sway over nature. This is 
the destructive behavior of the mortal races. The farther 
away from nature their actions take them, the more cor- 
rupting their influence becomes. As druids, we seek mainly 
to protect and educate, to preserve the Great Balance, but 
there are times when we must rise up against danger and 
eradicate it. 

—Safhran, archdruid 


Druids are the caretakers of the natural world, and it is 
said that in time a druid becomes the voice of nature, 
speaking the truth that is too subtle for the general pop- 
ulace to hear. Many who become druids find that they 
naturally gravitate toward nature; its forces, cycles, and 
movements fill their minds and spirits with wonder and 
insight. Many sages and wise folk have studied nature, 
writing volumes about its mystery and power, but druids 
are a special kind of being: at some point, they begin 

to embody these natural forces, producing magical 
phenomena that link them to the spirit of nature and 
the flow of life. Because of their strange and mysterious 
power, druids are often revered, shunned, or considered 
dangerous by the people around them. 

Your druid character might be a true worshiper of na- 
ture, one who has always scorned civilization and found 
solace in the wild. Or your character could be a child of 
the city who now strives to bring the civilized world into 
harmony with the wilderness. You can use the sections 
that follow to flesh out your druid, regardless of how 
your character came to the profession. 


TREASURED ITEM 


Some druids carry one or more items that are sacred 
to them or have deep personal significance. Such items 
are not necessarily magical, but every one is an object 
whose meaning connects the druid’s mind and heart to 
a profound concept or spiritual outlook. 

When you decide what your character’s treasured 
item is, think about giving it an origin story: how did you 
come by the item, and why is it important to you? 


natural ini di 
«әтдән sh jee iens And 
7 ould have such 


TREASURED ITEMS 


d6 Item 
1 A twig from the meeting tree that stands in the | 
center of your village 
A vial of water from the source of a sacred river | 
Special herbs tied together in a bundle 
A small bronze bowl engraved with animal images 
A rattle made from a dried gourd and holly berries 
A miniature golden sickle handed down to you by 
your mentor 


Oc UON 


GUIDING ASPECT 


Many druids feel a strong link to a specific aspect of the 
natural world, such as a body of water, an animal, a type 
of tree, or some other sort of plant. You identify with 
your chosen aspect; by its behavior or its very nature, it 
sets an example that you seek to emulate. 


GUIDING ASPECTS 
d6 Guiding Aspect 

1 Yew trees remind you of renewing your mind and 
spirit, letting the old die and the new spring forth. 

2 Oak trees represent strength and vitality. Medi- 
tating under an oak fills your body and mind with 
resolve and fortitude. 

3 The river's endless flow reminds you of the great 
span of the world. You seek to act with the long- 
term interests of nature in mind. 

4 The sea is a constant, churning cauldron of power 
and chaos. It reminds you that accepting change is 
necessary to sustain yourself in the world. 

5 The birds in the sky are evidence that even the 
smallest creatures can survive if they remain above 
the fray. 

6 As demonstrated by the actions of the wolf, an 
individual's strength is nothing compared to the 
power of the pack. 


MENTOR 


It's not unusual for would-be druids to seek out (or be 
sought out by) instructors or elders who teach them the 
basics of their magical arts. Most druids who learn from 
a mentor begin their training at a young age, and the 
mentor has a vital role in shaping a student's attitudes 
and beliefs. 

If your character received training from someone 
else, who or what was that individual, and what was the 
nature of your relationship? Did your mentor imbue you 
with a particular outlook or otherwise influence your 
approach to achieving the goals of your chosen path? 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS | 


Druio oF 
THE CIRCLE 
or DREAMS 


MENTORS 
d6 Mentor 
1 Your mentor was a wise treant who taught you to 


think in terms of years and decades rather than 
days or months. 

2 You were tutored by a dryad who watched over 
a slumbering portal to the Abyss. During your 
training, you were tasked with watching for hidden 
threats to the world. 

3 Your tutor always interacted with you in the form of 
a falcon. You never saw the tutor's humanoid form. 

\ 4 You were one of several youngsters who were 

mentored by an old druid, until one of your fellow 
pupils betrayed your group and killed your master. 

5 Your mentor has appeared to you only in visions. 
You have yet to meet this person, and you are not 
sure such a person exists in mortal form. 

6 Your mentor was a werebear who taught you to 
treat all living things with equal regard. 


DRUID CIRCLES 


At 2nd level, a druid gains the Druid Circle feature. The 
following options are available to a druid, in addition 
to those offered in the Player's Handbook: the Circle of 
Dreams and the Circle of the Shepherd. 


CHAPTER | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


U don't д 
leam 
MEE co ra Ш Т 


On. m 
u ( jeu i. can ever Shnegk ER leise s 
Ou, : *q weu( CAD xis 
mE theagh, because ie bie dreams th 
=) head is s) 


Ja bijer 


CIRCLE OF DREAMS 


Druids who are members of the Circle of Dreams hail 
from regions that have strong ties to the Feywild and 
its dreamlike realms. The druids’ guardianship of the 
natural world makes for a natural alliance between 
them and good-aligned fey. These druids seek to fill the 
world with dreamy wonder. Their magic mends wounds 
and brings joy to downcast hearts, and the realms they 
protect are gleaming, fruitful places, where dream and 
reality blur together and where the weary can find rest. 


CIRCLE OF DREAMS FEATURES 
Druid Level Feature 


2nd Balm of the Summer Court 

6th Hearth of Moonlight and Shadow 
10th Hidden Paths 

14th Walker in Dreams 


BALM OF THE SUMMER COURT 
At 2nd level, you become imbued with the blessings of 
the Summer Court. You are a font of energy that offers 
respite from injuries. You have a pool of fey energy rep- 
resented by a number of d6s equal to your druid level. 
As a bonus action, you can choose one creature you 
can see within 120 feet of you and spend a number of 
those dice equal to half your druid level or less. Roll the 
spent dice and add them together. The target regains a 
number of hit points equal to the total. The target also 
gains 1 temporary hit point per die spent. 
You regain all expended dice when you finish a 
long rest. 


HEARTH OF MOONLIGHT AND SHADOW 

At 6th level, home can be wherever you are. During a 
short or long rest, you can invoke the shadowy power of 
the Gloaming Court to help guard your respite. At the 
start of the rest, you touch a point in space, and an invis- 
ible, 30-foot-radius sphere of magic appears, centered 
on that point. Total cover blocks the sphere. 

While within the sphere, you and your allies gain a +5 
bonus to Dexterity (Stealth) and Wisdom (Perception) 
checks, and any light from open flames in the sphere (a 
campfire, torches, or the like) isn't visible outside it. 

The sphere vanishes at the end of the rest or when you 
leave the sphere. 


HIDDEN PATHS 

Starting at 10th level, you can use the hidden, magical 
pathways that some fey use to traverse space in the 
blink of an eye. As a bonus action on your turn, you can 
teleport up to 60 feet to an unoccupied space you can 
see. Alternatively, you can use your action to teleport 


one willing creature you touch up to 30 feet to an unoc- 
cupied space you can see. 

You can use this feature a number of times equal to 
your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you re- 
gain all expended uses of it when you finish a long rest. 


WALKER IN DREAMS 

At 14th level, the magic of the Feywild grants you 
the ability to travel mentally or physically through 
dreamlands. 

When you finish a short rest, you can cast one of the 
following spells, without expending a spell slot or re- 
quiring material components: dream (with you as the 
messenger), scrying, or teleportation circle. 

This use of teleportation circle is special. Rather than 
opening a portal to a permanent teleportation circle, it 
opens a portal to the last location where you finished 
a long rest on your current plane of existence. If you 
haven't taken a long rest on your current plane, the 
spell fails but isn’t wasted. 

Once you use this feature, you can't use it again 
until you finish a long rest. 


CIRCLE OF THE SHEPHERD 


Druids of the Circle of the Shepherd commune 
with the spirits of nature, especially the spirits 
of beasts and the fey, and call to those spirits for 
aid. These druids recognize that all living things 
play a role in the natural world, yet they focus on 
protecting animals and fey creatures that have 
difficulty defending themselves. Shepherds, as they are 
known, see such creatures as their charges. They ward 
off monsters that threaten them, rebuke hunters who 
kill more prey than necessary, and prevent civilization 
from encroaching on rare animal habitats and on sites 
sacred to the fey. Many of these druids are happiest far 
from cities and towns, content to spend their days in the 
company of animals and the fey creatures of the wilds. 

Members of this circle become adventurers to oppose 
forces that threaten their charges or to seek knowledge 
and power that will help them safeguard their charges 
better. Wherever these druids go, the spirits of the wil- 
derness are with them. 


CIRCLE OF THE SHEPHERD FEATURES 
Druid Level Feature 


2nd Speech of the Woods, Spirit Totem 
6th Mighty Summoner 

10th Guardian Spirit 

14th Faithful Summons 


SPEECH OF THE Woods 
At 2nd level, you gain the ability to converse with beasts 
and many fey. 

You learn to speak, read, and write Sylvan. In addi- 
tion, beasts can understand your speech, and you gain 
the ability to decipher their noises and motions. Most 
beasts lack the intelligence to convey or understand 
sophisticated concepts, but a friendly beast could relay 
what it has seen or heard in the recent past. This ability 
doesn't grant you friendship with beasts, though you can 


Druio оғ тне CIRCLE OF THE SHEPHERD 


combine this ability with gifts to curry favor with them 
as you would with any nonplayer character. 


SPIRIT TOTEM 

Starting at 2nd level, you can call forth nature spirits to 
influence the world around you. As a bonus action, you 
can magically summon an incorporeal spirit to a point 
you can see within 60 feet of you. The spirit creates an 
aura in a 30-foot radius around that point. It counts as 
neither a creature nor an object, though it has the spec- 
tral appearance of the creature it represents. 

As a bonus action, you can move the spirit up to 60 
feet to a point you can see. 

The spirit persists for 1 minute or until you're incapac- 
itated. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again 
until you finish a short or long rest. 

The effect of.the spirit's aura depends on the type of 
spirit you summon from the options below. 

Bear Spirit. The bear spirit grants you and your allies 
its might and endurance. Each creature of your choice 
in the aura when the spirit appears gains temporary 
hit points equal to 5 + your druid level. In addition, you 
and your allies gain advantage on Strength checks and 
Strength saving throws while in the aura. 

Hawk Spirit. The hawk spirit is a consummate 
hunter, aiding you and your allies with its keen sight. 
When a creature makes an attack roll against a target 
in the spirit's aura, you can use your reaction to grant 
advantage to that attack roll. In addition, you and your 
allies have advantage on Wisdom (Perception) checks 
while in the aura. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARAGTER OPTIONS 


Unicorn Spirit. The unicorn spirit lends its protection 
to those nearby. You and your allies gain advantage on 
all ability checks made to detect creatures in the spirit's 
aura. In addition, if you cast a spell using a spell slot 
that restores hit points to any creature inside or outside 
the aura, each creature of your choice in the aura also 
regains hit points equal to your druid level. 


MIGHTY SUMMONER 

Starting at 6th level, beasts and fey that you conjure are 
more resilient than normal. Any beast or fey summoned 
or created by a spell that you cast gains the follow- 

ing benefits: 


* The creature appears with more hit points than nor- 
mal: 2 extra hit points per Hit Die it has. 

* The damage from its natural weapons is considered 
magical for the purpose of overcoming immunity and 
resistance to nonmagical attacks and damage. 


GUARDIAN SPIRIT 

Beginning at 10th level, your Spirit Totem safeguards 
the beasts and fey that you call forth with your magic. 
When a beast or fey that you summoned or created with 
a spell ends its turn in your Spirit Totem aura, that crea- 
ture regains a number of hit points equal to half your 
druid level. 


FAITHFUL SUMMONS 
Starting at 14th level, the nature spirits you commune 
with protect you when you are the most defenseless. 
If you are reduced to 0 hit points or are incapacitated 
against your will, you can immediately gain the benefits 
of conjure animals as if it were cast using a 9th-level 
spell slot. It summons four beasts of your choice that are 
challenge rating 2 or lower. The conjured beasts appear 
within 20 feet of you. If they receive no commands from 
you, they protect you from harm and attack your foes. 
The spell lasts for 1 hour, requiring no concentration, or 
until you dismiss it (no action required). 

Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until 
you finish a long rest. 


LEARNING BEAST SHAPES 


The Wild Shape feature in the Player's Handbook lets 
you transform into a beast that you've seen. That rule 
gives you a tremendous amount of flexibility, making it 
easy to amass an array of beast form options for your- 
self, but you must abide by the limitations in the Beast 
Shapes table in that book. 

When you gain Wild Shape as a 2nd-level druid, you 
might wonder which beasts you've already seen. The 
following tables organize beasts from the Monster Man- 
ual according to the beasts' most likely environments. 
Consider the environment your druid grew up in, then 
consult the appropriate table for a list of animals that 
your druid has probably seen by 2nd level. 

These tables can also help you and your DM deter- 
mine which animals you might see on your travels. 

In addition, the tables include each beast's challenge 
rating and note whether a beast has a flying or swim- 
ming speed. This information will help you determine 
whether you qualify to assume that beast's form. 


CHAPTER | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


Uf coutd Lure inte something else, 
\ wouldn E. Because «есу 


else is inferior lo we. 


The tables include all the individual beasts that are 
eligible for Wild Shape (up to a challenge rating of 1) or 
the Circle Forms feature of the Circle of the Moon (up to 
a challenge rating of 6). 


ARCTIC 
CR Beast Fly/Swim 

0 Ow Fly 
1/8 Blood hawk Fly 
YA Giantowl ` Fly. 

1 Brown bear = 

2 Polar bear Swim 

2 Saber-toothed tiger — 

6 Mammoth — 

Coast 
CR Beast Fly/Swim 

0 Crab Swim 

0 Eagle Fly 
1/8 Blood hawk Fly 
1/8 Giant crab Swim 
1/8 Poisonous snake Swim 
1/8 Stirge Fly 
1/4 Giant lizard = 
1/4 Giant wolf spider — 
1/4 Pteranodon Fly 

l Giant eagle Fly 

l Giant toad Swim 

2 Plesiosaurus Swim 

DESERT 
CR Beast Fly/Swim 

0 Cat = 

0 Hyena — 

0 Jackal — 

0 Scorpion — 

O0 Vulture Fly 
1/8 Camel — 
1/8 Flying snake Fly 
18 Mule — 
1/8 Poisonous snake Swim 
1/8 Stirge Fly 
1/4 Constrictor snake Swim 
1/4 Giant lizard — 
1/4 Giant poisonous snake Swim 
1/4 Giant wolf spider = 

1 Giant hyena — 

1 Giant spider = 

1 Giant toad Swim 

1 Giant vulture Fly 

1 Lion = 

2 Giant constrictor snake Swim 

3 Giant scorpion — 


FOREST 


кою — EA E 


Beast 

Baboon 

Badger 

Cat 

Deer 

Hyena 

Owl 

Blood hawk 
Flying snake 
Giant rat 

Giant weasel 
Poisonous snake 
Mastiff 

Stirge 

Boar 

Constrictor snake 
Elk 

Giant badger 
Giant bat 

Giant frog 

Giant lizard 
Giant owl 

Giant poisonous snake 
Giant wolf spider 
Panther 

Wolf 

Ape 

Black bear 

Giant wasp 
Brown bear 

Dire wolf 

Giant hyena 
Giant spider 
Giant toad 

Tiger 

Giant boar 

Giant constrictor snake 
Giant elk 


Fly/Swim 


UPRWNNNN = = = a 


Beast 

Cat 

Deer 

Eagle 

Goat 

Hyena 

Jackal 

Vulture 

Blood hawk 
Flying snake 
Giant weasel 
Poisonous snake 
Stirge 

Axe beak 

Boar 

Elk 

Giant poisonous snake 
Giant wolf spider 
Panther (leopard) 
Pteranodon 
Riding horse 
Wolf 

Giant goat 

Giant wasp 
Giant eagle 
Giant hyena 
Giant vulture 
Lion 

Tiger 

Allosaurus 

Giant boar 

Giant elk 
Rhinoceros 
Ankylosaurus 
Elephant 
Triceratops 


Fly/Swim 


HILL 

CR Beast 

0 Baboon 

0 Eagle 

0 Goat 

0 Hyena 

O Raven 

0 Vulture 
1/8 Blood hawk 
1/8 Giant weasel 
1/8 Mastiff 
1/8 Mule 
1/8 Poisonous snake 
1/8 Stirge 
1/4 Axe beak 
1/4 Boar 
1/4 Elk 
1/4 Giant owl 
1/4 Giant wolf spider 
1/4 Panther (cougar) 
1/4 Wolf 
1/2 Giant goat 

1 Brown bear 
1l Dire wolf 

1  Gianteagle 
1 Giant hyena 
1 Lion 

2  Giantboar 
2  Giantelk 

MOUNTAIN 

CR Beast 

0 Eagle 

0 Goat 

1/8 Blood hawk 
1/8 Stirge 

1/4 Pteranodon 
1/2 Giant goat 

1 Giant eagle 

1 Lion 

2  Giantelk 

2  Saber-toothed tiger 


SWAMP 


Fly/Swim CR Beast 
EN 0 Rat 
Fly O0 Raven 


— 1/8 Giant rat 
— 1/8 Poisonous snake 


Fly 1/8 Stirge 
Fly 1/4 Constrictor snake 
Fly 1/4 Giant frog 


= 1/4 Giant lizard 
— 1/4 Giant poisonous snake 
— 1/2 Crocodile 
Swim 1 Giant spider 
l Giant toad 
— 2 Giant constrictor snake 
5  Giantcrocodile 


Fly UNDERDARK 

== CR Beast 

— O  Giantfie beetle 

1/8 = Giant rat 

1/8  Stirge 

= 1/4 Giant bat 

= 1/4 Giant centipede 

Ely 1/4 Giant lizard 

1/4 Giant poisonous snake 
Em 1 Giant spider 

1 Giant toad 

2 Giant constrictor snake 
2 Polar bear (cave bear) 


Fly/Swim UNDERWATER 

Fly CR Beast 

= 0 Quipper 

Fly 1/4 Constrictor snake 
Fly 1/2 Giant sea horse 
Ей 1/2 Reef shark 


= 1 Giant octopus 
2 Giant constrictor snake 
2 Hunter shark 

(Р; 2  Plesiosaurus 
3  Killerwhale 
5  Giantshark 


CHAPTER1| CHARACTER OPTIONS 


Fly/Swim 


Fly/Swim 
Swim 
Swim 
Swim 
Swim 
Swim 
Swim 
Swim 
Swim 
Swim 
Swim 


FIGHTER 


LET ME KNOW WHEN YOU'RE ALL DONE TALKING. 
—Tordek 


Of all the adventurers in the worlds of D&D, the fighter 
is perhaps the greatest paradox. On the one hand, a sin- 
gular feature of the class is that no two fighters ply their 
craft in quite the same way; their weapons, armor, and 
tactics differ across a vast spectrum. On the other hand, 
regardless of the tools and methods one uses, at the 
heart of every fighter's motivation lies the same basic 
truth: it is better to wound than to be wounded. 

Although some adventuring fighters risk their lives 
fighting for glory or treasure, others are primarily con- 
cerned with the welfare of others. They put more value 
on the well-being of the society, the village, or the group 
than on their own safety. Even if there's gold in the off- 
ing, the true reward for most fighters comes from send- 
ing enemies to their doom. 

The sections below offer ways to add a little depth and 
a few personal touches to your fighter character. 


HERALDIC SIGN 


Fighters typically do battle for a cause. Some fight on 
behalf of kingdoms besieged by monsters, while others 
quest only for personal glory. In either case, a fighter 
often displays a heraldic sign that represents that cause, 
either adopting the symbol of a nation or a royal line, or 
creating a crest to represent one's self-interest. 

Your character could be affiliated with an organization 
or a cause, and thus might already travel under a banner 
of some sort. If that's not the case, consider devising a 
heraldic sign that symbolizes an aspect of your nature 
or speaks to what you see as your purpose in the world. 


Slicks and stones nd 5 р 


but swords will never hurk me—as lon 


«s V stay really high and shoot Ses ak 


Gh sete. 


ake wy bones, 
к 


HERALDIC SiGNS 

d6 Sign 

1 A rampant golden dragon on a green field, repre- 
senting valor and a quest for wealth 

2 The fist of a storm giant clutching lightning before 
a storm cloud, symbolizing wrath and power 

3 Crossed greatswords in front of a castle gate, signi- 
fying the defense of a city or kingdom 

4 A skull with a dagger through it, representing the 
doom you bring to your enemies 


5 A phoenix in a ring of fire, an expression of an in- 
domitable spirit 
6 Three drops of blood beneath a horizontal sword 


blade on a black background, symbolizing three 
foes you have sworn to kill 


INSTRUCTOR 


Some fighters are natural-born combatants who have 
a talent for surviving in battle. Others learned the ba- 
sics of their combat prowess in their formative years 
from spending time in a military or some other martial 
organization, when they were taught by the leaders of 
the group. 

A third type of fighter comes from the ranks of those 
who received one-on-one instruction from an accom- 
plished veteran of the craft. That instructor was, or 
perhaps still is, well versed in a certain aspect of combat 
that relates to the student's background. 

If you decide that your character had an individual 
instructor, what is that person's specialty? Do you 
emulate your instructor in how you fight, or did you 
take the instructor's teachings and adapt them to your 
own purposes? 


INsTRUCTORS 
d6 Instructor 
1 Gladiator. Your instructor was a slave who fought 


for freedom in the arena, or one who willingly 
chose the gladiator's life to earn money and fame. 

2 Military. Your trainer served with a group of sol- 
diers and knows much about working as a team. 

3 City Watch. Crowd control and peacekeeping are 
your instructor's specialties. 

4 Tribal Warrior. Your instructor grew up in a tribe, 
where fighting for one’s life was practically an 
everyday occurrence. 

5 Street Fighter. Your trainer excels at urban combat, 
combining close-quarters work with silence and 
efficiency. 

6 Weapon Master. Your mentor helped you to be- 
come one with your chosen weapon, by imparting 
highly specialized knowledge of how to wield it 
most effectively. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


Arrows аге the worst, the, go much facther 
than «че rays 401: чі \ stay indoors al( the 
Line, Besides, the sku is ыч overrated. 


ГО: 


SIGNATURE STYLE 


Many fighters distinguish themselves from their peers 
by adopting and perfecting a particular style or method 
of waging combat. Although this style might be a natural 
outgrowth of a fighter's personality, that's not always the 
case—someone's approach to the world in general does 
not necessarily dictate how that person operates when 
lives are on the line. 

Do you have a combat style that mirrors your outlook 
on life, or is something else inside you unleashed when 
weapons are drawn? 


SIGNATURE STYLES 


d6 Style 

1 Elegant. You move with precise grace and total 
control, never using more energy than you need. 

2 Brutal. Your attacks rain down like hammer blows, 
meant to splinter bone or send blood flying. 

3 Cunning. You dart in to attack at just the right mo- 
ment and use small-scale tactics to tilt the odds in 
your favor. 


4 Effortless. You rarely perspire or display anything 
other than a stoic expression in battle. 

5 Energetic. You sing and laugh during combat as 
your spirit soars. You are happiest when you have a 
foe in front of you and a weapon in hand. 

6 Sinister. You scowl and sneer while fighting, and 
you enjoy mocking your foes as you defeat them. 


MARTIAL ARCHETYPES 


At 3rd level, a fighter gains the Martial Archetype fea- 
ture. The following options are available to a fighter, in 
addition to those offered in the Player's Handbook: the 
Arcane Archer, the Cavalier, and the Samurai. 


ARCANE ARCHER 


An Arcane Archer studies a unique elven method of 
archery that weaves magic into attacks to produce su- 
pernatural effects. Arcane Archers are some of the most 
elite warriors among the elves. They stand watch over 
the fringes of elven domains, keeping a keen eye out for 
trespassers and using magic-infused arrows to defeat 
monsters and invaders before they can reach elven set- 
tlements. Over the centuries, the methods of these elf 
archers have been learned by members of other races 
who can also balance arcane aptitude with archery. 


CHAPTER | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


ARCANE ARCHER FEATURES 
Fighter Level Feature 
3rd Arcane Archer Lore, Arcane Shot (2 options) 
7th Curving Shot, Magic Arrow, 
Arcane Shot (3 options) 
10th Arcane Shot (4 options) 
15th Ever-Ready Shot, Arcane Shot (5 options) 
18th Arcane Shot (6 options, improved shots) 


ARCANE ARCHER LORE 

At 3rd level, you learn magical theory or some of the 
secrets of nature—typical for practitioners of this elven 
martial tradition. You choose to gain proficiency in ei- 
ther the Arcana or the Nature skill, and you choose to 
learn either the prestidigitation or the druidcraft cantrip. 


ARCANE SHOT 

At 3rd level, you learn to unleash special magical effects 
with some of your shots. When you gain this feature, you 
learn two Arcane Shot options of your choice (see “Ar- 
cane Shot Options” below). 

Once per turn when you fire a magic arrow from a 
shortbow or longbow as part of the Attack action, you 
can apply one of your Arcane Shot options to that ar- 
row. You decide to use the option when the arrow hits 
a creature, unless the option doesn't involve an attack 
roll. You have two uses of this ability, and you regain all 
expended uses of it when you finish a short or long rest. 

You gain an additional Arcane Shot option of your 
choice when you reach certain levels in this class: 7th, 
10th, 15th, and 18th level. Each option also improves 
when you become an 18th-level fighter. 


MAGIC ARROW 

At 7th level, you gain the ability to infuse arrows with 
magic. Whenever you fire a nonmagical arrow from a 
shortbow or longbow, you can make it magical for the 
purpose of overcoming resistance and immunity to non- 
magical attacks and damage. The magic fades from the 
arrow immediately after it hits or misses its target. 


CunviNG SHOT 

At 7th level, you learn how to direct an errant arrow 
toward a new target. When you make an attack roll with 
a magic arrow and miss, you can use a bonus action to 
reroll the attack roll against a different target within 60 
feet of the original target. 


EvER-READY SHOT 

Starting at 15th level, your magical archery is available 
whenever battle starts. If you roll initiative and have no 
uses of Arcane Shot remaining, you regain one use of it. 


ARCANE SHOT OPTIONS 
The Arcane Shot feature lets you choose options for it at 
certain levels. The options are presented here in alpha- 
betical order. They are all magical effects, and each one 
is associated with one of the schools of magic. 

If an option requires a saving throw, your Arcane Shot 
save DC equals 8 + your proficiency bonus + your Intelli- 
gence modifier. 


Lert ro RIGHT: SAMURAI, CAVALIER, AND ARCANE ARCHER 


Banishing Arrow. You use abjuration magic to try to 
temporarily banish your target to a harmless location 
in the Feywild. The creature hit by the arrow must also 
succeed on a Charisma saving throw or be banished. 
While banished in this way, the target’s speed is 0, and 
it is incapacitated. At the end of its next turn, the target 
reappears in the space it vacated or in the nearest unoc- 
cupied space if that space is occupied. 

After you reach 18th level in this class, a target also 
takes 2d6 force damage when the arrow hits it. 

Beguiling Arrow. Your enchantment magic causes 
this arrow to temporarily beguile its target. The creature 
hit by the arrow takes an extra 2d6 psychic damage, and 
choose one of your allies within 30 feet of the target. 
The target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw, or 
it is charmed by the chosen ally until the start of your 
next turn. This effect ends early if the chosen ally at- 
tacks the charmed target, deals damage to it, or forces it 
to make a saving throw. 

The psychic damage increases to 4d6 when you reach 
18th level in this class. 

Bursting Arrow. You imbue your arrow with force 
energy drawn from the school of evocation. The energy 
detonates after your attack. Immediately after the ar- 
row hits the creature, the target and all other creatures 
within 10 feet of it take 2d6 force damage each. 

The force damage increases to 4d6 when you reach 
18th level in this class. 

Enfeebling Arrow. You weave necromantic magic into 
your arrow. The creature hit by the arrow takes an extra 
2d6 necrotic damage. The target must also succeed 


on a Constitution saving throw, or the damage dealt 
by its weapon attacks is halved until the start of your 
next turn. 

The necrotic damage increases to 4d6 when you reach 
18th level in this class. 

Grasping Arrow. When this arrow strikes its target, 
conjuration magic creates grasping, poisonous bram- 
bles, which wrap around the target. The creature hit by 
the arrow takes an extra 2d6 poison damage, its speed 
is reduced by 10 feet, and it takes 2d6 slashing dam- 
age the first time on each turn it moves 1 foot or more 
without teleporting. The target or any creature that can 
reach it can use its action to remove the brambles with 
a successful Strength (Athletics) check against your Ar- 
cane Shot save DC. Otherwise, the brambles last for 1 
minute or until you use this option again. / 

The poison damage and slashing damage both in- 
crease to 4d6 when you reach 18th level in this class. 

Piercing Arrow. You use transmutation magic to 
give your arrow an ethereal quality. When you use this 
option, you don’t make an attack roll for the attack. 
Instead, the arrow shoots forward in a line, which is 1 
foot wide and 30 feet long, before disappearing. The ha 
arrow passes harmlessly through objects, ignoring 
cover. Each creature in that line must make a Dexterity 
saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes damage 


as if it were hit by the arrow, plus an extra 1d6 piercing 

damage. On a successful save, a target takes half as 4 ; 

much damage. [ 
The piercing damage increases to 246 when you reach 


18th level in this class. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 29 


Seeking Arrow. Using divination magic, you grant 
your arrow the ability to seek out a target. When you use 
this option, you don't make an attack roll for the attack. 
Instead, choose one creature you have seen in the past 
minute. The arrow flies toward that creature, moving 
around corners if necessary and ignoring three-quarters 
cover and half cover. If the target is within the weapon's 
range and there is a path large enough for the arrow to 
travel to the target, the target must make a Dexterity 
saving throw. Otherwise, the arrow disappears after 
traveling as far as it can. On a failed save, the target 
takes damage as if it were hit by the arrow, plus an extra 
1d6 force damage, and you learn the target's current 
location. On a successful save, the target takes half as 
much damage, and you don't learn its location. 

The force damage increases to 2d6 when you reach 
18th level in this class. 

Shadow Arrow. You weave illusion magic into your 
arrow, causing it to occlude your foe's vision with shad- 
ows. The creature hit by the arrow takes an extra 2d6 
psychic damage, and it must succeed on a Wisdom 
saving throw or be unable to see anything farther than 5 
feet away until the start of your next turn. 

The psychic damage increases to 4d6 when you reach 
18th level in this class. 


CAVALIER 


The archetypal Cavalier excels at mounted combat. 
Usually born among the nobility and raised at court, a 
Cavalier is equally at home leading a cavalry charge or 
exchanging repartee at a state dinner. Cavaliers also 
learn how to guard those in their charge from harm, 
often serving as the protectors of their superiors and of 
the weak. Compelled to right wrongs or earn prestige, 
many of these fighters leave their lives of comfort to em- 
bark on glorious adventure. 


CAVALIER FEATURES 
Fighter Level Feature 


3rd Bonus Proficiency, Born to the Saddle, 
Unwavering Mark 

7th Warding Maneuver 

10th Hold the Line 

15th Ferocious Charger 


18th Vigilant Defender 


BONUS PROFICIENCY 

When you choose this archetype at 3rd level, you gain 
proficiency in one of the following skills of your choice: 
Animal Handling, History, Insight, Performance, or 
Persuasion. Alternatively, you learn one language of 
your choice. 


BORN TO THE SADDLE 
Starting at 3rd level, your mastery as a rider becomes 
apparent. You have advantage on saving throws made 
to avoid falling off your mount. If you fall off your mount 
and descend no more than 10 feet, you can land on your 
feet if you're not incapacitated. 

Finally, mounting or dismounting a creature costs you 
only 5 feet of movement, rather than half your speed. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


——EE—————————EEEEE ESS sss 

CAVALIERS, SAMURAI, AND HISTORY 

While both cavaliers and samurai existed in the real world, 

our inspirations for both fighter archetypes are taken from 

popular culture (folk tales, movies, and comic books), not 
from history. Our intent is to capture the cinematic, heroic 
element of both archetypes in the game, rather than create 
an accurate historical representation of either one. 
чечек сые ———— 
UNWAVERING MARK 
Starting at 3rd level, you can menace your foes, foiling 
their attacks and punishing them for harming others. 
When you hit a creature with a melee weapon attack, 
you can mark the creature until the end of your next 
turn. This effect ends early if you are incapacitated or 
you die, or if someone else marks the creature. 

While it is within 5 feet of you, a creature marked by 
you has disadvantage on any attack roll that doesn't 
target you. 

In addition, if a creature marked by you deals damage 
to anyone other than you, you can make a special melee 
weapon attack against the marked creature as a bonus 
action on your next turn. You have advantage on the 
attack roll, and if it hits, the attack's weapon deals extra 
damage to the target equal to half your fighter level. 

Regardless of the number of creatures you mark, you 
can make this special attack a number of times equal to 
your Strength modifier (minimum of once), and you re- 
gain all expended uses of it when you finish a long rest. 


WARDING MANEUVER 
At 7th level, you learn to fend off strikes directed at 
you, your mount, or other creatures nearby. If you or 
a creature you can see within 5 feet of you is hit by an 
attack, you can roll 1d8 as a reaction if you're wielding 
a melee weapon or a shield. Roll the die, and add the 
number rolled to the target's AC against that attack. If 
the attack still hits, the target has resistance against the 
attack's damage. 

You can use this feature a number of times equal 
to your Constitution modifier (minimum of once), and 
you regain all expended uses of it when you finish a 
long rest. 


HOLD THE LINE 

At 10th level, you become a master of locking down 
your enemies. Creatures provoke an opportunity attack 
from you when they move 5 feet or more while within 
your reach, and if you hit a creature with an opportunity 
attack, the target's speed is reduced to 0 until the end of 
the current turn. 


So мге аге hil fecent names lor 


rank socks of ewe e saing 


Ата dr bis sword 
orh saec. No, 


tak os ai a сөй n 


za bas RUN TON 


FEROCIOUS CHARGER 

Starting at 15th level, you can run down your foes, 
whether you're mounted or not. If you move at least 10 
feet in a straight line right before attacking a creature 
and you hit it with the attack, that target must succeed 
on a Strength saving throw (DC 8 + your proficiency bo- 
nus + your Strength modifier) or be knocked prone. You 
can use this feature only once on each of your turns. 


VIGILANT DEFENDER 

Starting at 18th level, you respond to danger with 
extraordinary vigilance. In combat, you get a special 
reaction that you can take once on every creature’s turn, 
except your turn. You can use this special reaction only 
to make an opportunity attack, and you can't use it on 
the same turn that you take your normal reaction. 


SAMURAI 


The Samurai is a fighter who draws on an implacable 
fighting spirit to overcome enemies. A Samurai's resolve 
is nearly unbreakable, and the enemies in a Samurai's 
path have two choices: yield or die fighting. 


SAMURAI FEATURES 
Fighter Level Feature 


3rd Bonus Proficiency, Fighting Spirit (5 temp. hp) 
7th Elegant Courtier 

10th Tireless Spirit, Fighting Spirit (10 temp. hp) 
15th Rapid Strike, Fighting Spirit (15 temp. hp) 
18th Strength before Death 


BONUS PROFICIENCY 

When you choose this archetype at 3rd level, you gain 
proficiency in one of the following skills of your choice: 
History, Insight, Performance, or Persuasion. Alterna- 
tively, you learn one language of your choice. 


FIGHTING SPIRIT 
Starting at 3rd level, your intensity in battle can shield 
you and help you strike true. As a bonus action on your 
turn, you can give yourself advantage on weapon attack 
rolls until the end of the current turn. When you do so, 
you also gain 5 temporary hit points. The number of 
temporary hit points increases when you reach certain 
levels in this class, increasing to 10 at 10th level and 15 
at 15th level. 

You can use this feature three times, and you regain 
all expended uses of it when you finish a long rest. 


ELEGANT COURTIER 

Starting at 7th level, your discipline and attention to de- 

tail allow you to excel in social situations. Whenever you 
make a Charisma (Persuasion) check, you gain a bonus 

to the check equal to your Wisdom modifier. 

Your self-control also causes you to gain proficiency 
in Wisdom saving throws. If you already have this pro- 
ficiency, you instead gain proficiency in Intelligence or 
Charisma saving throws (your choice). 


TIRELESS SPIRIT 

Starting at 10th level, when you roll initiative and 
have no uses of Fighting Spirit remaining, you re- 
gain one use. 


RAPID STRIKE 

Starting at 15th level, you learn to trade accuracy for 
swift strikes. If you take the Attack action on your turn 
and have advantage on an attack roll against one of 
the targets, you can forgo the advantage for that roll to 
make an additional weapon attack against that target, 
as part of the same action. You can do so no more than 
once per turn.” 


STRENGTH BEFORE DEATH 
Starting at 18th level, your fighting spirit can delay the 
grasp of death. If you take damage that reduces you to 
0 hit points and doesn't kill you outright, you can use 
your reaction to delay falling unconscious, and you can 
immediately take an extra turn, interrupting the current 
turn. While you have 0 hit points during that extra turn, 
taking damage causes death saving throw failures as 
normal, and three death saving throw failures can still : 
kill you. When the extra turn ends, you fall unconscious 4 3 
if you still have O hit points. 
Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until 
you finish a long rest. 


ki 
ck V could be а wor 
А u law d 


О: ме Why are 4° 


MONK 


DO NOT MISTAKE MY SILENCE FOR ACCEPTANCE OF YOUR 

villainy. While you blustered and threatened, I've planned 

four different ways to snap your neck with my bare hands. 
—Ember, grand master of flowers 


Monks walk a path of contradiction. They study their art 
as a wizard does, and like a wizard, they wear no armor 
and typically eschew weapons. Yet they are deadly com- 
batants, their abilities on a par with those of a raging 
barbarian or a superbly trained fighter. Monks embrace 
this seeming contradiction, for it speaks to the core of 
all monastic study. By coming to know oneself com- 
pletely, one learns much of the wider world. 

A monk's focus on inner mastery leads many such 
individuals to become detached from society, more con- 
cerned with their personal experience than with hap- 
penings elsewhere. Adventuring monks are a rare breed 
of an already rare type of character, taking their quest 
for perfection beyond the walls of the monastery into the 
world at large. 

Playing a monk character offers many intriguing op- 
portunities to try something different. To distinguish 
your monk character even further, consider the options 
in the sections that follow. 


MONASTERY 


A monk studies in a monastery in preparation for a life 
of asceticism. Most of those who enter a monastery 
make it their home for the rest of their lives, with the 
exception of adventurers and others who have reason to 
leave. For those individuals, a monastery might serve as 
a refuge between excursions to the world or as a source 
of support in times of need. 

What sort of place was your monastery, and where is 
it located? Did attending it contribute to your experience 
in an unusual or distinctive way? 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


_ MONASTERIES 


{\ wambea. 


d6 Monastery 


1 Your monastery is carved out of a mountainside, 
where it looms over a treacherous pass. 

2 Your monastery is high in the branches of an im- 
mense tree in the Feywild. 

3 Your monastery was founded long ago by a cloud 


giant and is inside a cloud castle that can be 
reached only by flying. 

4 Your monastery is built beside a volcanic system 
of hot springs, geysers, and sulfur pools. You regu- 
larly received visits from azer traders. 


5 Your monastery was founded by gnomes and is an 
underground labyrinth of tunnels and rooms. 
6 Your monastery was carved from an iceberg in the 


frozen reaches of the world. 


MONASTIC ICON 


Even in the monastic lifestyle, which eschews materi- 
alism and personal possessions, symbolism plays an 
important part in defining the identity of an order. Some 
monastic orders treat certain creatures with special 
regard, either because the creature is tied to the order's 
history or because it serves as an example of a quality 
the monks seek to emulate. 

If your character's monastery had a special icon, you 
might wear a crude image of the creature somewhere 
inconspicuous on your clothing to serve as an identify- 
ing mark. Or perhaps your order's icon does not have a 
physical form but is expressed through a gesture or a 
posture that you adopt, and which other monks might 
know how to interpret. 


Monastic Icons 


d6 Icon 

1 Monkey. Quick reflexes and the ability to travel 
through the treetops are two of the reasons why 
your order admires the monkey. 

2 Dragon Turtle. The monks of your seaside mon- 
astery venerate the dragon turtle, reciting ancient 
prayers and offering garlands of flowers to honor 
this living spirit ofthe sea. 

3 Ki-rin. Your monastery sees its main purpose as 
watching over and protecting the land in the man- 
ner of the ki-rin. 

4 Owlbear. The monks of your monastery revere a 
family of owlbears and have coexisted with them 
for generations. 

5 Hydra. Your order singles out the hydra for its abil- 
ity to unleash several attacks simultaneously. 

6 Dragon. A dragon once laired within your monas- 
tery. Its influence remains long after its departure. 


Lery ro Right: DRUNKEN Master, Kensei, ANO SUN SouL 


MASTER 


During your studies, you were likely under the tutelage 
of a master who imparted to you the precepts of the 
order. Your master was the one most responsible for 
shaping your understanding of the martial arts and your 
attitude toward the world. What sort of person was your 
master, and how did your relationship with your master 
affect you? 


MASTERS 
d6 Master 
1 Your master was a tyrant whom you had to defeat 
in single combat to complete your instruction. 
2 Your master was kindly and taught you to pursue 
the cause of peace. 
3 Your master was merciless in pushing you to your 


limits. You nearly lost an eye during one especially 
brutal practice session. 


4 Your master seemed goodhearted while tutoring 
you, but betrayed your monastery in the end. 

5 Your master was cold and distant. You suspect that 
the two of you might be related. 

6 Your master was kind and generous, never critical 


of your progress. Nevertheless, you feel you never 
fully lived up to the expectations placed on you. 


MONASTIC TRADITIONS 


At 3rd level, a monk gains the Monastic Tradition fea- 
ture. The following options are available to a monk, in 
addition to those offered in the Player's Handbook: the 
Way of the Drunken Master, the Way of the Kensei, and 
the Way of the Sun Soul. 


Wav OF THE DRUNKEN MASTER 


The Way of the Drunken Master teaches its students 
to move with the jerky, unpredictable movements of 

a drunkard. A drunken master sways, tottering on 
unsteady feet, to present what seems like an incompe- 
tent combatant who proves frustrating to engage. The 
drunken master's erratic stumbles conceal a carefully 
executed dance of blocks, parries, advances, attacks, 
and retreats. 

A drunken master often enjoys playing the fool to 
bring gladness to the despondent or to demonstrate 
humility to the arrogant, but when battle is joined, the 
drunken master can be a maddening, masterful foe. 


Way OF THE DRUNKEN MASTER FEATURES 
Monk Level Feature 


3rd Bonus Proficiencies, Drunken Technique 
6th Tipsy Sway 

Tith Drunkard's Luck 

17th Intoxicated Frenzy 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


BoNus PROFICIENCIES 

When you choose this tradition at 3rd level, you gain 
proficiency in the Performance skill if you don't already 
have it. Your martial arts technique mixes combat train- 
ing with the precision of a dancer and the antics of a 
jester. You also gain proficiency with brewer's supplies if 
you don't already have it. 


DRUNKEN TECHNIQUE 

At 3rd level, you learn how to twist and turn quickly as 
part of your Flurry of Blows. Whenever you use Flurry 
of Blows, you gain the benefit of the Disengage action, 
and your walking speed increases by 10 feet until the 
end of the current turn. 


Tipsy Sway 
Starting at 6th level, you can move in sudden, swaying 
ways. You gain the following benefits. 

Leap to Your Feet. When you're prone, you can stand 
up by spending 5 feet of movement, rather than half 
your speed. 

Redirect Attack. When a creature misses you with 
a melee attack roll, you can spend 1 ki point as a re- 
action to cause that attack to hit one creature of your 
choice, other than the attacker, that you can see within 5 
feet of you. 


DRUNKARD's LUCK 

Starting at 11th level, you always seem to get a lucky 
bounce at the right moment. When you make an ability 
check, an attack roll, or a saving throw and have disad- 
vantage on the roll, you can spend 2 ki points to cancel 
the disadvantage for that roll. 


INTOXICATED FRENZY 

At 17th level, you gain the ability to make an overwhelm- 
ing number of attacks against a group of enemies. When 
you use your Flurry of Blows, you can make up to three 
additional attacks with it (up to a total of five Flurry of 
Blows attacks), provided that each Flurry of Blows at- 
tack targets a different creature this turn. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


WAY OF THE KENSEI 


Monks of the Way of the Kensei train relentlessly with 
their weapons, to the point where the weapon becomes 
an extension of the body. Founded on a mastery of 
sword fighting, the tradition has expanded to include 
many different weapons. 

A kensei sees a weapon in much the same way a cal- 
ligrapher or painter regards a pen or brush. Whatever 
the weapon, the kensei views it as a tool used to express 
the beauty and precision of the martial arts. That such 
mastery makes a kensei a peerless warrior is but a side 
effect of intense devotion, practice, and study. 


Way OF THE КЕМЅЕІ FEATURES 


Monk Level Feature 
3rd Path of the Kensei (2 weapons) 
6th One with the Blade, 
Path of the Kensei (3 weapons) 


Mth Sharpen the Blade, 

Path of the Kensei (4 weapons) 
17th Unerring Accuracy, 

Path of the Kensei (5 weapons) 


PATH OF THE KENSEI 

When you choose this tradition at 3rd level, your spe- 
cial martial arts training leads you to master the use of 
certain weapons. This path also includes instruction in 
the deft strokes of calligraphy or painting. You gain the 
following benefits. 

Kensei Weapons. Choose two types of weapons to 
be your kensei weapons: one melee weapon and one 
ranged weapon. Each of these weapons can be any sim- 
ple or martial weapon that lacks the heavy and special 
properties. The longbow is also a valid choice. You gain 
proficiency with these weapons if you don't already have 
it. Weapons of the chosen types are monk weapons for 
you. Many of this tradition's features work only with 
your kensei weapons. When you reach 6th, 11th, and 
17th level in this class, you can choose another type of 
weapon—either melee or ranged—to be a kensei weapon 
for you, following the criteria above. 

Agile Parry. If you make an unarmed strike as part of 
the Attack action on your turn and are holding a kensei 
weapon, you can use it to defend yourself if it is a melee 
weapon. You gain a +2 bonus to AC until the start of 
your next turn, while the weapon is in your hand and 
you aren't incapacitated. 

Kensei's Shot. You can use a bonus action on your 
turn to make your ranged attacks with a kensei weapon 
more deadly. When you do so, any target you hit with a 
ranged attack using a kensei weapon takes an extra 1d4 
damage of the weapon's type. You retain this benefit un- 
til the end of the current turn. 

Way of the Brush. You gain proficiency with your 
choice of calligrapher's supplies or painter's supplies. 


ONE WITH THE BLADE 
At 6th level, you extend your ki into your kensei weap- 
ons, granting you the following benefits. 


Wa aid Le samargi Cross Lhe eal! . Now чеч sag 
“wha?” 54 Okay, (Recess Lhe p qe V Шам. Gek we 

А Ye hal? Wa EE чеч КО Ahe jeke is solid 
gu. and “ч delivery чоз perfect. Maule q^ didn't 
yt ik because qeu. re ой. 


Magic Kensei Weapons. Your attacks with your ken- 
sei weapons count as magical for the purpose of over- 
coming resistance and immunity to nonmagical attacks 
and damage. 

Deft Strike. When you hit a target with a kensei 
weapon, you can spend 1 ki point to cause the weapon 
to deal extra damage to the target equal to your Martial 
Arts die. You can use this feature only once on each of 
your turns. 


SHARPEN THE BLADE 

At 11th level, you gain the ability to augment your weap- 
ons further with your ki. As a bonus action, you can 
expend up to 3 ki points to grant one kensei weapon 
you touch a bonus to attack and damage rolls when you 
attack with it. The bonus equals the number of ki points 
you spent. This bonus lasts for 1 minute or until you 
use this feature again. This feature has no effect on a 
magic weapon that already has a bonus to attack and 
damage rolls. 


UNERRING ACCURACY 

At 17th level, your mastery of weapons grants you ex- 
traordinary accuracy. If you miss with an attack roll 
using a monk weapon on your turn, you can reroll it. You 
can use this feature only once on each of your turns. 


WAY OF THE SUN SOUL 


Monks of the Way of the Sun Soul learn to channel their 
life energy into searing bolts of light. They teach that 
meditation can unlock the ability to unleash the indomi- 
table light shed by the soul of every living creature. 


Way OF THE SUN SOUL FEATURES 
Monk Level Feature 


3rd Radiant Sun Bolt 
6th Searing Arc Strike 
Tith Searing Sunburst 


T7th Sun Shield 


RADIANT SUN BOLT 
Starting when you choose this tradition at 3rd level, you 
can hurl searing bolts of magical radiance. 

You gain a new attack option that you can use with 
the Attack action. This special attack is a ranged spell 
attack with a range of 30 feet. You are proficient with 
it, and you add your Dexterity modifier to its attack and 
damage rolls. Its damage is radiant, and its damage die 
is a d4. This die changes as you gain monk levels, as 
shown in the Martial Arts column of the Monk table. 

When you take the Attack action on your turn and use 
this special attack as part of it, you can spend 1 ki point 
to make the special attack twice as a bonus action. 


When you gain the Extra Attack feature, this special 
attack can be used for any of the attacks you make as 
part of the Attack action. 


SEARING ARC STRIKE 

At 6th level, you gain the ability to channel your ki into 
searing waves of energy. Immediately after you take the 
Attack action on your turn, you can spend 2 ki points to 
cast the burning hands spell as a bonus action. 

You can spend additional ki points to cast burning 
hands as a higher-level spell. Each additional ki point 
you spend increases the spell's level by 1. The maximum 
number of ki points (2 plus any additional points) that 
you can spend on the spell equals half your monk level. 


SEARING SUNBURST 

At 11th level, you gain the ability to create an orb of light 
that erupts into a devastating explosion. As an action, 
you magically create an orb and hurl it at a point you 
choose within 150 feet, where it erupts into a sphere of 
radiant light for a brief but deadly instant. 

Each creature in that 20-foot-radius sphere must suc- 
ceed on a Constitution saving throw or take 2d6 radiant 
damage. A creature doesn't need to make the save if the 
creature is behind total cover that is opaque. 

You can increase the sphere's damage by spending 
ki points. Each point you spend, to a maximum of 3, in- 
creases the damage by 2d6. 


SUN SHIELD 

At 17th level, you become wreathed in a luminous, mag- 
ical aura. You shed bright light in a 30-foot radius and 
dim light for an additional 30 feet. You can extinguish or 
restore the light as a bonus action. 

If a creature hits you with a melee attack while this 
light shines, you can use your reaction to deal radiant 
damage to the creature. The radiant damage equals 5 + 
your Wisdom modifier. 


So «ou. haue лз soul, but que cant set ik or 
kouch ik. And uber ie, this invisible thi 
legues your bolg and soe to а ЕЦ qua ^ 
And qu people Lhink Vue crara: iO: 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


| 
| 
| 
| 


PALADIN 


THE TRUE WORTH OF A PALADIN IS MEASURED NOT IN 

foes defeated or dungeons plundered. It is measured in lives 

saved and hearts turned to the causes of mercy and justice. 
—Isteval 


A paladin is a living embodiment of an oath—a promise 
or a vow made manifest in the person of a holy warrior 
who has the skill and the determination to see the cause 
through to the end. Some paladins devote themselves 
expressly to protecting the innocent and spreading jus- 
tice in the world, while others resolve to attain that goal 
by conquering those who stand defiant and bringing 
them under the rule of law. 

Although no paladin in the world could be described 
as typical, a number of them are narrow-minded 
do-gooders who refuse to tolerate even the smallest 
deviation from their own outlook. Paladins who take 
up the adventuring life, however, rarely remain so rigid 
in their attitudes—if only to keep from alienating their 
companions. 

You can flesh out your paladin character by using the 
suggestions below. It's important to keep in mind that 
most paladins aren't robots. They have doubts and prej- 
udices and harbor contradictory thoughts just as any 
other character does. Some are compelled by an inter- 
nal motivation that might sometimes be at odds with the 
principles of their oaths. 


PERSONAL GOAL 


The precepts of a paladin's oath provide purpose to the 
character and dictate an ultimate goal or an overall in- 
tent that the paladin abides by and advances. Aside from 
that, some paladins are driven by a personal goal that 
either complements or transcends the dictates of their 
oaths. Paladins who swear different oaths might have 
the same personal goal, differing only in how they apply 
that goal to their actions when upholding their oaths. 

If your paladin character has a personal goal, it might 
be drawn from some life event and thus not directly tied 
to the oath. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


Living up bo an oath” that sounds 

ridiculous. Wh, would anyone euer 

do Ша dheres nothing Heong with 
"i TN but only suckers 


nt ү tus. х5 


PERSONAL GOALS 


d6 Goal 
1 Peace. You fight so that future generations will not 
have to. 
2 Revenge. Your oath is the vehicle through which 
you will right an ancient wrong. 
3 Duty. You will live up to what you have sworn to do, 
or die trying. 


4 Leadership. You will win a great battle that bards 
will sing about, and in so doing, you will become 
an example to inspire others. 


5 Faith. You know your path is righteous, or else the 
gods would not have set you upon it. 
6 Glory. You will lead the world into a grand new era, 


one that will be branded with your name. 


SYMBOL 


Paladins are mindful of the influence of symbols, and 
many of them adopt or design an artistic device that 
bears a distinctive image. Your symbol exemplifies the 
oath you have taken and communicates that message to 
those around you, friend and foe alike. 

Your symbol might be displayed on a banner, a flag, or 
your clothing for all to see. Or it could be less obvious, 
such as a trinket or a token that you carry concealed on 
your person. 


SYMBOLS 

d6 Symbol 

1 A dragon, emblematic of your nobility in peace and 
your ferocity in combat 

2 A clenched fist, because you are always ready to 
fight for your beliefs 

3 An upraised open hand, indicating your preference 
for diplomacy over combat 

4 A red heart, showing the world your commitment 
to justice 


5 A black heart, signifying that emotions such as pity 
do not sway your dedication to your oath 

6 An unblinking eye, meaning that you are ever alert 
to all threats against your cause 


NEMESIS 


Their adherence to a sacred oath demands that paladins 
take an active stance in carrying their beliefs into the 
world. This activity naturally leads to conflict with crea- 
tures or entities that oppose those beliefs. Among those 
opponents, one often stands out as a paladin's most per- 
sistent or most formidable foe—a nemesis whose pres- 
ence or influence is a constant factor in a paladin's life. 


Your paladin character might have an enemy that 
dates from the days before you took up your path. Or you 
could be a target because when you became a paladin, 
you immediately attracted the attention of those that 
would do you in. If you have a nemesis, who or what is 
it? Whom among your enemies do you consider to be the 
biggest threat to achieving your goals? 


NEMESES 
dé Nemesis 
1 A mighty orc war chief who threatens to overrun 
and destroy everything you hold sacred 
2 A fiend or a celestial, the agent of a power of the 


Outer Planes, who has been charged with corrupt- 
ing or redeeming you, as appropriate 


3 A dragon whose servants dog your steps 

4 A high priest who sees you as a misguided fool and 
wants you to abandon your religion 

5 A rival paladin who trained with you but became an 
oath-breaker and holds you responsible 

6 A vampire who has sworn revenge against all pala- 


dins after being defeated by one 


TEMPTATION 


Although paladins are dedicated to their oaths, they are 
mortals, and thus they are flawed. Many of them exhibit 
a type of behavior or hold to an attitude that is not in 
keeping with the highest ideals of their calling. 

What is the temptation that your character succumbs 
to or finds it difficult to resist? 


TEMPTATIONS 
d6 Temptation 
1 Fury. When your anger is roused, you have trouble 


thinking straight, and you fear you might do some- 
thing you'll regret. 


2 Pride. Your deeds are noteworthy, and no one takes 
note of them more often than you. 

3 Lust. You can't resist an attractive face and a pleas- 
ant smile. 

4 Envy. You are mindful of what some famous folk 


have accomplished, and you feel inadequate when 
your deeds don’t compare to theirs. 

5 Despair. You consider the great strength of the 
enemies you must defeat, and at times you see no 
way to achieve final victory. 

6 Greed. Regardless of how much glory and treasure 
you amass, it’s never enough for you. 


SACRED OATHS 


At 3rd level, a paladin gains the Sacred Oath feature. 
The following options are available to a paladin, in addi- 
tion to those offered in the Player's Handbook: the Oath 
of Conquest and the Oath of Redemption. 


PALADIN оғ Conquest 


OATH OF CONQUEST 


The Oath of Conquest calls to paladins who seek glory 
in battle and the subjugation of their enemies. It isn’t 
enough for these paladins to establish order. They must 
crush the forces of chaos. Sometimes called knight ty- 
rants or iron mongers, those who swear this oath gather 
into grim orders that serve gods or philosophies of war 
and well-ordered might. 

Some of these paladins go so far as to consort with 
the powers of the Nine Hells, valuing the rule of law 
over the balm of mercy. The archdevil Bel, warlord of 
Avernus, counts many of these paladins—called hell 
knights—as his most ardent supporters. Hell knights 
cover their armor with trophies taken from fallen en- 
emies, a grim-warning to any who dare oppose them 
and the decrees of their lords. These knights are often 
most fiercely resisted by other paladins of this oath, 
who believe that the hell knights have wandered too far 
into darkness. 


TENETS OF CONQUEST 
A paladin who takes this oath has the tenets of conquest 
seared on the upper arm. 

Douse the Flame of Hope. It is not enough to merely 
defeat an enemy in battle. Your victory must be so over- 
whelming that your enemies’ will to fight is shattered 
forever. A blade can end a life. Fear can end an empire. 

Rule with an Iron Fist. Once you have conquered, 
tolerate no dissent. Your word is law. Those who obey it 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


4d 


| Confirest sounds Cool, > 


Do co, have о 
q9w ha L legue qur house for that? 


Because n € { 5 
VEN (oC а ish ure К 
lbs INT | fish named Salar, and V can't 


| оо lens or he jets sad. Ya 


shall be favored. Those who defy it shall be punished as 
an example to all who might follow. 

Strength Above All. You shall rule until a stronger 
one arises. Then you must grow mightier and meet the 
challenge, or fall to your own ruin. 


OaTH OF CONQUEST FEATURES 


Paladin 
Level Feature 
3rd Oath Spells, Channel Divinity 
7th Aura of Conquest (10 ft.) 


15th Scornful Rebuke 
18th Aura of Conquest (30 ft.) 
20th Invincible Conqueror 


OATH SPELLS 

You gain oath spells at the paladin levels listed in the 
Oath of Conquest Spells table. See the Sacred Oath 
class feature for how oath spells work. 


ОАТН OF CONQUEST SPELLS 


Paladin 
Level Spells 
3rd armor of Agathys, command 
5th hold person, spiritual weapon 
9th bestow curse, fear 
13th dominate beast, stoneskin 
17th cloudkill, dominate person 


CHANNEL DIVINITY 

When you take this oath at 3rd level, you gain the follow- 
ing two Channel Divinity options. See the Sacred Oath 
class feature for how Channel Divinity works. 

Conquering Presence. You can use your Channel 
Divinity to exude a terrifying presence. As an action, 
you force each creature of your choice that you can see 
within 30 feet of you to make a Wisdom saving throw. 
On a failed save, a creature becomes frightened of you 
for 1 minute. The frightened creature can repeat this 
saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the 
effect on itself on a success. 

Guided Strike. You can use your Channel Divinity to 
strike with supernatural accuracy. When you make an 
attack roll, you can use your Channel Divinity to gain a 
+10 bonus to the roll. You make this choice after you see 
the roll, but before the DM says whether the attack hits 
or misses. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


AURA OF CONQUEST 

Starting at 7th level, you constantly emanate a menacing 
aura while you're not incapacitated. The aura extends 

10 feet from you in every direction, but not through 

total cover. 

If a creature is frightened of you, its speed is reduced 
to 0 while in the aura, and that creature takes psychic 
damage equal to half your paladin level if it starts its 
turn there. 

At 18th level, the range of this aura increases 
to 30 feet. 


SCORNFUL REBUKE 

Starting at 15th level, those who dare to strike you are 
psychically punished for their audacity. Whenever a 
creature hits you with an attack, that creature takes 
psychic damage equal to your Charisma modifier (mini- 
mum of 1) if you're not incapacitated. 


INVINCIBLE CONQUEROR 

At 20th level, you gain the ability to harness extraordi- 
nary martial prowess. As an action, you can magically 
become an avatar of conquest, gaining the following 
benefits for 1 minute: 


* You have resistance to all damage. 

* When you take the Attack action on your turn, you can 
make one additional attack as part of that action. 

* Your melee weapon attacks score a critical hit on a 
roll of 19 or 20 on the d20. 


Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until 
you finish a long rest. 


OATH OF REDEMPTION 


The Oath of Redemption sets a paladin on a difficult 
path, one that requires a holy warrior to use violence 
only as a last resort. Paladins who dedicate themselves 
to this oath believe that any person can be redeemed 
and that the path of benevolence and justice is one that 
anyone can walk. These paladins face evil creatures in 
the hope of turning their foes to the light, and they slay 
their enemies only when such a deed will clearly save 
other lives. Paladins who follow this path are known as 
redeemers. 

While redeemers are idealists, they are no fools. Re- 
deemers know that undead, demons, devils, and other 
supernatural threats can be inherently evil. Against 
such foes, paladins who swear this oath bring the full 
wrath of their weapons and spells to bear. Yet the re- 
deemers still pray that, one day, even creatures of wick- 
edness will invite their own redemption. 


'TENETS OF REDEMPTION 
The tenets of the Oath of Redemption hold a paladin to a 
high standard of peace and justice. 
Peace. Violence is a weapon of last resort. Diplomacy 
and understanding are the paths to long-lasting peace. 
Innocence. All people begin life in an innocent state, 
and it is their environment or the influence of dark 
forces that drives them to evil. By setting the proper 
example, and working to heal the wounds of a deeply 
flawed world, you can set anyone on a righteous path. 


ReAewpkion. So you feel bad about having 
L4 hone something and then чеч have bo do 

E something ko feel belle? why Jone yu 
iet kill and eat someone’ thak ala 


makes me feel bekker. ЙО 


Patience. Change takes time. Those who have walked 
the path of the wicked must be given reminders to keep 
them honest and true. Once you have planted the seed of 
righteousness in a creature, you must work day after day 
to allow that seed to survive and flourish. 

Wisdom. Your heart and mind must stay clear, for 
eventually you will be forced to admit defeat. While ev- 
ery creature can be redeemed, some are so far along the 
path of evil that you have no choice but to end their lives 
for the greater good. Any such action must be carefully 
weighed and the consequences fully understood, but 
once you have made the decision, follow through with it 
knowing your path is just. 


ОАТН OF REDEMPTION FEATURES 


Paladin 
Level Feature 
3rd Oath Spells, Channel Divinity 
7th Aura of the Guardian (10 ft.) 
15th Protective Spirit 
18th Aura of the Guardian (30 ft.) 
20th Emissary of Redemption 


ОАТН SPELLS 

You gain oath spells at the paladin levels listed in the 
Oath of Redemption Spells table. See the Sacred Oath 
class feature for how oath spells work. 


ОАТН OF REDEMPTION SPELLS 


Paladin 
Level Spells 
3rd sanctuary, sleep 
5th calm emotions, hold person 
9th counterspell, hypnotic pattern 
13th Otiluke's resilient sphere, stoneskin 
17th hold monster, wall of force 


CHANNEL DIVINITY 
When you take this oath at 3rd level, you gain the follow- 
ing two Channel Divinity options. 

Emissary of Peace. You can use your Channel Divin- 
ity to augment your presence with divine power. As a 
bonus action, you grant yourself a +5 bonus to Charisma 
(Persuasion) checks for the next 10 minutes. 

Rebuke the Violent. You can use your Channel Divin- 
ity to rebuke those who use violence. Immediately after 
an attacker within 30 feet of you deals damage with an 
attack against a creature other than you, you can use 
your reaction to force the attacker to make a Wisdom 
saving throw. On a failed save, the attacker takes radiant 
damage equal to the damage it just dealt. On a success- 
ful save, it takes half as much damage. 


PALADIN OF 
REDEMPTION 


AURA OF THE GUARDIAN 
Starting at 7th level, you can shield others from harm at 
the cost of your own health. When a creature within 10 
feet of you takes damage, you can use your reaction to 
magically take that damage, instead of that creature tak- 
ing it. This feature doesn't transfer any other effects that 
might accompany the damage, and this damage can't be 
reduced in any way. 

At 18th level, the range of this aura increases 
to 30 feet. 


PROTECTIVE SPIRIT 

Starting at 15th level, a holy presence mends your 
wounds in battle. You regain hit points equal to 146 + 
half your paladin level if you end your turn in combat 
with fewer than half of your hit points remaining and 
you aren't incapacitated. 


EMISSARY OF REDEMPTION 
At 20th level, you become an avatar of peace, which 
gives you two benefits: 


* You have resistance to all damage dealt by other crea- 
tures (their attacks, spells, and other effects). 

+ Whenever a creature hits you with an attack, it takes 
radiant damage equal to half the damage you take 
from the attack. 


If you attack a creature, cast a spell on it, or deal dam- 
age to it by any means but this feature, neither benefit 
works against that creature until you finish a long rest. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


RANGER 


I SPEND A LOT OF MY LIFE AWAY FROM CIVILIZATION, 
keeping to its fringes to protect it. Don't assume that be- 
cause I don't bend the knee to your king that I haven't done 
more to protect him than all his knights put together. 
—Soveliss 


Rangers are free-minded wanderers and seekers who 
patrol the edges of civilized territory, turning back the 
denizens of the wild lands beyond. It is a thankless job, 
since their efforts are rarely understood and almost 
never rewarded. Yet rangers persist in their duties, 
never doubting that their work makes the world a 
safer place. 

A relationship with civilization informs every ranger's 
personality and history. Some rangers see themselves 
as enforcers of the law and bringers of justice on civili- 
zation's frontier, answering to no sovereign power. Oth- 
ers are survivalists who eschew civilization altogether. 
They vanquish monsters to keep themselves safe while 
they live in and travel through the perilous wild areas of 
the world. If their efforts also benefit the kingdoms and 
other civilized realms that they avoid, so be it. 

If you're creating or playing a ranger character, the 
following sections offer ideas for embellishing the char- 
acter and enhancing your roleplaying experience. 


VIEW OF THE WORLD 


A ranger's view of the world begins (and sometimes 
ends) with that character's outlook toward civilized folk 
and the places they occupy. Some rangers have an atti- 
tude toward civilization that's deeply rooted in disdain, 
while others pity the people they have sworn to pro- 
tect—though on the battlefield, it's impossible to tell the 
difference between one ranger and another. Indeed, to 
those who have seen them operate and been the benefi- 
ciaries of their prowess, it scarcely matters why rangers 
do what they do. That said, no two rangers are likely to 
express their opinions on any matter in the same way. 
If you haven't yet thought about the details of your 
character's worldview, consider putting a finer point on 
things by summarizing that viewpoint in a short state- 
ment (such as the entries on the following table). How 
might that feeling affect the way you conduct yourself? 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


vs а monster, Ace eu Ss lc Era bo kill 


X Duet Lhink so, Go kill some collins ос 
something On second thought, feblas cis dE 
won skers—tlheg ce people So magbe qu should 


cell чечсин а (< killen O 


VIEWS OF THE WORLD 


d6 View 
1 Towns and cities are the best places for those who 


can’t survive on their own. 


2 The advancement of civilization is the best way to 
thwart chaos, but its reach must be monitored. 
3 Towns and cities are a necessary evil, but once the 


wilderness is purged of supernatural threats, we 
will need them no more. 


4 Walls are for cowards, who huddle behind them 
while others do the work of making the world safe. 
5 Visiting a town is not unpleasant, but after a few 
days | feel the irresistible call to return to the wild. 
6 Cities breed weakness by isolating folk from the 


harsh lessons of the wild. 


HOMELAND 


All rangers, regardless of how they came to take up 
the profession, have a strong connection to the natural 
world and its various terrains. For some rangers, the 
wilderness is where they grew up, either as a result of 
being born there or moving there at a young age. For 
other rangers, civilization was originally home, but the 
wilderness became a second homeland. 

Think of your character’s backstory and decide what 
terrain feels most like home, whether or not you were 
born there. What does that terrain say about your per- 
sonality? Does it influence which spells you choose to 
learn? Have your experiences there shaped who your 
favored enemies are? 


HOMELANDS 
dé Homeland 
1 You patrolled an ancient forest, darkened and cor- 
rupted by several crossings to the Shadowfell. 
2 As part of a group of nomads, you acquired the 


skills for surviving in the desert. 
3 Your early life in the Underdark prepared you for 
the challenges of combating its denizens. 


4 You dwelled on the edge of a swamp, in an area im- 
periled by land creatures as well as aquatic ones. 

5 Because you grew up among the peaks, finding the 
best path through the mountains is second nature 
to you. 

6 You wandered the far north, learning how to pro- 


tect yourself and prosper in a realm overrun by ice. 


Lert ro Right: Horizon WALKER, MONSTER SLAYER, ANO GLOOM STALKER 


SwORN ENEMY 


Every ranger begins with a favored enemy (or two). The 
determination of a favored enemy might be tied to a 
specific event in the character's early life, or it might be 
entirely a matter of choice. 

What spurred your character to select a particular 
enemy? Was the choice made because of tradition or cu- 
riosity, or do you have a grudge to settle? 


Sworn ENEMIES 


d6 Enemy 

1 You seek revenge on nature's behalf for the great 
transgressions your foe has committed. 

2 Your forebears or predecessors fought these crea- 
tures, and so shall you. 

3 You bear no enmity toward your foe. You stalk such 
creatures as a hunter tracks down a wild animal. 

4 You find your foe fascinating, and you collect books 
oftales and history concerning it. 

5 You collect tokens of your fallen enemies to remind 
you of each kill. 

6 You respect your chosen enemy, and you see your 


battles as a test of respective skills. 


RANGER ARCHETYPES 


At 3rd level, a ranger gains the Ranger Archetype fea- 
ture. The following options are available to a ranger, 
in addition to those offered in the Player's Handbook: 
the Gloom Stalker, the Horizon Walker, and the Mon- 
ster Slayer. 


GLOOM STALKER _ 


Gloom Stalkers are at home in the darkest places: 
deep under the earth, in gloomy alleyways, in primeval 
forests, and wherever else the light dims. Most folk 
enter such places with trepidation, but a Gloom Stalker 
ventures boldly into the darkness, seeking to ambush 
threats before they can reach the broader world. Such 
rangers are often found in the Underdark, but they will 
go any place where evil lurks in the shadows. 


GLOOM STALKER FEATURES 


Ranger Level Feature 


3rd Gloom Stalker Magic, Dread Ambusher, 
Umbral Sight 

7th Iron Mind 

Tith Stalker's Flurry 

15th Shadowy Dodge 


GHAPTER 1 | CHARAGTER OPTIONS 


So yes seal ои 
know wosk evergthin buk humans 
seein the даг ri ut 

ТХ doesnt ) 


7 We gl( see you. 


urn you invisible 


m 


GLOOM STALKER Magic 

Starting at 3rd level, you learn an additional spell when 
you reach certain levels in this class, as shown in the 
Gloom Stalker Spells table. The spell counts as a ranger 
spell for you, but it doesn’t count against the number of 
ranger spells you know. 


GLOOM STALKER SPELLS 


Ranger Level Spell 
3rd disguise self 


5th rope trick 

9th fear 

13th greater invisibility 
17th seeming 


DREAD AMBUSHER 
At 3rd level, you master the art of the ambush. You can 
give yourself a bonus to your initiative rolls equal to your 
Wisdom modifier. 

At the start of your first turn of each combat, your 
walking speed increases by 10 feet, which lasts until 
the end of that turn. If you take the Attack action on that 
turn, you can make one additional weapon attack as 
part of that action. If that attack hits, the target takes an 
extra 1d8 damage of the weapon's damage type. 


UMBRAL SIGHT 
At 3rd level, you gain darkvision out to a range of 60 
feet. If you already have darkvision from your race, its 
range increases by 30 feet. 

You are also adept at evading creatures that rely 
on darkvision. While in darkness, you are invisible 
to any creature that relies on darkvision to see you in 
that darkness. 


IRON MIND 

By 7th level, you have honed your ability to resist the 
mind-altering powers of your prey. You gain proficiency 
in Wisdom saving throws. If you already have this pro- 
ficiency, you instead gain proficiency in Intelligence or 
Charisma saving throws (your choice). 


STALKER’S FLURRY 

At 11th level, you learn to attack with such unexpected 
speed that you can turn a miss into another strike. Once 
on each of your turns when you miss with a weapon at- 
tack, you can make another weapon attack as part of the 
same action. 


CHAPTER 1 |. CHARACTER OPTIONS 


SHADOWY DODGE 

Starting at 15th level, you can dodge in unforeseen 
ways, with wisps of supernatural shadow around you. 
Whenever a creature makes an attack roll against you 
and doesn't have advantage on the roll, you can use your 
reaction to impose disadvantage on it. You must use this 
feature before you know the outcome of the attack roll. 


HORIZON WALKER 


Horizon Walkers guard the world against threats that 
originate from other planes or that seek to ravage the 
mortal realm with otherworldly magic. They seek out 
planar portals and keep watch over them, venturing to 
the Inner Planes and the Outer Planes as needed to 
pursue their foes. These rangers are also friends to any 
forces in the multiverse—especially benevolent dragons, 
fey, and elementals—that work to preserve life and the 
order of the planes. 


HORIZON WALKER FEATURES 


Ranger Level Feature 


3rd Horizon Walker Magic, Detect Portal, 
Planar Warrior (1d8) 

7th Ethereal Step 

Tith Distant Strike, Planar Warrior (2d8) 

15th Spectral Defense 


HORIZON WALKER MAGIC 

Starting at 3rd level, you learn an additional spell when 
you reach certain levels in this class, as shown in the 
Horizon Walker Spells table. The spell counts as a 
ranger spell for you, but it doesn’t count against the 
number of ranger spells you know. 


HORIZON WALKER SPELLS 
Ranger Level Spell 


3rd protection from evil and good 
5th misty step 

9th haste 

13th banishment 

17th teleportation circle 


DETECT PORTAL 
At 3rd level, you gain the ability to magically sense the 
presence of a planar portal. As an action, you detect 
the distance and direction to the closest planar portal 
within 1 mile of you. 

Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until 
you finish a short or long rest. 

See the “Planar Travel” section in chapter 2 of the 
Dungeon Master's Guide for examples of planar portals. 


PLANAR WARRIOR 
At 3rd level, you learn to draw on the energy of the mul- 
tiverse to augment your attacks. 

As a bonus action, choose one creature you can see 
within 30 feet of you. The next time you hit that creature 
on this turn with a weapon attack, all damage dealt 
by the attack becomes force damage, and the creature 


A 


takes an extra 1d8 force damage from the attack. When 
you reach 11th level in this class, the extra damage in- 
creases to 2d8. 


ETHEREAL STEP 
At 7th level, you learn to step through the Ethereal 
Plane. As a bonus action, you can cast the etherealness 
spell with this feature, without expending a spell slot, 
but the spell ends at the end of the current turn. 

Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until 
you finish a short or long rest. 


DISTANT STRIKE 
At 11th level, you gain the ability to pass between the 
planes in the blink of an eye. When you take the Attack 
action, you can teleport up to 10 feet before each attack 
to an unoccupied space you can see. 

If you attack at least two different creatures with 
the action, you can make one additional attack with it 
against a third creature. 


SPECTRAL DEFENSE 

At 15th level, your ability to move between planes 
enables you to slip through the planar boundaries to 
lessen the harm done to you during battle. When you 
take damage from an attack, you can use your reaction 
to give yourself resistance to all of that attack's damage 
on this turn. 


MONSTER SLAYER 


You have dedicated yourself to hunting down creatures 
of the night and wielders of grim magic. A Monster 
Slayer seeks out vampires, dragons, evil fey, fiends, and 
other magical threats. Trained in supernatural tech- 
niques to overcome such monsters, slayers are experts 
at unearthing and defeating mighty, mystical foes. 


MONSTER SLAYER FEATURES 


Ranger Level Feature 


3rd Monster Slayer Magic, Hunter's Sense, 
Slayer's Prey 

7th Supernatural Defense 

Tith Magic-User's Nemesis 

15th Slayer's Counter 


MONSTER SLAYER MAGIC 

Starting at 3rd level, you learn an additional spell 
when you reach certain levels in this class, as shown 
in the Monster Slayer Spells table. The spell counts as 
a ranger spell for you, but it doesn't count against the 
number of ranger spells you know. 


MONSTER SLAYER SPELLS 
Ranger Level Spell 


3rd protection from evil and good. 
5th zone of truth 

9th magic circle 

13th banishment 

17th hold monster 


cab кен ow jetting (асла away, Boowl 
Did | (ust blew чес ied 
\ Ai, Aide E V 


HuNTER's SENSE 
At 3rd level, you gain the ability to peer at a creature 
and magically discern how best to hurt it. As an action, 
choose one creature you can see within 60 feet of you. 
You immediately learn whether the creature has any 
damage immunities, resistances, or vulnerabilities and 
what they are. If the creature is hidden from divination 
magic, you sense that it has no damage immunities, re- 
sistances, or vulnerabilities. 

You can use this feature a number of times equal to 
your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once). You regain all 
expended uses of it when you finish a long rest. 


SLAYER’S PREY 
Starting at 3rd level, you can focus your ire on one foe, 
increasing the harm you inflict on it. As a bonus action, 
you designate one creature you can see within 60 feet of 
you as the target of this feature. The first time each turn 
that you hit that target with a weapon attack, it takes an 
extra 1d6 damage from the weapon. 

This benefit lasts until you finish a short or long rest. It 
ends early if you designate a different creature. 


SUPERNATURAL DEFENSE 

At 7th level, you gain extra resilience against your prey's 
assaults on your mind and body. Whenever the target 

of your Slayer’s Prey forces you to make a saving throw 
and whenever you make an ability check to escape that 
target's grapple, add 1d6 to your roll. 


MaAGiIC-USER'S NEMESIS 
At 11th level, you gain the ability to thwart someone 
else's magic. When you see a creature casting a spell or 
teleporting within 60 feet of you, you can use your reac- 
tion to try to magically foil it. The creature must succeed 
on a Wisdom saving throw against your spell save DC, 
or its spell or teleport fails and is wasted. 

Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until 
you finish a short or long rest. 


SLAYER'S COUNTER 

At 15th level, you gain the ability to counterattack when 
your prey tries to sabotage you. If the target of your Slay- 
er's Prey forces you to make a saving throw, you can use 
your reaction to make one weapon attack against the 
quarry. You make this attack immediately before making 
the saving throw. If your attack hits, your save automati- 
cally succeeds, in addition to the attack's normal effects. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


ROGUE 


PEOPLE FORGET THAT THE ENTIRE POINT OF VENTURING 
down into a dusty tomb is to bring back the prizes hidden 
away there. Fighting is for fools. Dead men can't spend 
their fortunes. 

—Barnabas Bladecutter 


When brute force won't get the job done, or when magic 
isn't available or appropriate, the rogue rises to the 
fore. With skills tied to stealth, subterfuge, and trickery, 
rogues can get into and out of trouble in ways that few 
other characters can emulate. 

Some rogues who turn to adventuring are former 
criminals who have decided that dodging monsters 
is preferable to remaining one step ahead of the law. 
Others are professional killers in search of a profitable 
application of their talents between contracts. Some 
simply love the thrill of overcoming any challenge that 
stands in their way. 

On adventures, a rogue is likely to mix an outwardly 
cautious approach—few rogues enjoy combat—with a 
ravenous hunger for loot. Most of the time, in a rogue's 
mind, taking up arms against a creature is not about 
killing the creature but about becoming the new owner 
of its treasure. 

The following sections explore certain facets of what it 
means to be a rogue, which you can use to add depth to 
your character. 


GUILTY PLEASURE 


Most of what rogues do revolves around obtaining trea- 
sure and preventing others from doing the same. Little 
gets in the way of attaining those goals, except that 
many rogues are enticed away from that path by a com- 
pulsion that clouds their thinking—an irresistible need 
that must be satisfied, even if doing so is risky. 

A rogue's guilty pleasure could be the acquisition 
of a physical item, something to be experienced, or a 
way of conducting oneself at certain times. One rogue 
might not be able to pass up any loot made of silver, for 
instance, even if said loot is hanging around the neck 
of a castle guard. Another one can't go through a day 
in the city without lifting a purse or two, just to keep 
in practice. 


CHAPTER |. CHARACTER OPTIONS 


Дое асе khe worst. N hake anyone 


NUTS Vos nok 
Lek handles wg skuld ; ! 
loking, especially if Ше doe et ik 


а Mere Ше found ik. Io: 


What's the one form of temptation that your rogue 
character can't resist when the opportunity presents it- 
self, even if giving into it might mean trouble for you and 
your companions? 


GuiLTY PLEASURES 


46 Pleasure 

Large gems 

A smile from a pretty face 

A new ring for your finger 

The chance to deflate someone's ego 
The finest food and drink 

Adding to your collection of exotic coins 


сал > wN 


ADVERSARY 


Naturally, those who enforce the law are bound to come 
up against those who break it, and it's the rare rogue 
who isn't featured on at least one wanted poster. Beyond 
that, it's in the nature of their profession that rogues 
often come into contact with criminal elements, whether 
out of choice or necessity. Some of those people can be 
adversaries too, and they're likely to be harder to deal 
with than the average member of the city watch. 

If your character's backstory doesn't already include a 
personage of this sort, you could work with your DM to 
come up with a reason why an adversary has appeared 
in your life. Perhaps you've been the subject of scrutiny 
for a while from someone who wants to use you for 
nefarious purposes and has just now become known to 
you. Such an incident could be the basis for an upcom- 
ing adventure. 

Does your rogue character have an adversary who 
also happens to be a criminal? If so, how is this relation- 
ship affecting your life? 


ADVERSARIES 
d6 Adversary 
1 The pirate captain on whose ship you once served; 


what you call moving on, the captain calls mutiny 

2 A master spy to whom you unwittingly fed bad 
information, which led to the assassination of the 
wrong target 


B The master of the local thieves' guild, who wants 
you to join the organization or leave town 

4 An art collector who uses illegal means to acquire 
masterpieces 

5 A fence who uses you as a messenger to set up 
illicit meetings 


6 The proprietor of an illegal pit fighting arena where 
you once took bets 


Lert ro RIGHT: SwAsHBUCKLER, MASTERMIND, INQUISITIVE, AND SCOUT 


BENEFACTOR 


Few rogues make it far in life before needing someone's 
help, which means thereafter owing that benefactor a 
significant debt. 

If your character's backstory doesn't already include a 
personage of this sort, you could work with your DM to 
determine why a benefactor has appeared in your life. 
Perhaps you benefited from something your benefactor 
did for you without realizing who was responsible, and 
that person has now just become known to you. Who 
helped you in the past, whether or not you knew it at the 
time, and what do you owe that person as recompense? 


BENEFACTORS 
d6 Benefactor 
1 A smuggler kept you from getting caught but lost a 


valuable shipment in doing so. Now you owe that 
person an equally valuable favor. 

2 The Beggar King has hidden you from your pursu- 
ers many times, in return for future considerations. 


3 A magistrate once kept you out of jail in return for 
information on a powerful crime lord. 

4 Your parents used their savings to bail you out of 
trouble in your younger days and are now destitute. 

5 A dragon didn't eat you when it had a chance, and 


in return you promised to set aside choice pieces 
of treasure for it. 

6 A druid once helped you out of a tight spot; now 
any random animal you see could be that benefac- 
tor, perhaps come to claim a return favor. 


ROGUISH ARCHETYPES 


At 3rd level, a rogue gains the Roguish Archetype fea- 
ture. The following options are available to a rogue, 
in addition to those offered in the Player's Handbook: 
the Inquisitive, the Mastermind, the Scout, and the 
Swashbuckler. 


INQUISITIVE 
As an archetypal Inquisitive, you excel at rooting out se- 
crets and unraveling mysteries. You rely on your sharp 
eye for detail, but also on your finely honed ability to 
read the words and deeds of other creatures to deter- 
mine their true intent. You excel at defeating creatures 
that hide among and prey upon ordinary folk, and your 
mastery of lore and your keen deductions make you well 
equipped to expose and end hidden evils. 


INQUISITIVE FEATURES 


Rogue Level Feature 


3rd Ear for Deceit, Eye for Detail, 
Insightful Fighting 
9th Steady Eye 
13th Unerring Eye 
17th Eye for Weakness 
EAR FOR DECEIT P 


When you choose this archetype at 3rd level, you de- | 
velop a talent for picking out lies. Whenever you make а , 
Wisdom (Insight) check to determine whether a creature 
is lying, treat a roll of 7 or lower on the d20 as an 8. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


EYE FOR DETAIL 

Starting at 3rd level, you can use a bonus action to make 
a Wisdom (Perception) check to spot a hidden creature 
or object or to make an Intelligence (Investigation) 
check to uncover or decipher clues. 


INSIGHTFUL FIGHTING 
At 3rd level, you gain the ability to decipher an oppo- 
nent’s tactics and develop a counter to them. As a bonus 
action, you can make a Wisdom (Insight) check against 
a creature you can see that isn’t incapacitated, contested 
by the target's Charisma (Deception) check. If you suc- 
ceed, you can use your Sneak Attack against that target 
even if you don't have advantage on the attack roll, but 
not if you have disadvantage on it. 

This benefit lasts for 1 minute or until you success- 
fully use this feature against a different target. 


STEADY EYE 

Starting at 9th level, you have advantage on any Wisdom 
(Perception) or Intelligence (Investigation) check if you 
move no more than half your speed on the same turn. 


UNERRING EYE 
Beginning at 13th level, your senses are almost im- 
possible to foil. As an action, you sense the presence 
of illusions, shapechangers not in their original form, 
and other magic designed to deceive the senses within 
30 feet of you, provided you aren't blinded or deafened. 
You sense that an effect is attempting to trick you, 
but you gain no insight into what is hidden or into its 
true nature. 

You can use this feature a number of times equal to 
your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you re- 
gain all expended uses of it when you finish a long rest. 


EYE FOR WEAKNESS 

At 17th level, you learn to exploit a creature’s weak- 
nesses by carefully studying its tactics and movement. 
While your Insightful Fighting feature applies to a crea- 
ture, your Sneak Attack damage against that creature 
increases by 3d6. 


MASTERMIND 


Your focus is on people and on the influence and secrets 
they have. Many spies, courtiers, and schemers follow 
this archetype, leading lives of intrigue. Words are your 
weapons as often as knives or poison, and secrets and 
favors are some of your favorite treasures. 


MASTERMIND FEATURES 
Rogue Level Feature 


3rd Master of Intrigue, Master of Tactics 
9th Insightful Manipulator 

13th Misdirection 

17th Soul of Deceit 


CHAPTER | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


уа 


TOT 
oh, 055 4 S here ibs vet. 


мае А ground 


ke а wasker | 
Ne, you асе. 


0 E 
оу CEN 


„аас МҸ 


MASTER OF INTRIGUE 

When you choose this archetype at 3rd level, you gain 
proficiency with the disguise kit, the forgery kit, and one 
gaming set of your choice. You also learn two languages 
of your choice. 

Additionally, you can unerringly mimic the speech 
patterns and accent of a creature that you hear speak 
for at least 1 minute, enabling you to pass yourself off as 
a native speaker of a particular land, provided that you 
know the language. 


MASTER OF TACTICS 

Starting at 3rd level, you can use the Help action as a 
bonus action. Additionally, when you use the Help action 
to aid an ally in attacking a creature, the target of that 
attack can be within 30 feet of you, rather than within 5 
feet of you, if the target can see or hear you. 


INSIGHTFUL MANIPULATOR 

Starting at 9th level, if you spend at least 1 minute 
observing or interacting with another creature outside 
combat, you can learn certain information about its ca- 
pabilities compared to your own. The DM tells you if the 
creature is your equal, superior, or inferior in regard to 
two of the following characteristics of your choice: 


* Intelligence score 
* Wisdom score 

* Charisma score 

+ Class levels (if any) 


At the DM's option, you might also realize you know a 
piece of the creature's history or one of its personality 
traits, if it has any. 


MISDIRECTION 

Beginning at 13th level, you can sometimes cause an- 
other creature to suffer an attack meant for you. When 
you are targeted by an attack while a creature within 5 
feet of you is granting you cover against that attack, you 
can use your reaction to have the attack target that crea- 
ture instead of you. 


Sour or DECEIT 

Starting at 17th level, your thoughts can't be read by 
telepathy or other means, unless you allow it. You can 
present false thoughts by succeeding on a Charisma 
(Deception) check contested by the mind reader's Wis- 
dom (Insight) check. 

Additionally, no matter what you say, magic that would 
determine if you are telling the truth indicates you are 
being truthful if you so choose, and you can't be com- 
pelled to tell the truth by magic. 


Jeclvss ога 


SCOUT 


You are skilled in stealth and surviving far from the 
streets of a city, allowing you to scout ahead of your 
companions during expeditions. Rogues who embrace 
this archetype are at home in the wilderness and among 
barbarians and rangers, and many Scouts serve as the 
eyes and ears of war bands. Ambusher, spy, bounty 
hunter—these are just a few of the roles that Scouts as- 
sume as they range the world. 


Scour FEATURES 
Rogue Level Feature 


3rd Skirmisher, Survivalist 

9th Superior Mobility 

13th Ambush Master 

17th Sudden Strike 
SKIRMISHER 


Starting at 3rd level, you are difficult to pin down during 
a fight. You can move up to half your speed as a reaction 
when an enemy ends its turn within 5 feet of you. This 
movement doesn't provoke opportunity attacks. 


SURVIVALIST 

When you choose this archetype at 3rd level, you gain 
proficiency in the Nature and Survival skills if you don't 
already have it. Your proficiency bonus is doubled for 
any ability check you make that uses either of those pro- 
ficiencies. 


SuPERIOR MOBILITY 

At 9th level, your walking speed increases by 10 feet. If 
you have a climbing or swimming speed, this increase 
applies to that speed as well. 


AMBUSH MASTER 
Starting at 13th level, you excel at leading ambushes 
and acting first in a fight. 

You have advantage on initiative rolls. In addition, the 
first creature you hit during the first round of a combat 
becomes easier for you and others to strike; attack rolls 
against that target have advantage until the start of your 
next turn. 


SUDDEN STRIKE 

Starting at 17th level, you can strike with deadly speed. 
If you take the Attack action on your turn, you can make 
one additional attack as a bonus action. This attack can 
benefit from your Sneak Attack even if you have already 
used it this turn, but you can't use your Sneak Attack 
against the same target more than once in a turn. 


SWASHBUCKLER 


You focus your training on the art of the blade, relying 


on speed, elegance, and charm in equal parts. While 
some warriors are brutes clad in heavy armor, your 
method of fighting looks almost like a performance. Du- 
elists and pirates typically belong to this archetype. 

A Swashbuckler excels in single combat, and can 
fight with two weapons while safely darting away from 
an opponent. 


SWASHBUCKLER FEATURES 


Rogue Level Feature 


3rd Fancy Footwork, Rakish Audacity 
9th Panache 

13th Elegant Maneuver 

17th Master Duelist 


FANCY FOOTWORK 

When you choose this archetype at 3rd level, you learn 
how to land a strike and then slip away without reprisal. 
During your turn, if you make a melee attack against a 
creature, that creature can't make opportunity attacks 
against you for the rest of your turn. 


RAKISH AUDACITY 

Starting at 3rd level, your confidence propels you into 
battle. You can give yourself a bonus to your initiative 
rolls equal to your Charisma modifier. 

You also gain an additional way to use your Sneak At- 
tack; you don't need advantage on the attack roll to use 
your Sneak Attack against a creature if you are within 5 
feet of it, no other creatures are within 5 feet of you, and 
you don't have disadvantage on the attack roll. All the 
other rules for Sneak Attack still apply to you. 


PANACHE 

At 9th level, your charm becomes extraordinarily be- 
guiling. As an action, you can make a Charisma (Per- 
suasion) check contested by a creature's Wisdom (In- 
sight) check. The creature must be able to hear you, and 
the two of you must share a language. 

If you succeed on the check and the creature is hostile 
to you, it has disadvantage on attack rolls against tar- 
gets other than you and can't make opportunity attacks 
against targets other than you. This effect lasts for 1 
minute, until one of your companions attacks the target 
or affects it with a spell, or until you and the target are 
more than 60 feet apart. 

If you succeed on the check and the creature isn't 
hostile to you, it is charmed by you for 1 minute. While 
charmed, it regards you as a friendly acquaintance. This 
effect ends immediately if you or your companions do 
anything harmful to it. 


ELEGANT MANEUVER 

Starting at 13th level, you can use a bonus action on 
your turn to gain advantage on the next Dexterity (Ac- 
robatics) or Strength (Athletics) check you make during 
the same turn. 


MASTER DUELIST 

Beginning at 17th level, your mastery of the blade lets 
you turn failure into success in combat. If you miss with 
an attack roll, you can roll it again with advantage. Once 
you do so, you can't use this feature again until you fin- 
ish a short or long rest. 


м е, De чоч swash louckles ог ; xd 
kis buckle заела. You cane Lal we we font think 
hak word is fuming, 


GHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


SORCERER 


PRACTICE AND STUDY ARE FOR AMATEURS. TRUE POWER 
is a birthright. 
—Hennet, scion of Tiamat 


When it comes to drawing forth their abilities in times 
of need, sorcerers have it easy compared to other char- 
acters. Their power not only rests within them, but it 
likely takes some effort to keep it at bay. Every sorcerer 
is born to the role, or stumbles into it through cosmic 
chance. Unlike other characters, who must actively 
learn, embrace, and pursue their talents, sorcerers have 
their power thrust upon them. 

Because the idea of an innately magical being trav- 
eling among them does not sit well with many folk, 
sorcerers tend to breed mistrust and suspicion in others 
they come across. Nonetheless, many sorcerers succeed 
in overcoming that prejudice through deeds that benefit 
their less magically gifted contemporaries. 

Sorcerers are often defined by the events surrounding 
the manifestation of their power. For those who receive 
it as an expected birthright, its appearance is a cause 
for celebration. Other sorcerers are treated as outcasts, 
banished from their homes after the sudden, terrifying 
arrival of their abilities. 

Playing a sorcerer character can be as rewarding as it 
is challenging. The sections below offer suggestions on 
how to flesh out and personalize your persona. 


ARCANE ORIGIN 


Some sorcerers understand where their power came 
from, based on how their abilities manifested. Others 
can only speculate, since their powers came to them in a 
way that suggests no particular cause. 

Does your character know the source of your magi- 
cal power? Does it tie back to some distant relative, a 
cosmic event, or blind chance? If your sorcerer doesn't 
know where their power arose from, your DM can use 
this table (or select an origin) and reveal it to you when 
the information plays a role in the campaign. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


ARCANE ORIGINS 
d6 Origin 
1 Your power arises from your family's bloodline. 
You are related to some powerful creature, or you 
inherited a blessing or a curse. 


2 You are the reincarnation of a being from another 
plane of existence. 

3 A powerful entity entered the world. Its magic 
changed you. 

4 Your birth was prophesied in an ancient text, and 
you are foretold to use your power for terrible ends. 

5 You are the product of generations of careful, se- 
lective breeding. 

6 You were made in a vat by an alchemist. 

REACTION 


When a new sorcerer enters the world, either at birth 
or later when one's power becomes evident, the con- 
sequences of that event depend greatly on how its wit- 
nesses react to what they have seen. 

When your sorcerer's powers appeared, how did the 
world around you respond? Were other people support- 
ive, fearful, or somewhere in between? 


REACTIONS 
d6 Reaction 
1 Your powers are seen as a great blessing by those 


around you, and you are expected to use them in 
service to your community. 


2 Your powers caused destruction and even a death 
when they became evident, and you were treated 
as a criminal. 

3 Your neighbors hate and fear your power, causing 
them to shun you. 

4 You came to the attention of a sinister cult that 
plans on exploiting your abilities. 

5 People around you believe that your powers are a 
curse levied on your family for a past transgression. 

6 Your powers are believed to be tied to an ancient 


line of mad kings that supposedly ended in a 
bloody revolt over a century ago. 


SUPERNATURAL MARK 


А sorcerer at rest is almost indistinguishable from a 
normal person; it's only when their magic flies forth that 
sorcerers reveal their true nature. Even so, many sorcer- 
ers have a subtle but telling physical trait that sets them 
apart from other folk. 


Leer ro Ricur: Divine SouL, STORM SORCERER, AND SHADOW SORCERER 


If your sorcerer has a supernatural mark, it might be 
one that’s easily concealed, or it could be a source of 
pride that you keep on constant display. 


SUPERNATURAL MARKS 
d6 Mark 
Your eyes are an unusual color, such as red. 
You have an extra toe on one foot. 
One of your ears is noticeably larger than the other. 
Your hair grows at a prodigious rate. 


л ош кю — 


You wrinkle your nose repeatedly while you are 
chewing. 

6 A red splotch appears on your neck once a day, 
then vanishes after an hour. 


SIGN OF SORCERY 


As the world well knows, some sorcerers are better than 
others at controlling their spellcasting. Sometimes a 
wild display of magic gone awry emanates from a sor- 
cerer who casts a spell. But even when one’s magic goes 
off as planned, the act of casting is often accompanied 


by a telltale sign that makes it clear where that magical 
energy came from. 

When your sorcerer character casts a spell, does the 
effort reveal itself in a sign of sorcery? Is this sign tied to 
your origin or some other aspect of who you are, or is it 
a seemingly random phenomenon? 


SIGNS OF SORCERY 


d6 Sign 

1 You deliver the verbal components of your spells in 
the booming voice of a titan. 

2 For a moment after you cast a spell, the area 
around you grows dark and gloomy. 

3 You sweat profusely while casting a spell and for a 
few seconds thereafter. 

E Your hair and garments are briefly buffeted about, 
as if by a breeze, whenever you call forth a spell. 

5 If you are standing when you cast a spell, you rise 
six inches into the air and gently float back down. 

6 Illusory blue flames wreathe your head as you be- 


gin your casting, then abruptly disappear. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


SORCEROUS ORIGINS 


At 1st level, a sorcerer gains the Sorcerous Origin fea- 
ture. The following options are available to a sorcerer, 
in addition to those offered in the Player's Handbook: 
Divine Soul, Shadow Magic, and Storm Sorcery. 


DrviNE Sour 


Sometimes the spark of magic that fuels a sorcerer 
comes from a divine source that glimmers within the 
soul. Having such a blessed soul is a sign that your 
innate magic might come from a distant but powerful fa- 
milial connection to a divine being. Perhaps your ances- 
tor was an angel, transformed into a mortal and sent to 
fight in a god's name. Or your birth might align with an 
ancient prophecy, marking you as a servant of the gods 
or a chosen vessel of divine magic. 

A Divine Soul, with a natural magnetism, is seen as a 
threat by some religious hierarchies. As an outsider who 
commands sacred power, a Divine Soul can undermine 
an existing order by claiming a direct tie to the divine. 

In some cultures, only those who can claim the power 
of a Divine Soul may command religious power. In 
these lands, ecclesiastical positions are dominated by a 
few bloodlines and preserved over generations. 


Divine SOUL FEATURES 


Sorcerer Level Feature 


Ist Divine Magic, Favored by the Gods 
6th Empowered Healing 
14th Otherworldly Wings 
18th Unearthly Recovery 


DIVINE MAGIC 

Your link to the divine allows you to learn spells from 
the cleric class. When your Spellcasting feature lets you 
learn or replace a sorcerer cantrip or a sorcerer spell of 
1st level or higher, you can choose the new spell from 
the cleric spell list or the sorcerer spell list. You must 
otherwise obey all the restrictions for selecting the 
spell, and it becomes a sorcerer spell for you. 

In addition, choose an affinity for the source of your 
divine power: good, evil, law, chaos, or neutrality. You 
learn an additional spell based on that affinity, as shown 
below. It is a sorcerer spell for you, but it doesn't count 
against your number of sorcerer spells known. If you 
later replace this spell, you must replace it with a spell 
from the cleric spell list. 


Affinity Spell 

Good cure wounds 

Evil inflict wounds 

Law bless 

Chaos bane 

Neutrality protection from evil and good 


FAVORED BY THE GODS 

Starting at 1st level, divine power guards your destiny. 
If you fail a saving throw or miss with an attack roll, you 
can roll 2d4 and add it to the total, possibly changing 


CHAPTER | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


Why do зо many celestial things haue bird Еу 
and infernal things laa (ич en cia Ea 
арі саге К should be а bat angel 


the outcome. Once you use this feature, you can’t use it 
again until you finish a short or long rest. 


EMPOWERED HEALING 

Starting at 6th level, the divine energy coursing through 
you can empower healing spells. Whenever you or 

an ally within 5 feet of you rolls dice to determine the 
number of hit points a spell restores, you can spend 1 
sorcery point to reroll any number of those dice once, 
provided you aren't incapacitated. You can use this fea- 
ture only once per turn. 


OTHERWORLDLY WINGS 

Starting at 14th level, you can use a bonus action to 
manifest a pair of spectral wings from your back. While 
the wings are present, you have a flying speed of 30 feet. 
The wings last until you're incapacitated, you die, or you 
dismiss them as a bonus action. 

The affinity you chose for your Divine Magic feature 
determines the appearance of the spectral wings: eagle 
wings for good or law, bat wings for evil or chaos, and 
dragonfly wings for neutrality. 


UNEARTHLY RECOVERY 

At 18th level, you gain the ability to overcome grievous 

injuries. As a bonus action when you have fewer than 

half of your hit points remaining, you can regain a num- 

ber of hit points equal to half your hit point maximum. 
Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until 

you finish a long rest. 


SHADOW MAGIC 


You are a creature of shadow, for your innate magic 
comes from the Shadowfell itself. You might trace your 
lineage to an entity from that place, or perhaps you were 
exposed to its fell energy and transformed by it. 

The power of shadow magic casts a strange pall over 
your physical presence. The spark of life that sustains 
you is muffled, as if it struggles to remain viable against 
the dark energy that imbues your soul. At your option, 
you can pick from or roll on the Shadow Sorcerer 
Quirks table to create a quirk for your character. 


SHADOW SORCERER QUIRKS 


d6 Quirk 
1 You are always icy cold to the touch. 
2 When you are asleep, you don't appear to breathe 


(though you must still breathe to survive). 

3 You barely bleed, even when badly injured. 
Your heart beats once per minute. This event 
Sometimes surprises you. 

5 You have trouble remembering that living creatures 
and corpses should be treated differently. 

6 You blinked. Once. Last week. 


SHADOW MAGIC FEATURES 


Sorcerer 
Level Feature 
Ist Eyes of the Dark, Strength of the Grave 
3rd Eyes of the Dark (darkness) 
6th Hound of Ill Omen 
14th Shadow Walk 


18th Umbral Form 


EYES or THE DARK 
Starting at 1st level, you have darkvision with a range 
of 120 feet. 

When you reach 3rd level in this class, you learn 
the darkness spell, which doesn't count against your 
number of sorcerer spells known. In addition, you can 
cast it by spending 2 sorcery points or by expending a 
spell slot. If you cast it with sorcery points, you can see 
through the darkness created by the spell. 


STRENGTH OF THE GRAVE 


Starting at 1st level, your existence in a twilight state be- 


tween life and death makes you difficult to defeat. When 
damage reduces you to 0 hit points, you can make a 
Charisma saving throw (DC 5 + the damage taken). On 
a success, you instead drop to 1 hit point. You can't use 
this feature if you are reduced to 0 hit points by radiant 
damage or by a critical hit. 

After the saving throw succeeds, you can't use this 
feature again until you finish a long rest. 


HOUND or ILL OMEN 

At 6th level, you gain the ability to call forth a howling 
creature of darkness to harass your foes. As a bonus 
action, you can spend 3 sorcery points to magically 
summon a hound of ill omen to target one creature you 
can see within 120 feet of you. The hound uses the dire 
wolf's statistics (see the Monster Manual or appendix C 
in the Player's Handbook), with the following changes: 


+ The hound is size Medium, not Large, and it counts as 
a monstrosity, not a beast. 

+ It appears with a number of temporary hit points 
equal to half your sorcerer level. 

+ It can move through other creatures and objects as 
if they were difficult terrain. The hound takes 5 force 
damage if it ends its turn inside an object. 

+ At the start of its turn, the hound automatically knows 
its target's location. If the target was hidden, it is no 
longer hidden from the hound. 


The hound appears in an unoccupied space of your 
choice within 30 feet of the target. Roll initiative for the 
hound. On its turn, it can move only toward its target by 
the most direct route, and it can use its action only to at- 
tack its target. The hound can make opportunity attacks, 


Sometimes | А ^ 
à; “ч shadow when V see ik, 


because | ИТАК s 
G ТЕСИ beholder. Ye 


but only against its target. Additionally, while the hound 
is within 5 feet of the target, the target has disadvantage | 
on saving throws against any spell you cast. The hound 
disappears if it is reduced to 0 hit points, if its target is 
reduced to 0 hit points, or after 5 minutes. 


SHADOW WALK 

At 14th level, you gain the ability to step from one 
shadow into another. When you are in dim light or dark- 
ness, as a bonus action, you can magically teleport up to 
120 feet to an unoccupied space you can see that is also 
in dim light or darkness. 


UMBRAL FORM 
Starting at 18th level, you can spend 6 sorcery points 
as a bonus action to magically transform yourself into 
a shadowy form. In this form, you have resistance to 
all damage except force and radiant damage, and you 
can move through other creatures and objects as if they 
were difficult terrain. You take 5 force damage if you end 
your turn inside an object. 

You remain in this form for 1 minute. It ends early if 
you are incapacitated, if you die, or if you dismiss it as a 
bonus action. 


STORM SORCERY 


Your innate magic comes from the power of elemental 
air. Many with this power can trace their magic back to 
a near-death experience caused by the Great Rain, but 
perhaps you were born during a howling gale so power- 
ful that folk still tell stories of it, or your lineage might 
include the influence of potent air creatures such as 
djinn. Whatever the case, the magic of the storm perme- 
ates your being. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARAGTER OPTIONS 


Storm sorcerers are invaluable members of a ship's 
crew. Their magic allows them to exert control over 
wind and weather in their immediate area. Their abili- 
ties also prove useful in repelling attacks by sahuagin, 
pirates, and other waterborne threats. 


STORM SORCERY FEATURES 


Sorcerer 
Level Feature 
Ist Wind Speaker, Tempestuous Magic 
6th Heart of the Storm, Storm Guide 
14th Storm's Fury 


18th Wind Soul 


WIND SPEAKER 

The arcane magic you command is infused with ele- 
mental air. You can speak, read, and write Primordial. 
Knowing this language allows you to understand and 
be understood by those who speak its dialects: Aquan, 
Auran, Ignan, and Terran. 


TEMPESTUOUS MAGIC 

Starting at 1st level, you can use a bonus action on your 
turn to cause whirling gusts of elemental air to briefly 
surround you, immediately before or after you cast a 
spell of 1st level or higher. Doing so allows you to fly up 
to 10 feet without provoking opportunity attacks. 


HEART OF THE STORM 

At 6th level, you gain resistance to lightning and thunder 
damage. In addition, whenever you start casting a spell 
of 1st level or higher that deals lightning or thunder 
damage, stormy magic erupts from you. This eruption 
causes creatures of your choice that you can see within 
10 feet of you to take lightning or thunder damage 
(choose each time this ability activates) equal to half 
your sorcerer level. 


STORM GUIDE 
At 6th level, you gain the ability to subtly control the 
weather around you. 

If it is raining, you can use an action to cause the rain 
to stop falling in a 20-foot-radius sphere centered on 
you. You can end this effect as a bonus action. 

If it is windy, you can use a bonus action each 
round to choose the direction that the wind blows in a 
100-foot-radius sphere centered on you. The wind blows 
in that direction until the end of your next turn. This fea- 
ture doesn't alter the speed of the wind. 


Ѕтовм'ѕ Fury 

Starting at 14th level, when you are hit by a melee at- 
tack, you can use your reaction to deal lightning damage 
to the attacker. The damage equals your sorcerer level. 
The attacker must also make a Strength saving throw 
against your sorcerer spell save DC. On a failed save, 
the attacker is pushed in a straight line up to 20 feet 
away from you. 


WIND SOUL 
At 18th level, you gain immunity to lightning and thun- 
der damage. 

You also gain a magical flying speed of 60 feet. As an 
action, you can reduce your flying speed to 30 feet for 1 
hour and choose a number of creatures within 30 feet 
of you equal to 3 + your Charisma modifier. The chosen 
creatures gain a magical flying speed of 30 feet for 1 
hour. Once you reduce your flying speed in this way, you 
can’t do so again until you finish a short or long rest. 


what is ik with people Ghd Lhe weather’ 
an (ust Lhe sha ШО and shouting because 


ils so far аы {row vt, О! 


WARLOCK 


YOU THINK ME MAD? I THINK TRUE INSANITY IS BEING 

content to live a life of mortal drudgery when knowledge 

and power is there for the taking in the realm beyond. 
—Xarren, herald of Acamar 


Warlocks are finders and keepers of secrets. They push 
at the edge of our understanding of the world, always 
seeking to expand their expertise. Where sages or wiz- 
ards might heed a clear sign of danger and end their 
research, a warlock plunges ahead, heedless of the cost. 
Thus, it takes a peculiar mixture of intelligence, curios- 
ity, and recklessness to produce a warlock. Many folk 
would describe that combination as evidence of mad- 
ness. Warlocks see it as a demonstration of bravery. 

Warlocks are defined by two elements that work 
in concert to forge their path into this class. The first 
element is the event or circumstances that led to a 
warlock's entering into a pact with a planar entity. The 
second one is the nature of the entity a warlock is bound 
to. Unlike clerics, who typically embrace a deity and that 
god's ethos, a warlock might have no love for a patron, 
or vice versa. 

The sections that follow provide ways to embellish a 
warlock character that could generate some intriguing 
story and roleplaying opportunities. 


PATRON'S ATTITUDE 


Every relationship is a two-way street, but in the case of 
warlocks and their patrons it's not necessarily true that 
both sides of the street are the same width or made of 
the same stuff. The feeling that a warlock holds for their 
patron, whether positive or negative, might be recipro- 
cated by the patron, or the two participants in the pact 
might view one another with opposing emotions. 

When you determine the attitude your warlock charac- 
ter holds toward your patron, also consider how things 
look from the patron's perspective. How does your pa- 
tron behave toward you? Is your patron a friend and ally, 
or an enemy that grants you power only because you 
forced a pact upon it? 


So ypu get gour powers by makini 
а contrack with something! К 
TI perchance? Well, neuer mind, 
Just el( me his) Can \ yt eur 


; ? 
posers by taking gout Ye 


PATRON ATTITUDES 


Attitude 
Your patron has guided and helped your family for 
generations and is kindly toward you. 


2 Each interaction with your capricious patron is a 
surprise, whether pleasant or painful. 
3 Your patron is the spirit of a long-dead hero who 


sees your pact as a way for it to continue to influ- 
ence the world. 


4 Your patron is a strict disciplinarian but treats you 
with a measure of respect. 

5 Your patron tricked you into a pact and treats you 
as a slave. 

6 You are mostly left to your own devices with no in- 


terference from your patron. Sometimes you dread 
the demands it will make when it does appear. 


SPECIAL TERMS OF THE PACT 


A pact can range from a loose agreement to a formal 
contract with lengthy, detailed clauses and lists of re- 
quirements. The terms of a pact—what a warlock must 
do to receive a patron's favor—are always dictated by 
the patron. On occasion, those terms include a special 
proviso that might seem odd or whimsical, but warlocks 
take these dictates as seriously as they do the other re- 
quirements of their pacts. 

Does your character have a pact that requires you 
to change your behavior in an unusual or seemingly 
frivolous way? Even if your patron hasn't imposed 
such a duty on you already, that's not to say it couldn't 
still happen. 


SPECIAL TERMS 


d6 Term 

1 When directed, you must take immediate action 
against a specific enemy of your patron. 

2 Your pact tests your willpower; you are required to 
abstain from alcohol and other intoxicants. 

3 At least once a day, you must inscribe or carve your 
patron's name or symbol on the wall of a building. 

4 You must occasionally conduct bizarre rituals to 
maintain your pact. 

5 You can never wear the same outfit twice, since 
your patron finds such predictability to be boring. 

6 When you use an eldritch invocation, you must 


speak your patron's name aloud or risk incurring 
its displeasure. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


WARLOCK OF 
THE CELESTIAL 


BINDING MARK 


Some patrons make a habit of, and often enjoy, mark- 
ing the warlocks under their sway in some fashion. A 
binding mark makes it clear—to those who know about 
such things—that the individual in question is bound to 
the patron's service. A warlock might take advantage of 
such a mark, claiming it as proof of one's pact, or might 
want to keep it under wraps (if possible) to avoid the dif- 
ficulties it might bring. 

If your warlock's pact comes with a binding mark, 
how you feel about displaying it probably depends on the 
nature of your relationship with the one who gave it to 
you. Is the mark a source of pride or something you are 
secretly ashamed of? 


BiNDING MARKS 


dé Mark 

1 One of your eyes looks the same as one of your 
patron's eyes. 

2 Each time you wake up, the small blemish on your 
face appears in a different place. 

3 You display outward symptoms of a disease but 
suffer no ill effects from it. 

4 Your tongue is an unnatural color. 

5 You have a vestigial tail. 

6 Your nose glows in the dark. 


CHARACTER OPTIONS 


CHAPTER 1 | 


OTHERWORLDLY PATRONS 


At 1st level, a warlock gains the Otherworldly Patron 
feature. The following options are available to a warlock, 
in addition to those offered in the Player's Handbook: 
the Celestial and the Hexblade. 


THE CELESTIAL 


Your patron is a powerful being of the Upper Planes. 
You have bound yourself to an ancient empyrean, solar, 
ki-rin, unicorn, or other entity that resides in the planes 
of everlasting bliss. Your pact with that being allows you 
to experience the barest touch of the holy light that illu- 
minates the multiverse. 

Being connected to such power can cause changes in 
your behavior and beliefs, You might find yourself driven 
to annihilate the undead, to defeat fiends, and to protect 
the innocent. At times, your heart might also be filled 
with a longing for the celestial realm of your patron, 
and a desire to wander that paradise for the rest of your 
days. But you know that your mission is among mortals 
for now, and that your pact binds you to bring light to the 
dark places of the world. 


CELESTIAL FEATURES 


Warlock 
Level Feature 
Ist Expanded Spell List, Bonus Cantrips, 
Healing Light 
6th Radiant Soul 
10th Celestial Resilience 
14th Searing Vengeance 


EXPANDED SPELL LIST 

The Celestial lets you choose from an expanded list of 
spells when you learn a warlock spell. The following 
spells are added to the warlock spell list for you. 


CELESTIAL EXPANDED SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 


Ist cure wounds, guiding bolt 

2nd flaming sphere, lesser restoration 
3rd daylight, revivify 

4th guardian of faith, wall of fire 

Sth flame strike, greater restoration 


BONUS CANTRIPS 

At 1st level, you learn the /ight and sacred flame can- 
trips. They count as warlock cantrips for you, but they 
don’t count against your number of cantrips known. 


HEALING LIGHT 

At 1st level, you gain the ability to channel celestial 
energy to heal wounds. You have a pool of d6s that you 
spend to fuel this healing. The number of dice in the 
pool equals 1 + your warlock level. 

As a bonus action, you can heal one creature you can 
see within 60 feet of you, spending dice from the pool. 
The maximum number of dice you can spend at once 
equals your Charisma modifier (minimum of one die). 


Roll the dice you spend, add them together, and restore 
a number of hit points equal to the total. 

Your pool regains all expended dice when you finish a 
long rest. 


RADIANT SOUL 

Starting at 6th level, your link to the Celestial allows 
you to serve as a conduit for radiant energy. You have 
resistance to radiant damage, and when you cast a spell 
that deals radiant or fire damage, you can add your Cha- 
risma modifier to one radiant or fire damage roll of that 
spell against one of its targets. 


CELESTIAL RESILIENCE 

Starting at 10th level, you gain temporary hit points 
whenever you finish a short or long rest. These tempo- 
rary hit points equal your warlock level + your Charisma 
modifier. Additionally, choose up to five creatures you 
can see at the end of the rest. Those creatures each gain 
temporary hit points equal to half your warlock level + 
your Charisma modifier. 


SEARING VENGEANCE 
Starting at 14th level, the radiant energy you channel 
allows you to resist death. When you have to make a 
death saving throw at the start of your turn, you can 
instead spring back to your feet with a burst of radiant 
energy. You regain hit points equal to half your hit point 
maximum, and then you stand up if you so choose. Each 
creature of your choice that is within 30 feet of you takes 
radiant damage equal to 2d8 + your Charisma modifier, 
and it is blinded until the end of the current turn. 

Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until 
you finish a long rest. 


THE HEXBLADE 


You have made your pact with a mysterious entity from 
the Shadowfell—a force that manifests in sentient magic 
weapons carved from the stuff of shadow. The mighty 
sword Blackrazor is the most notable of these weapons, 
which have been spread across the multiverse over the 
ages. The shadowy force behind these weapons can 
offer power to warlocks who form pacts with it. Many 
hexblade warlocks create weapons that emulate those 
formed in the Shadowfell. Others forgo such arms, 
content to weave the dark magic of that plane into their 
spellcasting. 

Because the Raven Queen is known to have forged the 
first of these weapons, many sages speculate that she 
and the force are one and that the weapons, along with 
hexblade warlocks, are tools she uses to manipulate 
events on the Material Plane to her inscrutable ends. 


HEXBLADE FEATURES 


Warlock 
Level Feature 
Ist Expanded Spell List, Hexblade’s Curse, 
Hex Warrior 
6th Accursed Specter 
10th Armor of Hexes 


14th Master of Hexes 


EXPANDED SPELL LIST 

The Hexblade lets you choose from an expanded list of 
spells when you learn a warlock spell. The following 
spells are added to the warlock spell list for you. 


HEXBLADE EXPANDED SPELLS 
Spell Level Spells 


Ist shield, wrathful smite 

2nd blur, branding smite 

3rd blink, elemental weapon 

4th phantasmal killer, staggering smite 
Sth banishing smite, cone of cold 


HEXBLADE's CURSE 

Starting at 1st level, you gain the ability to place a bale- 
ful curse on someone. As a bonus action, choose one 
creature you can see within 30 feet of you. The target is 
cursed for 1 minute. The curse ends early if the target 
dies, you die, or you are incapacitated. Until the curse 
ends, you gain the following benefits: 


* You gain a bonus to damage rolls against the cursed 
target. The bonus equals your proficiency bonus. 

+ Any attack roll you make against the cursed target is a 
critical hit on a roll of 19 or 20 on the d20. 

+ Ifthe cursed target dies, you regain hit points equal 
to your warlock level + your Charisma modifier (mini- 
mum of 1 hit point). 


You can’t use this feature again until you finish a short 
or long rest. 


HEX WARRIOR 

At 1st level, you acquire the training necessary to effec- 
tively arm yourself for battle. You gain proficiency with 
medium armor, shields, and martial weapons. 

The influence of your patron also allows you to mys- 
tically channel your will through a particular weapon. 
Whenever you finish a long rest, you can touch one 
weapon that you are proficient with and that lacks 
the two-handed property. When you attack with that 
weapon, you can use your Charisma modifier, instead of 
Strength or Dexterity, for the attack and damage rolls. 
This benefit lasts until you finish a long rest. If you later 


WARLOCK OF THE HexBLADE 


gain the Pact of the Blade feature, this benefit extends 
to every pact weapon you conjure with that feature, no 
matter the weapon's type. 


ACCURSED SPECTER 
Starting at 6th level, you can curse the soul of a person 
you slay, temporarily binding it to your service. When 
you slay a humanoid, you can cause its spirit to rise from 
its corpse as a specter, the statistics for which are in 
the Monster Manual. When the specter appears, it gains 
temporary hit points equal to half your warlock level. 
Roll initiative for the specter, which has its own turns. 
It obeys your verbal commands, and it gains a special 
bonus to its attack rolls equal to your Charisma modifier 
(minimum of +0). 

` The specter remains in your service until the end of 
your next long rest, at which point it vanishes to the 
afterlife. 

Once you bind a specter with this feature, you can’t 

use the feature again until you finish a long rest. 


ARMOR OF HEXES 

At 10th level, your hex grows more powerful. If the tar- 

get cursed by your Hexblade’s Curse hits you with an 

attack roll, you can use your reaction to roll a d6. On a 
" 4 or higher, the attack instead misses you, regardless 


b of its roll. 


N MASTER OF HEXES 
NN 


Starting at 14th level, you can spread your Hexblade’s 
Curse from a slain creature to another creature. When 


CHARACTER OPTIONS 


CHAPTER 1 || 


Herbtade Whal а cool name! So is your sword evil 

er Cursed ог secat But qeu. re evil, right? Е 

Okay, now | dont (ke the name Names Gren E | 
cool if theg Jen E ekeitse ke miwa athe 
Xanathar Sel \ tool, and UE маце sense! 


О; 


the creature cursed by your Hexblade's Curse dies, 
you can apply the curse to a different creature you can 
see within 30 feet of you, provided you aren't inca- 
pacitated. When you apply the curse in this way, you 
don't regain hit points from the death of the previously 
cursed creature. 


ELDRITCH ÍNVOCATIONS 


At 2nd level, a warlock gains the Eldritch Invocations 
feature. Here are new options for that feature, in addi- 
tion to the options in the Player's Handbook. 

If an eldritch invocation has a prerequisite, you must 
meet it to learn the invocation. You can learn the invo- 
cation at the same time that you meet its prerequisite. A 
level prerequisite refers to your level in this class. 


ASPECT OF THE MOON 
Prerequisite: Pact of the Tome feature 


You no longer need to sleep and can't be forced to sleep 
by any means. To gain the benefits of a long rest, you 
can spend all 8 hours doing light activity, such as read- 
ing your Book of Shadows and keeping watch. 


CLOAK OF FLIES 
Prerequisite: 5th level 


As a bonus action, you can surround yourself with a 
magical aura that looks like buzzing flies. The aura ex- 
tends 5 feet from you in every direction, but not through 
total cover. It lasts until you're incapacitated or you dis- 
miss it as a bonus action. 

The aura grants you advantage on Charisma (Intimi- 
dation) checks but disadvantage on all other Charisma 
checks. Any other creature that starts its turn in the 
aura takes poison damage equal to your Charisma mod- 
ifier (minimum of 0 damage). 

Once you use this invocation, you can't use it again 
until you finish a short or long rest. 


ELDRITCH SMITE 
Prerequisite: 5th level, Pact of the Blade feature 


Once per turn when you hit a creature with your pact 
weapon, you can expend a warlock spell slot to deal an 
extra 1d8 force damage to the target, plus another 1d8 
per level of the spell slot, and you can knock the target 
prone if it is Huge or smaller. 


GHOSTLY GAZE 
Prerequisite: 7th level 


As an action, you gain the ability to see through solid 
objects to a range of 30 feet. Within that range, you have 
darkvision if you don't already have it. This special sight 
lasts for 1 minute or until your concentration ends (as 


if you were concentrating on a spell). During that time, 
you perceive objects as ghostly, transparent images. 

Once you use this invocation, you can't use it again 
until you finish a short or long rest. 


GIFT OF THE DEPTHS 
Prerequisite: 5th level 


You can breathe underwater, and you gain a swimming 
speed equal to your walking speed. 

You can also cast water breathing once without ex- 
pending a spell slot. You regain the ability to do so when 
you finish a long rest. 


GIFT OF THE EVER-LIVING ONES 
Prerequisite: Pact of the Chain feature 


Whenever you regain hit points while your familiar is 
within 100 feet of you, treat any dice rolled to determine 
the hit points you regain as having rolled their maxi- 
mum value for you. 


GRASP OF HADAR 
Prerequisite: eldritch blast cantrip 


Once on each of your turns when you hit a creature 
with your eldritch blast, you can move that creature in a 
straight line 10 feet closer to you. 


IMPROVED PACT WEAPON 
Prerequisite: Pact of the Blade feature 


You can use any weapon you summon with your Pact of 
the Blade feature as a spellcasting focus for your war- 
lock spells. 

In addition, the weapon gains a +1 bonus to its attack 
and damage rolls, unless it is a magic weapon that al- 
ready has a bonus to those rolls. 

Finally, the weapon you conjure can be a shortbow, 
longbow, light crossbow, or heavy crossbow. 


LANCE OF LETHARGY 
Prerequisite: eldritch blast cantrip 


Once on each of your turns when you hit a creature with 
your e/dritch blast, you can reduce that creature’s speed 
by 10 feet until the end of your next turn. 


MADDENING HEX 
Prerequisite: 5th level, hex spell or a warlock feature 
that curses 


As a bonus action, you cause a psychic disturbance 
around the target cursed by your hex spell or by a war- 
lock feature of yours, such as Hexblade's Curse or Sign 
of Ill Omen. When you do so, you deal psychic damage 
to the cursed target and each creature of your choice 
that you can see within 5 feet of it. The psychic damage 
equals your Charisma modifier (minimum of 1 dam- 
age). To use this invocation, you must be able to see the 
cursed target, and it must be within 30 feet of you. 


RELENTLESS HEX 
Prerequisite: 7th level, hex spell or a warlock feature 
that curses 


Your curse creates a temporary bond between you and 
your target. As a bonus action, you can magically tele- 


port up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space you can see 
within 5 feet of the target cursed by your hex spell or by 
a warlock feature of yours, such as Hexblade's Curse or 
Sign of Ill Omen. To teleport in this way, you must be 
able to see the cursed target. 


SHROUD or SHADOW 
Prerequisite: 15th level 


You can cast invisibility at will, without expending a 
spell slot. 


TOMB or LEVISTUS 
Prerequisite: 5th level 


As a reaction when you take damage, you can entomb 
yourself in ice, which melts away at the end of your 
next turn. You gain 10 temporary hit points per warlock 
level, which take as much of the triggering damage as 
possible. Immediately after you take the damage, you 
gain vulnerability to fire damage, your speed is reduced 
to 0, and you are incapacitated. These effects, including 
any remaining temporary hit points, all end when the 
ice melts. 

Once you use this invocation, you can't use it again 
until you finish a short or long rest. 


TRICKSTER’S ESCAPE 
Prerequisite: 7th level 


You can cast freedom of movement once on yourself 
without expending a spell slot. You regain the ability to 
do so when you finish a long rest. 


WIZARD 


WIZARDRY REQUIRES UNDERSTANDING. THE KNOWLEDGE 
of how and why magic works, and our efforts to broaden 
that understanding, have brought about the key advances 
in civilization over the centuries. 

—Gimble the illusionist 


Only a select few people in the world are wielders of 
magic. Of all those, wizards stand at the pinnacle of 

the craft. Even the least of them can manipulate forces 
that flout the laws of nature, and the most accomplished 
among them can cast spells with world-shaking effects. 

The price that wizards pay for their mastery is that 
most valuable of commodities: time. It takes years of 
study, instruction, and experimentation to learn how to 
harness magical energy and carry spells around in one’s 
own mind. For adventuring wizards and other spellcast- 
ers who aspire to the highest echelons of the profession, 
the studying never ends, nor does the quest for knowl- 
edge and power. 

If you're playing a wizard, take advantage of the 
opportunity to make your character more than just a 
stereotypical spell-slinger. Use the advice that follows to 
add some intriguing details to how your wizard interacts 
with the world. 


SPELLBOOK 
Your wizard character's most prized possession—your 
spellbook—might be an innocuous-looking volume 
whose covers show no hint of what's inside. Or you 
might display some flair, as many wizards do, by car- 
rying a spellbook of an unusual sort. If you don't own 
such an item already, one of your goals might be to find 
a spellbook that sets you apart by its appearance or its 


means of manufacture. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


dé Spellbook 

1 A tome with pages that are thin sheets of metal, 
spells etched into them with acid 

2 Long straps of leather on which spells are written, 
wrapped around a staff for ease of transport 

3 A battered tome filled with pictographs that only 
you can understand 

4 Small stones inscribed with spells and keptina 
cloth bag 

5 A scorched book, ravaged by dragon fire, with the 
script of your spells barely visible on its pages 

6 A tome full of black pages whose writing is visible 
only in dim light or darkness 

AMBITION 


Few aspiring wizards undertake the study of magic 
without some personal goal in mind. Many wizards use 
their spells as a tool to produce a tangible benefit, in ma- 
terial goods or in status, for themselves or their compan- 
ions. For others, the theoretical aspect of magic might 
have a strong appeal, pushing those wizards to seek out 
knowledge that supports new theories of the arcane or 
confirms old ones. 

Beyond the obvious, why does your wizard character 
study magic, and what do you want to achieve? If you ha- 
ven't given these questions much thought, you can do so 
now, and the answers you come up with will likely affect 
how your future unfolds. 


AMBITIONS 


46 
1 


SPELLBOOKS 


Ambition 
You will prove that the gods aren't as powerful as 
folk believe. 

Immortality is the end goal of your studies. 

If you can fully understand magic, you can unlock 
its use for all and usher in an era of equality. 
Magic is a dangerous tool. You use it to protect 
what you treasure. 

Arcane power must be taken away from those who 
would abuse it. 

You will become the greatest wizard the world has 
seen in generations. 


Wake. X (ove this Erick, Ye 
Hea, wizard! ypu cael до maji 
Oops, how you can, 


Oops, ho you сак Ё anymore, He ha hal 


ECCENTRICITY 


Endless hours of solitary study and research can have 
a negative effect on anyone's social skills. Wizards, who 
are a breed apart to begin with, are no exception. An 
odd mannerism or two is not necessarily a drawback, 
though; an eccentricity of this sort is usually harmless 
and could provide a source of amusement or serve as a 
calling card of sorts. 

If your character has an eccentricity, is it a physical 
tic or a mental one? Are you well known in some circles 
because of it? Do you fight to overcome it, or do you em- 
brace this minor claim to fame of yours? 


ECCENTRICITIES 
46 Eccentricity 


1 You have the habit of tapping your foot incessantly, 
which often annoys those around you. 
2 Your memory is quite good, but you have no trou- 


ble pretending to be absentminded when it suits 
your purposes. 


3 You never enter a room without looking to see 
what's hanging from the ceiling. 

4 Your most prized possession is a dead worm that 
you keep inside a potion vial. 

5 When you want people to leave you alone, you start 
talking to yourself. That usually does the trick. 

6 Your fashion sense and grooming, or more ac- 


curately lack thereof, sometimes cause others to 
assume you are a beggar. 


ARCANE TRADITION 


At 2nd level, a wizard gains the Arcane Tradition fea- 
ture. The following War Magic option is available to a 
wizard, in addition to the options offered in the P/ay- 
er's Handbook. 


War МАСІС 


A variety of arcane colleges specialize in training wiz- 
ards for war. The tradition of War Magic blends princi- 
ples of evocation and abjuration, rather than specializ- 
ing in either of those schools. It teaches techniques that 
empower a caster's spells, while also providing methods 
for wizards to bolster their own defenses. 

Followers of this tradition are known as war mages. 
They see their magic as both a weapon and armor, a re- 
source superior to any piece of steel. War mages act fast 
in battle, using their spells to seize tactical control of a 
situation. Their spells strike hard, while their defensive 
skills foil their opponents' attempts to counterattack. 
War mages are also adept at turning other spellcasters’ 
magical energy against them. 


War Mace 


In great battles, a war mage often works with evokers, 
abjurers, and other types of wizards. Evokers, in par- 
ticular, sometimes tease war mages for splitting their 
attention between offense and defense. A war mage’s 
typical response: “What good is being able to throw a 
mighty fireball if I die before I can cast it?” 


War МАСІС FEATURES 


Wizard Level Feature 


2nd Arcane Deflection, Tactical Wit 
6th Power Surge 

10th Durable Magic 

14th Deflecting Shroud 


ARCANE DEFLECTION 
At 2nd level, you have learned to weave your magic to 
fortify yourself against harm. When you are hit by an at- 
tack or you fail a saving throw, you can use your reaction 
to gain a +2 bonus to your AC against that attack or a +4 
bonus to that saving throw. 

When you use this feature, you can’t cast spells other 
than cantrips until the end of your next turn. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


War e Dees that make yeu а Мас Wirecd? Vue: heard 
about Lhem he, Aress in qune \ think. But qeu: ce wol 
dressed in purple “habs disapointing, Go change 


TACTICAL WIT 

Starting at 2nd level, your keen ability to assess tactical 
situations allows you to act quickly in battle. You can 
give yourself a bonus to your initiative rolls equal to your 
Intelligence modifier. 


POWER SURGE 
Starting at 6th level, you can store magical energy 
within yourself to later empower your damaging spells. 
In its stored form, this energy is called a power surge. 
You can store a maximum number of power surges 
equal to your Intelligence modifier (minimum of one). 
Whenever you finish a long rest, your number of power 
surges resets to one. Whenever you successfully end 
a spell with dispel magic or counterspell, you gain one 
power surge, as you steal magic from the spell you 
foiled. If you end a short rest with no power surges, you 
gain one power surge. 


Once per turn when you deal damage to a creature 
or object with a wizard spell, you can spend one power 
surge to deal extra force damage to that target. The ex- 
tra damage equals half your wizard level. 


DURABLE MAGIC 

Beginning at 10th level, the magic you channel helps 
ward off harm. While you maintain concentration on a 
spell, you have a +2 bonus to AC and all saving throws. 


DEFLECTING SHROUD 

At 14th level, your Arcane Deflection becomes infused 
with deadly magic. When you use your Arcane Deflec- 
tion feature, you can cause magical energy to arc from 
you. Up to three creatures of your choice that you can 
see within 60 feet of you each take force damage equal 
to half your wizard level. 


'THIS Is Your LIFE 


The character creation rules in the Player's Handbook 
provide all the information you need to define your char- 
acter in preparation for a life of adventuring. What they 
don't do is account for all the circumstances that shaped 
your character during the years between your birth and 
the start of your career as a member of a class. 

What did your character accomplish or experience be- 
fore deciding to become an adventurer? What were the 
circumstances of your birth? How large is your family, 
and what sorts of relationships do you have with your 
relatives? Which people were the greatest influences on 
you during your formative years, for better or worse? 

To answer these questions and more, you can use 
the tables and the advice in this section to compose a 
well-developed backstory for your character—an auto- 
biography of sorts—that you can use to inform how you 
roleplay the character. Your DM can draw from this ma- 
terial as the campaign proceeds, creating situations and 
scenarios that build off your previous life experiences. 


IDEAS, NOT RULES 


Even though these pages are full of tables and die rolls, 
they don't make up a rules system—in fact, the opposite 
is true. You can use as much or as little of this material 
as you desire, and you can make decisions in any or- 
der you want. 

For instance, you might not want these tables to help 
you decide who your parents and siblings are, because 
that's among the information you've already come up 
with. But you can still use other parts, such as the sec- 
tion on life events, to provide added depth and detail. 


How AND WHEN TO USE THE TABLES 
If you're comfortable with letting the dice decide a cer- 
tain fact about your character, go ahead and roll. If not, 
you can take charge and make the decision, choosing 
from among the possibilities on a table. Of course, you 
also have the option of disregarding the result of a die 
roll if it conflicts with another result. Likewise, if the 
text instructs you to roll on a table, that's not meant to 
be taken literally. You can always make your own choice. 
Although these tables are meant to augment the 
step-by-step character creation process in the Player's 
Handbook, they don't occupy a specific place in that pro- 
cess. You can use some of them early on—for instance, 
it's possible to determine your parents and other family 
members immediately after deciding your character's 
race—but you could also wait until later in the process. 
You might prefer to establish more facts about your 
character's game identity—such as your class, ability 
scores, and alignment—before supplementing that infor- 
mation with what's offered here. 


SECTION BY SECTION 

This material is divided into four sections, each address- 

ing a different aspect of your character's backstory. 
Origins. To find out who and where you came from, 

use the "Origins" section. When you're done, you will 

have a summary of facts about your parents, your sib- 

lings, and the circumstances under which you grew up. 


A YOUNG STREET URCHIN PILFERS A POUCH AND, TO HER 
SURPRISE, BECOMES THE NEW OWNER OF A SPELLBOOK 


Personal Decisions. After you have selected your 
character's background and class, use the appro- 
priate tables to determine how you came to make 
those choices. 

Life Events. Your character's existence until now, no 
matter how brief or uneventful, has been marked by one 
or more life events—memorable happenings that have 
had an effect on who you are today. 

Supplemental Tables. Your life has intersected with 
the lives of plenty of other people, all the way from your 
infancy to today. When a result mentions such a person, 
you can use the supplemental tables (page 72) to add 
needed details—such as race, class, or occupation—to 
that person. Some tables in the other sections direct you 
to one or more of the supplemental tables, and you can 
also use them any other time you see fit. 


ORIGINS 


The usual first step in creating your character's life story 
is to determine your early circumstances. Who were 
your parents? Where were you born? Did you have any 
siblings? Who raised you? You can address these ques- 
tions by using the following tables. 


PARENTS 

You had parents, of course, even if they didn't raise you. 

To determine what you know about these people, use p. 
the Parents table. If you want, you can roll separately on 4 
the table for your mother and your father. Use the sup- 9 
plemental tables as desired (particularly Class, Occupa- є 
tion, and Alignment) to learn more about your parents. f, d 


GHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS y бт 


So, clima асе you (сел? uh-huh. And Lhe 
0 whe did Lhe procreation thing II; cell 
чеч—аге they ski clc Okay, Cool. You know, 
\ ackually dont care in (ust makini swali ; 
katu while mg minion пеат up i 


Ha! Wade yeu (ook! С 


PARENTS 
4100 Parents 
01-95 You know who your parents are or were. 
96-00 You do not know who your parents were. 


^4 qeu. 


Nonhuman Parents. If your character is a half-elf, a 
half-orc, or a tiefling, you can use one of the tables below 
to determine the race of each of your parents. When you 
have a result, randomly determine which part of the re- 
sult refers to your father and which to your mother. 


HaLr-ELF PARENTS 
d8 Parents 
1-5 Опе parent was an elf and the other was a human. 


6 One parent was an elf and the other was a half-elf. 

7 One parent was a human and the other was a half- 
elf. 

8 Both parents were half-elves. 


HaLF-ORc PARENTS 

d8 Parents 

1-3 Опе parent was an orc and the other was a human. 

4-5 Опе parent was an orc and the other was a half- 
orc. 

6—7 One parent was a human and the other was a half- 
orc. 

8 Both parents were half-orcs. 


TIEFLING PARENTS 
48 Parents 
1-4 Both parents were humans, their infernal heritage 
dormant until you came along. 
5-6 One parent was a tiefling and the other was a 


human. 
One parent was a tiefling and the other was a devil. 
8 One parent was a human and the other was a devil. 
BIRTHPLACE 


After establishing your parentage, you can determine 
where you were born by using the Birthplace table. 
(Modify the result or roll again if you get a result that's 
inconsistent with what you know about your parents.) 
Once you have a result, roll percentile dice. On a roll of 
00, a strange event coincided with your birth: the moon 
briefly turning red, all the milk within a mile spoiling, 
the water in the area freezing solid in midsummer, all 
the iron in the home rusting or turning to silver, or some 
other unusual event of your choice. 


62 CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


BIRTHPLACE 
9100 Location 
01-50 Home 


51-55 Home of a family friend 

56-63 Home ofa healer or midwife 
64-65 Carriage, cart, or wagon 

66-68 Barn, shed, or other outbuilding 


69-70 Cave 
71-72 Field 
73-74 Forest 
75-77 Temple 


78 Battlefield 
79-80 Alley or street 
81-82  Brothel, tavern, or inn 
83-84 Castle, keep, tower, or palace 
85 Sewer or rubbish heap 
86-88 Among people of a different race 
89-91 On board a boat or a ship 
92-93 Ina prison or in the headquarters of a secret orga- 
nization 
94-95 Іпа sage's laboratory 
96 In the Feywild 
97 In the Shadowfell 
98 On the Astral Plane or the Ethereal Plane 
99 On an Inner Plane of your choice 
00 On an Outer Plane of your choice 


SIBLINGS 

You might be an only child or one of many children. 
Your siblings could be cherished friends or hated rivals. 
Roll on the Number of Siblings table to determine how 
many brothers or sisters you have. If you are a dwarf or 
an elf, subtract 2 from your roll. Then, roll on the Birth 
Order table for each sibling to determine that person’s 
age relative to yours (older, younger, or born at the 
same time). 

Occupation. For each sibling of suitable age, roll on 
the Occupation supplemental table to determine what 
that person does for a living. 

Alignment. You can choose your siblings’ alignments 
or roll on the Alignment supplemental table. 

Status. By now, each of your siblings might be alive 
and well, alive and not so well, in dire straits, or dead. 
Roll on the Status supplemental table. 

Relationship. You can roll on the Relationship sup- 
plemental table to determine how your siblings feel 
about you. They might all have the same attitude toward 
you, or some might view you differently from how the 
others do. 

Other Details. You can decide any other details you 
like about each sibling, including gender, personality, 
and place in the world. 


NUMBER OF SiBLINGS 
dio Siblings 
2orlower None 
3-4 1d3 
5-6 144 +1 
7-8 1d6+2 
9-10 1d8 +3 


BiRTH ORDER 
2d6 Birth Order 
2 Twin, triplet, or quadruplet 
3-7 Older 
8-12 Younger 


FAMILY AND FRIENDS 

Who raised you, and what was life like for you when you 
were growing up? You might have been raised by your 
parents, by relatives, or in an orphanage. Or you could 
have spent your childhood on the streets of a crowded 
city with only your fellow runaways and orphans to keep 
you company. 

Use the Family table to determine who raised you. If 
you know who your parents are but you get a result that 
does not mention one or both of them, use the Absent 
Parent table to determine what happened. 

Next, refer to the Family Lifestyle table to determine 
the general circumstances of your upbringing. (Chapter 
5 of the Player's Handbook has more information about 
lifestyles.) The result on that table includes a number 
that is applied to your roll on the Childhood Home table, 
which tells you where you spent your early years. Wrap 
up this section by using the Childhood Memories table, 
which tells you how you were treated by other young- 
sters as you were growing up. 

Supplemental Tables. You can roll on the Relation- 
ship table to determine how your family members or 
other important figures in your life feel about you. You 
can also use the Race, Occupation, and Alignment ta- 
bles to learn more about the family members or guard- 
ians who raised you. 


FAMILY 
9100 Family 
01 None 
02 Institution, such as an asylum 
03 Temple 


04-05 Orphanage 

06-07 Guardian 

08-15 Paternal or maternal aunt, uncle, or both; or ex- 
tended family such as a tribe or clan 

16-25 Paternal or maternal grandparent(s) 

26-35 Adoptive family (same or different race) 

36-55 Single father or stepfather 

56-75 Single mother or stepmother 

76-00 Mother and father 


YEARS LATER, WHILE SERVING ON A SHIP'S CREW, SHE 


CALLS ON A BIT OF HER MAGIC TO HELP RIG A MAST 


ABSENT PARENT 

d4 Fate 

1 Your parent died (roll on the Cause of Death sup- 
plemental table). 

2 Your parent was imprisoned, enslaved, or other- 
wise taken away. 
Your parent abandoned you. 

4 Your parent disappeared to an unknown fate. 


FAMILY LIFESTYLE 
3d6 Lifestyle” 
3 Wretched (-40) 
4-5 Squalid (-20) pa 
6-8 Poor (-10) m 
9-12 Modest (+0) 
13-15 Comfortable (+10) 4 


16-17 Wealthy (+20) 
18 Aristocratic (+40) 


*Use the number in this result as a modifier to your roll on the 
Childhood Home table. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


THOUGH SHE SURVIVED THE SINKING OF HER SHIP, SHE LOST 
ALL HER WORLOLY GOODS—EXCEPT FOR HER SPELLBOOK 


CHILDHOOD HOME 
d100* Home 
Oorlower Оп the streets 


1-20 Rundown shack 

21-30 No permanent residence; you moved around 
a lot 

31-40 Encampment or village in the wilderness 

41—50 Apartment in a rundown neighborhood 


51-70 Small house 
71-90 Large house 
91-110 Mansion 

111 or higher Palace or castle 


*After making this roll, apply the modifier from the Family Life- 
style table to arrive at the result. 


CHILDHOOD MEMORIES 
3d6 + 
Chamod Memory 
| 3orlower lam still haunted by my childhood, when I 
was treated badly by my peers. 
4-5 | spent most of my childhood alone, with no 
close friends. 
6-8 Others saw me as being different or strange, 
and so | had few companions. 
9-12 | had a few close friends and lived an ordinary 
childhood. 


ГИ 


NS 


64 NS CHAPTER] | CHARACTER OPTIONS 
М, 


346 + 
Chamod Memory 


13-15 | had several friends, and my childhood was 
generally a happy one. 
16-17 | always found it easy to make friends, and I 


loved being around people. 
180rhigher Everyone knew who | was, and | had friends 
everywhere | went. 


PERSONAL DECISIONS 


Your character's life takes a particular course depend- 
ing on the choices you make for the character's back- 
ground and class. 


BACKGROUND 

Roll on the appropriate table in this section as soon as 
you decide your background, or at any later time if you 
choose. If a background includes a special decision 
point, such as a folk hero’s defining event or the spe- 
cialty of a criminal or a sage, it’s best to make that deter- 
mination before using the pertinent table below. 


ACOLYTE 
d6 | became an acolyte because ... 
1 | ran away from home at an early age and found 


refuge in a temple. 

2 My family gave me to a temple, since they were un- 
able or unwilling to care for me. 

3 | grew up in a household with strong religious con- 
victions. Entering the service of one or more gods 
seemed natural. 


4 An impassioned sermon struck a chord deep in my 
soul and moved me to serve the faith. 
5 | followed a childhood friend, a respected acquain- 


tance, or someone | loved into religious service. 

6 After encountering a true servant of the gods, | was 
so inspired that | immediately entered the service 
of a religious group. 


CHARLATAN 

d6 | became a charlatan because ... 

1 | was left to my own devices, and my knack for ma- 
nipulating others helped me survive. 

2 | learned early on that people are gullible and easy 
to exploit. 

3 | often got in trouble, but | managed to talk my way 
out of it every time. 

4 | took up with a confidence artist, from whom | 


learned my craft. 

5 After a charlatan fleeced my family, | decided to 
learn the trade so | would never be fooled by such 
deception again. 

6 | was poor or | feared becoming poor, so | learned 
the tricks | needed to keep myself out of poverty. 


CRIMINAL 
d6 | became a criminal because ... 
1 | resented authority in my younger days and saw a 


life of crime as the best way to fight against tyranny 
and oppression. 


2 Necessity forced me to take up the life, since it was 
the only way | could survive. 

3 | fell in with a gang of reprobates and ne'er-do- 
wells, and | learned my specialty from them. 

4 A parent or relative taught me my criminal spe- 
cialty to prepare me for the family business. 

5 | left home and found a place in a thieves’ guild or 


some other criminal organization. 
6 | was always bored, so | turned to crime to pass the 
time and discovered | was quite good at it. 


ENTERTAINER 
d6 1 became an entertainer because ... 

1 Members of my family made ends meet by per- 
forming, so it was fitting for me to follow their 
example. 

2 | always had a keen insight into other people, 


enough so that | could make them laugh or cry 
with my stories or songs. 

3 | ran away from home to follow a minstrel troupe. 
| saw a bard perform once, and | knew from that 
moment on what | was born to do. 

5 | earned coin by performing on street corners and 
eventually made a name for myself. 


6 A traveling entertainer took me in and taught me 
the trade. 
FoLk HERO 
d6 | became a folk hero because ... 


| learned what was right and wrong from my family. 


2 | was always enamored by tales of heroes and 
wished | could be something more than ordinary. 

3 | hated my mundane life, so when it was time for 
someone to step up and do the right thing, | took 
my chance. 

4 A parent or one of my relatives was an adventurer, 
and | was inspired by that person's courage. 

5 A mad old hermit spoke a prophecy when | was 
born, saying that | would accomplish great things. 

6 | have always stood up for those who are weaker 
than | am. 


GuILD ARTISAN 
d6 | became a guild artisan because ... 
1 | was apprenticed to a master who taught me the 
guild's business. 
2 | helped a guild artisan keep a secret or complete a 
task, and in return | was taken on as an apprentice. 


d6 1 became a guild artisan because ... 

3 One of my family members who belonged to the 
guild made a place for me. 

4 | was always good with my hands, so | took the op- | 
portunity to learn a trade. | 

5 | wanted to get away from my home situation and | 
start a new life. 

6 | learned the essentials of my craft from a mentor 
but had to join the guild to finish my training. 

HERMIT 

d6 | became a hermit because ... 

1 My enemies ruined my reputation, and | fled to the 
wilds to avoid further disparagement. 

2 1 am comfortable with being isolated, as | seek 
inner peace. 

3 | never liked the people | called my friends, so it 
was easy for me to strike out on my own. 

4 | felt compelled to forsake my past, but did so with 
great reluctance, and sometimes | regret making 
that decision. 

5 | lost everything—my home, my family, my friends. 
Going it alone was all | could do. 

6 Society's decadence disgusted me, so | decided to 
leave it behind. 

NOBLE 

46 | became a noble because ... 

1 | come from an old and storied family, and it fell to 
me to preserve the family name. 

2 My family has been disgraced, and | intend to clear 
our name. 

3 My family recently came by its title, and that eleva- 
tion thrust us into a new and strange world. 

4 My family has a title, but none of my ancestors 
have distinguished themselves since we gained it. 

5 My family is filled with remarkable people. | hope 
to live up to their example. 

6 | hope to increase my family's power and influence. 

OUTLANDER 

d6 | became an outlander because ... 

1 | spent a lot of time in the wilderness as a young- 
ster, and | came to love that way of life. 

2 From a young age, | couldn't abide the stink of the 
cities and preferred to spend my time in nature. 

3 1 came to understand the darkness that lurks in the 
wilds, and | vowed to combat it. 

4 My people lived on the edges of civilization, and | 
learned the methods of survival from my family. 

5 After a tragedy | retreated to the wilderness, leav- 
ing my old life behind. 

6 My family moved away from civilization, and | 


learned to adapt to my new environment. 


GHAPTER 1 | CHARAGTER OPTIONS 


Se 
SAGE - 
d6 | became a sage because... 

1 | was naturally curious, so | packed up and went to 
a university to learn more about the world. 

2 My mentor's teachings opened my mind to new 
possibilities in that field of study. 

3 | was always an avid reader, and | learned much 
about my favorite topic on my own. 

4 | discovered an old library and pored over the texts 
| found there. That experience awakened a hunger 
for more knowledge. 

5 l impressed a wizard who told me | was squander- 
ing my talents and should seek out an education to 
take advantage of my gifts. 

6 One of my parents or a relative gave me a basic ed- 
ucation that whetted my appetite, and | left home 
to build on what | had learned. 

SAILOR 

d6 1 became a sailor because ... 

1 | was press-ganged by pirates and forced to serve 
on their ship until | finally escaped. 

2 | wanted to see the world, so | signed on as a deck- 
hand for a merchant ship. 

3 One of my relatives was a sailor who took me to 
sea. 

4 | needed to escape my community quickly, so | 
stowed away on a ship. When the crew found me, | 
was forced to work for my passage. 

5 Reavers attacked my community, so | found refuge 
on a ship until | could seek vengeance. 

6 | had few prospects where | was living, so | left to 
find my fortune elsewhere. 

SOLDIER 

d6 I became a soldier because ... 

1 1 joined the militia to help protect my community. 
from monsters. 

2 A relative of mine was a soldier, and | wanted to 
carry on the family tradition. 

3 The local lord forced me to enlist in the army. 

4 War ravaged my homeland while | was growing up. 
Fighting was the only life | ever knew. 

5 | wanted fame and fortune, so | joined a mercenary 
company, selling my sword to the highest bidder. 

6 Invaders attacked my homeland. It was my duty to 
take up arms in defense of my people. 

URCHIN 

d6 | became an urchin because ... 

1 Wanderlust caused me to leave my family to see 
the world. | look after myself. 

2 | ran away from a bad situation at home and made 


CHAPTER | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


my own way in the world. 


d6 


1 became an urchin because ... 

Monsters wiped out my village, and | was the sole 
survivor. | had to find a way to survive. 

A notorious thief looked after me and other or- 
phans, and we spied and stole to earn our keep. 
One day | woke up on the streets, alone and hun- 
gry, with no memory of my early childhood. 

My parents died, leaving no one to look after me. | 
raised myself. 


CLASS TRAINING 
If you haven't chosen your class yet, do so now, keeping 
in mind your background and all the other details you 
have established so far. Once you've made your selec- 
tion, roll a d6 and find the number you rolled on the ap- 
propriate table in this section, which describes how you 
came to be a member of that class. 

The class sections earlier in this chapter have further 
story suggestions, which you can use in concert with the 
material here. 


BARBARIAN 
d6 1 became a barbarian because ... 

1 My devotion to my people lifted me in battle, mak- 
ing me powerful and dangerous. 

2 The spirits of my ancestors called on me to carry 
out a great task. 

3 | lost control in battle one day, and it was as if 
something else was manipulating my body, forcing 
it to kill every foe | could reach. 

4 | went on a spiritual journey to find myself and 
instead found a spirit animal to guide, protect, and 
inspire me. 

5 | was struck by lightning and lived. Afterward, | 
found a new strength within me that let me push 
beyond my limitations. 

6 My anger needed to be channeled into battle, or | 
risked becoming an indiscriminate killer. 

BARD 
dé | became a bard because... 

1 1 awakened my latent bardic abilities through trial 
and error. 

2 | was a gifted performer and attracted the atten- 
tion of a master bard who schooled me in the old 
techniques. 

3 | joined a loose society of scholars and orators to 
learn new techniques of performance and magic. 

4 | felt a calling to recount the deeds of champions 
and heroes, to bring them alive in song and story. 

5 | joined one of the great colleges to learn old lore, 
the secrets of magic, and the art of performance. 

6 | picked up a musical instrument one day and in- 


stantly discovered that | could play it. 


DRUID 


| became a cleric because ... 

A supernatural being in service to the gods called 
me to become a divine agent in the world. 

| saw the injustice and horror in the world and felt 
moved to take a stand against them. 

My god gave me an unmistakable sign. | dropped 
everything to serve the divine. 

Although | was always devout, it wasn't until | com- 
pleted a pilgrimage that | knew my true calling. 

| used to serve in my religion's bureaucracy but 
found | needed to work in the world, to bring the 
message of my faith to the darkest corners of the 
land. 

| realize that my god works through me, and | do as 
commanded, even though | don't know why | was 
chosen to serve. 


| became a druid because ... 

| saw too much devastation in the wild places, too 
much of nature's splendor ruined by the despoil- 
ers. | joined a circle of druids to fight back against 
the enemies of nature. 

| found a place among a group of druids after | fled 
a catastrophe. 

| have always had an affinity for animals, so | ex- 
plored my talent to see how | could best use it. 

| befriended a druid and was moved by druidic 
teachings. | decided to follow my friend's guidance 
and give something back to the world. 

While | was growing up, | saw spirits all around 
me—entities no one else could perceive. | sought 
out the druids to help me understand the visions 
and communicate with these beings. 

| have always felt disgust for creatures of unnatural 
origin. For this reason, | immersed myself in the 
study of the druidic mysteries and became a cham- 
pion of the natural order. 


FIGHTER 


d6 
1 


| became a fighter because... 

| wanted to hone my combat skills, and so | joined 
a war college. 

| squired for a knight who taught me how to fight, 
care for a steed, and conduct myself with honor. | 

decided to take up that path for myself. 

Horrible monsters descended on my community, 

killing someone | loved. | took up arms to destroy 
those creatures and others of a similar nature. 

| joined the army and learned how to fight as part 

of a group. 

| grew up fighting, and | refined my talents by de- 

fending myself against people who crossed me. 

1 could always pick up just about any weapon and 

know how to use it effectively. 


TODAY, HER HUMBLE ORIGINS FAR BEHIND HER, SHE HAS BECOME 
A WIZARD OF GREAT RENOWN WITH A FLAIR FOR THE HIGH SEAS 


Момк 
46 


1 


emp s = 


| became a monk because ... 

| was chosen to study at a secluded monastery. 
There, | was taught the fundamental techniques 
required to eventually master a tradition. 

| sought instruction to gain a deeper understand- 
ing of existence and my place in the world. 

| stumbled into a portal to the Shadowfell and took 
refuge in a strange monastery, where | learned how 
to defend myself against the forces of darkness. 

| was overwhelmed with grief after losing someone 
close to me, and | sought the advice of philoso- 
phers to help me cope with my loss. 

| could feel that a special sort of power lay within 
me, so | sought out those who could help me call it 
forth and master it. 

| was wild and undisciplined as a youngster, but 
then | realized the error of my ways. | applied to a 
monastery and became a monk as a way to live a 
life of discipline. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


68 


PALADIN 
d6 
1 


RANGER 


46 
1 


1 became а paladin because ... 

A fantastical being appeared before me and called 
on me to undertake a holy quest. 

One of my ancestors left a holy quest unfulfilled, 
so | intend to finish that work. 

The world is a dark and terrible place. | decided to 
serve as a beacon of light shining out against the 
gathering shadows. 

| served as a paladin's squire, learning all | needed 
to swear my own sacred oath. 

Evil must be opposed on all fronts. | feel com- 
pelled to seek out wickedness and purge it from 
the world. 

Becoming a paladin was a natural consequence of 
my unwavering faith. In taking my vows, | became 
the holy sword of my religion. 


| became a ranger because ... 

| found purpose while | honed my hunting skills by 
bringing down dangerous animals at the edge of 
civilization. 

| always had a way with animals, able to calm them 
with a soothing word and a touch. 

I suffer from terrible wanderlust, so being a ranger 
gave me a reason not to remain in one place for 
too long. 

| have seen what happens when the monsters 
come out from the dark. | took it upon myself to 
become the first line of defense against the evils 
that lie beyond civilization's borders. 

| meta grizzled ranger who taught me woodcraft 
and the secrets of the wild lands. 

| served in an army, learning the precepts of my 
profession while blazing trails and scouting enemy 
encampments. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


ROGUE 
d6 
1 


| became a rogue because ... 

Гуе always been nimble and quick of wit, so | de- 
cided to use those talents to help me make my way 
in the world. 

An assassin or a thief wronged me, so | focused 
my training on mastering the skills of my enemy to 
better combat foes of that sort. 

An experienced rogue saw something in me and 
taught me several useful tricks. 

| decided to turn my natural lucky streak into the 
basis of a career, though I still realize that improv- 
ing my skills is essential. 

I took up with a group of ruffans who showed me 
how to get what | want through sneakiness rather 
than direct confrontation. 

I'm a sucker for a shiny bauble or a sack of coins, 
as long as | can get my hands on it without risking 
life and limb. 


SORCERER 


d6 
1 


| became а sorcerer because ... 

When | was born, all the water in the house froze 
solid, the milk spoiled, or all the iron turned to cop- 
per. My family is convinced that this event was a 
harbinger of stranger things to come for me. 

| suffered a terrible emotional or physical strain, 
which brought forth my latent magical power. I 
have fought to control it ever since. 

My immediate family never spoke of my ancestors, 
and when | asked, they would change the subject. 
It wasn't until | started displaying strange talents 
that the full truth of my heritage came out. 

When a monster threatened one of my friends, | 
became filled with anxiety. | lashed out instinctively 
and blasted the wretched thing with a force that 
came from within me. 

Sensing something special in me, a stranger taught 
me how to control my gift. 

After | escaped from a magical conflagration, | 
realized that though | was unharmed, | was not 
unchanged. | began to exhibit unusual abilities that 
| am just beginning to understand. 


WARLOCK 


dé 
1 


| became a warlock because ... 

While wandering around in a forbidden place, | 
encountered an otherworldly being that offered to 
enter into a pact with me. 

| was examining a strange tome | found in an aban- 
doned library when the entity that would become 
my patron suddenly appeared before me. 


———— ——— —] 


d6 | became a warlock because ... 

3 | stumbled into the clutches of my patron after | ac- 
cidentally stepped through a magical doorway. 

4 When | was faced with a terrible crisis, | prayed to 


any being who would listen, and the creature that 
answered became my patron. 


5 My future patron visited me in my dreams and of- 
fered great power in exchange for my service. 

6 One of my ancestors had a pact with my patron, so 
that entity was determined to bind me to the same 
agreement. 

WIZARD 
d6 1 became a wizard because ... 

1 An old wizard chose me from among several candi- 
dates to serve an apprenticeship. 

2 When | became lost іп a forest, a hedge wizard 


found me, took me in, and taught me the rudi- 
ments of magic. 

3 | grew up listening to tales of great wizards and 
knew | wanted to follow their path. | strove to be 
accepted at an academy of magic and succeeded. 

4 One of my relatives was an accomplished wizard 
who decided | was smart enough to learn the craft. 

5 While exploring an old tomb, library, or temple, 
| found a spellbook. | was immediately driven to 
learn all | could about becoming a wizard. 

6 | was a prodigy who demonstrated mastery of the 
arcane arts at an early age. When | became old 
enough to set out on my own, | did so to learn 
more magic and expand my power. 


LIFE EVENTS 


No matter how long you've been alive, you have expe- 
rienced at least one signature event that has markedly 
influenced your character. Life events include wondrous 
happenings and tragedies, conflicts and successes, and 
encounters with the unusual. They can help to explain 
why your character became an adventurer, and some 
might still affect your life even after they are long over. 

The older a character is, the greater the chance for 
multiple life events, as shown on the Life Events by Age 
table. If you have already chosen your character's start- 
ing age, see the entry in the Life Events column that 
corresponds to how old you are. Otherwise, you can roll 
dice to determine your current age and number of life 
events randomly. 

After you know the number of life events your charac- 
ter has experienced, roll once on the Life Events table 
for each of them. Many of the results on that table direct 
you to one of the secondary tables that follow. Once you 
have determined all of your character's life events, you 
can arrange them in any chronological order you see fit. 


Lire Events BY AGE 


d100 
01-20 
21-59 
60-69 
70-89 
90-99 
00 


Current Age Life Events 
20 years or younger 1 

21—30 years 1d4 

31—40 years 1d6 

41—50 years 1d8 

51—60 years 1d10 

61 years or older 1d12 


Lire EvENTS 


4100 
01—10 
11-20 


21-30 


31-40 


41—50 


51—70 


71—75 


76—80 


81—85 


86—90 


91—95 


96—99 


00 


Event 

You suffered a tragedy. Roll on the Tragedies table. 
You gained a bit of good fortune. Roll on the Boons 
table. 

You fell in love or got married. If you get this result 
more than once, you can choose to have a child 
instead. Work with your DM to determine the iden- 
tity of your love interest. 

You made an enemy of an adventurer. Roll a d6. An 
odd number indicates you are to blame for the rift, 
and an even number indicates you are blameless. 
Use the supplemental tables and work with your 
DM to determine this hostile character's identity 
and the danger this enemy poses to you. 

You made a friend of an adventurer. Use the sup- 
plemental tables and work with your DM to add 
more detail to this friendly character and establish 
how your friendship began. 

You spent time working in a job related to your 
background. Start the game with an extra 2d6 gp. 
You met someone important. Use the supplemen- 
tal tables to determine this character's identity and 
how this individual feels about you. Work out ad- 
ditional details with your DM as needed to fit this 
character into your backstory. 

You went on an adventure. Roll on the Adventures 
table to see what happened to you. Work with your 
DM to determine the nature of the adventure and 
the creatures you encountered. 

You had a supernatural experience. Roll on the Su- 
pernatural Events table to find out what it was. 

You fought in a battle. Roll on the War table to 
learn what happened to you. Work with your DM to 
come up with the reason for the battle and the fac- 
tions involved. It might have been a small conflict 
between your community and a band of orcs, or it 
could have been a major battle in a larger war. 

You committed a crime or were wrongly accused of 
doing so. Roll on the Crime table to determine the 
nature of the offense and on the Punishment table 
to see what became of you. 

You encountered something magical. Roll on the 
Arcane Matters table. 

Something truly strange happened to you. Roll on 
the Weird Stuff table. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


SECONDARY TABLES 


These tables add detail to many of the results on the Life 


Events table. The tables are in alphabetical order. 


ADVENTURES 
9100 Outcome 
01-10 You nearly died. You have nasty scars on your 


11-20 


21-30 
31-40 


41—50 


51-60 


61-70 


71-80 


81—90 


91—99 


00 


body, and you are missing an ear, 143 fingers, or 
1d4 toes. 

You suffered a grievous injury. Although the wound 
healed, it still pains you from time to time. 

You were wounded, but in time you fully recovered. 
You contracted a disease while exploring a filthy 
warren. You recovered from the disease, but you 
have a persistent cough, pockmarks on your skin, 
or prematurely gray hair. 

You were poisoned by a trap or a monster. You re- 
covered, but the next time you must make a saving 
throw against poison, you make the saving throw 
with disadvantage. 

You lost something of sentimental value to you 
during your adventure. Remove one trinket from 
your possessions. 

You were terribly frightened by something you en- 
countered and ran away, abandoning your compan- 
ions to their fate. 

You learned a great deal during your adventure. 
The next time you make an ability check or a saving 
throw, you have advantage on the roll. 

You found some treasure on your adventure. You 
have 2d6 gp left from your share of it. 

You found a considerable amount of treasure on 
your adventure. You have 1d20 + 50 gp left from 
your share of it. 

You came across a common magic item (of the 
DM's choice). 


ARCANE MATTERS 


dio 


ut 


ою 0 м с 


o 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


Magical Event 

You were charmed or frightened by a spell: 

You were injured by the effect of a spell. 

You witnessed a powerful spell being cast by a 
cleric, a druid, a sorcerer, a warlock, or a wizard. 
You drank a potion (of the DM's choice). 

You found a spell scroll (of the DM's choice) and 
succeeded in casting the spell it contained. 

You were affected by teleportation magic. 

You turned invisible for a time. 

You identified an illusion for what it was. 

You saw a creature being conjured by magic. 
Your fortune was read by a diviner. Roll twice on 
the Life Events table, but don't apply the results. 
Instead, the DM picks one event as a portent of 
your future (which might or might not come true). 


dio Boon 

1 A friendly wizard gave you a spell scroll containing 
one cantrip (of the DM's choice). 

2 You saved the life of a commoner, who now owes 
you a life debt. This individual accompanies you on 
your travels and performs mundane tasks for you, 
but will leave if neglected, abused, or imperiled. 
Determine details about this character by using the 
supplemental tables and working with your DM. 

3 You found a riding horse. 

4 You found some money. You have 1d20 gp in addi- 
tion to your regular starting funds. 

5 A relative bequeathed you a simple weapon of your 
choice. 

6 You found something interesting. You gain one 
additional trinket. 

7 You once performed a service for a local temple. 
The next time you visit the temple, you can receive 
healing up to your hit point maximum. 

8 A friendly alchemist gifted you with a potion of 
healing or a flask of acid, as you choose. 

9 You found a treasure map. 

10 A distant relative left you a stipend that enables 
you to live at the comfortable lifestyle for 1d20 
years. If you choose to live at a higher lifestyle, you 
reduce the price of the lifestyle by 2 gp during that 
time period. 

CRIME 

d8 Crime 

1 Murder 

2 Theft 

3 Burglary 

4 Assault 

5 Smuggling 

6 Kidnapping 

7 Extortion 

8 Counterfeiting 

PUNISHMENT 

912 Punishment 

1-3 You did not commit the crime and were exonerated 
after being accused. 

4-6 You committed the crime or helped do so, but 
nonetheless the authorities found you not guilty. 

7-8 You were nearly caught in the act. You had to flee 
and are wanted in the community where the crime 
occurred. 

9-12 You were caught and convicted. You spent time in 


jail, chained to an oar, or performing hard labor. 
You served a sentence of 1d4 years or succeeded in 
escaping after that much time. 


Г 
| 
i 


7 


SUPERNATURAL EVENTS 


d100 
01-05 


06-10 


11-15 


16-20 


21-30 


31-40 


41-50 


51-60 
61-70 


71-75 


76-80 
81-85 
86-90 


91-95 
96-00 


TRAGEDI 
di2 
1-2 


Event 

You were ensorcelled by a fey and enslaved for 196 
years before you escaped. 

You saw a demon and ran away before it could do 
anything to you. 

A devil tempted you. Make a DC 10 Wisdom saving 
throw. On a failed save, your alignment shifts one 
step toward evil (if it's not evil already), and you 
start the game with an additional 1d20 + 50 gp. 
You woke up one morning miles from your home, 
with no idea how you got there. 

You visited a holy site and felt the presence of the 
divine there. 

You witnessed a falling red star, a face appearing in 
the frost, or some other bizarre happening. You are 
certain that it was an omen of some sort. 

You escaped certain death and believe it was the 
intervention of a god that saved you. 

You witnessed a minor miracle. 

You explored an empty house and found it to be 
haunted. 

You were briefly possessed. Roll a d6 to determine 
what type of creature possessed you: 1, celestial; 2, 
devil; 3, demon; 4, fey; 5, elemental; 6, undead. 
You saw a ghost. 

You saw a ghoul feeding on a corpse. 

A celestial or a fiend visited you in your dreams to 
give a warning of dangers to come. 

You briefly visited the Feywild or the Shadowfell. 
You saw a portal that you believe leads to another 
plane of existence. 


ES 

Tragedy 

A family member or a close friend died. Roll on 
the Cause of Death supplemental table to find out 
how. 

A friendship ended bitterly, and the other person 
is now hostile to you. The cause might have been a 
misunderstanding or something you or the former 
friend did. 

You lost all your possessions in a disaster, and you 
had to rebuild your life. 

You were imprisoned for a crime you didn't com- 
mit and spent 1d6 years at hard labor, in jail, or 
shackled to an oar in a slave galley. 

War ravaged your home community, reducing ev- 
erything to rubble and ruin. In the aftermath, you 
either helped your town rebuild or moved some- 
where else. 

A lover disappeared without a trace. You have been 
looking for that person ever since. 


10 


n 


12 


Tragedy 

A terrible blight in your home community caused 
crops to fail, and many starved. You lost a sibling 
or some other family member. 

You did something that brought terrible shame to 
you in the eyes of your family. You might have been 
involved in a scandal, dabbled in dark magic, or 
offended someone important. The attitude of your 
family members toward you becomes indifferent at 
best, though they might eventually forgive you. 

For a reason you were never told, you were exiled 
from your community. You then either wandered in 
the wilderness for a time or promptly found a new 
place to live. 

A romantic relationship ended. Roll a dé. An odd 
number means it ended with bad feelings, while an 
even number means it ended amicably. 

A current or prospective romantic partner of yours 
died. Roll on the Cause of Death supplemental 
table to find out how. If the result is murder, roll a 
412. On a 1, you were responsible, whether directly 
or indirectly. 


War Outcome 

You were knocked out and left for dead. You woke 
up hours later with no recollection of the battle. 
You were badly injured in the fight, and you still 
bear the awful scars of those wounds. 

You ran away from the battle to save your life, but 
you still feel shame for your cowardice. 

You suffered only minor injuries, and the wounds 
all healed without leaving scars. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


912 
8-9 


10-11 


12 


War Outcome 

You survived the battle, but you suffer from terrible 
nightmares in which you relive the experience. 

You escaped the battle unscathed, though many of 
your friends were injured or lost. 

You acquitted yourself well in battle and are re- 
membered as a hero. You might have received a 
medal for your bravery. 


WEIRD STUFF 


di2 
1 


n 


12 


What Happened 

You were turned into a toad and remained in that 
form for 1d4 weeks. 

You were petrified and remained a stone statue for 
a time until someone freed you. 

You were enslaved by a hag, a satyr, or some other 
being and lived in that creature's thrall for 1d6 
years. 

A dragon held you as a prisoner for 1d4 months 
until adventurers killed it. 

You were taken captive by a race of evil humanoids 
such as drow, kuo-toa, or quaggoths. You lived as a 
slave in the Underdark until you escaped. 

You served a powerful adventurer as a hireling. You 
have only recently left that service. Use the supple- 
mental tables and work with your DM to determine 
the basic details about your former employer. 

You went insane for 1d6 years and recently re- 
gained your sanity. A tic or some other bit of odd 
behavior might linger. 

A lover of yours was secretly a silver dragon. 

You were captured by a cult and nearly sacrificed 
on an altar to the foul being the cultists served. 
You escaped, but you fear they will find you. 

You met a demigod, an archdevil, an archfey, a de- 
mon lord, or a titan, and you lived to tell the tale. 
You were swallowed by a giant fish and spent a 
month in its gullet before you escaped. 

A powerful being granted you a wish, but you 
squandered it on something frivolous. 


SUPPLEMENTAL TABLES 


The supplemental tables below give you a way to ran- 
domly determine characteristics and other facts about 
individuals who are part of your character's life. Use 
these tables when directed to do so by another table, or 
when you simply want to come up with a piece of infor- 
mation quickly. The tables are in alphabetical order. 


ALIGNMENT 
3d6 Alignment 
3 Chaotic evil (5026) or chaotic neutral (5096) 
4-5 Lawful evil 
6-8 Neutral evil 
9-12 Neutral 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


3d6 
13-15 
16-17 
18 


Alignment 

Neutral good 

Lawful good (50%) or lawful neutral (50%) 
Chaotic good (50%) or chaotic neutral (50%) 


CAUSE OF DEATH 


912 Cause of Death 
1 Unknown 
2 Murdered 
3 Killed in battle 
4 Accident related to class or occupation 
5 Accident unrelated to class or occupation 
6-7 Natural causes, such as disease or old age 
8 Apparent suicide 
9 Torn apart by an animal or a natural disaster 
10 Consumed by a monster 
n Executed for a crime or tortured to death 
12 Bizarre event, such as being hit by a meteorite, 
struck down by an angry god, or killed by a hatch- 
ing slaad egg 
CLass 
d100 Class 
01-07 Barbarian 
08-14 Bard 
15-29 Cleric 
30-36 Druid 
37-52 Fighter 
53-58 Monk 
59-64 Paladin 
65-70 Ranger 
71-84 Rogue 
85-89 Sorcerer 
90-94 Warlock 
95-00 Wizard 
OCCUPATION 
d100 Occupation 
01-05 Academic 
06-10 Adventurer (roll on the Class table) 
n Aristocrat 
12-26 Artisan or guild member 
27-31 Criminal 
32-36 Entertainer 
37-38 Exile, hermit, or refugee 
39-43 Explorer or wanderer 
44-55 Farmer or herder 
56-60 Hunter or trapper 
61-75 Laborer 
76-80 Merchant 
81-85  Politician or bureaucrat 
86-90 Priest 
91-95 Sailor 
96-00 Soldier 


T» 


RACE 
d100 Race 
01-40 Human 
41-50 Dwarf 
51-60 Elf 
61-70  Halfling 


71-75  Dragonborn 
76-80 Gnome 


81-85  Halfelf 
86-90 НаіҒогс 
91-95 Tiefling 


96-00 DM's choice 


RELATIONSHIP 


3d4 Attitude 
3-4 Hostile 
5-10 Friendly 


11-12 Indifferent 


STATUS 
3d6 Status 
3 Dead (roll on the Cause of Death table) 
4-5 Missing or unknown 
6-8 Alive, but doing poorly due to injury, financial trou- 
ble, or relationship difficulties 
9-12 Alive and well 
13-15 Alive and quite successful 
16-17 Alive and infamous 
18 Alive and famous 


WHAT’S NEXT? 


When you're finished using these tables, you'll have a 
collection of facts and notes that—at a minimum—encap- 
sulate what your character has been doing in the world 
up till now. Sometimes that might be all the information 
you want, but you don't have to stop there. 

By using your creativity to stitch all these bits together 
into a continuous narrative, you can create a full-fledged 
autobiography for your character in as little as a few 
sentences—an excellent example of how the whole is 
greater than the sum of its parts. 

Did you get a couple of results on the tables that don't 
outright contradict each other but also don't seem to fit 
together smoothly? If so, now is your chance to explain 
what happened to you. For instance, let's say you were 
born in a castle, but your childhood home was in the 
wilderness. It could be that your parents traveled from 
their forest home to seek help from a midwife at the 
castle when your mother was close to giving birth. Or 
your parents might have been members of the castle's 
staff before you were born, but they were released from 
service soon after you came into the world. 

In addition to deepening your own roleplaying experi- 
ence, your character's history presents your DM with op- 
portunities to weave those elements into the story of the 
campaign. Any way you look at it, adding definition to 
your character's pre-adventuring life is time well spent. 


RACIAL FEATS 


Leveling up in a class is the main way a character 
evolves during a campaign. Some DMs also allow the 
use of feats to customize a character. Feats are an op- 
tional rule in chapter 6, "Customization Options," of the 
Player's Handbook. The DM decides whether they're 
used and may also decide that some feats are available 
in a campaign and others aren't. 

This section introduces a collection of special feats 
that allow you to explore your character's race fur- 
ther. These feats are each associated with a race from 
the Player's Handbook, as summarized in the Racial 
Feats table. A racial feat represents either a deepening 
connection to your race's culture or a physical trans- 
formation that brings you closer to an aspect of your 
race's lineage. 

The cause of a particular transformation is up to you 
and your DM. A transformational feat can symbolize a 
latent quality that has emerged as you age, or a transfor- 
mation might be the result of an event in the campaign, 
such as exposure to powerful magic or visiting a place of 
ancient significance to your race. Transformations are a 
fundamental motif of fantasy literature and folklore. Fig- 
uring out why your character has changed can be a rich 
addition to your campaign's story. 


RaciAL FEATS 


Race Feat 

Dragonborn Dragon Fear 
Dragonborn Dragon Hide 
Dwarf Dwarven Fortitude 
Dwarf Squat Nimbleness 
Elf Elven Accuracy 

Elf (drow) Drow High Magic 
Elf (high) Fey Teleportation 
Elf (wood) Wood Elf Magic 
Gnome Fade Away 

Gnome Squat Nimbleness 
Half-elf Elven Accuracy 
Half-elf Prodigy 

Half-orc Orcish Fury 
Half-orc Prodigy 

Halfling Bountiful Luck 
Halfling Second Chance 
Halfling Squat Nimbleness 
Human ` Prodigy 

Tiefling Flames of Phlegethos 
Tiefling Infernal Constitution 


The feats are presented below in alphabetical order. 


BOUNTIFUL LUCK 
Prerequisite: Halfling 


Your people have extraordinary luck, which you have 
learned to mystically lend to your companions when you 
see them falter. You're not sure how you do it; you just 
wish it, and it happens. Surely a sign of fortune's favor! 


GHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


When an ally you can see within 30 feet of you rolls a 
1 оп the 120 for an attack roll, an ability check, or a sav- 
ing throw, you can use your reaction to let the ally reroll 
the die. The ally must use the new roll. 

When you use this ability, you can't use your Lucky 
racial trait before the end of your next turn. 


DRAGON FEAR 


Prerequisite: Dragonborn 


When angered, you can radiate menace. You gain the 
following benefits: 


+ Increase your Strength, Constitution, or Charisma 
score by 1, toa maximum of 20. 

+ Instead of exhaling destructive energy, you can ex- 
pend a use of your Breath Weapon trait to roar, forcing 
each creature of your choice within 30 feet of you to 
make a Wisdom saving throw (DC 8 + your proficiency 
bonus + your Charisma modifier). A target automati- 
cally succeeds on the save if it can’t hear or see you. 
On a failed save, a target becomes frightened of you 
for 1 minute. If the frightened target takes any dam- 
age, it can repeat the saving throw, ending the effect 
on itself on a success. 


DRAGON HIDE 
Prerequisite: Dragonborn 


You manifest scales and claws reminiscent of your dra- 
conic ancestors. You gain the following benefits: 


* Increase your Strength, Constitution, or Charisma 
score by 1, to a maximum of 20. 

* Your scales harden. While you aren't wearing armor, 
you can calculate your AC as 13 + your Dexterity mod- 
ifier. You can use a shield and still gain this benefit. 

* You grow retractable claws from the tips of your fin- 
gers. Extending or retracting the claws requires no 
action. The claws are natural weapons, which you can 
use to make unarmed strikes. If you hit with them, you 
deal slashing damage equal to 1d4 + your Strength 
modifier, instead of the normal bludgeoning damage 
for an unarmed strike. 


Drow HicH МАС1С 
Prerequisite: Elf (drow) 


You learn more of the magic typical of dark elves. You 
learn the detect magic spell and can cast it at will, with- 
out expending a spell slot. You also learn /evitate and 
dispel magic, each of which you can cast once without 
expending a spell slot. You regain the ability to cast 
those two spells in this way when you finish a long rest. 
Charisma is your spellcasting ability for all three spells. 


DWARVEN FORTITUDE 


Prerequisite: Dwarf 


You have the blood of dwarf heroes flowing through 
your veins. You gain the following benefits: 


* Increase your Constitution score by 1, to a max- 
imum of 20. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


* Whenever you take the Dodge action in combat, you 
can spend one Hit Die to heal yourself. Roll the die, 
add your Constitution modifier, and regain a number 
of hit points equal to the total (minimum of 1). 


ELVEN ACCURACY 
Prerequisite: Elf or half-elf 


The accuracy of elves is legendary, especially that of elf 
archers and spellcasters. You have uncanny aim with at- 
tacks that rely on precision rather than brute force. You 
gain the following benefits: 


* Increase your Dexterity, Intelligence, Wisdom, or Cha- 
risma score by 1, to a maximum of 20. 

+ Whenever you have advantage on an attack roll using 
Dexterity, Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma, you can 
reroll one of the dice once. 


FADE AWAY 
Prerequisite: Gnome 
Your people are clever, with a knack for illusion magic. 


You have learned a magical trick for fading away when 
you suffer harm. You gain the following benefits: 


+ Increase your Dexterity or Intelligence score by 1, toa 
maximum of 20. 

* Immediately after you take damage, you can use a 
reaction to magically become invisible until the end 
of your next turn or until you attack, deal damage, 
or force someone to make a saving throw. Once you 
use this ability, you can't do so again until you finish a 
short or long rest. 


FEY TELEPORTATION 

Prerequisite: Elf (high) 

Your study of high elven lore has unlocked fey power 
that few other elves possess, except your eladrin cous- 
ins. Drawing on your fey ancestry, you can momentarily 


stride through the Feywild to shorten your path from 
one place to another. You gain the following benefits: 


* Increase your Intelligence or Charisma score by 1, to 
а maximum of 20. 

+ You learn to speak, read, and write Sylvan. 

+ You learn the misty step spell and can cast it once 
without expending a spell slot. You regain the abil- 
ity to cast it in this way when you finish a short or 
long rest. Intelligence is your spellcasting ability for 
this spell. 


FLAMES OF PHLEGETHOS 
Prerequisite: Tiefling 


You learn to call on hellfire to serve your commands. 
You gain the following benefits: 


* Increase your Intelligence or Charisma score by 1, to 
a maximum of 20. 

* When you roll fire damage for a spell you cast, you can 
reroll any roll of 1 on the fire damage dice, but you 
must use the new roll, even if it is another 1. 

+ Whenever you cast a spell that deals fire damage, you 
can cause flames to wreathe you until the end of your 


next turn. The flames don't harm you or your posses- 
sions, and they shed bright light out to 30 feet and dim 
light for an additional 30 feet. While the flames are 
present, any creature within 5 feet of you that hits you 
with a melee attack takes 1d4 fire damage. 


INFERNAL CONSTITUTION 
Prerequisite: Tiefling 


Fiendish blood runs strong in you, unlocking a resil- 
ience akin to that possessed by some fiends. You gain 
the following benefits: 


* Increase your Constitution score by 1, to a max- 
imum of 20. 

* You have resistance to cold damage and poi- 
son damage. 

+ You have advantage on saving throws against be- 
ing poisoned. 


OrcISH FURY 
Prerequisite: Half-orc 


Your inner fury burns tirelessly. You gain the follow- 
ing benefits: 


* Increase your Strength or Constitution score by 1, toa 
maximum of 20. 

+ When you hit with an attack using a simple or martial 
weapon, you can roll one of the weapon's damage dice 
an additional time and add it as extra damage of the 
weapon's damage type. Once you use this ability, you 
can't use it again until you finish a short or long rest. 

* Immediately after you use your Relentless Endur- 
ance trait, you can use your reaction to make one 
weapon attack. 


PRODIGY 


Prerequisite: Half-elf, hal orc, or human 


You have a knack for learning new things. You gain the 
following benefits: 


* You gain one skill proficiency of your choice, one tool 
proficiency of your choice, and fluency in one language 
of your choice. 

* Choose one skill in which you have proficiency. You 
gain expertise with that skill, which means your profi- 
ciency bonus is doubled for any ability check you make 
with it. The skill you choose must be one that isn't 
already benefiting from a feature, such as Expertise, 
that doubles your proficiency bonus. 


SECOND CHANCE 
Prerequisite: Halfling 


Fortune favors you when someone tries to strike you. 
You gain the following benefits: 


* Increase your Dexterity, Constitution, or Charisma 
score by 1, toa maximum of 20. 

* When a creature you can see hits you with an attack 
roll, you can use your reaction to force that creature to 
reroll. Once you use this ability, you can't use it again 
until you roll initiative at the start of combat or until 
you finish a short or long rest. 


SQUAT NIMBLENESS 


Prerequisite: Dwarf or a Small race 


You are uncommonly nimble for your race. You gain the 
following benefits: 


* Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, to a 
maximum of 20. 

* Increase your walking speed by 5 feet. 

* You gain proficiency in the Acrobatics or Athletics 
skill (your choice). 

* You have advantage on any Strength (Athletics) or 
Dexterity (Acrobatics) check you make to escape from 
being grappled. 


Woop ELF Magic 
Prerequisite: Elf (wood) 


You learn the magic of the primeval woods, which are 
revered and protected by your people. You learn one 
druid cantrip of your choice. You also learn the /ong- 
strider and pass without trace spells, each of which you 
can cast once without expending a spell slot. You regain 
the ability to cast these two spells in this way when you 
finish a long rest. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for 
all three spells. 


CHAPTER 1 | CHARACTER OPTIONS 


S THE DUNGEON MASTER, YOU OVERSEE 
the game and weave together the story ex- 
perienced by your players. You're the one 
who keeps it all going, and this chapter is 
for you. It gives you new rules options, as 
well as some refined tools for creating and 
running adventures and campaigns. It is a 
supplement to the tools and advice offered 
in the Dungeon Master's Guide. 

The chapter opens with optional rules meant to help 
you run certain parts of the game more smoothly. The 
chapter then goes into greater depth on several topics— 
encounter building, random encounters, traps, magic 
items, and downtime—which largely relate to how you 
create and stage your adventures. 

The material in this chapter is meant to make your 
life easier. Ignore anything you find here that doesn't 
help you, and don't hesitate to customize the things that 
you do use. The game's rules exist to serve you and the 
games you run. As always, make them your own. 


SIMULTANEOUS EFFECTS 


Most effects in the game happen in succession, follow- 
ing an order set by the rules or the DM. In rare cases, 
effects can happen at the same time, especially at the 
start or end of a creature's turn. If two or more things 
happen at the same time on a character or monster's 
turn, the person at the game table—whether player or 
DM—who controls that creature decides the order in 
which those things happen. For example, if two effects 
occur at the end of a player character's turn, the player 
decides which of the two effects happens first. 


FALLING 


Falling from a great height is a significant risk for ad- 
venturers and their foes. The rule given in the Player's 
Handbook is simple: at the end of a fall, you take 1d6 
bludgeoning damage for every 10 feet you fell, to a maxi- 
mum of 20d6. You also land prone, unless you somehow 
avoid taking damage from the fall. Here are two optional 
rules that expand on that simple rule. 


RATE OF FALLING 


The rule for falling assumes that a creature immediately 
drops the entire distance when it falls. But what if a 
creature is at a high altitude when it falls, perhaps on 
the back of a griffon or on board an airship? Realisti- 
cally, a fall from such a height can take more than a few 
seconds, extending past the end of the turn when the fall 
occurred. If you'd like high-altitude falls to be properly 
time-consuming, use the following optional rule. 
When you fall from a great height, you instantly de- 
scend up to 500 feet. If you're still falling on your next 


CHAPTER 2 
DUNGEON MASTER’S TOOLS 


turn, you descend up to 500 feet at the end of that turn. 
This process continues until the fall ends, either be- 
cause you hit the ground or the fall is otherwise halted. 


FLYING CREATURES AND FALLING 


A flying creature in flight falls if it is knocked prone, if 
its speed is reduced to 0 feet, or if it otherwise loses the 
ability to move, unless it can hover or it is being held 
aloft by magic, such as the fly spell. 

If you'd like a flying creature to have a better chance of 
surviving a fall than a non-flying creature does, use this 
rule: subtract the creature’s current flying speed from 
the distance it fell before calculating falling damage. 
This rule is helpful to a flier that is knocked prone but 
is still conscious and has a current flying speed that is 
greater than 0 feet. The rule is designed to simulate the 
creature flapping its wings furiously or taking similar 
measures to slow the velocity of its fall. 

If you use the rule for rate of falling in the previous 
section, a flying creature descends 500 feet on the turn 
when it falls, just as other creatures do. But if that crea- 
ture starts any of its later turns still falling and is prone, 
it can halt the fall on its turn by spending half its flying 
speed to counter the prone condition (as if it were stand- 
ing up in midair). 


SLEEP 


Just as in the real world, D&D characters spend many 
hours sleeping, most often as part of a long rest. Most 
monsters also need to sleep. While a creature sleeps, 
it is subjected to the unconscious condition. Here are a 
few rules that expand on that basic fact. 


WAKING SOMEONE 


A creature that is naturally sleeping, as opposed to be- 
ing in a magically or chemically induced sleep, wakes 
up if it takes any damage or if someone else uses an ac- 
tion to shake or slap the creature awake. A sudden loud 
noise—such as yelling, thunder, or a ringing bell—also 
awakens someone that is sleeping naturally. 
Whispers don't disturb sleep, unless a sleeper's pas- 
sive Wisdom (Perception) score is 20 or higher and the 
whispers are within 10 feet of the sleeper. Speech at a " 
normal volume awakens a sleeper if the environment | 
is otherwise silent (no wind, birdsong, crickets, street 
sounds, or the like) and the sleeper has a passive Wis- 
dom (Perception) score of 15 or higher. 


SLEEPING IN ARMOR 


Sleeping in light armor has no adverse effect on the 
wearer, but sleeping in medium or heavy armor makes it 
difficult to recover fully during a long rest. 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


When you finish a long rest during which you slept in 
medium or heavy armor, you regain only one quarter of 
your spent Hit Dice (minimum of one die). If you have 
any levels of exhaustion, the rest doesn't reduce your 
exhaustion level. 


GOING WITHOUT A LONG REST 


A long rest is never mandatory, but going without sleep 
does have its consequences. If you want to account for 
the effects of sleep deprivation on characters and crea- 
tures, use these rules. 

Whenever you end a 24-hour period without finishing 
a long rest, you must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution 
saving throw or suffer one level of exhaustion. 

It becomes harder to fight off exhaustion if you stay 
awake for multiple days. After the first 24 hours, the 
DC increases by 5 for each consecutive 24-hour period 
without a long rest. The DC resets to 10 when you finish 
a long rest. 


ADAMANTINE WEAPONS 


Adamantine is an ultrahard metal found in meteorites 
and extraordinary mineral veins. In addition to being 
used to craft adamantine armor, the metal is also used 
for weapons. 

Melee weapons and ammunition made of or coated 
with adamantine are unusually effective when used 
to break objects. Whenever an adamantine weapon 
or piece of ammunition hits an object, the hit is a 
critical hit. 

The adamantine version of a melee weapon or of 
ten pieces of ammunition costs 500 gp more than the 
normal version, whether the weapon or ammunition is 
made of the metal or coated with it. 


TYING KNOTS 


The rules are purposely open-ended concerning mun- 
dane tasks like tying knots, but sometimes knowing 
how well a knot was fashioned is important in a dra- 
matic scene when someone is trying to untie a knot or 
slip out of one. Here's an optional rule for determining 
the effectiveness of a knot. 

The creature who ties the knot makes an Intelligence 
(Sleight of Hand) check when doing so. The total of the 
check becomes the DC for an attempt to untie the knot 
with an Intelligence (Sleight of Hand) check or to slip 
out of it with a Dexterity (Acrobatics) check. 

This rule intentionally links Sleight of Hand with 
Intelligence, rather than Dexterity. This is an example 
of how to apply the rule in the "Variant: Skills with 
Different Abilities” section in chapter 7 of the Play- 
er's Handbook. 


‘TOOL PROFICIENCIES 


Tool proficiencies are a useful way to highlight a charac- 
ter's background and talents. At the game table, though, 
the use of tools sometimes overlaps with the use of 
skills, and it can be unclear how to use them together in 
certain situations. This section offers various ways that 
tools can be used in the game. 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


'TOOLS AND SKILLS TOGETHER 


Tools have more specific applications than skills. The 
History skill applies to any event in the past. A tool such 
as a forgery kit is used to make fake objects and little 
else. Thus, why would a character who has the opportu- 
nity to acquire one or the other want to gain a tool profi- 
ciency instead of proficiency in a skill? 

To make tool proficiencies more attractive choices for 
the characters, you can use the methods outlined below. 

Advantage. If the use of a tool and the use of a skill 
both apply to a check, and a character is proficient with 
the tool and the skill, consider allowing the character 
to make the check with advantage. This simple benefit 
can go a long way toward encouraging players to pick 
up tool proficiencies. In the tool descriptions that follow, 
this benefit is often expressed as additional insight (or 
something similar), which translates into an increased 
chance that the check will be a success. 

Added Benefit. In addition, consider giving characters 
who have both a relevant skill and a relevant tool profi- 
ciency an added benefit on a successful check. This ben- 
efit might be in the form of more detailed information or 
could simulate the effect of a different sort of successful 
check. For example, a character proficient with mason's 
tools makes a successful Wisdom (Perception) check to 
find a secret door in a stone wall. Not only does the char- 
acter notice the door's presence, but you decide that the 
tool proficiency entitles the character to an automatic 
success on an Intelligence (Investigation) check to deter- 
mine how to open the door. 


'Toor DESCRIPTIONS 


The following sections go into detail about the tools pre- 
sented in the Player's Handbook, offering advice on how 
to use them in a campaign. 

Components. The first paragraph in each description 
gives details on what a set of supplies or tools is made 
up of. A character who is proficient with a tool knows 
how to use all of its component parts. 

Skills. Every tool potentially provides advantage on a 
check when used in conjunction with certain skills, pro- 
vided a character is proficient with the tool and the skill. 
As DM, you can allow a character to make a check using 
the indicated skill with advantage. Paragraphs that be- 
gin with skill names discuss these possibilities. In each 
of these paragraphs, the benefits apply only to someone 
who has proficiency with the tool, not someone who sim- 
ply owns it. 

With respect to skills, the system is mildly abstract in 
terms of what a tool proficiency represents; essentially, 
it assumes that a character who has proficiency with a 
tool also has learned about facets of the trade or pro- 
fession that are not necessarily associated with the use 
of the tool. 

In addition, you can consider giving a character extra 
information or an added benefit on a skill check. The 
text provides some examples and ideas when this oppor- 
tunity is relevant. 

Special Use. Proficiency with a tool usually brings 
with it a particular benefit in the form of a special use, 
as described in this paragraph. 


Sample DCs. A table at the end of each section lists 
activities that a tool can be used to perform, and sug- 
gested DCs for the necessary ability checks. 


ALCHEMIST’S SUPPLIES 
Alchemist's supplies enable a character to produce use- 
ful concoctions, such as acid or alchemist's fire. 

Components. Alchemist's supplies include two glass 
beakers, a metal frame to hold a beaker in place over 
an open flame, a glass stirring rod, a small mortar and 
pestle, and a pouch of common alchemical ingredients, 
including salt, powdered iron, and purified water. 

Arcana. Proficiency with alchemist's supplies allows 
you to unlock more information on Arcana checks in- 
volving potions and similar materials. 

Investigation. When you inspect an area for clues, 
proficiency with alchemist's supplies grants additional 
insight into any chemicals or other substances that 
might have been used in the area. 

Alchemical Crafting. You can use this tool proficiency 
to create alchemical items. A character can spend 
money to collect raw materials, which weigh 1 pound 
for every 50 gp spent. The DM can allow a character to 
make a check using the indicated skill with advantage. 
As part of a long rest, you can use alchemist's supplies 
to make one dose of acid, alchemist's fire, antitoxin, 
oil, perfume, or soap. Subtract half the value of the cre- 
ated item from the total gp worth of raw materials you 
are carrying. 


ALCHEMIST’S SUPPLIES 


Activity DC 
Create a puff of thick smoke 10 
Identify a poison 10 
Identify a substance 15 
Start a fire 15 
Neutralize acid 20 


BREWER’S SUPPLIES 

Brewing is the art of producing beer. Not only does beer 
serve as an alcoholic beverage, but the process of brew- 
ing purifies water. Crafting beer takes weeks of fermen- 
tation, but only a few hours of work. 

Components. Brewer's supplies include a large 
glass jug, a quantity of hops, a siphon, and several feet 
of tubing. 

History. Proficiency with brewer's supplies gives 
you additional insight on Intelligence (History) checks 
concerning events that involve alcohol as a signifi- 
cant element. 

Medicine. This tool proficiency grants additional 
insight when you treat anyone suffering from alcohol 
poisoning or when you can use alcohol to dull pain. 

Persuasion. A stiff drink can help soften the hardest 
heart. Your proficiency with brewer's supplies can help 
you ply someone with drink, giving them just enough 
alcohol to mellow their mood. 

Potable Water. Your knowledge of brewing enables 
you to purify water that would otherwise be undrink- 
able. As part of a long rest, you can purify up to 6 gal- 
lons of water, or 1 gallon as part of a short rest. 


BREWER’S SUPPLIES 


Activity DC 
Detect poison or impurities in a drink 10 
Identify alcohol 15 
Ignore effects of alcohol 20 


CALLIGRAPHER'S SUPPLIES 

Calligraphy treats writing as a delicate, beautiful art. 
Calligraphers produce text that is pleasing to the eye, 
using a style that is difficult to forge. Their supplies also 
give them some ability to examine scripts and determine 
if they are legitimate, since a calligrapher's training in- 
volves long hours of studying writing and attempting to 
replicate its style and design. 

Components. Calligrapher's supplies include ink, a 
dozen sheets of parchment, and three quills. 

Arcana. Although calligraphy is of little help in deci- 
phering the content of magical writings, proficiency with 
these supplies can aid in identifying who wrote a script 
of a magical nature. 

History. This tool proficiency can augment the 
benefit of successful checks made to analyze or inves- 
tigate ancient writings, scrolls, or other texts, includ- 
ing runes etched in stone or messages in frescoes or 
other displays. 

Decipher Treasure Map. This tool proficiency grants 
you expertise in examining maps. You can make an 
Intelligence check to determine a map's age, whether a 
map includes any hidden messages, or similar facts. 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


CALLIGRAPHER'S SUPPLIES 


Activity Dc 
Identify writer of nonmagical script 10 
Determine writer's state of mind 15 
Spot forged text 15 
Forge a signature 20 


CARPENTER'S TOOLS 

Skill at carpentry enables a character to construct 
wooden structures. A carpenter can build a house, a 
shack, a wooden cabinet, or similar items. 

Components. Carpenter's tools include a saw, a ham- 
mer, nails, a hatchet, a square, a ruler, an adze, a plane, 
and a chisel. 

History. This tool proficiency aids you in identifying 
the use and the origin of wooden buildings and other 
large wooden objects. 

Investigation. You gain additional insight when in- 
specting areas within wooden structures, because you 
know tricks of construction that can conceal areas from 
discovery. 

Perception. You can spot irregularities in wooden 
walls or floors, making it easier to find trap doors and 
secret passages. 

Stealth. You can quickly assess the weak spots in a 
wooden floor, making it easier to avoid the places that 
creak and groan when they're stepped on. 

Fortify. With 1 minute of work and raw materials, 
you can make a door or window harder to force open. 
Increase the DC needed to open it by 5. 

Temporary Shelter. As part of a long rest, you can 
construct a lean-to or a similar shelter to keep your 
group dry and in the shade for the duration of the rest. 
Because it was fashioned quickly from whatever wood 
was available, the shelter collapses 1d3 days after being 
assembled. 


CARPENTER’S TOOLS 


Activity DC 
Build a simple wooden structure 10 
Design a complex wooden structure 15 
Find a weak point in a wooden wall 15 
Pry apart a door 20 


CARTOGRAPHER'S TOOLS 

Using cartographer's tools, you can create accurate 
maps to make travel easier for yourself and those who 
come after you. These maps can range from large-scale 
depictions of mountain ranges to diagrams that show 
the layout of a dungeon level. 

Components. Cartographer's tools consist of a 
quill, ink, parchment, a pair of compasses, calipers, 
and a ruler. 

Arcana, History, Religion. You can use your knowl- 
edge of maps and locations to unearth more detailed 
information when you use these skills. For instance, you 
might spot hidden messages in a map, identify when the 
map was made to determine if geographical features 
have changed since then, and so forth. 


CHAPTER 2 |. DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


Nature. Your familiarity with physical geography 
makes it easier for you to answer questions or solve is- 
sues relating to the terrain around you. 

Survival. Your understanding of geography makes it 
easier to find paths to civilization, to predict areas where 
villages or towns might be found, and to avoid becom- 
ing lost. You have studied so many maps that common 
patterns, such as how trade routes evolve and where 
settlements arise in relation to geographic locations, are 
familiar to you. 

Craft a Map. While traveling, you can draw a map as 
you go in addition to engaging in other activity. 


CARTOGRAPHER's TOOLS 


Activity Dc 
Determine a map's age and origin 10 
Estimate direction and distance to a landmark 15 
Discern that a map is fake 15 
Fill in a missing part of a map 20 


CosBLER's TOOLS 

Although the cobbler's trade might seem too humble for 
an adventurer, a good pair of boots will see a character 
across rugged wilderness and through deadly dungeons. 

Components. Cobbler's tools consist of a hammer, 
an awl, a knife, a shoe stand, a cutter, spare leather, 
and thread. 

Arcana, History. Your knowledge of shoes aids you in 
identifying the magical properties of enchanted boots or 
the history of such items. 

Investigation. Footwear holds a surprising number 
of secrets. You can learn where someone has recently 
visited by examining the wear and the dirt that has ac- 
cumulated on their shoes. Your experience in repairing 
shoes makes it easier for you to identify where damage 
might come from. 

Maintain Shoes. As part of a long rest, you can repair 
your companions’ shoes. For the next 24 hours, up to six 
creatures of your choice who wear shoes you worked on 
can travel up to 10 hours a day without making saving 
throws to avoid exhaustion. 

Craft Hidden Compartment. With 8 hours of work, 
you can add a hidden compartment to a pair of shoes. 
The compartment can hold an object up to 3 inches long 
and 1 inch wide and deep. You make an Intelligence 
check using your tool proficiency to determine the In- 
telligence (Investigation) check DC needed to find the 
compartment. 


COBBLER’S TOOLS 


Activity DC 
Determine a shoe's age and origin 10 
Find a hidden compartment in a boot heel 15 


Cook's UTENSILS 
Adventuring is a hard life. With a cook along on the jour- 
ney, your meals will be much better than the typical mix 
of hardtack and dried fruit. 

Components. Cook's utensils include a metal pot, 
knives, forks, a stirring spoon, and a ladle. 


EB АЙ | 


А a 


History. Your knowledge of cooking techniques al- 
lows you to assess the social patterns involved in a cul- 
ture's eating habits. 

Medicine. When administering treatment, you can 
transform medicine that is bitter or sour into a pleasing 
concoction. 

Survival. When foraging for food, you can make do 
with ingredients you scavenge that others would be un- 
able to transform into nourishing meals. 

Prepare Meals. As part of a short rest, you can pre- 
pare a tasty meal that helps your companions regain 
their strength. You and up to five creatures of your 
choice regain 1 extra hit point per Hit Die spent during 
a short rest, provided you have access to your cook's 
utensils and sufficient food. 


Cook’s UTENSILS 


Activity DC 
Create a typical meal 10 
Duplicate a meal 10 
Spot poison or impurities in food 15 
Create a gourmet meal 15 


DISGUISE KIT 

The perfect tool for anyone who wants to engage in 
trickery, a disguise kit enables its owner to adopt a 
false identity. 

Components. A disguise kit includes cosmetics, hair 
dye, small props, and a few pieces of clothing. 

Deception. In certain cases, a disguise can improve 
your ability to weave convincing lies. 

Intimidation. The right disguise can make you look 
more fearsome, whether you want to scare someone 
away by posing as a plague victim or intimidate a gang 
of thugs by taking the appearance of a bully. 

Performance. A cunning disguise can enhance an au- 
dience’s enjoyment of a performance, provided the dis- 
guise is properly designed to evoke the desired reaction. 

Persuasion. Folk tend to trust a person in uniform. If 
you disguise yourself as an authority figure, your efforts 
to persuade others are often more effective. 

Create Disguise. As part of a long rest, you can 
create a disguise. It takes you 1 minute to don such a 
disguise once you have created it. You can carry only 
one such disguise on you at a time without drawing 
undue attention, unless you have a bag of holding or 
asimilar method to keep them hidden. Each disguise 
weighs 1 pound. 

At other times, it takes 10 minutes to craft a disguise 
that involves moderate changes to your appearance, 
and 30 minutes for one that requires more exten- 
sive changes. 


DiscuisE Kir 


Activity Dc 
Cover injuries or distinguishing marks 10 
Spot a disguise being used by someone else 15 
Copy a humanoid's appearance 20 


FORGERY KIT 
A forgery kit is designed to duplicate documents and to 
make it easier to copy a person's seal or signature. 

Components. A forgery kit includes several different 
types of ink, a variety of parchments and papers, several 
quills, seals and sealing wax, gold and silver leaf, and 
small tools to sculpt melted wax to mimic a seal. 

Arcana. A forgery kit can be used in conjunction 
with the Arcana skill to determine if a magic item is 
real or fake. 

Deception. A well-crafted forgery, such as papers pro- 
claiming you to be a noble or a writ that grants you safe 
passage, can lend credence to a lie. 

History. A forgery kit combined with your knowledge 
of history improves your ability to create fake historical 
documents or to tell if an old document is authentic. 

Investigation. When you examine objects, proficiency 
with a forgery kit is useful for determining how an ob- 
ject was made and whether it is genuine. 

Other Tools. Knowledge of other tools makes your 
forgeries that much more believable. For example, you 
could combine proficiency with a forgery kit and profi- 
ciency with cartographer's tools to make a fake map. 

Quick Fake. As part of a short rest, you can produce 
a forged document no more than one page in length. As 
part of a long rest, you can produce a document that is 
up to four pages long. Your Intelligence check using a 
forgery kit determines the DC for someone else's Intelli- 
gence (Investigation) check to spot the fake. 


FORGERY КІТ 


Activity DC 
Mimic handwriting 15 
Duplicate a wax seal 20 


GAMING SET 

Proficiency with a gaming set applies to one type of 
game, such as Three-Dragon Ante or games of chance 
that use dice. 

Components. A gaming set has all the pieces needed 
to play a specific game or type of game, such as a com- 
plete deck of cards or a board and tokens. 

History. Your mastery of a game includes knowledge 
of its history, as well as of important events it was con- 


nected to or prominent historical figures involved with it. 


Insiéht. Playing games with someone is a good way to 
gain understanding of their personality, granting you a 
better ability to discern their lies from their truths and 
read their mood. 

Sleight of Hand. Sleight of Hand is a useful skill for 
cheating at a game, as it allows you to swap pieces, 
palm cards, or alter a die roll. Alternatively, engrossing 
a target in a game by manipulating the components with 
dexterous movements is a great distraction for a pick- 
pocketing attempt. 


GAMING SET 


Activity DC 
Catch a player cheating 15 
Gain insight into an opponent's personality 15 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


GLASSBLOWER's TOOLS 

Someone who is proficient with glassblower's tools 
has not only the ability to shape glass, but also spe- 
cialized knowledge of the methods used to produce 
glass objects. 

Components. The tools include a blowpipe, a small 
marver, blocks, and tweezers. You need a source of heat 
to work glass. 

Arcana, History. Your knowledge of glassmaking 
techniques aids you when you examine glass objects, 
such as potion bottles or glass items found in a treasure 
hoard. For instance, you can study how a glass potion 
bottle has been changed by its contents to help deter- 
mine a potion's effects. (A potion might leave behind a 
residue, deform the glass, or stain it.) 

Investigation. When you study an area, your knowl- 
edge can aid you if the clues include broken glass or 
glass objects. 

Identify Weakness. With 1 minute of study, you can 
identify the weak points in a glass object. Any damage 
dealt to the object by striking a weak spot is doubled. 


GLASSBLOWER's TOOLS 


Activity DC 
Identify source of glass 10 
Determine what a glass object once held 20 


HERBALISM KIT 
Proficiency with an herbalism kit allows you to identify 
plants and safely collect their useful elements. 

Components. An herbalism kit includes pouches to 
store herbs, clippers and leather gloves for collecting 
plants, a mortar and pestle, and several glass jars. 

Arcana. Your knowledge of the nature and uses of 
herbs can add insight to your magical studies that deal 
with plants and your attempts to identify potions. 

Investigation. When you inspect an area overgrown 
with plants, your proficiency can help you pick out de- 
tails and clues that others might miss. 

Medicine. Your mastery of herbalism improves your 
ability to treat illnesses and wounds by augmenting your 
methods of care with medicinal plants. 

Nature and Survival. When you travel in the wild, 
your skill in herbalism makes it easier to identify plants 
and spot sources of food that others might overlook. 

Identify Plants. You can identify most plants with a 
quick inspection of their appearance and smell. 


HERBALISM KIT 


Activity DC 
Find plants 15 
Identify poison 20 


JEWELER’S TOOLS 
Training with jeweler's tools includes the basic tech- 
niques needed to beautify gems. It also gives you exper- 
tise in identifying precious stones. 

Components. Jeweler's tools consist of a small saw 
and hammer, files, pliers, and tweezers. 

Arcana. Proficiency with jeweler's tools grants you 
knowledge about the reputed mystical uses of gems. 


CHAPTER? | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


This insight proves handy when you make Arcana | 
checks related to gems or gem-encrusted items. 
Investigation. When you inspect jeweled objects, your 
proficiency with jeweler's tools aids you in picking out 
clues they might hold. 
Identify Gems. You can identify gems and determine | 
their value at a glance. 


JEwELER's TOOLS 


Activity DC 
Modify a gem's appearance 15 
Determine a gem's history 20 


LAND AND WATER VEHICLES 

Proficiency with land vehicles covers a wide range of op- 
tions, from chariots and howdahs to wagons and carts. 
Proficiency with water vehicles covers anything that nav- 
igates waterways. Proficiency with vehicles grants the 
knowledge needed to handle vehicles of that type, along 
with knowledge of how to repair and maintain them. 

In addition, a character proficient with water vehicles 
is knowledgeable about anything a professional sailor 
would be familiar with, such as information about the 
sea and islands, tying knots, and assessing weather and 
sea conditions. 

Arcana. When you study a magic vehicle, this tool pro- 
ficiency aids you in uncovering lore or determining how 
the vehicle operates. 

Investigation, Perception. When you inspect a vehi- 
cle for clues or hidden information, your proficiency aids 
you in noticing things that others might miss. 

Vehicle Handling. When piloting a vehicle, you can 
apply your proficiency bonus to the vehicle's AC and sav- 
ing throws. 


VEHICLES 
Activity Dc 
Navigate rough terrain or waters 10 
Assess a vehicle's condition 15 
Take a tight corner at high speed 20 


LEATHERWORKER'S TOOLS 

Knowledge of leatherworking extends to lore concern- 
ing animal hides and their properties. It also confers 
knowledge of leather armor and similar goods. 

Components. Leatherworker's tools include a knife, 
a small mallet, an edger, a hole punch, thread, and 
leather scraps. 

Arcana. Your expertise in working with leather grants 
you added insight when you inspect magic items crafted 
from leather, such as boots and some cloaks. 

Investigation. You gain added insight when studying 
leather items or clues related to them, as you draw on 
your knowledge of leather to pick out details that others 
would overlook. 

Identify Hides. When looking at a hide or a leather 
item, you can determine the source of the leather and 
any special techniques used to treat it. For example, 
you can spot the difference between leather crafted 
using dwarven methods and leather crafted using half- 
ling methods. 


LEATHERWORKER’S TOOLS 


Activity DC 
Modify a leather item's appearance 10 
Determine a leather item's history 20 


Mason’s TOOLS 
Mason's tools allow you to craft stone structures, includ- 
ing walls and buildings crafted from brick. 

Components. Mason's tools consist of a trowel, a 
hammer, a chisel, brushes, and a square. 

History. Your expertise aids you in identifying a stone 
building’s date of construction and purpose, along with 
insight into who might have built it. 

Investigation. You gain additional insight when in- 
specting areas within stone structures. 

Perception. You can spot irregularities in stone walls 
or floors, making it easier to find trap doors and se- 
cret passages. 

Demolition. Your knowledge of masonry allows you 
to spot weak points in brick walls. You deal double dam- 
age to such structures with your weapon attacks. 


Mason’s Toots 


Activity Dc 
Chisel a small hole in a stone wall 10 
Find a weak point in a stone wall 15 


MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS 

Proficiency with a musical instrument indicates you are 
familiar with the techniques used to play it. You also 
have knowledge of some songs commonly performed 
with that instrument. 

History. Your expertise aids you in recalling lore re- 
lated to your instrument. 

Performance. Your ability to put on a good show 
is improved when you incorporate an instrument 
into your act. 

Compose a Tune. As part of a long rest, you can 
compose a new tune and lyrics for your instrument. You 
might use this ability to impress a noble or spread scan- 
dalous rumors with a catchy tune. 


MusiCAL INSTRUMENT 


Activity DC 
Identify a tune 10 
Improvise a tune 20 


NAVIGATOR’S TOOLS 
Proficiency with navigator's tools helps you determine a 
true course based on observing the stars. It also grants 
you insight into charts and maps while developing your 
sense of direction. 
Components. Navigator's tools include a sextant, a 
compass, calipers, a ruler, parchment, ink, and a quill. 
Survival. Knowledge of navigator's tools helps you 
avoid becoming lost and also grants you insight into the 
most likely location for roads and settlements. 
Sighting. By taking careful measurements, you can 
determine your position on a nautical chart and the 
time of day. 


NaviGATOR'S TOOLS 


Activity DC 
Plot a course 10 
Discover your position on a nautical chart 15 


PAINTER'S SUPPLIES 

Proficiency with painter's supplies represents your 
ability to paint and draw. You also acquire an under- 
standing of art history, which can aid you in examining 
works of art. 

Components. Painter's supplies include an easel, can- 
vas, paints, brushes, charcoal sticks, and a palette. 

Arcana, History, Religion. Your expertise aids you in 
uncovering lore of any sort that is attached to a work of 
art, such as the magical properties of a painting or the 
origins of a strange mural found in a dungeon. 

Investigation, Perception. When you inspect a 
painting or a similar work of visual art, your knowledge 
of the practices behind creating it can grant you addi- 
tional insight. 

Painting and Drawing. As part of a short or long rest, 
you can produce a simple work of art. Although your 
work might lack precision, you can capture an image or 
ascene, or make a quick copy of a piece of art you saw. 


PAINTER’S SUPPLIES 


Activity DC 
Paint an accurate portrait 10 
Create a painting with a hidden message 20 


POISONER’S KIT 
A poisoner’s kit is a favored resource for thieves, assas- 
sins, and others who engage in skulduggery. It allows 
you to apply poisons and create them from various 
materials. Your knowledge of poisons also helps you 
treat them. 

Components. A poisoner's kit includes glass vials, a 
mortar and pestle, chemicals, and a glass stirring rod. 

History. Your training with poisons can help you 
when you try to recall facts about infamous poisonings. 

Investigation, Perception. Your knowledge of poisons 
has taught you to handle those substances carefully, 
giving you an edge when you inspect poisoned objects or 
try to extract clues from events that involve poison. 

Medicine. When you treat the victim of a poison, your 
knowledge grants you added insight into how to provide 
the best care to your patient. 

Nature, Survival. Working with poisons enables 
you to acquire lore about which plants and animals are 
poisonous. 

Handle Poison. Your proficiency allows you to handle 
and apply a poison without risk of exposing yourself to 
its effects. 


PoisoNEn's TOOLS 


Activity DC 
Spot a poisoned object 10 
Determine the effects of a poison 20 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


POTTER’S TOOLS 
Potter's tools are used to create a variety of ceramic ob- 
jects, most typically pots and similar vessels. 

Components. Potter's tools include potter's needles, 
ribs, scrapers, a knife, and calipers. 

History. Your expertise aids you in identifying ce- 
ramic objects, including when they were created and 
their likely place or culture of origin. 

Investigation, Perception. You gain additional insight 
when inspecting ceramics, uncovering clues others 
would overlook by spotting minor irregularities. 

Reconstruction. By examining pottery shards, you 
can determine an object's original, intact form and its 
likely purpose. 


PorrER's TOOLS 


Activity DC 
Determine what a vessel once held 10 
Create a serviceable pot 15 
Find a weak point in a ceramic object 20 


SMITH’s TOOLS 
Smith's tools allow you to work metal, heating it to 
alter its shape, repair damage, or work raw ingots into 
useful items. 

Components. Smith's tools include hammers, tongs, 
charcoal, rags, and a whetstone. 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER’S TOOLS 


Arcana and History. Your expertise lends you ad- 
ditional insight when examining metal objects, such 
as weapons. 

Investigation. You can spot clues and make deduc- 
tions that others might overlook when an investigation 
involves armor, weapons, or other metalwork. 

Repair. With access to your tools and an open flame 
hot enough to make metal pliable, you can restore 10 hit 
points to a damaged metal object for each hour of work. 


SMITH’s TOOLS 


Activity DC 
Sharpen a dull blade 10 
Repair a suit of armor 15 
Sunder a nonmagical metal object 15 


THIEVES’ TOOLS 

Perhaps the most common tools used by adventurers, 
thieves’ tools are designed for picking locks and foiling 
traps. Proficiency with the tools also grants you a gen- 
eral knowledge of traps and locks. 

Components. Thieves’ tools include a small file, a set 
of lock picks, a small mirror mounted on a metal handle, 
a set of narrow-bladed scissors, and a pair of pliers. 

History. Your knowledge of traps grants you insight 
when answering questions about locations that are re- 
nowned for their traps. 

Investigation and Perception. You gain additional in- 
sight when looking for traps, because you have learned 
a variety of common signs that betray their presence. 

Set a Trap. Just as you can disable traps, you can also 
set them. As part of a short rest, you can create a trap 
using items you have on hand. The total of your check 
becomes the DC for someone else's attempt to discover 
or disable the trap. The trap deals damage appropriate 
to the materials used in crafting it (such as poison or a 
weapon) or damage equal to half the total of your check, 
whichever the DM deems appropriate. 


THIEVES’ TOOLS 


Activity DC 
Pick a lock Varies 
Disable a trap Varies 


TINKER’S TOOLS 

A set of tinker's tools is designed to enable you to repair 
many mundane objects. Though you can't manufacture 
much with tinker's tools, you can mend torn clothes, 
sharpen a worn sword, and patch a tattered suit of 
chain mail. 

Components. Tinker's tools include a variety of hand 
tools, thread, needles, a whetstone, scraps of cloth and 
leather, and a small pot of glue. 

History. You can determine the age and origin of ob- 
jects, even if you have only a few pieces remaining from 
the original. 

Investigation. When you inspect a damaged ob- 
ject, you gain knowledge of how it was damaged and 
how long ago. 


Repair. You can restore 10 hit points to a damaged ob- 
ject for each hour of work. For any object, you need ac- 
cess to the raw materials required to repair it. For metal 
objects, you need access to an open flame hot enough to 
make the metal pliable. 


TINKER’S TOOLS 


Activity Dc 
Temporarily repair a disabled device 10 
Repair an item in half the time 15 
Improvise a temporary item using scraps 20 


WEAVER'S TOOLS 
Weaver's tools allow you to create cloth and tailor it into 
articles of clothing. 

Components. Weaver's tools include thread, needles, 
and scraps of cloth. You know how to work a loom, but 
such equipment is too large to transport. 

Arcana, History. Your expertise lends you additional 
insight when examining cloth objects, including cloaks 
and robes. 

Investigation. Using your knowledge of the process of 
creating cloth objects, you can spot clues and make de- 
ductions that others would overlook when you examine 
tapestries, upholstery, clothing, and other woven items. 

Repair. As part of a short rest, you can repair a single 
damaged cloth object. 

Craft Clothing. Assuming you have access to suf- 
ficient cloth and thread, you can create an outfit for a 
creature as part of a long rest. 


WEAVER's TOOLS 


Activity Dc 
Repurpose cloth 10 
Mend a hole in a piece of cloth 10 
Tailor an outfit 15 


WOODCARVER'S TOOLS 
Woodcarver's tools allow you to craft intricate objects 
from wood, such as wooden tokens or arrows. 

Components. Woodcarver's tools consist of a knife, a 
gouge, and a small saw. 

Arcana, History. Your expertise lends you additional 
insight when you examine wooden objects, such as figu- 
rines or arrows. 

Nature. Your knowledge of wooden objects gives you 
some added insight when you examine trees. 

Repair. As part of a short rest, you can repair a single 
damaged wooden object. 

Craft Arrows. As part of a short rest, you can craft 
up to five arrows. As part of a long rest, you can craft 
up to twenty. You must have enough wood on hand to 
produce them. 


WoopcanvtRn's TOOLS 


Activity Dc 
Craft a small wooden figurine 10 
Carve an intricate pattern in wood 15 


SPELLCASTING 


This section expands on the spellcasting rules pre- 
sented in the Player's Handbook and the Dungeon Mas- 
ter's Guide, providing clarifications and new options. 


PERCEIVING A CASTER AT WORK 


Many spells create obvious effects: explosions of fire, 
walls of ice, teleportation, and the like. Other spells, 
such as charm person, display no visible, audible, or oth- 
erwise perceptible sign of their effects, and could easily 
go unnoticed by someone unaffected by them. As noted 
in the Player's Handbook, you normally don't know that 
a spell has been cast unless the spell produces a notice- 
able effect. 

But what about the act of casting a spell? Is it possible 
for someone to perceive that a spell is being cast in their 
presence? To be perceptible, the casting of a spell must 
involve a verbal, somatic, or material component. The 
form of a material component doesn't matter for the 
purposes of perception, whether it's an object specified 
in the spell's description, a component pouch, or a spell- 
casting focus. 

If the need for a spell's components has been removed 
by a special ability, such as the sorcerer's Subtle Spell 
feature or the Innate Spellcasting trait possessed by 
many creatures, the casting of the spell is imperceptible. 
If an imperceptible casting produces a perceptible ef- 
fect, it’s normally impossible to determine who cast the 
spell in the absence of other evidence. 


IDENTIFYING A SPELL 


Sometimes a character wants to identify a spell that 
someone else is casting or that was already cast. To do | 
зо, a character can use their reaction to identify a spell | 
as it's being cast, or they can use an action on their turn 
to identify a spell by its effect after it is cast. 

If the character perceived the casting, the spell's ef- 
fect, or both, the character can make an Intelligence (Ar- 
cana) check with the reaction or action. The DC equals 
15 + the spell’s level. If the spell is cast as a class spell 
and the character is a member of that class, the check 
is made with advantage. For example, if the spellcaster 
casts a spell as a cleric, another cleric has advantage on 
the check to identify the spell. Some spells aren't asso- 
ciated with any class when they're cast, such as when a 
monster uses its Innate Spellcasting trait. 

This Intelligence (Arcana) check represents the fact 
that identifying a spell requires a quick mind and famil- 
iarity with the theory and practice of casting. This is 
true even for a character whose spellcasting ability is 
Wisdom or Charisma. Being able to cast spells doesn't 
by itself make you adept at deducing exactly what others 
are doing when they cast their spells. 


INVALID SPELL TARGETS 


A spell specifies what a caster can target with it: any 
type of creature, a creature of a certain type (humanoid 
or beast, for instance), an object, an area, the caster, 

or something else. But what happens if a spell tar- 

gets something that isn't a valid target? For example, 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


someone might cast charm person on a creature be- 
lieved to be a humanoid, not knowing that the target is 
in fact a vampire. If this issue comes up, handle it using 
the following rule. 

If you cast a spell on someone or something that can't 
be affected by the spell, nothing happens to that target, 
but if you used a spell slot to cast the spell, the slot is 
still expended. If the spell normally has no effect on a 
target that succeeds on a saving throw, the invalid target 
appears to have succeeded on its saving throw, even 
though it didn't attempt one (giving no hint that the crea- 
ture is in fact an invalid target). Otherwise, you perceive 
that the spell did nothing to the target. 


AREAS OF EFFECT ON A GRID 


The Dungeon Master's Guide includes the following 
short rule for using areas of effect on a grid. 

Choose an intersection of squares as the point of 
origin of an area of effect, then follow the rules for that 
kind of area as normal (see the "Areas of Effect" section 
in chapter 10 of the Player's Handbook). If an area of ef- 
fect is circular and covers at least half a square, it affects 
that square. 

That rule works, but it can require a fair amount of 
on-the-spot adjudication. This section offers two alterna- 
tives for determining the exact location of an area: the 
template method and the token method. Both of these 
methods assume you're using a grid and miniatures of 
some sort. Because these methods can yield different 
results for the number of squares in a given area, it's 
not recommended that they be combined at the table— 
choose whichever method you and your players find eas- 
ier or more intuitive. 


TEMPLATE METHOD 

The template method uses two-dimensional shapes 
that represent different areas of effect. The aim of the 
method is to accurately portray the length and width 
of each area on the grid and to leave little doubt about 
which creatures are affected by it. You'll need to make 
these templates or find premade ones. 

Making a Template. Making a template is simple. Get 
a piece of paper or card stock, and cut it in the shape of 
the area of effect you're using. Every 5 feet of the area 
equals 1 inch of the template's size. For example, the 
20-foot-radius sphere of the fireball spell, which has a 
40-foot diameter, would translate into a circular tem- 
plate with an 8-inch diameter. 

Using a Template. To use an area-of-effect template, 
apply it to the grid. If the terrain is flat, you can lay it on 
the surface; otherwise, hold the template above the sur- 
face and take note of which squares it covers or partially 
covers. If any part of a square is under the template, that 
square is included in the area of effect. If a creature's 
miniature is in an affected square, that creature is in 
the area. Being adjacent to the edge of the template 
isn't enough for a square to be included in the area of 
effect; the square must be entirely or partly covered by 
the template. 

You can also use this method without a grid. If you do 
so, a creature is included in an area of effect if any part 
of the miniature's base is overlapped by the template. 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


DiAGRAM 2.1; 


Cone TEMPLATE 


DIAGRAM 2.2: 
SPHERE TEMPLATE 


DIAGRAM 2.3: SQUARE 
Area USING TOKENS 


DIAGRAM 2.4: Square 
AREA WITH Total Cover 


kaa Wa ee Y ә 


| 
| 
| 


© : DiAGRAM 2.5: Cones UsiNc TokENs 


< 


¢ 


40644 


44404 
2 


DiAGRAM 2.6: Lines UsiNG TOKENS 


When you place a template, follow all the rules in the 
Player's Handbook for placing the associated area of 
effect. If an area of effect, such as a cone or a line, origi- 
nates from a spellcaster, the template should extend out 
from the caster and be positioned however the caster 
likes within the bounds of the rules. 

Diagrams 2.1 and 2.2 show the template method 
in action. 


TOKEN METHOD 

The token method is meant to make areas of effect 
tactile and fun. To use this method, grab some dice or 
other tokens, which you're going to use to represent your 
areas of effect. 

Rather than faithfully representing the shapes of the 
different areas of effect, this method gives you a way to 
create square-edged versions of them on a grid easily, as 
described in the following subsections. 


Using Tokens. Every 5-foot square of an area of effect 
becomes a die or other token that you place on the grid. 
Each token goes inside a square, not at an intersection 
of lines. If an area's token is in a square, that square is 
included in the area of effect. It's that simple. 

Diagrams 2.3 through 2.6 show this method in action, 
using dice as the tokens. 

Circles. This method depicts everything using 
squares, and a circular area of effect becomes square in 
it, whether the area is a sphere, cylinder, or radius. For 
instance, the 10-foot radius of flame strike, which has a 
diameter of 20 feet, is expressed as a square that is 20 
feet on a side, as shown in diagram 2.3. Diagram 2.4 
shows that area with total cover inside it. 

Cones. A cone is represented by rows of tokens on the 
grid, extending from the cone's point of origin. In the 
rows, the squares are adjoining side by side or corner to 
corner, as shown in diagram 2.5. To determine the num- 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


ber of rows a cone contains, divide its length by 5. For 
example, a 30-foot cone contains six rows. 

Here's how to create the rows. Starting with a square 
adjacent to the cone's point of origin, place one token. 
The square can be orthogonally or diagonally adjacent 
to the point of origin. In every row beyond that one, 
place as many tokens as you placed in the previous row, 
plus one more token. Place this row's tokens so that 
their squares each share a side with a square in the 
previous row. If the cone is orthogonally adjacent to the 
point of origin, you'll have one more token to place in the 
row; place it on one end or the other of the row you just 
created (you don't have to pick the side chosen in dia- 
gram 2.5). Keep placing tokens in this way until you've 
created all of the cone's rows. 

Lines. A line can extend from its source orthogonally 
or diagonally, as shown in diagram 2.6. 


ENCOUNTER BUILDING 


This section introduces new guidelines on building com- 
bat encounters for an adventure. They are an alternative 
to the rules in "Creating Encounters" in chapter 3 of the 
Dungeon Master's Guide. This approach uses the same 
math that underlies the rules presented in that book, but 
it makes a few adjustments to the way that math is pre- 
sented to produce a more flexible system. 

This encounter-building system assumes that, as DM, 
you want to have a clear understanding of the threat 
posed by a group of monsters. It will be useful to you if 
you want to emphasize combat in your adventure, if you 
want to ensure that a foe isn't too deadly for a group of 
characters, and if you want to understand the relation- 
ship between a character's level and a monster's chal- 
lenge rating. 

Building an encounter using these guidelines follows 
a series of steps. 


STEP 1: ASSESS THE CHARACTERS 


To build an encounter using this system, first take stock 
of the player characters. This system uses the charac- 
ters' levels to determine the numbers and challenge 
ratings of creatures you can pit them against without 
making a fight too hard or too easy. Even though char- 
acter level is important, you should also take note of 
each character's hit point maximum and saving throw 
modifiers, as well as how much damage the mightiest 
characters can deal with a single attack. Character level 
and challenge rating are good for defining the difficulty 
of an encounter, but they don't tell the whole story. You'll 
make use of these additional character statistics when 
you select monsters for an encounter in step 4. 


STEP 2: CHOOSE ENCOUNTER SIZE 


Determine whether you want to create a battle that pits 
one creature against the characters, or if you want to 
use multiple monsters. If the fight is against a single 
opponent, your best candidate for that foe is one of the 
game's legendary creatures, which are designed to fill 
this need. If the battle involves multiple monsters, de- 
cide roughly how many creatures you want to use before 
continuing with step 3. 


CHAPTER? | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


STEP 3: DETERMINE NUMBERS AND 
CHALLENGE RATINGS 


The process for building fights that feature only one leg- 
endary monster is simple. The Solo Monster Challenge 
Rating table shows you which challenge rating (CR) to 
use for a legendary creature opposing a party of four to 
six characters, creating a satisfying but difficult battle. 
For example, for a party of five 9th-level characters, a 
CR 12 legendary creature makes an optimal encounter. 

For a more perilous battle, match up the characters 
with a legendary creature whose challenge rating is 1 or 
2 higher than optimal. For an easy fight, use a legendary 
creature whose challenge rating is 3 or more lower than 
the challenge rating for an optimal encounter. 


SOLO MONSTER CHALLENGE RATING 


Party Size-—————_ 


Character 
Level 6 Characters 5 Characters 4 Characters 
Ist 2 2 1 
2nd 4 2 
3rd 5 4 3 
4th 6 5 4 
Sth 9 8 7 
6th 10 9 8 
7th n 10 9 
8th 12 n 10 
9th 13 12 11 
10th 14 13 12 
Tith 15 14 13 
12th 17 16 15 
13th 18 7 16 
14th 19 18 7 
15th 20 19 18 
16th 21 20 19 
17th 22 21 20 
18th 22 21 20 
19th 23 22 21 
20th 24 23 22 


If your encounter features multiple monsters, balanc- 
ing it takes a little more work. Refer to the Multiple 
Monsters tables, which are broken up by level ranges, 
providing information for how to balance encounters for 
characters of 1st-5th level, 6th—10th level, 11th—15th 
level, and 16th—20th level. 

First, you need to note the challenge rating for each 
creature the party will face. Then, to create your encoun- 
ter, find the level of each character on the appropriate ta- 
ble. Each table shows what a single character of a given 
level is equivalent to in terms of challenge rating—a 
value represented by a ratio that compares numbers of 
characters to a single monster ranked by challenge rat- 
ing. The first number in each expression is the number 
of characters of the given level. The second number tells 
how many monsters of the listed challenge rating those 
characters are equivalent to. 


EN 


For example, reading the row for 1st-level characters 
from the 1st-5th Level table, we see that one 1st-level 
character is the equivalent of two CR 1/8 monsters or 
one CR 1/4 monster. The ratio reverses for higher chal- 
lenge ratings, where a single monster is more powerful 
than a single 1st-level character. One CR 1/2 creature is 
equivalent to three 1st-level characters, while one CR 1 
opponent is equivalent to five. 

Let's say you have a party of four 3rd-level characters. 
Using the table, you can see that one CR 2 foe is a good 
match for the entire party, but that the characters will 
likely have a hard time handling a CR 3 creature. 

Using the same guidelines, you can mix and match 
challenge ratings to put together a group of creatures 
to oppose four 3rd-level characters. For example, you 
could select one CR 1 creature. That's worth two 3rd- 
level characters, leaving you with two characters' worth 
of monsters to allocate. You could then add two CR 1/4 
monsters to account for one other character and one CR 
1/2 monster to account for the final character. In total, 
your encounter has one CR 1, one CR 1/2, and two CR 
1/4 creatures. 

For groups in which the characters are of different lev- 
els, you have two options. You can group all characters 
of the same level together, match them with monsters, 
and then combine all the creatures into one encounter. 
Alternatively, you can determine the group's average 
level and treat each character as being of that level for 
the purpose of selecting appropriate monsters. 

The above guidelines are designed to create a fight 
that will challenge a party while still being winnable. 

If you want to create an easier encounter that will 
challenge characters but not threaten to defeat them, 
you can treat the party as if it were roughly one-third 


smaller than it is. For example, to make an easy encoun- 
ter for a party of five characters, put them up against 
monsters that would be a tough fight for three charac- 
ters. Likewise, you can treat the party as up to half again 
larger to build a battle that is potentially deadly, though 
still not likely to be an automatic defeat. A party of four 
characters facing an encounter designed for six charac- 
ters would fall into this category. 


WEAK MONSTERS AND HiGH-LEVEL 
CHARACTERS 

To save space on the tables and keep them simple, some 
of the lower challenge ratings are missing from the high- 
er-level tables. For low challenge ratings not appearing 
on the table, assume a 1:12 ratio, indicating that twelve 
creatures of those challenge ratings are equivalent to 
one character of a specific level. 


STEP 4: SELECT MONSTERS 


After using the tables from the previous step to deter- 
mine the challenge ratings of the monsters in your en- 
counter, you're ready to pick individual monsters. This 
process is more of an art than a science. 

In addition to assessing monsters by challenge rating, 
it's important to look at how certain monsters might 


“акаў а е} of minions is hard. 
You end ve jetting mgd and “Е аць of Шем 
us easier if чеч Ca^ keep an eye on each one 


So skick with ben, eleven legs О 


MULTIPLE MONSTERS: 1ST—5TH LEVEL 
— Challenge Rating: 


Character 
Level 178 1/4 1/2 1 2 3 4 
Ist 12 1:1 3:1 51 == кис=с 
2па 1:3 1:2 1:1 3:1 6:1 — — 
3rd 1:5 1:2 11 ОАТС 
4th 1:8 Ae ШШ zv WA 64 
5th WEP па ато SAB 215537 


MULTIPLE MONSTERS: 6TH-10TH LEVEL 


Character 
Level 1/8 1/4 1/2 1 2 3 4 
6th 132 1:9 1:5 ПОВЕ 2л 2 
7th 1:12 1:12 1:6 1:3 11 1:1 21 
8th 1:125 21712 1:7 WA лол 
9th 1:12 1:12 1:8 T4 12 1 1:1 
10th Wea Ub RO), aS) Sb АН a 


MULTIPLE MONSTERS: 11TH—15TH LEVEL 


Character 
Level 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Mth 1:6 ПЗ) 2: 2:1 2: 
12th 1:8 3 a п 21 21 
13th 1:9 Ue 972 В) п 2л 
14th 1:10 VA т тт м 11 2:1 
15th 1:12 189) т) Ae 11 1:1 


MULTIPLE MONSTERS: 16TH-20TH LEVEL 


Character 
Level 2 3 4 5 6 YA 8 9 
16th TES. ss} 20017 11 ПЛ 278524 
17th 17 14 13 111 лп лл 2 


18th ey ab We RE IB 358) УЛ) 
19th ES; 16 а 2 TZ WW Ga та 
20th Tee) ks ab le ES ОЙ) ikl T8 


stack up against your group. Hit points, attacks, and 
saving throws are all useful indicators. Compare the 
damage a monster can deal to the hit point maximum of 
each character. Be wary of any monster that is capable 
of dropping a character with a single attack, unless you 
are designing the fight to be especially deadly. 

In the same way, compare the monsters’ hit points to 
the damage output of the party's strongest characters, 
again looking for targets that can be killed with one 
blow. Having a significant number of foes drop in the 
first rounds of combat can make an encounter too easy. 

Likewise, look at whether a monster's deadliest 
abilities call for saving throws that most of the party 
members are weak with, and compare the characters' 
offensive abilities to the monsters' saving throws. 

If the only creatures you can choose from at the de- 
sired challenge rating aren't a good match for the char- 
acters' statistics, don't be afraid to go back to step 3. By 
altering your challenge rating targets and adjusting the 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


Challenge Rating 


5 
4:1 
3:1 
31 
21 
2: 


— — ——-Challenge Rating: 


8 
31 
31 
2: 
2: 
21 


10 
2: 
21 
2: 
21 
11 


6 7 8 9 10 


51 6:1 — — = 
4:1 5:1 — — — 

a 
31 4:1 6:1 = => 


9 10 n 12 13 14 15 
4:1 5:1 6:1 — = = == 
эл 41 ST 6l > — — 
3:1 31 4: 5:1 
31 31 4: 4:1 5:1 6:1 — 
2: 31 3:1 4: 5:1 5:1 6:1 


——Challenge Rating: 


п 12 13 3174 15 16 17 18 19,20 
eB] ABL КЕК. SB SRI GB SS 
2] 31 81 Al a M 61 — WEE 
ee) p zug сы cA cb cm) Go = = 
2] 21 32 эл 41 4) 351 Бли 
73) 25) 22) 25) hp. Bb EBD SG) 


number of creatures in the encounter, you can come up 
with different options for building the encounter. 


STEP 5: ADD FLAVOR 


The events that unfold during an encounter have to do 
with a lot more than swinging weapons and casting 
spells. The most interesting confrontations also take 
into account the personality or behavior of the monsters, 
perhaps determining whether they can be communi- 
cated with or whether they're all acting in concert. Other 
possible factors include the nature of the physical envi- 
ronment, such as whether it includes obstacles or other 
features that might come into play, and the ever-present 
possibility of something unexpected taking place. 

If you already have ideas for how to flesh out your 
encounter in these ways, go right ahead and finish your 
creation. Otherwise, take a look at the following sec- 
tions for some basic advice on adding flavor elements to 
the simple mechanics of the fight. 


dd 2a 5 


MONSTER PERSONALITY 

To address the question of a monster's personality, you 
can use the tables in chapter 4 of the Dungeon Master's 
Guide, use the Monster Personality table below, or sim- 
ply jot down a few notes based on a creature's Monster 
Manual description. During the battle, you can use these 
ideas to inform how you portray the monsters and their 
actions. To keep things simple, you can assign the same 
personality traits to an entire group of monsters. For ex- 
ample, one bandit gang might be an unruly mob of brag- 
garts, while the members of another gang are always on 
edge and ready to flee at the first sign of danger. 


MONSTER PERSONALITY 
d8 Personality 


1 Cowardly; looking to surrender 
2 Greedy; wants treasure 
3 Braggart; makes a show of bravery but runs from 


danger 
Fanatic; ready to die fighting 
Rabble; poorly trained and easily rattled 


4 
5 

6 Brave; stands its ground 
7 Joker; taunts its enemies 
8 


Bully; refuses to believe it can lose 


MONSTER RELATIONSHIPS 

Do rivalries, hatreds, or attachments exist among the 
monsters in an encounter? If so, you can use such re- 
lationships to inform the monsters' behavior during 
combat. The death of a much-revered leader might 
throw its followers into a frenzy. On the other hand, a 
monster might decide to flee if its spouse is killed, or a 
mistreated toady might be eager to surrender and betray 
its master in return for its life. 


MONSTER RELATIONSHIPS 


d6 Relationship 

Has a rival; wants one random ally to suffer 

Is abused by others; hangs back, betrays at first 
opportunity 

Is worshiped; allies will die for it 

Is outcast by group; its allies ignore it 

Is outcast by choice; cares only for itself 

Is seen as a bully; its allies want to see it defeated 


о Uu oU 


TERRAIN AND TRAPS 

A few elements that make a battlefield something other 
than a large area of flat ground can go a long way to- 
ward spicing up an encounter. Consider setting your en- 
counter in an area that would provide challenges even if 
a fight were not taking place there. What potential perils 
or other features might draw the characters’ attention, 
either before or during the fight? Why are monsters lurk- 
ing in this area to begin with—does it offer good hiding 
places, for instance? 

To add details to an encounter area at random, look to 
the tables in appendix A of the Dungeon Master's Guide 
to determine room and area features, potential hazards, 
obstacles, traps, and more. 


RANDOM EVENTS 

Consider what might happen in an encounter area if the 
characters were to never enter it. Do the guards serve in 
shifts? What other characters or monsters might visit? 
Do creatures gather there to eat or gossip? Are there 
any natural phenomena—such as strong winds, earth 
tremors, or rain squalls—that sometimes take place 

in the area? Random events can add a fun element of 
the unexpected to an encounter. Just when you think 

a fight’s outcome is evident, an unforeseen event can 
make things more compelling. 

A number of the tables in the Dungeon Master's Guide 
can suggest random events. The tables used for encoun- 
ter location, weird locales, and wilderness weather in 
chapter 5 of that book are a good starting point for out- 
door encounters. The tables in appendix A can be useful 
for indoor and outdoor encounters—especially the tables 
for obstacles, traps, and tricks. Finally, consult the ran- 
dom encounter tables in the next section of this book for 
inspiration. 


Quick MATCHUPS 


The guidelines above assume that you are concerned 
about balance in your combat encounters and have 
enough time to prepare them. If you don't have much 
time, or if you want simpler but less precise guidelines, 
the Quick Matchups table below offers an alternative. 
This table gives you a way to match a character of 
a certain level with a number of monsters. The table 
lists the challenge ratings to use for including one, two, 
and four monsters per character for each level. For in- 
stance, looking at the 3rd-level entry on the table, you 
can see that a CR 1/2 monster is equivalent to one 3rd- 
level character, as are two CR 1/4 monsters and four 
CR 1/8 ones. 


Quick MarcHUPS 
Character 
Level 1 Monster 2 Monsters 4 Monsters 
Ist 1/4 1/8 = 
2nd 2 1/4 = 
3rd 1/2 1/4 1/8 
4th 1/2 1/4 
5th 1/2 
12 
1/2 


N 
= 
= 
о 00 00 м му су OQ) Uh A d d оо ш мы HD 
с\ Oc tc їл > Ri Ь ош оо ко ко мю җ җ 


+ о ш ш ш о ко кә кюю К м = м 


20th 10 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


RANDOM ENCOUNTERS: 


A WORLD OF POSSIBILITIES 


Chapter 3 of the Dungeon Master's Guide provides guid- 
ance on using random encounters in your game. This 
section builds on that guidance, offering a host of ran- 
dom encounter tables for you to use when you determine 
that a random encounter is going to take place. 

Using the monster lists in appendix B of that book as 
a basis, we've built a set of tables for each environment 
category: arctic, coastal, desert, forest, grassland, hill, 
mountain, swamp, Underdark, underwater, and urban. 
Within each category, separate tables are provided for 
each of the four tiers of play: levels 1—4, 5—10, 11-16, 
and 17-20. 

Even though you can use these tables "out of the box," 
the advice in the Dungeon Master's Guide still holds 
true: tailoring such tables to your game can reinforce 
the themes and flavor of your campaign. We encourage 
you to customize this material to make it your own. 

In the tables, a name in bold refers to a stat block in 
the Monster Manual. 


FLIGHT, OR FIGHT, OR... ? 


Each of the results on these tables represents a certain 
kind of challenge or potential challenge. 

If you let the dice have their way and the result is a 
large number of monsters, the generated encounter 
might be too difficult or dangerous for the characters in 
their present circumstances. They might want to flee to 
avoid contact, or not to approach any closer after per- 
ceiving the monsters from a distance. 

Of course, you also have the freedom to adjust the 
numbers, but it's important to remember that not every 
encounter involving a monster needs to result in combat. 
An encounter might indeed be the prelude to a battle, 

a parley, or some other interaction. What happens next 
depends on what the characters try, or what you decide 
is bound to occur. 

The tables also include entries for what the Dungeon 
Master's Guide calls "encounters of a less monstrous 
nature." Many of these results cry out to be customized 
or detailed, which offers you an opportunity to connect 
them to the story of your campaign. And in so doing, 
you've taken a step toward making your own personal- 
ized encounter table. Now, keep going! 


(э. 


Arctic ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 1—4) 
d100 Encounter 
01 1 giant owl 
02-05 146 + 3 kobolds 
06-08 144 + 3 trappers (commoners) 
09-10 Томі 
11-12 244 blood hawks 
13-17 246 bandits 


СНАРТЕЕ 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


9100 Encounter 

18-20  1d3 winged kobolds with 1d6 kobolds 

21-25 The partially eaten carcass of a mammoth, from 
which 1d4 weeks of rations can be harvested 

26-29  2d8 hunters (tribal warriors) 

30-35 1 half-ogre 

36-40  Single-file tracks in the snow that stop abruptly 

41-45  1d3ice mephits 

46-50 1 brown bear 

51-53 146 + 1 orcs 

54-55 1 polar bear 

56-57 146 scouts 

58-60 1 saber-toothed tiger 


61-65 А frozen pond with a jagged hole in the ice that ap- 


pears recently made 
66-68 1 berserker 


69-70 1 орге 
71-72 1 griffon 
73-75 1 druid 


76-80 344 refugees (commoners) fleeing from orcs 
81 1d3 veterans 
82 1d4 orogs 
83 2 brown bears 
84 1 orc Eye of Gruumsh with 2d8 orcs 
85 1d3 winter wolves 
86-87 144 yetis 
88 1 half-ogre 
89 143 manticores 
90 1 bandit captain with 246 bandits 
91 1 revenant 
92-93 1 troll 
94-95 1 werebear 
96-97 1 young remorhaz 
98 1 mammoth 
99 1 young white dragon 
00 1 frost giant 


Arctic ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 5-10) 

d100 Encounter 

01-05 2 saber-toothed tigers 

06-07 144 half-ogres 

08-10 143 +1 brown bears 

11-15  1d3 polar bears 

16-20 244 berserkers 

21-25  Ahalf-orc druid tending to an injured polar bear. If 
the characters assist the druid, she gives them a 
vial of antitoxin. 

26-30  2d8 scouts 

31-35  2d4 ice mephits 

36-40 246 + 1 zombies aboard a galleon trapped in the 
ice. Searching the ship yields 2d20 days of rations. 

41-45 1 manticore 

46-50 246+ 3 orcs 

51-53 146 + 2 ogres 


Encounter 

2d4 griffons 

1d4 veterans 

1 bandit captain with 1 druid, 1d3 berserkers, and 
2d10 + 5 bandits 

1d4 hours of extreme cold (see chapter 5 of the 
Dungeon Master's Guide) 

1 young remorhaz 

1 orc Eye of Gruumsh with 1d6 orogs and 2d8 + 6 
orcs 

1 revenant 

A howl that echoes over the land for 1d3 minutes 
1d3 mammoths 

1 young white dragon 

2d4 winter wolves 

1d6 + 2 yetis 

1d2 frost giants 

1d3 werebears 

1d4 trolls 

1 abominable yeti 

1 remorhaz 

1 roc 

2d4 young remorhazes 


ARCTIC ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 11-16) 


d100 
01 
02-04 
05-10 
11-20 
21-25 


26-35 
36-40 


41-50 
51-60 
61-65 


66—75 
76-80 


81-90 

91-96 

97-99 
00 


Encounter 

1 abominable yeti 

1d6 revenants 

1d4 + 1 werebears 

1d3 young white dragons 

A blizzard that reduces visibility to 5 feet for 1d6 
hours 

1 roc 


A herd of 3d20 + 60 caribou (deer) moving through 


the snow 

1d4 mammoths 

1d8 + 1 trolls 

A mile-wide frozen lake in which the preserved 
corpses of strange creatures can be seen 

2d4 young remorhazes 

A crumbling ice castle littered with the frozen bod- 
ies of blue-skinned humanoids 

1 adult white dragon 

148 + 1 frost giants 

1d4 remorhazes 

1 ancient white dragon 


in 


Crazy things hapen all Lhe lime, 
ou never know ыда: just around 
Lhe corner or behind that door or 
down in Шлар rit where V threw 

all these duacues. Dwarues wight be 
doun Here slit. Ales re hardy, 
{һе bounce. Соле оез, 


Arctic ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 17—20) 


d100 
01—02 
03-04 
05—06 
07-08 
09—10 
11-20 
21-25 


26-35 
36—40 


41—50 
51—60 
61—65 


66—75 
76—80 


81—90 

91—96 

97—99 
00 


Encounter 

2d10 revenants 

2d8 trolls 

2d10 werebears 

1 frost giant 

2d4 young remorhazes 

1d4 frost giants 

A circular patch of black ice on the ground. The air 
temperature around the patch is warmer than in 
the surrounding area, and characters who inspect 
the ice find bits of machinery frozen within. 

1 ancient white dragon 

An adventurer frozen 6 feet under the ice; 50% 
chance the corpse has a rare magic item of the 
DM's choice 

1d3 abominable yetis 

1d4 remorhazes 

A 500-foot-high wall of ice that is 300 feet thick and 
spread across 1d4 miles 

1d4 rocs 

The likeness of a stern woman with long, flowing 
hair, carved into the side of a mountain 

1d10 frost giants with 2d4 polar bears 

1d3 adult white dragons 

2d4 abominable yetis 

1 ancient white dragon with 1d3 young white 


dragons 
^d N 
e 
x - P d 


COASTAL ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 1—4) 


d100 
01 
02-05 
06-10 
n 
12-13 
14-15 
16-18 
19-20 
21-25 


26-27 
28-29 
30-31 
32-33 
34-35 
36-40 


41-42 


Encounter 

1 pseudodragon 

2d8 crabs 

2d6 fishers (commoners) 

1d3 poisonous snakes 

1d6 guards protecting a stranded noble 

2d4 scouts 

2d10 merfolk 

1d6 + 2 sahuagin 

1d4 ghouls feeding on corpses aboard the wreck- 
age of a merchant ship. A search uncovers 2d6 
bolts of ruined silk, a 50-foot length of rope, and a 
barrel of salted herring. 

1d4 winged kobolds with 1d6 + 1 kobolds 

2d6 tribal warriors 

3d4 kobolds 

2d4 5 blood hawks 

148 + 1 pteranodons 

A few dozen baby turtles struggling to make their 
way to the sea 

1d6 « 2 giant lizards 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTERS TOOLS 


i 


d100 Encounter 
43-44 146+ 4 giant crabs 
45—46  2d4stirges 
47-48  2d6 + 3 bandits 
49-53 244 sahuagin 
54-55 146+ 2 scouts 
56-60 1 ѕеа hag 
61-65 A momentary formation in the waves that looks 
like an enormous humanoid face 
66-70 1 druid 
71-75  1d4 harpies 
76-80 Alone hermit (acolyte) sitting on the beach, con- 
templating the meaning of the multiverse 
81 1d4 berserkers 
82 1d6 giant eagles 
83 2d4 giant toads 
84 1d4 ogres or 1d4 merrow 
85 3d6 sahuagin 
86 1d4 veterans 
87 1d2 plesiosauruses 
88 1 bandit captain with 2d6 bandits 
89 1d3 manticores 
90 1 banshee 
91-92 1d4 +3 griffons 
93-94 1 sahuagin priestess with 143 merrow апа 246 
sahuagin 
95-96 1 sahuagin baron 
97-98 1 water elemental 
99 1 cyclops 
00 1 young bronze dragon 


COASTAL ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 5-10) 
d100 Encounter 
01 2d8 giant wolf spiders 
02-03  3d6 pteranodons 
04-05 244 scouts 
06-07 146 + 2 ѕаһиаріп 
08 1 ѕеа hag 
09-10 144 + 1 giant toads 
11—15 346 sahuagin 
16-20 246 giant eagles 
21-25  Apseudodragon chasing gulls through the air 
26-29 142 druids 
30-32 244+ 1 giant toads 
33-35 1 commoner singing a dirge (day only) or 
1 banshee (night only) 


d100 
36-40 


41-43 
44-46 
47-50 
51-53 
54-56 
57-60 
61-65 
66-70 
71-75 


76-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-93 
94-95 
96 


97 
98 
99 
00 


Encounter 

A stoppered bottle containing an illegible note and 
half buried in the sand 

3 sea hags 

1d8 + 1 harpies 

1d4 plesiosauruses 

1d4 manticores 

2d4 ogres 

1d10 griffons 

A battle at sea between two galleons 

144 + 3 merrow 

A pirate crew consisting of 1 bandit captain, 1 
druid, 2 berserkers, and 2d12 bandits, all searching 
for buried treasure 

A severed humanoid hand tangled in a net 

1 water elemental 

1 cyclops 

1d4 banshees (night only) 

2d4 veterans 

1 young bronze dragon 

1d3 cyclopes 

1 young blue dragon 

1 sahuagin baron with 1d3 sahuagin priestesses 
and 2d8 sahuagin 

1 djinni 

1 roc 

1 marid 

1 storm giant 


COASTAL ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 11-16) 


d100 
01 
02-04 
05-08 
09-10 
11-20 
21-25 
26-35 
36-40 
41-50 
51-55 
56-60 
61-65 


66-70 
71-75 
76—80 


81-82 
83—84 
85—86 


Encounter 

1d4 banshees (night only) 

1 cyclops 

1d6 + 2 manticores 

1d8 + 2 veterans 

1 young blue dragon 

A nest of 146 dragon turtle eggs 

1d4 sahuagin barons 

A trident partially buried in the sand 

1 young bronze dragon 

1 marid 

1d6 water elementals 

2d6 ghasts crawling over 1d6 wrecked ships and 
feeding on the dead 

1 djinni 

1d3 young bronze dragons 

A beached whale, dead and bloated. If it takes any 
damage, it explodes, and each creature within 

30 feet of it must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving 
throw, taking 5d6 bludgeoning damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 
2d4 cyclopes 

1 storm giant 

1d3 young blue dragons 


d100 Encounter 


87-88 1 adult bronze dragon 

89-90 1 adult blue dragon 

91-93 143 rocs 

94-97 1 dragon turtle 

98-99 1 ancient bronze dragon 
00 1 ancient blue dragon 


COASTAL ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 17-20) 
4100 Encounter 


01-10 roc 

11-20 1 storm giant 

21-25 An adult bronze dragon fighting an adult blue 
dragon to the death 

26-40 246 cyclopes 

41-50 1 adult bronze dragon or 1 adult blue dragon 

51-60  1d3 djinn or 1d3 marids 

61-70 1 dragon turtle 

71-75  1d3rocs 

76-80 146 + 2 waterspouts that dance on the water before 
stopping abruptly 

81-90  1d6 young blue dragons 

91-96 1 ancient bronze dragon 

97-99 1 ancient blue dragon 


00 1d3 + 1 storm giants 


DESERT ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 1—4) 


d100 
01 
02 
03 
04 


05 
06 
07 


Encounter 

3d8 scorpions 

2d4 vultures 

1 abandoned mule 

2d6 commoners with 2d4 camels bound for a dis- 
tant city 

1d6 flying snakes 

2d6 hyenas or 2d6 jackals 

1d6 guards escorting a noble to the edge of the 
desert, all of them astride camels 

1d6 cats 

1 pseudodragon 

1d4 poisonous snakes 

2d4 stirges 

1d6 + 2 giant wolf spiders 

1 scout 

2d4 giant poisonous snakes 

Single-file tracks marching deeper into the desert 
444 kobolds 

1 jackalwere 

3d6 tribal warriors 


GHAPTER? | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


КА 


4100 Encounter 

32-33  1d6 giant lizards 

34-35 1 swarm of insects 

36-40  Anoasis surrounded by palm trees and containing 
the remnants of an old camp 

41-44  3d6 bandits 

45-46 194 constrictor snakes 

47-48 244 winged kobolds 

49-50 1 dust mephit 

51-52 143 + 1 giant toads 

53-54 144 giant spiders 


55 1 druid 

56-57 244 hobgoblins 
58 1 wight 

59-60 logre 


61-65  Abrass lamp lying on the ground 
66-67 194 giant vultures 
68 ] phase spider 
69 1 giant constrictor snake 
70-71 1 gnoll pack lord with 143 giant hyenas 
72 1d6 + 2 gnolls 
73-74 | mummy 
75 1d3 half-ogres 
76-80 A pile of humanoid bones wrapped in rotting cloth 
81-82 1 lamia 
83 1 hobgoblin captain with 2d6 hobgoblins 
84 2d4 death dogs 
85-86  1d4 giant scorpions 
87 1 yuan-ti malison with 144 + 1 yuan-ti purebloods 
88-89 1 bandit captain with 1 druid and 346 bandits 
90 2d4 thri-kreen 


91 1 air elemental 
92 1d3 couatls 
93 1 fire elemental 


94 1d4 gnoll fangs of Yeenoghu 
95 1 revenant 

96 1d4 weretigers 

97 1 cyclops 

98 1 young brass dragon 

99 ] medusa 

00 1 yuan-ti abomination 


DESERT ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 5-10) 
4100 Encounter 
01 1d6 scouts 
02 2d4 jackalweres 
03 2d6 hobgoblins 
04 1d4 + 3 dust mephits 
05 1d6 swarms of insects 
06 1 giant constrictor snake 
07-08 1 lion 
09-10 244 gnolls 
11-12 246 giant toads 
13-17 1 mummy 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER’S TOOLS 


d100 
18-20 
21-25 
26—28 
29-35 
36-40 
41-43 
44-46 
47-50 
51—52 
53 
54—55 
56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-65 
66 
67-68 
69—70 


71-72 
73 
74-75 
76-80 


81-83 
84-85 
86-87 
88-90 
91 
92 
93 
94 
95 
96 
97 
98 
99 
00 


DESERT 


а100 
01 
02-05 
06-10 
11-12 
13-14 
15-17 
18—20 
21-25 


26-27 
28-30 
31-32 
33-35 


Encounter 

1d8 + 1 giant vultures 

A stone obelisk partly buried in the sand 
1 ogre with 143 half-ogres 

1d10 giant hyenas 

1d6 + 1 empty tents 

1d6 + 2 thri-kreen 

2d4 yuan-ti purebloods 

1d6 + 3 death dogs 

1d4 giant scorpions 

1 fire elemental 

1 hobgoblin captain with 3d4 hobgoblins 
1d6 + 2 ogres 

1d4 lamias 

1 air elemental 

A meteorite resting at the bottom of a glassy crater 
1d4 +1 wights 

1 young brass dragon 

1 bandit captain with 1d3 berserkers and 3d6 
bandits 

1 cyclops 

1d4 couatls 

1d4 yuan-ti malisons 

Strong winds that kick up dust and reduce visibility 
to 1d6 feet for 1d4 hours 

1 revenant with 143 wights 

1d8 + 1 phase spiders 

1d6 + 2 weretigers 

2d4 gnoll fangs of Yeenoghu 

1 young blue dragon 

1d4 cyclopes 

1d3 yuan-ti abominations 

1d4 medusas 

1 guardian naga 

1d3 young brass dragons 

1 efreeti 

1 roc 

1 gynosphinx 

1 adult brass dragon 


ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 11-16) 
Encounter 

1 young brass dragon 

4d6 gnolls 

3d10 giant hyenas 

148 + 1 lamias 

2d4 gnoll fangs of Yeenoghu 

1d6 + 2 giant scorpions 

2d4 phase spiders 

A desert caravan consisting of 1d6 merchants (no- 
bles) with 2d6 guards 

146 + 1 couatls 

1d4 fire elementals 

1 hobgoblin captain with 3d10 + 10 hobgoblins 
2d4 wights 


d100 
36-40 
41-42 
43-45 
46-48 
49-50 
51-55 
56—60 
61—65 
| 66—70 
71—75 
76—78 
79-82 
83-85 
86 
87-88 
89 
90 
91 
92-93 
94 
95 
96-97 
98—99 
00 


DESERT 
d100 
01-05 
06-10 


11—14 
15-18 
19-22 
23-25 


| 26—30 
31—35 
| 36—40 


41—50 
51—60 
61—63 


64—72 
73—80 
81—85 
86—90 
91—96 
97-99 
00 


Encounter 

1d6 square miles of desert glass 
1 young blue dragon 

1d6 + 2 weretigers 

1d4 air elementals 

146 + 1 yuan-ti malisons 
144 medusas 

1d4 revenants with 3d12 skeletons 
A plundered pyramid 
1d4 young brass dragons 
1d3 yuan-ti abominations 
146 + 2 cyclopes 

1 adult brass dragon 

1 purple worm 

1d2 young blue dragons 

1 mummy lord 

1d3 guardian nagas 

1 adult blue dragon 

1d2 gynosphinxes 

1d3 efreet 

1 androsphinx 

144 rocs 

1 adult blue dracolich 

1 ancient brass dragon 

1 ancient blue dragon 


ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 17-20) 
Encounter 

1 adult brass dragon 

1d2 yuan-ti abominations with 2d10 + 5 yuan-ti 
malisons and 4d6 + 6 yuan-ti purebloods 

1d6 + 2 medusas 

1d2 purple worms 

2d4 cyclopes 

An abandoned city made from white marble, empty 
during the day. At night, harmless apparitions 
roam the streets, replaying the final moments of 
their lives. 

1d3 young blue dragons 

1 mummy lord 

1d4 hours of extreme heat (see chapter 5 of the 
Dungeon Master's Guide) 

1d3 guardian nagas 

1d4 efreet 

An old signpost identifying a single destination, 
called Pazar 

1d4 rocs 

1d3 gynosphinxes 

1 adult blue dracolich 

1 androsphinx 


1 ancient brass dragon 
1 ancient blue dragon 
1d4 adult brass dragons 


MN 


<P. 


SONA ^) 
E — za Ns жы € 


N 


FOREST ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 1—4) 


d100 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08 
09 
10 
n 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
7 
18 
19 
20 
21-25 


26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36-40 


4 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 


Encounter 

1 giant owl 

1d4 cats 

2d4 woodcutters (commoners) 

1 badger or 1d4 poisonous snakes 

2d8 baboons 

1d6 + 3 hyenas 

lowl 

1 pseudodragon 

1 panther 

1 giant poisonous snake 

1d6 + 2 boars 

144 + 1 giant lizards 

1 ape or 1 tiger 

2d6 tribal warriors with 1d6 mastiffs 

1d6 + 2 giant bats or 3d6 flying snakes 

1 scout or 2d4 guards with 1d8 mastiffs 

1d8 + 1 winged kobolds 

1d3 constrictor snakes 

1d10 + 5 giant rats or 2d6 + 3 giant weasels 
1d4 +1 needle blights with 1d6 + 3 twig blights 
A lost, weeping child. If the characters take the 
child home, the parents reward them with 1d3 po- 
tions of healing. 

1d8 + 1 giant frogs 

4d4 kobolds 

1d3 black bears 

3d6 stirges 

1 satyr 

2d4 kenku 

1d3 vine blights with 1d12 awakened shrubs 
1d4 swarms of ravens 

1 faerie dragon (yellow or younger) 

1d4 + 2 giant badgers 

A young woodcutter (scout) racing through the for- 
est to rescue a lost friend 

2d4 blink dogs 

1d8 + 1 sprites 

1d6 + 2 elk 

1d4 lizardfolk or 3d6 bandits 

1d4 + 4 wolves 

2d4 giant wolf spiders 

1 swarm of insects or 2d8 blood hawks 

1d6 4 2 pixies 

1 brown bear 

1d4 + 3 goblins 

1d3 dryads 

1 awakened tree 


Aff 
CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S aA 
= 7: 


P» 4 


а100 


61—65 


Encounter 

] phase spider 

1d6 harpies 

1 ettercap or 1d8 + 1 orcs 

1 goblin boss with 2d6 + 1 goblins 
1 ankheg 

1 giant constrictor snake 

1d4 bugbears or 2d4 hobgoblins 

1 pegasus 

A stream of cool, clean water flowing between the 
trees 

1d4 half-ogres or 1 ogre 

1 faerie dragon (green or older) 

1 werewolf or 1d8 + 1 worgs 

1 druid harvesting mistletoe 

1 will-o'-wisp 

1d4 dire wolves or 1 giant boar 
1d10 giant wasps 

1 owlbear or 1 giant elk 

2d6 gnolls 

1d6 giant toads 

1d6 web cocoons hanging from the branches, hold- 
ing withered carcasses 


d100 
81 
82 
83 
84 
85 
86 
87 
88 
89 
90 
91 
92 


93 
94 
95 


96 
97 
98 
99 
00 


Encounter 

1 wereboar or 1d4 giant boars 

1d6 + 2 giant spiders 

1d4 centaurs or 1d4 giant elk 

1 orc Eye of Gruumsh with 204 + 2 orcs 

1 gnoll fang of Yeenoghu 

1d4 gricks 

1 bandit captain with 2d6 + 3 bandits 

1d4 wererats 

1 couatl (day) or 1 banshee (night) 

1 gnoll pack lord with 1d4 giant hyenas 

2d4 berserkers or 1d4 veterans 

1 lizardfolk shaman with 1d3 swarms of poisonous 
snakes and 1d10 + 2 lizardfolk 

1d4 displacer beasts 

1d3 green hags 

1 hobgoblin captain with 2d6 hobgoblins and 1d4 
giant boars 

1 yuan-ti malison with 146 + 1 yuan-ti purebloods 
1d3 weretigers 

1 gorgon or 1 unicorn 

1 shambling mound 

1 yuan-ti abomination 


Forest ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 5-10) 


d100 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 


07 
08 
| 09 
10 
| 11-13 
14-15 
16-17 
18 
19 
20 
21-25 


26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 

33 

34 

35 
36-40 


41-42 
43 
44 

45-46 

47-48 

49-50 

51-52 

53—54 

55—56 

57—58 

59—60 

61—65 


66—67 
68—69 
70—71 
72-73 
74-75 
76—80 


81 


Encounter 

2d4 vine blights 

2d6 hobgoblins or 2d6 orcs 

2d4 apes or 2d4 satyrs 

1d3 will-o’-wisps 

1d4 swarms of poisonous snakes 

1 orc Eye of Gruumsh with 1d3 orogs and 1d8 + 2 
orcs 

1d3 constrictor snakes or 1d4 tigers 

1 goblin boss with 3d6 goblins 

1 faerie dragon (any age) 

1 brown bear or 1d6 + 2 black bears 

1d4 giant boars 

148 + 1 giant spiders 

1 lizardfolk shaman with 2d4 lizardfolk 

1d10 giant toads 

1d4 ankhegs 

1d3 awakened trees (day) or 1 banshee (night) 
A small shack almost hidden by the deep forest. 
The interior is empty aside from a large cast-iron 
oven. 

1 couatl 

1d4 ogres or 1d6 2 half-ogres 

1 gnoll pack lord with 1d4 + 1 giant hyenas 

1d6 wererats 

1d4 gricks 

148 + 1 yuan-ti purebloods 

1d6 pegasi 

An old stone archway of obvious elven design. Any 
character who passes under it makes Wisdom (Per- 
ception) checks with advantage for 1 hour. 

1d6 + 2 dryads 

1d4 giant elk 

148 + 1 harpies 

1 bandit captain with 1 druid and 1d6 + 5 bandits 
2d4 dire wolves 

2d4 bugbears 

2d4 centaurs 

3d10 blink dogs 

1d4 owlbears 

1d8 + 1 berserkers 

1d3 green hags 

A clear pool of water with 1d6 sleeping animals 
lying around its edge 

1d4 werewolves 

1 werebear 

148 + 1 ettercaps 

2d10 elk 

1d4 veterans 

An old tree with a wizened face carved into the 
trunk 

1d4 wereboars 


d100 
82 
83 
84 


85 
86 
87 
88 
89 
90 
91 
92 
93 
94 
95 
96 
97 
98 
99 
00 


FOREST 
d100 
01-03 
04-05 


06-07 
08-10 
11-15 
16-20 
21-25 


26-30 
31-35 
36-40 


41-45 
46-50 
51-52 
53-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59—60 
61-65 


66—67 
68—69 
70—71 
72—73 
74—75 
76—80 
81—82 
83-84 


Encounter 

2d4 displacer beasts 

1d4 shambling mounds 

1 hobgoblin captain with 3d10 hobgoblins and 4d12 
goblins 

1 yuan-ti abomination 

1d8 + 1 phase spiders 

1d4 trolls 

2d4 yuan-ti malisons 

1 oni 

1d4 unicorns 

1d6 + 2 weretigers 

1 young green dragon 

1d4 gorgons 

146 + 2 gnoll fangs of Yeenoghu 
] treant 

1d4 revenants 

1 grick alpha with 1d6 + 1 gricks 
144 giant apes 

1 guardian naga 

1 adult gold dragon 


ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 11-16) 

Encounter 

1 werebear 

1d4 druids performing a ritual for the dead (day 
only) or 1d4 banshees (night only) 

1d3 couatls 

1d3 gnoll fangs of Yeenoghu with 2d6 + 3 gnolls 
2d4 displacer beasts 

1d6 + 2 veterans 

A pool of clear, still water. Gold coins litter the bot- 
tom, but they disappear if removed from the pool. 
1d4 « 1 green hags with 1d3 owlbears 

1d6 + 2 werewolves 

A small woodland shrine dedicated to a mysterious 
cult named the Siswa 

1d6 + 2 phase spiders 

2d4 yuan-ti malisons 

1d3 werebears 

1d4 revenants 

] young green dragon 

1d4 trolls 

1d6 + 2 wereboars 

A group of seven people (commoners) wearing ani- 
mal masks and ambling through the woods 

1d4 gorgons 

1d3 shambling mounds 

1 treant 

1d4 unicorns 

1d6 + 2 weretigers 

Peals of silvery laughter that echo from a distance 
1 guardian naga 

1 young gold dragon 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


d100 
85—86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-93 
94—96 
97—99 
00 


FOREST 
d100 
01-05 
06-10 
11—13 
14-16 
17—19 
20-22 
23225 


26-28 
29—31 
32-34 
35-37 
38-40 


41-43 
44—46 
47-49 
50-52 
53-62 
63-65 


66—75 
76-80 
81-90 
91-96 
97-99 
00 


~ 


Encounter 

1 grick alpha with 2d4 gricks 
1d3 yuan-ti abominations 

1 adult green dragon 

1d8 + 1 giant apes 

2d4 oni 

1d3 treants 

1 ancient green dragon 


ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 17—20) 
Encounter 

1 young green dragon 

1 treant 

1 guardian naga 

1d10 revenants 

1d8 + 1 unicorns 

1d3 grick alphas 

For a few hundred feet, wherever the characters 
step, flowers bloom and emit soft light. 

1 young gold dragon 

1d6 + 2 shambling mounds 

2d4 werebears 

1d4 oni 

4d6 + 10 elves living in a small community in the 
treetops 

146 + 2 gorgons 

2d4 trolls 

1d4 giant apes 

1d3 yuan-ti abominations 

1d3 young green dragons 

A 50-foot-tall stone statue of an elf warrior with 
hand raised, palm out, as if to forbid travelers from 
coming this way 

1d4 treants 

A cairn set atop a low hill 

1 adult gold dragon 

1 ancient green dragon 

2d4 + 1 treants 

1 ancient gold dragon 


GRASSLAND ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 1—5) 


d100 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08—09 


Encounter 

1 hobgoblin captain with 1d4 + 1 hobgoblins 
1 chimera 

1 gorgon 

1d2 couatls 

1 ankylosaurus 

1 weretiger 

1d3 allosauruses 

1d3 elephants 


GHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


d100 
10-14 


15-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-28 
29-32 
33-36 
37-40 
41-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49-50 
51-52 
53-54 
55—58 
59-62 
63-65 
66-69 
70-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 


81-82 
83-84 


85-89 

90-91 

92—93 
94 


95-96 
97 
98-99 
00 


Encounter 

A circle of standing stones within which the air is 
utterly still, no matter how hard the wind blows 
outside 

1 phase spider 

1 gnoll pack lord with 1d4 giant hyenas 

1 orog or 1 pegasus 

1 ankheg 

1d3 rhinoceroses 

1d3 cockatrices 

1d6 + 2 giant wasps or 1d4 + 3 swarms of insects 
1d4 jackalweres or 1d4 scouts 

1d8 giant goats or 1d8 worgs 

2d4 hobgoblins, 2d4 orcs, or 2d4 gnolls 

1d2 giant poisonous snakes 

1d6 + 2 elk or 1d6 + 2 riding horses 

2d4 goblins 

1d3 boars 

] panther (leopard) or 1 lion 

1d6 + 3 goblins riding wolves 

2d6 giant wolf spiders or 1 giant eagle 

1d8 + 4 pteranodons 

3d6 wolves 

2d4 + 2 axe beaks 

1 giant boar or 1d2 tigers 

1 ogre or 1d3 bugbears 

1 giant elk, or 1 gnoll pack lord with 143 giant 
hyenas 

1d3 giant vultures or 1d3 hippogriffs 

1 goblin boss with 1d6 + 2 goblins and 1d4 + 3 
wolves, or 1d3 thri-kreen 

1d3 druids patrolling the wilds 

1d6 scarecrows or 1 wereboar 

1d3 centaurs or 1d3 griffons 

1d3 gnoll fangs of Yeenoghu, or 1 orc Eye of 
Gruumsh with 2d4 + 1 orcs 

1 triceratops 

1 cyclops or 1 bulette 

1d4 manticores 

1 tyrannosaurus rex 


GRASSLAND ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 6-10) 


а100 
01 
02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-09 
10-11 


12—13 
14—15 
16—17 
18-19 


Encounter 

1d3 gorgons 

1d4 cyclopes 

1d3 gnoll fangs of Yeenoghu 

1 chimera 

1d4 + 1 veterans on riding horses 

A tornado that touches down 1d6 miles away, tear- 
ing up the land for 1 mile before it dissipates 
1d3 manticores 

2d4 ankhegs 

1d8 + 1 centaurs 

1d6 + 2 griffons 


Encounter 

1d6 elephants 

A stretch of land littered with rotting war ma- 
chines, bones, and banners of forgotten armies 
1d8 + 1 bugbears 

1 gnoll pack lord with 144 + 1 giant hyenas 

2d4 scarecrows 

1d12 lions 

1d10 thri-kreen 

1 allosaurus 

1 tiger 

1d2 giant eagles or 1d2 giant vultures 

1 goblin boss with 2d4 goblins 

1d2 pegasi 

1 ankylosaurus 

1d2 couatls 

1 orc Eye of Gruumsh with 148 + 1 orcs 

2d4 hippogriffs 

144 + 1 rhinoceroses 

1 hobgoblin captain with 246 hobgoblins 

1d3 phase spiders 

1d6 + 2 giant boars 

244 giant elk 

1d4 ogres and 1d4 orogs 

A hot wind that carries the stench of rot 

1d3 weretigers 

1 bulette 

A tribe of 2d20 + 20 nomads (tribal warriors) on 
riding horses following a herd of antelope (deer). 
The nomads are willing to trade food, leather, and 
information for weapons. 

1d6 + 2 wereboars 

1 young gold dragon 

1d4 triceratops 

1d3 tyrannosaurus rexes 


GRASSLAND ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 11-16) 


а100 
01—05 
06—10 
11-15 
16-17 


18-27 
28-30 


31-40 
41-46 
47-56 
57-61 
62-66 
67—69 


Encounter 

3d6 wereboars 

2d10 gnoll fangs of Yeenoghu 

1d4 bulettes 

An old road of paved stones, partly reclaimed by 
wilderness, that travels for 1d8 miles in either di- 
rection before ending 

1d12 couatls 

A witch (mage) dwelling in a crude hut. She offers 
potions of healing, antitoxins, and other consum- 


able items for sale in exchange for food and news. 


2d10 elephants 

2d4 weretigers 

1d8 + 1 cyclopes 

1d3 chimeras 

5 triceratops 

A giant hole 50 feet across that descends nearly 
500 feet before opening into an empty cave 


d100 
70-79 
80-88 
89-90 


91-96 
97-99 
00 


Encounter 

1d4 + 3 gorgons 

1d3 young gold dragons 

A circular section of grass nearly a quarter-mile 
across that appears to have been pressed down; 
1d4 more such circles connected by lines can be 
seen from overhead. 

2d4 tyrannosaurus rexes 

1 adult gold dragon 

1 ancient gold dragon 


GRASSLAND ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 17—20) 


d100 
01-10 
11-20 
21-25 


26-35 
36-40 
41-50 
51-60 
61-65 


66-75 
76-80 


81-90 
91-96 
97-99 


Encounter 

2d6 triceratops 

1d10 gorgons 

2d6 hyenas feeding on the carcass of a dead 
dinosaur 

3d6 bulettes 

A fiery chariot that races across the sky 

1d3 young gold dragons 

2d4 cyclopes 

A valley where all the grass has died and the 
ground is littered with stumps and fallen tree 
trunks, all petrified 

2d10 bugbears with 4d6 goblins and 2d10 wolves 
A friendly adventuring party of 1d6 + 1 characters 
of varying races, classes, and levels (average level 
1d6 + 2). They share information about their recent 
travels. 

1d12 chimeras 

1d6 + 2 tyrannosaurus rexes 

1 adult gold dragon 

1 ancient gold dragon 


RS 
А lo" id) AA 


Hitt ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 1—4) 


а100 
01 
02-03 
04—06 
07 
08 
09 
10 
11-13 
14 
15 
16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-22 


Encounter 

1 eagle 

2d4 baboons 

1d6 bandits 

1d4 vultures 

1d10 commoners 

1 raven 

1 poisonous snake 

2d6 bandits or 2d6 tribal warriors 
2d8 goats 

1d6 + 4 blood hawks 

1d4 + 3 giant weasels 

1d3 guards with 1d2 mastiffs and 1 mule 
1d6 + 5 hyenas 

2d4 stirges 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


d100 Encounter 
23-25 An empty cave littered with bones 
26 1 pseudodragon or 1d3 giant owls 
27 1 lion or 1 panther (cougar) 
28-30  2d8 kobolds 
31 1 hippogriff 
32-34  2d4 goblins 
35 1 моге 
36 1d3 swarms of bats or 1d3 swarms of ravens 
37 1 giant eagle 
38-40  Anold dwarf sitting on a stump, whittling a piece 
of wood 
41 144 elk 
42 1d4 winged kobolds with 1d6 kobolds 
43 146 + 2 giant wolf spiders 
44-45  2d4 wolves 
46 1 swarm of insects 
47 1d8 + 1 axe beaks 
48-49 1 brown bear or 143 boars 
50 1 scout 
51 logre 
52-53 244 gnolls 
54 1 giant elk 
55 1d3 + 1 harpies 
56 1 werewolf 
57-58 244 orcs 
59 1d4 half-ogres 
60 1 druid or 1 veteran 
61-63 The corpse of an adventurer that carries an intact 
explorer's pack and lies atop a longsword 
64 1 green hag 
65-66 143 dire wolves 
67-68 Asmall cemetery containing 2d6 graves 
69-70 1 hobgoblin captain with 2d4 hobgoblins 
71 244 giant goats 
72 1 manticore 
73-74  1d6 + 2 hobgoblins 
75 1 phase spider 
76-78 A pile of droppings from a very large bird 
79 1 gnoll fang of Yeenoghu 
80 1d3 giant boars 
81 1 gnoll pack lord with 1d3 giant hyenas 
82 1 bandit captain with 2d4 bandits 
83 1 orc Eye of Gruumsh with 148 + 2 orcs 
84 1d3 orogs or 1d4 berserkers 
85-86 1 ettin or 1 wereboar 
87-88 1 goblin boss with 2d6 goblins 
89 1d3 griffons 
90 1d3 perytons or 1d4 pegasi 
91-96 143 trolls 
97-99 1 cyclops 
00 1 stone giant 


CHAPTER? | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


Hitt ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 5-10) 


d100 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08 
09 
10 
11—12 
13 
14—15 
16—17 
18—19 
20 
21-25 


26-27 
28-29 
30-31 
32-33 
34-35 
36-40 


41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49-50 
51-54 
55-58 
59-62 
63-65 
66-69 
70-73 
74-77 
78-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-93 
94—96 
97-98 
99 
00 


Encounter 

1d4 pegasi or 1d3 perytons 

146 + 2 giant goats 

1 manticore 

1d8 +1 gnolls or 1d8 + 1 hobgoblins | 
144 lions | 
146 + 2 worgs 

144 brown bears 
3d6 axe beaks | 
1 half-ogre with 246 orcs 

2d10 winged kobolds 

1 goblin boss with 1d4 dire wolves and 2d6 goblins 

1d6 giant elk 

1d8 + 1 giant eagles 

1d4 phase spiders 

1 gnoll pack lord with 2d4 giant hyenas 

2d4 hippogriffs 

A 15-foot-tall stone statue of a dwarf warrior that 

has been tipped over on its side 

2d4 orogs 

1d4 + 1 griffons 

1d6 + 2 harpies 

1 orc Eye of Gruumsh with 2d6 + 3 orcs 

1d4 + 3 giant boars 

A stone door set into the side of a steep hill, open- 

ing onto 15 feet of descending stairs that end at a 

cave-in 

1d3 green hags 

1d4 werewolves 

1d6 + 2 ogres 

1 hobgoblin captain with 2d8 hobgoblins | 
1 bandit captain with 3d6 bandits 

1 chimera 

1d4 ettins 

1d6 + 2 veterans with 2d6 berserkers 

An abandoned wooden hut 

1 galeb duhr 

] bulette 

] wyvern 

2d6 + 10 goats with 1 herder (tribal warrior) | 
1d3 hill giants 

2d4 wereboars 

1d4 revenants | 
1d2 gorgons 

148 + 1 gnoll fangs of Yeenoghu 

1d4 cyclopes 

1 young red dragon 

1d4 stone giants 

1d3 young copper dragons 

1 roc 


BENE к C РЕ E 


HiLL ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 11-16) d100 Encounter 
di00 Encounter 78-80 143 nobles with 144 scouts prospecting for gold 
f 01 2d8 manticores or 2d8 phase spiders 81-85 1 adult copper dragon 
| 02-04  1d6 green hags with 1d6 wyverns 86-90  2d4 stone giants 
05-07 1 hobgoblin captain with 1 hill giant and 4910 91-96  1d4rocs 
hobgoblins 97-99 1 adult red dragon 
08-10 246 + 3 werewolves 00 1 ancient copper dragon 
11—14 146+ 2 ейіпѕ 
15-18 143 bulettes HILL ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 17-20) 
19-22 144 werebears d100 Encounter 
23-24 А stream of smoke emerging from a small chimney 01 142 rocs 
in the hillside 02-05 1 young red dragon 
25-28  1d4 wyverns 06-10 2d6ettins 
29-32 148 + 1 wereboars 11-15 194 bulettes 
335s 0mmulcsirevenants 16-20 1910 revenants 
37-38 A mild earthquake that shakes the region for 1920 21-25  Thewhite oütlineofan enormous horse carved 
seconds into the side of a high hill 
39-42 143 chimeras 26-30 1d6 + 1 gorgons 


43-46  1d4 gorgons 
47-50 146+ 2 gnoll fangs of Yeenoghu 


31-35 244 + 1 trolls 
36-40 Тһе scorched remains of 2410 humanoids littering 


51-54 144 hill giants a hillside 
55-58 1 young red dragon 41-45  2d4 hill giants 
59-62 143 + 1 galeb duhr 46-50 146 + 2 werebears 


63-65 2410 dwarf miners (commoners), whistling as they 51-55 294 galeb duhr 


march toward their mine ОД) EERO 


66-69 143 young copper dragons 61-65 
70-73 144 trolls 


A massive boulder partly buried in the earth as if it 
fell or was thrown there 


74-77 143 cyclopes 


d 


d100 
66-70 
71-75 
76-80 


81-85 
86-90 
91-96 
97—99 


Епсоипїег 

1 adult copper dragon 

1d6 + 3 cyclopes 

The stub of an old stone tower jutting from the top 
of a hill 

2d4 stone giants 

1 adult red dragon 

1 ancient copper dragon 

1 ancient red dragon 

1d2 adult red dragons with 1d3 young red dragons 


— 


MOUNTAIN ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 1—4) 


а100 
01-02 
03-05 
06-08 
09-11 
12-14 
15-17 
18-20 
21-24 


25-27 
28-30 
31-33 


34-36 
37-38 


39-41 
42-44 
45-47 
48—50 
51-53 
54—55 
56 
57 
58—59 
60—61 
62 
63—64 
65—67 


68—73 
74—75 
76—77 
78—79 

80 

81 
82 
83 


Епсоипїег 

1 eagle 

1d3 swarms of bats 

1d6 goats 

1d10 + 5 tribal warriors 

1d6 + 3 pteranodons 

1d8 + 1 winged kobolds 

1 lion 

Stairs chiseled into the side of the mountain that 
climb 3d20 + 40 feet before ending abruptly 
2d10 stirges 

2d4 aarakocra 

2d6 dwarf soldiers (guards) with 1d6 mules laden 
with iron ore 

1 giant eagle 

A small shrine dedicated to a lawful neutral god, 
perched on a stone outcropping 

248 + 1 blood hawks 

1 giant goat 

3d4 kobolds 

1 half-ogre 

1 berserker 

1 orog 

1 hell hound 

1 druid 

] peryton 

1d2 hippogriffs 

1 manticore 

1d6 + 2 scouts 

Enormous footprints left by a giant, which head 
into the mountain peaks 

2d4 orcs 

1 giant elk 

1 veteran 

1 orc Eye of Gruumsh 

1d4 harpies 

logre 

1 griffon 
1 basilisk 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


d100 

84—85 

86—90 
91 
92 
93 
94 
95 
96 
97 
98 
99 
00 


Encounter 

1 saber-toothed tiger 
A sparkling stream of water spilling from a crevice 
142 ettins 

1 cyclops 

1 troll 

1 galeb duhr 

1 air elemental 

1 bulette 

1 chimera 

] wyvern 

1 stone giant 

1 frost giant 


MOUNTAIN ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 5-10) 


а100 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
11-15 
16-20 
21-25 


26-30 
31-35 
36-40 


41-45 
46-50 
51-52 
53—54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61—65 
66—69 
70—73 
74—75 


76—80 


81—83 
84—85 
86—87 
88—90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97 
98 
99 
00 


Encounter 

2d8 + 1 aarakocra 

1 lion or 1 saber-toothed tiger 

1d8 + 1 giant goats 

144 + 3 dwarf trailblazers (scouts) 

1d6 + 2 orcs 

1d10 giant eagles 

1d8 + 1 hippogriffs 

1d8 fissures venting steam that partially obscures a 
20-foot cube above each fissure 

1 basilisk 

1d12 half-ogres 

A ravine blocked by a 100-foot-high wall, which has 
an opening in the center where a gate used to be 

1 manticore 

2d4 harpies 

1 galeb duhr 

1 bulette 

1d10 berserkers 

1d3 hell hounds 

1d8 + 1 veterans 

A distant mountain whose peak resembles a tooth 
144 ettins 

1 wyvern 

1 orc Eye of Gruumsh with 1d6 orogs and 3d6 + 10 
orcs 

A row of 1410 + 40 stakes upon which the bodies of 
kobolds, dwarves, or orcs are impaled 

1 fire giant 

1 young silver dragon 

1d4 air elementals 

1d4 trolls 

1d3 + 1 cyclopes 

1d4 chimeras 

1 cloud giant 

1 roc 

1d4 stone giants 

1 young red dragon 

1d4 frost giants 


MOUNTAIN ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 11—16) 


d100 

01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09—10 
11-15 
16—20 
21-25 


26-30 
31-35 
36—40 
41—45 
46-50 
51-55 
56—60 
61—65 


66—70 
71—75 
76—80 
81—85 
86—90 
91—96 
97—98 
99 
00 


Encounter 

1d8 + 1 basilisks 

2d4 hell hounds 

1d3 chimeras 

1 galeb duhr 

2d6 veterans 

1 young silver dragon 

2d4 trolls 

1 red dragon gliding through the sky above the 
highest mountaintops 

1d8 + 1 manticores 

1d4 cyclopes 

Heavy snowfall that lasts for 1d6 hours 

1d10 air elementals 

1d6 + 2 bulettes 

1d4 stone giants 

1 fire giant 

2 stone giants playing catch with a boulder a few 
hundred feet away 

1d8 + 1 ettins 

1d3 frost giants 

A wide crevasse, its depths shrouded in mist 
1d4 cloud giants 

1 adult silver dragon 

1 adult red dragon 

144 гос 

1 ancient silver dragon 

1 ancient red dragon 


MOUNTAIN ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 17-20) 


100 

01—05 
06—10 
11-15 
16-20 
21-25 
26-30 
31-35 
36-40 


41-45 
46—50 
51-55 
56-60 
61-65 


66-70 
71—75 
76—80 


Епсоипїег 

1410 bulettes 

148 + 1 chimeras 

1 adult silver dragon 

1d8 + 1 wyverns 

A massive boat perched atop a mountain 

2d4 galeb duhr 

1d4 frost giants 

A wooded valley haunted by secretive and reclusive 
elves who tell warily of their master: a mad wizard 
who lives in the heart of the valley 

1d10 air elementals 

146 + 3 trolls 

1 adult red dragon 

1d4 cloud giants 

A waterfall hundreds of feet high that drops into a 
clear pool 

1d3 fire giants 

2d4 stone giants 

A force of 100 dwarves (veterans) standing guard 
at a mountain pass, permitting no passage until 

a traveler pays 100 gp (if on foot) or 200 gp (if 
mounted) 


d100 
81-85 
86-90 
91-96 
97-00 


Encounter 

144 rocs 

1d4 young red dragons 
1 ancient silver dragon 
1 ancient red dragon 


FT K 


SwAMP ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 1—4) 


d100 
01 
02-05 
06-10 
11-12 
13 
14-15 
16-17 
18-19 
20 
21-22 
23-25 
26 
27-29 
30 
31-32 
33-34 


35-38 
39-4] 
42-44 
45 
46-48 
49-52 
53—54 
55—56 
57 
58—59 
60—62 
63-64 
65-67 
68-69 
70-71 
72 
73 
74-75 
76—77 
78-80 
81-83 
84-86 


Encounter 

1d4 poisonous snakes 

3d6 rats 

2d8 ravens 

3d6 giant rats 

1d10 + 5 tribal warriors 

148 + 1 giant lizards 

1 crocodile 

1 swarm of insects 

] giant spider 

144 + 1 mud huts partially sunken in murky water 
248 + 1 kobolds 

2d4 mud mephits 

1d6 + 2 giant poisonous snakes 

2d4 winged kobolds 

1 scout 

The corpse of an adventurer tangled in the weeds. 
Looting the body turns up an explorer's pack and 
perhaps (5096 chance) a random common magic 
item. 

1 giant toad 

1d6 + 2 constrictor snakes 

2d4 giant frogs 

1d8 + 1 swarms of rats or 1d6 + 2 swarms of ravens 
2d10 stirges 

2d6 + 3 bullywugs 

1d8 + 1 orcs 

1d4 yuan-ti purebloods 

1 druid 

1 yuan-ti malison 

1 giant constrictor snake 

A high-pitched shriek that lasts for 1d4 minutes 
244 lizardfolk 

1d4 ghouls 

1 will-o'-wisp 

1 wight 

1 ghast 

1 swarm of poisonous snakes 

A foul stench bubbling up from brackish waters 
1d4 + 2 ogres 

1 shambling mound 

1 lizardfolk shaman with 1d6 giant lizards and 2d10 
lizardfolk 


d100 Encounter 

87 1 troll 
1d4 green hags 
90-9] 1 revenant 
92-93 1 giant crocodile 


94-95 1 orc Eye of Gruumsh with 1d3 orogs and 2d6 + 3 
orcs 
96-97 1 young black dragon 
98 1 yuan-ti abomination 
99 1d4 water elementals 
00 1 hydra 


Swamp ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 5-10) 


di00 Encounter 
01 1 green hag 


02-03  2d4 giant lizards or 2d4 giant poisonous snakes 
04-05  2d8 winged kobolds 

06-07 19410 + 1 bullywugs with 1d8 + 1 giant frogs 
08-09 1 druid 


10 1d8 + 1 swarms of insects 
11-13 1d12 ghouls 
14-16 248 scouts 
17-19 2d10 orcs 
20-22 2d4 giant spiders 
23-24 Tainted water that exposes creatures that move 
through it to sight rot (see “Diseases” in chapter 8 
of the Dungeon Master’s Guide) 
25-27 1d6 + 2 giant toads 
28-30 346 lizardfolk 
31-33  1d8 + 1 yuan-ti purebloods 
34-36 
37-38 A bloated humanoid corpse floating facedown in 

the water 


1d4 + 1 swarms of poisonous snakes 


39-41 1 shambling mound 


42-44 144 + 1 will-o’-wisps 
45-47 246 crocodiles 
48-50 144 + 1 giant constrictor snakes 


51-54  1lizardfolk shaman with 143 swarms of poisonous 
snakes and 1d8 + 2 lizardfolk 
55-58 148 + 1 ogres 


59-62 244 рһаѕіѕ 

63-65 An altar partially sunk into the mud, devoted to a 
god that is part human and part frog 

66-69 1 giant crocodile 


70-73 1 shambling mound 

74—77 1 orc Eye of Gruumsh with 143 ogres and 2d10 + 5 
orcs 

78-80 A torrential rain that lasts 1d6 minutes and puts 

out all unprotected flames within 1 mile 

81-82 1 young black dragon 

83-84  1d4 green hags with 1d6 + 1 ogres 

85-86  1yuan-ti abomination 


87-88 144 +  wights 


М 
қу 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


а100 
89-90 
91-93 
94-96 
97-99 
00 


Encounter 

146 + 1 yuan-ti malisons 
1d4 + 1 trolls 

1d10 revenants 

1d8 + 1 water elementals 
1d3 hydras 


Swamp ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 11-20) 


а100 
01-10 
11—15 
16-20 
21-25 


26-30 
31-35 
36-40 


41—45 
46-50 
51-55 
56—60 
61-65 


66-70 
71-75 
76-80 
81-96 
97-00 


Encounter 

1d4 giant crocodiles 

1d3 yuan-ti abominations 

1d6 1 green hags 

A large, spreading tree from which 2d6 armored 
knights hang by the neck 

2d4 wights 

1d8 + 1 yuan-ti malisons 

Fog that rolls across the terrain, making the area 
within 1d3 miles heavily obscured for 1d4 hours 
1d4 revenants 

1d6 shambling mounds 

1d10 water elementals 

1d4 young black dragons 

An eerie, bat-headed idol almost completely cov- 
ered by vines 

1d8 + 2 trolls 

1d3 hydras 

The sound of drums beating several miles away 
1 adult black dragon 

1 ancient black dragon 


a | 
4 i 


UNDERDARK ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 1—4) 


d100 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08 
09 
10 


11-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-22 


Encounter 

1 mind flayer arcanist 

1d3 + 1 giant poisonous snakes 

1d3 giant lizards 

2d4 giant fire beetles 

1d8 + 1 flumphs 

1 shrieker 

1d12 giant rats 

2d4 kobolds 

1d8 + 1 stirges 

2d4 humans (tribal warriors) seeking the way to the 
surface, fleeing their Underdark oppressors 

1d10 troglodytes 

1d2 gray oozes 

3d6 stirges 

1d3 magma mephits 

1d10 goblins 

Orc graffiti on the walls, suggesting something 
rude about the mother of someone named Krusk 


23-24 
25 
26-28 
29-30 
31—32 
33 
34—35 


36-37 
38-39 
40-41 
42-43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 
63 
64 
65 
66 
67-68 
69 
70 
7 
72 
73 
74 
75 
76 
77 
78 
79-80 


81 
82 
83 


Encounter 

1 swarm of insects 
1 deep gnome 
1d8 + 1 drow 
1d4 violet fungi 
1d12 kuo-toa 

1 rust monster 
A rubble-strewn passage that appears to have been 
recently cleared after a cave-in 

148 + 1 giant bats 

3d6 kobolds 

2d4 grimlocks 

1d4 + 3 swarms of bats 

1 dwarf prospector (scout) looking for gold 

1 carrion crawler or 1 gelatinous cube 

1d8 darkmantles or 2d4 piercers 

1 hell hound 

1d3 specters 

1d4 bugbears 

1d10 + 5 winged kobolds 

1d4 fire snakes 

2d8 + 1 troglodytes 

1d6 giant spiders 

3d6 kuo-toa 

1 goblin boss with 2d4 goblins 

4d4 grimlocks 

1 ochre jelly 

2d10 giant centipedes 

1 nothic or 1 giant toad 

1d4 myconid adults with 5d4 myconid sprouts 

1 minotaur skeleton or 1 minotaur 

3d6 drow 

1 mimic or 1 doppelganger 

1d6 + 3 hobgoblins 

1 intellect devourer or 1 spectator 

1d8 + 1 orcs 

A faint tapping coming from inside a nearby wall 
1 gibbering mouther or 1 water weird 

1d12 gas spores 

1 giant constrictor snake 

1d10 shadows 

1d3 grells 

1d4 wights 

1d8 + 1 quaggoth spore servants 

1d2 gargoyles 

1d4 ogres or 1d3 ettins 

1d4 dwarf explorers (veterans) 

An abandoned miners’ camp spattered with blood 
and littered with the contents of 1d3 dungeoneer's 
packs 

1 chuul or 1 salamander 

1d4 phase spiders or 1d3 hook horrors 

5d4 duergar 

1 ghost or 1 flameskull or 1 wraith 


d100 
85 
86 


87 
88 
89 
90 
91 
92 
93-95 


96 
97 
98 
99 
00 


Encounter 

1 druid with 1 polar bear (cave bear) 

1 hobgoblin captain with 1d4 half-ogres and 2d10 
hobgoblins 

1 earth elemental or 1 black pudding 

1 kuo-toa monitor with 148 + 1 kuo-toa whips 

1 quaggoth thonot with 1d3 quaggoths 

1 beholder zombie or 1 bone naga 

1 orc Eye of Gruumsh with 1d4 orogs and 2d8 orcs 
144 ghasts with 1410 ghouls 

A reeking puddle where slimy water has dripped 
from the ceiling 

1 otyugh or 1 roper 

] vampire spawn 

1 chimera 

1 mind flayer 

1 spirit naga 


UNDERDARK ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 5-10) 


d100 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08 
09 
10 
n 
12 
13-14 
15 
16-17 
18 
19-20 
21-25 


26 
27 
28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35 
36-40 


4 
42-43 
44—45 
46 
47-48 


Епсоипїег 

346 swarms of bats 

1d4 giant spiders or 1d4 giant toads 
1 mimic 

2d4 gray oozes 

2d10 orcs or 3d6 troglodytes 

3d6 grimlocks 

1d6 + 2 magma mephits 

1 goblin boss with 2d4 goblins 

2d4 darkmantles 

2d8 + 1 drow 

2d10 piercers 

1d4 minotaur skeletons 

3d6 deep gnomes 

1 druid with 1 polar bear (cave bear) 
3d6 orcs 

1 bone naga 

2d6 bugbears 

Luminescent fungi growing on the walls of a moist 
cave, filling it with dim light 

2d4 specters 

1d12 + 4 shadows 

1d3 gibbering mouthers 

4d4 hobgoblins 

144 carrion crawlers 

1 black pudding 

1d4 ochre jellies 

A patch of mold that appears yellow when light is 
directed toward it 

1d4 nothics 

2d8 + 1 gas spores 

1d3 gelatinous cubes 

1 ghost 

1 flameskull 


| 
' 


248 duergar 


GHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


d100 
51 
52 
53 
54 


55 
56 
57 


58 

59 

60 
61—62 


63 
64 
65 
66 
67 


68 
69 
70 
71-72 
73 
74 
75 
76-77 
78 
79 
80 
81 
82 
83 
84 
85 
86 
87 
88 
89 
90 
91 
92 
93 
94 
95 
96 
97 
98 
99 
00 


Encounter 

1 wraith 

1 umber hulk 

1 xorn 

1d6 « 2 dwarf hunters (veterans) searching for 
trolls 

1 hobgoblin captain with 3d10 hobgoblins 
1 roper 

1 kuo-toa monitor with 1d4 kuo-toa whips and 1d8 
+ 1 kuo-toa 

1d3 water weirds 

1d4 ghasts with 1d10 ghouls 

1 otyugh 

A merchant caravan consisting of 1 drow mage, 2 
drow elite warriors, and 2d10 quaggoths 
1d4 wights 

1d4 doppelgangers 

2d8 fire snakes 

1d4 spectators 

1 orc Eye of Gruumsh with 1d4 orogs and 2d10 + 
3 orcs 

1d3 vampire spawn 

1d4 hook horrors or 1d4 minotaurs 

3d6 quaggoth spore servants 

1d3 grells 

1d6 + 1 intellect devourers 

1d10 gargoyles 

1 beholder zombie 

1 quaggoth thonot with 2d4 quaggoths 
1d6 ettins or 1d4 trolls 

1d8 + 1 phase spiders 

1 fomorian or 1d3 cyclopes 

1d4 earth elementals 

3d6 ogres 

144 + 1 chuuls 

1d10 hell hounds 

1d3 drow elite warriors 

1d4 chimeras 

1d4 salamanders 

1 cloaker 

2d4 wights 

1d4 driders 

] fire giant 

1 grick alpha with 2d4 gricks 

1 mind flayer arcanist 

1d4 drow mages 

1 spirit naga 

1d4 mind flayers 

1 behir 

1 aboleth 

1 dao or 1 stone giant 

1 beholder 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER’S TOOLS 


d100 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09—10 
11-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-25 


26-27 
28-29 
30-31 
32-33 
34-35 


36-40 


41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47—48 
49-50 
51—52 
53—54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 
63—65 
66 
67 
68 
69 
70 
71 
72 
73 
74 
75 
76—80 


81 
82 


UNDERDARK ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 11—16) 


Encounter 

3d6 carrion crawlers 

1d6 + 1 gelatinous cubes 

1d8 + 2 gibbering mouthers 

2d8 minotaur skeletons 

2d6 ochre jellies 

2d4 doppelgangers 

1d4 quaggoth thonots with 1d10 + 2 quaggoths 
1d3 ropers 

3d6 gargoyles 

1d10 mimics 

A 100-foot-long ravine, 4d10 feet wide and 5d20 + 
200 feet deep 

1 hobgoblin captain with 3410 hobgoblins 

2d4 spectators 

3d6 ghasts 

2d8 intellect devourers 

1d3 orc Eyes of Gruumsh with 2d4 orogs and 2d10 
orcs 

A large cave containing 2d10 extraordinarily de- 
tailed statues of various creatures 

1d8 + 1 kuo-toa monitors 

2d4 water weirds 

2d10 gricks 

3d6 nothics 

2d8 + 1 ogres 

146 + 2 chuuls 

1d8 + 1 ettins 

3d6 grells 

2d4 flameskulls 

2d12 dwarf soldiers (veterans) on patrol 

2d8 hell hounds 

1d10 ghosts 

3d4 wights 

3d6 phase spiders 

1d8 + 1 bone nagas 

A shrill scream followed by dark laughter 

1d4 chimeras 

1d10 black puddings 

3d6 minotaurs 

2d4 otyughs 

1d6 + 1 beholder zombies 

4d4 hook horrors 

1d8 + 1 umber hulks 

2d4 salamanders 

1d3 grick alphas 

1d6 + 2 хот 

A ruined village that once belonged to deep 
gnomes. A search has a 5096 chance of uncovering 
1d3 potions of healing and a 2596 chance of finding 
a random common magic item. 

2d4 earth elementals 

1d3 spirit nagas 


Encounter 

148 + 1 cyclopes 

1d6 + 2 trolls 

2d4 stone giants 

2d4 wraiths 

1d4 fomorians 

1d3 drow mages with 1d4 drow elite warriors 
1d10 vampire spawn 

1d3 cloakers 

1d4 fire giants 

1 mind flayer arcanist with 1d6 + 1 mind flayers 
1d4 dao 

148 + 1 driders 

1d3 behirs 

1d4 aboleths 

1 beholder 

1 young red shadow dragon 

1 death tyrant 

1 purple worm 


UNDERDARK ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 17—20) 


d100 
01 
02 
03-04 
05-06 
07—08 
09-10 
11-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-18 
19—20 
21 
22-23 
24-25 
26-27 
28-30 


31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39—40 
41-43 


44—45 
46—47 
48—49 
50—51 
52—53 
54—56 
57—59 
60—62 


Encounter 

1d4 grick alphas 

2d8 spectators 

3d6 minotaurs or 2d8 kuo-toa monitors 

2d8 grells 

2d10 phase spiders 

4d4 hell hounds 

1d6 + 2 ropers 

2d10 wights 

3d6 doppelgangers 

1d8 + 1 chimeras 

1d4 cloakers 

1d4 hobgoblin captains with 5d10 hobgoblins 
1d8 + 1 earth elementals 

2d4 vampire spawn 

3d6 minotaurs 

A 30-foot-tall inverted black pyramid floating 1 inch 
above the floor in a large cave 

1d10 beholder zombies 

1d4 mind flayer arcanists 

146 + 2 otyughs 

1d12 trolls 

1d10 wraiths 

A beautiful obsidian sculpture of a panther lying on 
the floor 

1d4 drow mages with 1d6 drow elite warriors 
1d4 spirit nagas 

148 + 1 salamanders 

2d4 umber hulks 

1d10 xorn 

1 young red shadow dragon 

2d4 fomorians 

1d8 + 1 driders 


а100 
63—65 


66-68 
69—70 
71-73 
74—76 
77-80 


81-85 
86-90 
91-93 
94-96 
97-99 


Encounter 

1d20 + 20 spiders crawling on the walls of a web- 
filled cave 

1d4 fire giants 

1d10 mind flayers 

2d4 stone giants 

1d12 cyclopes 

A large cave in which stands a 50-foot-tall idol of 
Blibdoolpoolp 

1d3 dao 

1d4 beholders 

1d4 behirs 

1 death tyrant 

1d3 purple worms 

2d4 aboleths 


SS 


UNDERWATER ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 1—4) 


d100 

01-10 
11-14 
15-18 
19-22 
23-25 
26-29 
30—33 
34—37 
38-40 
41-45 
46-50 
51-55 
56—60 
61—65 


66—70 
71—75 
76—80 
81—85 
86—90 
91—96 
97—98 
99 
00 


Encounter 

3d6 quippers 

2d4 steam mephits 

1d4 sahuagin 

2d6 merfolk 

2d4 corpses of drowned sailors tangled in kelp 
2d4 constrictor snakes 

1d4 reef sharks 

1 swarm of quippers 

A bed of enormous clams 

1d10 merfolk with 1d3 giant sea horses 

1 giant octopus 

1 merrow 

1 plesiosaurus 

2d10 pieces of corroded brass dinnerware littering 
the bottom 

1 giant constrictor snake 

] sea hag 

A school of silvery fish darting through the water 
1d4 hunter sharks 

1 sahuagin priestess with 2d4 sahuagin 

1d4 killer whales 

1 giant shark 

1 water elemental 

1 sahuagin baron 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S Л 


i Nm 7 ДУУ Em 


UNDERWATER ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 5-10) 


а100 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
11-15 
16—20 
21-25 


26-30 
31-35 
36-40 
41-50 
51-55 
56-60 
61—65 
66—70 
71—75 
76—80 


81—85 
86—90 
91—96 
97—99 
00 


Encounter 

3d6 steam mephits 

1d10 sahuagin 

1 giant octopus 

3d6 constrictor snakes 

2d10 merfolk with 1d4 giant sea horses 

144 sea hags 

2d4 swarms of quippers 

A sunken galleon with a 5096 chance of a random 
treasure hoard inside (roll on the Treasure Hoard: 
Challenge 5-10 table in chapter 7 of the Dungeon 
Master's Guide) 

1d4 plesiosauruses 

3d6 reef sharks 

An abandoned bathysphere 

1d4 giant constrictor snakes 

2d4 hunter sharks 

1d3 sahuagin priestesses with 2d10 sahuagin 

An empty castle made from coral 

1d4 killer whales 

1d10 merrow 

An eerie statue of a squatting humanoid, with bat 
wings on its back and tentacles sprouting from its 
face 

1d4 water elementals 

1 sahuagin baron with 248 sahuagin 

1d4 giant sharks 

] marid 

1 storm giant 


UNDERWATER ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 11—20) 


а100 
01-10 


11-35 
36-40 


41-60 
61—65 


66-75 
76-80 


81—90 

91—96 

97-99 
00 


Encounter 

1 sahuagin baron with 1d4 sahuagin priestesses 
and 2d10 sahuagin 

1d10 killer whales 

A ghost ship passing overhead, containing 2d6 + 
10 ghosts 

1d6 giant sharks 

A 1-mile-radius sphere of effervescent water that 
allows air-breathing creatures to breathe water 
while in the sphere 

1d10 water elementals 

A shimmering, blue-green portal to the Elemental 
Plane of Water 

1d4 marids 

1d3 storm giants 

1 dragon turtle 

1 kraken 


CHAPTER? | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


lati 2 


URBAN ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 1—4) 


d100 
01 
02-03 
04-05 
06 
07 
08 
09 
10 
11 
12—13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18—19 
20 
21—25 


26 
27—28 
29 
30—31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36-40 


41 
42-43 
44—45 
46-47 


48 

49 

50 
51—52 
53—54 
55—56 
57—58 
59—60 
61—62 
63—65 


66—67 
68—69 
70—71 
72—73 


Encounter 

1d6 cats 

1 commoner with 1d6 goats 

2d10 rats 

1 raven perched on a signpost 

1 commoner on a draft horse 

2d4 mastiffs 

142 commoners leading 144 mules or 1d4 ponies 
1 pseudodragon 

1 spy 

148 + 1 acolytes 

1d6 + 6 flying snakes 

3d6 kobolds 

2d4 giant centipedes 

1d8 + 1 skeletons 

1d6 + 2 swarms of rats 

1d12 zombies 

A peddler weighed down with a load of pots, pans, 
and other basic supplies 

1 giant wasp 

1 warhorse 

2d8 cultists 

3d4 giant rats 

2d8 stirges 

1d3 + 2 giant poisonous snakes 

1d4 + 2 swarms of bats 

2d4 winged kobolds 

A wagon loaded with apples that has a broken 
wheel and holds up traffic 

1 crocodile 

1 swarm of insects 

3d6 bandits 

1d3 + 2 nobles on riding horses with an escort of 
1d10 guards 

2d4 kenku 

1d6 + 2 smoke mephits 

1d8 + 1 swarms of ravens 

1 wererat 

1d3 half-ogres 

1 mimic 

1d4 ghouls 

1d4 specters 

1d10 shadows 

Someone empties a chamber pot onto the street 
from a second-floor window 

1 ghast 

1 priest 

1 will-o’-wisp 

1d3 giant spiders 


81 
82 
83 
84 
85 
86 
87 
88 
89 
90 
91 
92 
93 
94 
95 
96 
97 
98 
99 
00 


Encounter 

1d4 yuan-ti purebloods 
2d4 thugs 

A doomsayer who preaches the end of the world 
from a street corner 

1 cambion 

1 vampire spawn 

1 couatl 

1 ghost 

1 succubus or 1 incubus 
1 bandit captain with 3d6 bandits 
144 + 1 cult fanatics 

1 knight or 1 veteran 

1 water weird 

1 wight 

1 mage 

1 shield guardian 

1 gladiator 

1 revenant 

2d4 gargoyles 

1d4 doppelgangers 

1 oni 

1 invisible stalker 

1d8 + 1 phase spiders 

1 assassin 


URBAN ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 5-10) 


d100 
01—02 
03-04 


Encounter 
1d10 kenku 
2d6 giant centipedes 


Encounter 

2d8 skeletons 

1d6 swarms of bats and 1d6 swarms of rats 

3d6 winged kobolds 

2d4 specters 

1d4 wights 

4d4 acolytes on draft horses 

3d6 giant centipedes 

A talkative urchin, badgering passersby to serve as 
their guide through the community for a price of 
15р 

1410 spies 

346 crocodiles 

146 + 2 swarms of insects 

2d4 smoke mephits 

A noble shouts "Stop! Thief!” at a fleeing scoundrel 
(bandit) 

] succubus or 1 incubus 

1d10 half-ogres 

2d10 giant wasps 

4d10 zombies 

1d4 knights on warhorses 

144 + 1 water weirds 

148 + 1 mimics 

2d8 giant spiders 

3d6 shadows 

An actor leans out from a second-story window to 
call to passersby, announcing a show 

1 bandit captain with 3d8 bandits 

1d10 will-o'-wisps 

2d4 priests 


d100 Encounter 
72—74  3d6 yuan-ti purebloods 
75-76  2dl0thugs 
77-80  Afortune-teller reads cards for those who pay a 
price of 1 sp 
81 1d3 gladiators 
82 1d4 + 1 couatls 
83 1d8 ghosts 
84 2d4 doppelgangers 
85 1d6 +2 phase spiders 
86 2d4 veterans 
87 1d8 ghasts with 2d6 ghouls 
88 3d6 gargoyles 
89 2d10 cult fanatics 
90 3d6 wererats 
91 1 assassin 
92 1d3 invisible stalkers 
93 1 gray slaad 
94 1 young silver dragon 
95 1d4 cambions or 1d4 revenants 
96 3d6 wights 
97 1 archmage 
98 244 vampire spawn or 144 oni 
99 1 mage with 1 shield guardian 
00 1 rakshasa or 1 vampire 


URBAN ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 11—16) 
d100 Encounter 


01 1 mimic 
02-05 1 bandit captain with 5410 bandits, all on riding 
horses 
06-10 1410 knights on warhorses (one knight is a doppel- 
ganger) 


11-13 148 succubi ог 148 incubi 

14-16 346 cult fanatics 

17-19  1d10 wights 

20-22 346 wererats 

23-25  Adistant boom followed by a plume of smoke ris- 
ing from the other side of the community 

26-28 148 + 1 ghosts 

29-31 2d10 gargoyles 

32-34 146 + 2 water weirds 

35-37 1d4 + 4 will-o'-wisps 

38—40 Street performers putting on a puppet show, in- 
volving two puppets beating each other with sticks 
to the amusement of the gathered crowd 

41-43 244 couatls 

44-46 248 ghasts 

47-51 148 + 1 veterans 

52—55 344 priests 

56-58 244 cambions 

59-61 1910 revenants 

62-65 244 phase spiders 


CHAPTER? | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


9100 Encounter 
66—69  Ascruffy commoner that ducks into an alley to 
make a purchase from a suspicious-looking figure 
70-72 148 invisible stalkers 
73-75 148 1 gladiators 
76-80 Two farmers trading blows over the price of pota- 
toes (50% chance for one farmer to be a retired 
assassin) 
81-82 194 young silver dragons 
83-84 144 assassins 
85-86 1d8 oni 
87-88  1d4 mages with 1d4 shield guardians 
89-90 1d10 vampire spawn 
91-92 1 adult silver dragon 
93-94 144 gray slaadi 
95-96 1 spellcaster vampire or 1 warrior vampire 
97 1 archmage speeding down the street on a riding 
horse, blasting 1d4 guards with spells 
98 1 rakshasa 
99 1 vampire 
00 1 ancient silver dragon 


URBAN ENCOUNTERS (LEVELS 17—20) 
d100 Encounter 
01-05 1410 invisible stalkers 
06-10 1910 revenants 
11-14 196 + 2 gladiators 
15-18 244 cambions 
19-22 246 succubi or 2d6 incubi 
23-25 A witch (archmage) who zooms overhead on a 
broom of flying 
26-30  1d4 gray slaadi 
31-35 248 couatls 
36-40  Adistraught parent who rushes up to people, beg- 
ging for help for a child who fell into the sewer 
41-45 143 young silver dragons 
46-50 346 ghosts 
51-55 1 adult silver dragon 
56-60 144 mages with 144 shield guardians 
61-65 Ап aggressive merchant who hawks wares to pass- 
ersby, claiming to be the purveyor of the finest silks 
in all the land 
66-70  lancientsilver dragon 
71-75  3d6 vampire spawn 
76-80  Apatrol of 2d10 guards marching up the street, 
searching for someone or something 
81-85 1410 assassins 
86-90 1d4+1 gray slaadi 
91-93 1d10 oni 
94-96 1 spellcaster vampire or 1 warrior vampire 
97 1d4 archmages 
98 1d3 rakshasas 
99 1d4 vampires 
00 1 tarrasque 


BENE 0 005 — Ww IB BS 


TRAPS REVISITED 


The rules for traps in the Dungeon Master’s Guide pro- 
vide the basic information you need to manage traps 
at the game table. The material here takes a different, 
more elaborate approach—describing traps in terms of 
their game mechanics and offering guidance on creating 
traps of your own using these new rules. 

Rather than characterize traps as mechanical or magi- 
cal, these rules separate traps into two other categories: 
simple and complex. 


SIMPLE TRAPS 


A simple trap activates and is thereafter harmless or 
easily avoided. A hidden pit dug at the entrance of a 
goblin lair, a poison needle that pops from a lock, and 
a crossbow rigged to fire when an intruder steps ona 
pressure plate are all simple traps. 


ELEMENTS OF A SIMPLE TRAP 

The description of a simple trap begins with a line that 
gives the trap’s level and the severity of the threat it 
poses. Following a general note on what the trap looks 
like and how it functions are three paragraphs that tell 
how the trap works in the game. 

Level and Threat. A trap's level is actually a range of 
levels, equivalent to one of the tiers of play (levels 1—4, 
5-10, 11-16, and 17—20), indicating the appropriate time 
to use the trap in your campaign. Additionally, each trap 
poses either a moderate, dangerous, or deadly threat, 
based on its particular details. 

Trigger. A simple trap activates when an event occurs 
that triggers it. This entry in a trap's description gives 


the location of the trigger and the activity that causes 
the trap to activate. 

Effect. A trap's effect occurs after it activates. The 
trap might fire a dart, unleash a cloud of poison gas, 
cause a hidden enclosure to open, and so on. This en- 
try specifies what the trap targets, its attack bonus or 
saving throw DC, and what happens on a hit or a failed 
saving throw. 

Countermeasures. Traps can be detected or defeated 
in a variety of ways by using ability checks or magic. 
This entry in a trap's description gives the means for 
counteracting the trap. It also specifies what happens, if 
anything, on a failed attempt to disable it. 


RUNNING A SIMPLE TRAP 

To prepare for using a simple trap in play, start by mak- 
ing note of the characters' passive Wisdom (Perception) 
scores. Most traps allow Wisdom (Perception) checks 
to detect their triggers or other elements that can tip off 
their presence. If you stop to ask players for this infor- 
mation, they might suspect a hidden danger. 

When a trap is triggered, apply its effects as specified 
in its description. 

If the characters discover a trap, be open to adjudicat- 
ing their ideas for defeating it. The trap's description is 
a starting point for countermeasures, rather than a com- 
plete definition. 

To make it easier for you to describe what happens 
next, the players should be specific about how they want 
to defeat the trap. Simply stating the desire to make a 
check isn't helpful for you. Ask the players where their 
characters are positioned and what they intend to do to 
defeat the trap. 


el 
MAKING TRAPS MEANINGFUL 
If you want to improve the chance that the characters will 
come up against the traps you've set for them in an en- 
counter or an adventure, it can be tempting to use a large 
number of traps. Doing so ensures that the characters will 
have to deal with at least one or two of them, but it's better 
to fight that urge. 

If your encounters or adventures are sown with too 
many traps, and if the characters are victimized over and 
over again as a result, they are likely to take steps to pre- 
vent further bad things from happening. Because of their 
recent experience, the characters can become overly cau- 
tious, and you run the risk of the action grinding to a halt 
as the players search every square inch of the dungeon for 
trip wires and pressure plates. 

Traps are most effective when their presence comes as a 
surprise, not when they appear so often that the characters 
spend all their effort watching out for the next one. 

IEEE ————————————— 


EXAMPLE SIMPLE TRAPS 


The following simple traps can be used to populate your 
adventures or as models for your own creations. 


BEAR TRAP 
Simple trap (level 1—4, dangerous threat) 


A bear trap resembles a set of iron jaws that springs 
shut when stepped on, clamping down on a creature's 
leg. The trap is spiked in the ground, leaving the victim 
immobilized. 

Trigger. A creature that steps on the bear trap 
triggers it. 

Effect. The trap makes an attack against the trigger- 
ing creature. The attack has a +8 attack bonus and deals 
5 (1d10) piercing damage on a hit. This attack can't gain 
advantage or disadvantage. A creature hit by the trap 
has its speed reduced to 0. It can't move until it breaks 
free of the trap, which requires a successful DC 15 
Strength check by the creature or another creature adja- 
cent to the trap. 

Countermeasures. A successful DC 10 Wisdom 
(Perception) check reveals the trap. A successful DC 10 
Dexterity check using thieves' tools disables it. 


CROSSBOW TRAP 
Simple trap (level 1—4, dangerous threat) 


The crossbow trap is a favorite of kobolds and other 
creatures that rely on traps to defend their lairs. It 
consists of a trip wire strung across a hallway and con- 
nected to a pair of hidden heavy crossbows. The cross- 
bows are aimed to fire down the hallway at anyone who 
disturbs the trip wire. 

Trigger. A creature that walks through the trip wire 
triggers the trap. 

Effect. The trap makes two attacks against the trig- 
gering creature. Each attack has a +8 attack bonus and 
deals 5 (1d10) piercing damage on a hit. This attack 
can't gain advantage or disadvantage. 

Countermeasures. A successful DC 15 Wisdom 
(Perception) check reveals the trip wire. A successful 
DC 15 Dexterity check using thieves' tools disables the 
trip wire, and a check with a total of 5 or lower trig- 
gers the trap. 


| 
| 
| 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


FALLING PORTCULLIS 
Simple trap (level 1-4, moderate threat) 


Some folk who build dungeons, such as mad wizards 
in search of new victims, have no intention of allowing 
their visitors to make an easy escape. A falling portcullis 
trap can be especially devious if it causes a portcullis 
to drop some distance away from the pressure plate 
that activates the trap. Although the trap is deep in the 
dungeon, the portcullis closes off the dungeon entrance, 
which is hundreds of feet away, meaning that adventur- 
ers don't know they are trapped until they decide to head І 
for the exit. | 
Trigger. A creature that steps on the pressure plate 
triggers the trap. | 
Effect. An iron portcullis drops from the ceiling, | 
blocking an exit ог а passageway. | 
Countermeasures. А successful DC 20 Wisdom (Per- | 
ception) check reveals the pressure plate. A successful i 
DC 20 Dexterity check using thieves’ tools disables it, 1 
and a check with a total of 5 or lower triggers the trap. 


FIERY BLAST | 
Simple trap (level 5—10, dangerous threat) | 


The temple of Pyremius, a god of fire, is threatened by 
thieves who seek to steal the fire opals displayed there 
by the priests in tribute to their god. A mosaic on the 
floor of the entryway to the inner sanctum delivers a 
fiery rebuke to intruders. 

Trigger. Anyone who steps on the mosaic causes fire 
to erupt from it. Those who openly wear holy symbols of 
Pyremius don't trigger this trap. 

Effect. A 15-foot cube of fire erupts, covering the pres- 
sure plate and the area around it. Each creature in the 
area must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 
24 (7d6) fire damage on a failed save, or half as much 
damage on a successful one. 

Countermeasures. A successful DC 15 Wisdom 
(Perception) check reveals the presence of ash and faint 
burn marks in the area affected by this trap. A success- 
ful DC 15 Intelligence (Religion) check enables a crea- 
ture to destroy the trap by defacing a key rune on the 
perimeter of the mosaic that is within reach; failing this 
check causes the trap to activate. A successful dispel 
magic (DC 15) cast on the runes destroys the trap. 


NET TRAP 

Simple trap (level 1—4, dangerous threat) 
Goblins, with their propensity to enslave their enemies, 
prefer traps that leave intruders intact so the victims can 
be put to work in the mines or elsewhere. 


t hilarious! 
D: s ont of ge B 
sous fall dee! 
Alas the besk eet 


беса 
Lings skes an ont 
у s (ruck! 


Trigger. A trip wire strung across a hallway is rigged 
to a large net. If the trip wire is broken, the net falls on 
intruders. An iron bell is also rigged to the trip wire. It 
rings when the trap activates, alerting nearby guards. 

Effect. ^ net covering a 10-foot-by-10-foot area cen- 
tered on the trip wire falls to the floor as a bell rings. 
Any creature fully within this area must succeed on a 
DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or be restrained. A crea- 
ture can use its action to make a DC 10 Strength check 
to try to free itself or another creature in the net. Deal- 
ing 5 slashing damage to the net (AC 10, 20 hp) also 
frees a creature without harming the creature. 

Countermeasures. A successful DC 15 Wisdom (Per- 
ception) check reveals the trip wire and the net. A suc- 
cessful DC 15 Dexterity check using thieves' tools dis- 
ables the trip wire without causing the net to drop or the 
bell to ring; failing the check causes the trap to activate. 


Pit TRAP 
Simple trap (level 1—4, moderate threat) 


The simplest of pit traps consists of a 10-foot-deep hole 
in the floor, concealed by tattered canvas that's covered 
with leaves and dirt to look like solid ground. This type 
of trap is useful for blocking off the entrance to a mon- 
ster lair, and usually has narrow ledges along its sides to 
allow for movement around it. 

Trigger. Anyone who steps on the canvas might fall 
into the pit. 

Effect. The triggering creature must make a DC 10 
Dexterity saving throw. On a successful save, the crea- 
ture catches itself on the pit’s edge or instinctively steps 
back. On a failed save, the creature falls into the pit and 
takes 3 (1d6) bludgeoning damage from the fall. 

Countermeasures. A successful DC 10 Wisdom (Per- 
ception) check reveals the presence of the canvas and 
the 1-foot-wide ledge around the edges of the pit where it 
is safe to travel. 


POISON NEEDLE 
Simple trap (level 1—4, deadly threat) 


A tiny, poisoned needle hidden in a lock is a good way 
to discourage thieves from plundering a hoard. Such 
atrap is usually put in a chest or in the door to a trea- 
sure chamber. 

Trigger. Anyone attempting to pick or open the lock 
triggers the trap. 

Effect. The triggering creature must make a DC 20 
Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the creature 
takes 14 (4d6) poison damage and is poisoned for 10 
minutes. While poisoned in this way, the creature is par- 
alyzed. On a successful save, the creature takes half as 
much damage and isn't poisoned. 

Countermeasures. A successful DC 20 Wisdom (Per- 
ception) check reveals the needle, but only if a character 
inspects the lock. A successful DC 20 Dexterity check 
using thieves' tools disables the needle, and a check 
with a total of 10 or lower triggers the trap. 


ScyTHING BLADE 
Simple trap (level 5—10, dangerous threat) 


This trap uses moving blades that sweep down through 
a chamber, threatening anyone nearby. Typically, a 
scything blade trap is activated by manipulating a lever 
or some other simple device. Kobolds especially like this 
kind of trap, since it can take down bigger creatures. 
Trigger. When the lever is pulled, the trap activates. 
Effect. Each Medium or larger creature in a 5-foot- 
wide, 20-foot-long area must make a DC 15 Dexterity 
saving throw, taking 14 (4d6) slashing damage on a 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 
Countermeasures. The lever isn't hidden. A success- 
ful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check involving the 
surfaces in the trap's area of effect reveals scrape marks 
and bloodstains on the walls and floor. A successful 
DC 15 Dexterity check using thieves' tools disables 
the lever. 


SLEEP OF AGES 
Simple trap (level 11—16, deadly threat) 


When a sleep of ages trap activates, a pressure plate 
unleashes a spell that threatens to send intruders into a 
deep slumber. The dungeon's guardians can then more 
easily dispose of the sleepers. 

Trigger. Stepping on the pressure plate triggers 
this trap. 

Effect. When activated, this trap casts a s/eep spell 
centered on the pressure plate, using a 9th-level 
spell slot. 

Countermeasures. A successful DC 20 Wisdom (Per- 
ception) check reveals the pressure plate. A successful 
DC 20 Intelligence (Arcana) check made within 5 feet of 
the pressure plate disables the trap, and a check with a 
total of 10 or lower triggers it. A successful dispel magic 
(DC 19) cast on the pressure plate destroys the trap. 


DESIGNING SIMPLE TRAPS 


You can create your own simple traps by using the fol- 
lowing guidelines. You can also adapt the example traps 
for different levels and severity of threat by modifying 
their DCs and damage values as shown below. 


PURPOSE 

Before diving into the details of your trap, think about 
its reason for being. Why would someone build such a 
trap? What is its purpose? Consider the trap's creator (in 
the adventure), the creator's purpose, and the location 
the trap protects. Traps have context in the world—they 
aren't created for no reason—and that context drives the 
trap's nature and effects. 

Described below are a few of the general purposes a 
trap might have. Use them to inspire the creation of your 
own traps. 

Alarm. An alarm trap is designed to alert an area's 
occupants of intruders. It might cause a bell or a gong 
to sound. This type of trap rarely involves a saving 
throw, because the alarm can't be avoided when the 
trap goes off. 

Delay. Some traps are designed to slow down ene- 
mies, giving a dungeon's inhabitants time to mount a 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


defense or flee. The hidden pit is a classic example of 
this kind of trap. A 10-foot-deep pit usually deals little 
damage and is easy to escape, but it serves its purpose 
by impeding intruders. Other examples of delaying traps 
include collapsing walls, a portcullis that drops from the 
ceiling, and a locking mechanism that shuts and bars 

a door. If a delaying trap has moving parts that directly 
threaten characters when they operate, the characters 
are usually required to make Dexterity saving throws to 
avoid harm. 

Restrain. A restraining trap tries to keep its victims in 
place, leaving them unable to move. Such traps are often 
employed in conjunction with regular guard patrols, so 
that victims are periodically extricated and taken away 
to be dealt with. But in an ancient dungeon, the guards 
might be long gone. 

Restraining traps usually require a successful 
Strength saving throw to be avoided, but some don't 
allow saving throws. In addition to dealing damage, a 
restraining trap also renders a creature unable to move. 
Making a subsequent successful Strength check (using 
the trap's saving throw DC) or dealing damage against 
the trap can break it and free the captive. Examples in- 
clude a bear trap, a cage that drops from a ceiling, and a 
device that flings a net. 

Slay. Some traps are designed to eliminate intrud- 
ers, plain and simple. Their effects include poisoned 
needles that spring out when a lock is tampered with, 
blasts of fire that fill a room, poison gas, and other 
lethal measures. Saving throws—usually Dexterity or 
Constitution—allow creatures to avoid or mitigate the 
trap's effects. 


LEVEL AND LETHALITY 
Before creating a trap's effects, think about its level and 
its lethality. 

Traps are divided into four level ranges: 1—4, 5—10, 
11—16, and 17—20. The level you choose for a trap gives 
you a starting point for determining its potency. 

To further delineate the trap's strength, decide 
whether it is a moderate, dangerous, or deadly threat to 
characters in its level range. A moderate trap is unlikely 
to kill a character. A dangerous trap typically deals 
enough damage that a character hit by one is eager for 
healing. A deadly trap might reduce a creature to 0 hit 
points in one shot, and leaves most creatures hit by it in 
need of a short or long rest. 

Consult the following tables when determining a 
trap's effects. The Trap Save DCs and Attack Bonuses 
table provides guidelines for a trap's saving throw DC, 
check DC, and attack bonus. The check DC is the default 
for any check used to interact with the trap. 

The Damage Severity by Level table lists the typical 
damage a trap deals at certain character levels. The 
damage values given assume that the trap damages one 
creature. Use d6s for damage in place of d10s for traps 
that can affect more than one creature at a time. 

The Spell Equivalent by Level table shows the spell 
slot level that is appropriate for a given character level 
and the severity of danger posed by the trap. A spell is a 
great foundation to use as the design of a trap, whether 
the trap duplicates the spell (a mirror that casts charm 
person on whoever looks into it) or uses its effects (an 
alchemical device that explodes like a fireball). 

The Deadly entry for characters of 17th level or higher 
suggests combining a 9th-level and a 5th-level spell into 
one effect. In this case, pick two spells, or combine the 
effects of a spell cast using a 9th-level and a 5th-level 
slot. For instance, a fireball spell of this sort would deal 
24d6 fire damage on a failed saving throw. 


TRAP Save DCs AND ATTACK BONUSES 


Trap Danger Save/Check DC Attack Bonus 
Moderate 10 +5 
Dangerous 15 +8 
Deadly 20 +12 


DAMAGE SEVERITY BY LEVEL 


Character 
Level Moderate Dangerous Deadly 
1-4 5 (1410) 11 (2d10) 22 (4d10) 
5-10 11 (2d10) 22 (4d10) 55 (10d10) 
11-16 22 (4d10) 55 (10d10) 99 (18d10) 
17-20 55(10d10) 99 (18910) 132 (24910) 


SPELL EQUIVALENT BY LEVEL 


Character 
Level Moderate Dangerous Deadly 
1-4 Cantrip Ist 2nd 
5-10 Ist 3rd 6th 
11-16 3rd 6th 9th 
17-20 6th 9th 9th + Sth 


oe dm ars 


TRIGGERS 
A trigger is the circumstance that needs to take place to 
activate the trap. 

Decide what causes the trap to activate and determine 
how the characters can find the trigger. Here are some 
example triggers: 


- A pressure plate that, when it is stepped on, acti- 
vates the trap 

* Atrip wire that springs a trap when it is broken, usu- 
ally when someone walks through it 

+ A doorknob that activates a trap when it is turned 
the wrong way 

+ A door or chest that triggers a trap when it is opened 


A trigger usually needs to be hidden to be effective. Oth- 
erwise, avoiding the trap is usually easy. 

A trigger requires a Wisdom (Perception) check if 
simply spotting it reveals its nature. The characters can 
foil a pit trap hidden by a leaf-covered net if they spot the 
pit through a gap in the leaves. A trip wire is foiled if it is 
spotted, as is a pressure plate. 

Other traps require careful inspection and deduction 
to notice. A doorknob opens a door when turned to the 
left, but activates a trap when turned to the right. Such a 
subtle trap requires a successful Intelligence (Investiga- 
tion) check to notice. The trigger is obvious. Understand- 
ing its nature is not. 

The DC of the check, regardless of its type, depends 
on the skill and care taken to conceal the trap. Most 
traps can be detected with a successful DC 20 check, 
but a crudely made or hastily built trap has a DC of 15. 
Exceptionally devious traps might have a DC of 25. 

You must then put some thought into what the char- 
acters learn with a successful check. In most cases, the 
check reveals the trap. In other cases, it uncovers clues, 
but foiling the trap still requires some deduction. The 
characters might succeed on the check but still trigger 
the trap if they don't understand what they have learned. 


EFFECTS 

Designing a trap’s effects is a straightforward process. 
The tables for saving throw DCs, attack bonuses, dam- 
age, and the like give you a starting point for most sim- 
ple traps that deal damage. 

For traps with more complex effects, your best start- 
ing point is to use the Spell Equivalent by Level table to 
find the best match for your trap’s intended effect. Spells 
are a good starting point because they are compact 
pieces of game design that deliver specific effects. 

If you are using a spell as a starting point, check to see 
if you need to tweak its effects to fit the trap’s nature. For 
instance, you can easily change the damage type a spell 
delivers or the saving throw it requires. 


DISARMING A SIMPLE TRAP 

Only one successful ability check is required to disarm 
a simple trap. Imagine how your trap operates, and then 
think about how the characters could overcome it. More 
than one kind of ability check might be possible. Some 
traps are so poorly concealed that they can be discov- 
ered or circumvented without active effort. For instance, 
a hidden pit trap is effectively disarmed as soon as the 


characters notice it. After that, they can simply walk 
around it, or they can climb down one side, walk across 
the bottom of the pit, and climb up the other side. 

Once you determine how a trap can be disarmed or 
avoided, decide the appropriate ability and skill com- 
binations that characters can use. A Dexterity check 
using thieves’ tools, a Strength (Athletics) check, and an 
Intelligence (Arcana) check are all commonly used for 
this purpose. 

A Dexterity check using thieves’ tools can apply to any 
trap that has a mechanical element. Thieves’ tools can 
be used to disable a trip wire or a pressure plate, disas- 
semble a poison needle mechanism, or clog a valve that 
leaks poisonous gas into a room. 

A Strength check is often the method for thwarting 
traps that can be destroyed or prevented from operating 
through the use of brute force. A scything blade can be 
broken, a sliding block can be held in place, or a net can 
be torn apart. 

A magic trap can be disabled by someone who can 
undermine the magic used to power it. Typically, a suc- 
cessful Intelligence (Arcana) check enables a character 
to figure out how a magic trap functions and how to ne- 
gate its effect. For instance, the character could discover 
that a statue that belches a jet of magical flame can be 
disabled by shattering one of its glass eyes. 

Once you know what kind of check is called for, you 
then determine what happens on a failed attempt to dis- 
able the trap. Depending on the kind of check involved 
and the nature of the trap, you might determine that any 
failed check has negative consequences—usually involv- 
ing the triggering of the trap. At other times, you could 
assign a number that the check must exceed to prevent 
the trap from going off. If the total of the check is equal 
to or lower than that number, the trap activates. 


PLACING A SIMPLE TRAP 

Context and environment are critical when it comes 
to properly locating a trap. A swinging log trap that's 
meant to knock characters aside is a mere inconve- 
nience on a typical forest path, where it can be easily 
circumvented. But it's a potentially deadly hazard on a 
narrow trail that hugs the side of a towering cliff face. 

Choke points and narrow passages that lead to im- 
portant places in a dungeon are good spots for traps, 
especially those that serve as alarms or restraints. The 
goal is to foil or delay intruders before they can reach a 
critical location, giving the dungeon's denizens a chance 
to mount a defense or a counterattack. 

A treasure chest, a door leading to a vault, or any other 
obstacle'or container that bars the way to a valuable 
treasure is the ideal location for a slaying trap. In such 
instances, the trap is the last line of defense against a 
thief or intruder. 

Alarm traps, since they pose no direct physical 
threat, are appropriate for areas that are also used by 
a dungeon's denizens—assuming the residents know 
about the trap and how to avoid setting it off. Accidents 
can happen, but if a goblin stumbles inside its den and 
activates an alarm trap, there's no real harm done. The 
alarm sounds, the guards arrive, they punish the clumsy 
goblin, and they reset the trap. 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


COMPLEX TRAPS 


A complex trap poses multiple dangers to adventurers. 
After a complex trap activates, it remains dangerous 
round after round until the characters avoid it or disable 
it. Some complex traps become more dangerous over 
time, as they accumulate power or gain speed. 

Complex traps are also more difficult to disable than 
simple ones. A single check is not enough. Instead, a se- 
ries of checks is required to slowly disengage the trap's 
components. The trap's effect degrades with each suc- 
cessful check until the characters finally deactivate it. 

Most complex traps are designed so that they can be 
disarmed only by someone who is exposed to the trap's 
effect. For example, the mechanism that controls a hall- 
way filled with scything blades is on the opposite end 
from the entrance, or a statue that bathes an area in ne- 
crotic energy can be disabled only by someone standing 
in the affected area. 


DESCRIBING A COMPLEX TRAP 

A complex trap has all the elements of a simple trap, 
plus special characteristics that make the trap a more 
dynamic threat. 

Level and Threat. A complex trap uses the same level 
and severity designations that a simple trap does. 

Trigger. Just like a simple trap, a complex trap has a 
trigger. Some complex traps have multiple triggers. 

Initiative. A complex trap takes turns as a creature 
does, because it functions over a period of time. This 
part of a trap's description tells whether the trap is slow 
(acts on initiative count 10), fast (acts on initiative count 
20), or very fast (acts on initiative count 20 and also ini- 
tiative count 10). A trap always acts after creatures that 
have the same initiative count. 

Active Elements. On a trap's turn, it produces specific 
effects that are detailed in this part of its description. 
The trap might have multiple active elements, a table 
you roll on to determine its effect at random, or options 
for you to choose from. 

Dynamic Elements. A dynamic element is a threat 
that arises or evolves while the trap functions. Usually, 
changes involving dramatic elements take effect at the 
end of each of the trap's turns or in response to the char- 
acters' actions. 

Constant Elements. A complex trap poses a threat 
even when it is not taking its turn. The constant ele- 
ments describe how these parts of the trap function. 
Most make an attack or force a saving throw against any 
creature that ends its turn within a certain area. 

Countermeasures. A trap can be defeated in a variety 
of ways. A trap's description details the checks or spells 
that can detect or disable it. It also specifies what hap- 
pens, if anything, on a failed attempt to disable it. 

Disabling a complex trap is like disarming a simple 
trap, except that a complex trap requires more checks. 
It typically takes three successful checks to disable 
one of a complex trap's elements. Many of these traps 
have multiple elements, requiring a lot of work to shut 
down every part of the trap. Usually, a successful check 
reduces a trap element's effectiveness even if it doesn't 
disable the trap. 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


RUNNING A COMPLEX TRAP 

A complex trap functions in play much like a legendary 
monster. When it is activated, the trap's active elements 
act according to its initiative. On each of its initiative 
counts, after all creatures with that same initiative count 
have acted, the trap's features activate. Apply the effects 
detailed in the trap's description. 

After resolving the effects of the trap's active elements, 
check its dynamic elements to see if anything changes 
about the trap. Many complex traps have effects that 
vary during an encounter. A magical aura might do more 
damage the longer it is active, or a swinging blade might 
change which area of a chamber it attacks. 

The trap's constant elements allow it to have effects 
when it isn't the trap's turn. At the end of each creature's 
turn, look at the trap's constant elements to see if any of 
their effects are triggered. 


EXPERIENCE FOR COMPLEX TRAPS 

Overcoming a complex trap merits an experience point 
award, depending on the danger it poses. Judging 
whether a party has overcome a trap requires some 
amount of adjudication. As a rule of thumb, if the char- 
acters disable a complex trap or are exposed to its ef- 
fects and survive, award them experience points for the 
effort according to the table below. 


CoMPLEX TRAP EXPERIENCE AWARDS 


Trap Level Experience Points 


1-4 650 
5-10 3,850 
11-16 11,100 
17-20 21,500 


EXAMPLE COMPLEX TRAPS 


The following complex traps can be used to challenge 
characters or to inspire your own creations. 


PATH OF BLADES 
Complex trap (level 1—4, dangerous threat) 


Hidden within a buried pyramid that marks the location 
of the Lost City of Cynidicea is the tomb of King Alexan- 
der and Queen Zenobia. The entrance to their tomb is a 
long hallway riddled with traps, accessible only by cun- 
ningly hidden secret doors. The hallway is 20 feet wide 
and 160 feet long. It is mostly clear. After 80 feet, the 
floor is broken and cracked, becoming difficult terrain 
until the 130-foot mark. 

Trigger. This trap activates as soon as a non-undead 
creature enters the hallway, and it remains active while 
any non-undead creature is within the hall. 

Initiative. The trap acts on initiative count 20 and ini- 
tiative count 10. 

Active Elements. The Path of Blades includes a set of 
whirling blades along the first 80 feet of the trap, crush- 
ing pillars that slam down from the ceiling to the floor 
before rising back up to the ceiling in the next 50 feet, 
and a rune of fear in its final 30 feet. 


Whirling Blades (Initiative 20). The blades attack 
each creature in the first 80 feet of the hallway, with 


(————| 


а +5 bonus to the attack roll and dealing 11 (2410) 
slashing damage on a hit. 

Crushing Pillars (Initiative 10). Each creature in the 
50-foot-long area beyond the first 80 feet of the hall- 
way must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw. On 
a failed save, a creature takes 11 (2d10) bludgeoning 
damage and is knocked prone. On a successful save, 
the creature takes half as much damage and isn't 
knocked prone. 

Rune of Fear (Initiative 10). Each creature in the 
30-foot-long area beyond the Crushing Pillars must 
make a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw. On a failed 
saving throw, the creature becomes frightened by 
the rune, and it must immediately use its reaction 
to move its speed in the direction of the pillars. The 
frightened creature can't move closer to the far end 
of the hallway until it uses its action to make a DC 
15 Wisdom saving throw, which ends the frightened 
condition on itself on a success. 


Dynamic Elements. The blades and the rune become 
more dangerous the longer the trap remains active. 


Blades Accelerate. The blades move with increasing 
speed, slowing only when they hit a target. Each 
time the blades miss with an attack, their next at- 
tack becomes harder to avoid. After each miss, the 
blades' attack bonus increases by 2, and their dam- 
age increases by 3 (1d6). These benefits apply until 


the blades hit a target, after which the values return gains advantage on its attack against the creature. 

to normal. The creature then attacks. Each blade has AC 15 
Rune's Defense. Tampering with the Rune of Fear in- and 15 hit points. Destroying a blade reduces the 

creases the trap's power. Each successful check on Whirling Blades attack bonus by 2. 

an attempt to disable the rune increases the damage Dexterity check using thieves’ tools, DC 15. Creatures 

of the blades and the crushing pillars by 5 (1d10) can use thieves’ tools in the area attacked by the 


and increases the rune's saving throw DC by 1. 


Constant Elements. The Whirling Blades and the 
Rune of Fear affect each creature that ends its turn in 
an area affected by these elements. 


Whirling Blades. Any creature that ends its turn in 
the blades’ area is targeted by an attack: +5 attack 
bonus; 5 (1d10) slashing damage on a hit. 

Rune of Fear. Any creature that ends its turn within 
30 feet of the far end of the corridor must make a 
saving throw against the Rune of Fear effect. 


Countermeasures. Each of the trap's active elements 


can be thwarted by particular countermeasures. 


Whirling Blades. Characters can smash the blades, 
damage their components, or discern how to 
avoid them. The blades are disabled if their attack 
bonus is reduced to —8. Ways to reduce it are de- 
scribed below. 


Intelligence (Investigation), DC 15. As an action, a 
creature that can see the blades can attempt an In- 
telligence (Investigation) check. A successful check 
means that the character has learned how to antici- 
pate the blades' movement, imposing disadvantage 
on the blades' attacks against the creature while it 
isn't incapacitated. 

Attack. A creature in the area can ready an attack to 
strike at one of the blades as it goes by. The blade 


blades to foil their mechanism. A successful check 
reduces the Whirling Blades attack bonus by 2. 


Crushing Pillars. The pillars are not susceptible to 
countermeasures. 

Rune of Fear. The rune can be disabled with three 
successful DC 15 Intelligence (Arcana) checks. 
Each check requires an action. A creature must be 
at the end of the hallway to attempt the check, and 
only one creature can work on this task at once. 
Once a creature attempts a check for this purpose, 
no other character can do so until the end of that 
creature's next turn. Alternatively, the rune can be 
disabled with three successful castings of dispel 
magic (DC 13) targeting the rune. 


SPHERE OF CRUSHING Doom 
Complex trap (level 5—10, deadly threat) 


The court jester devised a deadly trap to foil anyone who 
sought to steal his magic fool’s cap. The jester’s tomb 

is located at the end of a 10-foot-wide, 150-foot-long 
hallway that descends sharply from north to south. The 
entrance to the tomb is a door on the eastern wall at the 
bottom of the slope, at the south end of the hall. 

Trigger. This trap activates as soon as the door lead- 
ing to the jester’s coffin is opened. A magic portal opens 
at the northern end of the hallway and disgorges an 
enormous steel sphere, which hurtles down the slope. 
When it reaches the bottom of the slope, a second portal 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


briefly appears and teleports the sphere back to the top 
of the slope to begin the process again. 

Initiative. The trap acts on initiative count 10 (but see 
the dynamic element below). 

Active Element. Although the trap is complex in na- 
ture, it has a single active element. That's all it needs. 


Sphere of Crushing Doom (Initiative 10). The trap's 
active element is a sphere of steel that almost fills 
the 10-foot width of the hallway and rolls to the 
bottom of the slope on its turn. Each creature in 
the sphere's path must make a DC 20 Strength 
saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes 22 
(4d10) bludgeoning damage and is knocked prone. 
On a successful save, a creature takes half as much 
damage and isn't knocked prone. Objects that block 
the sphere, such as a conjured wall, take maximum 
damage from the impact. 


Dynamic Element. The longer it rolls, the more lethal 
the sphere becomes. 


Speed Kills. After its turn, the sphere gains speed, 
represented by its damage increasing by 11 (2d10). 
While its damage is 55 (10d10) or greater, it acts on 
initiative count 20 and 10. 


Countermeasures. The trap can be neutralized either 
by stopping the sphere or preventing it from teleporting. 


Stop the Sphere. Stopping the sphere is the easiest 
way to disrupt the trap. A wall of force can do so 
easily, as can any object placed in its path that has 
enough hit points to absorb damage from the sphere 
without being destroyed. 

Disrupt the Portals. Either portal can be neutralized 
with three successful DC 20 Intelligence (Arcana) 
checks, but the process of analyzing a portal to 
disrupt it takes time. Faint runes in the ceiling and 
floor at both ends of the hallway are involved in the 
functioning of the portals. A creature must first 
use an action to examine a set of runes, then use a 
subsequent action to attempt to vandalize the runes. 
Each successful check reduces the sphere's damage 
by 11 (2d10), as the disrupted sphere loses speed 
moving through the failing portal. 

Alternatively, a set of runes can be disabled with 
three successful castings of dispel magic (DC 19) 
targeting any of the runes in the set. 

If the southern portal is destroyed, the sphere 
slams into the south wall and comes to a halt. It 
blocks the door to the tomb, but the characters 
can escape. 


PorsoNED TEMPEST 
Complex trap (level 11—16, deadly threat) 


This fiendish trap was built to eliminate intruders who 
infiltrate a yuan-ti temple. The trap is a room, 60 feet 
on a side, with 5-foot-wide stone doors in the middle of 
each wall. In each corner of the room stands a 10-foot- 
tall statue of a great serpent, coiled and ready to strike. 
The eyes in each statue are rubies worth 200 gp apiece. 
Trigger. This trap activates when a ruby is pried from 
one of the statues. Each statue's mouth slides open, re- 
vealing a 1-foot-wide pipe that runs down its throat. 


CHAPTER? | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


Initiative. The trap acts on initiative count 20 and ini- 
tiative count 10. 

Active Elements. The trap fills the room with poison 
and other deadly effects. 


Locked Doors (Initiative 20). The four doors to this 
room slam shut and are locked in place by magic. 
This effect activates only once, the first time the trap 
is triggered. 

Poison Gas (Initiative 20). Poison gas floods the 
room. Each creature inside must make a DC 20 
Constitution saving throw, taking 33 (6d10) poison 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on 
a successful one. 

Tempest (Initiative 10). Air and gas boils from the 
trap. Roll a d6, and consult the following table. 


TEMPEST EFFECTS 
d6 Effect 

1 Hallucinatory gas scrambles the mind and senses. 
All Intelligence and Wisdom checks made in the 
room have disadvantage until the Tempest element 
activates again. 

2 Explosive gas fills the area. If anyone holds an open 
flame, it causes an explosion. All creatures in the 
area must make a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw, 
taking 22 (4d10) fire damage on a failed save, or 
half as much damage on a successful one. The 
flame is then extinguished. 

3 Weakening gas fills the room. All Strength and Dex- 
terity checks made in the room have disadvantage 
until the Tempest element activates again. 

4 Buffeting winds force each creature in the room to 
succeed on a DC 20 Strength saving throw or be 
knocked prone. 

5 Smoke fills the room. Visibility is reduced to 1 foot 
until the next time the Tempest element activates. 

6 Poison floods the room, forcing creatures to make 
saving throws as for the Poison Gas element. 


Dynamic Element. The longer the poison gas re- 
mains in the room, the more lethal it becomes. 


Increased Potency. The damage from the Poison Gas 
element increases by 11 (2d10) each round after it 
activates, to a maximum of 55 (10d10). 


Countermeasures. There are a few ways that the trap 
can be overcome. 


Open the Doors. Opening the doors is the quickest 
way to circumvent the trap, but they are warded with 
magic. To open the doors, a character must first 
succeed on a DC 20 Wisdom (Perception) check to 
find the locking mechanism. A successful DC 20 In- 
telligence (Arcana) check is then required to disable 
the sphere of force that surrounds the lock (dispel 
magic is ineffective against it). Success on a DC 20 
Dexterity check using thieves' tools picks the lock. 
Finally, a successful DC 20 Strength (Athletics) 
check is needed to push the door open. Each check 
requires an action. 


Disable the Statues. A statue can be disabled by 
blocking the flow of gas from its mouth. Heavily 
damaging a statue is a bad idea, for doing so leaves 
the gas vents open. Reducing a statue to 0 hit points 
(AC 17; 20 hp; resistance to fire, piercing, and 
slashing damage; immune to poison and psychic 
damage) or making a successful DC 20 Strength 
check to break it cracks the statue and increases the 
Poison Gas damage by 5 (1d10). A successful DC 20 
Dexterity check using thieves' tools, or a successful 
DC 15 Strength check made to block up the statue 
with a cloak or similar object, decreases the poison 
damage by 5 (1d10). Once a character succeeds on 
the check, someone must remain next to the statue 
to keep it blocked up. When all four statues are 
blocked in this manner, the trap deactivates. 


DESIGNING COMPLEX TRAPS 


Creating a complex trap takes more work than building 
asimple one, but with some practice, you can learn the 
process and make it move quickly. 

Familiarize yourself with the advice on designing a 
simple trap before proceeding with the guidelines on 
complex traps. 


PURPOSE 

Complex traps are typically designed to protect an area 
by killing or disabling intruders. It is worth your time to 
consider who made the trap, the trap’s purpose, and its 
desired result. Does the trap protect a treasure? Does it 
target only certain kinds of intruders? 


LEVEL AND LETHALITY 

Complex traps use the same level designations and 
lethality descriptors that simple traps do. Refer to that 
section for a discussion of how level and lethality help 
determine saving throw and check DCs, attack bonuses, 
and other numerical elements of a complex trap. 


МАР 

A complex trap has multiple parts, typically relies on 

the characters' positions to resolve some of its effects, 
and can bring several effects to bear in each round. 

The traps are called complex for a reason! To begin the 
design process, consider drawing a map of the area to 
be affected by the trap on graph paper, using a scale of 5 
feet per square. This level of detail allows you to develop 
a clear idea of what the trap can do and how each of its 
parts interact. Your map is the starting point and context 
for the rest of the design process. 

Don't limit yourself to one room. Look at the passages 
and rooms around the area of the trap and think about 
the role they can play. The trap might cause doors to 
lock and barriers to fall into place to prevent escape. 

It could cause darts to fire from the walls in one area, 
forcing characters to enter rooms where other devices 
trigger and threaten them. 

Consider how terrain and furniture can add to the 
trap's danger. A chasm or a pit might create a buffer that 
allows a trap to send bolts of magic at the characters, 
while making it difficult or even impossible for them to 
reach the runes they must deface to foil that attack. 


Think of your map like a script. Where do the charac- 
ters want to go? What does the trap protect? How can 
the characters get there? What are their likely escape 
routes? Answering these questions tells you where the 
trap's various elements should be placed. 


ACTIVE ELEMENTS 

A complex trap's active elements work the same way as 
a simple trap's effects, except that a complex trap acti- 
vates in every round. Otherwise, the guidelines for pick- 
ing saving throw DCs, attack bonuses, and damage are 
the same. To make your trap logically consistent, make 
sure the elements you design can activate each round. 
For instance, ordinary crossbows rigged to fire at the 
characters would need a mechanism for reloading them 
between attacks. 

In terms of lethality, it's better to have multiple dan- 
gerous effects in a trap than a single deadly one. For 
example, the Path of Blades trap uses two dangerous 
elements and one moderate element. 

It's useful to create multiple active elements, with each 
affecting a different area. It's also a good idea to use 
a variety of effects. Some parts of the trap might deal 
damage, and others might immobilize characters or 
isolate them from the rest of the party. A bashing lever 
might knock characters into an area engulfed by jets of 
flame. Think about how the elements can work together. 


CONSTANT ELEMENTS 

In addition to the active steps a complex trap takes, it 
should also present a continual hazard. Often, the active 
and constant effects are the same thing. Imagine a hall- 
way filled with whirling saw blades. On the trap's turn, 
the blades attack anyone in the hall. In addition, anyone 
who lingers in the hallway takes damage at the end of 
each of their turns, accounting for the constant threat 
that the blades pose. 

A constant element should apply its effect to any 
creature that ends its turn in that element's area. If an 
active element presents a threat when it isn't the trap's 
turn, define the threat it poses as a constant element. 
Asa rule of thumb, keep the saving throw DC or attack 
bonus the same as for the active element but reduce the 
damage by half. 

Avoid filling the entire encounter area with constant 
elements. Part of the challenge of a complex trap lies in 
figuring out which areas are safe. A moment's respite 
can help add an element of pacing to an encounter with 
a complex trap and give the characters the feeling that 
they aren't in constant peril. For example, walls that 
slam together might need to reset between slams, mak- 
ing them harmless when it isn't their turn to act. 


DYNAMIC ELEMENTS 

Just as a battle is more interesting if the monsters 
change their tactics or unveil new abilities in later 
rounds, so too are complex traps more fun if their na- 
ture changes in some way. The whirling blades that 
protect a treasure chest do more damage each round as 
they speed up. The poison gas in a room grows thicker 
as more of it floods the chamber, dealing greater dam- 
age and affecting line of sight. The necrotic aura around 
an idol of Demogorgon produces random effects each 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


YA 


time its active element is triggered. As water floods a 
chamber, the characters must swim across areas they 
could walk through just a round or two earlier. 

Since a complex trap remains active over the course 
of several rounds, it might be possible to predict its 
future behavior by examining how it functions. This 
information can give its targets a much better chance of 
thwarting it. To minimize this possibility, design your 
trap so that it presents multiple threats that can change 
each round. The changes can include how a trap targets 
creatures (different attacks or saving throws), the dam- 
age or effects it produces, the areas it covers, and so 
on. Some traps might have a random effect each round, 
while others follow a carefully programmed sequence 
of attacks. 

Dynamic elements usually occur according to a sched- 
ule. For a room that floods, you can plan out how the 
rising water level affects the area each round. The water 
might be ankle deep at the end of the first round, knee 
deep the next, and so on. Not only does the water bring a 
risk of drowning, it also makes it harder to move across 
the area. On the other hand, the rising water level might 
allow characters to swim to the upper reaches of the 
chamber that they couldn't get to from the floor. 

Dynamic elements can also come into play in reaction 
to the characters' actions. Disarming one element of the 
trap might make the others deadlier. Disabling a rune 
that triggers a fire-breathing statue might cause the 
statue to explode. 


TRIGGERS 

The advice on triggers given for simple traps also ap- 
plies to complex traps, with one exception. Complex 
traps have multiple triggers, or are designed such that 
avoiding a trigger prevents intruders from reaching the 
area the trap guards. Other complex traps use magical 
triggers that activate on specific cues, such as when a 
door opens or someone enters an area without wearing 
the correct badge, amulet, or robe. 

Look at your map and consider when you want the 
trap to spring into action. It's best to have a complex trap 
trigger after the characters have committed to exploring 
an area. A simple trap might activate when the charac- 
ters open a door. A complex trap that triggers so early 
leaves the characters still outside the trapped room, in 
a place where they could decide to close the door and 
move on. À simple trap aims to keep intruders out. A 
complex trap wants to lure them in, so that when it acti- 
vates, the intruders must deal with the trap before they 
can escape. 

The trigger for a complex trap should be as foolproof 
as you can make it. A complex trap represents a serious 
expenditure of effort and magical power. No one builds 
such a trap and makes it easy to avoid. Wisdom (Per- 
ception) and Intelligence (Investigation) checks might 
be unable to spot a trigger, especially a magical one, but 
they can still give hints about the trap before it triggers. 
Bloodstains, ashes, gouges in the floor, and other clues 
of that sort can serve as evidence of the trap's presence. 


INITIATIVE 

A complex trap acts repeatedly, but unlike characters 
and monsters, traps don't roll for initiative. As mechan- 
ical or magical devices, their active elements operate in 
a periodic manner. When designing a complex trap, you 
need to decide when and how often its active elements 
produce their effects. 

In a trap with multiple active elements that work in 
concert, those different elements would act on different 
initiative counts. For instance, on initiative count 20, 
blades sweep across a treasure vault, driving the charac- 
ters back into the hallway. On initiative count 10, magic 
darts fire from statues in the hallway while a portcullis 
falls to confine the characters. 

Initiative 10. If a trap's active element takes time to 
build up its effects, then it acts on initiative count 10. 
This option is good for a trap that functions alongside 
allied monsters or other guardians; the delay before it 
acts can give guards the chance to move out of its area 
or force characters into the area before the trap triggers. 

Initiative 20. If an element is designed to surprise 
intruders and hit them before they can react, then it acts 
on initiative count 20. This option is generally best for a 
complex trap. Think of it as the default. Such a trap acts 
quickly enough to take advantage of most characters, 
with nimble characters like rogues, rangers, and monks 
having the best chance to move out of the area before 
the element activates. 

Initiative 20 and 10. Some active elements are in- 
credibly fast acting, laying waste to intruders in a few 
moments unless countered. They act on initiative count 
20 and 10. 


заци 


DEFEATING COMPLEX TRAPS 

A complex trap is never defeated with a single check. In- 
stead, each successful check foils some part of it or de- 
grades its performance. Each element of the trap must 
be overcome individually to defeat the trap as a whole. 

As part of determining how your trap can be over- 
come, look at your map and consider where the charac- 
ters must be located to attempt an action that can foil 
part of the trap. As a rule, the characters should need to 
be near or adjacent to an element to have a chance of af- 
fecting it. An element can be designed so that it protects 
itself. A fighter might be able to break a whirling blade, 
but moving close enough to attack it requires giving the 
blade a chance to strike. 

What methods are effective against your trap? Obvi- 
ous candidates are activities covered by the same sorts 
of checks used to defeat simple traps, but use your 
knowledge of the trap's design to identify other options. 
A valve that leaks poison gas into a room can be stopped 
up. A statue that emits a deadly aura can be pushed over 
and smashed. Attacks, spells, and special abilities can 
all play a role in undermining a trap. 

Leave room for improvisation by the characters. Don't 
create a few predetermined solutions and wait for the 
players to figure out the right approach. If you under- 
stand the mechanism behind how a trap works, that 
makes it much easier for you to respond to the players' 
ideas. If a character wants to try something you haven't 
allowed for, pick an ability, assess the chance of suc- 
cess, and ask for a roll. 

Shutting down one part of a complex trap usually 
requires multiple successes. As a default, it takes three 
successful checks or actions to disable an element. The 
first successful check might reduce the element's saving 
throw DC or attack bonus. The second successful check 
might halve the element's damage, and the final suc- 
cessful check shuts it down. 

For elements that don't attack, allow each successful 
check to reduce that element's effectiveness by one- 
third. A lock's DC is decreased, or a gate opens wide 
enough to allow a Small character to squeeze through 
it. A mechanism pumping poison gas into the room be- 
comes defective, causing the gas's damage to increase 
more slowly or not at all. 

It takes time to disable a complex trap. Three charac- 
ters can't make checks in rapid succession to disarm a 
complex trap in a matter of seconds. Each would get in 
thooo 

COMPLEX TRAPS AND LEGENDARY MONSTERS 

A complex trap is like a legendary monster in some ways. 

It has several tricks it can use on its turn, and it remains 

a threat throughout the round, not just on its turn. The 

trap's active elements are like a legendary creature's nor- 

mal actions, and its constant elements are equivalent to 

legendary actions—except they are tied to specific areas in 

the trapped room. 

Although a legendary creature can move, improvise 
actions, and so forth, a trap is set to a specific script—an 
aspect that has the potential to make a complex trap stale 
and predictable. That's where dynamic elements come in. 
They keep the players on their toes and make dealing with 


a complex trap feel like a challenging, evolving situation. 
яе o 


another character's way and disrupt the effort. Once а 
character succeeds on a check, another character can't 
attempt the same check against the same trap element 
until the end of the successful character's next turn. 

Not all of the characters' options need to be focused 
on stopping a trap from operating. Think of what charac- 
ters can do to mitigate or avoid a trap's effects. Making 
the trap vulnerable to this sort of effort is a way to en- 
gage characters who might be ill-suited to confront the 
trap directly. A successful Intelligence (Religion) check 
might provide insight into the imagery displayed by a 
trap in a temple or shrine, giving other characters a clue 
about how and where to direct their efforts. A character 
could stand in front of a dart trap while holding a shield 
that the darts can target harmlessly, while other charac- 
ters trigger that element as they work to disable it. 


DOWNTIME REVISITED 


It's possible for the characters to start a campaign at 1st 
level, dive into an epic story, and reach 10th level and 
beyond in a short amount of game time. Although that 
pace works fine for many campaigns, some DMs prefer 
a campaign story with pauses built into it-times when 
adventurers are not going on adventures. The downtime 
rules given in this section can be used as alternatives to 
the approach in the Player's Handbook and the Dungeon 
Master's Guide, or you can use the material here to in- 
spire the creation of your own options. 

By engaging the characters in downtime activities that 
take weeks or even months to complete, you can give 
your campaign a longer time line—one in which events 
in the world play out over years. Wars begin and end, ty- 
rants come and go, and royal lines rise and fall over the 
course of the story that you and the characters tell. 

Downtime rules also provide ways for characters to 
spend—or be relieved of—the monetary treasure they 
amass on their adventures. 

The system presented here consists of two elements. 
First, it introduces the concept of rivals. Second, it de- 
tails a number of downtime activities that characters 
can undertake. 


RIVALS 


Rivals are NPCs who oppose the characters and make 
their presence felt whenever the characters are engag- 
ing in downtime. A rival might be a villain you have 
featured in past adventures or plan to use in the future. 
Rivals can also include good or neutral folk who are at 
odds withthe characters, whether because they have 
opposing goals or they simply dislike one another. The 
cultist of Orcus whose plans the characters have foiled, 
the ambitious merchant prince who wants to rule the 
city with an iron fist, and the nosy high priest of Helm 
who is convinced the characters are up to no good are 
all examples of rivals. 

A rival’s agenda changes over time. Though the char- 
acters engage in downtime only between adventures, 
their rivals rarely rest, continuing to spin plots and work 
against the characters even when the characters are off 
doing something else. 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


CREATING A RIVAL 

In essence, a rival is a somewhat specialized NPC. You 
can use chapter 4 of the Dungeon Master's Guide to 
build a new NPC for this purpose, or pick one from your 
current cast of supporting characters and embellish that 
NPC as described below. 

It's possible for the characters to have two or three ri- 
vals at a time, each with a separate agenda. At least one 
should be a villain, but the others might be neutral or 
good; conflicts with those rivals might be social or politi- 
cal, rather than manifesting as direct attacks. 

The best rivals have a connection with their adver- 
saries on a personal level. Find links in the characters' 
backstories or the events of recent adventures that 
explain what sparked the rival's actions. The best trou- 
ble to put the characters in is trouble they created for 
themselves. 


EXAMPLE RiVALS 


d20 Rival 

1 Tax collector who is convinced the characters are 
dodging fees 

2 Politician who is concerned that the characters are 
causing more trouble than they solve 

9 High priest who worries the characters are dimin- 
ishing the temple's prestige 

4 Wizard who blames the characters for some recent 
troubles 

5 Rival adventuring party 

6 Bard who loves a scandal enough to spark one 

7 Childhood rival or member of a rival clan 

8 Scorned sibling or parent 

9 Merchant who blames the characters for any busi- 
ness woes 

10 Newcomer out to make a mark on the world 


11 Sibling or ally of defeated enemy 

12 Official seeking to restore a tarnished reputation 

13 Deadly foe disguised as a social rival 

14 Fiend seeking to tempt the characters to evil 

15 Spurned romantic interest 

16 Political opportunist seeking a scapegoat 

17 Traitorous noble looking to foment a revolution 

18 Would-be tyrant who brooks no opposition 

19 Exiled noble looking for revenge 

20 Corrupt official worried that recent misdeeds will 
be revealed 


To add the right amount of detail to a rival you want to 
create, give some thought to what that NPC is trying to 
accomplish and what resources and methods the rival 
can bring to bear against the characters. 

Goals. An effective rival has a clear reason for inter- 
fering with the characters' lives. Think about what the 
rival wants, how and why the characters stand in the 
way, and how the conflict could be resolved. Ideally, a 
rival's goal directly involves the characters or something 
they care about. 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


Assets. Think about the resources the rival can mar- 
shal. Does the character have enough money to pay 
bribes or to hire a small gang of mercenaries? Does 
the rival hold sway over any guilds, temples, or other 
groups? Make a list of the rival’s assets, and consider 
how they can be used. 

Plans. The foundation of a rival’s presence in the 
campaign is the actions the rival takes or the events that 
occur as a result of that character's goals. Each time you 
resolve one or more workweeks of downtime, pick one 
of the ways a rival’s plans might be advanced and intro- 
duce it into play. 

Think about how a rival might operate in order to 
bring specific plans to fruition, and jot down three or 
four kinds of actions the rival might undertake. Some 
of these might be versions of the downtime activities 
described later in this section, but these are more often 
efforts that are specific to the rival. 

A rival's action might be a direct attack, such as an as- 
sassination attempt, that you play out during a session. 
Or it might be a background activity that you describe 
as altering the campaign in some way. For example, a 
rival who wants to increase the prestige of the temple 
of a war god might hold a festival with drink, food, and 
gladiatorial games. Even if the characters aren't directly 
involved, the event becomes the talk of the town. 

Some elements of a rival's plans might involve 
events in the world that aren't under the rival's control. 
Whether such an event can be easily anticipated or not, 
the rival's plans might include contingencies for taking 
advantage of such happenings. 


EXAMPLE RIVAL: MARINA RODEMUS 

The Rodemus clan was a small but powerful family of 
traders in the city, but years ago, they pulled up stakes 
and left town overnight. Marina Rodemus, the youngest 
child, has now returned to restore her family's prestige. 

In truth, the family fled because its members became 
afflicted by lycanthropy. They joined a clan of wererats 
and delved into smuggling in a distant city, out of fear 
that their secret would be impossible to keep in their 
former home. After fighting her way to the top ranks of 
the wererat clans, Marina—along with a small army of 
followers—has returned to claim her place among the 
elite of her home city. She vows that if she doesn't suc- 
ceed, she'll leave the city in ruins. 

Goals. Marina wants to become the most respected, 
most important merchant in town—someone to whom 
even the prince must yield. 

Assets. Marina has a small fortune in gold; her abili- 
ties as a wererat, alchemist, and necromancer; a group 
of wererats dedicated to her; and a shield guardian that 
protects her. 

Plans. Marina works to discredit and ruin other mer- 
chants. Her wererats spy on her opponents and sneak 
into warehouses, unleashing hordes of rats to spoil 
goods. Marina even victimizes a few of her own ware- 
houses to avoid suspicion. 

If Marina's plans fail, she has a terrible alternative. 
Her knowledge of alchemy has enabled her to create a 
plague that she will unleash on the city through her rats. 
If she can't rule, then no one will. 


MARINA'Ss PLANS 

Element Description 

Event Rats become a noticeable problem in the streets, 
with swarms sighted in rundown neighborhoods. 
Folk demand that action be taken. 

Action Caravan raids by goblinoids become more com- 
mon, and folk talk of gathering a militia. Marina 
contributes generously to the effort. 

Action Warehouses are overrun with rats, ruining thou- 
sands of gold pieces worth of goods. Marina 
blames the city for a lax effort in pest control. 

Action If the characters interfere, Marina sends her as- 
sassins against them. 

Event A sudden storm creates minor flooding, washing 
dozens of dead, bloated, diseased rats from the 
sewers. Terror over the plague rips through town. 

Action Marina fans the flames of panic, spreading ru- 
mors that the characters or other rivals in town 
are responsible for the disease. 


EXAMPLE RIVAL: HIGH PRIEST CHELDAR 

The temple of Pholtus, god of the sun, seeks to bring 

as many folk as possible under its sway. Though it has 
been in town for only two years, the temple is already an 
influential force because of the determination and the 
brilliant oration of Cheldar, its high priest. 

Goals. Cheldar wants to make the temple of Pholtus 
the most popular religion in town by bringing about 
peace and security for all. He believes keeping adventur- 
ers in check or driving them out of town is an important 
step in that plan. 

Assets, The charismatic high priest has his oratory 
skill, divine spellcasting ability, and a few hundred com- 
mon folk recently converted to the temple’s cause. 

Plans. Cheldar is stern but fundamentally a good per- 
son. He tries to win support by providing charity, pro- 
moting peace, and working to enforce law and order. He 
is skeptical of the characters, however, convinced that 
they are troublemakers who will undermine the peace. 
He wants only officials of the town or the temple to be 
involved in handling any crises that arise. He strongly 
believes in his goals, yet he might still be made into an 
ally by good-hearted characters. 


When minions come back {row 
а mission, sometimes V send 


Ehem shop ying 


| Shopyins is this thing ahere 

minions Wwe ача Шс tuli bo 

okher сор Gnd okher peo le (iue 
ted бу) 
Шем Ad ecent shat 


(L's so strange 


С: 


CHELDAR'S PLANS 


Element Description 

Event The grand festival of Pholtus fills the streets 
with somber worshipers, who maintain a day- 
long torchlit vigil. They offer food, drink, and 
shelter to all in the temple of Pholtus. 

Action Cheldar, along with a small group of followers, 
appears in a tavern frequented by adventurers 
and seeks converts. A few NPC adventurers join 
his cause. 

Action In a public address in the town square, Cheldar 
rails against the forces of chaos, laying blame 
for recent troubles on adventurers who are med- 
dling in things best left alone. 

Event The characters find that all adventurers in town 
receive an icy reception at best. 

Action Cheldar demands that the city levy enormous 
taxes on adventurers, claiming that they must 
pay their fair share to keep the city safe. 


DOWNTIME ACTIVITIES 


Downtime activities are tasks that usually take a work- 
week (5 days) or longer to perform. These tasks can in- 
clude buying or creating magic items, pulling off crimes, 
and working at a job. A character selects a downtime 
activity from among those available and pays the cost 
of that activity in time and money. You, as DM, then fol- 
low the rules for the activity to resolve it, informing the 
player of the results and any complications that ensue. 
Consider handling downtime away from the game 
table. For example, you could have the players pick their 
downtime activities at the end of a session, and then 
communicate about them by email or text, until you next 
see them in person. 


RESOLVING ACTIVITIES 

The description of each activity tells you how to resolve 
it. Many activities require an ability check, so be sure to 
note the character's relevant ability modifiers. Follow 
the steps in the activity, and determine the results. 

Most downtime activities require a workweek (5 days) 
to complete. Some activities require days, weeks (7 
days), or months (30 days). A character must spend at 
least 8 hours of each day engaged in the downtime activ- 
ity for that day to count toward the activity's completion. 

The days of an activity don't need to be consecutive; 
you can spread them over a longer period of time than is 
required for the activity. But that period of time should 
be no more than twice as long as the required time; 
otherwise you should introduce extra complications (see 
below) and possibly double the activity's costs to repre- 
sent the inefficiency of the character's progress. 


COMPLICATIONS 

The description of each activity includes a discussion 
of complications you can throw at the characters. The 
consequences of a complication might spawn entire 
adventures, introduce NPCs to vex the party, or give the 
characters headaches or advantages in any number of 
other ways. 


GHAPTER? | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


| 


Each of these sections has a table that offers possible 
complications. You can roll to determine a complication 
randomly, pick one from the table, or devise one of your 
own, and then share it with the player. 


EXAMPLE DOWNTIME ACTIVITIES 


The following activities are suitable for any character 
who can afford to pursue them. As DM, you have the 
final say on which activities are available to the char- 
acters. The activities you allow might depend on the 
nature of the area where the characters are located. For 
example, you might disallow the creation of magic items 
or decide that the characters are in a town that is too 
isolated from major markets for them to buy such items. 


BUYING A MAGIC ITEM 

Purchasing a magic item requires time and money to 
seek out and contact people willing to sell items. Even 
then, there is no guarantee a seller will have the items a 
character desires. 

Resources. Finding magic items to purchase requires 
at least one workweek of effort and 100 gp in expenses. 
Spending more time and money increases your chance 
of finding a high-quality item. 

Resolution. A character seeking to buy a magic item 
makes a Charisma (Persuasion) check to determine 
the quality of the seller found. The character gains a 
+1 bonus on the check for every workweek beyond the 
first that is spent seeking a seller and a *1 bonus for 
every additional 100 gp spent on the search, up to a 
maximum bonus of +10. The monetary cost includes 
a wealthy lifestyle, for a buyer must impress potential 
business partners. 

As shown on the Buying Magic Items table, the total of 
the check dictates which table in the Dungeon Master's 
Guide to roll on to determine which items are on the 
market. Or you can roll for items from any table associ- 
ated with a lower total on the Buying Magic Items table. 
As a further option to reflect the availability of items 
in your campaign, you can apply a —10 penalty for low 
magic campaigns or a *10 bonus for high magic cam- 
paigns. Furthermore, you can double magic item costs 
in low magic campaigns. 

Using the Magic Item Price table, you then assign 
prices to the available items, based on their rarity. 
Halve the price of any consumable item, such as a po- 
tion or a scroll, when using the table to determine an 
asking price. 

You have final say in determining which items are for 
sale and their final price, no matter what the tables say. 

If the characters seek a specific magic item, first 
decide if it's an item you want to allow in your game. If 
so, include the desired item among the items for sale 
on a check total of 10 or higher if the item is common, 
15 or higher if itis uncommon, 20 or higher if it is rare, 
25 or higher if it is very rare, and 30 or higher if it is 
legendary. 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


BuyinG MAGIC ITEMS 


Check 
Total Items Acquired 
1-5 Roll 1d6 times on Magic Item Table A. 
6-10 Roll 1d4 times on Magic Item Table B. 
11—15 Roll 144 times on Magic Item Table C. 
16-20 Roll 1d4 times on Magic Item Table D. 
21-25 Roll 1d4 times on Magic Item Table E. 
26-30 Roll 144 times on Magic Item Table Е. 
31-35 Roll 1d4 times on Magic Item Table G. 
36-40 Roll 1d4 times on Magic Item Table Н. 
41+ Roll 1d4 times on Magic Item Table |. 


Macic ITEM PRICE 


Rarity Asking Price* 
Common (1d6 + 1) x 10 gp 
Uncommon 1d6 x 100 gp 
Rare 2d10 x 1,000 gp 
Very rare (1d4 + 1) x 10,000 gp 
Legendary 2d6 x 25,000 gp 


*Halved for a consumable item like a potion or scroll 


Complications. The magic item trade is fraught with 
peril. The large sums of money involved and the power 
offered by magic items attract thieves, con artists, and 
other villains. If you want to make things more interest- 
ing for the characters, roll on the Magic Item Purchase 
Complications table or invent your own complication. 


Macic ITEM PURCHASE COMPLICATIONS 
912 Complication 
The item is a fake, planted by an enemy.* 
The item is stolen by the party's enemies.* 
The item is cursed by a god. 
The item's original owner will kill to reclaim it; the 
party's enemies spread news of its sale.* 


oM 


The item is at the center of a dark prophecy. 
The seller is murdered before the sale.” 


The item is the key to freeing an evil entity. 
A third party bids on the item, doubling its price.” 
10 The item is an enslaved, intelligent entity. 
n The item is tied to a cult. 
12 The party's enemies spread rumors that the item is 
an artifact of evil? 


5 
6 
7 The seller is a devil looking to make a bargain. 
8 
9 


*Might involve a rival 


CAROUSING 
Carousing is a default downtime activity for many char- 
acters. Between adventures, who doesn't want to relax 
with a few drinks and a group of friends at a tavern? 
Resources. Carousing covers a workweek of fine 
food, strong drink, and socializing. A character can at- 
tempt to carouse among lower-, middle-, or upper-class 
folk. A character can carouse with the lower class for 
10 gp to cover expenses, or 50 gp for the middle class. 


Carousing with the upper class requires 250 gp for the 
workweek and access to the local nobility. 

A character with the noble background can mingle 
with the upper class, but other characters can do so only 
if you judge that the character has made sufficient con- 
tacts. Alternatively, a character might use a disguise kit 
and the Deception skill to pass as a noble visiting from a 
distant city. 

Resolution. After a workweek of carousing, a charac- 
ter stands to make contacts within the selected social 
class. The character makes a Charisma (Persuasion) 
check using the Carousing table. 


CAROUSING 
Check 
Total Result 
1-5 Character has made a hostile contact. 
6-10 Character has made no new contacts. 


11-15 Character has made an allied contact. 
16-20 Character has made two allied contacts. 
21+ Character has made three allied contacts. 


Contacts are NPCs who now share a bond with the 
character. Each one either owes the character a favor 
or has some reason to bear a grudge. A hostile contact 
works against the character, placing obstacles but stop- 
ping short of committing a crime or a violent act. Allied 
contacts are friends who will render aid to the character, 
but not at the risk of their lives. 


Lower-class contacts include criminals, laborers, 
mercenaries, the town guard, and any other folk who 
normally frequent the cheapest taverns in town. 

Middle-class contacts include guild members, spell- 
casters, town officials, and other folk who frequent well- 
kept establishments. 

Upper-class contacts are nobles and their personal 
servants. Carousing with such folk covers formal ban- 
quets, state dinners, and the like. 

Once a contact has helped or hindered a character, 
the character needs to carouse again to get back into the 
NPC's good graces. A contact provides help once, not 
help for life. The contact remains friendly, which can in- 
fluence roleplaying and how the characters interact with 
them, but doesn’t come with a guarantee of help. 

You can assign specific NPCs as contacts. You might 
decide that the barkeep at the Wretched Gorgon and 
a guard stationed at the western gate are the charac- 
ter’s allied contacts. Assigning specific NPCs gives the 
players concrete options. It brings the campaign to life 
and seeds the area with NPCs that the characters care 
about. On the other hand, it can prove difficult to track 
and might render a contact useless if that character 
doesn’t come into play. 

Alternatively, you can allow the player to make an 
NPC into a contact on the spot, after carousing. When 
the characters are in the area in which they caroused, 

a player can expend an allied contact and designate 
an NPC they meet as a contact, assuming the NPC is 
of the correct social class based on how the character 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


caroused. The player should provide a reasonable expla- 
nation for this relationship and work it into the game. 

Using a mix of the two approaches is a good idea, 
since it gives you the added depth of specific contacts 
while giving players the freedom to ensure that the con- 
tacts they accumulate are useful. 

The same process can apply to hostile contacts. You 
can give the characters a specific NPC they should 
avoid, or you might introduce one at an inopportune or 
dramatic moment. 

At any time, a character can have a maximum number 
of unspecified allied contacts equal to 1 + the character's 
Charisma modifier (minimum of 1). Specific, named 
contacts don't count toward this limit—only ones that 
can be used at any time to declare an NPC as a contact. 

Complications. Characters who carouse risk bar 
brawls, accumulating a cloud of nasty rumors, and 
building a bad reputation around town. As a rule of 
thumb, a character has a 10 percent chance of triggering 
a complication for each workweek of carousing. 


Lower-CLass CAROUSING COMPLICATIONS 


d8 Complication 
1 A pickpocket lifts 1d10 x 5 gp from you.* 


2 А bar brawl leaves you with a scar.* 

3 You have fuzzy memories of doing something very, 
very illegal, but can't remember exactly what. 

4 You are banned from a tavern after some obnox- 
ious behavior.* 

5 After a few drinks, you swore in the town square to 
pursue a dangerous quest. 

6 Surprise! You're married. 


Streaking naked through the streets seemed like a 
great idea at the time. 

8 Everyone is calling you by some weird, embarrass- 
ing nickname, like Puddle Drinker or Bench Slayer, 
and no one will say why.* 


*Might involve a rival 


MIDDLE-CLASS CAROUSING COMPLICATIONS 
d8 Complication 


1 You accidentally insulted a guild master, and only 
a public apology will let you do business with the 
guild again.* 

2 You swore to complete some quest on behalf of a 
temple or a guild. 

3 A social gaffe has made you the talk of the town.* 

4 A particularly obnoxious person has taken an in- 
tense romantic interest in you.* 

5 You have made a foe out of a local spellcaster* 


You have been recruited to help run a local festival, 
play, or similar event. 

7 You made a drunken toast that scandalized the 
locals. 

8 You spent an additional 100 gp trying to impress 
people. 


*Might involve a rival 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


UPPER-CLASS CAROUSING COMPLICATIONS 


d8 Complication 

1 A pushy noble family wants to marry off one of 
their scions to you.* 

2 You tripped and fell during a dance, and people 

can't stop talking about it. 

You have agreed to take on a noble's debts. 

You have been challenged to a joust by a knight.* 

You have made a foe out of a local noble 

A boring noble insists you visit each day and listen 

to long, tedious theories of magic. 

7 You have become the target of a variety of embar- 
rassing rumors.* 

8 You spent an additional 500 gp trying to impress 
people. 


nu o ш 


* Might involve a rival 


CRAFTING AN ITEM 

A character who has the time, the money, and the 
needed tools can use downtime to craft armor, weapons, 
clothing, or other kinds of nonmagical gear. 

Resources and Resolution. In addition to the appro- 
priate tools for the item to be crafted, a character needs 
raw materials worth half of the item's selling cost. To 
determine how many workweeks it takes to create an 
item, divide its gold piece cost by 50. A character can 
complete multiple items in a workweek if the items' com- 
bined cost is 50 gp or lower. Items that cost more than 
50 gp can be completed over longer periods of time, as 
long as the work in progress is stored in a safe location. 

Multiple characters can combine their efforts. Divide 
the time needed to create an item by the number of char- 
acters working on it. Use your judgment when determin- 
ing how many characters can collaborate on an item. A 
particularly tiny item, like a ring, might allow only one 
or two workers, whereas a large, complex item might 
allow four or more workers. 

A character needs to be proficient with the tools 
needed to craft an item and have access to the appro- 
priate equipment. Everyone who collaborates needs to 
have the appropriate tool proficiency. You need to make 
any judgment calls regarding whether a character has 
the correct equipment. The following table provides 
some examples. 


Proficiency Items 
Herbalism kit Antitoxin, potion of healing 
Leatherworker's tools Leather armor, boots 
Smith's tools Armor, weapons 
Weaver's tools Cloaks, robes 

If all the above requirements are met, the result of the 
process is an item of the desired sort. A character can 
sell an item crafted in this way at its listed price. 

Craftiné Magic Items. Creating a magic item requires 
more than just time, effort, and materials. It is a long- 
term process that involves one or more adventures to 
track down rare materials and the lore needed to cre- 
ate the item. 


————— 


Potions of healing and spell scrolls are exceptions to 
the following rules. For more information, see “Brewing 
Potions of Healing” later in this section and the “Scrib- 
ing a Spell Scroll” section, below. 

To start with, a character needs a formula for a magic 
item in order to create it. The formula is like a recipe. 

It lists the materials needed and steps required to 
make the item. 

An item invariably requires an exotic material to com- 
plete it. This material can range from the skin of a yeti to 
a vial of water taken from a whirlpool on the Elemental 
Plane of Water. Finding that material should take place 
as part of an adventure. 

The Magic Item Ingredients table suggests the chal- 
lenge rating of a creature that the characters need to 
face to acquire the materials for an item. Note that fac- 
ing a creature does not necessarily mean that the char- 
acters must collect items from its corpse. Rather, the 
creature might guard a location or a resource that the 
characters need access to. 


Magic ITEM INGREDIENTS 


Item Rarity CR Range 
Common 1—3 
Uncommon 4-8 
Rare 9-12 
Very rare 13-18 
Legendary 19+ 


If appropriate, pick a monster or a location that is a 
thematic fit for the item to be crafted. For example, cre- 
ating mariner's armor might require the essence of a 
water weird. Crafting a staff of charming might require 
the cooperation of a specific arcanaloth, who will help 
only if the characters complete a task for it. Making a 
staff of power might hinge on acquiring a piece of an 
ancient stone that was once touched by the god of mag- 
ic—a stone now guarded by a suspicious androsphinx. 

In addition to facing a specific creature, creating an 
item comes with a gold piece cost covering other mate- 
rials, tools, and so on, based on the item's rarity. Those 
values, as well as the time a character needs to work in 
order to complete the item, are shown on the Magic Item 
Crafting Time and Cost table. Halve the listed price and 
creation time for any consumable items. 


Magic ITEM CRAFTING TIME AND COST 


Item Rarity Workweeks* Cost* 
Common 1 50 gp 
Uncommon 2 200 gp 
Rare 10 2,000 gp 
Very rare 25 20,000 gp 
Legendary 50 100,000 gp 


*Halved for a consumable item like a potion or scroll 


To complete a magic item, a character also needs 
whatever tool proficiency is appropriate, as for crafting a 
nonmagical object, or proficiency in the Arcana skill. 

If all the above requirements are met, the result of the 
process is a magic item of the desired sort. 


Complications. Most of the complications involved in 
creating something, especially a magic item, are linked 
to the difficulty in finding rare ingredients or compo- 
nents needed to complete the work. The complications 
a character might face as byproducts of the creation 
process are most interesting when the characters are 
working on a magic item: there's a 10 percent chance for 
every five workweeks spent on crafting an item that a 
complication occurs. The Crafting Complications table 
provides examples of what might happen. 


CRAFTING COMPLICATIONS 
d6 Complication 


1 Rumors swirl that what you're working on is unsta- 
ble and a threat to the community.* 

2 Your tools are stolen, forcing you to buy new 
ones.* 

3 A local wizard shows keen interest in your work 
and insists on observing you. 

4 A powerful noble offers a hefty price for your work 


and is not interested in hearing no for an answer.* 
5 A dwarf clan accuses you of stealing its secret lore 
to fuel your work.* 
6 A competitor spreads rumors that your work is 
shoddy and prone to failure.* 


*Might involve a rival 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


Brewing Potions of Healing. Potions of healing fall 
into a special category for item crafting, separate from 
other magic items. A character who has proficiency with 
the herbalism kit can create these potions. The times 
and costs for doing so are summarized on the Potion of 
Healing Creation table. 


POTION OF HEALING CREATION 


Type Time Cost 
Healing 1 day 25 gp 
Greater healing 1 workweek 100 gp 
Superior healing 3 workweeks 1,000 gp 
Supreme healing 4 workweeks 10,000 gp 


CRIME 

Sometimes it pays to be bad. This activity gives a char- 
acter the chance to make some extra cash, at the risk 
of arrest. 

Resources. A character must spend one week and at 
least 25 gp gathering information on potential targets 
before committing the intended crime. 

Resolution. The character must make a series of 
checks, with the DC for all the checks chosen by the 
character according to the amount of profit sought from 
the crime. 

The chosen DC can be 10, 15, 20, or 25. Successful 
completion of the crime yields a number of gold pieces, 
as shown on the Loot Value table. 

To attempt a crime, the character makes three checks: 
Dexterity (Stealth), Dexterity using thieves’ tools, and 
the player's choice of Intelligence (Investigation), Wis- 
dom (Perception), or Charisma (Deception). 

If none of the checks are successful, the character is 
caught and jailed. The character must pay a fine equal to 
the profit the crime would have earned and must spend 
one week in jail for each 25 gp of the fine. 

If only one check is successful, the heist fails but the 
character escapes. 

If two checks are successful, the heist is a partial suc- 
cess, netting the character half the payout. 

If all three checks are successful, the character earns 
the full value of the loot. 


Loor VALUE 
DC Value 
10 50 gp, robbery of a struggling merchant 
15 100 gp, robbery of a prosperous merchant 
20 200 gp, robbery of a noble 
25 1,000 gp, robbery of one of the richest figures in town 


Complications. A life of crime is filled with complica- 
tions. Roll on the Crime Complications table (or create 
a complication of your own) if the character succeeds 
on only one check. If the character's rival is involved in 
crime or law enforcement, a complication ensues if the 
character succeeds on only two checks. 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


CriME COMPLICATIONS 
d8 Complication 


1 A bounty equal to your earnings is offered for infor- 
mation about your crime.” 

2 An unknown person contacts you, threatening to 
reveal your crime if you don't render a service.* 

3 Your victim is financially ruined by your crime. 

4 Someone who knows of your crime has been ar- 
rested on an unrelated matter.* 

5 Your loot is a single, easily identified item that you 
can't fence in this region. 

6 You robbed someone who was under a local crime 
lord's protection, and who now wants revenge. 

7 Your victim calls in a favor from a guard, doubling 
the efforts to solve the case. 

8 Your victim asks one of your adventuring compan- 


ions to solve the crime. 


* Might involve a rival 


GAMBLING 
Games of chance are a way to make a fortune—and per- 
haps a better way to lose one. 

Resources. This activity requires one workweek of ef- 
fort plus a stake of at least 10 gp, to a maximum of 1,000 
gp or more, as you see fit. 

Resolution. The character must make a series of 
checks, with a DC determined at random based on the 
quality of the competition that the character runs into. 
Part of the risk of gambling is that one never knows who 
might end up sitting across the table. 

The character makes three checks: Wisdom (Insight), 
Charisma (Deception), and Charisma (Intimidation). 

If the character has proficiency with an appropriate 
gaming set, that tool proficiency can replace the rele- 
vant skill in any of the checks. The DC for each of the 
checks is 5 + 2d10; generate a separate DC for each 
one. Consult the Gambling Results table to see how the 
character did. 


GAMBLING RESULTS 


Result Value 

Lose all the money you bet, and accrue a 
debt equal to that amount. 

Lose half the money you bet. 

Gain the amount you bet plus half again 
more. 

Gain double the amount you bet. 


0 successes 


1 success 
2 successes 


3 successes 


Complications. Gambling tends to attract unsavory 
individuals. The potential complications involved come 
from run-ins with the law and associations with various 
criminals tied to the activity. Every workweek spent 
gambling brings a 10 percent chance of a complication, 
examples of which are on the Gambling Complica- 
tions table. 


GAMBLING COMPLICATIONS 
d6 Complication 
1 You are accused of cheating. You decide whether 
you actually did cheat or were framed* 
2 The town guards raid the gambling hall and throw 


you in jail.” 

3 A noble in town loses badly to you and loudly vows 
to get revenge.* 

4 You won a sum from a low-ranking member of a 
thieves' guild, and the guild wants its money back. 

5 A local crime boss insists you start frequenting the 
boss's gambling parlor and no others. 

6 A high-stakes gambler comes to town and insists 


that you take part in a game. 


*Might involve a rival 


Pit FIGHTING 

Pit fighting includes boxing, wrestling, and other nonle- 
thal forms of combat in an organized setting with prede- 
termined matches. If you want to introduce competitive 
fighting in a battle-to-the-death situation, the standard 
combat rules apply to that sort of activity. 

Resources. Engaging in this activity requires one 
workweek of effort from a character. 

Resolution. The character must make a series of 
checks, with a DC determined at random based on the 
quality of the opposition that the character runs into. 

A big part of the challenge in pit fighting lies in the un- 
known nature of a character's opponents. 

The character makes three checks: Strength (Athlet- 
ics), Dexterity (Acrobatics), and a special Constitution 
check that has a bonus equal to a roll of the character's 
largest Hit Die (this roll doesn't spend that die). If de- 
sired, the character can replace one of these skill checks 
with an attack roll using one of the character's weapons. 
The DC for each of the checks is 5 + 2d10; generate a 
separate DC for each one. Consult the Pit Fighting Re- 
sults table to see how the character did. 


Pit FIGHTING RESULTS 


Result Value 

0 successes Lose your bouts, earning nothing. 
1 success Win 50 gp. 

2 successes Win 100 gp. 

3 successes Win 200 gp. 


Complications. Characters involved in pit fighting 
must deal with their opponents, the people who bet on 
matches, and the matches’ promoters. Every workweek 
spent pit fighting brings a 10 percent chance of a compli- 
cation, examples of which are on the Pit Fighting Com- 
plications table. 


Pit FIGHTING COMPLICATIONS 
dé Complication 


1 An opponent swears to take revenge on you.* 

2 A crime boss approaches you and offers to pay you 
to intentionally lose a few matches.* 

3 You defeat a popular local champion, drawing the 
crowd's ire. 

4 You defeat a noble's servant, drawing the wrath of 


the noble's house.* 

5 You are accused of cheating. Whether the allega- 
tion is true or not, your reputation is tarnished.* 

6 You accidentally deliver a near-fatal wound to a foe. 


*Might involve a rival 


RELAXATION 

Sometimes the best thing to do between adventures is 
relax. Whether a character wants a hard-earned vaca- 
tion or needs to recover from injuries, relaxation is the 
ideal option for adventurers who need a break. This op- 
tion is also ideal for players who don't want to make use 
of the downtime system. 

Resources. Relaxation requires one week. A charac- 
ter needs to maintain at least a modest lifestyle while 
relaxing to gain the benefit of the activity. 

Resolution. Characters who maintain at least a mod- 
est lifestyle while relaxing gain several benefits. While 
relaxing, a character gains advantage on saving throws 
to recover from long-acting diseases and poisons. In 
addition, at the end of the week, a character can end one 
effect that keeps the character from regaining hit points, 
or can restore one ability score that has been reduced to 
less than its normal value. This benefit cannot be used 
if the harmful effect was caused by a spell or some other 
magical effect with an ongoing duration. 

Complications. Relaxation rarely comes with com- 
plications. If you want to make life complicated for the 
characters, introduce an action or an event connected 
to a rival. 


RELIGIOUS SERVICE 

Characters with a religious bent might want to spend 
downtime in service to a temple, either by attending 
rites or by proselytizing in the community. Someone 
who undertakes this activity has a chance of winning 
the favor of the temple's leaders. 

Resources. Performing religious service requires ac- 
cess to, and often attendance at, a temple whose beliefs 
and ethos align with the character's. If such a place is 
available, the activity takes one workweek of time but 
involves no gold piece expenditure. 

Resolution. At the end of the required time, the char- 
acter chooses to make either an Intelligence (Religion) 
check or a Charisma (Persuasion) check. The total of 
the check determines the benefits of service, as shown 
on the Religious Service table. 


RELIGIOUS SERVICE 


Check 
Total Result 
1-10 No effect. Your efforts fail to make a lasting 


impression. 
11-20 You earn one favor. 
21+ You earn two favors. 


A favor, in broad terms, is a promise of future assis- 
tance from a representative of the temple. It can be 
expended to ask the temple for help in dealing with a 
specific problem, for general political or social support, 
or to reduce the cost of cleric spellcasting by 50 percent. 
A favor could also take the form of a deity’s intervention, 
such as an omen, a vision, or a minor miracle provided 
at a key moment. This latter sort of favor is expended by 
the DM, who also determines its nature. 

Favors earned need not be expended immediately, but 
only a certain number can be stored up. A character can 
have a maximum number of unused favors equal to 1 + 
the character's Charisma modifier (minimum of one un- 
used favor). 

Complications. Temples can be labyrinths of political 
and social scheming. Even the best-intentioned sect can 
fall prone to rivalries. A character who serves a temple 
risks becoming embroiled in such struggles. Every 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


workweek spent in religious service brings a 10 percent 
chance of a complication, examples of which are on the 
Religious Service Complications table. 


RELIGIOUS SERVICE COMPLICATIONS 

dé Complication 

1 You have offended a priest through your words or 
actions.* 

2 Blasphemy is still blasphemy, even if you did it by 
accident. 
A secret sect in the temple offers you membership. 

4 Another temple tries to recruit you as a spy.* 
The temple elders implore you to take up a holy 
quest. 

6 You accidentally discover that an important person 
in the temple is a fiend worshiper. 


*Might involve a rival 


RESEARCH 

Forewarned is forearmed. The research downtime ac- 

tivity allows a character to delve into lore concerning a 
monster, a location, a magic item, or some other partic- 
ular topic. 

Resources. Typically, a character needs access to a 
library or a sage to conduct research. Assuming such 
access is available, conducting research requires one 
workweek of effort and at least 50 gp spent on materials, 
bribes, gifts, and other expenses. 

Resolution. The character declares the focus of the 
research—a specific person, place, or thing. After one 
workweek, the character makes an Intelligence check 
with a +1 bonus per 100 gp spent beyond the initial 
100 gp, to a maximum of +6. In addition, a character 
who has access to a particularly well-stocked library 
or knowledgeable sages gains advantage on this check. 
Determine how much lore a character learns using the 
Research Outcomes table. 


RESEARCH OUTCOMES 
Check 
Total Outcome 
1-5 No effect. 
6-10 You learn one piece of lore. 
11-20 Хои learn two pieces of lore. 
21+ You learn three pieces of lore. 


Each piece of lore is the equivalent of one true state- 
ment about a person, place, or thing. Examples include 
knowledge of a creature's resistances, the password 
needed to enter a sealed dungeon level, the spells com- 
monly prepared by an order of wizards, and so on. 

As DM, you are the final arbiter concerning exactly 
what a character learns. For a monster or an NPC, you 
can reveal elements of statistics or personality. For a lo- 
cation, you can reveal secrets about it, such as a hidden 
entrance, the answer to a riddle, or the nature of a crea- 
ture that guards the place. 

Complications. The greatest risk in research is un- 
covering false information. Not all lore is accurate or 


UM M. NE 


———— o M————— 


truthful, and a rival with a scholarly bent might try to 
lead the character astray, especially if the object of the 
research is known to the rival. The rival might plant 
false information, bribe sages to give bad advice, or steal 
key tomes needed to find the truth. 

In addition, a character might run into other com- 
plications during research. Every workweek spent in 
research brings a 10 percent chance of a complication, 
examples of which are on the Research Complica- 
tions table. 


RESEARCH COMPLICATIONS 
d6 Complication 


1 You accidentally damage a rare book. 

2 You offend a sage, who demands an extravagant 
gift.* 

3 Ifyou had known that book was cursed, you never 
would have opened it. 

4 A sage becomes obsessed with convincing you of a 
number of strange theories about reality.* 

5 Your actions cause you to be banned from a library 
until you make reparations.* 

6 You uncovered useful lore, but only by promising 


to complete a dangerous task in return. 


*Might involve a rival 


SCRIBING A SPELL SCROLL 
With time and patience, a spellcaster can transfer a 
spell to a scroll, creating a spell scroll. 

Resources. Scribing a spell scroll takes an amount of 
time and money related to the level of the spell the char- 
acter wants to scribe, as shown in the Spell Scroll Costs 
table. In addition, the character must have proficiency 
in the Arcana skill and must provide any material com- 
ponents required for the casting of the spell. Moreover, 
the character must have the spell prepared, or it must be 
among the character's known spells, in order to scribe a 
scroll of that spell. 

If the scribed spell is a cantrip, the version on the 
scroll works as if the caster were 1st level. 


SPELL SCROLL Costs 


Spell Level Time Cost 
Cantrip 1 day 15 gp 
Ist 1 day 25 gp 
2nd 3 days 250 gp 
3rd 1 workweek 500 gp 
4th 2 workweeks 2,500 gp 
5th 4 workweeks 5,000 gp 
6th 8 workweeks 15,000 gp 
7th 16 workweeks 25,000 gp 
8th 32 workweeks 50,000 gp 
9th 48 workweeks 250,000 gp 


Complications. Crafting a spell scroll is a solitary 
task, unlikely to attract much attention. The complica- 
tions that arise are more likely to involve the preparation 
needed for the activity. Every workweek spent scribing 


brings a 10 percent chance of a complication, examples 
of which are on the Scribe a Scroll Complications table. 


ScRIBE A SCROLL COMPLICATIONS 


d6 Complication 
1 You bought up the last of the rare ink used to craft 
scrolls, angering a wizard in town. 


2 The priest of a temple of good accuses you of traf- 
ficking in dark magic.* 

3 A wizard eager to collect one of your spells in a 
book presses you to sell the scroll. 

4 Due to a strange error in creating the scroll, it is 
instead a random spell of the same level. 

5 The rare parchment you bought for your scroll has 
a barely visible map on it. 

6 A thief attempts to break into your workroom.* 


*Might involve a rival 


SELLING A МАСІС ITEM 

Selling a magic item is by no means an easy task. Con 
artists and thieves are always looking out for an easy 
score, and there's no guarantee that a character will re- 
ceive a good offer even if a legitimate buyer is found. 

Resources. A character can find a buyer for one 
magic item by spending one workweek and 25 gp, which 
is used to spread word of the desired sale. A character 
must pick one item at a time to sell. 

Resolution. A character who wants to sell an item 
must make a Charisma (Persuasion) check to determine 
what kind of offer comes in. The character can always 
opt not to sell, instead forfeiting the workweek of effort 
and trying again later. Use the Magic Item Base Prices 
and Magic Item Offer tables to determine the sale price. 


Magic ITEM BASE PRICES 


Rarity Base Price* 
Common 100 gp 
Uncommon 400 gp 
Rare 4,000 gp 
Very rare 40,000 gp 
Legendary 200,000 gp 


*Halved for a consumable item like a potion or scroll 


Magic ITEM OFFER 
Check 
Total , Offer 
1-10 5096 of base price 
11-20 100% of base price 
21+ 150% of base price 


Complications. The main risk in selling a magic item 
lies in attracting thieves and anyone else who wants the 
item but doesn’t want to pay for it. Other folk might try to 
undermine a deal in order to bolster their own business 
or seek to discredit the character as a legitimate seller. 
Every workweek spent trying to sell an item brings a 10 
percent chance of a complication, examples of which are 
on the Magic Item Sale Complications table. 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


TRAINING COMPLICATIONS 

d6 Complication 

1 Your instructor disappears, forcing you to spend 
one workweek finding a new one.* 

2 Your teacher instructs you in rare, archaic meth- 
ods, which draw comments from others. 

3 Your teacher is a spy sent to learn your plans.* 

4 Your teacher is a wanted criminal. 

5 Your teacher is a cruel taskmaster. 

6 Your teacher asks for help dealing with a threat. 


*Might involve a rival 


WORK 

When all else fails, an adventurer can turn to an honest 
trade to earn a living. This activity represents a char- 
acter’s attempt to find temporary work, the quality and 
wages of which are difficult to predict. 

Resources. Performing a job requires one workweek 
of effort. 

Resolution. To determine how much money a char- 
acter earns, the character makes an ability check: 
Strength (Athletics), Dexterity (Acrobatics), Intelligence 
using a set of tools, Charisma (Performance), or Cha- 
risma using a musical instrument. Consult the Wages 
table to see how much money is generated according to 
the total of the check. 


WAGES 
Check 
Total Earnings 
MAGIC ITEM SALE COMPLICATIONS 9orlower Poor lifestyle for the week 
d6 Complication 10-14 Modest lifestyle for the week 
1 Your enemy secretly arranges to buy the item to 15-20 Comfortable lifestyle for the week 
use it against you.* 21+ Comfortable lifestyle for the week + 25 gp 
2 A thieves’ guild, alerted to the sale, attempts to 
steal your item.* Complications. Ordinary work is rarely filled with 
3 A foe circulates rumors that your item is a fake.* significant complications. Still, the Work Complications 
4 A sorcerer claims your item as a birthright and de- table can add some difficulties to a worker's life. Each 


workweek of activity brings a 10 percent chance that a 


mands you hand it over. 78 
character encounters a complication. 


5 Your item's previous owner, or surviving allies of 
the owner, vow to retake the item by force. Work COMPLICATIONS 
6 The buyer is murdered before the sale is finalized.* 
| ав Complication 
МІБ толмо ме алма! 1 A difficult customer or a fight with a coworker re- 
TRAINING duces the wages you earn by one category.* 
ns Given enough free time and the services of an instruc- 2 Your employer's financial difficulties result in your 
tor, a character can learn a language or pick up profi- not being paid.* 
ciency with a tool. 3 A coworker with ties to an important family in town 
Resources. Receiving training in a language or tool takes a dislike to you.* 

typically takes at least ten workweeks, but this time is 4 Your employer is involved with a dark cult or a 


reduced by a number of workweeks equal to the char- 
acter's Intelligence modifier (an Intelligence penalty 
doesn't increase the time needed). Training costs 25 gp 
per workweek. 
Ч Complications. Complications that arise while train- 
ing typically involve the teacher. Every ten workweeks checks made for this downtime activity for the next 
spent in training brings a 10 percent chance of a compli- six workweeks you devote їо it.” 
cation, examples of which are on the Training Complica- 
tions table. 


criminal enterprise. 
5 A crime ring targets your business for extortion.* 
6 You gain a reputation for laziness (unjustified or 
not, as you choose), giving you disadvantage on 


*Might involve a rival 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


AWARDING MAGIC ITEMS 


Magic items are prized by D&D adventurers of all sorts 
and are often the main reward in an adventure. The 
rules for magic items are presented, along with the 
Treasure Hoard tables, in chapter 7 of the Dungeon 
Master's Guide. This section expands on those rules by 
offering you an alternative way of determining which 
magic items end up in the characters' possession and by 
adding a collection of common magic items to the game. 
The section ends with tables that group magic items ac- 
cording to rarity. 

The system in the Dungeon Master's Guide is de- 
signed so that you can generate all treasure randomly, 
and the tables also govern the number of magic items 
the characters receive. In short, the tables do the work. 
But a DM who's designing or modifying an adventure 
might prefer to choose the magic items that come into 
play. If you're in that situation, you can use the rules in 
this section to personalize your treasure hoards while 
staying within the game's limits for how many items the 
characters should ultimately accumulate. 


DISTRIBUTION BY RARITY 

This alternative method of treasure determination fo- 
cuses on choosing magic items based on their rarity, 
rather than by rolling on the tables in the Dungeon Mas- 
ter's Guide. This method uses two tables: Magic Items 
Awarded by Tier and Magic Items Awarded by Rarity. 

By Tier. The Magic Items Awarded by Tier table 
shows the number of magic items a D&D party typically 
gains during a campaign, culminating in the group's 
having accumulated one hundred magic items by 20th 
level. The table shows how many of those items are 
meant to be handed out during each of the four tiers of 
play. The emphasis on characters receiving more items 
during the second tier (levels 5—10) than in other tiers 
is by design. The second tier is where much of the play 
occurs in a typical D&D campaign, and the items gained 
in that tier prepare the characters for higher-level 
adventures. 

By Rarity. The Magic Items Awarded by Rarity table 
takes the numbers from the Magic Items Awarded by 
Tier table and breaks them down to show the number of 
items of each rarity the characters are expected to have 
when they reach the end of a tier. 

Minor and Major Items. Both tables in this section 
make a distinction between minor magic items and ma- 
jor magic items. This distinction exists in the Dungeon 
Master's Guide, yet those terms aren't used there. In 
that book, the minor items are those listed on Magic 
Item Tables A through E, and the major items are on 


Macic ITEMS AWARDED BY RARITY 
Minor Magic Items 


Level/CR Common Uncommon Rare Very Rare 
1-4 6 2 1 0 
5-10 10 12 5 1 
11-16 3 6 9 5 
17+ 0 0 4 9 
Total 19 20 19 15 


--— LLLL————————————— 
BEHIND THE DESIGN: Magic ITEM DISTRIBUTION 
The Dungeon Master’s Guide assumes a certain amount of 
treasure will be found over the course of a campaign. Over 
twenty levels of typical play, the game expects forty-five 
rolls on the Treasure Hoard tables, distributed as follows: 


+ Seven rolls on the Challenge 0—4 table 
+ Eighteen rolls on the Challenge 5—10 table 
+ Twelve rolls on the Challenge 11—16 table 
+ Eight rolls on the Challenge 17+ table 


Because many of the table results call for more than one 
magic item, those forty-five rolls will result in the charac- 
ters obtaining roughly one hundred items. The optional 
system described here yields the same number of items, 
distributed properly throughout the spectrum of rarity, 
while enabling you to control exactly which items the char- 
acters have a chance of acquiring. 
алаан. ] 
Magic Item Tables Е through I. As you can see from the 
Treasure Hoard tables in that book, major magic items 
are meant to be handed out much less frequently than 
minor items, even at higher levels of play. 


Macic ITEMS AWARDED BY TIER 


Character 
Level Minor Items Major Items All Items 
1-4 9 2 11 
5-10 28 6 34 
11-16 24 6 30 
17-20 19 6 25 
Total 80 20 100 


CHOOSING ITEMS LEVEL BY LEVEL 
You decide when to place an item in an adventure that 
you're creating or modifying, usually because you think 
the story calls for a magic item, the characters need one, 
or the players would be especially pleased to get one. 
When you want to select an item as treasure for an en- 
counter, the Magic Items Awarded by Rarity table serves 
as your item budget. Here’s how to use it: 


1. Jot down a copy of the table in your notes, so that you 
can make adjustments to the numbers as you select 
items to be placed in an adventure. 

2. Refer to the line in the Level/CR column that corre- 
sponds to one of the following values (your choice): 
the level of the player characters, the challenge rating 
of the magic item’s owner, or the challenge rating of 
the group of creatures guarding the item. The entries 
in that row of the table indicate the total number of 
items that would be appropriate for the characters to 
receive by the end of the tier represented by that row. 


Major Magic Items 


Legendary Uncommon Rare Very Rare Legendary 
0 2 0 0 0 
0 5 1 0 0 
1 1 2 2 1 
6 0 1 2 3 
7 8 4 4 4 


3. Choose a magic item of any rarity for which the entry 
in this row is not 0. 

4. When the characters obtain an item, modify your 
notes to indicate which part of your budget this expen- 
diture came from by subtracting 1 from the appropri- 
ate entry on the table. 


In the future, if you choose an item of a rarity that's 

not available in the current tier but is still available in 

a lower tier, deduct the item from the lower tier. If all 
lower tiers also have no items available of a given rarity, 
deduct the item from a higher tier. 


CHOOSING ITEMS PIECEMEAL 

If you prefer a more free-form method of choosing magic 
items, simply select each magic item you want to give 
out; then, when the characters acquire one, deduct it 
from the Magic Items Awarded by Rarity table in your 
notes. Whenever you do so, start with the lowest tier, 
and deduct the item from the first number you come 
across in the appropriate rarity column for the item, 
whether its minor or major. If that tier doesn't have a 
number greater than O for that rarity, go up a tier until 
you find one that does, and deduct the magic item from 
that number. Following this process, you will zero out 
each row of the table in order, going from the lowest lev- 
els to the highest. 


OVERSTOCKING AN ADVENTURE 
The magic item tables in this section are based on the 
number of items the characters are expected to receive, 
not the number of items that are available in an adven- 
ture. When creating or modifying an adventure, assume 
that the characters won't find all the items you place in 
it, unless most of the loot is in easy-to-find locations. 
Here's a good rule of thumb: an adventure can include a 
number of items that's 25 percent higher than the num- 
bers in the tables (round up). For example, an adventure 
designed to take characters from 1st to 4th level might 
include fourteen items rather than eleven, in the expec- 
tation that three of those items won't be found. 
al 
Are Macic ITEMS NECESSARY IN A CAMPAIGN? 
The D&D game is built on the assumption that magic 
items appear sporadically and that they are always a boon, 
unless an item bears a curse. Characters and monsters are 
built to face each other without the help of magic items, 
which means that having a magic item always makes a 
character more powerful or versatile than a generic char- 
acter of the same level. As DM, you never have to worry 
about awarding magic items just so the characters can 
keep up with the campaign's threats. Magic items are truly 
prizes. Are they useful? Absolutely. Are they necessary? No. 
Magic items can go from nice to necessary in the rare 
group that has no spellcasters, no monk, and no NPCs 
capable of casting magic weapon. Having no magic makes 
it extremely difficult for a party to overcome monsters that 
have resistances or immunity to nonmagical damage. In 
such a game, you'll want to be generous with magic weap- 
ons or else avoid using such monsters. 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


COMMON МАСІС ITEMS 


The Dungeon Master's Guide includes many magic 
items of every rarity. The one exception are common 
items; that book includes few of them. This section intro- 
duces more of them to the game. These items seldom in- 
crease a character's power, but they are likely to amuse 
players and provide fun roleplaying opportunities. 

The magic items are presented in alphabetical order. 


ARMOR OF GLEAMING 
Armor (any medium or heavy), common 


This armor never gets dirty. 


BEAD OF NOURISHMENT 

Wondrous item, common 

This spongy, flavorless, gelatinous bead dissolves on 
your tongue and provides as much nourishment as 1 day 
of rations. 


BEAD OF REFRESHMENT 

Wondrous item, common 

This spongy, flavorless, gelatinous bead dissolves in 
liquid, transforming up to a pint of the liquid into fresh, 
cold drinking water. The bead has no effect on magical 
liquids or harmful substances such as poison. 


BOOTS OF FALSE TRACKS 

Wondrous item, common 

Only humanoids can wear these boots. While wearing 
the boots, you can choose to have them leave tracks like 
those of another kind of humanoid of your size. 


CANDLE OF THE DEEP 

Wondrous item, common 

The flame of this candle is not extinguished when 
immersed in water. It gives off light and heat like a nor- 
mal candle. 


Cast-OFF ARMOR 
Armor (light, medium, or heavy), common 


You can doff this armor as an action. 


CHARLATAN'S DIE 
Wondrous item, common (requires attunement) 


Whenever you roll this six-sided die, you can control 
which number it rolls. 


CLOAK OF BILLOWING 
Wondrous item, common 


While wearing this cloak, you can use a bonus action to 
make it billow dramatically. 


CLOAK OF MANY FASHIONS 
Wondrous item, common 


While wearing this cloak, you can use a bonus action to 
change the style, color, and apparent quality of the gar- 
ment. The cloak's weight doesn't change. Regardless of 
its appearance, the cloak can't be anything but a cloak. 
Although it can duplicate the appearance of other magic 
cloaks, it doesn't gain their magical properties. 


| 
| 
| 
i 


CLOCKWORK AMULET 
Wondrous item, common 


This copper amulet contains tiny interlocking gears 
and is powered by magic from Mechanus, a plane of 
clockwork predictability. A creature that puts an ear to 
the amulet can hear faint ticking and whirring noises 
coming from within. 

When you make an attack roll while wearing the am- 
ulet, you can forgo rolling the d20 to get a 10 on the die. 
Once used, this property can't be used again until the 
next dawn. 


CLOTHES OF MENDING 
Wondrous item, common 


This elegant outfit of traveler's clothes magically mends 
itself to counteract daily wear and tear. Pieces of the out- 
fit that are destroyed can't be repaired in this way. 


DARK SHARD AMULET 
Wondrous item, common (requires attunement by a 
warlock) 


This amulet is fashioned from a single shard of resilient 
extraplanar material originating from the realm of your 
warlock patron. While you are wearing it, you gain the 
following benefits: 


+ You can use the amulet as a spellcasting focus for 
your warlock spells. 

+ You can try to cast a cantrip that you don't know. The 
cantrip must be on the warlock spell list, and you 
must make a DC 10 Intelligence (Arcana) check. If the 
check succeeds, you cast the spell. If the check fails, 
so does the spell, and the action used to cast the spell 
is wasted. In either case, you can't use this property 
again until you finish a long rest. 


DREAD HELM 
Wondrous item, common 


This fearsome steel helm makes your eyes glow red 
while you wear it. 


EAR HORN OF HEARING 

Wondrous item, common 

While held up to your ear, this horn suppresses the ef- 
fects of the deafened condition on you, allowing you to 
hear normally. 


ENDURING SPELLBOOK 

Wondrous item, common 

This spellbook, along with anything written on its 
pages, can't be damaged by fire or immersion in water. 
In addition, the spellbook doesn't deteriorate with age. 


ERSATZ EYE 
Wondrous item, common (requires attunement) 


This artificial eye replaces a real one that was lost or 
removed. While the ersatz eye is embedded in your eye 
socket, it can't be removed by anyone other than you, 
and you can see through the tiny orb as though it were a 
normal eye. 


HAT OF VERMIN 
Wondrous item, common 


This hat has 3 charges. While holding the hat, you can 
use an action to expend 1 of its charges and speak a 
command word that summons your choice of a bat, a 
frog, or a rat (see the Player's Handbook or the Monster 
Manual for statistics). The summoned creature magi- 
cally appears in the hat and tries to get away from you 
as quickly as possible. The creature is neither friendly 
nor hostile, and it isn't under your control. It behaves as 
an ordinary creature of its kind and disappears after 1 
hour or when it drops to 0 hit points. The hat regains all 
expended charges daily at dawn. 


НАТ OF WIZARDRY 
Wondrous item, common (requires attunement by a 
wizard) 


This antiquated, cone-shaped hat is adorned with gold 
crescent moons and stars. While you are wearing it, you 
gain the following benefits: 


* Youcan use the hat as a spellcasting focus for your 
wizard spells. 

* Youcan try to cast a cantrip that you don't know. The 
cantrip must be on the wizard spell list, and you must 
make a DC 10 Intelligence (Arcana) check. If the 
check succeeds, you cast the spell. If the check fails, 
so does the spell, and the action used to cast the spell 
is wasted. In either case, you can't use this property 
again until you finish a long rest. 


HEWARD’S HANDY SPICE POUCH 
Wondrous item, common 


This belt pouch appears empty and has 10 charges. 
While holding the pouch, you can use an action to ex- 
pend 1 of its charges, speak the name of any nonmag- 
ical food seasoning (such as salt, pepper, saffron, or 
cilantro), and remove a pinch of the desired seasoning 
from the pouch. A pinch is enough to season a single 
meal. The pouch regains 1d6 + 4 expended charges 
daily at dawn. 


Horn oF SILENT ALARM 
Wondrous item, common 


This horn has 4 charges. When you use an action to 
blow it, one creature of your choice can hear the horn's 
blare, provided the creature is within 600 feet of the 
horn and not deafened. No other creature hears sound 
coming from the horn. The horn regains 1d4 expended 
charges daily at dawn. 


INSTRUMENT OF ILLUSIONS 
Wondrous item, common (requires attunement) 


While you are playing this musical instrument, you 
can create harmless, illusory visual effects within a 
5-foot-radius sphere centered on the instrument. If 
you are a bard, the radius increases to 15 feet. Sample 
visual effects include luminous musical notes, a spec- 
tral dancer, butterflies, and gently falling snow. The 
magical effects have neither substance nor sound, and 
they are obviously illusory. The effects end when you 


stop playing. 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


INSTRUMENT OF SCRIBING 
Wondrous item, common (requires attunement) 


This musical instrument has 3 charges. While you are 
playing it, you can use an action to expend 1 charge 
from the instrument and write a magical message on 
a nonmagical object or surface that you can see within 
30 feet of you. The message can be up to six words long 
and is written in a language you know. If you are a bard, 
you can scribe an additional seven words and choose 
to make the message glow faintly, allowing it to be seen 
in nonmagical darkness. Casting dispel magic on the 
message erases it. Otherwise, the message fades away 
after 24 hours. 

The instrument regains all expended charges 
daily at dawn. 


Lock oF TRICKERY 
Wondrous item, common 


This lock appears to be an ordinary lock (of the type 
described in chapter 5 of the Player's Handbook) and 
comes with a single key. The tumblers in this lock magi- 
cally adjust to thwart burglars. Dexterity checks made to 
pick the lock have disadvantage. 


Moon-ToucHED SWORD 
Weapon (any sword), common 


In darkness, the unsheathed blade of this sword sheds 
moonlight, creating bright light in a 15-foot radius and 
dim light for an additional 15 feet. 


MYSTERY KEY 
Wondrous item, common 


A question mark is worked into the head of this key. The 
key has a 5 percent chance of unlocking any lock into 
which it’s inserted. Once it unlocks something, the key 
disappears. 


ORB OF DIRECTION 
Wondrous item, common 


While holding this orb, you can use an action to deter- 
mine which way is north. This property functions only 
on the Material Plane. 


ORB OF TIME 
Wondrous item, common 


While holding this orb, you can use an action to de- 
termine whether it is morning, afternoon, evening, or 
nighttime outside. This property functions only on the 
Material Plane. 


PERFUME OF BEWITCHING 
Wondrous item, common 


This tiny vial contains magic perfume, enough for one 
use. You can use an action to apply the perfume to your- 
self, and its effect lasts 1 hour. For the duration, you 
have advantage on all Charisma checks directed at hu- 
manoids of challenge rating 1 or lower. Those subjected 
to the perfume's effect are not aware that they've been 
influenced by magic. 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


PIPE OF SMOKE MONSTERS 
Wondrous item, common 


While smoking this pipe, you can use an action to ex- 
hale a puff of smoke that takes the form of a single crea- 
ture, such as a dragon, a flumph, or a froghemoth. The 
form must be small enough to fit in a 1-foot cube and 
loses its shape after a few seconds, becoming an ordi- 
nary puff of smoke. 


POLE OF ANGLING 
Wondrous item, common 


While holding this 10-foot pole, you can speak a com- 
mand word and transform it into a fishing pole with a 
hook, a line, and a reel. Speaking the command word 
again changes the fishing pole back into a normal 
10-foot pole. 


POLE OF COLLAPSING 
Wondrous item, common 


While holding this 10-foot pole, you can use an action 
to speak a command word and cause it to collapse into 
a 1-foot-long rod, for ease of storage. The pole’s weight 
doesn't change. You can use an action to speak a dif- 
ferent command word and cause the rod to revert toa 
pole; however, the rod will elongate only as far as the 
surrounding space allows. 


PoT OF AWAKENING 
Wondrous item, common 


If you plant an ordinary shrub in this 10-pound clay pot 
and let it grow for 30 days, the shrub magically trans- 
forms into an awakened shrub (see the Monster Man- 
ual for statistics) at the end of that time. When the shrub 
awakens, its roots break the pot, destroying it. 

The awakened shrub is friendly toward you. Absent 
commands from you, it does nothing. 


ROPE OF MENDING 
Wondrous item, common 


You can cut this 50-foot coil of hempen rope into any 
number of smaller pieces, and then use an action to 
speak a command word and cause the pieces to knit 
back together. The pieces must be in contact with each 
other and not otherwise in use. A rope of mending is for- 
ever shortened if a section of it is lost or destroyed. 


RUBY OF THE WAR MAGE 
Wondrous item, common (requires attunement by a 
spellcaster) 


Etched with eldritch runes, this 1-inch-diameter ruby 
allows you to use a simple or martial weapon as a spell- 
casting focus for your spells. For this property to work, 
you must attach the ruby to the weapon by pressing the 
ruby against it for at least 10 minutes. Thereafter, the 
ruby can’t be removed unless you detach it as an action 
or the weapon is destroyed. Not even an antimagic field 
causes it to fall off. The ruby does fall off the weapon if 
your attunement to the ruby ends. 


SHIELD OF EXPRESSION 
Armor (shield), common 


The front of this shield is shaped in the likeness of a 
face. While bearing the shield, you can use a bonus ac- 
tion to alter the face's expression. 


SMOLDERING ARMOR 
Armor (any), common 


Wisps of harmless, odorless smoke rise from this armor 
while it is worn. 


STAFF OF ADORNMENT 
Staff, common 


If you place an object weighing no more than 1 pound 
(such as a shard of crystal, an egg, or a stone) above 

the tip of the staff while holding it, the object floats an 
inch from the staff's tip and remains there until it is 
removed or until the staff is no longer in your posses- 
sion. The staff can have up to three such objects floating 
over its tip at any given time. While holding the staff, 
you can make one or more of the objects slowly spin or 
turn in place. 


STAFF OF BIRDCALLS 
Staff, common 


This wooden staff is decorated with bird carvings. It has 
10 charges. While holding it, you can use an action to 
expend 1 charge from the staff and cause it to create one 
of the following sounds out to a range of 60 feet: a finch's 
chirp, a raven's caw, a duck's quack, a chicken's cluck, a 
goose's honk, a loon's call, a turkey's gobble, a seagull’s 
cry, an owl's hoot, or an eagle's shriek. 

The staff regains 1d6 + 4 expended charges daily at 
dawn. If you expend the last charge, roll a d20. On a 1, 
the staff explodes in a harmless cloud of bird feathers 
and is lost forever. 


STAFF OF FLOWERS 
Staff, common 


This wooden staff has 10 charges. While holding it, you 
can use an action to expend 1 charge from the staff and 
cause a flower to sprout from a patch of earth or soil 
within 5 feet of you, or from the staff itself. Unless you 
choose a specific kind of flower, the staff creates a mild- 
scented daisy. The flower is harmless and nonmagical, 
and it grows or withers as a normal flower would. 

The staff regains 1d6 + 4 expended charges daily at 
dawn. If you expend the last charge, roll a d20. On a 1, 
the staff turns into flower petals and is lost forever. 


TALKING DOLL 
Wondrous item, common (requires attunement) 


While this stuffed doll is within 5 feet of you, you can 
spend a short rest telling it to say up to six phrases, none 
of which can be more than six words long, and set a con- 
dition under which the doll speaks each phrase. You can 
also replace old phrases with new ones. Whatever the 
condition, it must occur within 5 feet of the doll to make 
it speak. For example, whenever someone picks up the 
doll, it might say, “I want a piece of candy.” The doll’s 
phrases are lost when your attunement to the doll ends. 


UNBREAKABLE ARROWS 


TANKARD OF SOBRIETY 

Wondrous item, common 

This tankard has a stern face sculpted into one side. You 
can drink ale, wine, or any other nonmagical alcoholic 
beverage poured into it without becoming inebriated. 
The tankard has no effect on magical liquids or harmful 
substances such as poison. 


UNBREAKABLE ARROW 
Weapon (arrow), common 


This arrow can't be broken, except when it is within an 
antimagic. field. 


VETERAN'S CANE 

Wondrous item, common 

When you grasp this walking cane and use a bonus ac- 
tion to speak the command word, it transforms into an 
ordinary longsword and ceases to be magical. 


WALLOPING AMMUNITION 
Weapon (any ammunition), common 


This ammunition packs a wallop. A creature hit by the 
ammunition must succeed on a DC 10 Strength saving 
throw or be knocked prone. 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


WAND OF CONDUCTING 
Wand, common 


This wand has 3 charges. While holding it, you can use 
an action to expend 1 of its charges and create orches- 
tral music by waving it around. The music can be heard 
out to a range of 60 feet and ends when you stop wav- 
ing the wand. 

The wand regains all expended charges daily at dawn. 
If you expend the wand's last charge, roll a d20. On a 
1, asad tuba sound plays as the wand crumbles to dust 
and is destroyed. 


WAND OF PYROTECHNICS 
Wand, common 


This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can use 
an action to expend 1 of its charges and create a harm- 
less burst of multicolored light at a point you can see 
up to 60 feet away. The burst of light is accompanied 
by a crackling noise that can be heard up to 300 feet 
away. The light is as bright as a torch flame but lasts 
only a second. 

The wand regains 1d6 + 1 expended charges daily at 
dawn. If you expend the wand's last charge, roll a d20. 
On a 1, the wand erupts in a harmless pyrotechnic dis- 
play and is destroyed. 


WAND OF SCOWLS 
Wand, common 


This wand has 3 charges. While holding it, you can use 
an action to expend 1 of its charges and target a human- 
oid you can see within 30 feet of you. The target must 
succeed on a DC 10 Charisma saving throw or be forced 
to scowl for 1 minute. 

The wand regains all expended charges daily at dawn. 
If you expend the wand's last charge, roll a d20. On a 1, 
the wand transforms into a wand of smiles. 


WAND OF SMILES 
Wand, common 


This wand has 3 charges. While holding it, you can use 
an action to expend 1 of its charges and target a human- 
oid you can see within 30 feet of you. The target must 
succeed on a DC 10 Charisma saving throw or be forced 
to smile for 1 minute. 

The wand regains all expended charges daily at dawn. 
If you expend the wand's last charge, roll a d20. On a 1, 
the wand transforms into a wand of scowls. 

а ——————————————— AA 

CREATING ADDITIONAL COMMON ITEMS 

The "Special Features" section in chapter 7 of the Dungeon 

Master's Guide is useful if you want to design other com- 

mon magic items. For example, the What Minor Property 

Does It Have? table might inspire you to create a magic 

item that allows a character to speak and understand the 

Goblin language (based on the table's Language property), 

a magic item that glows in the presence of fiends (based 

on the Sentinel property), or a magic item that projects 

its user's voice over a great distance (based on the War 

Leader property). 


CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


Magic ITEM TABLES 


The tables in this section classify the magic items from 
the Dungeon Master's Guide and the new items pre- 
sented here into minor items and major items, then sep- 
arate the items in each group according to rarity. Each 
table entry includes the item's type and an indication of 
whether the item requires attunement. Artifacts aren't 
included here; they are beyond even major items in 
power and importance. 


MINOR ITEMS, COMMON 

Item Type Attune? 
Armor of gleaming Armor No 

Bead of nourishment Wondrous item No 

Bead of refreshment Wondrous item No 

Boots of false tracks Wondrous item No 

Candle of the deep Wondrous item No 

Cast-off armor Armor No 
Charlatan’s die Wondrous item Yes 

Cloak of billowing Wondrous item No 

Cloak of many fashions Wondrous item No 
Clockwork amulet Wondrous item No 

Clothes of mending Wondrous item No 

Dark shard amulet Wondrous item Yes (warlock) 
Dread helm Wondrous item No 

Ear horn of hearing Wondrous item No 

Enduring spellbook Wondrous item No 

Ersatz eye Wondrous item Yes 

Hat of vermin Wondrous item No 

Hat of wizardry Wondrous item Yes (wizard) 
Heward's handy spice Wondrous item No 

pouch 

Horn of silent alarm Wondrous item No 
Wondrous item Yes 
Wondrous item Yes 
Wondrous item No 
Weapon No 
Wondrous item No 
Wondrous item No 
Wondrous item No 
Wondrous item No 
Wondrous item No 
Wondrous item No 
Wondrous item No 
Wondrous item No 


Instrument of illusions 
Instrument of scribing 
Lock of trickery 
Moon-touched sword 
Mystery key 

Orb of direction 

Orb of time 

Perfume of bewitching 
Pipe of smoke monsters 
Pole of angling 

Pole of collapsing 

Pot of awakening 

Potion of climbing Potion No 

Potion of healing Potion No 

Wondrous item No 

Wondrous item Yes (spellcaster) 


Rope of mending 
Ruby of the war mage 


Shield of expression Armor No 
Smoldering armor Armor No 
Spell scroll (cantrip) Scroll No 
Spell scroll (1st level) Scroll No 
Staff of adornment Staff No 
Staff of birdcalls Staff No 


Item 

Staff of flowers 
Talking doll 

Tankard of sobriety 
Unbreakable arrow 
Veteran's cane 
Walloping ammunition 
Wand of conducting 
Wand of pyrotechnics 
Wand of scowls 
Wand of smiles 


Type 

Staff 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Weapon 
Wondrous item 
Weapon 

Wand 

Wand 

Wand 

Wand 


MINOR ITEMS, UNCOMMON 


Item 

Alchemy jug 
Ammunition, +1 

Bag of holding 

Cap of water breathing 
Cloak of the manta ray 
Decanter of endless water 
Driftglobe 

Dust of disappearance 
Dust of dryness 

Dust of sneezing and 
choking 

Elemental gem 

Eyes of minute seeing 
Goggles of night 

Helm of comprehending 
languages 

Immovable rod 
Keoghtom's ointment 
Lantern of revealing 
Mariner's armor 

Mithral armor 

Oil of slipperiness 
Periapt of health 

Philter of love 

Potion of animal friendship 
Potion of fire breath 
Potion of greater healing 
Potion of growth 

Potion of hill giant strength 
Potion of poison 

Potion of resistance 
Potion of water breathing 
Ring of swimming 

Robe of useful items 
Rope of climbing 

Saddle of the cavalier 
Sending stones 

Spell scroll (2nd level) 
Spell scroll (3rd level) 
Wand of magic detection 
Wand of secrets 


Type 
Wondrous item 
Weapon 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


Rod 

Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Armor 

Armor 

Potion 
Wondrous item 
Potion 

Potion 

Potion 

Potion 

Potion 

Potion 

Potion 

Potion 

Potion 

Ring 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Scroll 

Scroll 

Wand 

Wand 


Attune? 
No 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 


MiNOR ITEMS, RARE 
Item Type 
Weapon No 
Wondrous item No 
Wondrous item No 
Wondrous item No 


Ammunition, +2 
Bag of beans 
Bead of force 
Chime of opening 


Elixir of health Potion No 


Folding boat 


Wondrous item No 


Heward's handy haversack Wondrous item No 


Horseshoes of speed 
Necklace of fireballs 


Wondrous item No 
Wondrous item No 


Oil of etherealness Potion No 


Portable hole 


Wondrous item No 


Potion of clairvoyance Potion No 
Potion of diminution Potion No 
Potion of fire giant strength Potion No 
Potion of frost giant Potion No 
strength 

Potion of gaseous form Potion No 
Potion of heroism Potion No 
Potion of invulnerability Potion No 
Potion of mind reading Potion No 
Potion of stone giant Potion No 
strength 

Potion of superior healing Potion No 


Quaal’s feather token 


Wondrous item No 


Scroll of protection Scroll No 
Spell scroll (4th level) Scroll No 
Spell scroll (5th level) Scroll No 


MiNOR ITEMS, VERY RARE 


Item Type Attune? 
Ammunition, +3 Weapon No 
Arrow of slaying Weapon No 


Bag of devouring 
Horseshoes of a zephyr 
Nolzur's marvelous 


Wondrous item No 
Wondrous item No 
Wondrous item No 


pigments 

Oil of sharpness Potion No 
Potion of cloud giant Potion No 
strength 

Potion of flying Potion No 
Potion of invisibility Potion No 
Potion of longevity Potion No 
Potion of speed Potion No 
Potion of supreme healing Potion No 
Potion of vitality Potion No 
Spell scroll (6th level) Scroll No 
Spell scroll (7th level) Scroll No 
Spell scroll (8th level) Scroll No 


CHAPTER 2 | 


DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


М 


MINOR ITEMS, LEGENDARY 


Item 

Potion of storm giant 
strength 

Sovereign glue 

Spell scroll (9th level) 
Universal solvent 


Type 
Potion 


Wondrous item 
Scroll 
Wondrous item 


Major ITEMS, UNCOMMON 


Item 

Adamantine armor 
Amulet of proof against 
detection and location 
Bag of tricks 

Boots of elvenkind 
Boots of striding and 
springing 

Boots of the winterlands 
Bracers of archery 
Brooch of shielding 
Broom of flying 

Circlet of blasting 

Cloak of elvenkind 
Cloak of protection 
Deck of illusions 
Eversmoking bottle 
Eyes of charming 

Eyes of the eagle 
Figurine of wondrous 
power (silver raven) 
Gauntlets of ogre power 
Gem of brightness 
Gloves of missile snaring 
Gloves of swimming and 
climbing 

Gloves of thievery 

Hat of disguise 
Headband of intellect 
Helm of telepathy 
Instrument of the bards 
(Doss lute) 

Instrument of the bards 
(Fochlucan bandore) 
Instrument of the bards 
(Mac-Fuirmidh cittern) 
Javelin of lightning 
Medallion of thoughts 
Necklace of adaptation 
Pearl of power 

Periapt of wound closure 
Pipes of haunting 


Type 
Armor 
Wondrous item 


Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


Weapon 

Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


HAPTER-2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS 


Attune? 


Yes 
Yes (bard) 


Yes (bard) 


Yes (bard) 


Yes 
Yes (spellcaster) 
Yes 
No 


Item 

Pipes of the sewers 
Quiver of Ehlonna 

Ring of jumping 

Ring of mind shielding 
Ring of warmth 

Ring of water walking 

Rod of the pact keeper, +1 
Sentinel shield 

Shield, +1 

Slippers of spider climbing 
Staff of the adder 


Staff of the python 


Stone of good luck (luck- 
stone) 

Sword of vengeance 
Trident of fish command 
Wand of magic missiles 
Wand of the war mage, +1 
Wand of web 

Weapon of warning 
Weapon, +1 

Wind fan 

Winged boots 


MAJOR ITEMS, RARE 


Item 

Amulet of health 

Armor of resistance 
Armor of vulnerability 
Armor, +1 
Arrow-catching shield 
Belt of dwarvenkind 

Belt of hill giant strength 
Berserker axe 

Boots of levitation 
Boots of speed 

Bowl of commanding 
water elementals 
Bracers of defense 
Brazier of commanding 
fire elementals 

Cape of the mountebank 
Censer of controlling air 
elementals 

Cloak of displacement 


Type 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Ring 

Ring 

Ring 

Ring 

Rod 

Armor 

Armor 
Wondrous item 
Staff 


Staff 


Wondrous item 


Weapon 
Weapon 

Wand 

Wand 

Wand 

Weapon 
Weapon 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


Type 
Wondrous item 
Armor 

Armor 

Armor 

Armor 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Weapon 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


Wondrous item 


Yes (warlock) 


Yes 

Yes (cleric, 
druid, or 
warlock) 
Yes (cleric, 
druid, or 
warlock) 
Yes 


Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes (spellcaster) 
Yes (spellcaster) 
Yes 


Attune? 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 


Yes 


Нет 

Cloak ofthe bat 

Cube of force 

Daern's instant fortress 
Dagger of venom 
Dimensional shackles 
Dragon slayer 

Elven chain 

Figurine of wondrous 
power (bronze griffon) 
Figurine of wondrous 
power (ebony fly) 
Figurine of wondrous 
power (golden lions) 
Figurine of wondrous 
power (ivory goats) 
Figurine of wondrous 
power (marble elephant) 
Figurine of wondrous 
power (onyx dog) 
Figurine of wondrous 
power (serpentine owl) 
Flame tongue 

Gem of seeing 

Giant slayer 

Glamoured studded 
leather 

Helm of teleportation 
Horn of blasting 

Horn of Valhalla (silver or 
brass) 

Instrument of the bards 
(Canaith mandolin) 
Instrument of the bards 
(Cli lyre) 

loun stone (awareness) 
loun stone (protection) 
loun stone (reserve) 
loun stone (sustenance) 
Iron bands of Bilarro 
Mace of disruption 
Mace of smiting 

Mace of terror 

Mantle of spell resistance 
Necklace of prayer beads 


Periapt of proof against 
poison 


Type 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Weapon 
Wondrous item 
Weapon 

Armor 
Wondrous item 


Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


Weapon 
Wondrous item 
Weapon 

Armor 


Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Weapon 

Weapon 

Weapon 

Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


Wondrous item 


Yes (bard) 


Yes (bard) 


Yes 

Yes (cleric, 
druid, or 
paladin) 
No 


Item 

Ring of animal influence 
Ring of evasion 

Ring of feather falling 
Ring of free action 

Ring of protection 

Ring of resistance 

Ring of spell storing 

Ring of the ram 

Ring of X-ray vision 

Robe of eyes 

Rod of rulership 

Rod of the pact keeper, +2 
Rope of entanglement 
Shield of missile attraction 
Shield, +2 

Staff of charming 


Staff of healing 


Staff of swarming insects 


Staff of the woodlands 
Staff of withering 


Stone of controlling earth 
elementals 

Sun blade 

Sword of life stealing 
Sword of wounding 
Tentacle rod 

Vicious weapon 

Wand of binding 

Wand of enemy detection 
Wand of fear 

Wand of fireballs 

Wand of lightning bolts 
Wand of paralysis 

Wand of the war mage, +2 
Wand of wonder 
Weapon, +2 

Wings of flying 


Zi 
CHAPTER 2 | DUNGEON MASTER'S TOOLS | 
~~ > aa 


pi c 


Type 

Ring 

Ring 

Ring 

Ring 

Ring 

Ring 

Ring 

Ring 

Ring 
Wondrous item 
Rod 

Rod 

Wondrous item 
Armor 

Armor 

Staff 


Staff 


Staff 


Staff 
Staff 


Wondrous item 


Weapon 
Weapon 
Weapon 
Rod 
Weapon 
Wand 
Wand 
Wand 
Wand 
Wand 
Wand 
Wand 
Wand 
Weapon 
Wondrous item 


Attune? 


Yes (warlock) 


No 

Yes (bard, 
cleric, druid, 
sorcerer, | 
warlock, or 
wizard) 

Yes (bard, 
cleric, or 
druid) 

Yes (bard, 
cleric, druid, 
sorcerer, 
warlock, or 
wizard) 

Yes (druid) 
Yes (cleric, 
druid, or 
warlock) 

No 


Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes (spellcaster) 
Yes 


Yes 
Yes (spellcaster) 
Yes (spellcaster) 
Yes (spellcaster) 
Yes (spellcaster) 
Yes (spellcaster) 
No 
Yes 


RECHARGING WITHOUT A DAWN 
Some magic items can be used a limited number of times 
but are recharged by the arrival of dawn. What if you're on 
a plane of existence that lacks anything resembling dawn? 
The DM should choose a time every 24 hours when such 
magic items recharge on that plane of existence. 

Even on a world that experiences dawn each day, the DM 
is free to choose a different time—perhaps noon, sunset, 
or midnight—when certain magic items recharge. 


MAJOR ITEMS, VERY RARE 


Item 

Amulet of the planes 
Animated shield 
Armor, +2 

Belt of fire giant strength 
Belt of frost/stone giant 
strength 

Candle of invocation 
Carpet of flying 

Cloak of arachnida 
Crystal ball (very rare) 
Dancing sword 

Demon armor 

Dragon scale mail 
Dwarven plate 
Dwarven thrower 
Efreeti bottle 

Figurine of wondrous 
power (obsidian steed) 
Frost brand 

Helm of brilliance 
Horn of Valhalla (bronze) 
Instrument of the bards 
(Anstruth harp) 

loun stone (absorption) 
loun stone (agility) 
loun stone (fortitude) 
loun stone (insight) 
loun stone (intellect) 
loun stone (leadership) 
loun stone (strength) 
Manual of bodily health 
Manual of gainful exercise 
Manual of golems 
Manual of quickness of 
action 

Mirror of life trapping 
Nine lives stealer 
Oathbow 

Ring of regeneration 
Ring of shooting stars 


Ring of telekinesis 

Robe of scintillating 
colors 

Robe of stars 

Rod of absorption 

Rod of alertness 

Rod of security 

Rod of the pact keeper, +3 
Scimitar of speed 


Type 
Wondrous item 
Armor 

Armor 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Weapon 

Armor 

Armor 

Armor 

Weapon 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


Weapon 

Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 
Wondrous item 


Wondrous item 
Weapon 
Weapon 

Ring 

Ring 


Ring 
Wondrous item 


Wondrous item 
Rod 

Rod 

Rod 

Rod 

Weapon 


Yes (dwarf) 


Yes (bard) 


Yes 

Yes (outdoors 
at night) 

Yes 

Yes 


Yes (warlock) 
Yes 


Item Type 

Shield, +3 Armor 
Spellguard shield Armor 

Staff of fire Staff 

Staff of frost Staff 

Staff of power Staff 

Staff of striking Staff 
Staff of thunder and light- Staff 

ning 

Sword of sharpness Weapon 

Tome of clear thought Wondrous item 
Tome of leadership and Wondrous item 
influence 

Tome of understanding Wondrous item 
Wand of polymorph Wand 

Wand of the war mage, +3 Wand 

Weapon, +3 Weapon 


MAJOR ITEMS, LEGENDARY 


Item Type 
Apparatus of Kwalish Wondrous item 
Armor of invulnerability Armor 

Armor, +3 Armor 

Belt of cloud giant Wondrous item 
strength 

Belt of storm giant Wondrous item 
strength 

Cloak of invisibility Wondrous item 
Crystal ball (legendary | Wondrous item 
Cubic gate Wondrous item 
Deck of many things Wondrous item 
Defender Weapon 

Efreeti chain Armor 


Hammer of thunderbolts Weapon 


Holy avenger Weapon 

Horn of Valhalla (iron) Wondrous item 
Instrument of the bards Wondrous item 
(Ollamh harp) 


loun stone (greater ab- | Wondrous item 
sorption) 

loun stone (mastery) Wondrous item 
loun stone (regenera- Wondrous item 
tion) 

Iron flask Wondrous item 


Luck blade Weapon 


Yes 

Yes (druid, sor- 
cerer, warlock, 
or wizard) 

Yes (druid, sor- 
cerer, warlock, 
or wizard) 

Yes (sorcerer, 
warlock, or 
wizard) 

Yes 

Yes 


Yes 
No 
No 


No 
Yes (spellcaster) 
Yes (spellcaster) 
No 


Yes 

Yes (Giant's 
Bane) 

Yes (paladin) 
No 

Yes (bard) 


Yes 


Item Type 
Plate armor of ethere- Armor 
alness 

Ring of air elemental Ring 
command 


Ring of djinni summoning Ring 


Ring of earth elemental Ring 

command 

Ring of fire elemental Ring 
command 

Ring of invisibility Ring 

Ring of spell turning Ring 

Ring of three wishes Ring 

Ring of water elemental Ring 

command 

Robe of the archmagi Wondrous item 
Rod of lordly might Rod 

Rod of resurrection Rod 

Scarab of protection Wondrous item 
Sphere of annihilation Wondrous item 
Staff of the magi Staff 

Sword of answering Weapon 


Talisman of pure good Wondrous item 


Talisman ofthe sphere Wondrous item 
Talisman of ultimate evil Wondrous item 


Tome of the stilled Wondrous item 
tongue 

Vorpal sword Weapon 

Well of many worlds Wondrous item 


Yes (sorcerer, 
warlock, or 
wizard) 

Yes 

Yes (cleric, 
druid, or 
paladin) 

Yes 

No 

Yes (sorcerer, 
warlock, or 
wizard) 

Yes (creature of 
same alignment 
as sword) 

Yes (creature of 
good alignment) 
Yes 

Yes (creature of 
evil alignment) 
Yes (wizard) 


Yes 
No 


: ic i rure so fickle, 
h EN Never rela on wane ies. Ah ч“ | 

" fik, Hes work, ani 
On, of {, on, of 


A then es Jont. | 
{own nm blink of “ч V 


| 
| 
| 
| 


TER] 


ANY OF THE CHARACTER CLASSES IN THE 
Player's Handbook harness magic in the 
form of spells. This chapter provides new 
spells for those classes, as well as for 
spellcasting monsters. The Dungeon Mas- 
ter decides which of these spells are avail- 
able in a campaign and how they can be 
learned. For example, a DM might decide 
that some of the spells are freely available, that others 
are unobtainable, and that a handful can be found only 
after a special quest, perhaps discovered in a long-lost 
tome of magic. Wizard spells, in particular, can be intro- 
duced to a campaign in spellbooks found as treasure. 


SE 

de ik ац Hne Bt 

'L people alo se magic A ow. 

So uly p iue deu REN — Aet 
wd A t y 


) n 
te dee ever ory, ys O 


шш 
—— 


\ can Aisi 


And nou: And wen - 


poo oc co v DAZ 


CHAPTER 3 
— MÀ 
SPELLS 


When a DM adds spells to a campaign, clerics, druids, 
and paladins require special consideration. When char- 
acters of those classes prepare their spells, they have ac- 
cess to the entire spell list for their class. Given that fact, | 
the DM should be cautious about making all of these 
new spells available to a player who is overwhelmed 
when presented with many options. For such a player, 
consider adding only story-appropriate spells to the spell 
list of that player's character. 


SPELL LISTS 


The following spell lists show which spells can be cast 
by characters of each class. A spell's school of magic is 
noted in parentheses. If a spell can be cast as a ritual, 
the ritual tag also appears in the parentheses. 


BARD SPELLS 


CLERIC SPELLS 


DRUID SPELLS 


CaNrRiPS (О LEVEL) 
Thunderclap (evocation) 


1ST LEVEL 
Earth tremor (evocation) 


2ND LEVEL 

Pyrotechnics (transmutation) 
Skywrite (transmutation, ritual) 
Warding wind (evocation) 


3RD LEVEL 
Catnap (enchantment) 
Enemies abound (enchantment) 


4TH LEVEL 
Charm monster (enchantment) 


5TH LEVEL 


Skill empowerment (transmutation) 


Synaptic static (enchantment) 


9TH LEVEL 


Mass polymorph (transmutation) 


Psychic scream (enchantment) 


CaNrRiPS (О LEVEL) 
Toll the dead (necromancy) 
Word of radiance (evocation) 


1ST LEVEL 
Ceremony (abjuration, ritual) 


3RD LEVEL 
Life transference (necromancy) 


5TH LEVEL 
Dawn (evocation) 
Holy weapon (evocation) 


7TH LEVEL 
Temple of the gods (conjuration) 


CaNTRIPS (О LEVEL) 
Control flames (transmutation) 
Create bonfire (conjuration) 
Frostbite (evocation) 

Gust (transmutation) 
Infestation (conjuration) 
Magic stone (transmutation) 
Mold earth (transmutation) 
Primal savagery (transmutation) 
Shape water (transmutation) 
Thunderclap (evocation) 


1ST LEVEL 

Absorb elements (abjuration) 
Beast bond (divination) 
Earth tremor (evocation) 

Ice knife (conjuration) 

Snare (abjuration) 


2ND LEVEL | 
Dust devil (conjuration) L 
Earthbind (transmutation) 

Healing spirit (conjuration) 4 


Skywrite (transmutation, ritual) 
Warding wind (evocation) 


CHAPTER 5 | SPEELS 


3RD LEVEL 

Erupting earth (transmutation) 
Flame arrows (transmutation) 
Tidal wave (conjuration) 

Wall of water (evocation) 


4TH LEVEL 

Charm monster (enchantment) 
Elemental bane (transmutation) 
Guardian of nature (transmutation) 
Watery sphere (conjuration) 


5TH LEVEL 

Control winds (transmutation) 
Maelstrom (evocation) 
Transmute rock (transmutation) 
Wrath of nature (evocation) 


6TH LEVEL 

Bones of the earth (transmutation) 
Druid grove (abjuration) 

Investiture of flame (transmutation) 
Investiture of ice (transmutation) 
Investiture of stone (transmutation) 
Investiture of wind (transmutation) 
Primordial ward (abjuration) 


7TH LEVEL 
Whirlwind (evocation) 


PALADIN SPELLS 


1ST LEVEL 
Ceremony (abjuration, ritual) 


4TH LEVEL 
Find greater steed (conjuration) 


5TH LEVEL 
Holy weapon (evocation) 


RANGER SPELLS 


1ST LEVEL 

Absorb elements (abjuration) 
Beast bond (divination) 
Snare (abjuration) 

Zephyr strike (transmutation) 


2ND LEVEL 
Healing spirit (conjuration) 


3RD LEVEL 
Flame arrows (transmutation) 


4TH LEVEL 
Guardian of nature (transmutation) 


5TH LEVEL 
Steel wind strike (conjuration) 
Wrath of nature (evocation) 


CHAPTER 3 | SPELLS 


SORCERER SPELLS 


CANTRIPS (О LEVEL) 
Control flames (transmutation) 
Create bonfire (conjuration) 
Frostbite (evocation) 

Gust (transmutation) 
Infestation (conjuration) 

Mold earth (transmutation) 
Shape water (transmutation) 
Thunderclap (evocation) 


1st LEVEL 

Absorb elements (abjuration) 
Catapult (transmutation) 
Chaos bolt (evocation) 

Earth tremor (evocation) 

Ice knife (conjuration) 


2ND LEVEL 

Aganazzar's scorcher (evocation) 

Dragon's breath (transmutation) 

Dust devil (conjuration) 

Earthbind (transmutation) 

Maximilian's earthen grasp 
(transmutation) 

Mind spike (divination) 

Pyrotechnics (transmutation) 

Shadow blade (illusion) 

Snilloc's snowball swarm (evocation) 

Warding wind (evocation) 


3RD LEVEL 

Catnap (enchantment) 

Enemies abound (enchantment) 
Erupting earth (transmutation) 
Flame arrows (transmutation) 
Melf's minute meteors (evocation) 
Thunder step (conjuration) 

Tidal wave (conjuration) 

Wall of water (evocation) 


4TH LEVEL 

Charm monster (enchantment) 
Sickening radiance (evocation) 
Storm sphere (evocation) 
Vitriolic sphere (evocation) 
Watery sphere (conjuration) 


5TH LEVEL 

Control winds (transmutation) 
Enervation (necromancy) 

Far step (conjuration) 

Immolation (evocation) 

Skill empowerment (transmutation) 
Synaptic static (enchantment) 

Wall of light (evocation) 


6TH LEVEL 

Investiture of flame (transmutation) 
Investiture of ice (transmutation) 
Investiture of stone (transmutation) 
Investiture of wind (transmutation) 
Mental prison (illusion) 

Scatter (conjuration) 


7TH LEVEL 

Crown of stars (evocation) 
Power word pain (enchantment) 
Whirlwind (evocation) 


8TH LEVEL 
Abi-Dalzim's horrid wilting (necromancy) 


9TH LEVEL 
Mass polymorph (transmutation) 
Psychic scream (enchantment) 


WARLOCK SPELLS 


CaNrRiPS (О LEVEL) 
Create bonfire (conjuration) 
Frostbite (evocation) 
Infestation (conjuration) 
Magic stone (transmutation) 
Thunderclap (evocation) 
Toll the dead (necromancy) 


1ST LEVEL 
Cause fear (necromancy) 


2ND LEVEL 

Earthbind (transmutation) 
Mind spike (divination) 
Shadow blade (illusion) 


3RD LEVEL 

Enemies abound (enchantment) 
Thunder step (conjuration) 

Summon lesser demons (conjuration) 


4TH LEVEL 

Charm monster (enchantment) 
Elemental bane (transmutation) 
Shadow of moil (necromancy) 
Sickening radiance (evocation) 
Summon greater demon (conjuration) 


5TH LEVEL 

Danse macabre (necromancy) 
Enervation (necromancy) 

Far step (conjuration) 

Infernal calling (conjuration) 
Negative energy flood (necromancy) 
Synaptic static (enchantment) 

Wall of light (evocation) 


6TH LEVEL 

Investiture of flame (transmutation) 
Investiture of ice (transmutation) 
Investiture of stone (transmutation) 
Investiture of wind (transmutation) 
Mental prison (illusion) 

Scatter (conjuration) 

Soul cage (necromancy) 


7TH LEVEL 
Crown of stars (evocation) 
Power word pain (enchantment) 


8TH LEVEL 
Maddening darkness (evocation) 


9TH LEVEL 
Psychic scream (enchantment) 


WIZARD SPELLS 


CaNrRiPS (О LEVEL) 
Control flames (transmutation) 
Create bonfire (conjuration) 
Frostbite (evocation) 

Gust (transmutation) 
Infestation (conjuration) 

Mold earth (transmutation) 
Shape water (transmutation) 
Thunderclap (evocation) 

Toll the dead (necromancy) 


1ST LEVEL 

Absorb elements (abjuration) 
Catapult (transmutation) 
Cause fear (necromancy) 
Earth tremor (evocation) 

Ice knife (conjuration) 

Snare (abjuration) 


2ND LEVEL 
Aganazzar's scorcher (evocation) 
Dragon's breath (transmutation) 
Dust devil (conjuration) 
Earthbind (transmutation) 
Maximilian's earthen grasp 
(transmutation) 
Mind spike (divination) 
Pyrotechnics (transmutation) 
Shadow blade (illusion) 
Skywrite (transmutation, ritual) 


Snilloc's snowball swarm (evocation) 


Warding wind (evocation) 


3RD LEVEL 

Catnap (enchantment) 
Enemies abound (enchantment) 
Erupting earth (transmutation) 
Flame arrows (transmutation) 


Life transference (necromancy) 
Melf’s minute meteors (evocation) 
Summon lesser demons (conjuration) 
Thunder step (conjuration) 

Tidal wave (conjuration) 

Tiny servant (transmutation) 

Wall of sand (evocation) 

Wall of water (evocation) 


4TH LEVEL 

Charm monster (enchantment) 
Elemental bane (transmutation) 
Sickening radiance (evocation) 

Storm sphere (evocation) 

Summon greater demon (conjuration) 
Vitriolic sphere (evocation) 

Watery sphere (conjuration) 


5TH LEVEL 

Control winds (transmutation) 
Danse macabre (necromancy) 
Dawn (evocation) 

Enervation (necromancy) 

Far step (conjuration) 

Immolation (evocation) 

Infernal calling (conjuration) 
Negative energy flood (necromancy) 
Skill empowerment (transmutation) 
Steel wind strike (conjuration) 
Synaptic static (enchantment) 


Transmute rock (transmutation) 
Wall of light (evocation) 


6TH LEVEL 

Create homunculus (transmutation) 
Investiture of flame (transmutation) 
Investiture of ice (transmutation) 
Investiture of stone (transmutation) 
Investiture of wind (transmutation) 
Mental prison (illusion) 

Scatter (conjuration) 

Soul cage (necromancy) 

Tenser's transformation (transmutation) 


7TH LEVEL 

Crown of stars (evocation) 
Power word pain (enchantment) 
Whirlwind (evocation) 


8TH LEVEL 

Abi-Dalzim's horrid wilting (necromancy) 
Illusory dragon (illusion) 

Maddening darkness (evocation) 

Mighty fortress (conjuration) 


9TH LEVEL 

Invulnerability (abjuration) 

Mass polymorph (transmutation) 
Psychic scream (enchantment) 


CHAPTER 3 || SPELLS 


SPELL DESCRIPTIONS 


The spells are presented in alphabetical order. 


ABI-DALZIM'S HORRID WILTING 
&th-level necromancy 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 150 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a bit of sponge) 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You draw the moisture from every creature in a 30-foot 
cube centered on a point you choose within range. Each 
creature in that area must make a Constitution saving 
throw. Constructs and undead aren't affected, and plants 
and water elementals make this saving throw with dis- 
advantage. A creature takes 12d8 necrotic damage on a 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 

Nonmagical plants in the area that aren't creatures, 
such as trees and shrubs, wither and die instantly. 


ABSORB ELEMENTS 
Ist-level abjuration 


Casting Time: 1 reaction, which you take when you take 
acid, cold, fire, lightning, or thunder damage 

Range: Self 

Components: S 

Duration: 1 round 


The spell captures some of the incoming energy, less- 
ening its effect on you and storing it for your next melee 
attack. You have resistance to the triggering damage 
type until the start of your next turn. Also, the first time 
you hit with a melee attack on your next turn, the target 
takes an extra 1d6 damage of the triggering type, and 
the spell ends. 

At Hiéher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the extra damage in- 
creases by 1d6 for each slot level above 1st. 


AGANAZZAR'S SCORCHER 
2nd-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 30 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a red dragon's scale) 
Duration: Instantaneous 


A line of roaring flame 30 feet long and 5 feet wide ema- 
nates from you in a direction you choose. Each creature 
in the line must make a Dexterity saving throw. A crea- 
ture takes 3d8 fire damage on a failed save, or half as 
much damage on a successful one. 

At Hiéher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 3rd level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d8 for each slot level above 2nd. 


BEAST BOND 
Ist-level divination 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (a bit of fur wrapped in a cloth) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


You establish a telepathic link with one beast you touch 
that is friendly to you or charmed by you. The spell fails 


CHAPTER 3 | SPELLS 


if the beast's Intelligence score is 4 or higher. Until the i 
spell ends, the link is active while you and the beast are 
within line of sight of each other. Through the link, the 
beast can understand your telepathic messages to it, 
and it can telepathically communicate simple emotions 
and concepts back to you. While the link is active, the 
beast gains advantage on attack rolls against any crea- 
ture within 5 feet of you that you can see. 


BONES OF THE EARTH 
6th-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 120 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You cause up to six pillars of stone to burst from places 
on the ground that you can see within range. Each pillar 
is a cylinder that has a diameter of 5 feet and a height of 
up to 30 feet. The ground where a pillar appears must 
be wide enough for its diameter, and you can target the 
ground under a creature if that creature is Medium or 
smaller. Each pillar has AC 5 and 30 hit points. When 
reduced to О hit points, a pillar crumbles into rubble, 
which creates an area of difficult terrain with a 10- 

foot radius that lasts until the rubble is cleared. Each 
5-foot-diameter portion of the area requires at least 1 
minute to clear by hand. 

If a pillar is created under a creature, that creature 
must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or be lifted by 
the pillar. A creature can choose to fail the save. 

If a pillar is prevented from reaching its full height 
because of a ceiling or other obstacle, a creature on the 
pillar takes 6d6 bludgeoning damage and is restrained, 
pinched between the pillar and the obstacle. The re- 
strained creature can use an action to make a Strength 
or Dexterity check (the creature's choice) against the 
spell's save DC. On a success, the creature is no lon- 
ger restrained and must either move off the pillar or 
fall off it. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 7th level or higher, you can create two addi- 
tional pillars for each slot level above 6th. 


CATAPULT 
Ist-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 60 feet 
Components: S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


Choose one object weighing 1 to 5 pounds within range 

that isn't being worn or carried. The object flies in a 

straight line up to 90 feet in a direction you choose 

before falling to the ground, stopping early if it impacts 

against a solid surface. If the object would strike a crea- 

ture, that creature must make a Dexterity saving throw. 

On a failed save, the object strikes the target and stops 

moving. When the object strikes something, the object | 

and what it strikes each take 3d8 bludgeoning damage. i 
At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 

spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the maximum weight of 

objects that you can target with this spell increases by 5 

pounds, and the damage increases by 1d8, for each slot 

level above 1st. 


CATNAP 
3rd-level enchantment 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 30 feet 

Components: S, M (a pinch of sand) 
Duration: 10 minutes 


You make a calming gesture, and up to three willing 
creatures of your choice that you can see within range 
fall unconscious for the spell’s duration. The spell ends 
on a target early if it takes damage or someone uses an 
action to shake or slap it awake. If a target remains un- 
conscious for the full duration, that target gains the ben- 
efit of a short rest, and it can’t be affected by this spell 
again until it finishes a long rest. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, you can target one addi- 
tional willing creature for each slot level above 3rd. 


CAUSE FEAR 
Ist-level necromancy 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You awaken the sense of mortality in one creature you 

can see within range. A construct or an undead is im- 
| mune to this effect. The target must succeed on a Wis- 
| dom saving throw or become frightened of you until the 
| spell ends. The frightened target can repeat the saving 
| throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on 
| itself оп a success. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using 

a spell slot of 2nd level or higher, you can target one 
| additional creature for each slot level above 1st. The 
creatures must be within 30 feet of each other when you 
target them. 


CEREMONY 
Ist-level abjuration (ritual) 


Casting Time: 1 hour 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (25 gp worth of powdered silver, 
which the spell consumes) 

Duration: Instantaneous 


You perform a special religious ceremony that is infused 
with magic. When you cast the spell, choose one of the 
following rites, the target of which must be within 10 
feet of you throughout the casting. 
Atonement. You touch one willing creature whose 
alignment has changed, and you make a DC 20 Wisdom 
(Insight) check. On a successful check, you restore the 
target to its original alignment. 
Bless Water. You touch one vial of water and cause it 
to become holy water. 
Coming of Age. You touch one humanoid who is a 
l young adult. For the next 24 hours, whenever the target 
makes an ability check, it can roll a d4 and add the num- 
ber rolled to the ability check. A creature can benefit 
from this rite only once. 
Dedication. You touch one humanoid who wishes 
to be dedicated to your god's service. For the next 24 


hours, whenever the target makes a saving throw, it can 
roll a d4 and add the number rolled to the save. A crea- 
ture can benefit from this rite only once. 

Funeral Rite. You touch one corpse, and for the next 
7 days, the target can't become undead by any means 
short of a wish spell. 

Wedding. You touch adult humanoids willing to be 
bonded together in marriage. For the next 7 days, each 
target gains a +2 bonus to AC while they are within 30 
feet of each other. A creature can benefit from this rite 
again only if widowed. 


CHAos BOLT 
Ist-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 120 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You hurl an undulating, warbling mass of chaotic energy 
at one creature in range. Make a ranged spell attack 
against the target. On a hit, the target takes 2d8 + 1d6 
damage. Choose one of the d8s. The number rolled 

on that die determines the attack's damage type, as 
shown below. 


a 
бо 


Damage Туре 
Асїа 

Cold 

Fire 

Force 
Lightning 
Poison 
Psychic 
Thunder 


омо t€ EWN = 


If you roll the same number on both d8s, the chaotic 
energy leaps from the target to a different creature of 
your choice within 30 feet of it. Make a new attack roll 
against the new target, and make a new damage roll, 
which could cause the chaotic energy to leap again. 

A creature can be targeted only once by each casting 
of this spell. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using 
a spell slot of 2nd level or higher, each target takes 
1d6 extra damage of the type rolled for each slot level 
above Ist. 


CHARM MONSTER 
4th-level enchantment 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 30 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 1 hour 


You attempt to charm a creature you can see within 
range. It must make a Wisdom saving throw, and it does 
so with advantage if you or your companions are fight- 
ing it. If it fails the saving throw, it is charmed by you 
until the spell ends or until you or your companions do 
anything harmful to it. The charmed creature is friendly 
to you. When the spell ends, the creature knows it was 
charmed by you. 


CHAPTER 3 | SPEELS 


At Hiéher Levels. When you cast this spell using 
a spell slot of 5th level or higher, you can target one 
additional creature for each slot level above 4th. The 
creatures must be within 30 feet of each other when you 
target them. 


CONTROL FLAMES 
Transmutation cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: S 

Duration: Instantaneous or 1 hour (see below) 


You choose a nonmagical flame that you can see within 
range and that fits within a 5-foot cube. You affect it in 
one of the following ways: 


* You instantaneously expand the flame 5 feet in one 
direction, provided that wood or other fuel is present 
in the new location. 

* You instantaneously extinguish the flames 
within the cube. 

* You double or halve the area of bright light and dim 
light cast by the flame, change its color, or both. The 
change lasts for 1 hour. 

* You cause simple shapes—such as the vague form of a 
creature, an inanimate object, or a location—to appear 
within the flames and animate as you like. The shapes 
last for 1 hour. 


If you cast this spell multiple times, you can have up to 
three non-instantaneous effects created by it active at a 
time, and you can dismiss such an effect as an action. 


CONTROL WINDS 
5th-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 300 feet 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


You take control of the air in a 100-foot cube that you 
can see within range. Choose one of the following ef- 
fects when you cast the spell. The effect lasts for the 
spell's duration, unless you use your action on a later 
turn to switch to a different effect. You can also use your 
action to temporarily halt the effect or to restart one 
you've halted. 

Gusts. ^ wind picks up within the cube, continu- 
ally blowing in a horizontal direction you designate. 

You choose the intensity of the wind: calm, moderate, 
or strong. If the wind is moderate or strong, ranged 
weapon attacks that enter or leave the cube or pass 
through it have disadvantage on their attack rolls. If 
the wind is strong, any creature moving against the 
wind must spend 1 extra foot of movement for each 
foot moved. 

Downdraft. You cause a sustained blast of strong 
wind to blow downward from the top of the cube. 
Ranged weapon attacks that pass through the cube 
or that are made against targets within it have disad- 
vantage on their attack rolls. A creature must make a 
Strength saving throw if it flies into the cube for the first 
time on a turn or starts its turn there flying. On a failed 
save, the creature is knocked prone. 


CHAPTER'S | SPELLS 


Updraft. You cause a sustained updraft within the 
cube, rising upward from the cube's bottom side. Crea- 
tures that end a fall within the cube take only half dam- 
age from the fall. When a creature in the cube makes a 
vertical jump, the creature can jump up to 10 feet higher 
than normal. 


CREATE BONFIRE 
Conjuration cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You create a bonfire on ground that you can see within 
range. Until the spell ends, the magic bonfire fills a 
5-foot cube. Any creature in the bonfire's space when 
you cast the spell must succeed on a Dexterity saving 
throw or take 1d8 fire damage. A creature must also 
make the saving throw when it moves into the bonfire's 
space for the first time on a turn or ends its turn there. 

The bonfire ignites flammable objects in its area that 
aren't being worn or carried. 

The spell's damage increases by 1d8 when you reach 
5th level (2d8), 11th level (348), and 17th level (4d8). 


CREATE HOMUNCULUS 
6th-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 hour 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (clay, ash, and mandrake root, all 
of which the spell consumes, and a jewel-encrusted 
dagger worth at least 1,000 gp) 

Duration: Instantaneous 


While speaking an intricate incantation, you cut your- 
self with a jewel-encrusted dagger, taking 2d4 piercing 
damage that can't be reduced in any way. You then drip 
your blood on the spell's other components and touch 
them, transforming them into a special construct called 
a homunculus. 

The statistics of the homunculus are in the Monster 
Manual. It is your faithful companion, and it dies if you 
die. Whenever you finish a long rest, you can spend up 
to half your Hit Dice if the homunculus is on the same 
plane of existence as you. When you do so, roll each 
die and add your Constitution modifier to it. Your hit 
point maximum is reduced by the total, and the homun- 
culus's hit point maximum and current hit points are 
both increased by it. This process can reduce you to no 
lower than 1 hit point, and the change to your and the 
homunculus's hit points ends when you finish your next 
long rest. The reduction to your hit point maximum can't 
be removed by any means before then, except by the ho- 
munculus's death. 

You can have only one homunculus at a time. If 
you cast this spell while your homunculus lives, the 
spell fails. 


CROWN OF STARS 
7th-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: Self 


A 


Components: V, S 
Duration: 1 hour 


Seven star-like motes of light appear and orbit your 
head until the spell ends. You can use a bonus action to 
send one of the motes streaking toward one creature 
or object within 120 feet of you. When you do so, make 
a ranged spell attack. On a hit, the target takes 4d12 
radiant damage. Whether you hit or m the mote is ex- 
pended. The spell ends early if you expend the last mote. 
If you have four or more motes remaining, they shed 
bright light in a 30-foot radius and dim light for an addi- 
tional 30 feet. If you have one to three motes remaining, 
they shed dim light in a 30-foot radiu: 
At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 8th level or higher, the number of motes cre- 
ated increases by two for each slot level above 7th. 


DANSE MACABRE 
5th-level necromancy 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


Threads of dark power leap from your fingers to pierce 
up to five Small or Medium corpses you can see within 
range. Each corpse immediately stands up and becomes 
undead. You decide whether it is a zombie or a skeleton 
(the statistics for zombies and skeletons are in the Mon- 


G 


Danse MACABRE 


ster Manual), and it gains a bonus to its attack and dam- 
age rolls equal to your spellcasting ability modifier. 

You can use a bonus action to mentally command the 
creatures you make with this spell, issuing the same 
command to all of them. To receive the command, 
a creature must be within 60 feet of you. You decide 
what action the creatures will take and where they will 
move during their next turn, or you can issue a general 
command, such as to guard a chamber or passageway 
against your foes. If you issue no commands, the crea- 
tures do nothing except defend themselves against 
hostile creatures. Once given an order, the creatures 
continue to follow it until their task is complete. 

The creatures are under your control until the spell 
ends, after which they become inanimate once more. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slotof 6th level or higher, you animate up to two 
additional corpses for each slot level above 5th. 


DAWN 

5th-level evocation 

Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a sunburst pendant worth at 
least 100 gp) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


The light of dawn shines down on a location you spec- 
ify within range. Until the spell ends, a 30-foot-radius, 


40-foot-high cylinder of bright light glimmers there. This 
light is sunlight. 

When the cylinder appears, each creature in it must 
make a Constitution saving throw, taking 4d10 radiant 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. A creature must also make this saving 
throw whenever it ends its turn in the cylinder. 

If you're within 60 feet of the cylinder, you can move it 
up to 60 feet as a bonus action on your turn. 


DRAGON'S BREATH 
2nd-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 bonus action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (a hot pepper) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You touch one willing creature and imbue it with the 
power to spew magical energy from its mouth, provided 
it has one. Choose acid, cold, fire, lightning, or poison. 
Until the spell ends, the creature can use an action to 
exhale energy of the chosen type in a 15-foot cone. Each 
creature in that area must make a Dexterity saving 
throw, taking 3d6 damage of the chosen type on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 3rd level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d6 for each slot level above 2nd. 


DRUID GROVE 
6th-level abjuration 


Casting Time: 10 minutes 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (mistletoe, which the spell con- 
sumes, that was harvested with a golden sickle under 
the light of a full moon) 

Duration: 24 hours 


You invoke the spirits of nature to protect an area out- 
doors or underground. The area can be as small as a 
30-foot cube or as large as a 90-foot cube. Buildings and 
other structures are excluded from the affected area. If 
you cast this spell in the same area every day for a year, 
the spell lasts until dispelled. 

The spell creates the following effects within the area. 
When you cast this spell, you can specify creatures as 
friends who are immune to the effects. You can also 
specify a password that, when spoken aloud, makes the 
speaker immune to these effects. 

The entire warded area radiates magic. A dispel magic 
cast on the area, if successful, removes only one of the 
following effects, not the entire area. That spell's caster 
chooses which effect to end. Only when all its effects are 
gone is this spell dispelled. 

Solid Fog. You can fill any number of 5-foot squares 
on the ground with thick fog, making them heavily ob- 
scured. The fog reaches 10 feet high. In addition, every 
foot of movement through the fog costs 2 extra feet. To a 
creature immune to this effect, the fog obscures nothing 
and looks like soft mist, with motes of green light float- 
ing in the air. 

Grasping Undergrowth. You can fill any number of 
5-foot squares on the ground that aren't filled with fog 


CHAPTER 3 | SPELLS 


with grasping weeds and vines, as if they were affected 
by an entangle spell. To a creature immune to this effect, 
the weeds and vines feel soft and reshape themselves to 
serve as temporary seats or beds. 

Grove Guardians. You can animate up to four trees 
in the area, causing them to uproot themselves from 
the ground. These trees have the same statistics as an 
awakened tree, which appears in the Monster Manual, 
except they can't speak, and their bark is covered with 
druidic symbols. If any creature not immune to this 
effect enters the warded area, the grove guardians fight 
until they have driven off or slain the intruders. The 
grove guardians also obey your spoken commands (no 
action required by you) that you issue while in the area. 
If you don't give them commands and no intruders are 
present, the grove guardians do nothing. The grove 
guardians can't leave the warded area. When the spell 
ends, the magic animating them disappears, and the 
trees take root again if possible. 

Additional Spell Effect. You can place your choice 
of one of the following magical effects within the 
warded area: 


+ A constant gust of wind in two locations of your choice 
+ Spike growth in one location of your choice 
+ Wind wall in two locations of your choice 


To a creature immune to this effect, the winds are a 
fragrant, gentle breeze, and the area of spike growth 
is harmless. 


Dust DEVIL 
2nd-level conjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a pinch of dust) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


Choose an unoccupied 5-foot cube of air that you can 
see within range. An elemental force that resembles 
a dust devil appears in the cube and lasts for the 
spell's duration. 

Any creature that ends its turn within 5 feet of the 
dust devil must make a Strength saving throw. On a 
failed save, the creature takes 1d8 bludgeoning damage 
and is pushed 10 feet away from the dust devil. On a suc- 
cessful save, the creature takes half as much damage 
and isn't pushed. 

As a bonus action, you can move the dust devil up to 
30 feet in any direction. If the dust devil moves over 
sand, dust, loose dirt, or light gravel, it sucks up the ma- 
terial and forms a 10-foot-radius cloud of debris around 
itself that lasts until the start of your next turn. The 
cloud heavily obscures its area. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 3rd level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d8 for each slot level above 2nd. 


EARTHBIND 

2nd-level transmutation 

Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 300 feet 

Components: V 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


Choose one creature you can see within range. Yellow 
strips of magical energy loop around the creature. The 
target must succeed on a Strength saving throw, or its 
flying speed (if any) is reduced to 0 feet for the spell's du- 
ration. An airborne creature affected by this spell safely 
descends at 60 feet per round until it reaches the ground 
or the spell ends. 


EARTH TREMOR 
Ist-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 10 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You cause a tremor in the ground within range. Each 
creature other than you in that area must make a Dex- 
terity saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes 
1d6 bludgeoning damage and is knocked prone. If the 
ground in that area is loose earth or stone, it becomes 
difficult terrain until cleared, with each 5-foot-diameter 
portion requiring at least 1 minute to clear by hand. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d6 for each slot level above 1st. 


ELEMENTAL BANE 
4th-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 90 feet 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


Choose one creature you can see within range, and 
choose one of the following damage types: acid, cold, 
fire, lightning, or thunder. The target must succeed on a 
Constitution saving throw or be affected by the spell for 
its duration. The first time each turn the affected target 
takes damage of the chosen type, the target takes an ex- 
tra 2d6 damage of that type. Moreover, the target loses 
any resistance to that damage type until the spell ends. 
At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using 
a spell slot of 5th level or higher, you can target one 
additional creature for each slot level above 4th. The 
creatures must be within 30 feet of each other when you 
target them. 


ENEMIES ABOUND 
3rd-level enchantment 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 120 feet 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You reach into the mind of one creature you can see and 
force it to make an Intelligence saving throw. A creature 
automatically succeeds if it is immune to being fright- 
ened. On a failed save, the target loses the ability to dis- 
tinguish friend from foe, regarding all creatures it can 
see as enemies until the spell ends. Each time the target 
takes damage, it can repeat the saving throw, ending the 
effect on itself on a success. 


Whenever the affected creature chooses another 
creature as a target, it must choose the target at random 
from among the creatures it can see within range of the 
attack, spell, or other ability it's using. If an enemy pro- 
vokes an opportunity attack from the affected creature, 
the creature must make that attack if it is able to. 


ENERVATION 
Sth-level necromancy 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


A tendril of inky darkness reaches out from you, touch- 
ing a creature you can see within range to drain life 
from it. The target must make a Dexterity saving throw. 
On a successful save, the target takes 2d8 necrotic dam- 
age, and the spell ends. On a failed save, the target takes 
4d8 necrotic damage, and until the spell ends, you can 
use your action on each of your turns to automatically 
deal 4d8 necrotic damage to the target. The spell ends 
if you use your action to do anything else, if the target is 
ever outside the spell's range, or if the target has total 
cover from you. 

Whenever the spell deals damage to a target, you re- 
gain hit points equal to half the amount of necrotic dam- 
age the target takes. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 6th level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d8 for each slot level above 5th. 


ERUPTING EARTH 
3rd-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 120 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a piece of obsidian) 
Duration: Instantaneous 


Choose a point you can see on the ground within range. 
A fountain of churned earth and stone erupts in a 20- 
foot cube centered on that point. Each creature in that 
area must make a Dexterity saving throw. A creature 
takes 3d12 bludgeoning damage on a failed save, or 
half as much damage on a successful one. Additionally, 
the ground in that area becomes difficult terrain until 
cleared. Each 5-foot-square portion of the area requires 
at least 1 minute to clear by hand. 

At Hiéher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d12 for each slot level above 3rd. 


FAR STEP 
5th-level conjuration 


Casting Time: 1 bonus action 

Range: Self 

Components: V 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You teleport up to 60 feet to an unoccupied space you 
can see. On each of your turns before the spell ends, you 
can use a bonus action to teleport in this way again. 


CHAPTER 3 | SPELLS 


FiND GREATER STEED 
4th-level conjuration 


Casting Time: 10 minutes 
Range: 30 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You summon a spirit that assumes the form of a loyal, 
majestic mount. Appearing in an unoccupied space 
within range, the spirit takes on a form you choose: a 
griffon, a pegasus, a peryton, a dire wolf, a rhinoceros, 
or a saber-toothed tiger. The creature has the statistics 
provided in the Monster Manual for the chosen form, 
though it is a celestial, a fey, or a fiend (your choice) 
instead of its normal creature type. Additionally, if it 
has an Intelligence score of 5 or lower, its Intelligence 
becomes 6, and it gains the ability to understand one 
language of your choice that you speak. 

You control the mount in combat. While the mount is 
within 1 mile of you, you can communicate with it tele- 
pathically. While mounted on it, you can make any spell 
you cast that targets only you also target the mount. 

The mount disappears temporarily when it drops to 0 
hit points or when you dismiss it as an action. Casting 
this spell again re-summons the bonded mount, with all 
its hit points restored and any conditions removed. 

You can't have more than one mount bonded by this 
spell or find steed at the same time. As an action, you 
can release a mount from its bond, causing it to disap- 
pear permanently. 

Whenever the mount disappears, it leaves behind any 
objects it was wearing or carrying. 


CHAPTER 5 | SPELLS 


Fino GREATER STEED 


FLAME ARROWS 
3rd-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


You touch a quiver containing arrows or bolts. When a 
target is hit by a ranged weapon attack using a piece of 
ammunition drawn from the quiver, the target takes an 
extra 1d6 fire damage. The spell's magic ends on a piece 
of ammunition when it hits or misses, and the spell ends 
when twelve pieces of ammunition have been drawn 
from the quiver. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, the number of pieces of 
ammunition you can affect with this spell increases by 
two for each slot level above 3rd. 


FROSTBITE 
Evocation cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 60 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You cause numbing frost to form on one creature that 
you can see within range. The target must make a 
Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the target 
takes 1d6 cold damage, and it has disadvantage on the 
next weapon attack roll it makes before the end of its 
next turn. 


The spell's damage increases by 1d6 when you reach 
5th level (246), 11th level (346), and 17th level (4d6). 


GUARDIAN OF NATURE 
4th-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 bonus action 

Range: Self 

Components: V 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


A nature spirit answers your call and transforms you 
into a powerful guardian. The transformation lasts until 
the spell ends. You choose one of the following forms to 
assume: Primal Beast or Great Tree. 

Primal Beast. Bestial fur covers your body, your 
facial features become feral, and you gain the follow- 
ing benefits: 


* Your walking speed increases by 10 feet. 

* You gain darkvision with a range of 120 feet. 

* You make Strength-based attack rolls with advantage. 

* Your melee weapon attacks deal an extra 1d6 force 
damage on a hit. 


Great Tree. Your skin appears barky, leaves sprout 
from your hair, and you gain the following benefits: 


* You gain 10 temporary hit points. 

* You make Constitution saving throws with advantage. 

* You make Dexterity- and Wisdom-based attack rolls 
with advantage. 

* While you are on the ground, the ground within 15 
feet of you is difficult terrain for your enemies. 


GusT 
Transmutation cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 30 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You seize the air and compel it to create one of the fol- 
lowing effects at a point you can see within range: 


* One Medium or smaller creature that you choose 
must succeed on a Strength saving throw or be 
pushed up to 5 feet away from you. 

* You create a small blast of air capable of moving one 
object that is neither held nor carried and that weighs 
no more than 5 pounds. The object is pushed up to 10 
feet away from you. It isn't pushed with enough force 
to cause damage. 

+ You create a harmless sensory effect using air, such as 
causing leaves to rustle, wind to slam shutters closed, 
or your clothing to ripple in a breeze. 


HEALING SPIRIT 
2nd-level conjuration 


Casting Time: 1 bonus action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You call forth a nature spirit to soothe the wounded. The 
intangible spirit appears in a space that is a 5-foot cube 


you can see within range. The spirit looks like a trans- 
parent beast or fey (your choice). 

Until the spell ends, whenever you or a creature you 
can see moves into the spirit's space for the first time on 
a turn or starts its turn there, you can cause the spirit 
to restore 1d6 hit points to that creature (no action re- 
quired). The spirit can't heal constructs or undead. 

As a bonus action on your turn, you can move the 
spirit up to 30 feet to a space you can see. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 3rd level or higher, the healing increases by 
1d6 for each slot level above 2nd. 


HOLY WEAPON 
5th-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 bonus action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


You imbue a weapon you touch with holy power. Until 
the spell ends, the weapon emits bright light in a 30- 
foot radius and dim light for an additional 30 feet. In 
addition, weapon attacks made with it deal an extra 2d8 
radiant damage on a hit. If the weapon isn't already a 
magic weapon, it becomes one for the duration. 

As a bonus action on your turn, you can dismiss this 
spell and cause the weapon to emit a burst of radiance. 
Each creature of your choice that you can see within 30 
feet of you must make a Constitution saving throw. Ona 
failed save, a creature takes 4d8 radiant damage, and it 
is blinded for 1 minute. On a successful save, a creature 
takes half as much damage and isn’t blinded. At the 
end of each of its turns, a blinded creature can make a 
Constitution saving throw, ending the effect on itself on 
a success. 


IcE KNIFE 
Ist-level conjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: S, M (a drop of water or a piece of ice) 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You create a shard of ice and fling it at one creature 
within range. Make a ranged spell attack against the tar- 
get. On a hit, the target takes 1d10 piercing damage. Hit 
or miss, the shard then explodes. The target and each 
creature within 5 feet of it must succeed on a Dexterity 
saving throw or take 2d6 cold damage. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the cold damage in- 
creases by 1d6 for each slot level above 1st. 


ILLUSORY DRAGON 

8th-level illusion 

Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 120 feet 

Components: S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


By gathering threads of shadow material from the Shad- 
owfell, you create a Huge shadowy dragon in an unoc- 


CHAPTER 3 | SPELLS 


cupied space that you can see within range. The illusion 
lasts for the spell's duration and occupies its space, as if 
it were a creature. 

When the illusion appears, any of your enemies that 
can see it must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or 
become frightened of it for 1 minute. If a frightened crea- 
ture ends its turn in a location where it doesn't have line 
of sight to the illusion, it can repeat the saving throw, 
ending the effect on itself on a success. 

As a bonus action on your turn, you can move the illu- 
sion up to 60 feet. At any point during its movement, you 
can cause it to exhale a blast of energy in a 60-foot cone 
originating from its space. When you create the dragon, 
choose a damage type: acid, cold, fire, lightning, ne- 
crotic, or poison. Each creature in the cone must make 
an Intelligence saving throw, taking 7d6 damage of the 
chosen damage type on a failed save, or half as much 
damage on a successful one. 

The illusion is tangible because of the shadow stuff 
used to create it, but attacks miss it automatically, it suc- 
ceeds on all saving throws, and it is immune to all dam- 
age and conditions. A creature that uses an action to 
examine the dragon can determine that it is an illusion 
by succeeding on an Intelligence (Investigation) check 
against your spell save DC. If a creature discerns the 
illusion for what it is, the creature can see through it and 
has advantage on saving throws against its breath. 


IMMOLATION 
5th-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 90 feet 

Components: V 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


Flames wreathe one creature you can see within range. 
The target must make a Dexterity saving throw. It takes 
8d6 fire damage on a failed save, or half as much dam- 
age on a successful one. On a failed save, the target 
also burns for the spell’s duration. The burning target 
sheds bright light in a 30-foot radius and dim light for 
an additional 30 feet. At the end of each of its turns, the 
target repeats the saving throw. It takes 4d6 fire damage 
on a failed save, and the spell ends on a successful one. 
These magical flames can't be extinguished by nonmag- 
ical means. 

If damage from this spell kills a target, the target is 
turned to ash. 


INFERNAL CALLING 
5th-level conjuration 


Casting Time: 1 minute 

Range: 90 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a ruby worth at least 999 gp) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


Uttering a dark incantation, you summon a devil from 
the Nine Hells. You choose the devil’s type, which must 
be one of challenge rating 6 or lower, such as a barbed 


CHAPTERS | SPELLS 


devil or a bearded devil. The devil appears in an unoc- 
cupied space that you can see within range. The devil 
disappears when it drops to 0 hit points or when the 
spell ends. 

The devil is unfriendly toward you and your com- 
panions. Roll initiative for the devil, which has its own 
turns. It is under the Dungeon Master's control and acts 
according to its nature on each of its turns, which might 
result in its attacking you if it thinks it can prevail, or 
trying to tempt you to undertake an evil act in exchange 
for limited service. The DM has the creature's statistics. 

On each of your turns, you can try to issue a verbal 
command to the devil (no action required by you). It 
obeys the command if the likely outcome is in accor- 
dance with its desires, especially if the result would 
draw you toward evil. Otherwise, you must make a Cha- 
risma (Deception, Intimidation, or Persuasion) check 
contested by its Wisdom (Insight) check. You make the 
check with advantage if you say the devil's true name. 

If your check fails, the devil becomes immune to your 
verbal commands for the duration of the spell, though it 
can still carry out your commands if it chooses. If your 
check succeeds, the devil carries out your command— 
such as "attack my enemies," "explore the room ahead," 
or “bear this message to the queen"—until it completes 
the activity, at which point it returns to you to report hav- 
ing done so. 

If your concentration ends before the spell reaches its 
full duration, the devil doesn't disappear if it has become 
immune to your verbal commands. Instead, it acts in 
whatever manner it chooses for 3d6 minutes, and then it 
disappears. 

If you possess an individual devil's talisman, you can 
summon that devil if it is of the appropriate challenge 
rating plus 1, and it obeys all your commands, with no 
Charisma checks required. 

At Hiéher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 6th level or higher, the challenge rating in- 
creases by 1 for each slot level above 5th. 


INFESTATION 
Conjuration cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 30 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a living flea) 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You cause a cloud of mites, fleas, and other parasites to 
appear momentarily on one creature you can see within 
range. The target must succeed on a Constitution saving 
throw, or it takes 1d6 poison damage and moves 5 feet 
in a random direction if it can move and its speed is at 
least 5 feet. Roll a d4 for the direction: 1, north; 2, south; 
3, east; or 4, west. This movement doesn't provoke op- 
portunity attacks, and if the direction rolled is blocked, 
the target doesn't move. 

The spell's damage increases by 1d6 when you reach 
5th level (246), 11th level (346), and 17th level (446). 


INFERNAL CALLING 


INVESTITURE OF FLAME 
6th-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Self 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


Flames race across your body, shedding bright light in 

a 30-foot radius and dim light for an additional 30 feet 
for the spell's duration. The flames don't harm you. Until 
the spell ends, you gain the following benefits: 


* Youare immune to fire damage and have resistance to 
cold damage. 

* Any creature that moves within 5 feet of you for the 
first time on a turn or ends its turn there takes 1d10 
fire damage. 

+ You can use your action to create a line of fire 15 feet 
long and 5 feet wide extending from you in a direc- 
tion you choose. Each creature in the line must make 
a Dexterity saving throw. A creature takes 4d8 fire 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. 


INVESTITURE OF ICE 

6th-level transmutation 

Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Self 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


Until the spell ends, ice rimes your body, and you gain 
the following benefits: 


+ You are immune to cold damage and have resistance 
to fire damage. 

+ You can move across difficult terrain created by ice or 
snow without spending extra movement. 

* The ground in a 10-foot radius around you is icy and 
is difficult terrain for creatures other than you. The 
radius moves with you. 

* Youcan use your action to create a 15-foot cone of 
freezing wind extending from your outstretched hand 
in a direction you choose. Each creature in the cone 
must make a Constitution saving throw. A creature 
takes 4d6 cold damage on a failed save, or half as 
much damage on a successful one. A creature that 
fails its save against this effect has its speed halved 
until the start of your next turn. 


INVESTITURE OF STONE 
6th-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Self 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


Until the spell ends, bits of rock spread across your A 
body, and you gain the following benefits: [ 
* You have resistance to bludgeoning, piercing, and ! Иа 


slashing damage from nonmagical attacks. 


CHAPTER 3 | SPELLS 7 2 159 


* Youcan use your action to create a small earthquake 
on the ground in a 15-foot radius centered on you. 
Other creatures on that ground must succeed on a 
Dexterity saving throw or be knocked prone. 

+ You can move across difficult terrain made of earth 
or stone without spending extra movement. You can 
move through solid earth or stone as if it was air 
and without destabilizing it, but you can't end your 
movement there. If you do so, you are ejected to the 
nearest unoccupied space, this spell ends, and you are 
stunned until the end of your next turn. 


INVESTITURE OF WIND 
6th-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Self 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


Until the spell ends, wind whirls around you, and you 
gain the following benefits: 


+ Ranged weapon attacks made against you have disad- 
vantage on the attack roll. 

* You gain a flying speed of 60 feet. If you are still flying 
when the spell ends, you fall, unless you can somehow 
prevent it. 

+ You can use your action to create a 15-foot cube of 
swirling wind centered on a point you can see within 
60 feet of you. Each creature in that area must make 
a Constitution saving throw. A creature takes 2d10 
bludgeoning damage on a failed save, or half as much 
damage on a successful one. If a Large or smaller 
creature fails the save, that creature is also pushed up 
to 10 feet away from the center of the cube. 


INVULNERABILITY 
9th-level abjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Self 

Components: V, S, M (a small piece of adamantine 
worth at least 500 gp, which the spell consumes) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


You are immune to all damage until the spell ends. 


LIFE TRANSFERENCE 
3rd-level necromancy 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 30 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You sacrifice some of your health to mend another crea- 
ture's injuries. You take 4d8 necrotic damage, and one 
creature of your choice that you can see within range re- 
gains a number of hit points equal to twice the necrotic 
damage you take. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d8 for each slot level above 3rd. 


CHAPTER 3 | SPELLS 


MADDENING DARKNESS 
Sth-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 150 feet 

Components: V, M (a drop of pitch mixed with a drop 
of mercury) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


Magical darkness spreads from a point you choose 
within range to fill a 60-foot-radius sphere until the spell 
ends. The darkness spreads around corners. A creature 
with darkvision can’t see through this darkness. Non- 
magical light, as well as light created by spells of 8th 
level or lower, can't illuminate the area. 

Shrieks, gibbering, and mad laughter can be heard 
within the sphere. Whenever a creature starts its turn in 
the sphere, it must make a Wisdom saving throw, taking 
8d8 psychic damage on a failed save, or half as much 
damage on a successful one. 


MAELSTROM 
5th-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 120 feet 

Components: V, S, M (paper or leaf in the shape 
of a funnel) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


A swirling mass of 5-foot-deep water appears in a 30- 
foot radius centered on a point you can see within range. 
The point must be on the ground or in a body of water. 
Until the spell ends, that area is difficult terrain, and 

any creature that starts its turn there must succeed on a 
Strength saving throw or take 6d6 bludgeoning damage 
and be pulled 10 feet toward the center. 


Macic STONE 
Transmutation cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 bonus action 
Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 minute 


You touch one to three pebbles and imbue them with 
magic. You or someone else can make a ranged spell 
attack with one of the pebbles by throwing it or hurling 
it with a sling. If thrown, a pebble has a range of 60 feet. 
If someone else attacks with a pebble, that attacker adds 
your spellcasting ability modifier, not the attacker's, to 
the attack roll. On a hit, the target takes bludgeoning 
damage equal to 1d6 + your spellcasting ability modifier. 
Whether the attack hits or misses, the spell then ends 
on the stone. 

If you cast this spell again, the spell ends on any peb- 
bles still affected by your previous casting. 


Mass POLYMORPH 

9th-level transmutation 

Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 120 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a caterpillar cocoon) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


You transform up to ten creatures of your choice that 
you can see within range. An unwilling target must suc- 
ceed on a Wisdom saving throw to resist the transforma- 
tion. An unwilling shapechanger automatically succeeds 
on the save. 

Each target assumes a beast form of your choice, and 
you can choose the same form or different ones for each 
target. The new form can be any beast you have seen 
whose challenge rating is equal to or less than the tar- 
get's (or half the target's level, if the target doesn't have a 
challenge rating). The target's game statistics, including 
mental ability scores, are replaced by the statistics of 
the chosen beast, but the target retains its hit points, 
alignment, and personality. 

Each target gains a number of temporary hit points 
equal to the hit points of its new form. These temporary 
hit points can't be replaced by temporary hit points from 
another source. A target reverts to its normal form when 
it has no more temporary hit points or it dies. If the spell 
ends before then, the creature loses all its temporary hit 
points and reverts to its normal form. 

The creature is limited in the actions it can perform by 
the nature of its new form. It can't speak, cast spells, or 
do anything else that requires hands or speech. 

The target's gear melds into the new form. The target 
can't activate, use, wield, or otherwise benefit from any 
of its equipment. 


MAXIMILIAN'S EARTHEN GRASP 
2nd-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 30 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a miniature hand sculpted 
from clay) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You choose a 5-foot-square unoccupied space on the 
ground that you can see within range. A Medium hand 
made from compacted soil rises there and reaches for 
one creature you can see within 5 feet of it. The target 
must make a Strength saving throw. On a failed save, 
the target takes 2d6 bludgeoning damage and is re- 
strained for the spell's duration. 

As an action, you can cause the hand to crush the 
restrained target, which must make a Strength saving 
throw. The target takes 2d6 bludgeoning damage on a 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 

To break out, the restrained target can use its action 
to make a Strength check against your spell save DC. 
On a success, the target escapes and is no longer re- 
strained by the hand. 

As an action, you can cause the hand to reach for a 
different creature or to move to a different unoccupied 
space within range. The hand releases a restrained tar- 
get if you do either. 


MELF’s MINUTE METEORS 
3rd-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: Self 


Components: V, S, M (niter, sulfur, and pine tar formed 
into a bead) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


You create six tiny meteors in your space. They float 
in the air and orbit you for the spell’s duration. When 
you cast the spell—and as a bonus action on each of 
your turns thereafter—you can expend one or two of 
the meteors, sending them streaking toward a point or 
points you choose within 120 feet of you. Once a me- 
teor reaches its destination or impacts against a solid 
surface, the meteor explodes. Each creature within 5 
feet of the point where the meteor explodes must make 
a Dexterity saving throw. A creature takes 2d6 fire 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, the number of meteors 
created increases by two for each slot level above 3rd. 


MENTAL PRISON 
6th-level illusion 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You attempt to bind a creature within an illusory cell 
that only it perceives. One creature you can see within 
range must make an Intelligence saving throw. The 
target succeeds automatically if it is immune to being 
charmed. On a successful save, the target takes 5d10 
psychic damage, and the spell ends. On a failed save, 
the target takes 5d10 psychic damage, and you make 
the area immediately around the target’s space appear 
dangerous to it in some way. You might cause the target 
to perceive itself as being surrounded by fire, floating 
razors, or hideous maws filled with dripping teeth. 
Whatever form the illusion takes, the target can’t see or 
hear anything beyond it and is restrained for the spell's 
duration. If the target is moved out of the illusion, makes 
a melee attack through it, or reaches any part of its body 
through it, the target takes 10d10 psychic damage, and 
the spell ends. 


MIGHTY FORTRESS 
8th-level conjuration 


Casting Time: 1 minute 

Range: 1 mile 

Components: V, S, M (a diamond worth at least 500 gp, 
which the spell consumes) 

Duration: Instantaneous 


A fortress of stone erupts from a square area of ground 
of your choice that you can see within range. The area is 
120 feet on each side, and it must not have any buildings 
or other structures on it. Any creatures in the area are 
harmlessly lifted up as the fortress rises. 

The fortress has four turrets with square bases, each 
one 20 feet on a side and 30 feet tall, with one turret on 
each corner. The turrets are connected to each other by 
stone walls that are each 80 feet long, creating an en- 


CHAPTER 3 | SPELLS 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
{ 


closed area. Each wall is 1 foot thick and is composed of 
panels that are 10 feet wide and 20 feet tall. Each panel 
is contiguous with two other panels or one other panel 
and a turret. You can place up to four stone doors in the 
fortress's outer wall. 

A small keep stands inside the enclosed area. The 
keep has a square base that is 50 feet on each side, and 
it has three floors with 10-foot-high ceilings. Each of the 
floors can be divided into as many rooms as you like, 
provided each room is at least 5 feet on each side. The 
floors of the keep are connected by stone staircases, its 
walls are 6 inches thick, and interior rooms can have 
stone doors or open archways as you choose. The keep 
is furnished and decorated however you like, and it con- 
tains sufficient food to serve a nine-course banquet for 
up to 100 people each day. Furnishings, food, and other 
objects created by this spell crumble to dust if removed 
from the fortress. 

A staff of one hundred invisible servants obeys any 
command given to them by creatures you designate 
when you cast the spell. Each servant functions as if cre- 
ated by the unseen servant spell. 

The walls, turrets, and keep are all made of stone 
that can be damaged. Each 10-foot-by-10-foot section of 
stone has AC 15 and 30 hit points per inch of thickness. 
It is immune to poison and psychic damage. Reducing 
a section of stone to O hit points destroys it and might 
cause connected sections to buckle and collapse at the 
DM's discretion. 

After 7 days or when you cast this spell somewhere 
else, the fortress harmlessly crumbles and sinks back 


CHAPTER 3 |. SPELLS 


Мібнту Fortress E 


into the ground, leaving any creatures that were inside it 
safely on the ground. 

Casting this spell on the same spot once every 7 days 
for a year makes the fortress permanent. 


MIND SPIKE 
2nd-level divination 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


You reach into the mind of one creature you can see 
within range. The target must make a Wisdom saving 
throw, taking 3d8 psychic damage on a failed save, or 
half as much damage on a successful one. On a failed 
save, you also always know the target's location until the 
spell ends, but only while the two of you are on the same 
plane of existence. While you have this knowledge, the 
target can’t become hidden from you, and if it’s invisible, 
it gains no benefit from that condition against you. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 3rd level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d6 for each slot level above 2nd. 


MOLD EARTH 
Transmutation cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 30 feet 

Components: S 

Duration: Instantaneous or 1 hour (see below) 


You choose a portion of dirt or stone that you can see 
within range and that fits within a 5-foot cube. You ma- 
nipulate it in one of the following ways: 


+ Ifyou target an area of loose earth, you can instan- 
taneously excavate it, move it along the ground, and 
deposit it up to 5 feet away. This movement doesn't 
involve enough force to cause damage. 

- You cause shapes, colors, or both to appear on the dirt 
or stone, spelling out words, creating images, or shap- 
ing patterns. The changes last for 1 hour. 

+ If the dirt or stone you target is on the ground, you 
cause it to become difficult terrain. Alternatively, you 
can cause the ground to become normal terrain if it is 
already difficult terrain. This change lasts for 1 hour. 


If you cast this spell multiple times, you can have no 
more than two of its non-instantaneous effects active at 
a time, and you can dismiss such an effect as an action. 


NEGATIVE ENERGY FLOOD 
5th-level necromancy 


Casting Time: | action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, M (a broken bone and a square of 
black silk) 

Duration: Instantaneous 


You send ribbons of negative energy at one creature you 
can see within range. Unless the target is undead, it 
must make a Constitution saving throw, taking 5d12 ne- 
crotic damage on a failed save, or half as much damage 
on a successful one. A target killed by this damage rises 
up as a zombie at the start of your next turn. The zombie 
pursues whatever creature it can see that is closest to it. 
Statistics for the zombie are in the Monster Manual. 

If you target an undead with this spell, the target 
doesn't make a saving throw. Instead, roll 5d12. The tar- 
get gains half the total as temporary hit points. 


POWER WORD PAIN 
7th-level enchantment 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 60 feet 
Components: V 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You speak a word of power that causes waves of intense 
pain to assail one creature you can see within range. 

If the target has 100 hit points or fewer, it is subject 

to crippling pain. Otherwise, the spell has no effect 

on it. A target is also unaffected if it is immune to be- 
ing charmed. 

While the target is affected by crippling pain, any 
speed it has can be no higher than 10 feet. The target 
also has disadvantage on attack rolls, ability checks, and 
saving throws, other than Constitution saving throws. 
Finally, if the target tries to cast a spell, it must first suc- 
ceed on a Constitution saving throw, or the casting fails 
and the spell is wasted. 

A target suffering this pain can make a Constitution 
saving throw at the end of each of its turns. On a suc- 
cessful save, the pain ends. 


PRIMAL SAVAGERY 
Transmutation cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: Self 
Components: S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You channel primal magic to cause your teeth or fin- 
gernails to sharpen, ready to deliver a corrosive attack. 
Make a melee spell attack against one creature within 5 
feet of you. On a hit, the target takes 1d10 acid damage. 
After you make the attack, your teeth or fingernails re- 
turn to normal. 

The spell's damage increases by 1d10 when you reach 
5th level (2d10), 11th level (3d10), and 17th level (4d10). 


PRIMORDIAL WARD 
6th-level abjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Self 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You have resistance to acid, cold, fire, lightning, and 
thunder damage for the spell's duration. 

When you take damage of one of those types, you can 
use your reaction to gain immunity to that type of dam- 
age, including against the triggering damage. If you do 
so, the resistances end, and you have the immunity until 
the end of your next turn, at which time the spell ends. 


PSYCHIC SCREAM 
9th-level enchantment 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 90 feet 
Components: S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You unleash the power of your mind to blast the intellect 
of up to ten creatures of your choice that you can see 
within range. Creatures that have an Intelligence score 
of 2 or lower are unaffected. 

Each target must make an Intelligence saving throw. 
On a failed save, a target takes 14d6 psychic damage 
and is stunned. On a successful save, a target takes half 
as much damage and isn't stunned. If a target is killed 
by this damage, its head explodes, assuming it has one. 

A stunned target can make an Intelligence saving 
throw at the end of each of its turns. On a successful 
save, the stunning effect ends. 


PYROTECHNICS 
2nd-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 60 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


Choose an area of nonmagical flame that you can see 
and that fits within a 5-foot cube within range. You can 
extinguish the fire in that area, and you create either 
fireworks or smoke when you do so. 

Fireworks. The target explodes with a dazzling dis- 
play of colors. Each creature within 10 feet of the target 


CHAPTER 3 | SPEELS 


Shadow Brave 


must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or become 
blinded until the end of your next turn. 

Smoke. Thick black smoke spreads out from the tar- 
get in a 20-foot radius, moving around corners. The area 
of the smoke is heavily obscured. The smoke persists for 
1 minute or until a strong wind disperses it. 


SCATTER 
6th-level conjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 30 feet 
Components: V 
Duration: Instantaneous 


The air quivers around up to five creatures of your 
choice that you can see within range. An unwilling crea- 
ture must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw to resist 
this spell. You teleport each affected target to an unoccu- 
pied space that you can see within 120 feet of you. That 
space must be on the ground or on a floor. 


SHADOW BLADE 
2nd-level illusion 


Casting Time: 1 bonus action 

Range: Self 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You weave together threads of shadow to create a sword 
of solidified gloom in your hand. This magic sword lasts 
until the spell ends. It counts as a simple melee weapon 
with which you are proficient. It deals 2d8 psychic 
damage on a hit and has the finesse, light, and thrown 


CHAPTER 3 | SPELLS 


properties (range 20/60). In addition, when you use the 
sword to attack a target that is in dim light or darkness, 
you make the attack roll with advantage. 

If you drop the weapon or throw it, it dissipates at the 
end of the turn. Thereafter, while the spell persists, you 
can use a bonus action to cause the sword to reappear 
in your hand. 

At Hiéher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
3rd- or 4th-level spell slot, the damage increases to 3d8. 
When you cast it using a 5th- or 6th-level spell slot, the 
damage increases to 4d8. When you cast it using a spell 
slot of 7th level or higher, the damage increases to 5d8. 


SHADOW ОЕ MOIL 
4th-level necromancy 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Self 

Components: V, S, M (an undead eyeball encased in a 
gem worth at least 150 gp) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


Flame-like shadows wreathe your body until the spell 
ends, causing you to become heavily obscured to others. 
The shadows turn dim light within 10 feet of you into 
darkness, and bright light in the same area to dim light. 
Until the spell ends, you have resistance to radiant 

damage. In addition, whenever a creature within 10 feet 
of you hits you with an attack, the shadows lash out at 
that creature, dealing it 2d8 necrotic damage. 


SHAPE WATER 
Transmutation cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 30 feet 

Components: S 

Duration: Instantaneous or 1 hour (see below) 


You choose an area of water that you can see within 
range and that fits within a 5-foot cube. You manipulate 
it in one of the following ways: 


* Youinstantaneously move or otherwise change the 
flow of the water as you direct, up to 5 feet in any di- 
rection. This movement doesn't have enough force to 
cause damage. 

+ You cause the water to form into simple shapes 
and animate at your direction. This change lasts 
for 1 hour. 

* You change the water's color or opacity. The water 
must be changed in the same way throughout. This 
change lasts for 1 hour. 

* You freeze the water, provided that there are no crea- 
tures in it. The water unfreezes in 1 hour. 


If you cast this spell multiple times, you can have no 
more than two of its non-instantaneous effects active at 
a time, and you can dismiss such an effect as an action. 


SICKENING RADIANCE 

4th-level evocation 

Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 120 feet 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


MS ca M NN 


Dim, greenish light spreads within a 30-foot-radius 
sphere centered on a point you choose within range. 
The light spreads around corners, and it lasts until the 
spell ends. 

When a creature moves into the spell's area for the 
first time on a turn or starts its turn there, that creature 
must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or take 
4d10 radiant damage, and it suffers one level of exhaus- 
tion and emits a dim, greenish light in a 5-foot radius. 
This light makes it impossible for the creature to benefit 
from being invisible. The light and any levels of exhaus- 
tion caused by this spell go away when the spell ends. 


SKILL EMPOWERMENT 
5th-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


Your magic deepens a creature's understanding of its 
own talent. You touch one willing creature and give it 
expertise in one skill of your choice; until the spell ends, 
the creature doubles its proficiency bonus for ability 
checks it makes that use the chosen skill. 

You must choose a skill in which the target is profi- 
cient and that isn't already benefiting from an effect, 
such as Expertise, that doubles its proficiency bonus. 


SKYWRITE 
2nd-level transmutation (ritual) 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Sight 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


You cause up to ten words to form in a part of the sky 
you can see. The words appear to be made of cloud and 
remain in place for the spell's duration. The words dis- 
sipate when the spell ends. A strong wind can disperse 
the clouds and end the spell early. 


SNARE 
Ist-level abjuration 


Casting Time: 1 minute 

Range: Touch 

Components: S, M (25 feet of rope, which the 
spell consumes) 

Duration: 8 hours 


As you cast this spell, you use the rope to create a circle 
with a 5-foot radius on the ground or the floor. When 
you finish casting, the rope disappears and the circle 
becomes a magic trap. 

This trap is nearly invisible, requiring a successful 
Intelligence (Investigation) check against your spell save 
DC to be discerned. 

The trap triggers when a Small, Medium, or Large 
creature moves onto the ground or the floor in the 
spell's radius. That creature must succeed on a Dex- 
terity saving throw or be magically hoisted into the air, 
leaving it hanging upside down 3 feet above the ground 
or the floor. The creature is restrained there until the 
spell ends. 


A restrained creature can make a Dexterity saving 
throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on 
itself on a success. Alternatively, the creature or some- 
one else who can reach it can use an action to make an 
Intelligence (Arcana) check against your spell save DC. 
On a success, the restrained effect ends. 

After the trap is triggered, the spell ends when no 
creature is restrained by it. 


SNILLOC’s SNOWBALL SWARM 
2nd-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 90 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a piece of ice or a small white 
rock chip) 

Duration: Instantaneous 


A flurry of magic snowballs erupts from a point you 
choose within range. Each creature in a 5-foot-radius 
sphere centered on that point must make a Dexterity 
saving throw. A creature takes 3d6 cold damage ona 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 3rd level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d6 for each slot level above 2nd. 


SouL CAGE 
6th-level necromancy 


Casting Time: 1 reaction, which you take when a hu- 
manoid you can see within 60 feet of you dies 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a tiny silver cage worth 100 gp) 

Duration: 8 hours 


This spell snatches the soul of a humanoid as it dies and 
traps it inside the tiny cage you use for the material com- 
ponent. A stolen soul remains inside the cage until the 
spell ends or until you destroy the cage, which ends the 
spell. While you have a soul inside the cage, you can ex- 
ploit it in any of the ways described below. You can use a 
trapped soul up to six times. Once you exploit a soul for 
the sixth time, it is released, and the spell ends. While 

a soul is trapped, the dead humanoid it came from can't 
be revived. 

Steal Life. You can use a bonus action to drain vigor 
from the soul and regain 2d8 hit points. 

Query Soul. You ask the soul a question (no action re- 
quired) and receive a brief telepathic answer, which you 
can understand regardless of the language used. The 
soul knows only what it knew in life, but it must answer 
you truthfully and to the best of its ability. The answer is 
no more than a sentence or two and might be cryptic. 

Borrow Experience. You can use a bonus action to 
bolster yourself with the soul's life experience, making 
your next attack roll, ability check, or saving throw with 
advantage. If you don't use this benefit before the start of 
your next turn, it is lost. 

Eyes of the Dead. You can use an action to name a 
place the humanoid saw in life, which creates an invis- 
ible sensor somewhere in that place if it is on the plane 
of existence you're currently on. The sensor remains for 
as long as you concentrate, up to 10 minutes (as if you 
were concentrating on a spell). You receive visual and 


CHAPTER 3 | SPEELS 


auditory information from the sensor as if you were in 
its space using your senses. 

A creature that can see the sensor (such as one using 
see invisibility or truesight) sees a translucent image of 
the tormented humanoid whose soul you caged. 


STEEL WIND STRIKE 
5th-level conjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 30 feet 

Components: S, M (a melee weapon worth at least 1 sp) 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You flourish the weapon used in the casting and then 
vanish to strike like the wind. Choose up to five crea- 
tures you can see within range. Make a melee spell 
attack against each target. On a hit, a target takes 6110 
force damage. 

You can then teleport to an unoccupied space you can 
see within 5 feet of one of the targets you hit or missed. 


STORM SPHERE 

4th-level evocation 

Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 150 feet 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 

A 20-foot-radius sphere of whirling air springs into ex- 
istence, centered on a point you choose within range. 


CHAPTER 3 | SPELLS 


Storm SPHERE 


The sphere remains for the spell's duration. Each crea- 
ture in the sphere when it appears or that ends its turn 
there must succeed on a Strength saving throw or take 
2d6 bludgeoning damage. The sphere's space is diffi- 
cult terrain. 

Until the spell ends, you can use a bonus action on 
each of your turns to cause a bolt of lightning to leap 
from the center of the sphere toward one creature you 
choose within 60 feet of the center. Make a ranged spell 
attack. You have advantage on the attack roll if the target 
is in the sphere. On a hit, the target takes 4d6 light- 
ning damage. 

Creatures within 30 feet of the sphere have disadvan- 
tage on Wisdom (Perception) checks made to listen. 

At Hiéher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 5th level or higher, the damage for each of 
its effects increases by 1d6 for each slot level above 4th. 


SUMMON GREATER DEMON 
4th-level conjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a vial of blood from a humanoid 
killed within the past 24 hours) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


You utter foul words, summoning one demon from the 
chaos of the Abyss. You choose the demon's type, which 
must be one of challenge rating 5 or lower, such аз а 
shadow demon or a barlgura. The demon appears in 


UT UM C А aa 


an unoccupied space you can see within range, and the 
demon disappears when it drops to 0 hit points or when 
the spell ends. 

Roll initiative for the demon, which has its own turns. 
When you summon it and on each of your turns thereaf- 
ter, you can issue a verbal command to it (requiring no 
action on your part), telling it what it must do on its next 
turn. If you issue no command, it spends its turn attack- 
ing any creature within reach that has attacked it. 

At the end of each of the demon's turns, it makes a 
Charisma saving throw. The demon has disadvantage 
on this saving throw if you say its true name. On a failed 
save, the demon continues to obey you. On a success- 
ful save, your control of the demon ends for the rest of 
the duration, and the demon spends its turns pursuing 
and attacking the nearest non-demons to the best of its 
ability. If you stop concentrating on the spell before it 
reaches its full duration, an uncontrolled demon doesn't 
disappear for 1d6 rounds if it still has hit points. 

As part of casting the spell, you can form a circle 
on the ground with the blood used as a material com- 
ponent. The circle is large enough to encompass your 
space. While the spell lasts, the summoned demon can't 
cross the circle or harm it, and it can't target anyone 
within it. Using the material component in this manner 
consumes it when the spell ends. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 5th level or higher, the challenge rating in- 
creases by 1 for each slot level above 4th. 


SUMMON LESSER DEMONS 
3rd-level conjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a vial of blood from a humanoid 
killed within the past 24 hours) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


You utter foul words, summoning demons from the 


chaos of the Abyss. Roll on the following table to deter- 
mine what appears. 


46 Demons Summoned 

1-2 Two demons of challenge rating 1 or lower 
3-4 Four demons of challenge rating 1/2 or lower 
5-6 Eight demons of challenge rating 1/4 or lower 


The DM chooses the demons, such as manes or 
dretches, and you choose the unoccupied spaces you 
can see within range where they appear. A summoned 
demon disappears when it drops to 0 hit points or when 
the spell ends. 


The demons are hostile to all creatures, including you. 


Roll initiative for the summoned demons as a group, 
which has its own turns. The demons pursue and attack 
the nearest non-demons to the best of their ability. 

As part of casting the spell, you can form a circle 
on the ground with the blood used as a material com- 
ponent. The circle is large enough to encompass your 
space. While the spell lasts, the summoned demons 
can't cross the circle or harm it, and they can't target 


anyone within it. Using the material component in this 

manner consumes it when the spell ends. | 
At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 

spell slot of 6th or 7th level, you summon twice as many 

demons. If you cast it using a spell slot of 8th or 9th 

level, you summon three times as many demons. 


ЅҮМАРТІС STATIC 
5th-level enchantment 


| 
| 
Casting Time: 1 action | 
Range: 120 feet | 
Components: V, S | 
Duration: Instantaneous | 

| 


You choose a point within range and cause psychic en- 
ergy to explode there. Each creature in a 20-foot-radius 
sphere centered on that point must make an Intelligence 
saving throw. A creature with an Intelligence score of 
2 or lower can't be affected by this spell. A target takes 
846 psychic damage on a failed save, or half as much | 
damage on a successful one. | 
After a failed save, a target has muddled thoughts for | 
1 minute. During that time, it rolls a dó and subtracts | 
the number rolled from all its attack rolls and ability 
checks, as well as its Constitution saving throws to | 
| 


maintain concentration. The target can make an Intelli- 
gence saving throw at the end of each of its turns, end- 
ing the effect on itself on a success. 


TEMPLE OF THE GODS | 
7th-level conjuration | 


Casting Time: 1 hour 
Range: 120 feet Ji 
Components: V, S, M (a holy symbol worth at least 5 gp) 
Duration: 24 hours 


You cause a temple to shimmer into existence on ground | 
you can see within range. The temple must fit within an 
unoccupied cube of space, up to 120 feet on each side. 
The temple remains until the spell ends. It is dedicated 
to whatever god, pantheon, or philosophy is represented 
by the holy symbol used in the casting. 

You make all decisions about the temple's appear- 
ance. The interior is enclosed by a floor, walls, and a 
roof, with one door granting access to the interior and 
as many windows as you wish. Only you and any crea- 
tures you designate when you cast the spell can open or | 
close the door. 

The temple's interior is an open space with an idol | 
or altar at óne end. You decide whether the temple is | 
illuminated and whether that illumination is bright light 
or dim light. The smell of burning incense fills the air i 


within, and the temperature is mild. 

The temple opposes types of creatures you choose 
when you cast this spell. Choose one or more of the fol- 
lowing: celestials, elementals, fey, fiends, or undead. If a D 
creature of the chosen type attempts to enter the temple, 
that creature must make a Charisma saving throw. On " 
a failed save, it can't enter the temple for 24 hours. Even 
if the creature can enter the temple, the magic there hs 
hinders it; whenever it makes an attack roll, an ability 
check, or a saving throw inside the temple, it must roll a 


d4 and subtract the number rolled from the d20 roll. 2 
mi 
| 
CHAPTER 3 | SPEELS | 


—— ll 


In addition, the sensors created by divination spells 
can't appear inside the temple, and creatures within 
can't be targeted by divination spells. 

Finally, whenever any creature in the temple regains 
hit points from a spell of 1st level or higher, the creature 
regains additional hit points equal to your Wisdom mod- 
ifier (minimum 1 hit point). 

The temple is made from opaque magical force that 
extends into the Ethereal Plane, thus blocking ethereal 
travel into the temple's interior. Nothing can physically 
pass through the temple's exterior. It can't be dispelled 
by dispel magic, and antimagic field has no effect on it. A 
disintegrate spell destroys the temple instantly. 

Casting this spell on the same spot every day for a 
year makes this effect permanent. 


'TENSER'S TRANSFORMATION 
6th-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Self 

Components: V, S, M (a few hairs from a bull) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


You endow yourself with endurance and martial prow- 
ess fueled by magic. Until the spell ends, you can't cast 
spells, and you gain the following benefits: 


* You gain 50 temporary hit points. If any of these re- 
main when the spell ends, they are lost. 

* You have advantage on attack rolls that you make with 
simple and martial weapons. 

* When you hit a target with a weapon attack, that tar- 
get takes an extra 2d12 force damage. 

* You have proficiency with all armor, shields, simple 
weapons, and martial weapons. 

* You have proficiency in Strength and Constitution sav- 
ing throws. 

* Youcan attack twice, instead of once, when you take 
the Attack action on your turn. You ignore this benefit 
if you already have a feature, like Extra Attack, that 
gives you extra attacks. 


Immediately after the spell ends, you must succeed on 
a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or suffer one level of 
exhaustion. 


'THUNDERCLAP 
Evocation cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 5 feet 
Components: S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You create a burst of thunderous sound that can be 
heard up to 100 feet away. Each creature within range, 
other than you, must succeed on a Constitution saving 
throw or take 1d6 thunder damage. 

The spell's damage increases by 1d6 when you reach 
5th level (2d6), 11th level (3d6), and 17th level (4d6). 


CHAPTER 3 | SPELLS 


THUNDER STEP 
3rd-level conjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 90 feet 
Components: V 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You teleport yourself to an unoccupied space you can 
see within range. Immediately after you disappear, a 
thunderous boom sounds, and each creature within 10 
feet of the space you left must make a Constitution sav- 
ing throw, taking 3d10 thunder damage on a failed save, 
or half as much damage on a successful one. The thun- 
der can be heard from up to 300 feet away. 

You can bring along objects as long as their weight 
doesn't exceed what you can carry. You can also tele- 
port one willing creature of your size or smaller who is 
carrying gear up to its carrying capacity. The creature 
must be within 5 feet of you when you cast this spell, 
and there must be an unoccupied space within 5 feet of 
your destination space for the creature to appear in; oth- 
erwise, the creature is left behind. 

At Hiéher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d10 for each slot level above 3rd. 


TIDAL WAVE 
3rd-level conjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 120 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a drop of water) 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You conjure up a wave of water that crashes down on an 
area within range. The area can be up to 30 feet long, 
up to 10 feet wide, and up to 10 feet tall. Each creature 
in that area must make a Dexterity saving throw. On a 
failed save, a creature takes 4d8 bludgeoning damage 
and is knocked prone. On a successful save, a creature 
takes half as much damage and isn't knocked prone. 
The water then spreads out across the ground in all 
directions, extinguishing unprotected flames in its area 
and within 30 feet of it, and then it vanishes. 


Tiny SERVANT 
3rd-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 minute 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 8 hours 


You touch one Tiny, nonmagical object that isn't at- 
tached to another object or a surface and isn't being 
carried by another creature. The target animates and 
sprouts little arms and legs, becoming a creature under 
your control until the spell ends or the creature drops to 
0 hit points. See the stat block for its statistics. 

As a bonus action, you can mentally command the 
creature if it is within 120 feet of you. (If you control 
multiple creatures with this spell, you can command any 
or all of them at the same time, issuing the same com- 


Tiny SERVANT 


Tiny construct, unaligned 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 10 (4d4) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT М5 СНА 
4(-3) 16 (+3) 10(+0) 2(-4) 10(+0) 1(-5) 


Damage Immunities poison, psychic 

Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 
frightened, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned 

Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), passive 
Perception 10 

Languages — 


ACTIONS 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) bludgeoning damage. 


ae eee ESE SSS 


mand to each one.) You decide what action the creature 
will take and where it will move during its next turn, or 
you can issue a simple, general command, such as to 
fetch a key, stand watch, or stack some books. If you is- 
sue no commands, the servant does nothing other than 
defend itself against hostile creatures. Once given an 
order, the servant continues to follow that order until its 
task is complete. 

When the creature drops to 0 hit points, it reverts to 
its original form, and any remaining damage carries 
over to that form. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, you can animate two ad- 
ditional objects for each slot level above 3rd. 


TOLL THE DEAD 
Necromancy cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 60 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You point at one creature you can see within range, 
and the sound of a dolorous bell fills the air around it 
for a moment. The target must succeed on a Wisdom 
saving throw or take 1d8 necrotic damage. If the target 
is missing any of its hit points, it instead takes 1d12 ne- 
crotic damage. 

The spell's damage increases by one die when you 
reach 5th level (2d8 or 2d12), 11th level (3d8 or 3d12), 
and 17th level (4d8 or 4d12). 


TRANSMUTE ROCK 
5th-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 120 feet 

Components: V, S, M (clay and water) 
Duration: Until dispelled 


You choose an area of stone or mud that you can see 
that fits within a 40-foot cube and is within range, and 
choose one of the following effects. 

Transmute Rock to Mud. Nonmagical rock of any 
sort in the area becomes an equal volume of thick, flow- 
ing mud that remains for the spell's duration. 

The ground in the spell's area becomes muddy enough 
that creatures can sink into it. Each foot that a creature 
moves through the mud costs 4 feet of movement, and 
any creature on the ground when you cast the spell must 
make a Strength saving throw. A creature must also 
make the saving throw when it moves into the area for 
the first time on a turn or ends its turn there. On a failed 
save, a creature sinks into the mud and is restrained, 
though it can use an action to end the restrained condi- 
tion on itself by pulling itself free of the mud. 

If you cast the spell on a ceiling, the mud falls. Any 
creature under the mud when it falls must make a Dex- 
terity saving throw. A creature takes 4d8 bludgeoning 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. 

Transmute Mud to Rock. Nonmagical mud or quick- 
sand in the area no more than 10 feet deep transforms 
into soft stone for the spell's duration. Any creature in 
the mud when it transforms must make a Dexterity sav- 
ing throw. On a successful save, a creature is shunted 
safely to the surface in an unoccupied space. On a failed 
save, a creature becomes restrained by the rock. A re- 
strained creature, or another creature within reach, can 
use an action to try to break the rock by succeeding on 
a DC 20 Strength check or by dealing damage to it. The 
rock has AC 15 and 25 hit points, and it is immune to 
poison and psychic damage. 


CHAPTER 3 | SPELLS 


VITRIOLIC SPHERE 
4th-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 150 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a drop of giant slug bile) 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You point at a location within range, and a glowing, 
1-foot-diameter ball of emerald acid streaks there and 
explodes in a 20-foot-radius sphere. Each creature in 
that area must make a Dexterity saving throw. On a 
failed save, a creature takes 10d4 acid damage and an- 
other 5d4 acid damage at the end of its next turn. On a 
successful save, a creature takes half the initial damage 
and no damage at the end of its next turn. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 5th level or higher, the initial damage in- 
creases by 2d4 for each slot level above 4th. 


WALL OF LIGHT 
5th-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 120 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a hand mirror) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


A shimmering wall of bright light appears at a point you 
choose within range. The wall appears in any orienta- 
tion you choose: horizontally, vertically, or diagonally. It 
can be free floating, or it can rest on a solid surface. The 
wall can be up to 60 feet long, 10 feet high, and 5 feet 


thick, The wall blocks line of sight, but creatures and ob- 


jects can pass through it. It emits bright light out to 120 
feet and dim light for an additional 120 feet. 

When the wall appears, each creature in its area must 
make a Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, a 
creature takes 4d8 radiant damage, and it is blinded for 
1 minute. On a successful save, it takes half as much 
damage and isn't blinded. A blinded creature can make 
a Constitution saving throw at the end of each of its 
turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. 

A creature that ends its turn in the wall’s area takes 
4d8 radiant damage. 

Until the spell ends, you can use an action to launch a 
beam of radiance from the wall at one creature you can 
see within 60 feet of it. Make a ranged spell attack. On 
a hit, the target takes 4d8 radiant damage. Whether you 
hit or miss, reduce the length of the wall by 10 feet. If 
the wall's length drops to 0 feet, the spell ends. 

At Hiéher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 6th level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d8 for each slot level above 5th. 


WALL OF SAND 
3rd-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 90 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a handful of sand) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


You create a wall of swirling sand on the ground at a 
point you can see within range. You can make the wall 


CHAPTER 3 | SPELLS 


up to 30 feet long, 10 feet high, and 10 feet thick, and it 
vanishes when the spell ends. It blocks line of sight but 
not movement. A creature is blinded while in the wall’s 
space and must spend 3 feet of movement for every 1 
foot it moves there. 


WALL OF WATER 
3rd-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a drop of water) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


You create a wall of water on the ground at a point you 
can see within range. You can make the wall up to 30 
feet long, 10 feet high, and 1 foot thick, or you can make 
a ringed wall up to 20 feet in diameter, 20 feet high, and 
1 foot thick. The wall vanishes when the spell ends. The 
wall's space is difficult terrain. 

Any ranged weapon attack that enters the wall's space 
has disadvantage on the attack roll, and fire damage 
is halved if the fire effect passes through the wall to 
reach its target. Spells that deal cold damage that pass 
through the wall cause the area of the wall they pass 
through to freeze solid (at least a 5-foot-square section is 
frozen). Each 5-foot-square frozen section has AC 5 and 
15 hit points. Reducing a frozen section to 0 hit points 
destroys it. When a section is destroyed, the wall's water 
doesn't fill it. 


WARDING WIND 
2nd-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Self 

Components: V 

Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


A strong wind (20 miles per hour) blows around you in a 
10-foot radius and moves with you, remaining centered 
on you. The wind lasts for the spell's duration. 

The wind has the following effects: 


* It deafens you and other creatures in its area. 

+ It extinguishes unprotected flames in its area that are 
torch-sized or smaller. 

* It hedges out vapor, gas, and fog that can be dispersed 
by strong wind. 

* The area is difficult terrain for creatures 
other than you. 

* The attack rolls of ranged weapon attacks have disad- 
vantage if the attacks pass in or out of the wind. 


WATERY SPHERE 
4th-level conjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 90 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a droplet of water) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You conjure up a sphere of water with a 5-foot radius at 1 
a point you can see within range. The sphere can hover | 
but no more than 10 feet off the ground. The sphere re- 

mains for the spell's duration. 


Any creature in the sphere's space must make a 
Strength saving throw. On a successful save, a creature 
is ejected from that space to the nearest unoccupied 
space of the creature's choice outside the sphere. A 
Huge or larger creature succeeds on the saving throw 
automatically, and a Large or smaller creature can 
choose to fail it. On a failed save, a creature is restrained 
by the sphere and is engulfed by the water. At the end of 
each of its turns, a restrained target can repeat the sav- 
ing throw, ending the effect on itself on a success. 

The sphere can restrain as many as four Medium or 
smaller creatures or one Large creature. If the sphere 
restrains a creature that causes it to exceed this capac- 
ity, a random creature that was already restrained by the 
sphere falls out of it and lands prone in a space within 5 
feet of it. 

As an action, you can move the sphere up to 30 feet 
in a straight line. If it moves over a pit, a cliff, or other 
drop-off, it safely descends until it is hovering 10 feet 
above the ground. Any creature restrained by the sphere 
moves with it. You can ram the sphere into creatures, 
forcing them to make the saving throw. 

When the spell ends, the sphere falls to the ground 
and extinguishes all normal flames within 30 feet of it. 
Any creature restrained by the sphere is knocked prone 
in the space where it falls. The water then vanishes. 


WHIRLWIND 
7th-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 300 feet 

Components: V, M (a piece of straw) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


A whirlwind howls down to a point that you can 

see on the ground within range. The whirlwind is a 
10-foot-radius, 30-foot-high cylinder centered on that 
point. Until the spell ends, you can use your action to 
move the whirlwind up to 30 feet in any direction along 
the ground. The whirlwind sucks up any Medium or 
smaller objects that aren't secured to anything and that 
aren't worn or carried by anyone. 

A creature must make a Dexterity saving throw the 
first time on a turn that it enters the whirlwind or that 
the whirlwind enters its space, including when the whirl- 
wind first appears. A creature takes 10d6 bludgeoning 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a 
successful one. In addition, a Large or smaller creature 
that fails the save must succeed on a Strength saving 
throw or become restrained in the whirlwind until the 
spell ends. When a creature starts its turn restrained by 
the whirlwind, the creature is pulled 5 feet higher inside 
it, unless the creature is at the top. A restrained creature 
moves with the whirlwind and falls when the spell ends, 
unless the creature has some means to stay aloft. 

A restrained creature can use an action to make a 
Strength or Dexterity check against your spell save DC. 
If successful, the creature is no longer restrained by the 
whirlwind and is hurled 3d6 x 10 feet away from it in a 
random direction. 


WORD OF RADIANCE 
Evocation cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 5 feet 

Components: V, M (a holy symbol) 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You utter a divine word, and burning radiance erupts 
from you. Each creature of your choice that you can see 
within range must succeed on a Constitution saving 
throw or take 1d6 radiant damage. 

The spell's damage increases by 1d6 when you reach 
5th level (2d6), 11th level (3d6), and 17th level (4d6). 


WRATH OF NATURE 
5th-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 120 feet 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You call out to the spirits of nature to rouse them 
against your enemies. Choose a point you can see 
within range. The spirits cause trees, rocks, and grasses 
in a 60-foot cube centered on that point to become ani- 
mated until the spell ends. 

Grasses and Undergrowth. Any area of ground in the 
cube that is covered by grass or undergrowth is difficult 
terrain for your enemies. 

Trees. At the start of each of your turns, each of your 
enemies within 10 feet of any tree in the cube must suc- 
ceed on a Dexterity saving throw or take 4d6 slashing 
damage from whipping branches. 

Roots and Vines. At the end of each of your turns, one 
creature of your choice that is on the ground in the cube 
must succeed on a Strength saving throw or become 
restrained until the spell ends. A restrained creature 
can use an action to make a Strength (Athletics) check 
against your spell save DC, ending the effect on itself on 
a success. 

Rocks. As a bonus action on your turn, you can cause 
a loose rock in the cube to launch at a creature you can 
see in the cube. Make a ranged spell attack against the 
target. On a hit, the target takes 3d8 nonmagical blud- 
geoning damage, and it must succeed on a Strength 
saving throw or fall prone. 


ZEPHYR STRIKE 
1st-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 bonus action 

Range: Self 

Components: V 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You move like the wind. Until the spell ends, your move- 

ment doesn't provoke opportunity attacks. > 
Once before the spell ends, you can give yourself ad- 

vantage on one weapon attack roll on your turn. That at- 

tack deals an extra 1d8 force damage on a hit. Whether 

you hit or miss, your walking speed increases by 30 feet 4 

until the end of that turn. 


CHAPTER 3 | SPELLS 


APPENDIX A: SHARED CAMPAIGNS 


Coordinating a regular schedule of D&D game sessions, 
to keep a campaign active and vibrant, can be a chal- 
lenge. If the campaign's only Dungeon Master or enough 
players aren't available, the next session might have to 
be postponed, and repeated problems of this sort can 
endanger the continuation of the campaign. 

In short: in a world filled with distractions, it can be 
hard to keep a campaign going. Enter the concept of the 
shared campaign. 

In a shared campaign, more than one member of the 
group can take on the role of DM. A shared campaign is 
episodic rather than continuous, with each play session 
comprising a complete adventure. 

The largest shared campaigns are administered by 
the D&D Adventurers League and overseen by Wizards 
of the Coast. You can also create your own shared cam- 
paign for a school D&D club, at a game store, a library, 
or anywhere else where D&D players and DMs gather. 

A shared campaign establishes a framework that al- 
lows a player to take a character from one DM's game 
to another one within the shared campaign. It creates a 
situation where almost nothing can prevent a scheduled 
session from happening. The roster of potential players 
can be quite large, virtually ensuring that any session 
has at least the minimum number of characters needed 
to play. If everyone shows up to play at the same time, 
multiple DMs ensure that everyone can take part. 


аһ 
Copt or CONDUCT 
Time and time again, the core rulebooks come back to 
the point that the most important goal of a D&D play ses- 
sion is for everyone involved to have fun. In keeping with 
that goal, it's a good idea for a shared campaign to have 
a code of conduct. Because people who don't normally 
play together might end up at the same table in a shared 
campaign, it can be helpful to establish some ground rules 
for behavior. 

On the broadest level, everyone in a shared campaign 
is responsible for making sure that everyone else has an 
enjoyable time. If anyone feels offended, belittled, or bul- 
lied by the actions of another person, the entire purpose of 
getting together to play is defeated. 

The basic code of conduct for a shared campaign might 
be modeled on a similar document that another organiza- 
tion or location uses. Beyond that, some special policies 
might need to be added to account for what might happen 
atthe table when players and DMs interact. As a starting 
point, consider the following material, which is excerpted 
from the Adventurers League code of conduct. 


During a play session, participants are expected to ... 


* Follow the DM's lead and refrain from arguing with the 
DM or other players over rules. 

Let other players speak, and allow other players to get 
attention from the DM. 

+ Avoid excessive conversation that is not relevant to the 
adventure. 

Discourage others from using social media to bully, 
shame, or intimidate other participants. 

Make the DM or the campaign's administrators aware 
of disruptive or aggressive behavior so that appropriate 
action can be taken. 


APPENDIX A | SHARED CAMPAIGNS 


In order to be successful, a shared campaign needs 
a champion—someone who takes on the responsibil- 
ity of organizing and maintaining the group. If you're 
interested in learning more about how to run a shared 
campaign and seeing how the Adventurers League 
handles certain issues, then the rest of this appendix is 
meant for you. 


DESIGNING ADVENTURES 


Designing adventures for a shared campaign involves a 
different set of considerations than designing for a stan- 
dard group of players. Most important, the adventure 
must be timed to conclude when the session is sched- 
uled to end. You also need to balance combat encounters 
for a range of levels, since a wide range of characters 
might be experiencing the adventure at the same time. 


p md 


ADVENTURE DURATION 


Every adventure in a shared campaign begins and ends 
in the same play session. (If a group of participants 
wants to take longer to finish and all are willing to do 
so, they can exceed the time limit.) A session or an event 
can't end with the adventure unfinished, since there's no 
way to guarantee that the same players and DM will be 
available for the next session. 

Typically, adventures in a shared campaign are de- 
signed to take either 2 hours or 4 hours. In each hour of 
play, assume the characters can complete the following: 


* Three or four simple combat encounters, or one or 
two complex ones 

* Three or four scenes involving significant exploration 
or social interaction 


Within these constraints, it can be difficult to create 
open-ended adventures. A time limit assumes a specific 
starting point and endpoint. A good way to get around 
this restriction is to create an adventure with multiple 
possible endings. 

Location-based adventures also work well with this 
format. A dungeon presents a natural limit on character 
options, while still giving the players choices. The ad- 
venture could be a quest to defeat a creature or recover 
an item, but the path to achieving that goal can be differ- 
ent for each group. 

For more narrative adventures, try to focus on simple 
but flexible encounters or events. For instance, an ad- 
venture requires the characters to protect a high priest 
of Tyr from assassins. Give the players a chance to plan 
out how they want to protect the temple, complete with 
authority over the guards. A few well-fleshed out NPCs, 
some of whom might be suspected of working with the 
temple's enemies, add a layer of tension. Consider leav- 
ing some details or plot points for the DM to decide. For 
example, the DM might have the option to pick which 
member of the temple guards is the traitor, ensuring 
that the scenario is different for each group. 


COMBAT ENCOUNTERS 


Design your adventure for one of the four tiers, as set 
forth in chapter 1 of the Player’s Handbook: tier 1 in- 
cludes levels 1—4, tier 2 is levels 5—10, tier З is levels 
11-16, and tier 4 includes levels 17-20. Within each tier, 
it's a good idea to use a specific level as a starting point. 
Assume a party of five 3rd-level characters for tier 1, five 
8th-level characters for tier 2, five 13th-level characters 
for tier 3, and five 18th-level characters for tier 4. Use 
that assumption when creating combat encounters, 
whether you use the encounter-building rules in the 
Dungeon Master's Guide or are making an estimate. 

For each battle, provide guidelines to help DMs adjust 
the difficulty up or down to match stronger or weaker 
parties. As a rule of thumb, account for a party two 
levels higher and for a party two levels lower, and don't 
worry about balancing the adventure for parties outside 
the adventure's tier. 


REWARDS 


Adventures in a shared campaign that uses variant rules 
for gaining levels and acquiring treasure (such as those 
described below) don't include experience point awards 
or specific amounts and kinds of treasure. 


CHARACTER CREATION 


A shared campaign's guidelines for character creation 
might include definition of which races and classes 
players can choose from, how players generate ability 
scores, and which alignments players can choose. 


PLAYER'S HANDBOOK PLUS ONE 


You should think about which products players can use 
to create a character. The Adventurers League specifies 
that a player can use the Player's Handbook and one 
other official D&D source, such as a book or a PDF, to 
create a character. This restriction ensures that players 
don't need to own a lot of books to make a character 
and makes it easier for DMs to know how all the char- 
acters in the campaign work. Since a DM in a shared 
campaign must deal with a broad range of characters, 
rather than the same characters each week, it can be dif- 
ficult to track all the interactions and abilities possible 
through mixing options freely. We strongly recommend 
this rule for any shared campaign. 


ABILITY SCORES 


For generating ability scores, we recommend allowing 
players to choose between the standard array—15, 14, 
13, 12, 10, 8—and the option presented in "Variant: 
Customizing Ability Scores" in chapter 1 of the Play- 
er's Handbook. 


STARTING EQUIPMENT 


For the sake of simplicity and efficiency, it’s a good 
idea to require that beginning characters must take the 
starting equipment specified by a character's class and 
background. 


VARIANT RULES 


A shared campaign might use some variant rules to 
handle certain aspects of the game. The Adventurers 
League, for instance, has variant systems for gaining 
levels and acquiring treasure. These *house rules," 
presented below, serve as a sort of common language, 
ensuring that the rewards all characters receive are 
equivalent no matter what kind of adventure a character 
experienced. 


CHARACTER ADVANCEMENT 


In a shared campaign, characters gain levels not by 
accumulating experience points but by reaching experi- 
ence checkpoints. This system rewards every character 
(and player) for taking part in a play session. 

A character reaches 1 checkpoint for each hour an 
adventure is designed to last. Note that the award is 
based on the adventure's projected playing time, rather 
than the actual time spent at the table. The reward for 
completing an adventure designed for 2 hours of play is 
2 checkpoints, even if a group spends more than 2 hours 
playing through it. 

If a character completes an adventure designed for a 
tier higher than the character's current tier, the char- 
acter is awarded 1 additional checkpoint. For example, 
if a 2nd-level character completes a 6th-level adven- 
ture designed to take 2 hours, the character reaches 3 
checkpoints. 

Playing time might seem like an odd way to measure 
experience awards, but the concept is in keeping with 
how a shared campaign is meant to work. A character 
played for 10 hours reaches the same number of check- 
points, whether the character went up against a dragon 
or spent all that time lurking in a pub. This approach en- 
sures that a player's preferred style is neither penalized 
nor rewarded. Whether someone focuses on roleplaying 
and social interaction, defeating monsters in combat, 
or finding clever ways to avoid battles, this system gives 
credit where credit is due. 


USING CHECKPOINTS 
The number of checkpoints needed to gain the next level 
depends on a character's level: 


+ At levels 1-4, reaching 4 checkpoints is sufficient to 
advance to the next level. 

+ At level 5 or higher, reaching 8 checkpoints is needed 
to advance to the next level. 


At the end of a play session, characters must level up 
if they have reached enough checkpoints to do so. The 
required number of checkpoints is expended, and any 
remaining checkpoints are applied toward the next op- 
portunity for advancement. 


INDIVIDUAL TREASURE 


In a shared campaign, each character receives a fixed 
number of gold pieces upon gaining a new level. (This 
gain represents the treasure a character might find in a 
standard adventure.) 

As an additional benefit, characters are not required 
to put out gold to maintain a lifestyle. Instead, each char- 


APPENDIX A | SHARED CAMPAIGNS 


—- А 


acter begins with a modest lifestyle, which improves as 
the character attains higher levels. 

These benefits are summarized on the Individual 
Treasure table. Ways for characters to spend their 
treasure are covered in the "Buying and Selling" sec- 
tion below. 


INDIVIDUAL TREASURE 


Level Gained Lifestyle Reward 
2-4 Modest 75 gp 
5-10 Comfortable 150 gp 
11-16 Wealthy 550 gp 
17-20 Aristocratic 5,500 gp 


Macic ITEMS 


Characters earn treasure points from adventures, then 
redeem those points in exchange for magic items. The 

list of available magic items is agreed to and compiled 

by the DMs running the campaign. 


GAINING TREASURE POINTS 
Each character earns treasure points based on an ad- 
venture's tier and its intended playing time: 


+ 1 treasure point is awarded for every 2 hours played in 
a tier 1 or tier 2 adventure. 

+ 1 treasure point is awarded for every 1 hour played in 
a tier 3 or tier 4 adventure. 


As with the variant rules for gaining levels, this award is 
based on the adventure's projected playing time, rather 
than the actual time a group spent at the table. 

If a character completes an adventure of a tier higher 
than that character's tier, the character receives 1 addi- 
tional treasure point for that adventure. 


CREATING AN ITEM List 

The DMs of the shared campaign should work together 
to compile a list of magic items that players can pur- 
chase. The magic item tables in chapter 2 of this book 
and in chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master's Guide are the 
obvious starting point. Choosing which items to allow 
or ban is a matter of personal preference, just as it is for 
the DM in a standard campaign. Involving all the DMs 
helps to ensure that the list meets everyone's expecta- 
tions. When in doubt, disallow an item; it's easier to add 
it to the available items at a later time than it would be to 
remove it from the game once it has been handed out. 

Naturally, the list of available items is longer for ad- 
ventures in the higher tiers, and the point cost of those 
higher-tier items likewise increases. The Magic Items by 
Tier table provides the details. 

For instance, treasure points from a tier 1 adventure 
can be spent on items from tables A, B, C, and F. Any 
item on the first three tables costs 4 points, and an item 
from table F costs 8 points. 


Macic ITEMS BY TIER 


Magic Нет Table ^ Available at Tiers Point Cost 
A 1-4 4 
B 1-4 4 
(© 1-4 4 
D 2-4 8 
E 3-4 8 
F 1-4 8 
G 2-4 10 
H 3-4 10 
l 3-4 12 


SPENDING TREASURE POINTS 

Players must spend treasure points at the end of a play 
session, immediately after determining whether their 
characters have gained a level. The order of these steps 
is important, since a character might enter a new tier 
because of the level gain. 

Players are entitled to choose any approved item from 
one of the magic item tables available in the current tier. 
Treasure points can be spread across multiple items. 

Many items cost more treasure points than a charac- 
ter can earn in a 2- or 4-hour adventure. To buy such an 
item, a character can make a deposit, spending treasure 
points on the item until it's paid off, at which time the 
character gains the item. 


BUYING AND SELLING 


Characters can use their monetary treasure to purchase 
anything from the equipment lists in chapter 5 of the 
Player's Handbook. In addition, the Adventurers League 
allows characters to purchase potions and spell scrolls, 
as detailed below. A spell scroll can be purchased 

only by a character who is capable of casting the spell 

in question. 


POTIONS FOR SALE 


Potion of... Cost Potion of ... Cost 
Healing 50 gp Water breathing 100 gp 
Climbing 75 gp Superior healing 500 gp 
Animal friendship 100 gp Supreme healing 5,000 gp 
Greater healing 100 gp Invisibility 5,000 gp 


SPELL ScROLLS FOR SALE 


Spell Level Cost Spell Level Cost 
Cantrip 25gp 3rd 300 gp 
Ist 75 gp 4th 500 gp 
2nd 150 gp Sth 1,000 gp 


SELLING ITEMS 

In a shared campaign, characters are not entitled to sell 
items they find on adventures or equipment they pur- 
chase with their personal funds. Weapons, armor, and 
other gear used by enemies are considered too damaged 
to have any monetary value. 


ИИНЕНИН! 


APPENDIX B: CHARACTER NAMES 


Some players and DMs have a knack for coming up with 
character names on the fly, while others find that task 
more of a challenge. The tables in this appendix are 
designed to make life easier for both kinds of people, 
whether you're naming a player character, a nonplayer 
character, a monster, or even a place. 

Each table contains names that are associated with 
a nonhuman character race in the Player's Handbook 
or a real-world ethnic or language group, with a focus 
on groups from antiquity and the Middle Ages. You can 


NONHUMAN NAMES 


DRAGONBORN, DRAGONBORN, 
FEMALE FEMALE 

di00 Name di00 Name 
01-02 Akra 69—70 Pogranix 
03-04 Aasathra 71-72 Pyxrin 
05-06 Antrara 73-74 Quespa 
07-08 Arava 75-76 Raiann 
09-10 Biri 77-78 Rezena 
11-12 Blendaeth 79-80 Ruloth 
13-14 Burana 81-82 Saphara 
15-16 Chassath 83-84 Savaran 
17-18 Daar 85-86 Sora 
19-20 Dentratha 87-88 Surina 
21-22 Doudra 89-90 Synthrin 
23-24 Driindar 91-92 Tatyan 
25-26 Ерргеп 93-94 Thava 
27-28 Farideh 95-96 Uadjit 
29-30 Findex 97-98 Vezera 
31-32 Furrele 99-00 Zykroff 
33-34 Gesrethe 

35-36 Gilkass DRAGONBORN, MALE 
37-38 Нагапп d100 Name 
39-40 Havilar 01-02 Аагех 
41-42 Hethress 03-04 Arjhan 
43-44 Hillanot 05-06 Azzakh 
45-46 Jaxi 07-08 Balasar 
47-48 Jezean 09-10 Baradad 
49-50 Јһегі 11-12 Bharash 
51-52 Кайайа 13-14  Bidreked 
Se) 1 15-16 Dadalan 
55-56 Korinn 17-18  Dazzazn 
357-58 Megren 19-20 Direcris 
59-60 Mijira 21-22 Donaar 
01562 Пала 23-24 Fax 
63-64 Nala 25—26 Gargax 
65-66 Nuthra 27-28. Ghesh 
67-68 Perra 29-30 Gorbundus 


select from the possibilities here, or use dice to deter- 
mine a name. 

Even though names are associated with races in this 
appendix, a character might not have a name from their 
own race. For instance, a half-orc might have grown up 
among dwarves and have a dwarven name. Or, as DM, 
you might decide that dragonborn in your campaign 
have a culture reminiscent of ancient Rome and there- 
fore use Roman names, rather than the dragonborn 
names suggested here. 


DRAGONBORN, MALE DRAGONBORN, CLAN 


d100 Name 4100 Name 
31-32 Greethen 01-02 Akambherylliax 
33-34 Heskan 03-04 Argenthrixus 
35-36 Hirrathak 05-06 Baharoosh 
37-38 |ldrex 07-08 Beryntolthropal 
39-40 Kaladan 09-10 Bhenkumbyrznaax 
41-42 Kerkad 11—12 Caavylteradyn 
43-44 Kiirith 13-14 Chumbyxirinnish 
45-46 Kriv 15-16 Clethtinthiallor 
47-48 Maagog 17-18 Daardendrian 
49-50 Medrash 19-20 Delmirev 
51-52 Mehen 21-22 Dhyrktelonis 
53-54 Mozikth 23-24 Ebynichtomonis 
55-56 Mreksh 25-26 Esstyrlynn 
57-58 Mugrunden 27-28 Fharngnarthnost 
59-60 Nadarr 29-30 Ghaallixirn 
61-62 Nithther 31-32 Grrrmmballhyst 
63-64 Norkruuth 33-34 Gygazzylyshrift 
65-66 Nykkan 35-36 Hashphronyxadyn 
67-68 Pandjed 37-38 Hshhsstoroth 
69—70 Patrin 39-40 Imbixtellrhyst 
71-72 Pijjirik 41-42 Јегупотопіѕ 
73-74 Quarethon 43-44 Jjharthraxyn 
75-76 Rathkran 45-46 Kerrhylon 
77-78 Rhogar 47-48 Kimbatuul 
79-80 Rivaan 49-50 Lhamboldennish 
81-82 Sethrekar 51-52 Linxakasendalor 
83-84 Shamash 53-54 Mohradyllion 
85-86 Shedinn 55-56 Mystan 
87-88 Srorthen 57-58 Nemmonis 
89-90 Tarhun 59-60 Norixius 
91-92 Torinn 61-62 Ophinshtalajiir 
93-94 Trynnicus 63-64 Orexijandilin 
95-96 Valorean 65-66 Pfaphnyrennish 
97-98 Vrondiss 67-68 Phrahdrandon 
99-00 Zedaar 69-70 Pyraxtallinost 
71-72 Qyxpahrgh 


APPENDIX B | CHARACTER NAMES 


ЎА 


DRAGONBORN, CLAN 
di00 Name 
73—74 Raghthroknaar 
75-76 Shestendeliath 
77-78 Skaarzborroosh 
79-80 Sumnarghthrysh 
81-82 Tiammanthyllish 
83-84 Turnuroth 
85-86 Umbyrphrael 
87-88 Vangdondalor 
89-90 Verthisathurgiesh 
91-92 Wivvyrholdalphiax 
93-94 Wystongjiir 
95-96 Xephyrbahnor 
97-98 Yarjerit 
99-00 Zzzxaaxthroth 


Dwarr, FEMALE 
di00 Name 
01-02 Anbera 
03-04 Artin 
05-06 Audhild 
07-08 Balifra 
09-10 Barbena 
11-12 Bardryn 
13-14 Bolhild 
15-16 Dagnal 
17-18 Dariff 
19-20 Delre 
21-22 Diesa 
23-24 Eldeth 
25-26 Eridred 
27-28 Falkrunn 
29-30 Fallthra 
31-32 Finellen 
33-34 Gillydd 
35-36 Gunnloda 
37-38 Gurdis 
39-40 Helgret 
41-42 Helja 
43-44 Hlin 
45-46 |lde 
47-48 Јагапа 
49-50 Kathra 
51-52 Kilia 
53-54 Kristryd 
55-56 Liftrasa 
57-58 Marastyr 
59-60 Mardred 
61-62 Могапа 
63-64 Nalaed 
65-66 Nora 
67-68 Nurkara 


APPENDIX B | CHARACTER NAMES 


Dwarr, FEMALE 
di00 Name 
69-70 Oriff 
71-72 Ovina 
73-74 Riswynn 
75-76 Sannl 
77-78 Therlin 
79-80 Thodris 
81-82 Torbera 
83-84 Tordrid 
85-86 Torgga 
87-88 Urshar 
89-90 Valida 
91-92 Vistra 
93-94 Vonana 
95-96 Werydd 
97-98 Whurdred 
99-00 Yurgunn 


Dwarr, MALE 
d100 Name 
01-02 Adrik 
03-04 Alberich 
05-06 Baern 
07-08 Barendd 
09—10 Beloril 
11-12 Brottor 
13-14 Dain 
15-16 Dalgal 
17-18 Darrak 
19-20 Delg 
21-22 Duergath 
23-24 Dworic 
25-26 Eberk 
27-28 Einkil 
29-30 Elaim 
31-32 Erias 
33-34 Fallond 
35-36 Fargrim 
37-38 Gardain 
39-40 Gilthur 
41-42 Gimgen 
43-44 Gimurt 
45-46 Harbek 
47-48 Kildrak 
49—50 Kilvar 
51-52 Morgran 
53-54 Morkral 
55-56 Nalral 
57-58 Могаак 
59-60 Nuraval 
61-62 Oloric 
63-64 Olunt 


Dwarr, MALE 
di00 Name 
65-66 Огѕік 
67-68 Oskar 
69—70 Rangrim 
71-72 Reirak 
73-74 Rurik 
75-76 Taklinn 
77-78 Thoradin 
79-80 Thorin 
81-82 Thradal 
83-84 Tordek 
85-86 Traubon 
87-88 Travok 
89-90 Ulfgar 
91-92 Uraim 
93-94 Veit 
95-96 Vonbin 
97-98 Vondal 
99-00 Whurbin 


DwaRF, CLAN 
9100 Мате 

01-02 Агапоге 
03-04 Balderk 
05-06 Battlehammer 
07-08 Bigtoe 

09-10 Bloodkith 
11-12 Bofdann 
13-14 Brawnanvil 
15-16 Brazzik 
17-18 Broodfist 
19-20 Burrowfound 
21-22 Caebrek 
23-24 Daerdahk 
25-26 Dankil 

27-28 Daraln 

29-30 Deepdelver 
31-32 Durthane 
33-34 Eversharp 
35-36 Fallack 

37-38 Fireforge 
39-40 Foamtankard 
41-42 Frostbeard 
43-44 Glanhig 
45-46 Goblinbane 
47-48 Goldfinder 
49-50 Gorunn 
51-52 Graybeard 
53-54  Hammerstone 
55-56 Helcral 
57-58 Holderhek 
59-60 Ironfist 


DwaRF, CLAN 
di00 Name 
61—62 Loderr 
63-64 Lutgehr 
65-66 Morigak 
67-68 Orcfoe 
69—70 Rakankrak 
71-72 Ruby-Eye 
73-74 Rumnaheim 
75-76 Silveraxe 
77-78 Silverstone 
79-80 Steelfist 
81-82 Stoutale 
83-84 Strakeln 
85-86 Strongheart 
87-88 Thrahak 
89-90 Torevir 
91-92 Torunn 
93-94 Trollbleeder 
95-96 Trueanvil 
97-98 Trueblood 
99-00 Ungart 


ELF, CHILD 
di00 Name 
01-02 Ael 
03-04 Ang 
05-06 Ara 
07-08 Ari 
09-10 Arn 
11-12 Аут 
13-14 Broe 
15-16 Bryn 
17-18 Cael 
19-20 Cy 
21-22 Dae 
23-24 Del 
25-26 Eli 
27-28 Eryn 
29-30 Faen 
31-32 Fera 
33-34 Gael 
35-36 Gar 
37-38 Innil 
39-40 Jar 
41-42 Kan 
43-44 Koeth 
45—46 Lael 
47-48 Lue 
49-50 Mai 
51-52 Mara 
53—54 Mella 
55-56 Mya 


"my" 


ELF, CHILD 


алоо 
57-58 Маегіѕ 
59-60 Naill 
61-62 Nim 
63-64 Phann 
65-66 Py 
67-68 Rael 
69—70 Raer 
71-72 Ren 
73-74 Rinn 
75-76 Rua 
77-78 Sael 
79-80 Sai 
81-82 Sumi 
83-84 Syllin 
85-86 Ta 
87-88 Thia 
89-90 Tia 
91-92 Traki 
93-94 Vall 
95-96 Von 
97-98 Wil 
99-00 Za 


Name 


ELF, FEMALE ADULT 
d100 Name 

01-02 Adrie 

03-04 Ahinar 

05-06 Althaea 

07-08 
09-10 
11-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-18 Веїһгуппа 
19-20 Birel 


Anastrianna 
Andraste 
Antinua 
Arara 
Baelitae 


ELF, FEMALE ADULT 


d100 
21-22 


Name 
Caelynn 
23-24 Chaedi 
25-26 Claira 
27-28 Dara 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 Enna 
35-36 Faral 
37-38 
39—40 
41-42 
43—44 
45—46 
47-48 Jarsali 
49-50 Jelenneth 
51-52 Keyleth 
53-54 Leshanna 
55-56 Lia 
57-58 Maiathah 
59-60 Malquis 
61-62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 
69-70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 Sumnes 
85-86 Theirastra 
87-88 Thiala 
89-90 Tiaathque 
91-92 


Drusilia 
Elama 


Felosial 
Hatae 
lelenia 
Папіѕ 


lrann 


Meriele 
Mialee 
Myathethil 
Naivara 
Quelenna 
Quillathe 
Ridaro 
Sariel 
Shanairla 
Shava 
Silaqui 


Traulam 


ELF, FEMALE ADULT 


d100 
93-94 


Name 
Vadania 
95-96 Valanthe 
97-98 Valna 
99-00 Xanaphia 


ELF, MALE ADULT 
9100 Мате 
01-02 Adran 
03-04 Aelar 

05-06 Aerdeth 
07-08 Ahvain 
09-10 Aramil 
11-12 Arannis 
13-14 Aust 

15-16 Azaki 

17-18 Beiro 

19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 Erdan 
37-38 Erevan 
39-40 Fivin 
41-42 
43—44 
45—46 
47—48 
49-50 
51-52 
53—54 
55—56 


Berrian 
Caeldrim 
Carric 
Dayereth 
Dreali 
Efferil 
Eiravel 
Enialis 


Galinndan 
Gennal 
Hadarai 
Halimath 
Heian 
Himo 
Immeral 


Ivellios 


РАІ 
YA 
APPENDIX B | CHARACTER NAMES A 


Р a < > 
— —— oos Eu Ea uta 


ELF, MALE ADULT 
d100 
57-58 
59-60 
61—62 
63-64 Lucan 

65-66 Mindartis 
67-68 Маа! 

69—70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77—78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 Suhnae 
85-86 Thamior 
87-88 Tharivol 
89-90 Theren 
91-92 Theriatis 
93-94 Thervan 
95-96 Uthemar 
97-98 Vanuath 
99-00 Varis 


Name 
Korfel 
Lamlis 
Laucian 


Nutae 
Paelias 
Peren 
Quarion 
Riardon 
Rolen 
Soveliss 


ELF, FAMILY 


d100 Name 

01-02 Aloro 

03-04 Amakiir 

05-06 Amastacia 
07-08 
09-10 
11—12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-18 
19-20 


Ariessus 

Arnuanna 
Berevan 

Caerdonel 
Caphaxath 
Casilltenirra 2 
Cithreth 


А 
AD 
| 


ЄС Гб 


ELF, FAMILY 


d100 
| 21-22 
| 23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
| 35-36 
| 37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49—50 
51—52 
53—54 
55—56 
57—58 
59—60 
61—62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 
69-70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77278 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 


N 97-98 
| 99-00 


Name 
Dalanthan 
Eathalena 
Erenaeth 
Ethanasath 
Fasharash 
Firahel 
Floshem 
Galanodel 
Goltorah 
Hanali 
Holimion 
Horineth 
lathrana 
IIphelkiir 
lranapha 
Koehlanna 
Lathalas 
Liadon 
Meliamne 
Mellerelel 
Mystralath 
Nailo 
Netyoive 
Ofandrus 
Ostoroth 
Othronus 
Qualanthri 
Raethran 
Rothenel 
Selevarun 
Siannodel 
Suithrasas 
Sylvaranth 
Teinithra 
Tiltathana 
Wasanthi 
Withrethin 
Xiloscient 
Xistsrith 
Yaeldrin 


GNOME, FEMALE 


d100 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
1-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-38 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49-50 
51-52 
53-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 
69-70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Abalaba 
Bimpnottin 
Breena 
Buvvie 
Callybon 
Caramip 
Carlin 
Cumpen 
Dalaba 
Donella 
Duvamil 
Ella 
Ellyjoybell 
Ellywick 
Enidda 

Lilli 
Loopmottin 
Lorilla 
Luthra 
Mardnab 
Meena 
Menny 
Mumpena 
Nissa 
Numba 
Nyx 

Oda 
Oppah 
Orla 
Panana 
Pyntle 
Quilla 
Ranala 
Reddlepop 
Roywyn 
Salanop 
Shamil 
Siffress 
Symma 
Tana 
Tenena 
Tervaround 
Tippletoe 
Ulla 
Unvera 
Veloptima 
Virra 
Waywocket 
Yebe 
Zanna 


GNOME, MALE 


d100 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
11-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49-50 
51-52 
53-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 
69-70 
7-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Alston 
Alvyn 
Anverth 
Arumawann 
Bilbron 
Boddynock 
Brocc 
Burgell 
Cockaby 
Crampernap 
Dabbledob 
Delebean 
Dimble 
Eberdeb 
Eldon 
Erky 
Fablen 
Fibblestib 
Fonkin 
Frouse 
Frug 
Gerbo 
Gimble 
Glim 
Igden 
Jabble 
Jebeddo 
Kellen 
Kipper 
Namfoodle 
Oppleby 
Orryn 
Paggen 
Pallabar 
Pog 
Qualen 
Ribbles 
Rimple 
Roondar 
Sapply 
Seebo 
Senteq 
Sindri 
Umpen 
Warryn 
Wiggens 
Wobbles 
Wrenn 
Zaffrab 
Zook 


GNOME, CLAN 


d100 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
11-12 
13—14 
15-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49-50 
51-52 
53-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 
69-70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
31-82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Albaratie 
Bafflestone 
Beren 
Boondiggles 
Cobblelob 
Daergel 
Dunben 
Fabblestabble 
Fapplestamp 
Fiddlefen 
Folkor 
Garrick 
Gimlen 
Glittergem 
Gobblefirn 
Gummen 
Horcusporcus 
Humplebumple 
Ironhide 
Leffery 
Lingenhall 
Loofollue 
Maekkelferce 
Miggledy 
Munggen 
Murnig 
Musgraben 
Nackle 
Ningel 
Nopenstallen 
Nucklestamp 
Offund 
Oomtrowl 
Pilwicken 
Pingun 
Quillsharpener 
Raulnor 
Reese 
Rofferton 
Scheppen 
Shadowcloak 
Silverthread 
Sympony 
Tarkelby 
Timbers 
Turen 
Umbodoben 
Waggletop 
Welber 
Wildwander 


HALFLING, FEMALE HALFLING, MALE HALFLING, FAMILY HaLr-ORc, FEMALE 


di00 Name 9100 Мате 9100 Мате 9100 Мате 
01-02 Alain 01-02 Alton 01-02 Appleblossom 01-02 Arha 
03-04 Andry 03-04 Ander 03-04 Bigheart 03-04 Baggi 
05-06 Anne 05-06 Bernie 05-06 Brightmoon 05-06 Bendoo 
07-08 Bella 07-08 Bobbin 07-08 Brushgather 07-08 Bilga | 
09-10 Blossom 09-10 Cade 09-10 Cherrycheeks 09—10 Brakka 
11-12 Bree 11-12 Callus 11-12 Copperkettle 11-12 Creega 
13-14 Callie 13-14 Corrin 13-14 Deephollow 13-14 Drenna | 
15-16 Chenna 15-16 Dannad 15-16 Elderberry 15-16 Ekk 
17-18 Cora 17-18 Danniel 17-18 Fastfoot 17-18 Emen 
19-20 Dee 19-20 Eddie 19-20 Fatrabbit 19-20 Engong 
21-22 Dell 21-22 Ера 21-22 Glenfellow 21-22 Fistula 
23-24 Eida 23-24 Eldon 23-24 Goldfound 23-24 Саакі 
25-26 Eran 25-26 Errich 25-26 Goodbarrel 25-26 Gorga 
27-28 Euphemia 27-28 Fildo 27-28 Goodearth 27-28 Grai 
29-30 Georgina 29-30 Finnan 29-30 Greenbottle 29-30 Greeba 
31-32 Суппіе 31-32 Franklin 31-32 Greenleaf 31-32 Grigi 
33-34 Harriet 33-34 Garret 33-34 High-hill 33-34 Gynk 
35-36 Jasmine 35-36 Garth 35-36 Hilltopple 35-36 Hrathy 
37-38 jillian 37-38 Gilbert 37-38 Hogcollar 37-38 Huru 
39-40 Jo 39-40 Gob 39-40 Honeypot 39-40 Ilga 
41-42 Kithri 41-42 Harol 41-42 Јатјаг 41-42 Kabbarg 
43-44 Lavinia 43-44 Igor 43-44 Kettlewhistle 43-44 Kansif 
45-46 Lidda 45-46 Jasper 45-46 Leagallow 45-46 Lagazi 
47-48 Maegan 47-48 Keith 47-48 Littlefoot 47-48 Lezre 
49-50 Marigold 49-50 Kevin 49-50 Nimblefingers 49-50 Murgen 
51-52 Merla 51-52 Lazam 51-52 Porridgepot 51-52 Murook 
53-54 Мугіа 53-54 Lerry 53-54 Quickstep 53-54 Myev 
55-56 Меада 55-56 Lindal 55-56 Reedfellow 55-56 Nagrette 
57-58 Nikki 57-58 Lyle 57-58 Shadowquick 57-58 Neega 
59-60 Nora 59-60 Merric 59-60 Silvereyes 59-60 Nella 
61-62 Olivia 61-62 Mican 61-62 Smoothhands 61-62 Nogu 
63-64 Paela 63-64 Milo 63-64 Stonebridge 63-64 Oolah 
65-66 Pearl 65-66 Morrin 65-66 Stoutbridge 65-66 Ootah 
67-68 Pennie 67-68 Nebin 67-68 Stoutman 67-68 Ovak 
69-70 Philomena 69-70 Nevil 69-70 Strongbones 69-70 Ownka 
71-72 Portia 71-72 Osborn 71-72 Sunmeadow 71-72 Puyet 
73-74 Robbie 73-74 Ostran 73-74 Swiftwhistle 73-74 Reeza 
75-76 Rose 75-76 Oswalt 75-76 Tallfellow 75-76 Shautha 
77-78 Saral 77-78 Perrin 77-78 Tealeaf 77-78 Silgre 
79-80 Seraphina 79-80 Poppy 79-80 Tenpenny 79-80 Sutha 
81-82 Shaena 81-82 Reed 81-82 Thistletop 81-82 Tagga 
83-84 Stacee 83-84 Roscoe 83-84 Thorngage 83-84 Tawar 
85-86 Tawna 85-86 Sam 85-86 Tosscobble 85-86 Tomph 
| 87-88 Thea 87-88 Shardon 87-88 Underbough 87-88 Ubada 
89-90 Trym 89-90 Tye 89-90 Underfoot 89-90 Vanchu 
91-92 Tyna 91-92 Ulmo 91-92 Warmwater 91-92 Vola 
93-94 Vani 93-94 Wellby 93-94 Whispermouse 93-94 Volen 
95-96 Verna 95-96 Wendel 95-96 Wildcloak 95-96 Vorka 
97-98 Wella 97-98 Wenner 97-98 Wildheart 97-98 Yevelda WA 
99-00 Willow 99-00 Wes 99-00 Wiseacre 99-00 Zagga f j 
A 


APPENDIX B | CHARACTER КЛ | 


> 


Hatr-Orc, MALE TIEFLING, FEMALE TIEFLING, MALE TIEFLING, VIRTUE , 

| d100 Name 9100 Мате 4100 Мате 9100 Мате 

| 01-02 Argran 01-02 Akta 01-02 Abad 01-02 Ambition 

| 03-04 Вгаак 03-04 Апакіѕ 03-04 Ahrim 03-04 Art 

| 05-06 Brug 05-06 Armara 05-06 Akmen 05-06 Carrion 
07-08 Cagak 07-08 Astaro 07-08 Amnon 07-08 Chant 
09-10 Dench 09-10 Aym 09-10 Andram 09-10 Creed 
11-12 Dorn 11-12 Azza 11-12 Astar 11-12 Death 
13-14 Dren 13-14 Beleth 13-14 Balam 13-14 Debauchery 
15-16 Druuk 15-16 Bryseis 15-16 Barakas 15-16 Despair 
17-18 Feng 17-18 Bune 17-18  Bathin 17-18 Doom 

| 19-20 Gell 19-20 Criella 19-20 Caim 19-20 Doubt 
21-22 Gnarsh 21-22 Damaia 21-22 Chem 21-22 Dread 
23-24 Grumbar 23-24 Decarabia 23-24 Cimer 23-24 Ecstasy 
25-26 Gubrash 25-26 Ea 25-26 Cressel 25-26 Ennui 
27-28 Наргеп 27-28 Gadreel 27-28 Damakos 27-28 Entropy 
29-30 Henk 29-30 Gomory 29-30 Ekemon 29-30 Excellence 
31-32 Hogar 31-32 Hecat 31-32 Euron 31-32 Fear 
33-34 Holg 33-34 Ishte 33-34 Fenriz 33-34 Glory 

| 35-36 |msh 35-36 Jezebeth 35-36 Forcas 35-36 Gluttony 

| 37-38 Karash 37-38 Kali 37-38 Habor 37-38 Grief 
39-40 Karg 39-40 Kallista 39-40 lados 39-40 Hate 
41-42 Keth 41-42 Kasdeya 41-42 Kairon 41-42 Hope 

| 43-44 Korag 43-44 Lerissa 43-44 Leucis 43-44 Horror 

| 45-46 Krusk 45-46 Lilith 45-46 Mamnen 45-46 Ideal 

| 47-48 Lubash 47-48 Макагіа 47-48 Mantus 47-48 Ignominy 
49-50 Megged 49-50 Manea 49-50 Marbas 49-50 Laughter 
51-52 Mhurren 51-52 Markosian 51-52 Melech 51-52 Love 
53-54 Mord 53-54 Mastema 53-54 Merihim 53-54 Lust 
55-56 Morg 55-56 Naamah 55-56 Modean 55-56 Mayhem 
57-58 Nil 57-58 Nemeia 57-58 Mordai 57-58 Mockery 
59-60 Nybarg 59-60 Nija 59-60 Mormo 59-60 Murder 
61-62 Odorr 61-62 Orianna 61-62 Morthos 61-62 Muse 

| 63-64 Оһг 63-64 Osah 63-64 Nicor 63-64 Music 

| 65-66 Rendar 65-66 Phelaia 65-66 Nirgel 65-66 Mystery 

| 67-68 Resh 67-68 Prosperine 67-68 Oriax 67-68 Nowhere 
69-70 Ront 69-70 Purah 69-70 Paymon 69-70 Open 
71-72 Rrath 71-72 Pyra 71-72 Pelaios 71-72 Pain 
73-74 Sark 73—74 Rieta 73—74 Purson 73-74 Passion 
75-76 Scrag 75-76 Ronobe 75-76 Qemuel 75-76 Poetry 
77-18 Sheggen 77-78 Ronwe 77-78 Каат 77-78 Quest 

| 79-80 $һитр 79-80 Seddit 79-80 Rimmon 79-80 Random 

@ 81-82 Tanglar 81-82 Seere 81-82 Sammal 81-82 Reverence 
83-84 Tarak 83-84 Sekhmet 83-84 Skamos 83-84 Revulsion 
85-86 Thar 85-86 Semyaza 85-86 Tethren 85-86 Sorrow 
87-88 Thokk 87-88 Shava 87-88 Thamuz 87-88 Temerity 
89-90 Trag 89-90 Shax 89-90 Therai 89-90 Torment 
91-92 Ugarth 91-92 Sorath 91-92 Valafar 91-92 Tragedy 
93-94 Varg 93-94 Uzza 93-94 Vassago 93-94 Vice 
95-96 Vilberg 95-96 Vapula 95-96 Xappan 95-96 Virtue 

N 97-98 Yurk 97-98 Vepar 97-98 Zepar 97-98 Weary 
eo 99-00 Zed 99-00 Verin 99-00 Zephan 99-00 Wit 


APPENDIX B | CHARACTER NAMES 1 


HUMAN NAMES 


ARABIC, FEMALE ARABIC, MALE 
di00 Name di00 Name 
01-02 Aaliyah 01-02 Abbad 
03-04 Aida 03-04 Abdul 
05-06 Akilah 05-06 Achmed 
07-08 Alia 07-08 Akeem 
09-10 Amina 09-10 Alif 
11-12 Atefeh 11-12 Amir 
13-14 Chaima 13-14 Asim 
15-16 Dalia 15-16 Bashir 
17-18 Ehsan 17-18 Bassam 
19-20 Elham 19-20 Fahim 
21-22 Farah 21-22 Farid 
23-24 Fatemah 23-24 Farouk 
25-26 Gamila 25-26 Fayez 
27-28 lesha 27-28 Fayyaad 
29-30 Inbar 29-30 Fazil 
31-32 Kamaria 31-32 Hakim 
33-34 Khadija 33-34 Halil 
35-36 Layla 35-36 Hamid 
37-38 Lupe 37-38 Hazim 
39-40 Nabila 39-40 Heydar 
41-42 Nadine 41-42 Hussein 
43-44 Naima 43-44 Jabari 
45-46 Najila 45—46 Jafar 
47-48 Najwa 47-48 Јаһіа 
49-50 Мака 49-50 Jamal 
51-52 Nashwa 51-52 Кайт 
53-54 Nawra 53-54 Karim 
55-56 Nuha 55-56 Kazim 
57-58 Мига 57-58 Khadim 
59-60 Oma 59-60 Khalid 
61-62 Qadira 61-62 Mahmud 
63-64 Qamar 63-64 Mansour 
65-66 Qistina 65-66 Musharraf 
67-68 Rahima 67-68 Mustafa 
69-70 Rihanna 69-70 Nadir 
71-72 Saadia 71-72 Nazim 
73-74 Sabah 73-74 Omar 
75-76 Sada 75-76 Qadir 
77-78 Saffron 77—78 Qusay 
79-80 Sahar 79-80 Rafiq 
81-82 Salma 81-82 Rakim 
83-84 Shatha 83-84 Rashad 
85-86 Tahira 85-86 Rauf 
87-88 Takisha 87-88 Saladin 
89-90 Thana 89-90 Sami 
91-92 Yadira 91-92 Samir 
93-94 Zahra 93-94 Talib 
95-96 Zaida 95-96 Tamir 
97-98 Zaina 97-98 Tariq 


99-00 Zeinab 99-00 Yazid 


CELTIC, FEMALE 


d100 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
11-12 
13—14 
15—16 
17—18 
19—20 
21—22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39—40 
41—42 
43-44 
45—46 
47-48 
49—50 
51-52 
53-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 
69-70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-92 
93—94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Aife 
Aina 
Alane 
Ardena 
Arienh 
Beatha 
Birgit 
Briann 
Caomh 
Cara 
Cinnia 
Cordelia 
Deheune 
Divone 
Donia 
Doreena 
Elsha 
Enid 
Ethne 
Evelina 
Fianna 
Genevieve 
Gilda 
Gitta 
Grania 
Gwyndolin 
Idelisa 
Isolde 
Keelin 
Kennocha 
Lavena 
Lesley 
Linnette 
Lyonesse 
Mabina 
Marvina 
Mavis 
Mirna 
Morgan 
Muriel 
Nareena 
Oriana 
Regan 
Ronat 
Rowena 
Selma 
Ula 
Venetia 
Wynne 
Yseult 


CELTIC, MALE 


d100 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
11-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49-50 
51-52 
53-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 
69-70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


APPENDIX B | CHARACTER NAMES 


Name 
Airell 
Airic 
Alan 
Anghus 
Aodh 
Bardon 
Bearacb 
Bevyn 
Boden 
Bran 
Brasil 
Bredon 
Brian 
Bricriu 
Bryant 
Cadman 
Caradoc 
Cedric 
Conalt 
Conchobar 
Condon 
Darcy 
Devin 
Dillion 
Donaghy 
Donall 
Duer 
Eghan 
Ewyn 
Ferghus 
Galvyn 
Gildas 
Guy 
Harvey 
Iden 
Irven 
Karney 
Kayne 
Kelvyn 
Kunsgnos 
Leigh 
Maccus 
Moryn 
Neale 
Owyn 
Pryderi 
Reaghan 
Taliesin 
Tiernay 
Turi 


CHINESE, FEMALE 


d100 
01—02 
03-04 
05—06 
07-08 
09—10 
11-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49—50 
51—52 
53—54 
55—56 
57—58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65—66 
67-68 
69-70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85—86 
87—88 
89—90 
91—92 
93—94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Ai 
Anming 
Baozhai 
Bei 
Caixia 
Changchang 
Chen 
Chou 
Chunhua 
Daianna 
Daiyu 
Die 
Ehuang 
Fenfang 
Ge 
Hong 
Huan 
Huifang 
Jia 

Jiao 
Jiaying 
Jingfei 
Jinjing 
Lan 

L 

Lihua 
Lin 
Ling 
Liu 
Meili 
Ning 
Qi 
Qiao 
Rong 
Shu 
Shuang 
Song 
Ting 
Wen 
Xia 
Xiaodan 
Xiaoli 
Xingjuan 
Xue 

Ya 

Yan 
Ying 
Yuan 
Yue 
Yun 


CHiNESE, MALE 


d100 
01—02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09—10 
11-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49—50 
51-52 
53—54 
55—56 
57—58 
59—60 
61—62 
63-64 
65—66 
67-68 
69-70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85—86 
87—88 
89—90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Bingwen 
Bo 
Bolin 
Chang 
Chao 
Chen 
Cheng 
Da 
Dingxiang 
Fang 
Feng 
Fu 
Gang 
Guang 
Hai 
Heng 
Hong 
Huan 
Huang 
Huiliang 
Huizhong 
Jian 
Jiayi 
Junjie 
Kang 
Lei 
Liang 
Ling 
Liwei 
Meilin 
Niu 
Peizhi 
Peng 
Ping 
Qiang 
Qiu 
Quan 
Renshu 
Rong 
Ru 
Shan 
Shen 
Tengfei 
Wei 
Xiaobo 
Xiaoli 
Xin 
Yang 
Ying 
Zhong 


EGYPTIAN, FEMALE 
d100 Name 
01-02 Mat 

03-04 Ahset 
05-06 Amunet 
07-08 Aneksi 
09—10 Atet 

11-12 Baketamon 
13—14 Betrest 
15-16 Bunefer 
17-18  Dedyet 
19-20 Hatshepsut 
21-22 Hentie 
23-24 Herit 
25-26 Hetepheres 
27-28 |ntakaes 
29-30 |pwet 
31-32 Itet 

33-34 Joba 
35-36 Kasmut 
37-38 Kemanub 
39-40 Khemut 
41-42 Kiya 

43-44 Maia 
45-46 Menhet 
47-48 Merit 
49-50 Meritamen 
51-52 Merneith 
53-54 Merseger 
55-56 Muyet 
57-58 Nebet 
59-60 Nebetah 
61-62 Nedjemmut 
63-64 Nefertiti 
67-68 Neithotep 


EGYPTIAN, FEMALE 


9100 Мате 
69-70 Nit 
71-72 Nofret 
73-74 Nubemiunu 
75-76 Peseshet 
77—78 Pypuy 
79-80 Qalhata 
81-82 Rai 
83-84 Redji 
85-86 Sadeh 
87-88 Sadek 
89-90 Sitamun 
91-92 Sitre 
93-94 Takhat 
95-96 Tarset 
97-98 Taweret 
99-00 Werenro 


EGYPTIAN, MALE 
di00 Name 
01-02 Ahmose 
03-04 Akhom 
05-06 Amasis 
07-08 Amenemhet 
09-10 Anen 
11-12 Banefre 
13-14 Bek 

15-16 Djedefre 
17-18 Djoser 
19-20 Hekaib 
21-22 Henenu 
23-24 Horemheb 
25-26 Horwedja 
27-28 Huya 
29-30 “bebi 
31-32 Idu 


EGYPTIAN, MALE 
d100 Name 
33-34 Imhotep 
35-36 Ineni 
37-38 Ірикі 
39-40 Irsu 
41-42 Kagemni 
43-44 Kawab 
45-46 Kenamon 
47-48 Kewap 
49-50 Khaemwaset 
51-52 Khafra 
53-54 Khusebek 
55-56 Masaharta 
57-58 Meketre 
59-60 Menkhaf 
61-62 Merenre 
63-64 Metjen 
65-66 Nebamun 
67-68 Nebetka 
69-70 Nehi 
71-72 Nekure 
73-74 Nessumontu 
75-76 Pakhom 
77-78 Рамаһ 
79-80 Pawero 
81-82 Ramose 
83-84 Rudjek 
85-86 Sabaf 
87-88 Sebek-khu 
89-90 Sebni 
91-92 Senusret 
93-94 Shabaka 
95-96 Somintu 
97-98 Thaneni 
99-00 Thethi 


APPENDIX B | CHARACTER NAMES: 


ENGLISH, FEMALE 
di00 Name 
01-02 Adelaide 
03-04 Agatha 
05-06 Agnes 
07-08 Alice 
09-10 Aline 
11-12 Anne 
13-14 Avelina 
15-16 Avice 
17-18 Beatrice 
19-20 Cecily 
21-22 Egelina 
23-24 Eleanor 
25-26 Elizabeth 
27-28 Ella 
29-30 Eloise 
31-32 Elysande 
33-34 Emeny 
35-36 Emma 
37-38 Emmeline 
39-40 Ermina 
41-42 Eva 
43-44 Galiena 
45-46 Geva 
47-48 Giselle 
49-50 Griselda 
51-52 Hadwisa 
53-54 Helen 
55-56 Herleva 
57-58 Hugolina 
59-60 Ida 
61—62 Isabella 
63-64 Jacoba 
65-66 Jane 
67-68 Joan 


APPENDIX B | CHARACTER NAMES 


ENGLISH, FEMALE 
d100 Name 
69-70 Juliana 
71-72 Katherine 
73-74 Margery 
75-76 Mary 
77-78 Matilda 
79-80 Maynild 
81-82 Millicent 
83-84 Oriel 
85-86 Rohesia 
87-88 Rosalind 
89-90 Rosamund 
91-92 Sarah 
93-94 Susannah 
95-96 Sybil 
97-98 Williamina 
99-00 Yvonne 


ENGLISH, MALE 
d100 Name 
01-02 Adam 
03-04 Adelard 
05-06 Aldous 
07-08 Anselm 
09-10 Arnold 
11-12 Bernard 
13-14 Bertram 
15-16 Charles 
17-18 Clerebold 
19-20 Conrad 
21-22 Diggory 
23-24 Drogo 
25-26 Everard 
27-28 Frederick 
29-30 Geoffrey 
31-32 Gerald 


ENGLISH, MALE 


d100 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49-50 
51-52 
53-54 
55—56 
57—58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65—66 
67-68 
69—70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77—78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-92 
93—94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Gilbert 
Godfrey 
Gunter 
Guy 
Henry 
Heward 
Hubert 
Hugh 
Jocelyn 
John 
Lance 
Manfred 
Miles 
Nicholas 
Norman 
Odo 
Percival 
Peter 
Ralf 
Randal 
Raymond 
Reynard 
Richard 
Robert 
Roger 
Roland 
Rolf 
Simon 
Theobald 
Theodoric 
Thomas 
Timm 
William 
Wymar 


FRENCH, FEMALE FRENCH, MALE GERMAN, FEMALE GERMAN, MALE 


9100 Мате 9100 Мате 9100 Мате 9100 Мате 
01-02 Aalis 01-02 Ambroys 01-02 Adelhayt 01-02 Albrecht 
03-04 Agatha 03-04 Ame 03-04 Affra 03-04 Allexander 
05-06 Agnez 05-06 Andri 05-06 Agatha 05-06 Baltasar 
07-08 Alberea 07-08 Andriet 07-08 Allet 07-08 Benedick 
09-10 Alips 09-10 Anthoine 09-10 Angnes 09-10 Berhart 
11-12 Amée 11-12 Bernard 11-12 Anna 11-12 Caspar 
13—14 Amelot 13-14 Charles 13-14 Apell 13-14 Clas 
15-16 Anne 15-16 Charlot 15-16 Applonia 15-16 Cristin 
17-18 Avelina 17-18 Colin 17-18 Barbara 17-18 Cristoff 
19-20 Blancha 19-20 Denis 19-20 Brida 19-20 Dieterich 
21-22 Cateline 21-22 Durant 21-22 Brigita 21-22 Engelhart 
23-24 Cecilia 23-24 Edouart 23-24 Cecilia 23-24 Erhart 
25-26 Claricia 25-26 Eremon 25-26 Clara 25-26 Felix 
27-28 Collette 27-28 Ernault 27-28 Cristina 27-28 Frantz 
29-30 Denisete 29-30 Ethor 29-30 Dorothea 29-30 Fritz 
31-32 Dorian 31-32 Felix 31-32 Duretta 31-32 Gerhart 
33-34 Edelina 33-34 Floquart 33-34 Ella 33-34 Gotleib 
35-36 Emelina 35-36 Galleren 35-36 Els 35-36 Hans 
37-38 Emmelot 37-38 Gaultier 37-38 Elsbeth 37-38 Hartmann 
39-40 Ermentrudis 39-40 Gilles 39-40 Engel 39-40 Heintz 
41-42 Gibelina 41-42 Guy 41-42 Enlein 41-42 Herman 
43-44 Gila 43-44 Henry 43-44 Enndlin 43-44 Jacob 
45-46 Gillette 45-46 Hugo 45-46 Eva 45-46 Јегетіаѕ 
47-48 Guiburgis 47-48 |mbert 47-48 Fela 47-48 Jorg 
49-50 Guillemette 49-50 Jacques 49-50 Fronicka 49-50 Karll 
51-52 Guoite 51-52 Jacquot 51-52 Genefe 51-52 Kilian 
53-54 Hecelina 53-54 jean 53-54 Geras 53-54 Linhart 
55-56 Heloysis 55-56 Jehannin 55-56 Gerhauss 55-56 Lorentz 
57-58 Helyoudis 57-58 Louis 57-58 Gertrudt 57-58 Ludwig 
59-60 Hodeardis 59-60 Louys 59-60 Guttel 59-60 Marx 
61-62 Isabellis 61-62 Loys 61-62 Helena 61-62 Melchor 
63-64 jaquette 63-64 Martin 63-64 |rmel 63-64 Mertin 
65-66 Jehan 65-66 Michel 65-66 Jonata 65-66 Michel 
67-68 Johanna 67-68 Mille 67-68 Katerina 67-68 Moritz 
69-70 Juliote 69-70 Morelet 69-70 Kuen 69-70 Osswald 
71-72 Katerine 71-72 Nicolas 71-72 Kungund 71-72 Ott 
73-74 Luciana 73-74 Nicolle 73-74 Lucia 73-74 Peter 
75-76 Margot 75-76 Oudart 75-76 Madalena 75-76 Rudolff 
77—78 Marguerite 77-78 Perrin 77-78 Magdalen 77-78 Ruprecht 
79-80 Maria 79-80 Phillippe 79-80 Margret 79-80 Sewastian 
81-82 Marie 81-82 Pierre 81-82 Marlein 81-82 Sigmund 
83-84 Melisende 83-84 Regnault 83-84 Martha 83-84 Steffan 
85-86 Odelina 85-86 Richart 85-86 Otilia 85-86 Symon 
87-88 Perrette 87-88 Robert 87-88 Ottilg 87-88 Thoman 
89-90 Petronilla 89-90 Robinet 89-90 Peternella 89-90 Ulrich i 
91-92 Sedilia 91-92 Sauvage 91-92 Reusin 91-92 Vallentin 
93-94 Stephana 93-94 Simon 93-94 Sibilla 93-94 Wendel 
95-96 Sybilla 95-96 Talbot 95-96 Ursel 95-96 Wilhelm 
97-98 Ysabeau 97-98 Tanguy 97-98 Vrsula 97-98 Wolff Au 
99-00 Ysabel 99-00 Vincent 99-00 Walpurg 99-00 Wolfgang 


r4 
| 


APPENDIX В | CHARACTER NAMES 


GREEK, FEMALE 


d100 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
11-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45—46 
47-48 
49—50 
51-52 
53-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 
69-70 
71-72 
73—74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-34 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Acantha 
Aella 
Alektos 
Alkippe 
Andromeda 
Antigone 
Ariadne 
Astraea 
Chloros 
Chryseos 
Daphne 
Despoina 
Dione 
Eileithyia 
Elektra 
Euadne 
Eudora 
Eunomia 
Hekabe 
Helene 
Hermoione 
Hippolyte 
lanthe 
lokaste 
lole 
Iphigenia 
Ismene 
Kalliope 
Kallisto 
Kalypso 
Karme 
Kassandra 
Kassiopeia 
Kirke 
Kleio 
Klotho 
Klytié 
Kynthia 
Leto 
Megaera 
Melaina 
Melpomene 
Nausikaa 
Nemesis 
Niobe 
Ourania 
Phaenna 
Polymnia 
Semele 
Theia 


Greek, MALE 


d100 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
11-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49—50 
51—52 
53—54 
55—56 
57—58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 
69-70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


APPENDIX В | CHARACTER NAMES 


Name 
Adonis 
Adrastos 
Aeson 
Aias 
Aineias 
Aiolos 
Alekto 
Alkeides 
Argos 
Brontes 
Damazo 
Dardanos 
Deimos 
Diomedes 
Endymion 
Epimetheus 
Erebos 
Euandros 
Ganymedes 
Glaukos 
Hektor 
Heros 
Hippolytos 
lacchus 
lason 
Kadmos 
Kastor 
Kephalos 
Kepheus 
Koios 
Kreios 
Laios 
Leandros 
Linos 
Lykos 
Melanthios 
Menelaus 
Mentor 
Neoptolemus 
Okeanos 
Orestes 
Pallas 
Patroklos 
Philandros 
Phoibos 
Phrixus 
Priamos 
Pyrrhos 
Xanthos 
Zephyros 


INDIAN, FEMALE 


d100 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
11-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45—46 
47-48 
49—50 
51—52 
53—54 
55—56 
57—58 
59—60 
61—62 
63-64 
65—66 
67-68 
69-70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Abha 
Aishwarya 
Amala 
Ananda 
Ankita 
Archana 
Avani 
Chandana 
Chandrakanta 
Chetan 
Darshana 
Devi 
Dipti 
Esha 
Gauro 
Gita 
Indira 
Indu 
Jaya 
Kala 
Kalpana 
Kamala 
Kanta 
Kashi 
Kishori 
Lalita 
Lina 
Madhur 
Manju 
Meera 
Mohana 
Mukta 
Nisha 
Nitya 
Padma 
Pratima 
Priya 
Rani 
Sarala 
Shakti 
Shanta 
Shobha 
Sima 
Sonal 
Sumana 
Sunita 
Tara 
Valli 
Vijaya 
Vimala 


INDIAN, MALE 


d100 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
11-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17—18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41—42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49—50 
51-52 
53—54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 
69—70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85—86 
87—88 
89—90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Abhay 
Ahsan 
Ajay 

Ajit 
Akhil 
Amar 
Amit 
Ananta 
Aseem 
Ashok 
Bahadur 
Basu 
Chand 
Chandra 
Damodar 
Darhsan 
Devdan 
Dinesh 
Dipak 
Gopal 
Govind 
Harendra 
Harsha 
lla 

Isha 
Johar 
Kalyan 
Kiran 
Kumar 
Lakshmana 
Mahavir 
Narayan 
Naveen 
Nirav 
Prabhakar 
Prasanna 
Raghu 
Rajanikant 
Rakesh 
Ranjeet 
Rishi 
Sanjay 
Sekar 
Shandar 
Sumantra 
Vijay 
Vikram 
Vimal 
Vishal 
Yash 


JAPANESE, FEMALE 


9100 Мате 
01-02 Aika | 
03-04 Akemi > 
05-06 Akiko Se. 
07-08 Amaya N 
09-10 Asami | 
11-12. Ayumi | 
13—14 Bunko 
15-16 Chieko 
17-18 Chika | 
19-20 Chiyo 
21-22 Cho 
23-24 Eiko Í 
25-26 Emiko 
27-28 Eri | 
29-30 Etsuko 
31-32 Gina 
33-34 Hana 
35-36 Haruki 
37-38 Hideko 
39-40 Hikari 
41-42 Hiroko 
43-44 Hisoka 
45-46 Hishi JAPANESE, MALE 
47-48 Hotaru 4100 Name 
ZG Tren] 01-02 Akio JAPANESE, MALE 
51-52 Катеуо 03-04 Atsushi 9100 Name 
53-54 Kasumi 05-06 Daichi 53-54 Makoto 
55-56 Kimiko 07-08 Daiki 55-56 Mamoru 
57-58 Kotone 09-10 Daisuke 57-58 Masato 
59-60 Kyoko 1-12 Eiji 59-60 Masumi 
61-62 Maiko 13-14 Fumio 61-62 Noboru 
63-64 Masako 15-16 Hajime 63-64 Norio 
65-66 Mi 17-18 Наги 65-66 Osamu 
67-68 Minori 19-20 Hideaki 67-68 Ryota 
69-70 Mizuki 21-22 Hideo 69—70 Sadao 
71-72 Naoki 23-24 Hikaru 71-72 Satoshi 
73—74 Natsuko 25-26 Hiro 73-74 Shigeo 
75-76 Noriko 27-28 Hiroki 2 75-76 Shin 
77-78 Rei 29-30 Hisao 77-78 Sora 
79-80 Ren 31-32 Hitoshi 79-80 Tadao 
81-82 Saki 33-34 Isamu 81-82 Takehiko 
83-84 Shigeko 35-36 Isao 83-84 Takeo 
85-86 Shinju 37-38 Jun 85-86 Takeshi 
87-88 Sumiko 39-40 Katashi 87-88 Takumi 
89-90 Toshiko 41-42 Katsu 89—90 Tamotsu 
| 91-92 Tsukiko 43-44 Kei 91-92 Tatsuo 
| 93-94 Ume 45-46 Кеп 93-94 Toru 
95-96 Usagi 47-48 Kenshin 95-96 Toshio 
97-98 Yasuko 49-50 Kenta 97-98 Yasuo 
99-00 Yuriko 51-52 Kioshi 99-00 Yukio 


APPENDIX B | CHARACTER NAMES 


% 


| MESOAMERICAN, FEMALE 


| 4100 

01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
11-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
| 29-30 
31-32 
| 33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49-50 
51-52 
53-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 


Name 
Ahuiliztli 

Atl 

Centehua 
Chalchiuitl 
Chipahua 
Cihuaton 
Citlali 
Citlalmina 
Coszcatl 
Cozamalotl 
Cuicatl 
Eleuia 
Eloxochitl 
Eztli 

Ichtaca 
Icnoyotl 
Ihuicatl 
Whuitl 

Itotia 

luitl 

Ixcatzin 

Izel 
Malinalxochitl 
Mecatl 
Meztli 
Miyaoaxochitl 
Mizquixaual 
Moyolehuani 
Nahuatl 
Necahual 
Nenetl 
Nochtli 
Noxochicoztli 
Ohtli 


APPENDIX B | CHARACTER NAMES 


MESOAMERICAN, FEMALE 


di00 Name 
69-70 Papan 
71-72 Patli 
73-74 Quetzalxochitl 
75-76 Sacnite 
77—78 Teicui 
79-80 Tepin 
81-82 Teuicui 
83-84 Teyacapan 
85-86 Tlaco 
87-88 Tlacoehua 
89-90 Tlacotl 
91-92 Tlalli 
93-94 Tlanextli 
95-96 Xihuitl 
97-98 Xiuhcoatl 
99-00 Xiuhtonal 


MESOAMERICAN, MALE 
9100 Name 
01-02 Achcauhtli 
03-04 Amoxtli 
05-06 Chicahua 
07-08 Chimalli 
09-10 Cipactli 
11-12. Coaxoch 
13-M  Coyotl 
15-16 Cualli 
17-18 Cuauhtémoc 
19-20 Cuetlachtilo 
21-22 Cuetzpalli 
23-24 Cuixtli 
25-26 Ehecatl 
27-28 Etalpalli 
29-30 Huemac 
31-32 Huitzilihuitl 


= COMES. — с ee "o ee 


MESOAMERICAN, MALE 


d100 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45—46 
47-48 
49—50 
51-52 
53-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 
69-70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Iccauhtli 
llhicamina 
Itztli 

Ixtli 
Mahuizoh 
Manauia 
Matlal 
Matlalihuitl 
Mazatl 
Mictlantecuhtli 
Milintica 
Momoztli 
Namacuix 
Necalli 
Necuametl 
Nezahualcoyotl 
Nexahualpilli 
Nochehuatl 
Nopaltzin 
Ollin 
Quauhtli 
Tenoch 
Teoxihuitl 
Tepiltzin 
Tezcacoatl 
Tlacaelel 
Tlacelel 
Tlaloc 
Tlanextic 
Tlazohtlaloni 
Tlazopillo 
Uetzcayotl 
Xipilli 

Yaotl 


NicER-CONGO, 
FEMALE 


d100 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
11-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49-50 
51-52 
53-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65—66 
67-68 
69—70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
39-90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Abebi 
Abena 
Abimbola 
Akoko 
Akachi 
Alaba 
Anuli 
Ayo 
Bolanle 
Bosede 
Chiamaka 
Chidi 
Chidimma 
Chinyere 
Chioma 
Dada 
Ebele 
Efemena 
Ejiro 
Ekundayo 
Enitan 
Funanya 
Ifunanya 
Ige 

Ime 
Kunto 
Lesedi 
Lumusi 
Mojisola 
Monifa 
Nakato 
Ndidi 
Ngozi 
Nkiruka 
Nneka 
Ogechi 
Olamide 
Oluchi 
Omolara 
Onyeka 
Simisola 
Temitope 
Thema 
Titlayo 
Udo 
Uduak 
Ufuoma 
Yaa 
Yejide 
Yewande 


NiGcER-CONGO, 


MALE 


d100 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
11-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49-50 
51-52 
53-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 
69-70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Abebe 
Abel 
Abidemi 
Abrafo 
Adisa 
Amadi 
Amara 
Anyim 
Azubuike 
Bapoto 
Baraka 
Bohlale 
Bongani 
Bujune 
Buziba 
Chakide 
Chibuzo 
Chika 
Chimola 
Chiratidzo 
Dabulamanzi 
Dumisa 
Dwanh 
Emeka 
Folami 
Gatura 
Gebhuza 
Gero 
Isoba 
Kagiso 
Kamau 
Katlego 
Masego 
Matata 
Nthanda 
Ogechi 
Olwenyo 
Osumare 
Paki 
Qinisela 
Quanda 
Samanya 
Shanika 
Sibonakaliso 
Tapiwa 
Thabo 
Themba 
Uzoma 
Zuberi 
Zuri 


NoRsE, FEMALE 


d100 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
11-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49-50 
51-52 
53-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 
69-70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Alfhild 
Arnbjorg 
Ase 
Aslog 
Astrid 
Auda 
Audhid 
Bergljot 
Birghild 
Bodil 
Brenna 
Brynhild 
Dagmar 
Eerika 
Eira 
Gudrun 
Gunborg 
Gunhild 
Gunvor 
Helga 
Hertha 
Hilde 
Hillevi 
Ingrid 
lona 
Jorunn 
Kari 
Kenna 
Magnhild 
Nanna 
Olga 
Ragna 
Ragnhild 
Ranveig 
Runa 
Saga 
Sigfrid 
Signe 
Sigrid 
Sigrunn 
Solveg 
Svanhild 
Thora 
Torborg 
Torunn 
Tove 
Unn 
Vigdis 
Ylva 
Yngvild 


Norse, MALE 


d100 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
11-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17—18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49-50 
51-52 
53-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 
69-70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77—78 
79-80 
81—82 
83-84 
85—86 
87-88 
89—90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Agni 
Alaric 
Anvindr 
Arvid 
Asger 
Asmund 
Bjarte 
Bjorg 
Bjorn 
Brandr 
Brandt 
Brynjar 
Calder 
Colborn 
Cuyler 
Egil 
Einar 
Eric 
Erland 
Fiske 
Folkvar 
Fritjof 
Frode 
Geir 
Halvar 
Hemming 
Hjalmar 
Hjortr 
Ingimarr 
Ivar 
Knud 
Leif 
Liufr 
Manning 
Oddr 
Olin 
Ormr 
Ove 
Rannulfr 
Sigurd 
Skari 
Snorri 
Sten 
Stigandr 
Stigr 
Sven 
Trygve 
Ulf 

Vali 
Vidar 


Ж 
APPENDIX В | CHARACTER МАМЕ A 


Р 
(0 


ES 
M ——— _ 


POLYNESIAN, MALE 


POLYNESIAN, 
FEMALE d100 
9100 Name 01-02 
01-02 Ahulani 03-04 
03—04 Airini 05-06 
05-06 Alani 07-08 
07-08 Aluala 09-10 
| 09-10 Anahera 1-12 
11-12 Anuhea 13-14 
13-14 Aolani 15-16 
15-16 Elenoa 17-18 
17-18 Emele 19-20 
19-20 Fetia 21-22 
21-22 Fiva 23-24 
23-24 Halona 25-26 
25-26 Hi'ilei 27-28 
27-28 Hina 29-30 
29-30 Ніпаќеа 31-32 
31-32 Huali 33-34 
33-34 Inia 35-36 
35-36 Inina 37-38 
37-38 lolani 39-40 
39-40 Isa 41-42 
41-42 Ka'ana'ana 43-44 
43-44 Ka'ena 45-46 
45-46 Kaamia 47-48 
47-48 Kahula 49—50 
49—50 Kailani 51-52 
51-52 Kamaile 53-54 
53—54 Kamakani 55-56 
55-56 Kamea 57-58 
57-58 Latai 59-60 
59-60 Liona 61—62 
61—62 Lokelani 63-64 
63-64 Marva 65-66 
65-66 Mehana 67-68 
67-68 Millawa 69-70 
69-70 Moana 71-72 
71-72 Ngana 73—74 
73—74 Моһеа 75-76 
` 75-76 Pelika 77—78 
| 77-78 Sanoe 79-80 
79-80 Satina 81-82 
81-82 Tahia 83-84 
83-84 Tasi 85—86 
85-86 Tiaho 87-88 
87-88 Tihani 89-90 
89-90 Toroa 91-92 
91-92 Ulanni 93-94 
93-94 Uluwehi 95-96 
95-96 Vaina 97-98 
97-98 Waiola 99-00 
99-00 Waitara 
APPENDIX В| CHARACTER NAMES 


Name 
Afa 
Ahohako 
Aisake 
Aleki 
Anewa 
Anitelu 
Aputi 
Ariki 
Butat 
Enele 
Fef 
Fuifui 
Ha'aheo 
Hanohano 
Haunui 
Hekili 
Hiapo 
Hikawera 
Hanano 
Ho'onani 
Hoku 
Hü'eu 
Ina 

Itu 
Ka'aukai 
Ka'eo 
Kaelani 
Kahale 
Kaiea 
Kaikoa 
Kana'l 
Koamalu 
Ka 

Laki 
Makai 
Manu 
Manuka 
Nui 
Pono 
Popoki 
Ruru 
Tahu 
Taurau 
Tuala 
Turoa 
Tusitala 
Uaine 
Waata 
Waipuna 
Zamar 


ROMAN, FEMALE 


d100 

01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
11-12 
13—14 
15-16 
17—18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49-50 
51-52 
53-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 
69-70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Aelia 
Aemilia 
Agrippina 
Alba 
Antonia 
Aquila 
Augusta 
Aurelia 
Balbina 
Blandina 
Caelia 
Camilla 
Casia 
Claudia 
Cloelia 
Domitia 
Drusa 
Fabia 
Fabricia 
Fausta 
Flavia 
Floriana 
Fulvia 
Germana 
Glaucia 
Gratiana 
Hadriana 
Hermina 
Horatia 
Hortensia 
lovita 
lulia 
Laelia 
Laurentia 
Livia 
Longina 
Lucilla 
Lucretia 
Marcella 
Marcia 
Maxima 
Nona 
Octavia 
Paulina 
Petronia 
Porcia 
Tacita 
Tullia 
Verginia 
Vita 


ROMAN, MALE 


d100 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
11212. 
13-14 
15-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49-50 
51-52 
53-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 
69-70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Aelius 
Aetius 
Agrippa 
Albanus 
Albus 
Antonius 
Appius 
Aquilinus 
Atilus 
Augustus 
Aurelius 
Avitus 
Balbus 
Blandus 
Blasius 
Brutus 
Caelius 
Caius 
Casian 
Cassius 
Cato 
Celsus 
Claudius 
Cloelius 
Cnaeus 
Crispus 
Cyprianus 
Diocletianus 
Egnatius 
Ennius 
Fabricius 
Faustus 
Gaius 
Germanus 
Gnaeus 
Horatius 
lovianus 
lulius 
Lucilius 
Manius 
Marcus 
Marius 
Maximus 
Octavius 
Paulus 
Quintilian 
Regulus 
Servius 
Tacitus 


Varius 


SLAvic, FEMALE 


4100 
01—02 
03-04 
05—06 
07-08 
09-10 
11-12 
13—14 
15-16 
WANS 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49—50 
51-52 
53-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65—66 
67-68 
69—70 
71-72 
73—74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Agripina 
Anastasiya 
Bogdana 
Boleslava 
Bozhena 
Danica 
Darya 
Desislava 
Dragoslava 
Dunja 
Efrosinia 
Ekaterina 
Elena 
Faina 
Galina 
Irina 
Iskra 
Jasna 
Katarina 
Katya 
Kresimira 
Lyudmila 
Magda 
Mariya 
Militsa 
Miloslava 
Mira 
Miroslava 
Mokosh 
Morana 
Natasha 
Nika 
Olga 
Rada 
Radoslava 
Raisa 
Slavitsa 
Sofiya 
Stanislava 
Svetlana 
Tatyana 
Tomislava 
Veronika 
Vesna 
Vladimira 
Yaroslava 
Yelena 
Zaria 
Zarya 
Zoria 


SLAvic, MALE 


d100 
01—02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09—10 
11-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25-26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49-50 
51-52 
53—54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65—66 
67-68 
69—70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-18 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85—86 
87—88 
89—90 
91-92 
93—94 
95-96 
97—98 
99-00 


Name 
Aleksandru 
Berislav 
Blazh 
Bogumir 
Boguslav 
Borislav 
Bozhidar 
Bratomil 
Bratoslav 
Bronislav 
Chedomir 
Chestibor 
Chestirad 
Chestislav 
Desilav 
Dmitrei 
Dobromil 
Dobroslav 
Dragomir 
Dragutin 
Drazhan 
Gostislav 
Kazimir 
Kyrilu 
Lyubomir 
Mechislav 
Milivoj 
Milosh 
Mstislav 
Nikola 
Ninoslav 
Premislav 
Radomir 
Radovan 
Ratimir 
Rostislav 
Slavomir 
Stanislav 
Svetoslav 
Tomislav 
Vasili 
Velimir 
Vladimir 
Vladislav 
Vlastimir 
Volodimeru 
Vratislav 
Yarognev 
Yaromir 
Zbignev 


SPANISH, FEMALE 


d100 
01-02 
03-04 
05—06 
07-08 
09-10 
11—12 
13—14 
15-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21—22 
23-24 
25—26 
27—28 
29—30 
31-32 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49—50 
51-52 
53—54 
55—56 
57-58 
59-60 
61—62 
63—64 
65—66 
67—68 


Мате 
Abella 
Adalina 
Adora 
Adriana 
Ana 
Antonia 
Basilia 
Beatriz 
Bonita 
Camila 
Cande 
Carmen 
Catlina 
Dolores 
Dominga 
Dorotea 
Elena 
Elicia 
Esmerelda 
Felipina 
Francisca 
Gabriela 
Imelda 
Ines 
Isabel 
Juana 
Leocadia 
Leonor 
Leta 
Lucinda 
Maresol 
Maria 
Maricela 
Matilde 


N APPENDIX B | CHARACTER NAMES 
NN 


SPANISH, FEMALE 


d100 
69-70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77—78 
79—80 
81—82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Melania 
Monica 
Neva 
Nilda 
Petrona 
Rafaela 
Ramira 
Rosario 
Sofia 
Suelo 
Teresa 
Tomasa 
Valentia 
Veronica 
Ynes 
Ysabel 


SPANISH, MALE 


d100 
01-02 
03-04 
05-06 
07-08 
09-10 
11-12 
13-14 
15-16 
17-18 
19-20 
21-22 
23-24 
25—26 
27-28 
29-30 
31-32 


Name 
Alexandre 
Alfonso 
Alonso 
Anthon 
Arcos 
Arnaut 
Arturo 
Bartoleme 
Benito 
Bernat 
Blasco 
Carlos 
Damian 
Diego 
Domingo 
Enrique 


SPANISH, MALE 


d100 
33-34 
35-36 
37-38 
39-40 
41-42 
43-44 
45-46 
47-48 
49-50 
51-52 
53-54 
55-56 
57-58 
59-60 
61-62 
63-64 
65-66 
67-68 
69-70 
71-72 
73-74 
75-76 
77-78 
79-80 
81-82 
83-84 
85-86 
87-88 
89-90 
91-92 
93-94 
95-96 
97-98 
99-00 


Name 
Escobar 
Ettor 
Fernando 
Franciso 
Gabriel 
Garcia 
Gaspar 
Gil 
Gomes 
Goncalo 
Gostantin 
Jayme 
Joan 
Jorge 
Jose 
Juan 
Machin 
Martin 
Mateu 
Miguel 
Nicolas 
Pascual 
Pedro 
Porico 
Ramiro 
Ramon 
Rodrigo 
Sabastian 
Salvador 
Simon 
Tomas 
Tristan 
Valeriano 
Ynigo 


BEAUTY AND GUILE 
ARE IN THE EYES OF 
OF THE BEHOLDER! 


The beholder Xanathar. Waterdeep’s most 
infamous crime lord, is known to hoard 
information on friend and foe alike. He catalogs 
lore about adventurers and ponders methods to 
thwart them. His twisted mind imagines that he 
can eventually record everything! 


Assembled here for the first time are a set of 
new rules and story options for all the character 
classes in the Player's Handbook, including 
over twenty-five new subclasses. The book also 
presents new spells for both player characters 
and monsters. 


Dungeon Masters will find new rules for traps, 
magic items, downtime activities, and more-all 
designed to enhance a D&D campaign and push 
it in new directions. 


Amid all this expansion material, the Xanathar 
offers bizarre observations about whatever his 
eyestalks happen to glimpse. Pray they don't 
come to rest on you! 


For use with the fifth edition 
Player's Handbook®, Monster Manual®, and 
Dungeon Master's Guide® 


Q 
ce 


DUNGEONSANDDRAGONS.cOM 


ISBN 978-0-7869-6611-0 $49.95 
9 780786 966110 | Il | 
Sug. Retail: US $49.95 CAN $65.95 

Printed in USA C22150000 


