AGE 12+ 


ae 


NTIALS KIT 


Everything you need to create characters and play new adventures 
in this introduction to the world’s greatest roleplaying game 


AGE 12+ 


ESSENTIALS KIT 


RULEBOOK 


RULEBOOK 


CONTENTS 


Welcome to DUNGEONS & DRAGONS...... 2 
Chapter 1: Creating a Character ........... 4 
Creation терена 4 
Gaining Devels ТТТ 7 
Касаба 7 

УАТ А Аа 7 

БИ ане ЕТ eRe PEE А 8 


ВасЕртоипабвтшаса 2 croire tenere а; 24 
Acolyte .......... 


Criminal ....... mes 25 


Entertainer .. anys) 
Sage... mess 
Озера ыы ние 27 
Chapter 2: Playing the Game ............... 28 
Advantage and Disadvantage ................. 28 
аео tette eee E 28 
"Ability OhecleS нна еее 29 
GOMLESES ы ыы алымын 0 REY a 29 
SKU Soaps ааа се оқыл Кайы 29 
Working Together ................... eee 30 
Strength Checks... .30 


Dexterity Checks... 


Constitution Checks. 9L 
Intelligence Сһескв.............20.422.4..4 31 
Masdorn GhecksS. eere rennen conserere 31 
Charisma беске иду. 31 


CREDITS 


Rulebook Designer: Jeremy Crawford 
Adventure Designer: Christopher Perkins 
Additional Adventure Design: Richard Baker 
Adventure Development: Ben Petrisor 
Adventure Editing: Scott Fitzgerald Gray 
Playtest Coordinator: Christopher Lindsay 


Art Directors: Kate Irwin, Shauna Narciso 
Graphic Designer: Trish Yochum 

Cover Illustrator: Grzegorz Rutkowski 
Illustrators: Mark Behm, Eric Belisle, 
Christopher Burdett, Wesley Burt, 
Conceptopolis, Olga Drebas, Jesper Ejsing, 
Craig Elliot, Tomas Giorello, Lars Grant-West, 
Suzanne Helmigh, Brynn Metheney, Claudio 
Pozas, Craig | Spearing, Zack Stella, Richard 
Whitters, Shawn Wood 

Cartographers: Jason A. Engle, Mike Schley 


The Environment... 


Special Types of Movement... 
Бао 
SSUFLOGAt ID E шун ык as 32 
Морава 32 
Interacting with Objects....................... 33 
SOCIAL пїегасноп. eee cie recreo in 33 
RESE Уулуке ано CIT Е 33 
Сора. быу уе ыу ы 34 


Movement and Position.. 
Actions in Combat......... E 
Making an Attack................. erre 
Ө ЕО ede eet SERERE а АА. 
КапвесАНаске о е 
Melee Attacks ince наи 
Damage and Неайпр............................ 
Mounted Combat............... rere 


Weapons ................. ; 
Adventuring Gear ................... eere 
Mounts and Services..........................—..—. 
Magic te ds... -- | отек а 


Chapter 4: Spells.........................4. 
Whai Sa Spell? auro errore йн reps 
Schools of Magic.. 
юре OVE) а 
Known апа Prepared Spells Dm 
Spell: іо ША 
©АПНЛ1р8.;.... идәне ӨМ EUN, 
ДЕ Ы К ditte Кайа 


Original 5th Edition Design: Jeremy Crawford, 
Mike Mearls, Christopher Perkins, James 
Wyatt, Rodney Thompson, Robert ). Schwalb, 
Peter Lee, Steve Townshend, Bruce R. Cordell 
Original 5th Edition Editing: Chris Sims, 
Michele Carter, Scott Fitzgerald Gray, Kim 
Mohan 


Based on the original D&D game by 
E. Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson 


Casting a Spell........ dh 49 
Casting in Armor -reessione ienne 49 
Сазбен 49 
SRAM GS Carer оаа Cc 49 
GCOMPOTEMES е 49 
O E E E 50 
Тате A E xs leur dar 50 
Атеа онбес оа 50 
ФАУІП ТОВ 51 
Attack ROMS и 51 


Producer: Dan Tovar 

Product Concept: Mark Price 

Production Services: Cynda Callaway, Kevin 
Yee, David Gershman, Jefferson Dunlap 


Senior Director Global Brand Strategy: 
Nathan Stewart 

Director Licensing & Publishing: Liz Schuh 
Licensing Manager: Hilary Ross 

Digital Marketing Manager: Bart Carroll 
Senior Communications Manager: Greg Tito 
Manager Global Brand Marketing: Anna Vo 
Brand Manager: Shelly Mazzanoble 
Associate Brand Manager: Pelham Greene 
Narrative Designers: Adam Lee, Ari Levitch 
Game Designer: Kate Welch 

Graphic Designer: Emi Tanji 

Project Manager: Bill Benham 

Editor: F. Wesley Schneider 


WELCOME ТО DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 


DRIVEN BY IMAGINATION, THE DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 
roleplaying game is about storytelling in worlds of swords 
and spells. This rulebook gives you the rules for creating 
a character in those worlds, and it provides all the rules 
you need to start adventuring. The other book in this set 
contains an adventure for you to play. Everyone who plays 
may read this rulebook, but the adventure is just for the 
eyes of the Dungeon Master (DM), who will run it. 


GAME OVERVIEW 


In the D&D game, each player creates a character who 
is an adventurer and teams up with other adventurers 
(played by friends). One player, however, takes on the role 
of the DM, the game's lead storyteller and referee. The 
DM runs adventures for the characters, who navigate its 
hazards and decide which paths to explore. The DM de- 
scribes the locations and creatures that the adventurers 
face, and the players decide what they want their char- 
acters to do. Then the DM determines the results of the 
adventurers’ actions and narrates what they experience. 
Because the DM can improvise to react to anything the 
players attempt, D&D is infinitely flexible, and each ad- 
venture can be unexpected. 

Here's an example of the DM describing a scene, with 
two players responding: 


Dungeon Master (DM): The castle stands among the 
trees, the crumbling ruins of seven round towers jutting 
up from it like broken teeth. An archway littered with 
twisted shards of rusted metal gapes open at the top of 
a short flight of steps. Two of the towers, speckled with 
dark arrow slits, loom beside the entryway, and a dark hall 
yawns beyond. 

Phillip (cleric): Let's send the rogue up ahead to look in 
and make sure it's safe. 

Amy (rogue): OK, l'Il move to the side and sneak along 
the wall of the tower until | can peer in through the 
entrance. 


The game's rules give structure to your D&D stories, 
a way of determining the consequences of the adven- 
turers' action. Players roll dice to resolve whether their 
attacks hit or miss, whether they escape from a danger, 
or whether they pull off some other dangerous task. Any- 
thing is possible, but the dice make some outcomes more 
probable than others. Here's an example of dice in action: 


DM: All right, Amy, let's see how sneaky you are. Make a 
Dexterity check. 

Amy: With my Stealth skill, right? 

DM: You bet. 

Amy (rolling а d20): I'm pretty sneaky—that's a 17. 

DM: OK, there's no sign that anyone notices you. And 
you're looking inside? 


WELCOME TO DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 


The game ends only when your group decides it does; 
when one story or quest wraps up, another one can be- 
gin, creating an ongoing story called a campaign. Many 
people who play the game keep their campaigns going for 
months or years, meeting with their friends a few times 
a month to pick up the story where they left off. The ad- 
venturers grow in might as the campaign continues. Each 
monster defeated, each adventure completed, and each 
treasure recovered not only adds to the continuing story, 
but also earns the adventurers new capabilities. This in- 
crease in power is reflected by an adventurer's level. 

There's no winning and losing in the D&D game—at 
least, not the way those terms are usually understood. To- 
gether, the DM and the players create an exciting story of 
bold adventurers who confront deadly perils. Sometimes 
an adventurer might come to a grisly end, torn apart by 
ferocious monsters or done in by a nefarious villain. Even 
So, the other adventurers can search for powerful magic to 
revive their fallen comrade, or the player might choose to 
create a new character to carry on. The group might fail to 
complete an adventure successfully, but if everyone had a 
good time and created a memorable story, they all win. 


How To PLAY 


The play of the DUNGEONS & DRAGONS game unfolds ac- 
cording to this basic pattern. 

1. The DM describes the environment. The DM 
tells the players where their adventurers are and what's 
around them, presenting the basic scope of options that 
present themselves (how many doors lead out of a room, 
what's on a table, who's in the tavern, and so on). 

2. The players describe what they want to do. Some- 
times one player speaks for the whole party, saying, 
"We'll take the east door," for example. Other times, 
different adventurers do different things: one adventurer 
might search a treasure chest while a second examines 
an esoteric symbol engraved on a wall and a third keeps 
watch for monsters. The players don't need to take turns, 
but the DM listens to every player and decides how to re- 
solve those actions. 

Sometimes, resolving a task is easy. If an adventurer 
wants to walk across a room and open a door, the DM 
might just say that the door opens and describe what lies 
beyond. But the door might be locked, the floor might 
hide a deadly trap, or some other circumstance might 
make it challenging for an adventurer to complete a task. 
In those cases, the DM decides what happens, often 
relying on the roll of a die to determine the results of 
an action. 

3. The DM narrates the results of the adventurers' 
actions. Describing the results often leads to another de- 
cision point, which brings the flow of the game right back 
to step 1. 

This pattern holds whether the adventurers are cau- 
tiously exploring a ruin, talking to a devious prince, or 
locked in mortal combat against a dragon. In certain situ- 
ations, particularly combat, the action is more structured 
and the players (and DM) do take turns choosing and 
resolving actions. But most of the time, play is fluid and 
flexible, adapting to the circumstances of the adventure. 


GAME DICE 


The game uses polyhedral dice with different numbers of 


sides. In these rules, the different dice are referred to by 
the letter d followed by the number of sides: d4, d6, d8, 
d10, d12, and d20. For instance, a d6 is a six-sided die 
(the typical cube that many games use). 

Percentile dice, or d100, work a little differently. You 
generate a number between 1 and 100 by rolling two dif- 
ferent ten-sided dice numbered from 0 to 9. One die (des- 
ignated before you roll) gives the tens digit, and the other 
gives the ones digit. If you roll а 7 and a 1, for example, 
the number rolled is 71. Two Os represent 100. 

When you need to roll dice, the rules tell you how many 
dice to roll of a certain type, as well as what modifiers to 
add. For example, “3d8 + 5” means you roll three eight- 
sided dice, add them together, and add 5 to the total. 


THE CORE RULE 


When the outcome of an action is uncertain, the game re- 


lies on the roll of a d20 to determine success or failure. 

Every character and monster in the game has capa- 
bilities defined by six ability scores. The abilities are 
Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, 
and Charisma, and they typically range from 3 to 18 for 
most adventurers. (Monsters might have scores as low as 
1 or as high as 30.) These ability scores, and the ability 
modifiers derived from them, are the basis for almost 
every 420 roll that a player makes оп a character's or 
monster's behalf. 

Ability checks, attack rolls, and saving throws are the 
three main kinds of d20 rolls, forming the core of the 
game's rules. АП three follow these simple steps. 

1. Roll the die and add a modifier. Roll а 420 and add 
the relevant modifier. This is typically the modifier de- 
rived from one of the six ability scores, and it sometimes 
includes a proficiency bonus to reflect a character's par- 
ticular skill. (See chapter 1 for details on each ability and 
how to determine an ability's modifier.) 

2. Apply circumstantial bonuses and penalties. A 
class feature, a spell, a particular circumstance, or some 
other effect might give a bonus or penalty to the check. 
Also, the roll might have advantage or disadvantage, ex- 
plained on page 28. 

3. Compare the total to a target number. If the total 
equals or exceeds the target number, the ability check, 
attack roll, or saving throw is a success. Otherwise, it's a 
failure. The DM is usually the one who determines target 


numbers and tells players whether their ability checks, 
attack rolls, and saving throws are successful. 

The target number for an ability check or a saving 
throw is called a Difficulty Class (DC). The target num- 
ber for an attack roll is called an Armor Class (AC). 

This simple rule governs the resolution of most tasks 
in D&D play. Chapter 2 provides more detailed rules for 
using the d20 in the game. 


OTHER RULES TO REMEMBER 


'THE DM ADJUDICATES THE RULES 

The DM is the final authority on how the rules work 

in play. If there's ever a question about how something 
functions in the game, the DM provides the answer. This 
helps keep the game moving. If you're the DM, remember 
this: D&D is a co-op game, so make rules decisions that 
enhance the enjoyment of your group. 


ROUND Down 

Whenever you divide a number in the game, round down 
if you end up with a fraction, even if the fraction is one- 
half or greater. 


SPECIFIC BEATS GENERAL 

This book contains rules that govern how the game plays. 
That said, many things in the game (racial traits, class 
features, spells, magic items, monster abilities, and other 
game elements) break the general rules in some way, 
creating an exception to how the rest of the game works. 
If a specific rule contradicts a general rule, the specific 
rule wins. 

For example, you always round down when you end up 
with a fraction in D&D, but you might have a class fea- 
ture that tells you to round a particular fraction up. That 
feature creates a minor exception in the game. 


EFFECTS WITH THE SAME NAME Don’t STACK 
Different effects in the game can affect a target at the 
same time. For example, two different benefits can give 
you a bonus to your Armor Class. But when two or more 
effects have the same proper name, only one of them 
applies while the durations of the effects overlap (a dura- 
tion is a time span of 1 round or more). The most potent 
effect—such as the highest bonus—is the one that applies, 
or the most recent effect applies if the effects are equally 
potent. For example, if bless spell is cast on you when 
you're still under the effect of an earlier bless, you gain 
the benefit of only one casting. 
aL. ———M——M—Ó———Ó Jl. 
Wuat’s Next? 
This set is a complete D&D experience, enough to provide 
hours of play. You can even play through the adventure book 
multiple times. You might be surprised at how differently 
things can turn out! But one of the most rewarding things 
about D&D is that it provides the opportunity to create 
characters, and even worlds, of your own. 

If you want to create a greater variety of characters or pop- 
ulate your adventures with other monsters, check out the 
fifth edition Player’s Handbook, Monster Manual, and Dun- 
geon Master's Guide. These advanced rulebooks introduce 
you to the vast multiverse of D&D and invite you to create 
unique characters and worlds within it. 


= 


WELCOME ТО DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 


CHAPTER |: CREATING А CHARACTER 


YOUR FIRST STEP IN PLAYING AN ADVENTURER IN THE 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS game is to create a character of 
your own. Your character is a combination of game statis- 
tics, roleplaying hooks, and your imagination. You choose 
а race (such as human or elf) and a class (such as fighter 
or wizard). You also invent the personality, appearance, 
and backstory of the character, 


CREATION STEPS 


Follow these suggested steps, making decisions that 
reflect the character you want. Your conception of your 
character might evolve with each choice you make. 

In this section, we use the term character sheet to 
mean whatever you use to track your character, whether 
it's a formal character sheet (like the one that comes with 
this rulebook), some form of digital record (such as on 
D&D Beyond, dndbeyond.com), or a plain piece of paper. 


1. CHOOSE A RACE 


Every character belongs to a race, one of the many hu- 
manoid species in D&D. The most common player char- 
acter races are dwarves, elves, halflings, and humans. 
Each race is detailed in the “Races” section (page 7). 

Your character's race grants particular racial traits, 
such as special senses. Record all these traits on your 
character sheet. Your race also increases one or more of 
your ability scores, which you determine in step 3. Note 
these increases and remember to apply them later. 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING A CHARACTER 


2. CHOOSE A CLASS 


Every adventurer is a member of a character class. Class 
broadly describes a character's vocation, special talents, 
and the tactics the character is most likely to employ 
when exploring a dungeon, fighting monsters, or engag- 
ing in a tense negotiation. Each class is detailed in the 
"Character Classes" section (page 11). 

Your character receives many benefits from your choice 
of class. These benefits are class features— capabilities 
(including spellcasting) that set your character apart from 
members of other classes. You also gain a number of 
proficiencies: armor, weapons, skills, saving throws, and 
sometimes tools. Your proficiencies define many of the 
things your character can do particularly well, from using 
certain weapons to telling a convincing lie. 

On your character sheet, record all the features that 
your class gives you at 1st level. 


LEVEL 
Your character starts at 1st level and advances in level 


by adventuring and gaining experience points (XP). You 
start with 0 XP. 


Ніт POINTS AND Hirt DICE 

Your character’s hit points define how tough your char- 
acter is in combat and other dangerous situations. Your 
hit points are determined by your Hit Dice (short for Hit 
Point Dice). 


At 1st level, your character has 1 Hit Die, and the die 
type is determined by your class. You start with hit points 
equal to the highest roll of that die, as indicated in your 
class description. (You also add your Constitution mod- 
ifier, which you'll determine in step 3.) This is also your 
hit point maximum. 

Record your character's hit points on your character 
sheet. Also record the type of Hit Die your character uses 
and the number of Hit Dice you have. After you rest, you 
can spend Hit Dice to regain hit points (see page 33). 


PROFICIENCY BONUS 

The table that appears in your class description shows 
your proficiency bonus, which is +2 for a 1st-level 
character and gets better as you gain levels. The rules tell 
you when the bonus applies. Here are the most common 
times you'll use it: 


. Ability checks using skills you're proficient іп 

Ability checks using tools you're proficient with 

. Attack rolls using weapons you're proficient with 

* Attack rolls with spells you cast 

* Saving throws you're proficient in 

* Saving throw DCs for spells you cast (explained in each 
spellcasting class) 


Proficiencies. Your class determines your weapon and 
your saving throw proficiencies, and some of your skill 
and tool proficiencies. (Skills are described in chapter 2, 
tools in chapter 3.) Your background, which you choose in 
step 4, gives you additional proficiencies, and some races 
give you more. Be sure to note all your proficiencies, as 
well as your proficiency bonus, on your character sheet. 

Using the Bonus. Your proficiency bonus can't be 
added to a die roll or other number more than once. For 
example, if two different rules say you can add your profi- 
ciency bonus to a Wisdom saving throw, you nevertheless 
add the bonus only once when you make the save. 

Occasionally, your proficiency bonus might be multi- 
plied or divided (doubled or halved, for example) before 
you apply it. For example, the rogue's Expertise feature 
doubles the proficiency bonus for certain ability checks. If 
a circumstance suggests that your proficiency bonus ap- 
plies more than once to the same roll, you still add it only 
once and multiply or divide it only once. 


3. DETERMINE ABILITY SCORES 


Much of what your character does relies on six abilities: 


Strength, measuring physical power 

Dexterity, measuring agility 

Constitution, measuring endurance 
Intelligence, measuring reasoning and memory 
Wisdom, measuring perception and insight 
Charisma, measuring force of personality 


Each ability has a score, which is a number you record on 
your character sheet. The six abilities and their use in the 
game are detailed in chapter 2. 

You generate your character's six ability scores ran- 
domly. Roll four 6-sided dice and record the total of the 
highest three dice on a piece of scratch paper. Do this five 
more times, so that you have six numbers. If you don't 
like the idea of randomly determining ability scores, you 
can use the following scores instead: 15, 14, 13, 12, 10, 8. 


A score of 10 or 11 is the human average, but adventur- 
ers and monsters are above average in some abilities. A 
score of 18 is the highest that a person usually reaches. 
Adventurers can have scores as high as 20, and monsters 
and divine beings can have scores as high as 30. 

Now take your six numbers assign them to your 
Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, 
and Charisma. Afterward, make any changes to your abil- 
ity scores as a result of your race choice. 

After assigning your ability scores, determine your 
ability modifiers using the Ability Scores and Modifiers 
table. Write the modifier next to each of your scores. 


ABILITY SCORES AND MODIFIERS 


Score Modifier Score Modifier 
1 -5 16-17 +3 
2-3 -4 18-19 +4 
4-5 -3 20-21 +5 
6-7 -2 22-23 +6 
8-9 -1 24-25 +7 
10-11 +0 26-27 +8 
12-13 +1 28-29 +9 
14-15 +2 30 +10 


4, DESCRIBE YOUR CHARACTER 


Once you know the basic game aspects of your charac- 
ter, it’s time to flesh out a backstory and a personality. 
Your character also needs a name. Spend a few minutes 
thinking about what the character's behavior and looks. 
You choose your character’s age and the color of their 
hair, eyes, and skin. To add a touch of distinctiveness, you 
might want to give your character a memorable physical 
characteristic, such as a scar, a limp, or a tattoo. 


GENDER 

Choose your character's gender. Your choice has no effect 
on game statistics. Think about how your character re- 
lates to the broader culture’s expectations of gender. Your 
character’s sexual orientation is also for you to decide. 


BACKGROUND 

Look at the “Backgrounds” section (page 24), and 
choose a background for your character. A background 
describes your original occupation. It also gives your 
character a background feature (a general benefit) and 
proficiency in two skills, and it might also give you ad- 
ditional languages or proficiency with certain kinds of 
tools. Record this information on your character sheet. 


ALIGNMENT 
Choose your character’s alignment, which broadly de- 
scribes moral and personal attitudes. Alignment is a 
combination of two factors: one identifies morality (good, 
evil, or neutral), and the other describes attitudes toward 
society and order (lawful, chaotic, or neutral). Thus, nine 
distinct alignments define the possible combinations. 
These summaries of the nine alignments describe the 
typical behavior of a creature with that alignment. Indi- 
viduals might vary significantly from that behavior. 
Lawful good (LG) creatures can be counted on to do 
the right thing as expected by society. Gold dragons, 
many paladins, and most dwarves are lawful good. 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING A CHARACTER 


Neutral good (NG) folk do the best they can to help oth- 
ers according to their needs. Many celestials, some cloud 
giants, and most gnomes are neutral good. 

Chaotic good (CG) creatures act as their conscience 
directs, with little regard for what others expect. Copper 
dragons, many elves, and unicorns are chaotic good. 

Lawful neutral (LN) individuals act in accordance with 
law, tradition, or personal codes. Many monks and some 
wizards are lawful neutral. 

Neutral (N) is the alignment of those who prefer to 
steer clear of moral questions and don’t take sides, doing 
what seems best at the time. Lizardfolk, most druids, and 
many humans are neutral. 

Chaotic neutral (CN) creatures follow their whims, 
holding their personal freedom above all else. Many bar- 
barians and rogues, and some bards, are chaotic neutral. 

Lawful evil (LE) creatures methodically take what they 
want, within the limits of a code of tradition, loyalty, or or- 
der. Devils, blue dragons, and hobgoblins are lawful evil. 

Neutral evil (NE) is the alignment of those who do 
whatever they can get away with, without compassion or 
qualms. Many drow, some cloud giants, and yugoloths 
are neutral evil. 

Chaotic evil (CE) creatures act with arbitrary violence, 
spurred by their greed, hatred, or bloodlust. Demons, red 
dragons, and orcs are chaotic evil. 

Most creatures that lack the capacity for rational 
thought don’t have alignments—they are unaligned. 
Such a creature is incapable of making a moral or ethical 
choice and acts according to its bestial nature. Sharks 
are savage predators, for example, but they aren't evil. 


PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS 

Fleshing out your character's personality will help you 
bring him or her to life as you play the game. Four cate- 
gories of characteristics are presented here: personality 
traits, ideals, bonds, and flaws. Beyond those categories, 
think about your character's favorite words or phrases, 
habitual gestures, vices and pet peeves, and whatever 
else you can imagine. 

Each background presented later in this chapter in- 
cludes suggested characteristics that you can use to 
spark your imagination. You're not bound to those op- 
tions, but they're a good starting point. 

Personality Traits. Give your character two personal- 
ity traits, which should tell you something interesting and 
fun about your character. They should be specific about 
what makes your character stand out. "I'm smart” isn't 
a good trait, because it describes many characters. “I’ve 
read every book in Candlekeep" tells you something spe- 
cific about your character's interests and disposition. 

Personality traits might describe the things your char- 
acter likes, past accomplishments, things your character 
dislikes or fears, or your character's mannerisms. 

A useful place to start thinking about personality traits 
is to look at your highest and lowest ability scores and de- 
fine one trait related to each. Either one could be positive 
or negative: you might work hard to overcome a low score, 
for example, or be cocky about your high score. 

Ideals. Describe one ideal that drives your character. 
Your ideals are the things that you believe in most. Ideals 
might answer any of these questions: What are the prin- 
ciples that you will never betray? What would prompt you 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING A CHARACTER 


to make sacrifices? What drives you to act and guides 
your goals and ambitions? What is the most important 
thing you strive for? 

You can choose any ideals you like, but your character's 
alignment is a good place to start defining them. Each 
background in this chapter includes suggested ideals. 
Five of them are linked to aspects of alignment: law, 
chaos, good, evil, and neutrality. 

Bonds. Create one bond for your character. Bonds 
represent a character's connections to people, places, 
and events in the world. They tie you to things from your 
background. They might inspire you to heights of hero- 
ism, or lead you to act against your own best interests if 
they are threatened. They can work very much like ideals, 
driving a character's motivations and goals. 

Bonds might answer any of these questions: Whom do 
you care most about? To what place do you feel a special 
connection? What is your most treasured possession? 

Your bonds might be tied to your class, your back- 
ground, your race, or some other aspect of your char- 
acter's history or personality. You might also gain new 
bonds over the course of your adventures. 

Flaws. Choose a flaw for your character. Your charac- 
ter's flaw represents some vice, fear, or weakness—in 
particular, anything that someone else could exploit to 
bring you to ruin or cause you to act against your best in- 
terests. More significant than negative personality traits, 
a flaw might answer any of these questions: What en- 
rages you? What's the one person, concept, or event that 
you are terrified of? What are your vices? 


HEIGHT AND WEIGHT 

You determine your character's height and weight. Your 
race description includes suggestions for them. If you 
want to, you can roll randomly for them using the Ran- 
dom Height and Weight table. The dice roll given in the 
Height Modifier column determines the character's extra 
height (in inches) beyond the base height. That same 
number multiplied by the dice roll or quantity given in the 
Weight Modifier column determines the character's extra 
weight (in pounds) beyond the base weight. 


RANDOM HEIGHT AND WEIGHT 
Base Height ^ Base Weight 


Race Height Modifier Weight Modifier 
Human 48" +2d10 1016. х (244) Ib. 
Dwarf, hill 38" +2d4 11516. х (2d6) Ib. 
Dwarf, mountain 4' *2d4 130 lb. х (2d6) Ib. 
Elf, high 4'6" +40 90Ь x (1d4) lb. 
Elf, wood 46" +2410 1005. х (144) lb. 
Halfling 2975 +244 35 Ib. x1 Ib. 


5. CHOOSE EQUIPMENT 


Your class and background determine your character's 
starting equipment. Record this equipment on your 
character sheet. All such items are detailed in chapter 3. 


ARMOR CLASS 

Your Armor Class (AC) represents how well your char- 
acter avoids being wounded in battle. Things that con- 
tribute to your AC include the armor you wear, the shield 
you carry, and your Dexterity modifier. Not all characters 


wear armor or carry shields, however. As explained іп 
chapter 3, your character needs to be proficient with 
armor and shields to wear and use them effectively, and 
your armor and shield proficiencies are determined by 
your class. 

Without armor or a shield, your character's AC equals 
10 + his or her Dexterity modifier. If your character 
wears armor, carries a shield, or both, calculate your 
AC using the rules in chapter 3. Record your AC on 
your character sheet. 

Some spells and class features give you a different way 
to calculate your AC. If you have multiple features that 
give you different ways to calculate your AC, you can use 
only one of them, and you choose which one. 


WEAPONS 

For each weapon your character wields, calculate the 
modifier you use when you attack with the weapon and 
the damage you deal when you hit. 

When you make an attack with a weapon, you roll a 
d20 and add your proficiency bonus (but only if you are 
proficient with the weapon) and the appropriate abil- 
ity modifier. 

For attacks with melee weapons, use your Strength 
modifier for attack and damage rolls. A weapon that has 
the finesse property, such as a rapier, can use your Dex- 
terity modifier instead. 

For attacks with ranged weapons, use your Dexterity 
modifier for attack and damage rolls. A melee weapon 
that has the thrown property, such as a handaxe, can use 
your Strength modifier instead. 


6. GoME TOGETHER 


D&D characters don't work alone. Each character plays 
a role within a party, a group of adventurers working to- 
gether for a common purpose. Talk to your fellow players 
and your DM to decide whether your characters know 
one another, how they met, and what sorts of quests the 
group might undertake. 


GAINING LEVELS 


As characters go on adventures, each character gains ex- 
perience, represented by experience points. A character 
who reaches a specified experience point total advances 
in capability. This advancement is called gaining a level. 


CHARACTER ADVANCEMENT 


Experience Points Level Proficiency Bonus 
0 1 +2 
300 2 +2 
900 3 +2 
2,700 4 +2 
6,500 5 +3 
14,000 6 +3 


The Character Advancement table specifies the XP you 
need to advance to a level and the proficiency bonus for a 
character of that level. 

Each time you gain a level, you gain 1 additional Hit 
Die. Roll that Hit Die, add your Constitution modifier 
to the roll, and add the total (minimum of 1) to your hit 


point maximum. Alternatively, you can use the fixed value 
shown in your class entry, which is the average result of 
the die roll (rounded up). 

When your Constitution modifier increases by 1, your 
hit point maximum increases by 1 for each level you have 
attained. For example, when Bruenor reaches 8th level as 
a fighter, he increases his Constitution score from 17 to 
18, thus increasing his Constitution modifier from +3 to 
+4. His hit point maximum then increases by 8. 

Consult your character's class description to see what 
other improvements you gain at each level. 


RACES 


Humans are the most common people in the worlds of 
D&D, but they live and work alongside dwarves, elves, 
halflings, and countless other fantastic species. Your 
character belongs to one of these peoples. 


DWARF 


Kingdoms rich in ancient grandeur, halls carved into the 
roots of mountains, the echoing of picks and hammers in 
deep mines and blazing forges, and a commitment to clan 
and tradition—these common threads unite all dwarves. 


LONG MEMORY, LONG GRUDGES 


Dwarves can live to be more than 400 years old. They re- 
spect the traditions of their clans, tracing their ancestry 
back to the founding of their most ancient strongholds in 
the youth of the world, and don’t abandon those traditions 
lightly. Part of those traditions is devotion to the gods of 
the dwarves, who uphold the dwarven ideals of industri- 
ous labor, skill in battle, and devotion to the forge. 


CLANS AND KINGDOMS 


Dwarven kingdoms stretch deep beneath the mountains 
where the dwarves mine gems and precious metals and 
forge items of wonder. They love the beauty and artistry 
of precious metals and fine jewelry, and in some dwarves 
this love festers into avarice. Whatever wealth they can't 
find in their mountains, they gain through trade. 

The chief unit of dwarven society is the clan. Even 
dwarves who live far from their own kingdoms cherish 
their clan affiliations, recognize related dwarves, and 
invoke their ancestors’ names in oaths and curses. To be 
clanless is the worst fate that can befall a dwarf. 

Dwarves in other lands are typically artisans, espe- 
cially weaponsmiths, armorers, and jewelers. Some be- 
come mercenaries or bodyguards, highly sought after for 
their courage and loyalty. 


Gops, GOLD, AND CLAN 


Dwarves who take up the adventuring life might be moti- 
vated by a desire for treasure. Other dwarves are driven 
by the inspiration of a deity, a direct calling or simply a 
desire to bring glory to one of the dwarf gods. Clan and 
ancestry are also important motivators. A dwarf might 
seek to restore a clan’s lost honor, avenge an ancient 
wrong the clan suffered, or earn a new place within the 
clan after having been exiled. Or a dwarf might search for 
the axe wielded by a mighty ancestor long ago. 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING A CHARACTER 


DWARF TRAITS 


Your dwarf character has the following traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution score in- 
creases by 2. 

Age. Dwarves mature at the same rate as humans, but 
they're considered young until they reach the age of 50. 
On average, they live about 350 years. 

Alignment. Most dwarves are lawful, believing firmly 
in the benefits of a well-ordered society. They tend to- 
ward good as well, with a strong sense of fair play and a 
belief that everyone deserves to share in the benefits of a 
just order. 

Size. Dwarves stand between 4 and 5 feet tall and aver- 
age about 150 pounds. Your size is Medium. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feet. Your speed 
isn't reduced by wearing heavy armor. 

Darkvision. Accustomed to life underground, you have 
superior vision in dark and dim conditions. You can see 
in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were bright light, 
and in darkness as if it were dim light. You can't discern 
color in darkness, only shades of gray. 

Dwarven Resilience. You have advantage on saving 
throws against poison, and you have resistance against 
poison damage (see page 38 for the resistance rule). 

Dwarven Combat Training. You have proficiency with 
the battleaxe, handaxe, light hammer, and warhammer. 

Tool Proficiency. You gain proficiency with the arti- 
san's tools of your choice: smith's tools, brewer's supplies, 
or mason's tools. 

Stonecunning. Whenever you make an Intelligence 
(History) check related to the origin of stonework, you are 
considered proficient in the History skill and add double 
your proficiency bonus to the check, instead of your nor- 
mal proficiency bonus. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Dwarvish. Dwarvish is full of hard consonants and 
guttural sounds, and those characteristics spill over into 
whatever other language a dwarf might speak. 

Subrace. Two main subraces of dwarves populate the 
worlds of D&D: hill dwarves and mountain dwarves. 
Choose one of these subraces, and add its traits to your 
other racial traits. 


HILL DWARF 
As a hill dwarf, you have keen senses, deep intuition, and 
remarkable resilience. The gold dwarves of the Forgotten 
Realms are hill dwarves. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score in- 
creases by 1. 

Dwarven Toughness. Your hit point maximum 
increases by 1, and it increases by 1 every time you 
gain a level. 


MOUNTAIN DWARF 
As a mountain dwarf, you're strong and hardy, accus- 
tomed to a difficult life in rugged terrain. You're probably 
on the tall side (for a dwarf), and tend toward lighter col- 
oration. The shield dwarves of the North in the Forgotten 
Realms are mountain dwarves. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score in- 
creases by 2. 

Dwarven Armor Training. You have proficiency with 
light and medium armor. 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING A CHARACTER 


ELF 


A people of otherworldly grace, elves dwell in places 
of ethereal beauty, in the midst of ancient forests or in 
spires glittering with faerie light, where soft music drifts 
through the air and gentle fragrances waft on the breeze. 
Elves encountered outside their own lands are com- 
monly traveling minstrels, artists, or sages. Human no- 
bles compete for the services of elf instructors to teach 
swordplay or magic to their children. 


A TIMELESS PERSPECTIVE 


Elves can live well over 700 years. They are more often 
amused than excited and more likely to be curious than 
greedy. They tend to remain aloof and unfazed by petty 
happenstance. When pursuing a goal, however, whether 
adventuring on a mission or learning a new skill or art, 
elves can be focused and relentless. They are slow to 
make friends and enemies, and even slower to forget 
them. They reply to petty insults with disdain and to seri- 
ous insults with vengeance. 

Like the branches of a young tree, elves are flexible 
in the face of danger. They trust in diplomacy and com- 
promise to resolve differences before they escalate to 
violence. They have been known to retreat from intru- 
sions into their woodland homes, confident that they can 
simply wait the invaders out. But when the need arises, 
elves reveal a stern martial side, demonstrating skill with 
sword, bow, and strategy. 


EXPLORATION AND ADVENTURE 


Elves take up adventuring out of wanderlust. Since they 
are so long-lived, they can enjoy centuries of exploration 
and discovery. Elves also enjoy exercising their martial 
prowess or gaining greater magical power, and adventur- 
ing allows them to do so. 


ELF NAMES 


Elves are considered children until they declare them- 
selves adults, some time after the hundredth birthday, 
and before this period they are called by child names. 
Little distinction exists between male names and female 
names for elves of any age. 

On declaring adulthood, an elf selects a new name, al- 
though family and friends might continue to use the child 
name. In addition, every elf bears a family name, typically 
a combination of other Elvish words. Some elves trav- 
eling among humans translate their family names into 
Common, but others retain the Elvish version. 


ELF TRAITS 


Your elf character has the following traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity score in- 
creases by 2. 

Age. Although elves reach physical maturity at about 
the same age as humans, the elven understanding of 
adulthood goes beyond physical growth to encompass 
worldly experience. An elf typically claims adulthood 
and an adult name around the age of 100 and can live 
to be 750 years old. 

Alignment. Elves love freedom, variety, and self-ex- 
pression, so they lean strongly toward the gentler aspects 


of chaos. They value and protect others’ freedom as well 
as their own, and they are more often good than not. 

Size. Elves range from under 5 to over 6 feet tall and 
have slender builds. Your size is Medium. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Darkvision. Accustomed to twilit forests and the night 
sky, you have superior vision in dark and dim conditions. 
You can see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were 
bright light, and in darkness as if it were dim light. You 
can't discern color in darkness, only shades of gray. 

Keen Senses. You have proficiency in the Percep- 
tion skill. 

Fey Ancestry. You have advantage on saving throws 
against being charmed, and magic can’t put you to sleep. 

Trance. Elves don't need to sleep. Instead, they medi- 
tate deeply, remaining semiconscious, for 4 hours a day. 
(The Common word for such meditation is "trance.") 
While meditating, you can dream after a fashion: such 
dreams are actually mental exercises that have become 
reflexive through years of practice. After resting in this 
way, you gain the same benefit that a human does from 8 
hours of sleep. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Elvish. Elvish is fluid, with subtle intonations and 
intricate grammar. Elven literature is rich and varied, and 
their songs and poems are famous among other races. 
Many bards learn their language so they can add Elvish 
ballads to their repertoires. 

Subrace. Ancient divides among elves resulted in three 
main subraces: high elves, wood elves, and dark elves, 
who are commonly called drow. This rulebook presents 
two of these subraces to choose from: high elves and 
wood elves. Choose one of these subraces, and add its 
traits to your other racial traits. 


HicH ELF 

As a high elf, you have a keen mind and a mastery of at 
least the basics of magic. In many of the worlds of D&D, 
there are two kinds of high elves. One type (which in- 
cludes the sun elves of the Forgotten Realms) is haughty 
and reclusive, believing themselves to be superior to non- 
elves and even other elves. The other type (including the 
moon elves of the Forgotten Realms) are more common 
and more friendly, and often encountered among humans 
and other races. 

The sun elves of the Forgotten Realms (also called gold 
elves or sunrise elves) have bronze skin and hair of сор- 
per, black, or golden blond. Their eyes аге golden, silver, 
or black. Moon elves (also called silver elves or gray elves) 
are much paler, with alabaster skin sometimes tinged 
with blue. They often have hair of silver-white, black, or 
blue, but various shades of blond, brown, and red aren't 
uncommon. Their eyes are blue or green and flecked 
with gold. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Intelligence score in- 
creases by 1. 

Elf Weapon Training. You have proficiency with the 
longsword, shortsword, shortbow, and longbow. 

Cantrip. You know one cantrip of your choice from the 
wizard spell list. Intelligence is your spellcasting abil- 
ity for it. 

Extra Language. You can speak, read, and write one 
extra language of your choice. 


Woop ELF 

As a wood elf, you have keen senses and intuition, and 
your fleet feet carry you quickly and stealthily through 
your native forests. In the Forgotten Realms, wood elves 
(also called wild elves, green elves, or forest elves) are 
reclusive and distrusting of non-elves. 

Wood elves' skin tends to be copperish in hue, some- 
times with traces of green. Their hair tends toward 
browns and blacks, but it is occasionally blond or cop- 
per-colored. Their eyes are green, brown, or hazel. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score in- 
creases by 1. 

Elf Weapon Training. You have proficiency with the 
longsword, shortsword, shortbow, and longbow. 

Fleet of Foot. Your base walking speed increases 
to 35 feet. 

Mask of the Wild. You can attempt to hide even when 
you are only lightly obscured by foliage, heavy rain, fall- 
ing snow, mist, and other natural phenomena. 


HALFLING 


The comforts of home are the goals of most halflings: a 
place to settle in peace and quiet, far from marauding 
monsters and clashing armies; a blazing fire and a gen- 
erous meal; fine drink and fine conversation. Though 
some halflings live out their days in remote agricultural 
communities, others form nomadic bands that travel con- 
stantly, lured by the open road and the wide horizon to 
discover the wonders of new lands and peoples. 


SMALL AND PRACTICAL 


The diminutive halflings survive in a world full of larger 
creatures by avoiding notice or, barring that, avoiding 
offense. Standing about 3 feet tall, they appear relatively 
harmless and so have managed to survive for centuries 
in the shadow of empires and on the edges of wars. 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING A CHARACTER 


Halflings like to wear practical clothes, favoring bright 
colors. Halfling practicality extends beyond their cloth- 
ing. They're concerned with basic needs and simple 
pleasures and have little use for ostentation. Even the 
wealthiest of halflings keep their treasures locked in a 
cellar rather than on display for all to see. They have a 
knack for finding the most straightforward solution to a 
problem, and have little patience for dithering. 


KIND AND CURIOUS 


Halflings are an affable and cheerful people. They сһег- 
ish the bonds of family and friendship as well as the com- 
forts of hearth and home. Even adventurers among them 
usually venture into the world for reasons of community, 
friendship, wanderlust, or curiosity. They love discover- 
ing new things, even simple things, such as an exotic food 
or an unfamiliar style of clothing. 

Halflings are easily moved to pity and hate to see any 
living thing suffer. They are generous, happily sharing 
what they have even in lean times. 


HALFLING TRAITS 


Your halfling character has the following traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Dexterity score in- 
creases by 2. 

Age. A halfling reaches adulthood at the age of 20 
and generally lives into the middle of his or her sec- 
ond century. 

Alignment. Most halflings are lawful good. As a rule, 
they are good-hearted and kind, hate to see others in 
pain, and have no tolerance for oppression. They are 
also very orderly and traditional, leaning heavily on 
the support of their community and the comfort of 
their old ways. 

Size. Halflings average about 3 feet tall and weigh 
about 40 pounds. Your size is Small. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feet. 

Lucky. When you roll a 1 on the d20 for an attack roll, 
ability check, or saving throw, you can reroll the die and 
must use the new roll. 

Brave. You have advantage on saving throws against 
being frightened. 

Halfling Nimbleness. You can move through the space 
of any creature that is of a size larger than yours. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and Halfling. The Halfling language isn't secret, but hal- 
flings are loath to share it with others. They write very lit- 
tle, so they don't have a rich body of literature. Their oral 
tradition, however, is very strong. Almost all halflings 
speak Common to converse with the people in whose 
lands they dwell or through which they are traveling. 

Subrace. The two main kinds of halfling, lightfoot and 
Stout, are more like closely related families than true sub- 
races. Choose one of these subraces, and add its traits to 
your other racial traits. 


LIGHTFOOT 

As a lightfoot halfling, you can easily hide from notice, 
even using other people as cover. You're inclined to be 
especially affable. In the Forgotten Realms, lightfoot 
halflings have spread the farthest and thus are the most 
common variety. 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING A CHARACTER 


Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma score in- 
creases by 1. 

Naturally Stealthy. You can attempt to hide even when 
you are obscured only by a creature that is at least one 
size larger than you. 


STOUT 
As a stout halfling, you're hardier than average. In the 
Forgotten Realms, these halflings are called strong- 
hearts, and they're most common in the south. 

Ability Score Increase. Your Constitution score in- 
creases by 1. 

Stout Resilience. You have advantage on saving 
throws against poison, and you have resistance against 
poison damage. 


HUMAN 


In the reckonings of most worlds, humans are the young- 
est of the common races, short-lived in comparison to 
dwarves, elves, and dragons. Perhaps it is because of 
their shorter lives that they strive to achieve as much as 
they can in the years they are given. Or maybe they feel 
they have something to prove to the elder species, and 
that's why they build their mighty empires. Whatever 
drives them, humans are the innovators, the achievers, 
and the pioneers of the worlds. 


VARIETY IN ALL THINGS 


Humans are the most adaptable and ambitious people 
among the common races. They have widely varying 
tastes, morals, and customs in the many different lands 
where they have settled. When they settle, though, they 
stay: they build cities to last for the ages. An individual 
human might have a relatively short life span, but a 
human nation or culture preserves traditions and in- 
stitutions—temples, governments, libraries, and codes 
of law—with origins far beyond the reach of any single 
human's memory. They live fully in the present—making 
them well suited to the adventuring life—but also plan for 
the future, striving to leave a lasting legacy. Individually 
and as a group, humans are adaptable opportunists, and 
they stay alert to changing political and social dynamics. 


HUMAN TRAITS 


Your human character has the following traits. 

Ability Score Increase. Your ability scores each in- 
crease by 1. 

Age. Humans reach adulthood in their late teens and 
live less than a century. 

Alignment. Humans tend toward no particular align- 
ment. The best and the worst are found among them. 

Size. Humans vary widely in height and build, from 
barely 5 feet to well over 6 feet tall. Regardless of your 
position in that range, your size is Medium. 

Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet. 

Languages. You can speak, read, and write Common 
and one extra language of your choice. Humans typically 
learn the languages of other peoples they deal with, 
including obscure dialects. They are fond of sprinkling 
their speech with words borrowed from other tongues: 
Orc curses, Elvish musical expressions, Dwarvish mili- 
tary phrases, and so on. 


CHARACTER CLASSES 


Five classes—bard, cleric, fighter, rogue, and wizard—are 
presented here. See the Player's Handbook for expanded 
versions of these classes and for whole other classes. 


BARD 


Whether poet, scholar, or scoundrel, a bard weaves 
magic through words and music to inspire allies, demor- 
alize foes, manipulate minds, and heal wounds. The bard 
is a master of song, speech, and the magic they contain. 
Bards say that the multiverse was spoken into existence, 
that the words of the gods gave it shape, and that echoes 
of these primordial Words of Creation still resound 
throughout the cosmos. The music of bards is an attempt 
to snatch and harness those echoes, subtly woven into 
their spells and powers. 


THE INSPIRATIONS OF ADVENTURE 
DO ENTE NO LAV ENO RE 


Rarely do bards settle in one place for long, and their 
desire to travel—to find new tales to tell—makes an ad- 
venturing career a natural calling. Every adventure is 
an opportunity to learn, practice a variety of skills, enter 
long-forgotten tombs, discover lost works of magic, de- 
cipher old tomes, travel to strange places, or encounter 
exotic creatures. 

Bards love to accompany heroes to witness their deeds 
firsthand. A bard who can tell an awe-inspiring story 
from personal experience earns renown among other 
bards. Indeed, after telling so many stories about heroes 
accomplishing mighty deeds, many bards take these 
themes to heart and assume heroic roles themselves. 


CREATING A BARD 


What's the story of your past? Were you an apprentice, 
following another bard until you were ready to strike out 
on your own? Or did you attend a college where you stud- 
ied bardic lore and practiced musical magic? Perhaps you 
were a runaway or an orphan, befriended by a wandering 
bard who became your mentor. Or you might have been 

a noble child tutored by a master. Perhaps you stumbled 
into the clutches of a hag, making a bargain for a musical 
gift in addition to your life and freedom, but at what cost? 


Quick Вор 

You can make a bard quickly by following these 
suggestions. First, Charisma should be your highest 
ability score, followed by Dexterity. Second, choose 
the entertainer background. Third, choose the 


Cantrips 
Known 


THE BARD 
Proficiency 
Level Bonus Features 
Ist +2 Spellcasting, Bardic Inspiration (d6) 2 
2nd +2 Jack of All Trades, Song of Rest (46) 2 
3rd +2 Bard College, Expertise 2 
4th +2 Ability Score Improvement 3 
5th +3 Bardic Inspiration (d8), 3 
Font of Inspiration 
6th +3 Countercharm, Bard College feature 3 


dancing lights and vicious mockery cantrips, along with 
the following 1st-level spells: charm person, detect magic, 
healing word, and thunderwave. 


CLASS FEATURES 


As a bard, you gain the following class features. 


HIT POINTS 

Hit Dice: 1d8 per bard level 

Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constitution modifier 

Hit Points at Higher Levels: 1d8 (or 5) + your Constitu- 
tion modifier per bard level after 1st 


PROFICIENCIES 

Armor: Light armor 

Weapons: Simple weapons, hand crossbows, long- 
swords, rapiers, shortswords 

Tools: Three musical instruments of your choice 


Saving Throws: Dexterity, Charisma 
Skills: Choose any three 


EQUIPMENT 
You start with the following equipment, in addition to the 
equipment granted by your background: 


“ (a) rapier, (b) longsword, or (c) any simple weapon 
* (а) diplomat's pack or (b) entertainer's pack 

* A musical instrument 

* Leather armor and a dagger 


— Spell Slots per Spell Level— 


Spells 
Known Ist 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 
4 ee es ce m 
Эм Sn) тш ee, ee eee 
6 4 27 Ча = — = — = — 
7 SEES AE Saree 
8 4 3 2 -- с- -- -- -- — 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING А CHARACTER 


SPELLCASTING 


You have learned to reshape reality in harmony with your 
wishes and music. Your spells are part of your vast reper- 
toire, magic that you can tune to different situations. See 


chapter 4 for the general rules of spellcasting. 


BARD SPELL LIST 


Here's the list of spells you consult when you learn a bard 
spell. The list is organized by spell level, not character 
level. If a spell can be cast as a ritual, the ritual tag ap- 
pears after the spell’s name. See the Player’s Handbook 
for an expanded version of this list. 


CANTRIPS (о LEVEL) longstrider 
light silent image 
mage hand sleep 
mending thunderwave 
minor illusion 
prestidigitation 2ND LEVEL 
vicious mockery hold person 
invisibility 
15Т LEVEL knock 
charm person lesser restoration 
comprehend languages (ritual) ^ shatter 


cure wounds 


silence (ritual) 


detect magic (ritual) suggestion 

disguise self 

faerie fire 3RD LEVEL 

feather fall dispel magic 

healing word fear 

identify (ritual) major image 
sending 


CANTRIPS 
You know two cantrips of your choice from the bard spell 
list. You learn additional bard cantrips of your choice at 


higher levels, as shown in the Cantrips Known column of 
the Bard table. 


SPELL SLOTS 
The Bard table shows how many spell slots you have to 
cast your bard spells of 1st level and higher. To cast one 
of these spells, you must expend a slot of the spell's level 
or higher. You regain all expended spell slots when you 
finish a long rest. 

For example, if you know the Ist-level spell cure 
wounds and have a 1st-level and a 2nd-level spell slot 
available, you can cast cure wounds using either slot. 


SPELLS KNOWN ОЕ Ist LEVEL AND HIGHER 
You know four 1st-level spells of your choice from the 
bard spell list. 

The Spells Known column of the Bard table shows 
when you learn more bard spells of your choice. Each of 
these spells must be of a level for which you have spell 
slots, as shown on the table. For instance, when you 
reach 3rd level in this class, you can learn one new spell 
of 1st or 2nd level. 

Additionally, when you gain a level in this class, you 
can choose one of the bard spells you know and replace 
it with another spell from the bard spell list, which also 
must be of a level for which you have spell slots. 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING A CHARACTER 


SPELLCASTING ABILITY 

Charisma is your spellcasting ability for your bard spells. 
You use your Charisma whenever a spell refers to your 
spellcasting ability. In addition, you use your Charisma 
modifier when setting the saving throw DC for a bard 
spell you cast and when making an attack roll with one, 
as explained in chapter 4. 


RITUAL CASTING 

You can cast any bard spell you know as a ritual if 
that spell has the ritual tag. See chapter 4 for how 
rituals work. 


SPELLCASTING Focus 
You can use a musical instrument (see chapter 3 for ex- 
amples) as a spellcasting focus for your bard spells. 


BARDIC INSPIRATION 


You can inspire others through stirring words or music. 
To do so, you use a bonus action on your turn to choose 
one creature other than yourself within 60 feet of you 
who can hear you. That creature gains one Bardic Inspi- 
ration die, a d6. 

Once within the next 10 minutes, the creature can roll 
the die and add the number rolled to one ability check, 
attack roll, or saving throw it makes. The creature can 
wait until after it rolls the d20 before deciding to use the 
Bardic Inspiration die, but must decide before the DM 
says whether the roll succeeds or fails. Once the Bardic 
Inspiration die is rolled, it is lost. A creature can have 
only one Bardic Inspiration die at a time. 

You can use this feature a number of times equal to 
your Charisma modifier (a minimum of once). You regain 
any expended uses when you finish a long rest. 

Your Bardic Inspiration die becomes a d8 when you 
reach 5th level in this class. 


JACK OF ALL TRADES 


Starting at 2nd level, you can add half your proficiency 
bonus, rounded down, to any ability check you make that 
doesn't already include your proficiency bonus. 


SONG OF REST 


Beginning at 2nd level, you can use soothing music or 
oration to help revitalize your wounded allies during а 
short rest. If you or any friendly creatures who can hear 
your performance regain hit points at the end of the short 
rest by spending one or more Hit Dice, each of those 
creatures regains an extra 1d6 hit points. 


BARD COLLEGE 


At 3rd level, you delve into the advanced techniques of 

a bard college of your choice: the College of Lore or the 
College of Valor, both detailed at the end of the class de- 
scription. Your choice grants you features at 3rd level and 
again at 6th. 


EXPERTISE 
i ee eo haa ee А 


At 3rd level, choose two of your skill proficiencies. Your 
proficiency bonus is doubled for any ability check you 
make that uses either of the chosen proficiencies. 


ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT 


When you reach 4th level, you can increase one ability 
score of your choice by 2, or you can increase two ability 
Scores of your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase 
an ability score above 20 using this feature. 


FONT OF INSPIRATION 


Beginning when you reach 5th level, you regain all of 
your expended uses of Bardic Inspiration when you finish 
a short or long rest. 


COUNTERCHARM 


At 6th level, you gain the ability to use musical notes or 
words of power to disrupt mind-influencing effects. As 
an action, you can start a performance that lasts until 
the end of your next turn. During that time, you and any 
friendly creatures within 30 feet of you have advantage 
on saving throws against being frightened or charmed. 
A creature must be able to hear you to gain this benefit. 
The performance ends early if you are incapacitated or 
silenced or if you voluntarily end it (no action required). 


BARD COLLEGES 


Bards form loose associations, which they call colleges, 
to facilitate their gatherings and preserve their traditions. 


COLLEGE OF LORE 


Bards of the College of Lore know something about most 
things, collecting bits of knowledge from sources as 
diverse as scholarly tomes and peasant tales. Whether 
singing folk ballads in taverns or elaborate compositions 
in royal courts, these bards use their gifts to hold audi- 
ences spellbound. 


BONUS PROFICIENCIES 


When you join the College of Lore at 3rd level, you gain 
proficiency with three skills of your choice. 


CUTTING WORDS 

Also at 3rd level, you learn how to use your wit to distract, 
confuse, and otherwise sap the confidence and compe- 
tence of others. When a creature that you can see within 
60 feet of you makes an attack roll, an ability check, or a 
damage roll, you can use your reaction to expend one of 
your uses of Bardic Inspiration, rolling a Bardic Inspi- 
ration die and subtracting the number rolled from the 
creature's roll. You can choose to use this feature after 
the creature makes its roll, but before the DM determines 
whether the attack roll or ability check succeeds or fails, 
or before the creature deals its damage. The creature 

is immune if it can't hear you or if it’s immune to be- 

ing charmed. 


ADDITIONAL MAGICAL SECRETS 

At 6th level, you learn two spells of your choice from any 
class. A spell you choose must be of a level you can cast, 
as shown on the Bard table, or a cantrip. The chosen 
spells count as bard spells for you but don’t count against 
the number of bard spells you know. 


COLLEGE OF VALOR 


The daring bards of the College of Valor keep alive the 
memory of the great heroes of the past, and thereby in- 
spire a new generation of heroes. They travel the land 
to witness great events firsthand and to ensure that the 
memory of those events doesn’t pass from the world. 


BONUS PROFICIENCIES 
When you join the College of Valor at 3rd level, you 


gain proficiency with medium armor, shields, and mar- 
tial weapons. 


СОМВАТ INSPIRATION 

Also at 3rd level, you learn to inspire others in battle. A 
creature that has a Bardic Inspiration die from you can 
roll that die and add the number rolled to a weapon dam- 
age roll it just made. Alternatively, when an attack roll is 
made against the creature, it can use its reaction to roll 
the Bardic Inspiration die and add the number rolled to 
its AC against that attack, after seeing the roll but before 
knowing whether it hits or misses. 


EXTRA ATTACK 


Starting at 6th level, you can attack twice, instead of 
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. 


CLERIC 


Clerics are intermediaries between the mortal world and 
the distant planes of the gods. As varied as the gods they 
serve, clerics strive to embody the handiwork of their dei- 
ties and are imbued with magic. 


HEALERS AND WARRIORS 


Divine magic, as the name suggests, is the power of the 
gods, flowing from them into the world. Clerics are con- 
duits for that power, manifesting it as miraculous effects. 
Harnessing divine magic doesn't rely on study or train- 
ing. A cleric might learn formulaic prayers and ancient 
rites, but the ability to cast cleric spells relies on devotion 
and an intuitive sense of a deity's wishes. 

Clerics combine the helpful magic of healing and in- 
spiring their allies with spells that harm and hinder foes. 
They can provoke awe and dread, lay curses of plague 
or poison, and even call down flames from heaven to con- 
sume their enemies. For those evildoers who will benefit 
most from a mace to the head, clerics depend on their 
combat training to let them wade into melee with the 
power of the gods on their side. 


DIVINE AGENTS 


Not every acolyte or officiant at a temple or shrine is a 
cleric. Some priests are called to a simple life of temple 
service, carrying out their gods' will through prayer and 
sacrifice, not by magic and strength of arms. In some cit- 
ies, priesthood amounts to a political office, involving no 
communion with a god at all. True clerics are rare. 
When a cleric takes up an adventuring life, it is usually 
because a god demands it. This path often involves brav- 
ing dangers beyond the walls of civilization. Many clerics 
are also expected to protect their deities’ worshipers, 
which can mean fighting rampaging monsters, negotiat- 
ing peace between nations, or sealing a fiendish portal. 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING A CHARACTER 


THE CLERIC 


Proficiency 
Level Bonus Features 
Ist +2 Spellcasting, Divine Domain 
2nd +2 Channel Divinity (1/rest), 
Divine Domain feature 
3rd +2 — 
4th *2 Ability Score Improvement 
5th 43 Destroy Undead (CR 1/2) 
6th +3 Channel Divinity (2/rest), 


Divine Domain feature 


CREATING A CLERIC 


As you create a cleric, the most important question to 
consider is which deity to serve. The Divine Domains 
section at the end of this class description suggests some 
gods that your cleric might serve. 

Once you've chosen a deity, consider your cleric’s rela- 
tionship to that god. Did you enter this service willingly? 
Or did the god choose you? What are your ultimate goals? 
Does your deity have a special task in mind for you? 


Quick BUILD 

You can make a cleric quickly by following these sugges- 
tions. First, Wisdom should be your highest ability score, 
followed by Strength or Constitution. Second, choose the 
acolyte background. 


CLASS FEATURES 


As a cleric, you gain the following class features. 


Hit Points 

Hit Dice: 1d8 per cleric level 

Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constitution modifier 

Hit Points at Higher Levels: 148 (or 5) + your Constitu- 
tion modifier per cleric level after 1st 


PROFICIENCIES 

Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields 
Weapons: Simple weapons 

Tools: None 


Saving Throws: Wisdom, Charisma 
Skills: Choose two from History, Insight, Medicine, Per- 
suasion, and Religion 


EQUIPMENT 
You start with the following equipment, in addition to the 
equipment granted by your background: 


* (a) mace or (b) warhammer (if proficient) 

* (a) scale mail, (b) leather armor, or (c) chain mail (if 
proficient) 

“ (а) light crossbow and 20 bolts or (Б) any 
simple weapon 

+ (а) priest’s pack or (Б) explorer's pack 

* Ashield and a holy symbol 


SPELLCASTING 


As a conduit for divine power, you can cast cleric spells. 
See chapter 4 for the general rules of spellcasting. 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING A CHARACTER 


Cantrips — Spell Slots per Spell Level — 


Known Ist 2nd 3rd 4th Sth 6th 7th 8th 9th 


А ЕЕ АС ыз ee 


3-7 КЗ I cL nj АЕ a кейш 


ж ы ы о 
Aa AAA 
WwW wn 

| 

| 

| 

| 

| 

| 

| 


CLERIC SPELL LisT 

Here's the list of spells you consult when you learn a 
cleric cantrip or prepare a cleric spell of 1st level or 
higher. The list is organized by spell level, not character 
level. If a spell can be cast as a ritual, the ritual tag ap- 
pears after the spell's name. See the Player's Handbook 
for an expanded version of this list. 


CANTRIPS (o LEVEL) 2ND LEVEL 
guidance aid 

light augury (ritual) 
mending hold person 
resistance lesser restoration 
sacred flame silence (ritual) 
thaumaturgy spiritual weapon 
1ST LEVEL warding bond 
bless 3RD LEVEL 
command beacon of hope 
cure wounds dispel magic 


detect magic (ritual) mass healing word 


guiding bolt remove curse 
healing word revivify 

inflict wounds spirit guardians 
sanctuary 

shield of faith 

CANTRIPS 


At Ist level, you know three cantrips of your choice from 
the cleric spell list. You learn additional cleric cantrips 
of your choice at higher levels, as shown in the Cantrips 
Known column of the Cleric table. 


PREPARING AND CASTING SPELLS 

The Cleric table shows how many spell slots you have to 
cast your cleric spells of 1st level and higher. To cast one 
of these spells, you must expend a slot of the spell's level 
or higher. You regain all expended spell slots when you 
finish a long rest. 

You prepare the list of cleric spells that are available for 
you to cast, choosing from the cleric spell list. When you 
do so, choose a number of cleric spells equal to your Wis- 
dom modifier + your cleric level (minimum of one spell). 
The spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. 

For example, if you are a 3rd-level cleric, you have four 
Ist-level and two 2nd-level spell slots. With a Wisdom of 
16, your list of prepared spells can include six spells of 
1st or 2nd level, in any combination. If you prepare the 
Ist-level spell cure wounds, you can cast it using а Ist- 
level or 2nd-level slot. Casting the spell doesn't remove it 
from your list of prepared spells. 


You сап change your list of prepared spells when you 
finish a long rest. Preparing a new list of cleric spells 
requires time spent in prayer and meditation: at least 1 
minute per spell level for each spell on your list. 


SPELLCASTING ABILITY 

Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your cleric spells. 
The power of your spells comes from your devotion to 
your deity. You use your Wisdom whenever a cleric spell 
refers to your spellcasting ability. In addition, you use 
your Wisdom modifier when setting the saving throw DC 
for a cleric spell you cast and when making an attack roll 
with one, as explained in chapter 4. 


RITUAL CASTING 
You can cast a cleric spell as a ritual if that spell has the 
ritual tag and you have the spell prepared. See chapter 4 
for how rituals work. 


SPELLCASTING Focus 
You can use a holy symbol (found in chapter 3) as a spell- 
casting focus for your cleric spells. 


DIVINE DOMAIN 


Choose one domain related to your deity: Life or War, 
both of which are detailed at the end of the class descrip- 
tion. See the Player's Handbook for more domains. 

Your choice grants you domain spells and other fea- 
tures when you choose it at Ist level. It also grants you 
additional ways to use Channel Divinity when you gain 
that feature at 2nd level, and an additional benefit at 
6th level. 


DOMAIN SPELLS 
Each domain has a list of spells—its domain spells—that 
you gain at the cleric levels noted in the domain descrip- 
tion. Once you gain a domain spell, you always have it 
prepared, and it doesn’t count against the number of 
spells you can prepare each day. 

If you have a domain spell that doesn’t appear on 
the cleric spell list, the spell is nonetheless a cleric 
spell for you. 


CHANNEL DIVINITY 


At 2nd level, you gain the ability to channel divine energy 
directly from your deity, using that energy to fuel magical 
effects. You start with two such effects: Turn Undead and 
an effect determined by your domain. Some domains 
grant you additional effects as you advance in levels, as 
noted in the domain description. 

When you use your Channel Divinity, you choose which 
effect to create. You must then finish a short or long rest 
to use your Channel Divinity again. 

Some Channel Divinity effects require saving throws. 
When you use such an effect from this class, the DC 
equals your cleric spell save DC. 

Beginning at 6th level, you can use your Channel Divin- 
ity twice between rests. When you finish a short or long 
rest, you regain your expended uses. 


CHANNEL DIVINITY: TURN UNDEAD 
As an action, you present your holy symbol and speak a 
prayer censuring the undead. Each undead that can see 


or hear you within 30 feet of you must make a Wisdom 
saving throw. If the creature fails its saving throw, it is 
turned for 1 minute or until it takes any damage. 

A turned creature must spend its turns trying to move 
as far away from you as it can, and it can’t willingly move 
to a space within 30 feet of you. It also can’t take reac- 
tions. For its action, it can use only the Dash action or 
try to escape from an effect that prevents it from moving. 
If there’s nowhere to move, the creature can use the 
Dodge action. 


ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT 


When you reach 4th level, you can increase one ability 
score of your choice by 2, or you can increase two ability 
scores of your choice by 1. As normal, you can’t increase 
an ability score above 20 using this feature. 


DESTROY UNDEAD 


Starting at 5th level, when an undead fails its saving 
throw against your Turn Undead feature, the creature is 
instantly destroyed if its challenge rating is 1/2 or lower. 
(Its challenge rating appears in its stat block.) 


DIVINE DOMAINS 


In a pantheon, every deity has influence over different 
aspects of mortal life and civilization, called a deity’s 
domain. All the domains over which a deity has influence 
are called the deity's portfolio. As a cleric, you choose опе 
aspect of your deity’s portfolio to emphasize, and you are 
granted powers related to that domain. 


LIFE DOMAIN 


The gods of the Life domain promote vitality through 
healing the sick and wounded, caring for those in need, 


CHAPTER 1: GREATING A CHARACTER 


and destroying the forces of undeath. Almost апу non-evil 
deity can claim influence over this domain, particularly 
agricultural deities (such as Chauntea, Arawai, and 
Demeter), sun gods (such as Lathander, Pelor, and Re- 
Horakhty), gods of healing or endurance (such as Ilmater, 
Mishakal, Apollo, and Diancecht), and gods of home and 
community (such as Hestia, Hathor, and Boldrei). 


ШЕЕ DOMAIN SPELLS 


Cleric Level Spells 
Ist bless, cure wounds 
3rd lesser restoration, spiritual weapon 
5th beacon of hope, revivify 


BONUS PROFICIENCY 
When you choose this domain at 1st level, you gain profi- 
ciency with heavy armor. 


DISCIPLE OF LIFE 

Also starting at 1st level, your healing spells are more 
effective. Whenever you use a spell of 1st level or higher 
to restore hit points to a creature, the creature regains 
additional hit points equal to 2 + the spell's level. 


CHANNEL DIVINITY: PRESERVE LIFE 
Starting at 2nd level, you can use your Channel Divinity 
to heal the badly injured. 

As an action, you present your holy symbol and evoke 
healing energy that can restore a number of hit points 
equal to five times your cleric level. Choose any creatures 
within 30 feet of you, and divide those hit points among 
them. This feature can restore a creature to no more than 
half of its hit point maximum. You can’t use this feature 
on an undead or a construct. 


BLESSED HEALER 

Beginning at 6th level, the healing spells you cast on 
others heal you as well. When you cast a spell of 1st level 
or higher that restores hit points to a creature other than 
you, you regain hit points equal to 2 + the spell's level. 


WAR DOMAIN 


War has many manifestations. It can make heroes of or- 
dinary people. It can be desperate and horrific. In either 
case, the gods of war inspire warriors to excellence. The 
clerics of such gods excel in battle themselves. Gods of 
war include champions of honor (such as Torm, Heirone- 
ous, and Kiri-Jolith) as well as gods of destruction (such 
as Erythnul, the Fury, Gruumsh, and Ares) and gods 

of domination (such as Bane, Hextor, and Maglubiyet). 
Other war gods (such as Tempus, Nike, and Nuada) take 
а тоге neutral stance. 


War DOMAIN SPELLS 


Cleric Level Spells 
Ist divine favor, shield of faith 
3rd magic weapon, spiritual weapon 
5th crusader’s mantle, spirit guardians 


BONUS PROFICIENCIES 


At 1st level, you gain proficiency with martial weapons 
and heavy armor. 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING А CHARACTER 


WAR PRIEST 

From Ist level, your god delivers bolts of inspiration to 

you while you're in battle. When you use the Attack ac- 

tion, you can make one weapon attack as a bonus action. 
You can use this feature a number of times equal to 

your Wisdom modifier (a minimum of once). You regain 

all expended uses when you finish a long rest. 


CHANNEL DIVINITY: GUIDED STRIKE 

Starting at 2nd level, you can use your Channel Divinity 
to strike with supernatural accuracy. When you make an 
attack roll, you can use your Channel Divinity to gain a 
+10 bonus to the roll. You make this choice after you see 
the roll, but before the DM says whether the attack hits 
or misses. 


CHANNEL Divinity: WAR Gop’s BLESSING 

At 6th level, when a creature within 30 feet of you makes 
an attack roll, you can use your reaction to grant that 
creature a +10 bonus to the roll, using your Channel 
Divinity. You make this choice after you see the roll, but 
before the DM says whether the attack hits or misses. 


FIGHTER 


Questing knights, mighty champions, elite soldiers, and 
cunning mercenaries—as fighters, they all share an un- 
paralleled mastery with weapons and armor. And they 
are well acquainted with death, staring it defiantly in the 
face as they defend their friends and destroy their foes. 


WELL-ROUNDED SPECIALISTS 


Every fighter can pick up a weapon and wield it ably. Like- 
wise, a fighter is adept with shields and every form of ar- 
mor. Beyond that basic degree of familiarity, each fighter 
specializes in a certain style of combat. Some concentrate 
on archery, some on fighting with two weapons at once, 
and some on augmenting their martial skills with magic. 
This combination of broad general ability and extensive 
specialization makes fighters superior combatants. 


CREATING A FIGHTER 


As you build your fighter, think about two related ele- 
ments of your character's background: Where did you get 
your combat training, and what set you apart from the 
mundane warriors around you? Were you particularly 
brave? Did you get extra help from a mentor? What drove 
you to this training in the first place? 

Perhaps you trained in a war academy, learning strat- 
egy, tactics, and military history. Or you might be self- 
taught. Did you take up the sword as a way to escape 
the limits of life on a farm, or are you following a proud 
family tradition? Where did you get your weapons and ar- 
mor? They might have been heirlooms or military issue, 
or perhaps you scrimped and saved to buy them. 


Quick BUILD 

You can make a fighter quickly by following these sug- 
gestions. First, make Strength or Dexterity your highest 
ability score, depending on whether you want to focus 
on melee weapons or on archery (or finesse weapons). 
Your next-highest score should be Constitution. Second, 
choose the soldier background. 


THE FIGHTER 


Proficiency 

Level Bonus Features 

Ist +2 Fighting Style, Second Wind 
2nd +2 Action Surge (one use) 

3rd +2 Martial Archetype 

4th +2 Ability Score Improvement 
5th +3 Extra Attack 

6th +3 Ability Score Improvement 


CLASS FEATURES 


As a fighter, you gain the following class features. 


Hit Points 

Hit Dice: 1d10 per fighter level 

Hit Points at 1st Level: 10 + your Constitution modifier 

Hit Points at Higher Levels: 1410 (or 6) + your Constitu- 
tion modifier per fighter level after 1st 


PROFICIENCIES 

Armor: All armor, shields 

Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons 
Tools: None 


Saving Throws: Strength, Constitution 

Skills: Choose two skills from Acrobatics, Animal Han- 
dling, Athletics, History, Insight, Intimidation, Percep- 
tion, and Survival 


EQUIPMENT 
You start with the following equipment, in addition to the 
equipment granted by your background: 


* (а) chain mail or (b) leather armor, longbow, 
and 20 arrows 
* (a) martial weapon and a shield or (b) two mar- 
tial weapons 
* (a) light crossbow and 20 bolts or (b) two handaxes 
* (a) dungeoneer's pack or (b) explorer's pack 


FIGHTING STYLE 


Choose one of these options as your specialty: Archery, 

Defense, Dueling, Great Weapon Fighting, Protection, or 
Two-Weapon Fighting. You can’t take a Fighting Style op- 
tion more than once, even if you later get to choose again. 


ARCHERY 


You gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls you make with 
ranged weapons. 


DEFENSE 
While you are wearing armor, you gain a +1 bonus to AC. 


DUELING 

When you are wielding a melee weapon in one hand and 
no other weapons, you gain a +2 bonus to damage rolls 
with that weapon. 


GREAT WEAPON FIGHTING 

When you roll а 1 or 2 on a damage die for an attack you 
make with a melee weapon that you are wielding with 
two hands, you can reroll the die and must use the new 
roll, even if the new roll is a 1 or a 2. The weapon must 
have the two-handed or versatile property for you to gain 
this benefit. 


PROTECTION 
When a creature you can see attacks a target other than 
you that is within 5 feet of you, you can use your reaction 
to impose disadvantage on the attack roll. You must be 
wielding a shield. 


TWO-WEAPON FIGHTING 
When you engage in two-weapon fighting, you can add 
your ability modifier to the damage of the second attack. 


SECOND WIND 


You have a limited well of stamina that you can draw on 
to protect yourself. On your turn, you can use a bonus ac- 
tion to regain hit points equal to 1d10 + your fighter level. 

Once you use this feature, you must finish a short or 
long rest before you can use it again. 


ACTION SURGE 


Starting at 2nd level, you can push yourself beyond your 
normal limits for a moment. On your turn, you can take 
one additional action. 

Once you use this feature, you must finish a short or 
long rest before you can use it again. 


MARTIAL ARCHETYPE 


At 3rd level, you choose an archetype that you strive 

to emulate in your combat styles and techniques. The 
Champion and Eldritch Knight archetypes are detailed 
at the end of the class description; see the Player's Hand- 
book for more information on martial archetypes. 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING A CHARACTER 


ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT 


When you reach 4th level and again at 6th level, you can 
increase one ability score of your choice by 2, or you can 
increase two ability scores of your choice by 1. As nor- 
mal, you can't increase an ability score above 20 using 
this feature. 


EXTRA ATTACK 


Beginning at 5th level, you can attack twice, instead of 
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. 


MARTIAL ARCHETYPES 


Different fighters choose different approaches to perfect- 
ing their fighting prowess. The martial archetype you 
choose to emulate reflects your approach. 


CHAMPION 


The archetypal Champion hones battlefield prowess to 
deadly perfection. 


IMPROVED CRITICAL 
Beginning when you choose this archetype at 3rd 


level, your weapon attacks score a critical hit on a roll 
of 19 or 20. 


ELDRITCH KNIGHT 


The archetypal Eldritch Knight combines the martial 
mastery common to all fighters with a study of magic. 
They focus their study on two of the eight schools of 
magic: abjuration and evocation. These knights learn a 
small number of spells, committing them to memory in- 
stead of keeping them in a spellbook. 


SPELLCASTING 

When you reach 3rd level, you augment your martial 
prowess with the ability to cast spells. See chapter 4 for 
the general rules of spellcasting. You learn your Eldritch 
Knight spells from the wizard spell list (page 22). 


ELDRITCH KNIGHT SPELLCASTING 


Fighter Cantrips Spells —Spell Slots per Spell Level— 


Level Known Known īst 2nd 3rd 4th 


3rd 2 3 2 — — — 
4th 2 E 3 — — -- 
5th 2 4 3 — — — 
6th 2 4 3 — — — 


Cantrips. You learn two cantrips of your choice from 
the wizard spell list. 

Spell Slots. The Eldritch Knight Spellcasting table 
shows how many spell slots you have to cast your wizard 
spells of 1st level and higher. To cast one of these spells, 
you must expend a slot of the spell's level or higher. 

You regain all expended spell slots when you finish a 
long rest. 

For example, if you know the 1st-level spell shield and 
have a Ist-level and a 2nd-level spell slot available, you 
can cast shield using either slot. 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING A CHARACTER 


Spells Known of Ist-Level and Higher. You know 
three 1st-level wizard spells of your choice, two of which 
you must choose from the abjuration and evocation spells 
on the wizard spell list. 

The Spells Known column of the Eldritch Knight Spell- 
casting table shows when you learn more wizard spells 
of Ist level or higher. Each of these spells must be an ab- 
juration or evocation spell of your choice, and must be of 
a level for which you have spell slots. For instance, when 
you reach 4th level in this class, you can learn one new 
spell of 1st level. 

Whenever you gain a level in this class, you can replace 
one of the wizard spells you know with another spell of 
your choice from the wizard spell list. The new spell must 
be of a level for which you have spell slots, and it must be 
an abjuration or evocation spell, unless you're replacing 
the spell you gained at 3rd level from any school of magic. 

Spellcasting Ability. Intelligence is your spellcasting 
ability for your wizard spells. You use your Intelligence 
whenever a spell refers to your spellcasting ability. In 
addition, you use your Intelligence modifier when setting 
the saving throw DC for a wizard spell you cast and when 
making an attack roll with one, as explained in chapter 4. 


ROGUE 


Rogues rely on skill, stealth, and their foes’ vulnerabili- 
ties to get the upper hand in any situation. They have a 
knack for finding the solution to just about any problem, 
demonstrating a resourcefulness and versatility that is 
the cornerstone of any successful adventuring party. 


SKILL AND PRECISION 


Rogues have a broad expertise that few other characters 
can match. Many rogues focus on stealth and deception, 
while others refine skills like climbing, finding and dis- 
arming traps, and opening locks. 

When it comes to combat, rogues prioritize cunning 
over brute strength. A rogue would rather make one pre- 
cise strike, placing it exactly where the attack will hurt 
the target most, than wear an opponent down. 


CREATING A ROGUE 


As you create your rogue character, consider the charac- 
ter's relationship to the law. Do you have a criminal past? 
Are you on the run from the law or from an angry thieves' 
guild master? Or did you leave your guild in search of big- 
ger risks and bigger rewards? Is it greed that drives you 
in your adventures, or some other desire or ideal? 

What led you away from your previous life? Did a con 
or heist gone terribly wrong cause you to reevaluate your 
career? Maybe a successful robbery gave you the coin you 
needed to escape the squalor of your life. Did wanderlust 
finally call you away from your home? 


Quick Вир 

You can make a rogue quickly by following these sug- 
gestions. First, Dexterity should be your highest ability 
score. Make Intelligence your next-highest if you want to 
excel at Investigation. Choose Charisma instead if you 
plan to emphasize deception and social interaction. Sec- 
ond, choose the criminal background. 


THE ROGUE 


Proficiency Sneak 
Level Bonus Attack Features 
15% +2 146 Expertise, Sneak Attack, 
Thieves’ Cant 
2nd +2 146 Сиппіпр Action 
3rd +2 246  Roguish Archetype 
4th +2 2d6 Ability Score Improvement 
5th +3 3d6 Uncanny Dodge 
6th +3 346 Expertise 


CLASS FEATURES 


As a rogue, you have the following class features. 


Hirt Points 

Hit Dice: 1d8 per rogue level 

Hit Points at 1st Level: 8 + your Constitution modifier 

Hit Points at Higher Levels: 1d8 (or 5) * your Constitu- 
tion modifier per rogue level after 1st 


PROFICIENCIES 

Armor: Light armor 

Weapons: Simple weapons, hand crossbows, long- 
Swords, rapiers, shortswords 

Tools: Thieves' tools 


Saving Throws: Dexterity, Intelligence 

Skills: Choose four from Acrobatics, Athletics, Decep- 
tion, Insight, Intimidation, Investigation, Perception, 
Performance, Persuasion, Sleight of Hand, and Stealth 


EQUIPMENT 
You start with the following equipment, in addition to the 
equipment granted by your background: 


* (a) rapier or (b) shortsword 
* (a) shortbow and quiver of 20 arrows or (b) shortsword 
* (a) burglar's pack, (b) dungeoneer's pack, or 
(c) explorer's pack 
* Leather armor, two daggers, and thieves' tools 


EXPERTISE 


At 1st level, choose two of your skill proficiencies, or 
one of your skill proficiencies and your proficiency with 
thieves' tools. Your proficiency bonus is doubled for any 
ability check you make that uses either of the chosen pro- 
ficiencies. 

At 6th level, you can choose two more of your proficien- 
cies (in skills or with thieves' tools) to gain this benefit. 


SNEAK ATTACK 


Beginning at 1st level, you know how to strike subtly and 
exploit a foe's distraction. Once per turn, you can deal an 
extra 1d6 damage to one creature you hit with an attack 
if you have advantage on the attack roll. The attack must 
use a finesse or a ranged weapon. 

You don't need advantage on the attack roll if another 
enemy of the target is within 5 feet of it, that enemy isn't 
incapacitated, and you don't have disadvantage on the 
attack roll. 

The amount of the extra damage increases as you gain 
levels in this class, as shown in the Sneak Attack column 
of the Rogue table. 


THIEVES' CANT 


During your rogue training you learned thieves' cant, a 
secret mix of dialect, jargon, and code that allows you to 
hide messages in seemingly normal conversation. Only 
another creature that knows thieves' cant understands 
such messages. It takes four times longer to convey such 
a message than it does to speak the same idea plainly. 

In addition, you understand a set of secret signs and 
symbols used to convey short, simple messages, such as 
whether an area is dangerous or the territory of a thieves’ 
guild, whether loot is nearby, or whether the people in 
an area are easy marks or will provide a safe house for 
thieves on the run. 


CUNNING ACTION 


Starting at 2nd level, your quick thinking and agility 
allow you to move and act quickly. You can take a bonus 
action on each of your turns in combat. This action can 
be used only to take the Dash, Disengage, or Hide action. 


RoGUISH ARCHETYPE 


At 3rd level, you choose an archetype that you emulate in 
the exercise of your rogue abilities. The Arcane Trickster 
and Thief archetypes are detailed at the end of the class 
description. See the Player's Handbook for more arche- 
type options. 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING A CHARACTER 


19 


ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT 


When you reach 4th level, you can increase one ability 
score of your choice by 2, or you can increase two ability 
scores of your choice by 1. As normal, you can’t increase 
an ability score above 20 using this feature. 


UNCANNY DODGE 


Starting at 5th level, when an attacker that you can see 
hits you with an attack, you can use your reaction to halve 
the attack’s damage against you. 


ROGUISH ARCHETYPES 


Rogues steer their talents in varying directions, embod- 
ied by the rogue archetypes. 


THIEF 


You hone your skills in the larcenous arts. Burglars, 
bandits, cutpurses, and other criminals typically follow 
this archetype, but so do rogues who prefer to think of 
themselves as professional treasure seekers, explorers, 
and investigators. 


Fast HANDS 

Starting at 3rd level, you can use the bonus action 
granted by your Cunning Action to make a Dexterity 
(Sleight of Hand) check, use your thieves’ tools to disarm 
a trap or open a lock, or take the Use an Object action. 


SEcOND-STORY WORK 
When you choose this archetype at 3rd level, you gain the 
ability to climb faster than normal; climbing no longer 
costs you extra movement. 

In addition, when you make a running jump, the dis- 
tance you cover increases by a number of feet equal to 
your Dexterity modifier. 


ARCANE TRICKSTER 


Some rogues enhance their fine-honed skills of stealth 
and agility with magic, learning tricks of enchantment 
and illusion. These rogues include pickpockets and bur- 
glars, but also performers and mischief-makers. 


SPELLCASTING 

When you reach 3rd level, you gain the ability to cast 
spells. See chapter 4 for the general rules of spellcasting. 
You learn your Arcane Trickster spells from the wizard 
spell list (page 22). 


ARCANE TRICKSTER SPELLCASTING 


Rogue Cantrips Spells — Spell Slots per Spell Level— 
Level Known Known īst 2nd 3rd 4th 


3rd 3 3 2 — -- — 
4th 3 4 3 -- — — 
5th 3 4 3 — — — 
6th 3 4 3 — — — 


Cantrips. You learn three cantrips: mage hand and two 
other cantrips of your choice from the wizard spell list. 

Spell Slots. The Arcane Trickster Spellcasting table 
shows how many spell slots you have to cast your wizard 
spells of 1st level and higher. To cast one of these spells, 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING A CHARACTER 


you must expend a slot of the spell's level or higher. 
You regain all expended spell slots when you finish a 
long rest. 

For example, if you know the 1st-level spell charm per- 
son and have a Ist-level and a 2nd-level spell slot avail- 
able, you can cast charm person using either slot. 

Spells Known of Ist-Level and Higher. You know 
three 1st-level wizard spells of your choice, two of which 
you must choose from the enchantment and illusion 
spells on the wizard spell list. 

The Spells Known column of the Arcane Trickster 
Spellcasting table shows when you learn more wizard 
spells of 1st level or higher. Each of these spells must be 
an enchantment or illusion spell of your choice, and must 
be of a level for which you have spell slots. For instance, 
when you reach 4th level in this class, you can learn one 
new spell of 1st level. 

Whenever you gain a level in this class, you can replace 
one of the wizard spells you know with another spell of 
your choice from the wizard spell list. The new spell must 
be of a level for which you have spell slots, and it must be 
an enchantment or illusion spell, unless you're replacing 
the spell you gained at 3rd level from any school of magic. 

Spellcasting Ability. Intelligence is your spellcasting 
ability for your wizard spells. You use your Intelligence 
whenever a spell refers to your spellcasting ability. In 
addition, you use your Intelligence modifier when setting 
the saving throw DC for a wizard spell you cast and when 
making an attack roll with one, as explained in chapter 4. 


МАСЕ HAND LEGERDEMAIN 

Starting at 3rd level, when you cast mage hand, you can 
make the spectral hand invisible, and you can perform 
the following additional tasks with it: 


* Youcan stow one object the hand is holding in a 
container worn or carried by another creature. 

* Youcan retrieve an object in a container worn or 
carried by another creature. 

* You can use thieves’ tools to pick locks and disarm 
traps at range. 


You can perform one of these tasks without being noticed 
by a creature if you succeed on a Dexterity (Sleight of 
Hand) check contested by the creature's Wisdom (Per- 
ception) check. 

In addition, you can use the bonus action granted by 
your Cunning Action to control the hand. 


WIZARD 


Drawing on the subtle weave of magic that permeates the 
cosmos, wizards cast spells of explosive fire, arcing light- 
ning, subtle deception, and brute-force mind control. 


SCHOLARS OF THE ARCANE 


Wild and enigmatic, varied in form and function, the 
power of magic draws students who seek to master its 
mysteries. Some aspire to become like the gods, shap- 
ing reality itself. Though the casting of a typical spell 
requires merely the utterance of a few strange words, 
fleeting gestures, and sometimes a pinch or clump of 
exotic materials, these surface components barely hint at 
the expertise attained after years of apprenticeship and 
countless hours of study. 


THE WIZARD 


Proficiency 

Level Bonus Features 

Ist +2 Spellcasting, Arcane Recovery 
2nd +2 Arcane Tradition 

3rd +2 — 

4th %2 Ability Score Improvement 
5th +3 — 

6th +3 Arcane Tradition feature 


Wizards live and die by their spells. Everything else is 
secondary. They learn new spells as they experiment and 
grow in experience. They can also learn them from other 
wizards, from ancient tomes or inscriptions, and from an- 
cient creatures (such as the fey) that are steeped in magic. 


THE LURE OF KNOWLEDGE 


Wizards’ lives are seldom mundane. The closest a wizard 
is likely to come to an ordinary life is working as a sage 
or lecturer in a library or university, teaching others the 
secrets of the multiverse. But the lure of knowledge and 
power calls even the most unadventurous wizards out 

of the safety of their libraries and laboratories and into 
crumbling ruins and lost cities. Most wizards believe that 
their counterparts in ancient civilizations knew secrets 
of magic that have been lost to the ages, and discovering 
those secrets could unlock the path to a power greater 
than any magic available in the present age. 


CREATING A WIZARD 


How did your character first come into contact with 
magic? How did you discover you had an aptitude for 
it? Do you have a natural talent, or did you simply study 
hard and practice incessantly? Did you encounter a 
magical creature or an ancient tome that taught you the 
basics of magic? 

What drew you forth from your life of study? Did your 
first taste of magical knowledge leave you hungry for 
more? Have you received word of a secret repository of 
knowledge not yet plundered by any other wizard? Per- 
haps you're simply eager to put your newfound magical 
skills to the test in the face of danger. 


Quick BUILD 

You can make a wizard quickly by following these sug- 
gestions. First, Intelligence should be your highest ability 
score, followed by Constitution or Dexterity. Second, 
choose the sage background. Third, choose the /ight, 
mage hand, and ray of frost cantrips, along with the 
following 1st-level spells for your spellbook: burning 
hands, charm person, mage armor, magic missile, shield, 
and sleep. 


CLASS FEATURES 


As a wizard, you gain the following class features. 


HiT POINTS 

Hit Dice: 1d6 per wizard level 

Hit Points at 1st Level: 6 + your Constitution modifier 

Hit Points at Higher Levels: 1d6 (or 4) + your Constitu- 
tion modifier per wizard level after 1st 


Cantrips 
Known 


—Spell Slots per Spell Level — 


Ist 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 
3 Жк =з» крз 7-5. бош „ ызы шш сен 
3 i LUE mE a =Т= 
3 4 о ар р с; asm. uc 
4 4 ЕЕЕ ea 
4 4 3 i) ee ы = 
4 4 3 i SSS SiS таш 

PROFICIENCIES 


Armor: None 

Weapons: Daggers, darts, slings, quarterstaffs, 
light crossbows 

Tools: None 


Saving Throws: Intelligence, Wisdom 
Skills: Choose two from Arcana, History, Insight, Investi- 
gation, Medicine, and Religion 


EQUIPMENT 


You start with the following equipment, in addition to the 
equipment granted by your background: 


“ (а) quarterstaff ог (b) dagger 

“ (a) component pouch or (5) arcane focus 
“ (а) scholar's pack or (Б) explorer’s pack 
* Aspellbook 


SPELLCASTING 


As a student of arcane magic, you have a spellbook con- 
taining spells that show the first glimmerings of your true 
power. See chapter 4 for the general rules of spellcasting. 


TEE УЕ -= 
LU oe T с 
SSSA Ж dO 3 № 


ANN SE 
NS 


NC 
{© : 1 


а 


22 


‚ mage hand (conjuration) 


WIZARD SPELL LIST 

Here's the list of spells you use when you learn a wizard 
cantrip or add a wizard spell of Ist level or higher to your 
spellbook. The list is organized by spell level, not charac- 
ter level. Each spell belongs to a school of magic, which is 
identified after the spell's name. If a spell can be cast as a 
ritual, the ritual tag also appears after its name. See the 
Player's Handbook for an expanded version of this list. 


CANTRIPS (о LEVEL) 
acid splash (conjuration) 
dancing lights (evocation) 
fire bolt (evocation) 

light (evocation) 


2ND LEVEL 

arcane lock (abjuration) 

blur (illusion) 

darkness (evocation) 
flaming sphere (conjuration) 
hold person (enchantment) 
minor illusion (illusion) invisibility (illusion) 

poison spray (conjuration) knock (transmutation) 
prestidigitation (transmutation) levitate (transmutation) 

ray of frost (evocation) magic weapon (transmutation) 
shocking grasp (evocation) misty step (conjuration) 
shatter (evocation) 

spider climb (transmutation) 
suggestion (enchantment) 


1st LEVEL 
burning hands (evocation) 
charm person (enchantment) 
comprehend languages (divina- В (conjuration) 

tion, ritual) 3RD LEVEL 
detect magic (divination, ritual) dispel magic (abjuration) 
disguise self (illusion) fear (illusion) 
feather fall (transmutation) fireball (evocation) 
identify (divination, ritual) fly (transmutation) 
longstrider (transmutation) haste (transmutation) 
mage armor (abjuration) lightning bolt (evocation) 
magic missile (evocation) major image (illusion) 
shield (abjuration) 
silent image (illusion) 
sleep (enchantment) 
thunderwave (evocation) 


CANTRIPS 

At Ist level, you know three cantrips of your choice from 
the wizard spell list. You learn additional wizard cantrips 
of your choice at higher levels, as shown in the Cantrips 
Known column of the Wizard table. 


SPELLBOOK 

At Ist level, you have a spellbook containing six 1st-level 
wizard spells of your choice. Your spellbook is the repos- 
itory of the wizard spells you know, except your cantrips, 
which are fixed in your mind. 


PREPARING AND CASTING SPELLS 

Тһе Wizard table shows how many spell slots you have 
to cast your wizard spells of 1st level and higher. To cast 
one of these spells, you must expend a slot of the spell's 
level or higher. You regain all expended spell slots when 
you finish a long rest. 

You prepare the list of wizard spells that are available 
for you to cast. To do so, choose a number of wizard spells 
from your spellbook equal to your Intelligence modifier + 
your wizard level (minimum of one spell). The spells must 
be of a level for which you have spell slots. 

For example, if you're a 3rd-level wizard, you have 
four 1st-level and two 2nd-level spell slots. With an In- 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING A CHARACTER 


ÉLL——————————————————— m» 
YouR SPELLBOOK 


The spells that you add to your spellbook as you gain levels 
reflect the research you conduct on your own, as well as 
intellectual breakthroughs you have had about the nature of 
the multiverse. You might find other spells during your ad- 
ventures. You could discover a spell recorded on a scroll, for 
example, or in a dusty tome in an ancient library. 

Copying a Spell into the Book. When you find a wizard 
spell of 1st level or higher, you can add it to your spellbook 
if it is of a spell level you can prepare and if you can spare 
the time to decipher and copy it. 

Copying a spell into your spellbook involves reproducing 
the basic form of the spell, then deciphering the unique sys- 
tem of notation used by the wizard who wrote it. You must 
practice the spell until you understand the sounds or ges- 
tures required, then transcribe it into your spellbook using 
your own notation. 

For each level of the spell, the process takes 2 hours and 
costs 50 gp. The cost represents material components you 
expend as you experiment with the spell to master it, as well 
as the fine inks you need to record it. Once you have spent 
this time and money, you can prepare the spell just like your 
other spells. 

Replacing the Book. You can copy a spell from your own 
spellbook into another book—for example, if you want to 
make a backup copy of your spellbook. This is just like copy- 
ing a new spell into your spellbook, but faster and easier, 
since you understand your own notation and already know 
how to cast the spell. You need spend only 1 hour and 10 gp 
for each level of the copied spell. 

If you lose your spellbook, you can use the same proce- 
dure to transcribe the spells that you have prepared into a 
new spellbook. Filling out the remainder of your spellbook 
requires you to find new spells to do so, as normal. For this 
reason, many wizards keep backup spellbooks in a safe place. 

The Book's Appearance. Your spellbook is a unique compi- 
lation of spells, with its own decorative flourishes. It might 
be a plain, functional leather volume that you received as 
a gift from your master, a finely bound tome you found 
in an ancient library, or even a loose collection of notes 
scrounged together after you lost your previous spellbook. 


p———————————| 


telligence of 16, your list of prepared spells can include 
six spells of 1st or 2nd level, іп any combination, chosen 
from your spellbook. If you prepare the 1st-level spell 
magic missile, you can cast it using a 1st-level or a 2nd- 
level slot. Casting the spell doesn't remove it from your 
list of prepared spells. 

You can change your list of prepared spells when you 
finish a long rest. Preparing a new list of wizard spells re- 
quires time spent studying your spellbook and memoriz- 
ing the incantations and gestures you must make to cast 
the spell: at least 1 minute per spell level for each spell on 
your list. 


SPELLCASTING ABILITY 

Intelligence is your spellcasting ability for your wizard 
spells, since you learn your spells through dedicated 
study and memorization. You use your Intelligence when- 
ever a spell refers to your spellcasting ability. In addition, 
you use your Intelligence modifier when setting the sav- 
ing throw DC for a wizard spell you cast and when mak- 
ing an attack roll with one, as explained in chapter 4. 


RITUAL CASTING 


You can cast a wizard spell as a ritual if that spell has 
the ritual tag and you have the spell in your spellbook. 


You don’t need to have the spell prepared. See chapter 4, 
“Spells,” for how rituals work. 


SPELLCASTING Focus 


You can use an arcane focus (found in chapter 3) as a 
spellcasting focus for your wizard spells. 


LEARNING SPELLS OF 15Т LEVEL AND HIGHER 
Each time you gain a wizard level, you can add two wiz- 
ard spells of your choice to your spellbook for free. Each 
of these spells must be of a level for which you have spell 
slots, as shown on the Wizard table. On your adventures, 
you might find other spells that you can add to your spell- 
book (see the *Your Spellbook" sidebar). 


ARCANE RECOVERY 


You have learned to regain some of your magical energy 
by studying your spellbook. Once per day when you fin- 
ish a short rest, you can choose expended spell slots to 
recover. The spell slots can have a combined level that is 
equal to or less than half your wizard level (rounded up), 
and none of the slots can be 6th level or higher. 

For example, if you're a 4th-level wizard, you can recover 
up to two levels worth of spell slots. You can recover either a 
2nd-level spell slot or two 1st-level spell slots. 


ARCANE TRADITION 


When you reach 2nd level, you choose an arcane tradi- 
tion, shaping your practice of magic: Evocation or Trans- 
mutation, both of which are detailed at the end of the 
class description. See the Player's Handbook for more 
information on arcane traditions. 

Your choice grants you features at 2nd level and again 
at 6th level. 


ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT 


When you reach 4th level, you can increase one ability 
score of your choice by 2, or you can increase two ability 
scores of your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase 
an ability score above 20 using this feature. 


ARCANE TRADITIONS 


The most ancient arcane traditions in the multiverse 
revolve around the schools of magic. Wizards through 
the ages have cataloged thousands of spells, grouping 
them into eight categories called schools, as described 

in chapter 4. In some places, these traditions are literally 
schools. Elsewhere, they are more like academic depart- 
ments, with rival faculties competing for students. 


SCHOOL ОЕ EVOCATION 


Your studies focus on magic that creates powerful cle- 
mental effects such as bitter cold, searing flame, rolling 
thunder, crackling lightning, and burning acid. Some 
evokers find employment in military forces, serving as ar- 
tillery to blast enemy armies from afar. Others use their 
spectacular power to protect the weak or to conquer. 


EVOCATION SAVANT 

Beginning when you select this school at 2nd level, the 
gold and time you must spend to copy an evocation spell 
into your spellbook is halved. 


SCULPT SPELLS 

Beginning at 2nd level, you can create pockets of relative 
safety within the effects of your evocation spells. When 
you cast an evocation spell that affects other creatures 
that you can see, you can choose a number of them equal 
to 1 + the spell's level. The chosen creatures automati- 
cally succeed on their saving throws against the spell, 
and they take no damage if they would normally take half 
damage on a successful save. 


POTENT CANTRIP 

Starting at 6th level, your damaging cantrips affect even 
creatures that avoid the brunt of the effect. When a crea- 
ture succeeds on a saving throw against your cantrip, 
the creature takes half the cantrip’s damage (if any) but 
suffers no additional effect from the cantrip. 


SCHOOL OF TRANSMUTATION 


You are a student of spells that modify energy and matter. 
To you, the world isn’t a fixed thing, but eminently mu- 
table, and you delight in being an agent of change. 


TRANSMUTATION SAVANT 

Beginning when you select this school at 2nd level, the 
gold and time you must spend to copy a transmutation 
spell into your spellbook is halved. 


MINOR ALCHEMY 

Starting at 2nd level when you select this school, you 
can temporarily alter the physical properties of one 
nonmagical object, changing it from one substance into 
another. You perform a special alchemical procedure on 
one object composed entirely of wood, stone (but not a 
gemstone), iron, copper, or silver, transforming it into a 
different one of those materials. For each 10 minutes you 
spend performing the procedure, you can transform up 
to 1 cubic foot of material. After 1 hour, or until you lose 
your concentration (as if you were concentrating on а 
spell), the material reverts to its original substance. 


TRANSMUTER'S STONE 

Starting at 6th level, you can spend 8 hours creating a 
transmuter's stone that stores transmutation magic. You 
can benefit from the stone yourself or give it to another 
creature. A creature gains a benefit of your choice 

as long as the stone is in the creature's possession. 
When you create the stone, choose the benefit from the 
following options: 


* Darkvision out to a range of 60 feet (this functions like 
the darkvision of a dwarf or an elf) 

* An increase to speed of 10 feet while the creature is 
unencumbered 

* Proficiency in Constitution saving throws 

* Resistance to acid, cold, fire, lightning, or thunder dam- 
age (your choice whenever you choose this benefit; see 
page 38 for how resistance works) 


Each time you cast a transmutation spell of 1st level 
or higher, you can change the effect of your stone if the 
stone is on your person. 

If you create a new transmuter's stone, the previous one 
ceases to function. 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING A CHARACTER 


oO 


24 


BACKGROUNDS 


Your character's background reveals where you came 
from. Choose one of the following backgrounds: acolyte, 
criminal, entertainer, sage, or soldier. Then ask your- 
self why your character left that occupation for a life of 
adventure. 

A background includes the following elements: 


Proficiencies. Each background gives a character profi- 
ciency in two skills (see page 29). In addition, most 
backgrounds give a character proficiency with one or 
more tools. Tools and tool proficiencies are detailed in 
chapter 3. If a 1st-level character would gain the same 
proficiency from two different sources, choose a differ- 
ent proficiency of the same kind (skill or tool) instead. 

Equipment. A background provides equipment. 

Feature. Your background gives you a feature, a special 
ability that members of your background share. 

Suggested Characteristics. A background suggests per- 
sonal characteristics for your character. You can pick 
characteristics, roll dice to determine them randomly, 
or use the suggestions as inspiration for characteristics 
of your own creation. 


Some backgrounds allow you to learn more languages. 


ACOLYTE 


You have spent your life in the service of a temple to a 
god or a pantheon. You perform sacred rites in order to 
conduct worshipers into the presence of the divine. You 
aren't necessarily a cleric—performing sacred rites isn’t 
the same thing as channeling divine power. 

Choose a god, a pantheon, or some other quasi-divine 
being, and work with your DM to detail the nature of 
your religious service. Were you a lesser functionary 
in a temple, raised from childhood to assist the priests 
in the sacred rites? Or were you a priest who suddenly 
experienced a call to serve your god in a different way? 


Skill Proficiencies: Insight, Religion 

Languages: Two of your choice 

Equipment: A holy symbol (a gift to you when you en- 
tered the priesthood), a prayer book or prayer wheel, 5 
sticks of incense, vestments, a set of common clothes, 
and a pouch containing 15 gp 


FEATURE: SHELTER OF THE FAITHFUL 
ааа EL ЕК OR PRE SALT REO LE: 


As an acolyte, you command the respect of those who 
share your faith, and you can perform the religious cer- 
emonies of your deity. You and your adventuring com- 
panions can expect to receive free healing and care at 

a temple, shrine, or other established presence of your 
faith, though you must provide any material components 
needed for spells. Those who share your religion will sup- 
port you (but only you) at a modest lifestyle. 

You might also have ties to a specific temple dedicated 
to your chosen deity or pantheon, and you have a resi- 
dence there. This could be the temple where you used to 
serve, if you remain on good terms with it, ог а temple 
where you have found a new home. While near your tem- 
ple, you can call upon the priests for assistance, provided 
the assistance you ask for isn’t hazardous and you remain 
in good standing with your temple. 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING A CHARACTER 


SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 


48 Personality Trait 

l lidolize a particular hero of my faith, and constantly 
refer to that person's deeds and example. 

2 Ісап find common ground between the fiercest 
enemies, empathizing with them and always working 
toward peace. 

3  Iseeomens in every event and action. The gods try to 
speak to us, we just need to listen. 

4 Nothing can shake my optimistic attitude. 

5 I quote (or misquote) sacred texts and proverbs in 
almost every situation. 

6 Тат tolerant (or intolerant) of other faiths and respect 
(or condemn) the worship of other gods. 

7 I've enjoyed fine food, drink, and high society among my 
temple's elite. Rough living grates on me. 

8  l'vespent so long in the temple that | have little 
experience dealing with people in the outside world. 


d6 Ideal 

1 Tradition. The ancient traditions of worship and sacrifice 
must be preserved and upheld. (Lawful) 

2 Charity. | always try to help those in need, no matter 
what the personal cost. (Good) 

3 Change. We must help bring about the changes the 
gods are constantly working in the world. (Chaotic) 

4 Power. hope to one day rise to the top of my faith's 
religious hierarchy. (Lawful) 

5 Faith. | trust that my deity will guide my actions. | have 
faith that if | work hard, things will go well. (Lawful) 

6 Aspiration. | seek to prove myself worthy of my god’s 
favor by matching my actions against his or her 
teachings. (Any) 


46 Bond 

| | would die to recover an ancient relic of my faith that 
was lost long ago. 

2 Iwill someday get revenge on the corrupt temple 
hierarchy who branded me a heretic. 

3 | owe my life to the priest who took me in when my 
parents died. 
Everything | do is for the common people. 

5 Iwill do anything to protect the temple where | served. 
| seek to preserve a sacred text that my enemies 
consider heretical and seek to destroy. 


46 Flaw 
l | judge others harshly, and myself even more severely. 
2 lputtoo much trust in those who wield power within 


my temple's hierarchy. 

3 My piety sometimes leads me to blindly trust those that 
profess faith in my god. 
ат inflexible in my thinking. 
ат suspicious of strangers. 
Once | pick a goal, | become obsessed with it to the 
detriment of everything else in my life. 


CRIMINAL 


You are an experienced criminal and still have contacts 
within the criminal underworld. 


Skill Proficiencies: Deception, Stealth 

Tool Proficiencies: One type of gaming set, thieves’ tools 

Equipment: A crowbar, a set of dark common clothes in- 
cluding a hood, and a pouch containing 15 gp 


CRIMINAL SPECIALTY 


There are many kinds of criminals, and within a thieves’ 
guild or similar organization, members have specialties. 
Choose the role you played in your criminal life, or roll on 
the table below. 


48 Specialty d8 Specialty 

1 Blackmailer 5 Highway robber 
2  Burglar 6 Hired killer 

3  Enforcer 7 Pickpocket 

4 Fence 8 Smuggler 


FEATURE: CRIMINAL CONTACT 


You have a reliable and trustworthy contact who acts as 
your liaison to a network of other criminals. You know 
how to get messages to and from your contact, even over 
great distances; specifically, you know the local messen- 
gers, corrupt caravan masters, and seedy sailors who can 
deliver messages for you. 


SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 


d8 Personality Trait 

1 always һауе а plan for what to do when things go 
wrong. 

2 lam always calm, no matter what the situation. | never 
raise my voice or let my emotions control me. 

3 The first thing | do in a new place is note the locations 
of everything valuable—or where such things could be 
hidden. 

4 | would rather make a new friend than a new enemy. 

5 lam incredibly slow to trust. Those who seem the 
fairest often have the most to hide. 

6 | don’t pay attention to the risks in a situation. Never tell 
me the odds. 

7 The best way to get me to do something is to tell me | 
can't do it. 

8 | blow up at the slightest insult. 


d6 Ideal 

1 Honor. | don't steal from others іп the trade. (Lawful) 

2 Freedom. Chains are meant to be broken, as are those 
who would forge them. (Chaotic) 

3 Charity. | steal from the wealthy so that | can help 
people in need. (Good) 

4 Greed. I'll do whatever it takes to become wealthy. (Evil) 
People. I'm loyal to my friends, not to any ideals, and 
everyone else can take a trip down the Styx for all | care. 
(Neutral) 

6 Redemption. There's good in everyone. (Good) 


d6 Bond 

1 l'm trying to pay offa debt | owe to a kind benefactor. 
2  Myill-gotten gains go to support my family. 

3 Something important was taken from me, and | aim to 


steal it back. 
4 Iwill become the greatest thief that ever lived. 
5 |'m guilty of a terrible crime and want to redeem myself. 
6 Someone | loved died because of | mistake | made. That 
will never happen again. 


dé Flaw 

1 When І see something valuable, | can't think about 
anything but how to steal it. 

2 When faced with a choice between money and my 
friends, | usually choose the money. 

3  Ifthere's a plan, I'll forget it. If | don’t forget it, I'll 
ignore it. 

4  lhavea "tell" that reveals when I'm lying. 

5 I turn tail and run when things look bad. 

6  Aninnocent person is in prison for a crime that | 
committed. I'm okay with that. 


ENTERTAINER 


You thrive in front of an audience. You know how to 
entrance them, amuse them, and even inspire them. 
Whatever techniques you use, your art is your life. 


Skill Proficiencies: Acrobatics, Performance 

Tool Proficiencies: Disguise kit, one type of musical 
instrument 

Equipment: A musical instrument (one of your choice), 
the favor of an admirer (love letter, lock of hair, or trin- 
ket), a costume, and a pouch containing 15 gp 


ENTERTAINER ROUTINES 


A good entertainer is versatile, spicing up a performance 
with a variety of routines. Choose one to three routines or 
roll on the table below to define your specialties. 


410 Entertainer Routine 410 Entertainer Routine 


1 Actor 6 Instrumentalist 
2 Dancer 7 Poet 

3 Fire-eater 8 Singer 

4 Jester 9 Storyteller 

5 Juggler 10 Tumbler 


FEATURE: By POPULAR DEMAND 


You can always find a place to perform, usually in an 

inn or tavern but possibly with a circus, at a theater, or 
even in a noble’s court. At such a place, you receive free 
lodging and food of a modest or comfortable standard 
(depending on the quality of the establishment), as long 
as you perform each night. In addition, your performance 
makes you something of a local figure. When strangers 
recognize you in a town where you have performed, they 
typically take a liking to you. 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING A CHARACTER 


SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 


48 Personality Trait 

Т ІКпоууа story relevant to almost every situation. 

2 Whenever | come to a new place, | collect local rumors 
and spread gossip. 

3 I'ma hopeless romantic, always searching for that 
"special someone." 

4 Nobody stays angry at me or around me for long, since | 
can defuse any amount of tension. 


5 | love a good insult, even one directed at me. 

6 | get bitter if l'm not the center of attention. 

7. I'll settle for nothing less than perfection. 

8 I change my mood as quickly as | change key in а song. 
46 Ideal 

1 Beauty. When | perform, | make the world better than it 


was. (Good) 

2 Tradition. The stories, legends, and songs ofthe past 
must never be forgotten, for they teach us who we 
are. (Lawful) 

3 Creativity. The world is in need of new ideas and bold 
action. (Chaotic) 

4 Greed. l'm only in it for the money and fame. (Evil) 

5 People. | like seeing the smiles on people's faces when | 
perform. That's all that matters. (Neutral) 

6 Honesty. Art should reflect the soul; it should come 
from within and reveal who we really are. (Any) 


46 Bond 

1 My instrument is my most treasured possession, and it 
reminds me of someone I love. 

2 Someone stole my precious instrument, and someday 


ІМ! get it back. 
3 lwant to be famous, whatever it takes. 
4  lidolizea hero of the old tales and measure my deeds 


against that person's. 
5 Iwill do anything to prove myself superior to my rival. 
6 | would do anything for the other members of my 

old troupe. 


d6  Flaw 
1 {ll do anything to win fame and renown. 
2 I'ma sucker for a pretty face. 
3 Ascandal prevents me from ever going home again. 
That kind of trouble seems to follow me around. 
4  lonce satirized a noble who still wants my head. It was 
a mistake that | will likely repeat. 
5 Ihave trouble keeping my true feelings hidden. My 
sharp tongue lands me in trouble. 
6 Despite my best efforts, | am unreliable to my friends. 


SAGE 


You spent years learning the lore of the multiverse. You 
scoured manuscripts, studied scrolls, and listened to the 
greatest experts on the subjects that interest you. Your 
efforts have made you a master in your fields of study. 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING А CHARACTER 


Skill Proficiencies: Arcana, History 

Languages: Two of your choice 

Equipment: A bottle of black ink, a quill, a small knife, a 
letter from a dead colleague posing a question you have 
not yet been able to answer, a set of common clothes, 
and a pouch containing 10 gp 


SPECIALTY 
tactile ce ee ЖУ ЩЫ RS 


To determine the nature of your scholarly training, roll a 
d8 or choose from the options in the table below. 


d8 Specialty d8 Specialty 

1 Alchemist 5 Professor 

2  Astronomer 6 Researcher 

3  Discredited academic 7  Wizard's apprentice 
4 Librarian 8 Scribe 


FEATURE: RESEARCHER 


When you attempt to learn or recall a piece of lore, if you 
don't know that information, you often know where and 
from whom you can obtain it. Usually, this information 
comes from a library, scriptorium, university, or a sage 
or other learned person or creature. Your DM might rule 
that the knowledge you seek is secreted away in an al- 
most inaccessible place, or that it simply can't be found. 
Unearthing the deepest secrets of the multiverse can re- 
quire an adventure or even a whole campaign. 


SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 


d8 Personality Trait 

1 use polysyllabic words that convey the impression of 
great erudition. 

2 I've read every book in the world's greatest libraries—or 
| like to boast that | have. 

3 I'm used to helping out those who aren't as smart as | 
am, and | patiently explain anything and everything to 
others. 

There's nothing | like more than a good mystery. 

5 I’m willing to listen to every side of an argument before | 
make my own judgment. 

6 l... speak ... slowly ... when talking ... to idiots, which 
almost everyone is compared to me. 
| am horribly, horribly awkward in social situations. 


8 I'm convinced that people are always trying to steal my 
secrets. 
46 Ideal 


1 Knowledge. The path to power and self-improvement is 
through knowledge. (Neutral) 

2 Beauty. What is beautiful points us beyond itself toward 
what is true. (Good) 

3 Logic. Emotions must not cloud our logical thinking. 
(Lawful) 

4 No Limits. Nothing should fetter the infinite possibility 
inherent in all existence. (Chaotic) 

3 Power. Knowledge is the path to power. (Evil) 
Self-Improvement. The goal of a life of study is the 
betterment of oneself. (Any) 


46 Bond 

l It is my duty to protect my students. 

2 | have an ancient text that holds terrible secrets that 
must not fall into the wrong hands. 

3 | work to preserve a library, university, scriptorium, 
or monastery. 

4  Mylife's work is a series of tomes related to a specific 
field of lore. 

5 I've been searching my whole life for the answer to a 
certain question. 

6 Isold my soul for knowledge. | hope to do great deeds 
and win it back. 


46 Flaw 


1 lam easily distracted by the promise of information. 

2 Most people scream and run when they see a demon. | 
stop and take notes on its anatomy. 

3 Unlocking an ancient mystery is worth the price of a 
civilization. 

4  loverlook obvious solutions in favor of complicated 
ones. 

5 | speak without really thinking through my words, 
invariably insulting others. 

6 can’t keep а secret to save my life, or anyone else's. 


SOLDIER 


War has long been your life. You might have been part of 
a national army or a mercenary company, or perhaps a 
member of a local militia. 

When you choose this background, work with your DM 
to determine which military organization you were a part 
of, how far through its ranks you progressed, and what 
kind of experiences you had during your military career. 


Skill Proficiencies: Athletics, Intimidation 

Tool Proficiencies: One type of gaming set, vehi- 
cles (land) 

Equipment: An insignia of rank, a trophy taken from a 
fallen enemy (a dagger, broken blade, or piece of a ban- 
ner), a set of bone dice or deck of cards, a set of com- 
mon clothes, and a pouch containing 10 gp 


SPECIALTY 


During your time as a soldier, you had a specific role to 
play in your unit or army. Roll а d8 or choose from the op- 
tions in the table below to determine your role: 


48 Specialty d8 Specialty 

1 Officer 6 Quartermaster 

2 Scout 7 Standard bearer 

3 Infantry 8 Support staff (cook, 
4  Cavalry blacksmith, or the 

5 Healer like) 


FEATURE: MILITARY RANK 


You have a military rank from your career as a soldier. 
Soldiers loyal to your former military organization still 
recognize your authority and influence, and they defer to 


you if they are of a lower rank. You can invoke your rank 
to exert influence over other soldiers and requisition sim- 
ple equipment or horses for temporary use. You can also 
usually gain access to friendly military encampments and 
fortresses where your rank is recognized. 


SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS 


48 Personality Trait 

1 I'm always polite and respectful. 

2 l'mhaunted by memories of war. | can’t get the images 

of violence out of my mind. 

3 I’ve lost too many friends, and I'm slow to make new 

ones. 

4 I'm full of inspiring and cautionary tales from my 
military experience relevant to almost every combat 
situation. 
| сап stare down a hell hound without flinching. 
| enjoy being strong and like breaking things. 
| have a crude sense of humor. 
| face problems head-on. A simple, direct solution is the 
best path to success. 


со м су tn 


46 Ideal 

1 Greater Good. Our lot is to lay down our lives in defense 
of others. (Good) 

2 Responsibility. | do what | must and obey just authority. 
(Lawful) 

3 Independence. When people follow orders blindly, they 
embrace a kind of tyranny. (Chaotic) 

4 Might. In life as in war, the stronger force wins. (Evil) 

5 Live and Let Live. Ideals aren't worth killing over or 
going to war for. (Neutral) 

6 Nation. My city, nation, or people are all that matter. 


(Any) 

d6 Bond 

1 would still lay down my life for the people | 
served with. 


2 Someone saved my life on the battlefield. To this day, | 
will never leave a friend behind. 

3 My honor is my life. 

I'll never forget the crushing defeat my company 

suffered or the enemies who dealt it. 

Those who fight beside me are those worth dying for. 

6 | fight for those who can't fight for themselves. 


іл 


46 Flaw 

1 Тһе monstrous enemy we faced in battle still leaves me 

quivering with fear. 

2 Ihave little respect for anyone who isn't a 

proven warrior. 

3 | made a terrible mistake in battle that cost many 
lives—and | would do anything to keep that mistake 
secret. 

My hatred of my enemies is blind and unreasoning. 
| obey the law, even if the law causes misery. 
6  l'drather eat my armor than admit when I'm wrong. 


іл > 


CHAPTER 1: CREATING A CHARACTER 


THIS CHAPTER GIVES YOU THE MAIN RULES YOU NEED ТО 
play. The foundation of these rules are your six abilities, 
whether you're exploring, engaging in social interaction, 
or fighting for your life. Here you'll learn more about the 
three main ways to use your abilities: saving throws, abil- 
ity checks, and attack rolls, all of which can be affected by 
advantage and disadvantage. 


ADVANTAGE AND 
DISADVANTAGE 


Sometimes a special ability or spell tells you that you 
have advantage or disadvantage on an ability check, a 
saving throw, or an attack roll. When that happens, you 
roll a second d20 when you make the roll. Use the higher 
of the two rolls if you have advantage, and use the lower 
roll if you have disadvantage. For example, if you have 
disadvantage and roll a 17 and a 5, you use the 5. If you 
instead have advantage and roll those numbers, you 

use the 17. 

If multiple situations affect a roll and each one grants 
advantage or imposes disadvantage on it, you don't roll 
more than one additional d20. If two favorable situations 
grant advantage, for example, you still roll only one addi- 
tional d20. 

If circumstances cause a roll to have both advantage 
and disadvantage, you are considered to have neither of 
them, and you roll one d20. This is true even if multiple 
circumstances impose disadvantage and only one grants 


CHAPTER 2: PLAYING THE GAME 


CHAPTER 2: PLAYING THE GAME УШИ ЕУ 


advantage or vice versa. In such a situation, you have nei- 
ther advantage nor disadvantage. 

When you have advantage or disadvantage and some- 
thing in the game, such as the halfling's Lucky trait, lets 
you reroll or replace the d20, you can reroll or replace 
only one of the dice. You choose which one. For example, 
if a halfling has advantage or disadvantage on ап ability 
check and rolls a 1 and a 13, the halfling could use the 
Lucky trait to reroll the 1. 

You usually gain advantage or disadvantage through 
the use of special abilities, actions, or spells. The DM 
can also decide that circumstances influence a roll in one 
direction or the other and grant advantage or impose dis- 
advantage as a result. 


SAVING THROWS 


A saving throw—also called a save—represents an at- 
tempt to resist a spell, a trap, a poison, a disease, or a 
similar threat. You don't normally decide to make a sav- 
ing throw; you are forced to make one because your char- 
acter or monster is at risk of harm. 

To make a saving throw, roll a 420 and add the appro- 
priate ability modifier. For example, you use your Dexter- 
ity modifier for a Dexterity saving throw. 

A saving throw can be modified by a situational 
bonus or penalty and can be affected by advantage 
and disadvantage, as determined by the DM. 

Each class gives proficiency in at least two saving 
throws. The wizard, for example, is proficient in Intelli- 


gence saves. Proficiency іп а saving throw lets а character 
add their proficiency bonus to saving throws made using a 
particular ability score. Some monsters have saving throw 
proficiencies as well. 

The Difficulty Class for a saving throw is determined by 
the effect that causes it. For example, the DC for a saving 
throw allowed by a spell is determined by the caster's 
spellcasting ability modifier and proficiency bonus. 

The result of a successful or failed saving throw is also 
detailed in the effect that allows the save. Usually, a suc- 
cessful save means that a creature suffers no harm, or 
reduced harm, from an effect. 


ABILITY CHECKS 


An ability check tests a character's or monster's innate 
talent and training in an effort to overcome a challenge. 
The DM calls for an ability check when a character or 
monster attempts an action (other than an attack) that 
has a chance of failure. When the outcome is uncertain, 
the dice determine the results. 

For every ability check, the DM decides which of the six 
abilities is relevant to the task at hand and the difficulty 
of the task, represented by a Difficulty Class. The more 
difficult a task, the higher its DC. The Typical Difficulty 
Classes table shows the most common DCs. 


TYPICAL DIFFICULTY CLASSES 


Task Difficulty DC Task Difficulty DC 
Very easy 5 Hard 20 
Easy 10 Very hard 25 
Medium 15 Nearly impossible 30 


To make an ability check, roll a d20 and add the rele- 
vant ability modifier. As with other d20 rolls, apply bo- 
nuses and penalties, and compare the total to the DC. If 
the total equals or exceeds the DC, the ability check is a 
success. Otherwise, it's a failure, which means the char- 
acter or monster makes no progress toward the objective 


or makes progress combined with a setback determined 
by the DM. 


CONTESTS 


Sometimes one character's or monster's efforts are di- 
rectly opposed to another's. This can occur when both 

of them are trying to do the same thing and only one can 
succeed, such as attempting to snatch up a magic ring on 
the floor. This situation also applies when one of them 

is trying to prevent the other one from accomplishing a 
goal—for example, when a monster tries to force open a 
door that an adventurer is holding closed. In situations 
like these, the outcome is determined by a special form of 
ability check, called a contest. 

Both participants in a contest make ability checks 
appropriate to their efforts. They apply all appropriate 
bonuses and penalties, but instead of comparing the total 
to a DC, they compare the totals of their two checks. The 
participant with the higher check total wins the contest. 
That character or monster either succeeds at the action 
or prevents the other one from succeeding. 

If the contest results in a tie, the situation remains the 
same as it was before the contest. Thus, one contestant 


might win the contest by default. If two characters tie in 
a contest to snatch a ring off the floor, neither character 
grabs it. In a contest between a monster trying to open 
a door and an adventurer trying to keep the door closed, 
a tie means that the door remains shut. 


SKILLS 


Each ability covers a range of capabilities, including 
skills that a character or a monster can be proficient in. A 
skill represents a specific aspect of an ability score, and 
an individual's proficiency in a skill demonstrates a focus 
on that aspect. (A character's starting skill proficiencies 
are determined at character creation, and a monster's 
skill proficiencies appear in the monster's stat block.) 

For example, a Dexterity check might reflect a char- 
acter's attempt to pull off an acrobatic stunt, to palm an 
object, or to stay hidden. Each of these aspects of Dexter- 
ity has an associated skill: Acrobatics, Sleight of Hand, 
and Stealth, respectively. So a character who has profi- 
ciency in the Stealth skill is particularly good at Dexterity 
checks related to sneaking and hiding. 

The skills related to each ability score are shown in the 
following list. (No skills are related to Constitution.) See 
an ability's description in the later sections of this chapter 
for examples of how to use a skill. 


Ability Skills 

Strength Athletics 
Dexterity Acrobatics 
Sleight of Hand 
Stealth 

Arcana 

History 
Investigation 
Nature 

Religion 
Animal Handling 


Intelligence 


Wisdom 
Insight 
Medicine 
Perception 
Survival 
Deception 
Intimidation 
Performance 
Persuasion 


Charisma 


Sometimes, the DM might ask for an ability check us- 
ing a specific skill—for example, “Make a Wisdom (Per- 
ception) check." At other times, a player might ask the 
DM if proficiency in a particular skill applies to a check. 
In either case, proficiency in a skill means an individual 
can add their proficiency bonus to ability checks that 
involve that skill. Without proficiency in the skill, the indi- 
vidual makes a normal ability check. 

For example, if a character attempts to climb up a dan- 
gerous cliff, the Dungeon Master might ask for a Strength 
(Athletics) check. If the character is proficient in Ath- 
letics, the character's proficiency bonus is added to the 
Strength check. If the character lacks that proficiency, he 
or she just makes a Strength check. 


CHAPTER 2: PLAYING THE GAME 


20 


WORKING TOGETHER 


Sometimes two or more characters team up to attempt a 
task. The character who's leading the effort—or the one 
with the highest ability modifier—can make an ability 
check with advantage, reflecting the help provided by the 
other characters. In combat, this requires the Help ac- 
tion (page 35). 

A character can only provide help if the task is one that 
they could attempt alone. For example, trying to opena 
lock might require proficiency with thieves’ tools, so a 
character who lacks that proficiency couldn't help another 
character in that task. Moreover, a character can help only 
when two or more individuals working together would 
actually be productive. Some tasks, such as threading a 
needle, are no easier with help. 


STRENGTH CHECKS 


Strength measures the extent to which you can exert raw 
physical force. A Strength check can model any attempt 
to lift, push, pull, or break something. The Athletics skill 
reflects aptitude in certain kinds of Strength checks. 
Athletics. Your Strength (Athletics) check covers 
difficult situations you encounter while climbing, 
jumping, or swimming. Examples include the following: 


* You attempt to climb a sheer or slippery cliff, avoid 
hazards while scaling a wall, or cling to a surface while 
something is trying to knock you off. 

You try to jump an unusually long distance or pull 

off a stunt midjump. 

You struggle to swim or stay afloat in treacherous cur- 
rents, storm-tossed waves, or areas of thick seaweed. 
Or another creature tries to push or pull you underwa- 
ter or otherwise interfere with your swimming. 


LIFTING AND CARRYING 

Your Strength score determines the amount of weight 
you can bear. The following terms define what you can 
lift or carry. 


GHAPTER 2: PLAYING THE GAME 


Carrying Capacity. Your carrying capacity is your 
Strength score multiplied by 15. This is the weight (in 
pounds) that you can carry, which is high enough that 
most characters don't usually have to worry about it. 

Push, Drag, or Lift. You can push, drag, or lift a weight 
in pounds up to twice your carrying capacity (or 30 times 
your Strength score). While pushing or dragging weight 
in excess of your carrying capacity, your speed drops 
to 5 feet. 

Size and Strength. Larger creatures can bear more 
weight, whereas Tiny creatures can carry less. For each 
size category above Medium, double the creature's carry- 
ing capacity and the amount it can push, drag, or lift. For 
a Tiny creature, halve these weights. 


DEXTERITY CHECKS 


Dexterity measures agility, reflexes, and balance. A Dex- 
terity check can model any attempt to move nimbly or 
quietly or to keep from falling on tricky footing. The Acro- 
batics, Sleight of Hand, and Stealth skills reflect aptitude 
in certain kinds of Dexterity checks. 

Acrobatics. Your Dexterity (Acrobatics) check covers 
your attempt to stay on your feet in a tricky situation, such 
as when you're trying to run across a sheet of ice, balance 
on a tightrope, or stay upright on a rocking ship's deck. 
The DM might also call for a Dexterity (Acrobatics) check 
to see if you can perform acrobatic stunts, including 
dives, rolls, somersaults, and flips. 


LL— ——————————— M MM CÉÉÁOÓÓÉÁáÁ. 
HIDING 


The DM decides when circumstances are appropriate for 
hiding. When you try to hide, make a Dexterity (Stealth) 
check. Until you are discovered or you stop hiding, that 
check's total is contested by the Wisdom (Perception) 
check of any creature that actively searches for signs of 
your presence. 

You can't hide from a creature that can see you clearly, 
and you give away your position if you make noise, such as 
shouting a warning or knocking over a vase. An invisible 
creature can't be seen, so it can always try to hide. Signs of 
its passage might still be noticed, however, and it still has to 
stay quiet. 

In combat, most creatures stay alert for signs of danger 
all around, so if you come out of hiding and approach a 
creature, it usually sees you. However, under certain circum- 
stances, the Dungeon Master might allow you to stay hid- 
den as you approach a creature that is distracted, allowing 
you to gain advantage on an attack before you are seen. 

Passive Perception. When you hide, there's a chance 
someone will notice you even if they aren't searching. To 
determine whether such a creature notices you, the DM 
compares your Dexterity (Stealth) check with that creature's 
passive Wisdom (Perception) score, which equals 10 the 
creature's Wisdom modifier, as well as any other bonuses 
or penalties. If the creature has advantage, add 5. For disad- 
vantage, subtract 5. 

For example, if a 1st-level character (with a proficiency 
bonus of +2) has a Wisdom of 15 (a +2 modifier) and profi- 
сіепсу in Perception, he or she has a passive Wisdom (Per- 
ception) of 14. 

What Can You See? One of the main factors in 
determining whether you can find a hidden creature or 
object is how well you can see in an area, which might be 
lightly or heavily obscured, as explained on page 32. 


Sleight of Hand. Whenever you attempt ап act of leger- 
demain or manual trickery, such as planting something 
on someone else or concealing an object on your person, 
make a Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check. The DM might 
also call for a Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check to deter- 
mine whether you can lift a coin purse off another person 
or slip something out of another person's pocket. 

Stealth. Make a Dexterity (Stealth) check when you 
attempt to conceal yourself from enemies, slink past 
guards, slip away without being noticed, or sneak up on 
someone without being seen or heard. 


CONSTITUTION CHECKS 


Constitution measures health, stamina, and vital force. 
Constitution checks are uncommon, and no skills apply 
to such checks, because the endurance this ability rep- 
resents is largely passive. A Constitution check can model 
your attempt to push beyond normal limits, however. 


INTELLIGENCE CHECKS 


Intelligence measures mental acuity, accuracy of recall, 
and the ability to reason. An Intelligence check comes 
into play when you need to draw on logic, education, 
memory, or deductive reasoning. The Arcana, History, 
Investigation, Nature, and Religion skills reflect aptitude 
in certain kinds of Intelligence checks. 

Arcana. Your Intelligence (Arcana) check measures 
your ability to recall lore about spells, magic items, 
eldritch symbols, magical traditions, the planes of exis- 
tence, and the inhabitants of those planes. 

History. Your Intelligence (History) check measures 
your ability to recall lore about historical events, legend- 
ary people, ancient kingdoms, past disputes, recent wars, 
and lost civilizations. 

Investigation. When you look around for clues and 
make deductions based on those clues, you make an 
Intelligence (Investigation) check. You might deduce the 
location of a hidden object, discern from the appearance 
of a wound what kind of weapon dealt it, or determine the 
weakest point in a tunnel that could cause it to collapse. 
Poring through ancient scrolls in search of a hidden 
fragment of knowledge might also call for an Intelligence 
(Investigation) check. 

Nature. Your Intelligence (Nature) check measures 
your ability to recall lore about terrain, plants and ani- 
mals, the weather, and natural cycles. 

Religion. Your Intelligence (Religion) check measures 
your ability to recall lore about deities, rites and prayers, 
religious hierarchies, holy symbols, and the practices of 
secret cults. 


WISDOM CHECKS 


Wisdom reflects how attuned you are to the world around 
you and represents perceptiveness and intuition. A Wis- 
dom check might reflect an effort to read body language, 
understand someone's feelings, notice things about the 
environment, or care for an injured person. The Animal 
Handling, Insight, Medicine, Perception, and Survival 
skills reflect aptitude in certain kinds of Wisdom checks. 
Animal Handling. When there is any question whether 
you can calm down a domesticated animal, keep a mount 
from getting spooked, or intuit an animal's intentions, the 


-— OMM m 
FINDING A HIDDEN OBJECT 
When your character searches for a hidden object such as 
a secret door or a trap, the DM typically asks you to make 
a Wisdom (Perception) check. Such a check can be used to 
find hidden details or other information and clues that you 
might otherwise overlook. 

In most cases, you need to describe where you are looking 
in order for the DM to determine your chance of success. 
For example, a key is hidden beneath a set of folded clothes 
in the top drawer of a bureau. If you tell the DM that you 
pace around the room, looking at the walls and furniture for 
clues, you have no chance of finding the key, regardless of 
your Wisdom (Perception) check result. You would have to 
specify that you were opening the drawers or searching the 
bureau in order to have any chance of success. 


—«ooR—MM——— ридо» 


DM might call for a Wisdom (Animal Handling) check. 
You also make a Wisdom (Animal Handling) check to con- 
trol your mount when you attempt a risky maneuver. 

Insight. Your Wisdom (Insight) check decides whether 
you can determine the true intentions of a creature, such 
as when searching out a lie or predicting someone's next 
move. Doing so involves gleaning clues from body lan- 
guage, speech habits, and changes in mannerisms. 

Medicine. A Wisdom (Medicine) check lets you try to 
stabilize a dying companion or diagnose an illness. 

Perception. Your Wisdom (Perception) check lets you 
spot, hear, or otherwise detect the presence of something. 
It measures your general awareness of your surroundings 
and the keenness of your senses. For example, you might 
try to hear а conversation through a closed door, eaves- 
drop under an open window, or hear monsters moving 
stealthily in the forest. Or you might try to spot things that 
are obscured or easy to miss, whether they are orcs lying 
in ambush on a road, thugs hiding in the shadows of an 
alley, or candlelight under a closed secret door. 

Survival. The DM might ask you to make a Wisdom 
(Survival) check to follow tracks, hunt wild game, guide 
your group through frozen wastelands, identify signs that 
owlbears live nearby, predict the weather, or avoid quick- 
sand and other natural hazards. 


CHARISMA CHECKS 


Charisma measures your ability to interact effectively 
with others. It includes such factors as confidence and 
eloquence. A Charisma check might arise when you try 
to influence or entertain others, when you try to make an 
impression or tell a convincing lie, or when you are navi- 
gating a tricky social situation. The Deception, Intimida- 
tion, Performance, and Persuasion skills reflect aptitude 
in certain kinds of Charisma checks. 

Deception. Your Charisma (Deception) check deter- 
mines whether you can convincingly hide the truth, either 
verbally or through your actions. This deception can en- 
compass everything from misleading others through am- 
biguity to telling outright lies. Typical situations include 
trying to fast-talk a guard, con a merchant, earn money 
through gambling, pass yourself off in a disguise, dull 
someone's suspicions with false assurances, or maintain 
a straight face while telling a blatant lie. 

Intimidation. When you attempt to influence someone 
through overt threats, hostile actions, and physical vio- 
lence, the DM might ask you to make a Charisma (Intimi- 
dation) check. Examples include trying to pry information 


CHAPTER 2: PLAYING THE GAME 


Qt 


out of a prisoner, convincing street thugs to back down 
from a confrontation, or using the edge of a broken bottle 
to convince a sneering vizier to reconsider a decision. 

Performance. Your Charisma (Performance) check 
determines how well you can delight an audience with 
music, dance, acting, storytelling, or some other form of 
entertainment. 

Persuasion. When you attempt to influence someone 
or a group of people with tact, social graces, or good na- 
ture, the DM might ask you to make a Charisma (Persua- 
sion) check. Typically, you use persuasion when acting in 
good faith, to foster friendships, make cordial requests, 
or exhibit proper etiquette. Examples of persuading oth- 
ers include convincing a chamberlain to let your party see 
the king, negotiating peace between warring tribes, or 
inspiring a crowd of townsfolk. 


THE ENVIRONMENT 


By its nature, adventuring involves delving into places 
that are dark, dangerous, and full of mysteries to be ex- 
plored. The rules in this section cover some of the most 
important ways in which adventurers interact with the en- 
vironment in such places. The Dungeon Master's Guide 
has rules covering more unusual situations. 


TRAVEL 


Over the course of an adventure, the characters might 
travel across wide areas, on trips that could take days. 
The DM can summarize this travel without calculating 
exact distances or travel times: “You travel through the 
forest and find the old ruin late in the evening of the third 
day.” Characters can walk about 24 miles in a day. 


SPECIAL TYPES OF MOVEMENT 


Movement through dungeons or wilderness areas often 
involves more than walking. Adventurers might have to 
climb, crawl, swim, or jump to get where they need to go. 


CLIMBING, SWIMMING, AND CRAWLING 

Each foot of movement costs 1 extra foot (2 extra feet 

in difficult terrain) when you're climbing, swimming, or 
crawling. You ignore this extra cost if you have a climbing 
speed and use it to climb or a swimming speed and use it 
to swim. At the DM’s option, climbing a slippery vertical 
surface or one with few handholds requires a successful 
Strength (Athletics) check. Similarly, gaining any dis- 
tance in rough water might require a successful Strength 
(Athletics) check. 


JUMPING 

Long Jump. When you make a long jump, you cover a 
number of feet up to your Strength score if you move at 
least 10 feet on foot immediately before the jump. When 
you make a standing long jump, you can leap only half 
that distance. Either way, each foot you clear on the jump 
costs a foot of movement. 

This rule assumes that the height of your jump doesn't 
matter, such as a jump across a stream or chasm. At your 
DM's option, you must succeed on a DC 10 Strength (Ath- 
letics) check to clear a low obstacle (no taller than a quar- 
ter of the jump's distance), such as a hedge or low wall. 
Otherwise, you hit it. 


CHAPTER 2: PLAYING THE GAME 


When you land in difficult terrain, you must succeed on 
a DC 10 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check to land on your feet. 
Otherwise, you land prone. 

High Jump. When you make a high jump, you leap 
into the air a number of feet equal to 3 + your Strength 
modifier (minimum of 0 feet) if you move at least 10 feet 
on foot immediately before the jump. When you make a 
standing high jump, you can jump only half that distance. 
Either way, each foot you clear on the jump costs a foot of 
movement. In some circumstances, your DM might allow 
you to make a Strength (Athletics) check to jump higher 
than you normally can. 

You can extend your arms half your height above your- 
self during the jump. Thus, you can reach above you a 
distance equal to the height of the jump plus 1% times 
your height. 


FALLING 


At the end of a fall, a creature takes 1d6 bludgeoning 
damage for every 10 feet it fell, to a maximum of 20d6. 
The creature lands prone, unless it avoids taking damage 
from the fall. 


SUFFOCATING 


A creature can hold its breath for a number of minutes 
equal to 1 + its Constitution modifier (minimum of 
30 seconds). 

When a creature runs out of breath or is choking, it can 
survive for a number of rounds equal to its Constitution 
modifier (minimum of 1 round). At the start of its next 
turn, it drops to 0 hit points and is dying, and it can't re- 
gain hit points or be stabilized until it can breathe again. 


VISION AND LIGHT 


The most fundamental tasks of adventuring—noticing 
danger, finding hidden objects, hitting an enemy in com- 
bat, and targeting a spell, to name just a few—rely heavily 
on a character's ability to see. Darkness and other effects 
that obscure vision can prove a significant hindrance. 

A given area might be lightly or heavily obscured. In a 
lightly obscured area, such as dim light, patchy fog, or 
moderate foliage, creatures have disadvantage on Wis- 
dom (Perception) checks that rely on sight. 

A heavily obscured area—such as darkness, opaque 
fog, or dense foliage—blocks vision entirely. A creature ef- 
fectively suffers from the blinded condition (see appendix 
B) when trying to see something in that area. 

The presence or absence of light in an environment 
creates three categories of illumination: bright light, dim 
light, and darkness. 

Bright light lets most creatures see normally. Even 
gloomy days provide bright light, as do torches, lanterns, 
fires, and other sources of illumination within a spe- 
cific radius. 

Dim light, also called shadows, creates a lightly ob- 
scured area. An area of dim light is usually a boundary 
between a source of bright light, such as a torch, and sur- 
rounding darkness. The soft light of twilight and dawn 
also counts as dim light. A particularly brilliant full moon 
might bathe the land in dim light. 

Darkness creates a heavily obscured area. Charac- 
ters face darkness outdoors at night (even most moonlit 


nights), within the confines of an unlit dungeon or a sub- 
terranean vault, or in an area of magical darkness. 


INTERACTING WITH OBJECTS 


A character's interaction with objects in an environment 
is simple to resolve in the game. The player tells the 

DM that his or her character is doing something, such 
as moving a lever, and the DM describes what, if any- 
thing, happens. 

Characters can also damage objects with their weap- 
ons and spells. Objects are immune to poison and psy- 
chic damage, but otherwise they can be affected by physi- 
cal and magical attacks much like creatures can. The DM 
determines an object's Armor Class and hit points, and 
might decide that certain objects have resistance or im- 
munity to certain kinds of attacks. (It's hard to cut a rope 
with a club, for example.) Objects always fail Strength 
and Dexterity saving throws, and they are immune to ef- 
fects that require other saves. When an object drops to 0 
hit points, it breaks. 

A character can also attempt a Strength check to break 
an object. The DM sets the DC for any such check. 


SOCIAL INTERACTION 


Exploring dungeons, overcoming obstacles, and slaying 
monsters are key parts of D&D adventures. No less im- 
portant, though, are the social interactions that adventur- 
ers have with other inhabitants of the world. 

Interaction takes on many forms. You might need to 
convince an unscrupulous thief to confess to some mal- 
feasance, or you might try to flatter a dragon so that it 
will spare your life. The DM assumes the roles of any 
characters who are participating in the interaction that 
don't belong to another player at the table. Any such char- 
acter is called a nonplayer character (NPC). 

In general terms, an NPC's attitude toward you is de- 
scribed as friendly, indifferent, or hostile. Friendly NPCs 
are predisposed to help you, and hostile ones are inclined 
to get in your way. It's easier to get what you want from a 
friendly NPC, of course. 

Social interactions have two primary aspects: roleplay- 
ing and ability checks. 


ROLEPLAYING 


Roleplaying is, literally, the act of playing out a role. In 
this case, it's you as a player determining how your char- 
acter thinks, acts, and talks. 

Roleplaying is part of every aspect of the game, and it 
comes to the fore during social interactions. Your charac- 
ter's quirks, mannerisms, and personality influence how 
interactions resolve. 

The DM uses your character's actions and attitudes to 
determine how an NPC reacts. A cowardly NPC buckles 
under threats of violence. A stubborn dwarf refuses to let 
anyone badger her. A vain dragon laps up flattery. 

When interacting with an NPC, pay close attention to 
the DM's portrayal of the NPC's mood, dialogue, and 
personality. You might be able to determine an NPC's 
personality traits, ideals, flaws, and bonds, then play on 
them to influence the NPC's attitude. 

Interactions in D&D are much like interactions in real 
life. If you can offer NPCs something they want, threaten 


them with something they fear, or play on their sympa- 
thies and goals, you can use words to get almost anything 
you want. On the other hand, if you insult a proud warrior 
or speak ill of a noble's allies, your efforts to convince or 
deceive will fall short. 


ABILITY CHECKS 


In addition to roleplaying, ability checks can be key in de- 
termining the outcome of an interaction. 

Your roleplaying efforts can alter an NPC's attitude, but 
there might still be an element of chance in the situation. 
For example, your DM can call fora Charisma check 
at any point during an interaction if they want the dice 
to play a role in determining an NPC's reactions. Other 
checks might be appropriate in certain situations, at your 
DM's discretion. 

Pay attention to your skill proficiencies when thinking 
of how you want to interact with an NPC, and stack the 
deck in your favor by using an approach that relies on 
your skills. If the group needs to trick a guard into letting 
them into a castle, the rogue who is proficient in Decep- 
tion is the best bet to lead the discussion. When negoti- 
ating for a hostage's release, the cleric with Persuasion 
should do most of the talking. 


RESTING 


Adventurers, as well as other creatures, can take short 
rests in the midst of a day and a long rest to end it. 


SHORT REST 


A short rest is a period of downtime, at least 1 hour long, 
during which a character does nothing more strenuous 
than eating, drinking, reading, and tending to wounds. 

A character can spend one or more Hit Dice at the end 
of a short rest, up to the character's maximum number of 
Hit Dice, which is equal to the character's level. For each 
Hit Die spent in this way, the player rolls the die and adds 
the character's Constitution modifier to it. The character 
regains hit points equal to the total (minimum of 0). The 
player can decide to spend an additional Hit Die after 
each roll. A character regains some spent Hit Dice upon 
finishing a long rest, as explained below. 


LONG REST 


A long rest is a period of extended downtime, at least 8 
hours long, during which a character sleeps for at least 
6 hours and performs no more than 2 hours of light ac- 
tivity, such as reading, talking, eating, or standing watch. 
If the rest is interrupted by a period of strenuous activ- 
ity—at least 1 hour of walking, fighting, casting spells, or 
similar adventuring activity—the characters must begin 
the rest again to gain any benefit from it. 

At the end of a long rest, a character regains all lost 
hit points. The character also regains spent Hit Dice, up 
to a number of dice equal to half of the character's total 
number of them (minimum of one die). For example, if a 
character has eight Hit Dice, he or she can regain four 
spent Hit Dice upon finishing a long rest. 

A character can't benefit from more than one long rest 
in a 24-hour period, and a character must have at least 
1 hit point at the start of the rest to gain its benefits. 


CHAPTER 2: PLAYING THE GAME 


34 


СОМВАТ 


This section provides the rules you need for your char- 
acters and monsters to engage in combat. The rules ad- 
dress you, the player or Dungeon Master. “You” can also 
mean the character or monster that you control. 


THE ORDER OF COMBAT 


A typical combat encounter is a clash between two sides, 
a flurry of weapon swings, feints, parries, footwork, and 
spellcasting. The game organizes combat into a cycle of 
rounds and turns. A round represents about 6 seconds 

in the game world. During a round, each participant in a 
battle takes a turn. The order of turns is determined at 
the beginning of a combat encounter, when everyone rolls 
initiative. Once everyone has taken a turn, the fight con- 
tinues to the next round if neither side is defeated. 


СОМВАТ STEP By STEP 

1. Determine surprise. Тһе DM determines whether 
anyone involved in the combat encounter is surprised. 

2. Establish positions. The DM decides where all the 
characters and monsters are located. Given the adven- 
turers’ marching order or their stated positions in the 
room or other location, the DM figures out where the 
adversaries are—how far away and in what direction. 

3. Roll initiative. Everyone involved in the combat en- 
counter rolls initiative, determining the order of com- 
batants’ turns. 

4. Take turns. Each participant in the battle takes a turn 
in initiative order. 

5. Begin the next round. When everyone involved in the 
combat has had a turn, the round ends. Repeat step 4 
until the fighting stops. 


SURPRISE 

A band of adventurers sneaks up on a bandit camp, 
springing from the trees to attack them. A gelatinous 
cube glides down a hallway, unnoticed by the adventurers 
until the cube engulfs one of them. In these situations, 
one side of the battle gains surprise over the other. 

The DM determines who might be surprised. If nei- 
ther side tries to be stealthy, they automatically notice 
each other. Otherwise, the DM compares the Dexterity 
(Stealth) checks of anyone hiding with the passive Wis- 
dom (Perception) score of each creature on the opposing 
side. Any character or monster that doesn’t notice a 
threat is surprised at the start of the encounter. 

If you're surprised, you can't move or take an action 
on your first turn of the combat, and you can't take a re- 
action until that turn ends. A member of a group can be 
surprised even if the other members aren't. 


INITIATIVE 
Initiative determines the order of turns during combat. 
When combat starts, every participant makes a Dexterity 
check to determine their place in the initiative order. The 
check total is called a combatant's initiative count, or 
initiative for short. The DM makes one roll for a group of 
identical creatures, so each member of the group acts at 
the same time. 

The DM ranks the combatants in order, from the one 
with the highest initiative to the one with the lowest. This 


CHAPTER 2: PLAYING THE GAME 


is the order in which they act during each round. The ini- 
tiative order remains the same from round to round. 

If a tie occurs, the DM decides the order among tied 
DM-controlled creatures, and the players decide the 
order among their tied characters. The DM decides the 
order if the tie is between a monster and a player charac- 
ter, or the DM can have the tied characters and monsters 
each roll a die and go in order from highest roll to lowest. 


YOUR TURN 


On your turn, you can move a distance up to your speed 
and take one action. You decide whether to move first or 
take your action first. Your speed—sometimes called your 
walking speed—is noted on your character sheet. 

The actions you can take are described in the “Actions 
in Combat" section later in this chapter. The "Movement 
and Position" section later in this chapter gives the rules 
for your move. 

You can forgo moving, taking an action, or doing any- 
thing at all on your turn. If you can't decide what to do on 
your turn, consider taking the Dodge or Ready action, as 
described in "Actions in Combat." 

Bonus Actions. Various class features, spells, and 
other abilities let you take an additional action on your 
turn called a bonus action. The Cunning Action feature, 
for example, allows a rogue to take a bonus action. You 
can take a bonus action only when a special ability, spell, 
or other feature of the game states that you can do some- 
thing as a bonus action. You otherwise don't have a bonus 
action to take. 

You can take only one bonus action on your turn, so you 
must choose which bonus action to use when you have 
more than one available. 

You choose when to take a bonus action during your 
turn, unless the bonus action's timing is specified, and 
anything that deprives you of your ability to take actions 
also prevents you from taking a bonus action. 

Other Activity on Your Turn. Your turn can include a 
variety of flourishes that require neither your action nor 
your move. 

You can communicate however you are able, through 
brief utterances and gestures, as you take your turn. 

You can also interact with one object or feature of the 
environment for free, during either your move or your 
action. For example, you could open a door during your 
move as you stride toward a foe, or you could draw your 
weapon as part of the same action you use to attack. 

If you want to interact with a second object, you need 
to use your action. Some magic items and other special 
objects always require an action to use, as stated in their 
descriptions. 

The DM might require you to use an action for any of 
these activities when it needs special care or when it 
presents an unusual obstacle. For instance, the DM could 
reasonably expect you to use an action to open a stuck 
door or turn a crank to lower a drawbridge. 


REACTIONS 

Certain special abilities, spells, and situations allow you 
to take a special action called a reaction. A reaction is 

an instant response to a trigger of some kind, which can 
occur on your turn or on someone else's. The opportunity 
attack, described later in this chapter, is the most com- 
mon type of reaction. 


When you take a reaction, you can’t take another one 
until the start of your next turn. If the reaction interrupts 
another creature’s turn, that creature can continue its 
turn right after the reaction. 


MOVEMENT AND POSITION 


On your turn, you can move a distance up to your speed. 
You can use as much or as little of your speed as you like 
on your turn, following the rules here. 

Your movement can include jumping, climbing, and 
swimming (See “Special Types of Movement,” page 
32). These different modes of movement can be com- 
bined with walking, or they can constitute your entire 
move. However you're moving, you deduct the distance of 
each part of your move from your speed until it is used up 
or until you are done moving. 


BREAKING Up Үоов MOVE 

You can break up your movement on your turn, using 
some of your speed before and after your action. For 

example, if you have a speed of 30 feet, you can move 
10 feet, take your action, and then move 20 feet. 

Similarly, if you take an action that includes more than 
one weapon attack, you can break up your movement 
even further by moving between those attacks. 

If you have more than one speed, such as your walking 
speed and a flying speed, you can switch back and forth 
between your speeds during your move. Whenever you 
switch, subtract the distance you've already moved from 
the new speed. The result determines how much farther 
you can move. If the result is 0 or less, you can't use the 
new speed during the current move. 

For example, if you have a speed of 30 and a flying 
speed of 60 because a wizard cast the fly spell on you, 
you could fly 20 feet, then walk 10 feet, and then leap into 
the air to fly 30 feet more. 


DIFFICULT TERRAIN 
Combatants are often slowed down by difficult terrain. 
Low furniture, rubble, undergrowth, steep stairs, snow, 
and shallow bogs are examples of difficult terrain. The 
space of another creature, whether hostile or not, also 
counts as difficult terrain. 

Every foot of movement in difficult terrain costs 1 
extra foot. This rule is true even if multiple things in 
a space count as difficult terrain. 


BEING PRONE 

Combatants often find themselves lying on the ground, 
either because they are knocked down or because they 
throw themselves down. In the game, they are prone, 
a condition described in appendix B. 

You can drop prone without using any of your speed. 
Standing up takes more effort; doing so costs an amount 
of movement equal to half your speed. For example, if 
your speed is 30 feet, you must spend 15 feet of move- 
ment to stand up. You can't stand up if you don't have 
enough movement left or if your speed is 0. 

То move while prone, you must crawl (see page 32) 
or use magic such as teleportation. 


MOVING AROUND OTHER CREATURES 
You can move through a friend's space. In contrast, you 
can move through an enemy's space only if the foe is at 
least two sizes larger or smaller than you. Remember 
that another creature's space is difficult terrain for you. 
Whether a creature is a friend or an enemy, you can't 
willingly end your move in its space. 
If you leave an enemy's reach during your move, you 
provoke an opportunity attack (see page 37). 


FLYING MOVEMENT 

Flying creatures enjoy many benefits of mobility, but 
they must also deal with the danger of falling. If a flying 
creature is knocked prone, has its speed reduced to 0, or 
is otherwise deprived of the ability to move, the creature 
falls, unless it has the ability to hover or it is being held 
aloft by magic, such as by the Яу spell. 


ACTIONS IN COMBAT 


When you take your action on your turn, you can take one 
of the actions presented here. When you describe an ac- 
tion not detailed here, the DM tells what kind of roll you 
need to make, if any, to determine success or failure. 


ATTACK 
The most common action to take in combat is the Attack 
action, whether you are swinging a sword, firing an ar- 
row from a bow, or brawling with your fists. 

With this action, you make one melee or ranged attack. 
See the "Making an Attack" section for the rules that gov- 
ern attacks. 


CAST A SPELL 


Most spells require an action to cast. See chapter 4 for 
the rules on casting a spell. 


DasH 

When you take the Dash action, you gain extra movement 

for the current turn. The increase equals your speed, af- 

ter applying any modifiers. With a speed of 30 feet, for ex- 

ample, you can move up to 60 feet on your turn if you dash. 
Any increase or decrease to your speed changes this 

additional movement by the same amount. 


DISENGAGE 
If you take the Disengage action, your movement doesn't 
provoke opportunity attacks for the rest of the turn. 


DODGE 

When you take the Dodge action, you focus on avoiding 
attacks. Until the start of your next turn, any attack roll 
made against you has disadvantage if you can see the 
attacker, and you make Dexterity saving throws with ad- 
vantage. You lose this benefit if you are incapacitated (as 
explained in appendix B) or if your speed drops to 0. 


HELP 
You can lend your aid to another creature in the comple- 
tion of a task. When you take the Help action, the crea- 
ture you aid gains advantage on the next ability check it 
makes to perform the task you are helping with, provided 
that it makes the check before the start of your next turn. 
Alternatively, you can aid an ally in attacking a creature 
within 5 feet of you. You feint, distract the target, or in 


35 
CHAPTER 2; PLAYING THE GAME 


36 


some other way team up to make your ally’s attack more 
effective. If your ally attacks the target before your next 
turn, the first attack roll is made with advantage. 


HIDE 

When you take the Hide action, you make a Dexterity 
(Stealth) check in an attempt to hide, following the rules 
on page 30 for hiding. If you succeed, you gain certain 
benefits, as described in the “Unseen Attackers and Tar- 
gets” section below. 


READY 

Sometimes you want to get the jump on a foe or wait for a 
particular circumstance before you act. To do so, you can 
take the Ready action on your turn, which lets you act us- 
ing your reaction before the start of your next turn. 

First, you decide what perceivable circumstance will 
trigger your reaction. Then, you choose the action you 
will take in response to that trigger, or you choose to 
move up to your speed in response to it. Examples in- 
clude “If the cultist steps on the trapdoor, ГЇЇ pull the 
lever that opens it,” and “If the goblin steps next to me, I 
move away.” 

When the trigger occurs, you can either take your reac- 
tion right after the trigger finishes or ignore the trigger. 

When you ready a spell, you cast it as normal but hold 
its energy, which you release with your reaction when the 
trigger occurs. To be readied, a spell must have a casting 
time of 1 action, and holding onto the spell's magic ге- 
quires concentration (explained in chapter 4). If your con- 
centration is broken, the spell dissipates without taking 
effect. For example, if you are concentrating on the web 
spell and ready magic missile, your web spell ends, and 
if you take damage before you release magic missile with 
your reaction, your concentration might be broken. 


SEARCH 

When you take the Search action, you devote your atten- 
tion to finding something, and the DM might have you 
make a Wisdom (Perception) check or an Intelligence 
(Investigation) check. 


USE A MAGIC ITEM 


If you have a magic item that requires an action to use, 
you take the Use a Magic Item action. 


USE AN OBJECT 

You normally interact with an object while doing some- 
thing else, such as when you draw a sword as part of an 
attack. When a nonmagical object requires your action, 
you take the Use an Object action. This action is also use- 
ful when you want to interact with more than one object 
on your turn. 


USE A SPECIAL ABILITY 


Many class features give you special ways to use your 
action. Monsters also have their own special actions, as 
detailed in their stat blocks. 


MAKING AN ATTACK 


Whether you're striking with a melee weapon, firing a 
weapon at range, or making an attack roll as part of a 
spell, an attack has the following structure: 


CHAPTER 2: PLAYING THE GAME 


1. Choose a target. Pick a target within your attack's 
range: a creature, an object, or a location. 

2. Determine modifiers. The DM determines whether 
the target has cover and whether you have advantage 
or disadvantage against the target. In addition, spells, 
special abilities, and other effects can apply penalties 
or bonuses to your attack roll. 

3. Resolve the attack. You make the attack roll. On a hit, 
you roll damage, unless the particular attack has rules 
that specify otherwise. Some attacks cause special 
effects in addition to or instead of damage. 


If there's ever any question whether something you're 
doing counts as an attack, the rule is simple: if you're 
making an attack roll, you're making an attack. 


ATTACK ROLLS 

When you make an attack, your attack roll determines 
whether the attack hits or misses. To make an attack roll, 
roll а d20 and add the appropriate modifiers. If the total 
of the roll plus modifiers equals or exceeds the target's 
Armor Class (AC), the attack hits. 

When a character makes an attack roll, the two most 
common modifiers to the roll are an ability modifier 
and the character's proficiency bonus. When a monster 
makes an attack roll, it uses whatever modifier is pro- 
vided in its stat block. 

Ability Modifier. The ability modifier used for a melee 
weapon attack is Strength, and the ability modifier used 
for a ranged weapon attack is Dexterity. 

Some spells also require an attack roll. The ability 
modifier used for a spell attack depends on the spellcast- 
ing ability of the spellcaster, as explained in chapter 4. 

Proficiency Bonus. You add your proficiency bonus 
to your attack roll when you attack using a weapon with 
which you have proficiency, as well as when you attack 
with a spell. 


ROLLING 1 ов 20 
If the d20 roll for an attack is a 20, the attack hits regard- 
less of any modifiers or the target's AC. This is called a 
critical hit, which is explained later in this chapter. 

If the d20 roll for an attack is a 1, the attack misses re- 
gardless of any modifiers or the target's AC. 


UNSEEN ATTACKERS AND TARGETS 
When you make an attack roll against a target you can't 
see, you have disadvantage on the roll. This is true 
whether you're guessing the target's location or you're 
targeting a creature you can hear but not see. If the target 
isn't in the location you targeted, you automatically miss, 
but the DM typically just says that the attack missed, not 
whether you guessed the target's location correctly. 

When a creature can't see you, you have advantage on 
attack rolls against it. 

If you are hidden—both unseen and unheard—when 
you make an attack, you give away your location when the 
attack hits or misses. 


COVER 


Walls, trees, creatures, and other obstacles can provide 
cover, making a target more difficult to harm. A target 
can benefit from cover only when an attack or other effect 
originates on the opposite side of the cover. 


There аге three degrees of cover. If a target is behind 
multiple sources of cover, only the most protective degree 
of cover applies; the degrees aren’t added together. For 
example, if a target is behind a creature that gives half 
cover and a tree trunk that gives three-quarters cover, the 
target has three-quarters cover. 

A target with half cover has a +2 bonus to AC and 
Dexterity saving throws. A target has half cover if an ob- 
stacle blocks at least half of its body. The obstacle might 
be a low wall, a large piece of furniture, a narrow tree 
trunk, or a creature, whether that creature is an enemy 
or a friend. 

A target with three-quarters cover has a +5 bonus to 
AC and Dexterity saving throws. A target has three-quar- 
ters cover if about three-quarters of it is covered by an ob- 
stacle. The obstacle might be a portcullis, an arrow slit, 
or a thick tree trunk. 

A target with total cover can't be targeted directly by 
an attack or a spell, although some spells can reach such 
a target by including it in an area of effect. A target has 
total cover if it is completely concealed by an obstacle. 


RANGED ATTACKS 


When you make a ranged attack, you fire a bow or a 
crossbow, hurl a handaxe, or otherwise send projectiles 
to strike a foe at a distance. Many spells also involve mak- 
ing a ranged attack. 


RANGE 

You can make ranged attacks only against targets within 
a specified range. If a ranged attack, such as one made 
with a spell, has a single range, you can't attack a target 
beyond this range. 

Some ranged attacks, such as those made with a long- 
bow or a shortbow, have two ranges. The smaller number 
is the normal range, and the larger number is the long 
range. Your attack roll has disadvantage when your target 
is beyond normal range, and you can't attack a target be- 
yond the long range. 


RANGED ATTACKS IN CLOSE COMBAT 

Aiming a ranged attack is more difficult when a foe 

is next to you. When you make a ranged attack with a 
weapon, a spell, or some other means, you have disadvan- 
tage on the attack roll if you are within 5 feet of an enemy 
who can see you and who isn't incapacitated. 


MELEE ATTACKS 


Used in hand-to-hand combat, a melee attack allows you 
to attack a foe within your reach. A melee attack typically 
uses a handheld weapon. A typical monster makes a 
melee attack when it strikes with its claws, horns, teeth, 
tentacles, or other body part. A few spells also involve 
making a melee attack. 

Most creatures have a 5-foot reach and can thus attack 
targets within 5 feet of them when making a melee at- 
tack. Certain creatures have melee attacks with a greater 
reach than 5 feet, as noted in their descriptions. 

Instead of using a weapon to make a melee weapon 
attack, you can use an unarmed strike: a punch, kick, 
head-butt, or similar forceful blow. On a hit, an unarmed 
strike deals bludgeoning damage equal to 1 + your 
Strength modifier. You are proficient with your unarmed 
Strikes. They aren't considered weapons by the rules, but 
they nonetheless work for melee weapon attacks. 


OPPORTUNITY ATTACKS 

In a fight, everyone is constantly watching for enemies 
to drop their guard. You can rarely move heedlessly past 
your foes without putting yourself in danger; doing so 
provokes an opportunity attack. | 

You сап make ап opportunity attack when an enemy 
that you can see moves out of your reach. To make the 
opportunity attack, you use your reaction to make one 
melee attack against the provoking creature. The attack 
occurs right before the creature leaves your reach. 

You can avoid provoking an opportunity attack by 
taking the Disengage action. You also don’t provoke an 
opportunity attack when you teleport or when someone 
or something moves you without using your movement, 
action, or reaction. For example, you don’t provoke an 
opportunity attack if an explosion hurls you out of a foe’s 
reach or if gravity causes you to fall past an enemy. 


Two-WEAPON FIGHTING 
When you take the Attack action and attack with a light 
melee weapon that you're holding in one hand, you can 
use a bonus action to attack with a different light melee 
weapon that you're holding in the other hand. You don't 
add your ability modifier to the damage of the bonus at- 
tack, unless that modifier is negative. 

If either weapon has the thrown property, you can 
throw the weapon, instead of making a melee at- 
tack with it. 


GRAPPLING 
When you want to grab a creature or wrestle with it, you 
can use the Attack action to make a special melee attack, 
a grapple. If you're able to make multiple attacks with the 
Attack action, this attack replaces one of them. 

The target of your grapple must be no more than one 
size larger than you, and it must be within your reach. 
Using at least one free hand, you try to seize the target 


CHAPTER 2: PLAYING THE GAME 


38 


by making a grapple check, a Strength (Athletics) check 
contested by the target's Strength (Athletics) or Dexterity 
(Acrobatics) check (the target chooses the ability to use). 
You succeed automatically if the target is incapacitated. If 
you succeed, you subject the target to the grappled condi- 
tion (see appendix B). The condition specifies the things 
that end it, and you can release the target whenever you 
like (no action required). 

Escaping a Grapple. A grappled creature can use its 
action to escape. To do so, it must succeed оп а Strength 
(Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check contested by 
your Strength (Athletics) check. 

Moving a Grappled Creature. When you move, you 
can drag or carry the grappled creature with you, but 
your speed is halved, unless the creature is two or more 
sizes smaller than you. 


SHOVING A CREATURE 
Using the Attack action, you can make a special melee at- 
tack to shove a creature, either to knock it prone or push 
it away from you. If you're able to make multiple attacks 
with the Attack action, this attack replaces one of them. 
The target of your shove must be no more than one 
size larger than you, and it must be within your reach. 
You make a Strength (Athletics) check contested by 
the target's Strength (Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobat- 
ics) check (the target chooses the ability to use). You 
succeed automatically if the target is incapacitated. If 
you succeed, you either knock the target prone or push 
it 5 feet away from you. 


DAMAGE AND HEALING 


On adventures, injury and death are constant threats. 


Нтт Points 


Hit points represent a combination of physical and men- 
tal durability, the will to live, and luck. Creatures with 
more hit points are more difficult to kill. Those with 
fewer hit points are more fragile. 

A creature's current hit points (usually just called hit 
points) can be any number from the creature's hit point 
maximum down to 0. This number changes frequently as 
a creature takes damage or receives healing. 

Whenever a creature takes damage, that damage is 
subtracted from its hit points. The loss of hit points has 
no effect on a creature's capabilities until the creature 
drops to 0 hit points. 


DAMAGE ROLLS 

Each weapon, spell, and harmful monster ability speci- 
fies the damage it deals. You roll the damage die or dice, 
add any modifiers, and apply the damage to your target. 
Magic weapons, special abilities, and other factors can 
grant a bonus to damage. 

When attacking with a weapon, you add your ability 
modifier—the same modifier used for the attack roll—to 
the damage. A spell tells you which dice to roll for dam- 
age and whether to add any modifiers. 

If a spell or other effect deals damage to more than 
one target at the same time, roll the damage once for all 
of them. For example, when a wizard casts fireball or a 
cleric casts fame strike, the spell’s damage is rolled once 
for all creatures caught in the blast. 


CHAPTER 2: PLAYING THE GAME 


CRITICAL HITS 

When you score a critical hit, you get to roll extra dice 
for the attack’s damage against the target. Roll all of the 
attack's damage dice twice and add them together. Then 
add any relevant modifiers as normal. To speed up play, 
you can roll all the damage dice at once. 

For example, if you score a critical hit with a dagger, 
roll 2d4 for the damage, rather than 1d4, and then add 
your relevant ability modifier. If the attack involves other 
damage dice, such as from the rogue's Sneak Attack fea- 
ture, you roll those dice twice as well. 


DAMAGE TYPES 

Different attacks and damaging spells deal different types 

of damage. Damage types have no rules of their own, but 

other rules, such as damage resistance, rely on the types. 
The types are acid, bludgeoning, cold, fire, force, light- 

ning, necrotic, piercing, poison, psychic, radiant, slashing, 

and thunder. 


DAMAGE RESISTANCE AND VULNERABILITY 
Some creatures and objects are exceedingly difficult or 
unusually easy to hurt with certain types of damage. 

If a creature or an object has resistance to a damage 
type, damage of that type is halved against it. If a crea- 
ture or an object has vulnerability to a damage type, 
damage of that type is doubled against it. 

Resistance and then vulnerability are applied after all 
other modifiers to damage. For example, a creature has 
resistance to bludgeoning damage and is hit by an attack 
that deals 25 bludgeoning damage. The creature is also 
within a magical aura that reduces all damage by 5. The 
25 damage is first reduced by 5 and then halved, so the 
creature takes 10 damage. 

Multiple instances of resistance or vulnerability that 
affect the same damage type count as only one instance. 
For example, if a creature has resistance to fire damage 
as well as resistance to all nonmagical damage, the dam- 
age of a nonmagical fire is reduced by half against the 
creature, not reduced by three-quarters. 


HEALING 

Unless it results in death, damage isn't permanent. Even 
death is reversible through powerful magic. Rest can re- 
Store a creature's hit points (see page 33), and magical 
methods such as a cure wounds spell or a potion of heal- 
in$ can remove damage in an instant. 

When a creature receives healing of any kind, hit points 
regained are added to its current hit points. A creature's 
hit points can't exceed its hit point maximum, so any hit 
points regained in excess of this number are lost. For 
example, a druid grants a ranger 8 hit points of healing. 
If the ranger has 14 current hit points and has a hit point 
maximum of 20, the ranger regains 6 hit points from the 
druid, not 8. 

A creature that has died can't regain hit points until 
magic such as the revivify spell has restored it to life. 


DROPPING TO 0 Ніт POINTS 

When you drop to 0 hit points, you either die outright or 

fall unconscious, as explained in the following sections. 
Instant Death. Massive damage can kill you instantly. 

When damage reduces you to 0 hit points and there is 


damage remaining, you die if the remaining damage 
equals or exceeds your hit point maximum. 

For example, a cleric with a maximum of 12 hit points 
currently has 6 hit points. If she takes 18 damage from 
an attack, she is reduced to 0 hit points, but 12 damage 
remains. Because the remaining damage equals her hit 
point maximum, the cleric dies. 

Falling Unconscious. If damage reduces you to 0 hit 
points and fails to kill you, you fall unconscious (see ap- 
pendix B). This unconsciousness ends if you regain any 
hit points. 

Death Saving Throws. Whenever you start your turn 
with 0 hit points, you must make a special saving throw, 
called a death saving throw, to determine whether you 
creep closer to death or hang onto life. Unlike other sav- 
ing throws, this one isn't tied to any ability score. You 
are in the hands of fate now, aided only by spells and 
features that improve your chances of succeeding on a 
saving throw. 

Roll a d20. If the roll is 10 or higher, you succeed. Oth- 
erwise, you fail. A success or failure has no effect by it- 
self. On your third success, you become stable (see below). 
On your third failure, you die. The successes and failures 
don't need to be consecutive; keep track of both until you 
collect three of a kind. The number of both is reset to zero 
when you regain any hit points or become stable. 

When you make a death saving throw and roll a 1 on 
the d20, it counts as two failures. If you roll a 20 on the 
420, you regain 1 hit point. 

Damage at 0 Hit Points. If you take any damage while 
you have 0 hit points, you suffer a death saving throw 
failure. If the damage is from a critical hit, you suffer two 
failures instead. If the damage equals or exceeds your hit 
point maximum, you suffer instant death. 

Stabilizing a Creature. The best way to save a creature 
with O hit points is to heal it. If healing is unavailable, the 
creature can at least be stabilized so that it isn't killed by a 
failed death saving throw. 

You can use your action to administer first aid to an 
unconscious creature and attempt to stabilize it, which 
requires a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Medicine) check. 

A stable creature doesn't make death saving throws, 
even though it has O hit points, but it does remain un- 
conscious. The creature stops being stable, and must 
start making death saving throws again, if it takes any 
damage. A stable creature that isn't healed regains 
1 hit point after 1d4 hours. 


MONSTERS AND DEATH 
Most DMs have a monster die the instant it drops to O hit 
points, rather than having it fall unconscious and make 
death saving throws. 

Mighty villains and special nonplayer characters are 
common exceptions; the DM might have them fall uncon- 
scious and follow the same rules as player characters. 


KNOCKING A CREATURE OUT 

Sometimes an attacker wants to incapacitate a foe, rather 
than deal a killing blow. When an attacker reduces a 
creature to 0 hit points with a melee attack, the attacker 
can knock the creature out. The attacker can make this 
choice the instant the damage is dealt. The creature falls 
unconscious and is stable. 


MOUNTED COMBAT 


A willing creature that is at least one size larger than 
you and that has an appropriate anatomy can serve as a 
mount, using the following rules. 


MOUNTING AND DISMOUNTING 

Once during your move, you can mount a creature that 
is within 5 feet of you or dismount. Doing so costs an 
amount of movement equal to half your speed. For ex- 
ample, if your speed is 30 feet, you must spend 15 feet of 
movement to mount a horse. Therefore, you can't mount 
it if you don't have 15 feet of movement left or if your 
speed is 0. 

If an effect moves your mount against its will while 
you're on it, you must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity sav- 
ing throw or fall off the mount, landing prone in a space 
within 5 feet of it. If you're knocked prone while mounted, 
you must make the same saving throw. 

If your mount is knocked prone, you can use your reac- 
tion to dismount it as it falls and land on your feet. Other- 
wise, you are dismounted and fall prone in a space within 
5 feet it. 


CONTROLLING A MOUNT 

While you're mounted, you have two options. You can 
either control the mount or allow it to act independently. 
Intelligent creatures, such as dragons, act independently. 

You can control a mount only if it has been trained to 
accept a rider. Domesticated horses, donkeys, and sim- 
ilar creatures are assumed to have such training. The 
initiative of a controlled mount changes to match yours 
when you mount it. It moves as you direct it, and it has 
only three action options: Dash, Disengage, and Dodge. A 
controlled mount can move and act even on the turn that 
you mount it. 

An independent mount retains its place in the initiative 
order. Bearing a rider puts no restrictions on the actions 
the mount can take, and it moves and acts as it wishes. It 
might flee from combat, rush to attack and devour a badly 
injured foe, or otherwise act against your wishes. 

In either case, if the mount provokes an opportunity 
attack while you're on it, the attacker can target you or 
the mount. 


UNDERWATER COMBAT 


When adventurers pursue sahuagin back to their under- 
sea homes, fight off sharks in an ancient shipwreck, or 
find themselves in a flooded dungeon room, they must 
fight in a challenging environment. Underwater the fol- 
lowing rules apply. 

When making a melee weapon attack, a creature that 
doesn't have a swimming speed (either natural or granted 
by magic) has disadvantage on the attack roll unless the 
weapon is a dagger, javelin, shortsword, spear, or trident. 

A ranged weapon attack automatically misses a target 
beyond the weapon's normal range. Even against a target 
within normal range, the attack roll has disadvantage un- 
less the weapon is a crossbow or a weapon that is thrown 
like a javelin (including a spear, trident, or dart). 

Creatures and objects that are fully immersed in water 
have resistance to fire damage. 


CHAPTER 2: PLAYING THE GAME 


39 


THIS CHAPTER DETAILS THE MUNDANE AND EXOTIC 
merchandise that adventurers commonly find useful in the 
face of the threats that the worlds of D&D present. 


COINAGE 


Common coins come in several different denominations 
based on the relative worth of the metal from which they 
are made. The three most common coins are the gold 

piece (gp), the silver piece (sp), and the copper piece (cp). 


The gold piece is the standard unit of measure for wealth, 


even if the coin itself is not commonly used. In addition, 
unusual coins made of other precious metals sometimes 
appear in treasure hoards. The electrum piece (ep) and 
the platinum piece (pp) originate from fallen empires and 
lost kingdoms, and they sometimes arouse suspicion and 
skepticism when used in transactions. 

A standard coin weighs about a third of an ounce, 
so fifty coins weigh a pound. 


STANDARD EXCHANGE RATES 


Coin cp sp ep gP pp 
Copper (cp) | 1/10 1/50 1100 1/1000 
Silver (sp) 10 1 5 M0 1/100 
Electrum (ep) 50 5 1 1/2 1/20 
Gold (gp) 100 10 2 1 1/10 


Platinum (pp) 1,000 100 20 10 1 


CHAPTER 3: EQUIPMENT 


CHAPTER 3: EQUIPMENT 


SELLING TREASURE 


As a general rule, undamaged weapons, armor, and other 
equipment fetch half their cost when sold in a market. 
Weapons and armor used by monsters are rarely in good 
enough condition to sell. 

Gems, jewelry, and art objects retain their full value in 
the marketplace. 

In most places, magic items are priceless. 


ARMOR AND SHIELDS 


The Armor table collects types of armor found in the 
game and separates them into three categories: 


Light Armor. If you wear light armor, you add your Dex- 
terity modifier to the base number from your armor 
type to determine your Armor Class. 
Medium Armor. If you wear medium armor, you add 
your Dexterity modifier, to a maximum of +2, to the 
base number from your armor type to determine your 
Armor Class. 
Heavy Armor. Heavy armor doesn’t let you add your Dex- 
terity modifier to your Armor Class, but it also doesn't 
penalize you if your Dexterity modifier is negative. 
If the Armor table shows “Str 13” or “Str 15” in the 
Strength column for an armor type, the armor reduces 
the wearer’s speed by 10 feet unless the wearer has a ; 
Strength score equal to or higher than the listed score. x 


Авмов 


Armor Cost Armor Class (AC) 
Light Armor 
Leather 10 gp 11 + Dex modifier 
Studded leather 45 gp 12 + Dex modifier 
Medium Armor 
Hide 10 gp 12 + Dex modifier (max 2) 
Chain shirt 50 gp 13 + Dex modifier (max 2) 
Scale mail 50 gp 14 + Dex modifier (max 2) 
Breastplate 400 gp 14 + Dex modifier (max 2) 
Half plate 750 gp 15 + Dex modifier (max 2) 
Heavy Armor 
Ring mail 30 gp 14 
Chain mail 75 gp 16 
Splint 200 gp 17 
Plate 1,500 gp 18 
Shield 
Shield 10 gp +2 


ARMOR PROFICIENCY 


Anyone can put on a suit of armor or strap a shield to an 
arm. Only those proficient in the armor’s use know how 
to wear it effectively, however. Your class gives you pro- 
ficiency with certain types of armor. If you wear armor 
that you lack proficiency with, you have disadvantage on 
any ability check, saving throw, or attack roll that involves 
Strength or Dexterity, and you can’t cast spells. 


STEALTH 


If the Armor table shows “Disadvantage” in the Stealth 
column, the wearer has disadvantage on Dexterity 
(Stealth) checks. 


SHIELDS 


Many warriors supplement their armor with a shield. 

A shield is made from wood or metal and is carried in 
one hand. Wielding a shield increases your Armor Class 
by 2. You can benefit from only one shield at a time. 


WEAPONS 


The Weapons table shows weapons, their price and 
weight, the damage they deal when they hit, and any spe- 
cial properties they possess. Every weapon is classified 
as either melee or ranged. A melee weapon is used to 
attack a target within 5 feet of you, whereas a ranged 
weapon is used to attack a target at a distance. 


WEAPON PROFICIENCY 


Your race and class can grant you proficiency with cer- 
tain weapons or categories of weapons. The two catego- 
ries are simple and martial. 

Proficiency with a weapon allows you to add your pro- 
ficiency bonus to the attack roll for any attack you make 
with that weapon. 


WEAPON PROPERTIES 


Many weapons have special properties related to their use, 
as shown in the Weapons table. 


Strength Stealth Weight 
— - 10 Ib. 
-- -- 13 ІБ. 
- — 12 Ib. 
— — 20 Ib. 
— Disadvantage 45 |b. 
— — 20 Ib. 
— Disadvantage 40 Ib. 
— Disadvantage 40 Ib. 
Str 13 Disadvantage 55 Ib. 
Str 15 Disadvantage 60 Ib. 
Str 15 Disadvantage 65 Ib. 
-- — 6 Ib. 


Ammunition. You can use a weapon that has the am- 
munition property to make a ranged attack only if you 
have ammunition to fire from the weapon. Each time you 
attack with the weapon, you expend one piece of ammu- 
nition. Drawing the ammunition from a quiver, case, or 
other container is part of the attack (you need a free hand 
to load a one-handed weapon). At the end of the battle, 
you can recover half your expended ammunition by tak- 
ing a minute to search the battlefield. 

If you use a weapon that has the ammunition property to 
make a melee attack, you treat the weapon as an improvised 
weapon (see "Improvised Weapons" later in the section). 

A sling must be loaded to deal any damage when used 
in this way. 

Finesse. When making an attack with a finesse 
weapon, you use your choice of your Strength or Dexter- 
ity modifier for the attack and damage rolls. You must use 
the same modifier for both rolls. 

Heavy. Small creatures have disadvantage on attack 
rolls with heavy weapons. A heavy weapon's size and 
bulk make it too large for a Small creature to use ef- 
fectively. 

Light. A light weapon is small and easy to handle, mak- 
ing it ideal for use when fighting with two weapons. See 
the rules for two-weapon fighting in chapter 2. 

Loading. Because of the time required to load this 
weapon, you can fire only one piece of ammunition from 
it when you use an action, bonus action, or reaction to 
fire it, regardless of the number of attacks you can nor- 
mally make. 

Range. A weapon that can be used to make a ranged 
attack has a range shown in parentheses after the ammu- 
nition or thrown property. The range lists two numbers. 
The first is the weapon's normal range in feet, and the 
second indicates the weapon's long range. When attack- 
ing a target beyond normal range, you have disadvantage 
on the attack roll. You can't attack a target beyond the 
weapon's long range. 

Reach. This weapon adds 5 feet to your reach when 
you attack with it, as well as when determining your 
reach for opportunity attacks with it (see chapter 2). 


CHAPTER 5: EQUIPMENT 


Thrown. If a weapon has the thrown property, you сап 
throw the weapon to make a ranged attack. If the weapon 
is a melee weapon, you use the same ability modifier for 
that attack roll and damage roll that you would use for a 
melee attack with the weapon. For example, if you throw 
a handaxe, you use your Strength, but if you throw a dag- 
ger, you can use either your Strength or your Dexterity, 
since the dagger has the finesse property. 

Two-Handed. This weapon requires two hands when 
you attack with it. 

Versatile. This weapon can be used with one or two 
hands. A damage value in parentheses appears with the 
property—the damage when the weapon is used with two 
hands to make a melee attack. 


IMPROVISED WEAPONS 
Sometimes characters don't have their weapons and have 
to attack with whatever is close at hand. An improvised 
weapon includes any object you can wield in one or two 
hands, such as broken glass, a table leg, a frying pan, a 
wagon wheel, or a dead goblin. 

In many cases, an improvised weapon is similar to an 
actual weapon and can be treated as such. For example, a 


GHAPTER 3: EQUIPMENT 


WEAPONS 

Name Cost Damage Weight 

Simple Melee Weapons 
Club lsp 1d4 bludgeoning 2 lb. 
Dagger 2 ер 144 piercing 1 Ib. 
Greatclub 2sp 1d8 bludgeoning 10 Ib. 
Handaxe 5 gp 1d6 slashing 2 Ib. 
Javelin 5 sp 1d6 piercing 2 Ib. 
Light hammer 2gp 144 bludgeoning 2 Ib. 
Mace 5 gp 1d6 bludgeoning 4 lb. 
Quarterstaff 25р 146 bludgeoning 4 Ib. 
Spear lgp 1d6 piercing 3 Ib. 

Simple Ranged Weapons 
Crossbow, light 25 gp 1d8 piercing 5 Ib. 
Dart 5cp 1d4 piercing 1/4 Ib. 
Shortbow 25 gp 1d6 piercing 2 lb. 
Sling lsp 1d4 bludgeoning — 

Martial Melee Weapons 
Battleaxe 10 gp 148 slashing 4 lb. 
Flail 10 gp 1d8 bludgeoning 2 Ib. 
Greataxe 30 gp 1d12 slashing 7 lb. 
Greatsword 50 gp 2d6 slashing 6 Ib. 
Halberd 20 gp 1410 slashing 6 Ib. 
Longsword 15 gp 1d8 slashing 3 Ib. 
Maul 10 gp 2d6 bludgeoning 101b. 
Morningstar 15 gp 1d8 piercing 4 Ib. 
Rapier 25 gp 1d8 piercing 2 Ib. 
Scimitar 25 gp 1d6 slashing 3 Ib. 
Shortsword 10 gp 1d6 piercing 2 lb. 
Trident 5gp 1d6 piercing 4 Ib. 
Warhammer 15gp 1d8 bludgeoning 2 lb. 

Martial Ranged Weapons 
Crossbow, hand 75gp 1d6 piercing 3 Ib. 
Crossbow, heavy 50 gp 1d10 piercing 18 Ib. 
Longbow 50 gp 1d8 piercing 2 Ib. 


table leg is akin to a club. At the DM's option, a character 
proficient with a weapon can use a similar object as if it 
were that weapon and use his or her proficiency bonus. 
An object that bears no resemblance to a weapon deals 
144 damage (the DM assigns a damage type appropri- 
ate to the object). If a character uses a ranged weapon 
to make a melee attack, or throws a melee weapon that 
does not have the thrown property, it also deals 1d4 dam- 
age. An improvised thrown weapon has a normal range 
of 20 feet and a long range of 60 feet. 


ADVENTURING GEAR 


The Adventuring Gear table lists various useful items. 


EQUIPMENT PACKS 


The starting equipment of each class includes a special 
pack. The contents of these packs are listed here: 


Burglar's Pack: Includes a backpack, a bag of 1,000 ball 
bearings, 10 feet of string, a bell, 5 candles, a crowbar, 
a hammer, 10 pitons, a hooded lantern, 2 flasks of oil, 
5 days rations, a tinderbox, and a waterskin. The pack 
also has 50 feet of hempen rope strapped to it. 


Properties 


Light 

Finesse, light, thrown (range 20/60) 
Two-handed 

Light, thrown (range 20/60) 

Thrown (range 30/120) 

Light, thrown (range 20/60) 

Versatile (1d8) 

Thrown (range 20/60), versatile (148) 


Ammunition (range 80/320), loading, two-handed 
Finesse, thrown (range 20/60) 

Ammunition (range 80/320), two-handed 
Ammunition (range 30/120) 


Versatile (1410) 

Heavy, two-handed 
Heavy, two-handed 
Heavy, reach, two-handed 
Versatile (1410) 

Heavy, two-handed 
Finesse 

Finesse, light 

Finesse, light 

Thrown (range 20/60), versatile (1d8) 
Versatile (1410) 


Ammunition (range 30/120), light, loading 
Ammunition (range 100/400), heavy, loading, two-handed 
Ammunition (range 150/600), heavy, two-handed 


ADVENTURING GEAR 

Item 

Abacus 

Ammunition 
Arrows (20) 
Crossbow bolts (20) 
Sling bullets (20) 

Arcane focus 
Crystal 
Orb 
Rod 
Staff 
Wand 

Artisan’s tools 
Brewer’s supplies 
Calligrapher's supplies 
Carpenter's tools 
Cartographer's tools 
Cobbler's tools 
Cook's utensils 
Jeweler's tools 
Leatherworker's tools 
Mason's tools 
Painter's supplies 
Smith's tools 
Tinker's tools 
Weaver's tools 
Woodcarver's tools 

Backpack 

Ball bearings (bag of 1,000) 

Barrel 

Barding 

Basket 

Bedroll 

Bell 

Blanket 

Book 

Bottle, glass 

Bucket 

Candle 

Case, crossbow bolt (up to 20) 

Case, map or scroll 

Chalk (1 piece) 

Chest 

Clothes, common 

Clothes, costume 

Clothes, fine 

Clothes, traveler's 

Component pouch 

Crowbar 

Disguise kit 

Gaming set 
Dice set 
Dragonchess set 
Playing card set 
Three-Dragon Ante set 

Hammer 


Cost 
2gp 


1ёр 
1ёр 
4 cp 


10 gp 
20 gp 
10 gp 
5 gp 
10 gp 


20 gp 
10 gp 
8 gp 
15 gp 
5 gp 
1gp 
25 gp 
5 gp 
10 gp 
10 gp 
20 gp 
50 gp 
Тер 
Тр 
2 gp 
1 gp 
2gp 


25 gp 


Тер 


5 ер 


15 gp 
25 gp 


25 gp 


lgp 


12р 


Нет 
Healer's kit 
Holy symbol 
Amulet 
Emblem 
Reliquary 
Holy water (flask) 
Hourglass 
Ink (1 ounce bottle) 
Ink pen 
Ladder (10-foot) 
Lamp 
Lantern, bullseye 
Lantern, hooded 
Lock 
Mess kit 
Mirror, steel 
Musical instrument 
Bagpipes 
Drum 
Flute 
Lute 
Lyre 
Horn 
Pan flute 
Oil (flask) 
Paper (one sheet) 
Parchment (one sheet) 
Perfume (vial) 
Pick, miner’s 
Piton 
Pole (10-foot) 
Potion of healing (see page 47) 
Pouch 
Quiver 
Rations (1 day) 
Saddle, riding 
Robes 
Rope, hempen (50 feet) 
Rope, silk (50 feet) 
Sack 
Sealing wax 
Shovel 
Signal whistle 
Signet ring 
Soap 
Spellbook 
Spikes, iron (10) 
Tent, two-person 
Thieves’ tools 
Tinderbox 
Torch 
Vial 
Waterskin 
Whetstone 


Cost 
5 gp 


5 gp 
5 gp 
5gp 
25 gp 
25 gp 
10 gp 
2 ср 
15р 
55р 
10 gp 
5 gp 
10 ер 
25р 
5 gp 


30 gp 
6 gp 
2gp 
35 gp 
30 gp 
3 gp 
12 gp 
15р 
25р 
15р 
5ёр 
2ёр 
5ср 
5ср 
50 ер 
5 sp 
Тер 
5 sp 
10 gp 
1 gp 
1 gp 
10 gp 
1 ср 
5 sp 
2 ер 
5 ср 
5 gp 
2cp 
50 gp 
1 gp 
2 ер 
25 gp 
5 sp 
1ср 
1gp 
2sp 
1 ср 


CHAPTER 3: 


3 Ib. 
5 Ib. 

20 Ib. 
11b. 

1 Ib. 

1b. 

5 Ib. (full) 
1 Ib. 


EQUIPMENT 


Diplomat’s Pack: Includes а chest, 2 cases (ог maps and 
scrolls, a set of fine clothes, a bottle of ink, an ink pen, 
a lamp, 2 flasks of oil, 5 sheets of paper, а vial of per- 
fume, sealing wax, and soap. 

Dungeoneer's Pack: Includes a backpack, a crowbar, a 
hammer, 10 pitons, 10 torches, a tinderbox, 10 days of 
rations, and a waterskin. The pack also has 50 feet of 
hempen rope strapped to the side of it. 

Entertainer’s Pack: Includes a backpack, a bedroll, 2 
costumes, 5 candles, 5 days of rations, a waterskin, and 
a disguise kit. 

Explorer’s Pack: Includes a backpack, a bedroll, a mess 
kit, a tinderbox, 10 torches, 10 days of rations, and a 
waterskin. The pack also has 50 feet of hempen rope 
strapped to the side of it. 

Priest’s Pack: Includes a backpack, a blanket, 10 can- 
dles, a tinderbox, an alms box, 2 blocks of incense, a 
censer, vestments, 2 days of rations, and a waterskin. 

Scholar’s Pack: Includes a backpack, a book of lore, a 
bottle of ink, an ink pen, 10 sheets of parchment, a little 
bag of sand, and a small knife. 


SPECIAL ITEMS 


Here items that have special rules or need explanation. 
Arcane Focus. An arcane focus is a special item—an 
orb, a crystal, a rod, a specially constructed staff, a wand- 
like length of wood, or some similar item—designed to 

channel the power of arcane spells. A wizard can use 
such an item as a spellcasting focus. 

Artisan’s Tools. These special tools include the items 
needed to pursue a craft or trade. The table shows exam- 
ples of types of tools, each providing items related to a 
single craft. Proficiency with a set of artisan's tools lets 
you add your proficiency bonus to any ability checks you 
make using the tools in your craft. Each type of artisan’s 
tools requires a separate proficiency. 

Ball Bearings. As an action, you can spill these tiny 
metal balls from their pouch to cover a level, square area 
that is 10 feet on a side. A creature moving across the 
covered area must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity saving 
throw or fall prone. A creature moving through the area 
at half speed doesn’t need to make the saving throw. 

Barding. Barding is armor designed to protect an 
animal's head, neck, chest, and body. Any type of armor 
shown on the Armor table in this chapter can be pur- 
chased as barding. The cost is four times the equivalent 
armor made for humanoids, and it weighs twice as much. 

Candle. For 1 hour, a candle sheds bright light in a 
5-foot radius and dim light for an additional 5 feet. 

Component Pouch. A component pouch is a small, wa- 
tertight leather belt pouch that has compartments to hold 
all the material components and other special items you 
need to cast your spells, except for those components that 
һауе a specific cost (as indicated in а spell's description). 

Crowbar. Using a crowbar grants advantage to Strength 
checks where the crowbar's leverage can be applied. 

Disguise Kit. This pouch of cosmetics, hair dye, and 
small props lets you create disguises that change your 
physical appearance. Proficiency with this kit lets you 
add your proficiency bonus to any ability checks you 
make to create a visual disguise. 


CHAPTER 3: EQUIPMENT 


Gaming Set. This item encompasses a wide range 
of game pieces, including dice and decks of cards (for 
games such as Three-Dragon Ante). A few common 
examples appear on the Tools table, but other kinds of 
gaming sets exist. If you are proficient with a gaming set, 
you can add your proficiency bonus to ability checks you 
make to play a game with that set. Each type of gaming 
set requires a separate proficiency. 

Healer’s Kit. This kit is a leather pouch containing 
bandages, salves, and splints. The kit has ten uses. As 
an action, you can expend one use of the kit to stabilize a 
creature that has 0 hit points, without needing to make a 
Wisdom (Medicine) check. 

Holy Symbol. A holy symbol is a representation of 
a god or pantheon. It might be an amulet depicting a 
symbol representing a deity, the same symbol carefully 
engraved or inlaid as an emblem on a shield, or a tiny box 
holding a fragment of a sacred relic. The Player's Hand- 
book lists many gods in the multiverse and their typical 
symbols. A cleric can use a holy symbol as a spellcasting 
focus. To use the symbol in this way, the caster must hold 
it in hand, wear it visibly, or bear it on a shield. 

Holy Water. As an action, you can splash the contents 
of this flask onto a creature within 5 feet of you or throw 
it up to 20 feet, shattering it on impact. In either case, 
make a ranged attack against a target creature, treating 
the holy water as an improvised weapon. If the target is a 
fiend or undead, it takes 2d6 radiant damage. 

A cleric can create holy water by performing a special 
ritual. The ritual takes 1 hour to perform, uses 25 gp 
worth of powdered silver, and requires the caster to ex- 
pend a Ist-level spell slot. 

Lamp. A lamp casts bright light in a 15-foot radius and 
dim light for an additional 30 feet. Once lit, it burns for 6 
hours on a flask (1 pint) of oil. 

Lantern, Bullseye. А bullseye lantern casts bright light 
in a 60-foot cone and dim light for an additional 60 feet. 
Once lit, it burns for 6 hours on a flask (1 pint) of oil. 

Lantern, Hooded. A hooded lantern casts bright light 
in a 30-foot radius and dim light for an additional 30 feet. 
Once lit, it burns for 6 hours on a flask (1 pint) of oil. As 
an action, you can lower the hood, reducing the light to 
dim light in a 5-foot radius. 


Lock. А key is provided with this lock. Without the key, 
a creature proficient with thieves’ tools can pick this lock 
with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check. 

Mess Kit. This tin box contains a cup and simple cut- 
lery. The box clamps together, and one side can be used 
as a cooking pan and the other as a plate or shallow bowl. 

Musical Instrument. Several of the most common 
types of musical instruments are shown on the table as 
examples. If you have proficiency with a given musical in- 

„Strument, you can add your proficiency bonus to any abil- 
ity checks you make to play music with the instrument. 
Each type of musical instrument requires a separate 
proficiency. 

Oil. Oil usually comes in a clay flask that holds 1 pint. 
As an action, you can splash the oil in this flask onto a 
creature within 5 feet of you or throw it up to 20 feet, 
shattering it on impact. Make a ranged attack against a 
target creature or object, treating the oil as an improvised 
weapon. On a hit, the target is covered in oil. If the target 
takes any fire damage before the oil dries (after 1 min- 
ute), the target takes an additional 5 fire damage from the 
burning oil. You can also pour a flask of oil on the ground 
to cover a 5-foot-square area, provided that the surface 
is level. If lit, the oil burns for 2 rounds and deals 5 fire 
damage to any creature that enters the area or ends its 
turn in the area. A creature can take this damage only 
once per turn. 

Quiver. A quiver can hold up to 20 arrows. 

Rations. Rations consist of dry foods suitable for 
extended travel, including jerky, dried fruit, hard- 
tack, and nuts. 

Rope. Rope, whether made of hemp or silk, has 2 hit 
points and can be burst with a DC 17 Strength check. 

Spellbook. Essential for wizards, а spellbook is a 
leather-bound tome with 100 blank vellum pages suitable 
for recording spells. 

Thieves’ Tools. This set of tools includes a small file, a 
set of lock picks, a small mirror mounted оп а metal han- 
dle, a set of narrow-bladed scissors, and a pair of pliers. 
Proficiency with these tools lets you add your proficiency 
bonus to any ability checks you make to disarm traps or 
open locks. 

Tinderbox. This small container holds flint, fire steel, 
and tinder (usually dry cloth soaked in light oil) used to 
kindle a fire. Using it to light a torch—or anything else 
with abundant, exposed fuel—takes an action. Lighting 
any other fire takes 1 minute. 

Torch. A torch burns for 1 hour, providing bright light 
in a 20-foot radius and dim light for an additional 20 feet. 
If you make a melee attack with a burning torch and hit, it 
deals 1 fire damage. 


MOUNTS AND SERVICES 


Mounts 


Carrying 
Item Cost Speed Capacity 
Donkey or mule 8 gp 40 ft. 420 |b. 
Horse, draft 50 gp 40 ft. 540 Ib. 
Horse, riding 75 gp 60 ft. 480 Ib. 
Pony 30 gp 40 ft. 225 Ib. 
Warhorse 400 gp 60 ft. 540 Ib. 


Ғоор, DRINK, AND LODGING 


Item Cost 
Ale 
Gallon 25р 
Mug 4cp 
Inn stay (per day) 
Squalid 7 ср 
Роог 15р 
Modest 5 sp 
Comfortable 8 sp 
Wealthy 2 ер 
Aristocratic 4 ер 
Meals (per day) 
Squalid 3 ср 
Роог 6 ср 
Modest 3 sp 
Comfortable 5 sp 
Wealthy 85р 
Aristocratic 2 gp 
Stabling (per day) 5 sp 
Wine 
Common (pitcher) 25р 
Fine (bottle) 10 gp 


OTHER SERVICES 


Service Pay 
Coach cab 
Between towns 3 cp per mile 
Within a city lep 
Hireling 
Skilled 2 gp per day 
Untrained 2 sp per day 
Messenger 2 cp per mile 
Road or gate toll 1ср 
Ship's passage 1 sp per mile 


MAGIC ITEMS 


Every adventure holds the promise—but not a guaran- 
tee—of finding one or more magic items. The DM decides 
when such items fall into the characters’ hands. See the 
Dungeon Master's Guide for many more items. 


USING A MAGIC ITEM 


A magic item's description explains how the item works. 
Handling a magic item is enough to give a character a 
sense that something is extraordinary about the item. 
Casting the identify spell on the item then reveals its 
properties. Alternatively, a character can concentrate 
on the item during a short rest, while being in physical 
contact with the item. At the end of the rest, the charac- 
ter learns the item's properties. Potions are an excep- 
tion; a little taste is enough to tell the taster what the 
potion does. 

Certain magic items require a user to attune to them 
before their magical properties can be used. Attuning to 
a magic item requires that you spend an entire short rest 
concentrating on it (this can't be the same short rest used 
to learn an item's properties). Once you are attuned to an 
item, you can use its magical properties. 


CHAPTER 3: EQUIPMENT 


46 


Ап item can be attuned to only one creature at a time. 
A creature can be attuned to no more than three magic 
items at any given time, and you can attune yourself to 
only one item during a short rest. 

Your attunement to an item ends if it has been more 
than 100 feet away from you for 24 hours or if you die. 
You can also voluntarily end your attunement to an item 
with another short rest. 


ITEM DESCRIPTIONS 


These items are in alphabetical order. Under an item's 
name is a line that tells you the type of the item, its rarity, 
and whether you must attune to it. 


Boots OF ELVENKIND 
Wondrous item, uncommon 


While you wear these boots, your steps make no sound, 
regardless of the surface you are moving across. You also 
have advantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks that rely on 
moving silently. 


CLOAK OF BILLOWING 
Wondrous item, common 


While wearing this cloak, you can use a bonus action to 
make it billow dramatically. 


CLOAK OF MANY FASHIONS 
Wondrous item, common 


While wearing this cloak, you can use a bonus action to 
change the style, color, and apparent quality of the gar- 
ment. The cloak's weight doesn't change. Regardless of 
its appearance, the cloak can't be anything but a cloak. 
Although it can duplicate the appearance of other magic 
cloaks, it doesn't gain their magical properties. 


CLOCKWORK AMULET 
Wondrous item, common 


This copper amulet contains tiny interlocking gears and 
is powered by magic from Mechanus, a plane of clock- 
work predictability. A creature that puts an ear to the 
amulet can hear faint ticking and whirring noises coming 
from within. 

When you make an attack roll while wearing the am- 
ulet, you can forgo rolling the d20 to get a 10 on the die. 
Once used, this property can't be used again until the 
next dawn. 


DRAGON SLAYER 
Weapon (any sword), rare 
You gain a *1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic weapon. 

When you hit a dragon with this weapon, the dragon 
takes an extra 3d6 damage of the weapon's type. For the 


purpose of this weapon, "dragon" refers to any creature 
with the dragon type. 


DREAD HELM 
Wondrous item, common 


This fearsome steel helm makes your eyes glow red while 
you wear it. 


CHAPTER 3: EQUIPMENT 


DusT ОЕ DISAPPEARANCE 
Wondrous item, uncommon 


Found in a small packet, this powder resembles very fine 
sand. There is enough of it for one use. When you use an 
action to throw the dust into the air, you and each crea- 
ture and object within 10 feet of you become invisible for 
244 minutes. The duration is the same for all subjects, 
and the dust is consumed when its magic takes effect. If a 
creature affected by the dust attacks or casts a spell, the 
invisibility ends for that creature. 


GAUNTLETS OF OGRE POWER 
Wondrous item, uncommon (requires attunement) 


Your Strength score is 19 while you wear these gaunt- 
lets. They have no effect on you if your Strength is 19 or 
higher without them. 


GOGGLES OF NIGHT 
Wondrous item, uncommon 


While wearing these dark lenses, you have darkvision out 
to a range of 60 feet. If you already have darkvision, wear- 
ing the goggles increases its range by 60 feet. 


HAT OF WIZARDRY 
Wondrous item, common (requires attunement by a 
wizard) 


While you are wearing this hat, you gain the follow- 
ing benefits: 


* You can use the hat as a spellcasting focus for your 
wizard spells. 

* You can try to cast a cantrip that you don't know. The 
cantrip must be on the wizard spell list, and you must 
make a DC 10 Intelligence (Arcana) check. If the check 
succeeds, you cast the spell. If the check fails, so 
does the spell, and the action used to cast the spell is 
wasted. In either case, you can't use this property again 
until you finish a long rest. 


IMMOVABLE ROD 
Rod, uncommon 


This flat iron rod has a button on one end. You can use 
an action to press the button, which causes the rod to 
become magically fixed in place. Until you or another 
creature uses an action to push the button again, the rod 
doesn't move, even if it is defying gravity. The rod can 
hold up to 8,000 pounds of weight. More weight causes 
the rod to deactivate and fall. A creature can use an ac- 
tion to make a DC 30 Strength check, moving the fixed 
rod up to 10 feet on a success. 


INSTRUMENT OF ILLUSIONS 
Wondrous item, common (requires attunement) 


While you are playing this musical instrument, you 

can create harmless, illusory visual effects within a 
5-foot-radius sphere centered on the instrument. If you 
are a bard, the radius increases to 15 feet. Sample visual 
effects include luminous musical notes, a spectral dancer, 
butterflies, and gently falling snow. The magic effects 
have neither substance nor sound, and they are obviously 
illusory. The effects end when you stop playing. 


MITHRAL ARMOR 
Armor (medium or heavy, but not hide), uncommon 


Mithral is a light, flexible metal. A mithral chain shirt 
or breastplate can be worn under normal clothes. If the 
armor normally imposes disadvantage on Dexterity 
(Stealth) checks or has a Strength requirement, the mi- 
thral version of the armor doesn't. 


MysTERY КЕҮ 
Wondrous item, common 


A question mark is worked into the head of this key. The 
key has a 5 percent chance of unlocking any lock into 
which it’s inserted. Once it unlocks something, the key 
disappears. 


NECKLACE OF FIREBALLS 
Wondrous item, rare 


This necklace has 1d6 + 3 beads hanging from it. You can 
use an action to detach a bead and throw it up to 60 feet 
away. When it reaches the end of its trajectory, the bead 
detonates as a 3rd-level fireball spell (save DC 15). 

You can hurl multiple beads, or even the whole neck- 
lace, as one action. When you do so, increase the level of 
the fireball by 1 for each bead beyond the first. 


POLE OF COLLAPSING 
Wondrous item, common 


While holding this 10-foot pole, you can use an action 

to speak a command word and cause it to collapse into 
a 1-foot-long rod, for ease of storage. The pole’s weight 
doesn’t change. You can use an action to speak a differ- 
ent command word and cause the rod to revert to a pole; 
however, the rod will elongate only as far as the sur- 
rounding space allows. 


POTION OF HEALING 
Potion, rarity varies 


You regain hit points when you drink this potion. The 
number of hit points depends on the potion’s rarity, as 
shown in the Potions of Healing table. Whatever its po- 
tency, the potion’s red liquid glimmers when agitated. 


POTIONS OF HEALING 


Potion of... Rarity HP Regained 
Healing Common 2d4 + 2 
Greater healing Uncommon 4d4 + 4 
Superior healing Rare 8d4+8 


POTION OF INVULNERABILITY 
Potion, rare 


For 1 minute after you drink this potion, you have resis- 
tance to all damage. The potion’s syrupy liquid looks like 
liquified iron. 


POTION OF WATER BREATHING 
Potion, uncommon 


You can breathe underwater for 1 hour after drinking this 
potion. Its cloudy green fluid smells of the sea and has a 
jellyfish-like bubble floating in it. 


SENDING STONES 
Wondrous item, uncommon 


Sending stones come in pairs, with each smooth stone 
carved to match the other so the pairing is easily recog- 
nized. While you touch one stone, you can use an action 
to cast the sending spell from it. The target is the bearer 
of the other stone. If no creature bears the other stone, 
you know that fact as soon as you use the stone and don't 
cast the spell. 

Once sending is cast through the stones, they can't be 
used again until the next dawn. If one of the stones in a 
pair is destroyed, the other one becomes nonmagical. 


SHIELD, +] 
Armor (shield), uncommon 


While holding this shield, you have a +1 bonus to 
AC. This bonus is in addition to the shield’s normal 
bonus to AC. 


STAFF OF BIRDCALLS 
Staff, common 


This wooden staff is decorated with bird carvings. It has 
10 charges. While holding it, you can use an action to 
expend 1 charge from the staff and cause it to create one 
of the following sounds out to a range of 60 feet: a finch’s 
chirp, а raven's caw, a duck’s quack, a chicken's cluck, a 
goose's honk, a loon's call, a turkey's gobble, a seagull's 
cry, an owl's hoot, or an eagle's shriek. 

The staff regains 146 + 4 expended charges daily at 
dawn. If you expend the last charge, roll a d20. On a 1, 
the staff explodes in a harmless cloud of bird feathers 
and is lost forever. 


WAND OF PYROTECHNICS 
Wand, common 


This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can use 
an action to expend 1 of its charges and create a harm- 
less burst of multicolored light at a point you can see 
up to 60 feet away. The burst of light is accompanied 
by a crackling noise that can be heard up to 300 feet 
away. The light is as bright as a torch flame but lasts 
only a second. 

The wand regains all expended charges daily at dawn. 
If you expend the wand's last charge, roll a d20. On a 1, 
the wand erupts in a harmless pyrotechnic display and is 
destroyed. 


WAND OF SECRETS 
Wand, uncommon 


The wand has 3 charges. While holding it, you can use 
an action to expend 1 of its charges, and if a secret door 
or trap is within 30 feet of you, the wand pulses and 
points at the one nearest to you. The wand regains 1d3 
expended charges daily at dawn. 


WEAPON, +] 
Weapon (any), uncommon 


You have a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls made 
with this magic weapon. 


CHAPTER 3: EQUIPMENT 


~~ 


CHAPTER 4: SPELLS 


MAGIC PERMEATES THE WORLDS OF D&D AND MOST 

often appears in the form ofa spell. This chapter provides 
the rules for casting spells. Spells can be versatile tools, 
weapons, or protective wards. They can deal damage or 
undo it, impose or remove conditions (see appendix B), 
drain life energy away, and restore life to the dead. 


WHAT Is A SPELL? 


A spell is a discrete magical effect, a single shaping of 
the magical energies that suffuse the multiverse into a 
specific, limited expression. In casting a spell, a charac- 
ter carefully plucks at the invisible strands of raw magic 
suffusing the world, pins them in place іп а particular 
pattern, sets them vibrating in a specific way, and then re- 
leases them to unleash the desired effect—in most cases, 
all in the span of seconds. 


SCHOOLS OF MAGIC 


Scholars who study the workings of magic group spells 
into eight categories called schools of magic. The schools 
help describe spells; the schools have no game rules of 
their own, although some other rules refer to them. 
Abjuration spells are protective, often creating bar- 
riers or warding off trespassers. Conjuration spells 
transport objects or creatures from one location to an- 
other. Divination spells reveal glimpses of the future, the 
locations of hidden things, or visions of distant people 
or places. Enchantment spells affect the minds of oth- 


CHAPTER 4: SPELLS 


ers, influencing or controlling their behavior. Evocation 
spells tap mystical sources of energy to create a variety 
of effects, including blasts of fire and channeling positive 
energy to heal wounds. Illusion spells deceive the senses 
or minds of others. Necromancy spells manipulate the 
energies of life and death. Transmutation spells change 
the properties or physical form of a creature or object. 


SPELL LEVEL 


Every spell has a level from 0 to 9. A spell's level is a gen- 
eral indicator of how powerful it is, with the lowly (but 
still impressive) magic missile at 1st level and the incredi- 
ble time stop at 9th. Cantrips—simple but powerful spells 
that characters can cast almost by rote—are level 0. The 
higher a spell's level, the higher level a spellcaster must 
be to use that spell. 

Spell level and character level don't correspond di- 
rectly. Typically, a character has to be at least 17th level, 
not 9th level, to cast a 9th-level spell. 


KNOWN AND PREPARED SPELLS 


Before a spellcaster can use a spell, he or she must have 
the spell firmly fixed in mind, or must have access to the 
spell in a magic item. Members of a few classes have a 
limited list of spells they know that are always fixed in 
mind. The same thing is true of many magic-using mon- 
sters. Other spellcasters, such as clerics and wizards, un- 
dergo a process of preparing spells. This process varies 
for different classes, as detailed in their descriptions. 


SPELL SLOTS 


Regardless of how many spells a caster knows or pre- 
pares, he or she can cast only a limited number of spells 
before resting. Manipulating the fabric of magic and 
channeling its energy into even a simple spell is phys- 
ically and mentally taxing, and higher-level spells are 
even more so. Thus, each spellcasting class's description 
includes a table showing how many spell slots of each 
spell level a character can use at each character level. For 
example, the 3rd-level wizard Umara has four 1st-level 
spell slots and two 2nd-level slots. 

When a character casts a spell, he or she expends a 
slot of that spell's level or higher, effectively "filling" a slot 
with the spell. You can think of a spell slot as a groove 
of a certain size—small for а 1st-level slot, larger for a 
spell of higher level. А 1st-level spell fits into a slot of any 
size, but a 3rd-level spell fits only in a slot that's at least 
3rd level. So when Umara casts magic missile, a 1st-level 
spell, she spends one of her four 1st-level slots and has 
three remaining. 

Finishing a long rest restores any expended spell slots 
(see page 33 for the rules on resting). 

Some characters and monsters have special abilities 
that let them cast spells without using spell slots. 


CASTING A SPELL AT A HIGHER LEVEL 
When a spellcaster casts a spell using a slot that is of a 
higher level than the spell, the spell assumes the higher 
level for that casting. For instance, if Umara casts magic 
missile using one of her 2nd-level slots, that magic mis- 
sile is 2nd level. Effectively, the spell expands to fill the 
slot it is put into. 

Some spells, such as magic missile and cure wounds, 
have more powerful effects when cast at a higher level, as 
detailed in a spell’s description. 


CANTRIPS 


А cantrip is a spell that can be cast without using a spell 
slot and without being prepared in advance. Repeated 
practice has fixed the spell in the caster's mind and in- 
fused the caster with the magic needed to produce the 
effect over and over. А cantrip's spell level is 0. 


RITUALS 


Certain spells have a special tag: "ritual." Such a spell 
can be cast following the normal rules for spellcasting, 
or the spell can be cast as a ritual. The ritual version of a 
spell takes 10 minutes longer to cast than normal. It also 
doesn't expend a spell slot, which means the ritual ver- 
sion of a spell can't be cast at a higher level. 

То cast a spell as a ritual, a spellcaster must have a 
feature that grants the ability to do so. The cleric and the 
druid, for example, have such a feature. The caster must 
also have the spell prepared or on his or her list of spells 
known, unless the character's ritual feature specifies oth- 
erwise, as the wizard's does. 


CASTING A SPELL 


When a character casts any spell, the same basic rules 
are followed, regardless of the character's class or the 
spell's effects. 


Each spell description in this chapter begins with a 
block of information, including the spell's name, level, 
school of magic, casting time, range, components, and du- 
ration. The rest of a spell entry describes the spell's effect. 


CASTING IN ARMOR 


Because of the mental focus and precise gestures re- 
quired for spellcasting, you must be proficient with the 
armor you are wearing to cast a spell. You are otherwise 
too distracted and physically hampered by your armor for 
spellcasting. 


CASTING TIME 


Most spells require a single action to cast, but some 
spells require a bonus action, a reaction, or much more 
time to cast. 


BONUS ACTION 

A spell cast with a bonus action is especially swift. You 
must use a bonus action on your turn to cast the spell, 
provided that you haven't already taken a bonus action 
this turn. You can't cast another spell during the same 
turn, except for a cantrip with a casting time of 1 action. 


REACTIONS 

Some spells can be cast as reactions. These spells take 

a fraction of a second to bring about and are cast in re- 
sponse to some event. If a spell can be cast as a reaction, 
the spell description tells you exactly when you can do so. 


LONGER CASTING TIMES 

Certain spells (including spells cast as rituals) require 
more time to cast: minutes or even hours. When you cast 
a spell with a casting time longer than a single action or 
reaction, you must spend your action each turn casting 
the spell, and you must maintain your concentration 
while you do so (see “Concentration” below). If your con- 
centration is broken, the spell fails, but you don't expend 
a spell slot. If you want to try casting the spell again, you 
must start over. 


RANGE 


The target of a spell must be within the spell's range. For 
a spell like magic missile, the target is a creature. For a 
spell like fireball, the target is the point in space where 
the ball of fire erupts. 

Most spells have ranges expressed in feet. Some spells 
can target only a creature (including you) that you touch. 
Other spells, such as the shield spell, affect only you. 
These spells have a range of self. 

Spells that create cones or lines of effect that originate 
from you also have a range of self, indicating that the or- 
igin point of the spell's effect must be you (see "Areas of 
Effect" later in the this chapter). 

Once a spell is cast, its effects aren't limited by its range, 
unless the spell's description says otherwise. 


COMPONENTS 


А spell's components are the physical requirements you 
must meet in order to cast it. Each spell's description in- 
dicates whether it requires verbal (V), somatic (S), or ma- 
terial (M) components. If you can't provide one or more of 
a spell’s components, you are unable to cast the spell. 


CHAPTER 4: SPELLS 


49 


VERBAL (У) 

Most spells require the chanting of mystic words. The 
words themselves aren’t the source of the spell’s power; 
rather, the particular combination of sounds, with spe- 
cific pitch and resonance, sets the threads of magic in 
motion. Thus, a character who is gagged or in an area 
of silence, such as one created by the si/ence spell, can't 
cast a spell with a verbal component. 


Somatic (S) 

Spellcasting gestures might include a forceful gesticula- 
tion or an intricate set of gestures. If a spell requires a so- 
matic component, the caster must have free use of at least 
one hand to perform these gestures. 


MATERIAL (M) 

Casting some spells requires particular objects, specified 
in parentheses in the component entry. A character can 
use a component pouch or a spelicasting focus (found 
in chapter 3) in place of the components specified for a 
spell. But if a cost is indicated for a component, a char- 
acter must have that specific component before he or she 
can cast the spell. 

If a spell states that a material component is consumed 
by the spell, the caster must provide this component for 
each casting of the spell. 

A spellcaster must have a hand free to access these 
components—or to hold a spellcasting focus—but it can 
be the same hand that he or she uses to perform somatic 
components. 


DURATION 


А spell's duration is the length of time the spell persists. 
A duration can be expressed in rounds, minutes, hours, 
or even years. Some spells specify that their effects last 
until the spells are dispelled or destroyed. 


INSTANTANEOUS 
Many spells are instantaneous. The spell harms, heals, 
creates, or alters a creature or an object in a way that 


can't be dispelled, because its magic exists only for 
an instant. 


CONCENTRATION 

Some spells require you to maintain concentration in or- 
der to keep their magic active. If you lose concentration, 
such a spell ends. 

If a spell must be maintained with concentration, that 
fact appears in its Duration entry, and the spell specifies 
how long you can concentrate on it. You can end concen- 
tration at any time (no action required). 

Normal activity, such as moving and attacking, doesn't 
interfere with concentration. The following factors can 
break concentration: 


* Casting another spell that requires concentration. 
You lose concentration on a spell if you cast another 
spell that requires concentration. You can't concentrate 
on two spells at once. 

* Taking damage. Whenever you take damage while you 
are concentrating on a spell, you must make a Constitu- 
tion saving throw to maintain your concentration. The 
DC equals 10 or half the damage you take, whichever 
number is higher. If you take damage from multiple 


CHAPTER 4: SPELLS 


sources, such as an arrow and a dragon's breath, 
you make a separate saving throw for each source 
of damage. 
* Being incapacitated or killed. You lose concentration 
on a spell if you are incapacitated or if you die. 


Тһе DM might also decide that certain environmental 
phenomena, such as a wave crashing over you while 
you're on a storm-tossed ship, require you to succeed on a 
DC 10 Constitution saving throw to maintain concentra- 
tion on a spell. 


TARGETS 


A typical spell requires you to pick one or more targets 
to be affected by the spell’s magic. A spell’s description 
tells you whether the spell targets creatures, objects, or a 
point of origin for an area of effect (described below). 
Unless a spell has a perceptible effect, a creature might 
not know it was targeted by a spell at all. An effect like 
crackling lightning is obvious, but a more subtle effect, 
such as an attempt to read a creature's thoughts, typically 
goes unnoticed, unless a spell says otherwise. 


A CLEAR PATH TO THE TARGET 
To target something, you must have a clear path to it, 
so it can’t be behind total cover. 

If you place an area of effect at a point that you can't 
see and an obstruction, such as a wall, is between you 
and that point, the point of origin comes into being on the 
near side of that obstruction. 


TARGETING YOURSELF 

If a spell targets a creature of your choice, you can 
choose yourself, unless the creature must be hostile or 
specifically a creature other than you. If you are in the 
area of effect of a spell you cast, you can target yourself. 


AREAS OF EFFECT 


Spells such as burning hands and cone of cold cover an 
area, allowing them to affect multiple creatures at once. 

А spell's description specifies its area of effect, which 
typically has one of five different shapes: cone, cube, cyl- 
inder, line, or sphere. Every area of effect has a point of 
origin, a location from which the spell's energy erupts. 
The rules for each shape specify how you position its 
point of origin. Typically, a point of origin is a point in 
space, but some spells have an area whose origin is a 
creature or an object. 

A spell's effect expands in straight lines from the point 
of origin. If no unblocked straight line extends from the 
point of origin to a location within the area of effect, that 
location isn't included in the spell's area. To block one of 
these imaginary lines, an obstruction must provide total 
cover (see page 36). 


CONE 
А cone extends in a direction you choose from its point of 
origin. A cone's width at a given point along its length is 
equal to that point's distance from the point of origin. A 
cone's area of effect specifies its maximum length. 

А cone's point of origin is not included in the cone's 
area of effect, unless you decide otherwise. 


CUBE 
You select a cube’s point of origin, which lies anywhere 
on a face of the cubic effect. The cube's size is expressed 
as the length of each side. 

A cube's point of origin is not included in the cube's 
area of effect, unless you decide otherwise. 


CYLINDER 
A cylinder's point of origin is the center of a circle of a 
particular radius, as given in the spell description. The 
circle must either be on the ground or at the height of the 
spell effect. The energy in a cylinder expands in straight 
lines from the point of origin to the perimeter of the cir- 
cle, forming the base of the cylinder. The spell's effect 
then shoots up from the base or down from the top, to a 
distance equal to the height of the cylinder. 

А cylinder's point of origin is included in the cylinder's 
area of effect. 


LINE 

A line extends from its point of origin in a straight path 

up to its length and covers an area defined by its width. 
A line's point of origin is not included in the line's area 

of effect, unless you decide otherwise. 


SPHERE 

You select a sphere's point of origin, and the sphere 

extends outward from that point. The sphere's size is ex- 

pressed as a radius in feet that extends from the point. 
A sphere's point of origin is included in the sphere's 

area of effect. 


SAVING THROWS 


Many spells specify that a target can make a saving 
throw to avoid some or all of a spell's effects. The spell 
specifies the ability that the target uses for the save and 
what happens on a success or failure. 


Spell save DC = 8 + your proficiency bonus + 
your spellcasting ability modifier 


ATTACK ROLLS 


Some spells require the caster to make an attack 
roll to determine whether the spell effect hits the in- 
tended target. 


Spell attack modifier = your proficiency bonus + 
your spellcasting ability modifier 


SPELL DESCRIPTIONS 


The spells are presented in alphabetical order. 


ACID SPLASH 
Conjuration cantrip 
Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 60 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You hurl a bubble of acid. Choose one or two creatures 
you can see within range. If you choose two, they must 


be within 5 feet of each other. A target must succeed оп а 
Dexterity saving throw or take 1d6 acid damage. 

This spell’s damage increases by 1d6 when you reach 
5th level (246), 11th level (346), and 17th level (446). 


AID 


2nd-level abjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 30 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a tiny strip of white cloth) 
Duration: 8 hours 


Your spell bolsters your allies with toughness and re- 
solve. Choose up to three creatures within range. Each 
target's hit point maximum and current hit points in- 
crease by 5 for the duration. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 3rd level or higher, a target's hit points in- 
crease by an additional 5 for each slot level above 2nd. 


ARCANE Lock 
2nd-level abjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (gold dust worth at least 25 gp, 
which the spell consumes) 

Duration: Until dispelled 


You touch a closed door, window, gate, chest, or other en- 
tryway, and it becomes locked for the duration. You and 
the creatures you designate when you cast this spell can 
open the object normally. You can also set a password 
that, when spoken within 5 feet of the object, suppresses 
this spell for 1 minute. Otherwise, it is impassable un- 
til it is broken or the spell is dispelled or suppressed. 
Casting knock on the object suppresses arcane lock for 
10 minutes. 

While affected by this spell, the object is more difficult 
to break or force open; the DC to break it or pick any 
locks on it increases by 10. 


AUGURY 
2nd-level divination (ritual) 


Casting Time: 1 minute 

Range: Self 

Components: V, S, M (specially marked sticks, bones, or 
similar tokens worth at least 25 gp) 

Duration: Instantaneous 


By casting gem-inlaid sticks, rolling dragon bones, laying 
out ornate cards, or employing some other divining tool, 
you receive an omen from an otherworldly entity about 
the results of a specific course of action that you plan to 
take within the next 30 minutes. The DM chooses from 
the following possible omens: 


Weal, for good results 

Woe, for bad results 

Weal and woe, for both good and bad results 
Nothing, for results that aren't especially good or bad 


The spell doesn't take into account any possible circum- 
stances that might change the outcome, such as the cast- 


ing of additional spells or the loss or gain of a companion. 


CHAPTER 4: SPELLS 


zo 


AuGury 


If you cast the spell two or more times before complet- 
ing your next long rest, there is a cumulative 25 percent 
chance for each casting after the first that you get a ran- 
dom reading. The DM makes this roll in secret. 


BEACON OF HOPE 
3rd-level abjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 30 feet 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


This spell bestows hope and vitality. Choose any number 
of creatures within range. For the duration, each target 
has advantage on Wisdom saving throws and death 
saving throws, and regains the maximum number of hit 
points possible from any healing. 


BLESS 
Ist-level enchantment 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 30 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a sprinkling of holy water) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You bless up to three creatures of your choice within 
range. Whenever a target makes an attack roll or a saving 
throw before the spell ends, the target can roll a d4 and 
add the number rolled to the attack roll or saving throw. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, you can target one addi- 
tional creature for each slot level above 1st. 


CHAPTER 4: SPELLS 


BLUR 
2nd-level illusion 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Self 

Components: V 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


Your body becomes blurred, shifting and wavering to 

all who can see you. For the duration, any creature has 
disadvantage on attack rolls against you. An attacker is 
immune to this effect if it doesn’t rely on sight, as with 
blindsight, or can see through illusions, as with truesight. 


BURNING HANDS 
Ist-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: Self (15-foot cone) 
Components: У, 5 
Duration: Instantaneous 


As you hold your hands with thumbs touching and fingers 
spread, a thin sheet of flames shoots forth from your out- 
stretched fingertips. Each creature in a 15-foot cone must 
make a Dexterity saving throw. A creature takes 3d6 fire 
damage оп a failed save, or half as much damage оп а 
successful one. 

The fire ignites any flammable objects in the area that 
aren't being worn or carried. 

At Hiéher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d6 for each slot level above 1st. 


CHARM PERSON 
Ist-level enchantment 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 30 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 1 hour 


You attempt to charm a humanoid you can see within 
range. It must make a Wisdom saving throw, and does so 
with advantage if you or your companions are fighting it. 
If it fails the saving throw, it is charmed by you until the 
spell ends or until you or your companions do anything 
harmful to it. The charmed creature regards you as a 
friendly acquaintance. When the spell ends, the creature 
knows it was charmed by you. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using 
a spell slot of 2nd level or higher, you can target one 
additional creature for each slot level above Ist. The 
creatures must be within 30 feet of each other when you 
target them. 


COMMAND 
Ist-level enchantment 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 60 feet 
Components: V 
Duration: 1 round 


You speak a one-word command to a creature you can 
see within range. The target must succeed on a Wisdom 
saving throw or follow the command on its next turn. 
The spell has no effect if the target is undead. if it doesn't 


understand your language, or if your command is directly 
harmful to it. 

Some typical commands and their effects follow. You 
might issue a command other than one described here. If 
you do so, the DM determines how the target behaves. If 
the target can’t follow your command, the spell ends. 

Approach. The target moves toward you by the short- 
est and most direct route, ending its turn if it moves 
within 5 feet of you. 

Drop. The target drops whatever it is holding and then 
ends its turn. 

Flee. The target spends its turn moving away from you 
by the fastest available means. 

Grovel. The target falls prone and then ends its turn. 
Halt. The target doesn’t move and takes no actions. A 
flying creature stays aloft, provided that it is able to do so. 
If it must move to stay aloft, it flies the minimum distance 

needed to remain in the air. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using 
a spell slot of 2nd level or higher, you can affect one 
additional creature for each slot level above 1st. The 
creatures must be within 30 feet of each other when you 
target them. 


COMPREHEND LANGUAGES 
Ist-level divination (ritual) 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Self 

Components: V, S, M (a pinch of soot and salt) 
Duration: 1 hour 


For the duration, you understand the literal meaning of 
any spoken language that you hear. You also understand 
any written language that you see, but you must be touch- 
ing the surface on which the words are written. It takes 
about 1 minute to read one page of text. 

This spell doesn't decode secret messages in a text or 
a glyph, such as an arcane sigil, that isn't part of a writ- 
ten language. 


CRUSADER'S MANTLE 
3rd-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Self 

Components: V 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


Holy power radiates from you in an aura with a 30-foot 
radius, awakening boldness in friendly creatures. Until 
the spell ends, the aura moves with you, centered on you. 
While in the aura, each nonhostile creature in the aura 
(including you) deals an extra 1d4 radiant damage when 
it hits with a weapon attack. 


Сове WOUNDS 
Ist-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


A creature you touch regains a number of hit points equal 
to 1d8 + your spellcasting ability modifier, This spell has 
no effect on undead or constructs. 


At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the healing increases by 
1d8 for each slot level above 1st. 


DANCING LIGHTS 
Evocation cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 120 feet 

Components: У, 5, M (a bit of phosphorus ог wychwood, 
or a glowworm) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You create up to four torch-sized lights within range, 
making them appear as torches, lanterns, or glowing 
orbs that hover in the air for the duration. You can also 
combine the four lights into one glowing vaguely human- 
oid form of Medium size. Whichever form you choose, 
each light sheds dim light in a 10-foot radius. 

As a bonus action on your turn, you can move the lights 
up to 60 feet to a new spot within range. A light must be 
within 20 feet of another light created by this spell, and a 
light winks out if it exceeds the spell's range. 


DARKNESS 
2nd-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, M (bat fur and a drop of pitch or 
piece of coal) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


Magical darkness spreads from a point you choose 
within range to fill a 15-foot-radius sphere for the dura- 
tion. The darkness spreads around corners. A creature 
with darkvision can't see through this darkness, and non- 
magical light can't illuminate it. 

If the point you choose is on an object you are holding 
or one that isn't being worn or carried, the darkness em- 
anates from the object and moves with it. Completely cov- 
ering the source of the darkness with an opaque object, 
such as a bowl or a helm, blocks the darkness. 

If any of this spell's area overlaps with an area of light 
created by a spell of 2nd level or lower, the spell that cre- 
ated the light is dispelled. 


DETECT MAGIC 
Ist-level divination (ritual) 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Self 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


For the duration, you sense the presence of magic within 
30 feet of you. If you sense magic in this way, you can use 
your action to see a faint aura around any visible creature 
or object in the area that bears magic, and you learn its 
school of magic, if any. 

The spell can penetrate most barriers, but it is blocked 
by 1 foot of stone, 1 inch of common metal, a thin sheet of 
lead, or 3 feet of wood or dirt. 


CHAPTER 4: SPELLS 


DISGUISE SELF 
Ist-level illusion 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: Self 
Components: V, S 
Duration: 1 hour 


You make yourself—including your clothing, armor, weap- 
ons, and other belongings on your person—look different 
until the spell ends or until you use your action to dismiss 
it. You can seem 1 foot shorter or taller and can appear 
thin, fat, or in between. You can't change your body type, 
so you must adopt a form that has the same basic ar- 
rangement of limbs. Otherwise, the extent of the illusion 
is up to you. 

The changes wrought by this spell fail to hold up to 
physical inspection. For example, if you use this spell to 
add a hat to your outfit, objects pass through the hat, and 
anyone who touches it would feel nothing or would feel 
your head and hair. If you use this spell to appear thinner 
than you are, the hand of someone who reaches out to 
touch you would bump into you while it was seemingly 
still in midair. 

To discern that you are disguised, a creature can use 
its action to inspect your appearance and must succeed 
on an Intelligence (Investigation) check against your 
spell save DC. 


DisPEL MAGIC 
3rd-level abjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 120 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


Choose one creature, object, or magical effect within 
range. Any spell of 3rd level or lower on the target ends. 
For each spell of 4th level or higher on the target, make 
an ability check using your spellcasting ability. The DC 
equals 10 + the spell’s level. On a successful check, the 
spell ends. 

At Hiéher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, you automatically end the 
effects of a spell on the target if the spell's level is equal to 
or less than the level of the spell slot you used. 


DIVINE FAVOR 

Ist-level evocation 

Casting Time: 1 bonus action 

Range: Self 

Components: У, 5 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


Your prayer empowers you with divine radiance. Until the 
spell ends, your weapon attacks deal an extra 1d4 radiant 
damage on a hit. 


FAERIE FIRE 

Ist-level evocation 

Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


CHAPTER 4: SPELLS 


Each object in a 20-foot cube within range is outlined in 
blue, green, or violet light (your choice). Any creature in 
the area when the spell is cast is also outlined in light if 
it fails a Dexterity saving throw. For the duration, objects 
and affected creatures shed dim light in a 10-foot radius. 
Any attack roll against an affected creature or object 

has advantage if the attacker can see it, and the affected 
creature or object can’t benefit from being invisible. 


FEAR 
3rd-level illusion 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Self (30-foot cone) 

Components: V, S, M (a white feather or the 
heart of a hen) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You project a phantasmal image of a creature’s worst 
fears. Each creature іп a 30-foot cone must succeed on а 
Wisdom saving throw or drop whatever it is holding and 
become frightened for the duration. 

While frightened by this spell, a creature must take the 
Dash action and move away from you by the safest avail- 
able route on each of its turns, unless there is nowhere 
to move. If the creature ends its turn in a location where 
it doesn’t have line of sight to you, the creature can make 
a Wisdom saving throw. On a successful save, the spell 
ends for that creature. 


FEATHER FALL 
Ist-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 reaction, which you take when you ora 
creature within 60 feet of you falls 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, M (a small feather or piece of down) 

Duration: 1 minute 


Choose up to five falling creatures within range. A falling 
creature’s rate of descent slows to 60 feet per round until 
the spell ends. If the creature lands before the spell ends, 
it takes no falling damage and can land on its feet, and 
the spell ends for that creature. 


FIREBALL 
3rd-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 150 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a tiny ball of bat guano and sulfur) 
Duration: Instantaneous 


A bright streak flashes from your pointing finger to a 
point you choose within range and then blossoms with 
a low roar into an explosion of flame. Each creature 
in a 20-foot-radius sphere centered on that point must 
make a Dexterity saving throw. A target takes 8d6 fire 
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage ona 
successful one. 

The fire spreads around corners. It ignites flammable 
objects in the area that aren’t being worn or carried. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d6 for each slot level above 3rd. 


FIRE BOLT 
Evocation cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 120 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You hurl a mote of fire at a creature or object within 
range. Make a ranged spell attack against the target. On a 
hit, the target takes 1d10 fire damage. A flammable object 
hit by this spell ignites if it isn’t being worn or carried. 
This spell’s damage increases by 1d10 when you reach 
5th level (2410), 11th level (3410), and 17th level (4410). 


FLAMING SPHERE 
2nd-level conjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a bit of tallow, a pinch of brim- 
stone, and a dusting of powdered iron) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


A 5-foot-diameter sphere of fire appears in an unoccupied 
space of your choice within range and lasts for the dura- 
tion. Any creature that ends its turn within 5 feet of the 
sphere must make a Dexterity saving throw. The creature 
takes 2d6 fire damage on a failed save, or half as much 
damage on a successful one. 

As a bonus action, you can move the sphere up to 30 
feet. If you ram the sphere into a creature, that creature 
must make the saving throw against the sphere’s dam- 
age, and the sphere stops moving this turn. 

When you move the sphere, you can direct it over bar- 
riers up to 5 feet tall and jump it across pits up to 10 feet 
wide. The sphere ignites flammable objects not being 
worn or carried, and it sheds bright light in а 20-foot ra- 
dius and dim light for an additional 20 feet. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 3rd level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d6 for each slot level above 2nd. 


FLY 
3rd-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Touch 

Components: У, 5, М (a wing feather from any bird) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


You touch a willing creature. The target gains a flying 
speed of 60 feet for the duration. When the spell ends, the 
target falls if it is still aloft, unless it can stop the fall. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, you can target one addi- 
tional creature for each slot level above 3rd. 


GUIDANCE 
Divination cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Touch 

Components: У, 5 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You touch one willing creature. Once before the spell 
ends, the target can roll a d4 and add the number rolled 
to one ability check of its choice. It can roll the die before 
or after making the ability check. The spell then ends. 


GUIDING BOLT 
Ist-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 120 feet 
Components: У, 5 
Duration: 1 round 


A flash of light streaks toward a creature of your choice 
within range. Make a ranged spell attack against the tar- 
get. On a hit, the target takes 446 radiant damage, and 
the next attack roll made against this target before the 
end of your next turn has advantage, thanks to the mysti- 
cal dim light glittering on the target until then. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d6 for each slot level above 1st. 


FLAMING SPHERE 


CHAPTER 4: SPELLS 


HASTE 
3rd-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 30 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a shaving of licorice root) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


Choose a willing creature that you can see within range. 
Until the spell ends, the target's speed is doubled, it gains 
a +2 bonus to AC, it has advantage on Dexterity saving 
throws, and it gains an additional action on each of its 
turns. That action can be used only to take the Attack 
(one weapon attack only), Dash, Disengage, Hide, or Use 
an Object action. 

When the spell ends, the target can’t move or take 
actions until after its next turn, as a wave of lethargy 
sweeps over it. 


HEALING WORD 
Ist-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 bonus action 
Range: 60 feet 

Components: V 

Duration: Instantaneous 


A creature of your choice that you can see within range 
regains hit points equal to 1d4 + your spellcasting 
ability modifier. This spell has no effect on undead or 
constructs. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the healing increases by 
144 for each slot level above 1st. 


HOLD PERSON 
2nd-level enchantment 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a small, straight piece of iron) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


Choose a humanoid that you can see within range. The 
target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or be 
paralyzed for the duration. At the end of each of its turns, 
the target can make another Wisdom saving throw. On a 
success, the spell ends on the target. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 3rd level or higher, you can target one addi- 
tional humanoid for each slot level above 2nd. The hu- 
manoids must be within 30 feet of each other when you 
target them. 


IDENTIFY 
Ist-level divination (ritual) 


Casting Time: 1 minute 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (a pearl worth at least 100 gp and 
an owl feather) 

Duration: Instantaneous 


You choose one object that you must touch throughout 
the casting of the spell. If it is a magic item or some other 
magic-imbued object, you learn its properties and how to 
use them, whether it requires attunement to use, and how 
many charges it has, if any. You learn whether any spells 


CHAPTER 4: SPELLS 


are affecting the item and what they are. If the item was 
created by a spell, you learn which spell created it. 

If you instead touch a creature throughout the casting, 
you learn what spells, if any, are currently affecting it. 


INFLICT WOUNDS 
Ist-level necromancy 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


Make a melee spell attack against a creature you can 
reach. On a hit, the target takes 3d10 necrotic damage. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the damage increases by 
1410 for each slot level above 1st. 


INVISIBILITY 
2nd-level illusion 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (an eyelash encased in gum arabic) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


A creature you touch becomes invisible until the spell 
ends. Anything the target is wearing or carrying is invis- 
ible as long as it is on the target's person. The spell ends 
for a target that attacks or casts a spell. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 3rd level or higher, you can target one addi- 
tional creature for each slot level above 2nd. 


KNOCK 
2nd-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 60 feet 
Components: V 
Duration: Instantaneous 


Choose an object that you can see within range. The 
object can be a door, a box, a chest, a set of manacles, a 
padlock, or another object that contains a mundane or 
magical means that prevents access. 

A target that is held shut by a mundane lock or that 
is stuck or barred becomes unlocked, unstuck, or un- 
barred. If the object has multiple locks, only one of them 
is unlocked. 

If you choose a target that is held shut with arcane lock 
that spell is suppressed for 10 minutes, during which 
time the target can be opened and shut normally. 

When you cast the spell, a loud knock, audible from as 
far away as 300 feet, emanates from the target object. 


, 


LESSER RESTORATION 
2nd-level abjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You touch a creature and can end either one disease or 
one condition afflicting it. The condition can be blinded, 
deafened, paralyzed, or poisoned. 


LEVITATE 
2nd-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (either a small leather loop or a 
piece of golden wire bent into a cup shape with a long 
shank on one end) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


One creature or loose object of your choice that you 
can see within range rises vertically, up to 20 feet, and 
remains suspended there for the duration. The spell 
can levitate a target that weighs up to 500 pounds. An 
unwilling creature that succeeds on a Constitution saving 
throw is unaffected. 

The target can move only by pushing or pulling against 
a fixed object or surface within reach (such as a wall or 
a ceiling), which allows it to move as if it were climbing. 
You can change the target's altitude by up to 20 feet in 
either direction on your turn. If you are the target, you 
can move up or down as part of your move. Otherwise, 
you can use your action to move the target, which must 
remain within the spell's range. 

When the spell ends, the target floats gently to the 
ground if it is still aloft. 


LIGHT 
Evocation cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, M (a firefly or phosphorescent moss) 
Duration: 1 hour 


You touch one object that is no larger than 10 feet in any 
dimension. Until the spell ends, the object sheds bright 
light in a 20-foot radius and dim light for an additional 
20 feet. The light can be colored as you like. Completely 
covering the object with something opaque blocks the 
light. The spell ends if you cast it again or dismiss it as 
an action. 

If you target an object held or worn by a hostile crea- 
ture, that creature must succeed on a Dexterity saving 
throw to avoid the spell. 


LIGHTNING BOLT 
3rd-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Self (100-foot line) 

Components: V, S, M (a bit of fur and a rod of amber, 
crystal, or glass) 

Duration: Instantaneous 


A stroke of lightning forming a line 100 feet long and 5 
feet wide blasts out from you in a direction you choose. 
Each creature in the line must make a Dexterity saving 
throw. A creature takes 8d6 lightning damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 

The lightning ignites flammable objects in the area that 
aren't being worn or carried. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d6 for each slot level above 3rd. 


Ü NI / S 
2 fi Ў) p? ^ S | 
(P N 


LEvITATE 


LONGSTRIDER 
Ist-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (a pinch of dirt) 
Duration: 1 hour 


You touch a creature. The target's speed increases by 10 
feet until the spell ends. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, you can target one addi- 
tional creature for each slot level above 1st. 


MAGE ARMOR 
Ist-level abjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (a piece of cured leather) 
Duration: 8 hours 


You touch a willing creature who isn't wearing armor, 
and a protective magical force surrounds it until the spell 
ends. The target's base AC becomes 13 + its Dexterity 
modifier. The spell ends if the target dons armor or if you 
dismiss the spell as an action. 


CHAPTER 4: SPELLS 


МАСЕ HAND 
Conjuration cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 30 feet 
Components: У, 5 
Duration: 1 minute 


A spectral, floating hand appears at a point you choose 
within range. The hand lasts for the duration or until 
you dismiss it as an action. The hand vanishes if it is 
ever more than 30 feet away from you or if you cast this 
spell again. 

You can use your action to control the hand. You can 
use the hand to manipulate an object, open an unlocked 
door or container, stow or retrieve an item from an open 
container, or pour the contents out of a vial. You can 
move the hand up to 30 feet each time you use it. 

The hand can't attack, activate magic items, or carry 
more than 10 pounds. 


МАСІС MISSILE 
Ist-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 120 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You create three glowing darts of magical force. Each 
dart hits a creature of your choice that you can see within 
range. A dart deals 1d4 + 1 force damage to its target. 
The darts all strike simultaneously, and you can direct 
them to hit one creature or several. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the spell creates one 
more dart for each slot level above 1st. 


MAGIC WEAPON 
2nd-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 bonus action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


You touch a nonmagical weapon. Until the spell ends, 
that weapon becomes a magic weapon with a +1 bonus to 
attack rolls and damage rolls. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, the bonus increases to +2. 
When you use a spell slot of 6th level or higher, the bonus 
increases to *3. 


MAJOR IMAGE 
3rd-level illusion 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 120 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a bit of fleece) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


You create the image of an object, a creature, or some 
other visible phenomenon that is no larger than a 20- 
foot cube. The image appears at a spot that you can see 
within range and lasts for the duration. It seems com- 
pletely real, including sounds, smells, and temperature 
appropriate to the thing depicted. You can't create suffi- 
cient heat or cold to cause damage, a sound loud enough 


CHAPTER 4: SPELLS 


to deal thunder damage or deafen a creature, or a smell 
that might sicken a creature (like a troglodyte's stench). 

As long as you are within range of the illusion, you can 
use your action to cause the image to move to any other 
spot within range. As the image changes location, you 
can alter its appearance so that its movements appear 
natural for the image. For example, if you create an im- 
age of a creature and move it, you can alter the image so 
that it appears to be walking. Similarly, you can cause the 
illusion to make different sounds at different times, even 
making it carry on a conversation, for example. 

Physical interaction with the image reveals it to be an 
illusion, because things can pass through it. A creature 
that uses its action to examine the image can determine 
that it is an illusion with a successful Intelligence (Inves- 
tigation) check against your spell save DC. If a creature 
discerns the illusion for what it is, the creature can see 
through the image, and its other sensory qualities be- 
come faint to the creature. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 6th level or higher, the spell lasts until dis- 
pelled, without requiring your concentration. 


MASS HEALING WORD 
3rd-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 bonus action 
Range: 60 feet 

Components: V 

Duration: Instantaneous 


As you call out words of restoration, up to six creatures 
of your choice that you can see within range regain hit 
points equal to 1d4 + your spellcasting ability modifier. 
This spell has no effect on undead or constructs. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, the healing increases by 
1d4 for each slot level above 3rd. 


MENDING 
Transmutation cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 minute 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (two lodestones) 
Duration: Instantaneous 


This spell repairs a single break or tear in an object 
you touch, such as a broken chain link, two halves of 
a broken key, a torn cloak, or a leaking wineskin. As 
long as the break or tear is no larger than 1 foot in 
any dimension, you mend it, leaving no trace of the 
former damage. 

This spell can physically repair a magic item 
or construct, but the spell can’t restore magic to 
such an object. 


MINOR ILLUSION 
Illusion cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 30 feet 

Components: S, M (a bit of fleece) 
Duration: 1 minute 


You create a sound or an image of an object within range 
that lasts for the duration. The illusion also ends if you 
dismiss it as an action or cast this spell again. 


If you create а sound, its volume can range from а 
whisper to a scream. It can be your voice, someone else’s 
voice, a lion’s roar, a beating of drums, or any other sound 
you choose. The sound continues unabated throughout 
the duration, or you can make discrete sounds at different 
times before the spell ends. 

If you create an image of an object—such as a chair, 
muddy footprints, or a small chest—it must be no larger 
than a 5-foot cube. The image can’t create sound, light, 
smell, or any other sensory effect. Physical interaction 
with the image reveals it to be an illusion, because things 
can pass through it. 

If a creature uses its action to examine the sound or im- 
age, the creature can determine that it is an illusion with 
a successful Intelligence (Investigation) check against 
your spell save DC. If a creature discerns the illusion for 
what it is, the illusion becomes faint to the creature. 


Misty STEP 
2nd-level conjuration 


Casting Time: 1 bonus action 
Range: Self 

Components: V 

Duration: Instantaneous 


Briefly surrounded by silvery mist, you teleport up to 30 
feet to an unoccupied space that you can see. 


POISON SPRAY 
Conjuration cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 10 feet 
Components: У, 5 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You extend your hand toward a creature you can see 
within range and project a puff of noxious gas from your 
palm. The creature must succeed on a Constitution sav- 
ing throw or take 1d12 poison damage. 

This spell’s damage increases by 1d12 when you reach 
5th level (2d12), 11th level (3412), and 17th level (4412). 


PRESTIDIGITATION 
Transmutation cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 10 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Up to 1 hour 


This spell is a minor magical trick that novice 
spellcasters use for practice. You create one of the 
following magical effects within range: 


* You create an instantaneous, harmless sensory effect, 
such as a shower of sparks, a puff of wind, faint musical 
notes, or an odd odor. 

* You instantaneously light or snuff out a candle, a torch, 
or a small campfire. 

* You instantaneously clean or soil an object no larger 
than 1 cubic foot. 

* You chill, warm, or flavor up to 1 cubic foot of nonliving 
material for 1 hour. 

* You make a color, a small mark, or a symbol appear on 
an object or a surface for 1 hour. 


* You create a nonmagical trinket or an illusory image 
that can fit in your hand and that lasts until the end of 
your next turn. 


If you cast this spell multiple times, you can have up to 
three of its non-instantaneous effects active at a time, and 
you can dismiss such an effect as an action. 


Ray OF FROST 
Evocation cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 60 feet 
Components: У, 5 
Duration: Instantaneous 


A frigid beam of blue-white light streaks toward a crea- 
ture within range. Make a ranged spell attack against the 
target. On a hit, it takes 1d8 cold damage, and its speed is 
reduced by 10 feet until the start of your next turn. 

The spell’s damage increases by 1d8 when you reach 
5th level (248), 11th level (348), and 17th level (448). 


REMOVE CURSE 
3rd-level abjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: Touch 
Components: У, 5 
Duration: Instantaneous 


At your touch, all curses affecting one creature or object 
end. If the object is a cursed magic item, its curse re- 
mains, but the spell breaks its owner's attunement to the 
object so it can be removed or discarded. 


RESISTANCE 
Abjuration cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (a miniature cloak) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute 


You touch one willing creature. Once before the spell 
ends, the target can roll a 44 and add the number rolled 
to one saving throw of its choice. It can roll the die before 
or after making the saving throw. The spell then ends. 


REVIVIFY 
3rd-level necromancy 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (diamonds worth 300 gp, which the 
spell consumes) 

Duration: Instantaneous 


You touch a creature that has died within the last minute. 
That creature returns to life with 1 hit point. This spell 
can't return to life a creature that has died of old age, nor 
can it restore any missing body parts. 


SAGRED FLAME 
Evocation cantrip 
Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 60 feet 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


CHAPTER 4; SPELLS 


6o 


Flame-like radiance descends on a creature that you can 
see within range. The target must succeed on a Dexterity 
saving throw or take 1d8 radiant damage. The target 
gains no benefit from cover for this saving throw. 

The spell's damage increases by 1d8 when you reach 
Sth level (248), 11th level (348), and 17th level (4d8). 


SANCTUARY 
Ist-level abjuration 


Casting Time: 1 bonus action 

Range: 30 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a small silver mirror) 
Duration: 1 minute 


You ward a creature within range against attack. Until 
the spell ends, any creature who targets the warded crea- 
ture with an attack or a harmful spell must first make a 
Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the creature must 
choose a new target or lose the attack or spell. This spell 
doesn't protect the warded creature from area effects, 
such as the explosion of a fireball. 

If the warded creature makes an attack, casts a spell 
that affects an enemy, or deals damage to another crea- 
ture, this spell ends. 


SENDING 
3rd-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Unlimited 

Components: V, S, M (a short piece of fine copper wire) 
Duration: 1 round 


You send a short message of twenty-five words or less 
to a creature with which you are familiar. The creature 
hears the message in its mind, recognizes you as the 
sender if it knows you, and can answer in a like manner 
immediately. The spell enables creatures with Intelli- 
gence scores of at least 1 to understand the meaning of 
your message. 

You can send the message across any distance and 
even to other planes of existence, but if the target is on a 
different plane than you, there is а 5 percent chance that 
the message doesn't arrive. 


SHATTER 
2nd-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a chip of mica) 
Duration: Instantaneous 


A sudden loud ringing noise, painfully intense, erupts 
from a point of your choice within range. Each creature 
in a 10-foot-radius sphere centered on that point must 
make a Constitution saving throw. A creature takes 3d8 
thunder damage on a failed save, or half as much damage 
on a successful one. A creature made of inorganic mate- 
rial such as stone, crystal, or metal has disadvantage on 
this saving throw. 

A nonmagical object that isn't being worn or carried 
also takes the damage if it's in the spell's area. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 3rd level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d8 for each slot level above 2nd. 


CHAPTER 4: SPELLS 


SHIELD 
Ist-level abjuration 


Casting Time: 1 reaction, which you take when you аге 
hit by an attack or targeted by the magic missile spell 

Range: Self 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 round 


An invisible barrier of magical force appears and protects 
you. Until the start of your next turn, you have a +5 bonus 
to AC, including against the triggering attack, and you 
take no damage from magic missile. 


SHIELD OF FAITH 
Ist-level abjuration 


Casting Time: 1 bonus action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a small parchment with a bit of 
holy text written on it) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


A shimmering field appears and surrounds a creature of 
your choice within range, granting it a +2 bonus to AC for 
the duration. 


SHOCKING GRASP 
Evocation cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: Touch 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


Lightning springs from your hand to deliver a shock to 
à creature you try to touch. Make a melee spell attack 
against the target. You have advantage on the attack roll 
if the target is wearing armor made of metal. On a hit, the 
target takes 1d8 lightning damage, and it can't take reac- 
tions until the start of its next turn. 

The spell's damage increases by 1d8 when you reach 
Sth level (248), 11th level (348), and 17th level (4d8). 


SILENCE 
2nd-level illusion (ritual) 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 120 feet 

Components: V, S 

Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


For the duration, no sound can be created within or pass 
through a 20-foot-radius sphere centered on a point you 
choose within range. Any creature or object entirely in- 
side the sphere is immune to thunder damage, and crea- 
tures are deafened while entirely inside it. Casting a spell 
that includes a verbal component is impossible there. 


SILENT IMAGE 
Istlevel illusion 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a bit of fleece) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


You create the image of an object, a creature, or some 
other visible phenomenon that is no larger than a 15-foot 


cube. The image appears at a spot within range and lasts 
for the duration. The image is purely visual; it isn't accom- 
panied by sound, smell, or other sensory effects. 

You can use your action to cause the image to move to 
any spot within range. As the image changes location, 
you can alter its appearance so that its movements ap- 
pear natural for the image. For example, if you create an 
image of a creature and move it, you can alter the image 
So that it appears to be walking. 

Physical interaction with the image reveals it to be an 
illusion, because things can pass through it. A creature 
that uses its action to examine the image can determine 
that it is an illusion with a successful Intelligence (Inves- 
tigation) check against your spell save DC. If a creature 
discerns the illusion for what it is, the creature can see 
through the image. 


SLEEP 
Ist-level enchantment 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 90 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a pinch of fine sand, rose petals, or 
a cricket) 

Duration: 1 minute 


This spell sends creatures into a magical slumber. Roll 
548; the total is how many hit points of creatures this 
spell can affect. Creatures within 20 feet of a point you 
choose within range are affected in ascending order of 
their current hit points (ignoring unconscious creatures). 

Starting with the creature that has the lowest current 
hit points, each creature affected by this spell falls un- 
conscious until the spell ends, the sleeper takes damage, 
or someone uses an action to shake or slap the sleeper 
awake. Subtract each creature's hit points from the total 
before moving on to the creature with the next lowest hit 
points. A creature's hit points must be equal to or less 
than the remaining total for that creature to be affected. 

Undead and creatures immune to being charmed aren't 
affected by this spell. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, roll an additional 2d8 for 
each slot level above 1st. 


SPIDER CLIMB 
2nd-level transmutation 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, 5, M (a drop of bitumen and a spider) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


Until the spell ends, one willing creature you touch gains 
the ability to move up, down, and across vertical surfaces 
and upside down along ceilings, while leaving its hands 
free. The target also gains a climbing speed equal to its 
walking speed. 


SPIRIT GUARDIANS 
3rd-level conjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Self (15-foot radius) 

Components: V, S, M (a holy symbol) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes 


You call forth spirits to protect you. They flit around you 
to a distance of 15 feet for the duration. If you are good or 
neutral, their spectral form appears angelic or fey (your 
choice). If you are evil, they appear fiendish. 

When you cast this spell, you can designate any num- 
ber of creatures you can see to be unaffected by it. An 
affected creature's speed is halved in the area, and when 
the creature enters the area for the first time on a turn 
or starts its turn there, it must make a Wisdom saving 
throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 3d8 radiant 
damage (if you are good or neutral) or 3d8 necrotic dam- 
age (if you are evil). On a successful save, the creature 
takes half as much damage. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using а 
spell slot of 4th level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d8 for each slot level above 3rd. 


SPIRITUAL WEAPON 
2nd-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 bonus action 
Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S 

Duration: 1 minute 


You create a floating, spectral weapon within range that 
lasts for the duration or until you cast this spell again. 
When you cast the spell, you can make a melee spell 
attack against a creature within 5 feet of the weapon. On 
a hit, the target takes force damage equal to 1d8 + your 
spellcasting ability modifier. 

As a bonus action on your turn, you can move the 
weapon up to 20 feet and repeat the attack against a crea- 
ture within 5 feet of it. 

The weapon can take whatever form you choose. 
Clerics of deities who are associated with a particular 
weapon (as St. Cuthbert is known for his mace and 
Thor for his hammer) make this spell's effect resemble 
that weapon. 

At Higher Levels. When you cast this spell using а 
spell slot of 3rd level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d8 for every two slot levels above the 2nd. 


SUGGESTION 
2nd-level enchantment 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 30 feet 

Components: V, M (a snake's tongue and either a bit of 
honeycomb or a drop of sweet oil) 

Duration: Concentration, up to 8 hours 


You suggest a course of activity (limited to a sentence 
or two) and magically influence a creature you can see 
within range that can hear and understand you. Crea- 
tures that can't be charmed are immune to this effect. 
The suggestion must be worded in such a manner as to 
make the course of action sound reasonable. Asking the 
creature to stab itself, throw itself onto a spear, immo- 
late itself, or do some other obviously harmful act ends 
the spell. 

Тһе target must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a 
failed save, it pursues the course of action you described 
to the best of its ability. The suggested course of action 
can continue for the entire duration. If the suggested 


CHAPTER 4: SPELLS 


61 


activity can be completed іп a shorter time, the spell ends 
when the subject finishes what it was asked to do. 

You can also specify conditions that will trigger a spe- 
cial activity during the duration. For example, you might 
suggest that a knight give her warhorse to the first beggar 
she meets. If the condition isn’t met before the spell ex- 
pires, the activity isn't performed. 

If you or any of your companions damage the target, the 
spell ends. 


THAUMATURGY 
Transmutation cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 30 feet 
Components: V 
Duration: Up to 1 minute 


You manifest a minor wonder, a sign of supernatural 
power, within range. You create one of the following 
magical effects within range: 


* Your voice booms up to three times as loud as normal 
for 1 minute. 

* You cause flames to flicker, brighten, dim, or change 
color for 1 minute. 

* You cause harmless tremors in the ground 
for 1 minute. 

* You create an instantaneous sound that originates from 
a point of your choice within range, such as a rumble of 
thunder, the cry of a raven, or ominous whispers. 

+ You instantaneously cause an unlocked door or window 
to fly open or slam shut. 

+ You alter the appearance of your eyes for 1 minute. 


If you cast this spell multiple times, you can have up to 
three of its 1-minute effects active at a time, and you can 
dismiss such an effect as an action. 


'THUNDERWAVE 
Ist-level evocation 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: Self (15-foot cube) 
Components: V, S 
Duration: Instantaneous 


A wave of thunderous force sweeps out from you. Each 
creature in a 15-foot cube originating from you must 
make a Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, a 
creature takes 2d8 thunder damage and is pushed 10 feet 
away from you. On a successful save, the creature takes 
half as much damage and isn't pushed. 

In addition, unsecured objects that are completely 
within the area of effect are automatically pushed 10 feet 
away from you by the spell's effect, and the spell emits a 
thunderous boom audible out to 300 feet. 

At Hiéher Levels. When you cast this spell using a 
spell slot of 2nd level or higher, the damage increases by 
1d8 for each slot level above 1st. 


CHAPTER 4; SPELLS 


VICIOUS MOCKERY 
Enchantment cantrip 


Casting Time: 1 action 
Range: 60 feet 
Components: V 
Duration: Instantaneous 


You unleash a string of insults laced with subtle enchant- 
ments at a creature you can see within range. If the target 
can hear you (though it need not understand you), it must 
succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or take 1d4 psychic 
damage and have disadvantage on the next attack roll it 
makes before the end of its next turn. 

This spell’s damage increases by 1d4 when you reach 
Sth level (244), 11th level (344), and 17th level (444). 


WARDING BOND 
2nd-level abjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: Touch 

Components: V, S, M (a pair of platinum rings worth at 
least 50 gp each, which you and the target must wear 
for the duration) 

Duration: 1 hour 


This spell wards a willing creature you touch and creates 
a mystic connection between you and the target until the 
spell ends. While the target is within 60 feet of you, it 
gains a +1 bonus to AC and saving throws, and it has re- 
sistance to all damage. Also, each time it takes damage, 
you take the same amount of damage. 

The spell ends if you drop to 0 hit points or if you and 
the target become separated by more than 60 feet. It also 
ends if the spell is cast again on either of the connected 
creatures. You can also dismiss the spell as an action. 


WEB 


2nd-level conjuration 


Casting Time: 1 action 

Range: 60 feet 

Components: V, S, M (a bit of spiderweb) 
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour 


You conjure a mass of thick, sticky webbing at a point of 
your choice within range. The webs fill a 20-foot cube 
from that point for the duration. The webs are difficult 
terrain and lightly obscure their area. 

If the webs aren't anchored between two solid masses 
(such as walls or trees) or layered across a floor, wall, or 
ceiling, the conjured web collapses on itself, and the spell 
ends at the start of your next turn. Webs layered over a 
flat surface have a depth of 5 feet. 

Each creature that starts its turn in the webs or that 
enters them during its turn must make a Dexterity saving 
throw. On a failed save, the creature is restrained as long 
as it remains in the webs or until it breaks free. 

A creature restrained by the webs can use its action to 
make a Strength check against your spell save DC. If it 
succeeds, it is no longer restrained. 

The webs are flammable. Any 5-foot cube of webs 
exposed to fire burns away in 1 round, dealing 2d4 fire 
damage to any creature that starts its turn in the fire. 


APPENDIX А: SIDEKICKS 


On your adventures, the DM might reveal that you've be- 
friended a special character called a sidekick, who joins 
your party. This appendix presents the game statistics for 
sidekicks, of which there are three types: 


Expert, an agile and exceedingly helpful jack of all trades 

Spellcaster, a magic-user who can cast spells to harm 
your foes or heal you and your friends 

Warrior, a martial companion who specializes in striking 
your foes or defending you and your allies 


The DM will either tell you which type of sidekick to use 
or let you choose one. It's up to you and the DM to decide 
who controls the sidekick in play. 


SIDEKICK STAT BLocks 


A sidekick's game statistics are presented in a box called 
a stat block, which is essentially a mini character sheet. 
A stat block contains things like ability scores and hit 
points, as well as the actions a sidekick is most likely to 
take in combat. Like any character, a sidekick can use the 
action options in the combat section of chapter 2. 

These stat blocks work with any character race. If you 
and the DM agree, you may enhance your sidekick with 
the appropriate racial traits from chapter 1. 

For more information on stat blocks, see the “Сгеа- 
tures" section of the adventure booklet. 

i UU 


SPELLCASTER 
Ist-level Medium humanoid 
! Armor Class 12 (leather) 
Hit Points 9 (2d8) 
| Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 12 (+1) 10 (40) 15 (+2) 14(%2) 13 (+1) 


| Saving Throws Wis +4 

| Skills Arcana +4, Investigation +4, Religion +4 
Senses passive Perception 12 

Languages Common, plus one of your choice 


Magical Role. Choose a role for the spellcaster: healer or mage. 
Your choice determines which Spellcasting trait to use below. 


Spellcasting (Healer). The spellcaster's spellcasting ability is 
Wisdom (spell save DC 12, +4 to hit with spell attacks). The 
spellcaster has following cleric spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): guidance, sacred flame 
Ist level (2 slots): cure wounds 


Spellcasting (Mage). The spellcaster's spellcasting ability is 
Intelligence (spell save DC 12, +4 to hit with spell attacks). The 
spellcaster has following wizard spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): fire bolt, light 
Ist level (2 slots): sleep 


ACTIONS 


Quarterstaff. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 3 (1d6) bludgeoning damage, or 4 (1d8) bludgeon- 
ing damage if used with two hands. 


EXPERT 


Tst-level Medium humanoid 


Armor Class 14 (studded leather) 
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10(0) 15(42) 12 (+1) 13(41) 10(40 14 (+2) 


Saving Throws Dex +4 

Skills Acrobatics +4, Performance +4, Persuasion +4, Sleight of 
Hand +4, Stealth +4 

Senses passive Perception 10 

Languages Common, plus one of your choice 


Helpful. The expert can take the Help action as a bonus action. 
Tools. The expert has thieves’ tools and a musical instrument. 


ACTIONS 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 80/320 ft., 
one target. Hit: 6 (148 + 2) piercing damage. 


WARRIOR 


Ist-level Medium humanoid 


Armor Class 16 (chain shirt, shield) 
Hit Points 13 (248 + 4) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (+2) 13 (#1) 14 (+2) 10(0) 12(41) 10 (40) 


Saving Throws Con +4 

Skills Athletics +4, Perception +3, Survival +3 
Senses passive Perception 13 

Languages Common, plus one of your choice 


Martial Role. The warrior has one of the following traits of 
your choice: 


Attacker. The warrior gains a +2 bonus to attack rolls. 
Defender. The warrior gains the Protection reaction below. 


ACTIONS 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) slashing damage, or 7 (1d10 + 2) slashing 
damage if used with two hands. 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range 150/600 ft., 
one target. Hit: 5 (1d8 + 1) piercing damage. 
REACTIONS 


Protection (Defender Only). The warrior imposes disadvantage 
on the attack roll of a creature within 5 feet of it whose target 
isn’t the warrior. The warrior must be able to see the attacker. 


APPENDIX A: SIDEKICKS 


63 


64. 


PROFICIENCIES 


A sidekick is proficient with any armor, weapons, and 
tools included in its stat block. In addition, experts are 
proficient with simple weapons, rapiers, shortswords, 
and light armor; spellcasters are proficient with simple 
weapons and light armor; and warriors are proficient 
with simple and martial weapons, shields, and all armor. 


SIDEKICK LEVEL 


Your sidekick starts as a 1st-level character. As you and 
your sidekick adventure together, your sidekick gains 
experience points and reaches new levels the same way a 
player character does, using the rules in chapter 1. 

When a sidekick gains a level, look at the sidekick's 
table below, and consult the new level's row, which shows 
the sidekick's new hit point maximum and features. 

Тһе DM may start a sidekick at a level higher than 1st, 
using the hit point maximum for its level on the appropri- 
ate table below. Also, give the sidekick the features for its 
current level and any earlier levels on that table. 


ExPERTS BEYOND 15Т LEVEL 


Level Hit Points Мем Features 

2nd 16 (348 + 3) Cunning Action. On the expert's turn 
in combat, it can take the Dash, Disen- 
gage, or Hide action as a bonus action. 

3rd 22 (448 + 4) Expertise. Choose two of the expert's 
skill proficiencies. The proficiency bo- 
nus is doubled for any ability check the 
expert makes that uses either of the 
chosen proficiencies. 

4th 27 (5d8+5) Ability Score Improvement. The ex- 
pert's Dex. score increases by 2, raising 
the modifier by 1, so increase the fol- 
lowing numbers by 1: the Dex. saving 
throw bonus; the Acrobatics, Sleight of 
Hand, and Stealth bonuses; and the bo- 
nuses to hit and damage of the expert's 
weapon attacks. 

Sth 33 (6d8+6) Proficiency Bonus. The expert's profi- 
ciency bonus increases by 1, so make 
the following changes in the stat block: 
increase the bonuses in the Saving 
Throws and Skills entries by 1, and in- 
crease the bonuses to hit of the weapon 
attacks by 1. 

6th 38 (708 + 7) Extra Attack. The expert can attack 
twice, instead of once, whenever it 
takes the Attack action on its turn. 


SPELLCASTERS BEYOND 1ST LEVEL 
Level Ні Points 
2nd 13 (348) 


New Features 

Spellcasting. The spellcaster learns 
another Ist-level spell: bless (healer) or 
burning hands (mage). 

Spellcasting. The spellcaster gains one 
Ist-level spell slot. The spellcaster also 
learns another Ist-level spell: shield of 
faith (healer) or shield (mage). 


3rd 13 (408) 


APPENDIX А: SIDEKICKS 


Level Ні Points 
4th 22 (548) 


New Features 

Ability Score Improvement. The spell- 
caster's Int. (mage) or Wis. (healer) 
score increases by 2, raising the mod- 
ifier by 1, so increase the following 
numbers by 1: the spellcaster’s spell 
save DC and the bonus to hit of spell 
attacks, the bonuses in the Skills entry 
of the mage, the Wisdom saving throw 
bonus of the healer, and the passive 
Perception of the healer. 


Spellcasting. Тһе spellcaster learns 

another cantrip: resistance (healer) or 

mage hand (mage). 
5th 27 (6d8) Proficiency Bonus. The spellcaster's 
proficiency bonus increases by 1, so 
make the following changes in the stat 
block: increase the bonuses in the Sav- 
ing Throws and Skills entries by 1, and 
increase the bonuses to hit of its spell 
and weapon attacks by 1. 


Spellcasting. The spellcaster gains one 
Ist-level spell slot and two 2nd-level 
spell slots. The spellcaster also learns 
one 2nd-level spell: aid (healer) or 
invisibility (mage). 

Potent Cantrips. The spellcaster can 
add its spellcasting ability modifier to 
the damage it deals with any cantrip. 


6th 31 (7d8) 


WARRIORS BEYOND 1ST LEVEL 


Level Hit Points Мем Features 

2nd 19 (3d8+6) Second Wind. The warrior can use a 
bonus action on its turn to regain hit 
points equal to 1d10 + its level. If it 
does so, it can't use this feature again 
until it finishes a short or long rest. 

3rd 26 (408 +8) Improved Critical. The warrior's attack 
rolls now score a critical hit on a roll of 
19 or 20 on the d20. 

4th 32 (5d8+10) Ability Score Improvement. The war- 
rior's Str. score increases by 2, raising 
the modifier by 1, so increase the war- 
rior's Athletics bonus by 1, and increase 
the bonuses to hit and damage of the 
warrior's melee weapon attack by 1. 

Sth 39 (6d8 +12) Proficiency Bonus. The warrior's profi- 
ciency bonus increases by 1, so make 
the following changes in the stat block: 
increase the bonuses in the Saving 
Throws and Skills entries by 1, increase 
the passive Perception by 1, and in- 
crease the bonuses to hit of the weapon 
attacks by 1. 

6th 45 (748 + 14) Extra Attack. The warrior can attack 
twice, instead of once, whenever it 
takes the Attack action on its turn. 


APPENDIX В: CONDITIONS 


Conditions alter a creature's capabilities in a variety of 
ways and can arise as a result of a spell, a class feature, a 
monster's attack, or other effect. Most conditions, such as 
blinded, are impairments, but a few, such as invisible, can 
be advantageous. 

A condition lasts either until it is countered (the prone 
condition is countered by standing up, for example) or for a 
duration specified by the effect that imposed the condition. 

If multiple effects impose the same condition on a crea- 
ture, each instance of the condition has its own duration, 
but the condition's effects don't get worse. A creature ei- 
ther has a condition or doesn't. 

The following definitions specify what happens toa 
creature while it is subjected to a condition. 


BLINDED 

* A blinded creature can't see and automatically fails any 
ability check that requires sight. 

* Attack rolls against the creature have advantage, and the 
creature's attack rolls have disadvantage. 


CHARMED 


+ А charmed creature can't attack the charmer or target 
the charmer with harmful abilities or magical effects. 

* The charmer has advantage on any ability check to inter- 
act socially with the creature. 


DEAFENED 


* A deafened creature can't hear and automatically fails 
any ability check that requires hearing. 


FRIGHTENED 

* Afrightened creature has disadvantage on ability checks 
and attack rolls while the source of its fear is within line 
of sight. 


* The creature can't willingly move closer to the source of 
its fear. 


GRAPPLED 

* A grappled creature's speed becomes 0, and it can't ben- 
efit from any bonus to its speed. 
The condition ends if the grappler is incapacitated (see 
the condition). 
The condition also ends if an effect removes the grap- 
pled creature from the reach of the grappler or grappling 
effect, such as when a creature is hurled away by the 
thunderwave spell. 


INCAPACITATED 
* An incapacitated creature can't take actions or reactions. 


INVISIBLE 

* An invisible creature is impossible to see without the 
aid of magic or a special sense. For the purpose of 
hiding, the creature is heavily obscured. The creature's 
location can be detected by any noise it makes or any 
tracks it leaves. 
Attack rolls against the creature have disadvantage, and 
the creature's attack rolls have advantage. 


PARALYZED 

* A paralyzed creature is incapacitated (see the condition) 
and can't move or speak. 

* The creature automatically fails Strength and Dexterity 
saving throws. 
Attack rolls against the creature have advantage. 
Any attack that hits the creature is a critical hit if the 
attacker is within 5 feet of the creature. 


PETRIFIED 

* A petrified creature is transformed, along with any 
nonmagical object it is wearing or carrying, into a solid 
inanimate substance (usually stone). Its weight increases 
by a factor of ten, and it ceases aging. 
The creature is incapacitated (see the condition), can't 
move or speak, and is unaware of its surroundings. 
Attack rolls against the creature have advantage. 
The creature automatically fails Strength and Dexterity 
saving throws. 
The creature has resistance to all damage. 
The creature is immune to poison and disease, although 
a poison or disease already in its system is suspended, 
not neutralized. 


POISONED 


* A poisoned creature has disadvantage on attack rolls 
and ability checks. 


PRONE 


* A prone creature's only movement option is to crawl, 
unless it stands up and thereby ends the condition. 

* The creature has disadvantage on attack rolls. 

* An attack roll against the creature has advantage if the 
attacker is within 5 feet of the creature. Otherwise, the 
attack roll has disadvantage. 


RESTRAINED 

* A restrained creature's speed becomes 0, and it can't 
benefit from any bonus to its speed. 

* Attack rolls against the creature have advantage, and the 
creature's attack rolls have disadvantage. 

* The creature has disadvantage on Dexterity saving 
throws. 


STUNNED 

* A stunned creature is incapacitated (see the condition), 
can't move, and can speak only falteringly. 

* The creature automatically fails Strength and Dexterity 
saving throws. 

* Attack rolls against the creature have advantage. 


UNCONSCIOUS 

* Àn unconscious creature is incapacitated (see the 
condition), can't move or speak, and is unaware of its 
surroundings. 
The creature drops whatever it's holding and falls prone. 
The creature automatically fails Strength and Dexterity 
saving throws. 
Attack rolls against the creature have advantage. 
Any attack that hits the creature is a critical hit if the 
attacker is within 5 feet of the creature. 


Bc 


Mal r 


DRAGON oF ICESPIRE PEAK 


Running the Adventure ........................... 2 Falcons Hunting Lodge ........................ 24  Mountain's Toe Gold Mine .................... 36 
ОЛЕГЕ а асова а 2 Location Overview Location Оуетміеуе.................. 0.40 өлен 36 
The Forgotten Realms ...................... А» BALSA AL 5» ә ое ODDO YO j Travel to thè Mine... .36 
First Session: Character Creation .......... 6 Соотеодагбе...........................». Уаз: ПАО „36 
The Adventure Вевїпз........... 7 Location Overview Shrine ОЁ базгав..... а 38 
Ахеһоі а ысы Ж "“Астұашрсасраврра даананын Location Оуегуіемг.........2.1.1. көкек кескен» 38 
Location Overview. ‚12 ГИ еа ne ОВО e AN. ER. АТУ К е Фишер еее ес е ДОМ 38 
Travel to Axeholm... 12 Location Охегуіему................. еккеннен» 30: Ооо ОИ. н 40 
Arrival ........ nennen nnns 12 Finding Icespire Hold............................... 30 Location Overview.............:. entente 40 
Butterskull Ranch .................................. 16 Тгахе! to Icespire Hold ............................ 30 Travel to the Lighthous 240 
Location Overview... 16 И CATT IVE Gore EE ik t reset неона МЫ 31: Arrival; ..40 
Travel tothe Rancho ossa: 16 Loggers' Camp... 134  Umbrage Hill... .43 
Атгіміі.......... rennen ыы амы тыны Location Overview. „ЭЙ. LocaHon Ое чех. сне 43 
Circle of Thunder...... Preparations ....... -34 Woodland Manse ......... s 44 
Location Overview Travel to the Camp. “34 Location Overview... 44 
Travel to the Circle АТЕШ EL esas ы на SANE 34 Pe ee Ceci РИНЕ Ек 44 
VV AE ESTE TETTE леса ый ОТТГО Leaving the Manse.......... s 47 
Dragón Bürrow..................... Counterattack oss ema loni vere e to 
Location Overview ................».-eerereeen enne 20 Ending the Adventure 
Travel to the Ваггомб....................... 20 Where Next? аар 48 
Аа ала ы 20 

СБа осеннее 
Dwarven Excavation ............................... 22 Creature Stat Blocks 
Location Overview. -22 Creature Descriptions................. ere 51 


RUNNING THE ADVENTURE 


THIS BOOK IS WRITTEN FOR THE DUNGEON MASTER. IT 
contains a complete DUNGEONS & DRAGONS adventure, 
as well as descriptions for every creature that appears 
in the adventure. It also teaches you how to run 
a D&D game. 

The other book that accompanies this one (called “the 
rulebook”) contains the information the players need 
to create and advance their characters (the adventurers 
and heroes of the story), as well as the rules you need to 
adjudicate situations that arise during the adventure. 


OVERVIEW 


A D&D adventure is a collection of locations, quests, and 
challenges that inspires you to tell a story. The outcome 
of that story is determined by the actions and decisions of 
the adventurers—and, of course, the luck of the dice. You 
can run Dragon of Icespire Peak for as few as one player 
ог as many as five players. Each player starts with a 1st- 
level character. 

The adventure is set a short distance from the city of 
Neverwinter in the Sword Coast region of the Forgotten 
Realms setting. The Sword Coast is part of the North—a 
vast realm of free settlements surrounded by lawless, 
untamed wilderness. You don't need to be a Forgotten 
Realms expert to run the adventure, as everything you 
need to know about the setting is contained in this book. 

If this is your first time running a D&D adventure, read 
the "Role of the Dungeon Master" section. 


ROLE OF THE DUNGEON MASTER 


The Dungeon Master (also called “the DM") has а special 
role in the D&D game. 

The DM is a referee. When it's not clear what ought to 
happen next, the DM decides how to apply the rules and 
keep the story going. 

The DM is a storyteller. The DM sets the pace of the 
story and presents the various challenges and encounters 
that the players must overcome. The DM is the players' 
interface to the D&D world, as well as the one who reads 
(and sometimes also writes) the adventure and describes 
what happens in response to the characters' actions. 

The DM is a roleplayer. The DM plays the monsters 
and villains in the adventure, choosing their actions and 
rolling dice for their attacks. The DM also plays the parts 
of all the other characters who the adventurers meet, in- 
cluding helpful ones. 

The most important thing to remember about being a 
good DM is that the rules are a tool to help you and the 
players have fun. The rules aren't in charge. You're the 
DM—you're in charge of the game. 


CHOOSING A DUNGEON MASTER 

Who should be the DM for your gaming group? Whoever 
wants to be! The person who has the most drive to pull a 
group together and start up a game often ends up being 
the DM by default, but that doesn't have to be the case. 


DM Ties 


As the DM, you are the final authority when it comes to 
rules questions or disputes during the game. Here are 
some guidelines to help you arbitrate issues as they arise. 


When in doubt, make it up. It's better to keep the game 
moving than to get bogged down in the rules. 

Embrace the shared story. D&D is about telling a story 
as a group, so let the players contribute to the outcome 
through the words and deeds of their characters. If 
some players are reluctant to speak up, remember to 
ask them what their characters are doing. 

It's not a competition. The DM isn't competing against 
the player characters. Your job is to referee the rules, 
run monsters, and keep the story moving. 

Be consistent and fair. If you decide that a rule works a 
certain way, make sure it works that way the next time 
it comes into play. Treat the rules and your players in a 
fair, impartial manner. 

Modify the adventure to suit your tastes. The adventure 
has no prescribed outcome. You can alter any encoun- 
ter to make it more interesting and fun for your particu- 
lar group of players. 

Keep a notepad and some graph paper handy. Use the 
notepad to keep track of details such as the characters’ 
marching order. Graph paper will be helpful if you need 
to draw a quick map for your players. 


IMPROVISING ABILITY CHECKS 

The adventure often tells you what ability checks char- 
acters might try in a certain situation, and the Difficulty 
Class (DC) of those checks. Sometimes characters try 
things that the adventure can't possibly anticipate. You 
decide whether their attempts are successful. 

Ability checks only come into play if there's a genuine 
chance of succeeding or failing at the task. If it seems 
like anyone should have an easy time doing it, don't ask 
for an ability check. Just tell the player what happens. 
Conversely, if there's no way anyone could accomplish 
the task, just tell the player it doesn't work. 

If and when you decide that an ability check is required, 
ask yourself these questions: 

What Kind of Ability Check? Use the descriptions of 
the ability scores and their associated skills in the rule- 
book to help you decide what kind of ability check to use. 

How Hard Is It? Decide whether the task's difficulty is 
easy, moderate, or hard, and use the appropriate DC. 


DC 10 (Easy). An easy task requires a minimal level of 
competence or a modicum of luck to accomplish. 

DC 15 (Moderate). A moderate task requires a higher 
level of competence to accomplish. A character with 
natural aptitude and specialized training can accom- 
plish a moderate task more often than not. 

DC 20 (Hard). Hard tasks include things beyond the 
capabilities of most people without aid or exceptional 
ability. Even with aptitude and training, a character 
needs some amount of luck—or a lot of specialized 
training—to pull off a hard task. 


OTHER COMPONENTS 


The box containing this adventure includes components 
designed to help you as the Dungeon Master. In addition 
to the rulebook, these components are as follows: 


DM SCREEN 


The inside of the folding screen has information that can 
help you while running the adventure. You can also use 
the screen to hide your notes and die rolls, thus keeping 
the players in suspense. 


PosTER МАР 


When you're ready to begin the adventure, unfold the 
poster map so that the map of Phandalin faces up. Here 
is where the adventure begins. When it comes time for 
players to embark on quests, use the Sword Coast map 
on the reverse side to help chart their overland journey. 


CARDS 
The box contains the following cards: 


Combat Step by Step Cards. These identical cards out- 
line the order of combat, as described in the rulebook. 

Condition Cards. These cards describe various condi- 
tions that can affect creatures in the game. A player 
whose character is suffering from a condition can keep 
the card as a reminder, giving it back to you when the 
condition ends for that character. 

Initiative Cards. After the characters and each group of 
monsters involved in a combat roll initiative, distribute 
these cards among the combat participants, from the 
highest to lowest initiative count. For example, whoever 
rolls the highest initiative gets the “1” card and acts 
first, whoever rolls the second highest initiative gets the 
"2" card, and so on. Keep the numbered cards for the 
creatures you're running. 

Magic Charm Card. This card describes a special charm 
(see "Charm of the Storm,” page 41). Give the card 
to the player whose character receives the charm. Col- 
lect the card when the charm ends for that character. 

Magic Item Cards. When the characters acquire a magic 
item and identify it, give the players the card for that 
item. Let the player whose character has the item keep 
the card for reference until the item is expended or no 
longer in that character's possession. 

Quest Cards. When a new quest becomes available to 
the characters, give that quest's card to the players. 
Collect the card if the characters complete the quest or 
decide they don't want to complete it. 

Sidekick Cards. If you're running the game for a single 
player, give the player these cards and let them choose 
a sidekick. The sidekick's corresponding stat block can 
be found in the rulebook. If the sidekick dies, collect 
the card; the player can't choose that sidekick again. 


———————— MÀ — o0 eee 
ADVENTURE MAPS 


Maps that appear in this book are for the DM's eyes only. A 
map not only shows an adventure location in its entirety but 
also shows secret doors, hidden traps, and other elements 
the players aren't meant to see—hence the need for secrecy. 
When the characters arrive at a location marked on a 
map, you can either rely on a verbal description to give 
them a clear mental picture of the location, or you can draw 
what they see on a piece of graph paper, copying what's 
on your map while omitting details as appropriate. It’s 
not important that your hand-drawn map perfectly match 
what's in the printed adventure. Focus on getting the shape 
and dimensions correct, and leave the rest to the players' 
imaginations. 
С 


RUNNING THE ADVENTURE 


THE FORGOTTEN REALMS 


The world of the Forgotten Realms is one of high fantasy, 
populated by elves, dwarves, halflings, humans, and 
other folk. In the Realms, knights dare the crypts of the 
fallen dwarf kings of Delzoun, seeking glory and trea- 
sure. Rogues prowl the dark alleyways of teeming cities 
such as Neverwinter and Baldur's Gate. Clerics in the 
service of gods wield mace and spell, questing against 
the terrifying powers that threaten the land. Wizards 
plunder the ruins of the fallen Netherese empire, delving 
into secrets too dark for the light of day. Bards sing of 
kings, queens, heroes, and tyrants who died long ago. 

On the roads and rivers of the Realms travel min- 
strels and peddlers, merchants and guards, soldiers and 
sailors. Steel-hearted adventurers from backcountry 
farmsteads and sleepy villages follow tales of strange, 
glorious, faraway places. Good maps and clear trails can 
take even an inexperienced youth with dreams of glory 
far across the world, but these paths are never safe. Fell 
magic and deadly monsters are the perils one faces when 
traveling in the Realms. Even farms and freeholds within 
a day’s walk of a city can fall prey to monsters, and no 
place is safe from the sudden wrath of a dragon. 


MAP OF THE SWORD COAST 


The map on the facing page shows a region of the For- 
gotten Realms called the Sword Coast. This is a place of 
adventure, where daring souls delve into ancient strong- 
holds and explore the ruins of long-lost kingdoms. Amid a 
lawless wilderness of jagged, snow-capped peaks, alpine 
forests, bitter winds, and roaming monsters, the coast 
holds such great bastions of civilization as the city of 
Neverwinter, in the shadow of the fuming volcano known 
as Mount Hotenow. 

This map is for the DM’s eyes only, as it indicates the 
locations of places described later in this adventure. A 
larger, player-friendly version of the map appears on one 
side of the poster map included with this adventure. The 
poster map of the Sword Coast can be shared freely with 
the players as their characters explore the region. 

Geographical locations marked on both the DM’s map 
and the players’ map are described below in alphabetical 
order. This information is not secret, and can be shared 
with players if they request details about a particu- 
lar location. 


CONYBERRY 

The Triboar Trail runs right through this abandoned 
town, which was sacked by barbarians years ago and 
now lies in ruins. A dirt road extending south of the town 
leads to a supposedly abandoned shrine dedicated to 
Savras (god of divination and fate). For more information 
on this location, see "Shrine of Savras" (page 38). 


CRAGS 


These rocky, windswept hills are dotted with old mines 
that have become infested with monsters. 


Нісн ROAD 


This highway hugs the coast, connecting Neverwinter 
to the coastal cities of Luskan to the north and Water- 
deep to the south. For years, the stretch of road south of 


RUNNING THE ADVENTURE 


Neverwinter fell into disuse because of frequent monster 
attacks. Of late, efforts have been made to keep the road 
safe, with light patrols of guards on horseback moving 
between Neverwinter and Leilon. 


KRYPTGARDEN FOREST 
This ancient forest tucked behind the Sword Mountains 
contains the ruins of bygone dwarven civilizations. 


LEILON 

This small town along the High Road is in the midst of re- 
building itself after being abandoned for years. Its inhab- 
itants hail from Neverwinter and are in the paid service 
of the city's Lord Protector, who has tasked them with 
turning Leilon into a fortified settlement that can ward 
off threats from the Mere of Dead Men. 


MERE ОҒ DEAD MEN 

Travelers on the High Road, which skirts the mere to the 
east, must resist being lured into this cold and desolate 
swamp by bobbing will-owisps. Countless adventurers 
have perished in the mere, drawn by tales of ruined cas- 
tles half-sunk in the mire. 


NEVERWINTER 

This city was badly damaged when Mount Hotenow 
erupted some fifty years ago. Now, the City of Skilled 
Hands works to rebuild under the watchful eye of its Lord 
Protector, Dagult Neverember, who rules in the absence 
of an heir to Neverwinter's crown. At present, no legiti- 
mate heirs to the old Alagondar royal line are known to 
exist, and many believe that the line is ended. Lord Nev- 
erember, taking no chances, quietly pays off or disposes 
of anyone claiming a connection to the rulers of old. 


NEVERWINTER WOOD 

The forest east of Neverwinter seems to have a magical 
quality about it, or at least an air of mystical secrecy. Re- 
clusive spellcasters are rumored to dwell deep within. 


PHANDALIN 

This nondescript mining settlement, nestled in the 
foothills of the Sword Mountains, serves as the starting 
location for the adventure. For more information, see 
"Welcome to Phandalin" (page 7). 


STARMETAL HILLS 

This range of rocky knolls is so named because the area 
has been the impact site of a number of meteor showers 

over millennia. The hills are haunted by ruthless barbar- 
ian tribes, giving others little reason to visit the area. 


SWORD MOUNTAINS 

These steep, craggy, snow-capped mountains are home 
to scattered tribes of orcs as well as other monsters. 
Icespire Peak is the tallest among them. Their foothills 
are strewn with the ruins of bygone kingdoms, and more 
than a few half-forgotten dungeons and tombs. 


TRIBOAR TRAIL 

This path south of Neverwinter Wood is the safest route 
between Neverwinter and the town of Triboar, located in 
the Dessarin Valley to the east (off the map). The trail is 

not patrolled, and monster attacks are commonplace. 


T)eM e 
75 as 


сете 


5 AN 
m ^ y N 2 
ЛУ 1n Ma 


ЗЕ? г 
Gnomen 


p 

. Dwarven / 

Excavation. 
"2 Ar ” 


& toy he 
= Же... RA "AS SN 
SONG MEE e E 
27м à VES, 
г cre of WEN 


саа Mer- ^ 


FIRST SESSION: 
CHARACTER CREATION 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS is a game that requires several 
hours to play, but you can stop the game at any time and 
continue it later. The first session should focus on charac- 
ter creation—one of the most fun aspects of the game. If 
the players create and equip their characters with time to 
spare, you сап begin the adventure once they're ready to 
go. Otherwise, congratulate them on building their char- 
acters and begin the adventure with the next session. 

During character creation, your role as the DM is to let 
your players build the characters they want, and to help 
them come up with explanations for how their characters 
came together to form an adventuring party. If you have 
only one player, work with that player to come up with 
their character's backstory, then let the player decide if 
they want the character to have a sidekick (see "Running 
for One Player" below). 


CHARACTER OPTIONS 


Each player has options when it comes to choosing a 
character race, class, and background. These options are 
summarized in the Character Options table. If there are 
multiple players in the group, encourage them to choose 
different classes so that the party has a range of abilities. 
It's less important that the party include multiple races or 
backgrounds, as sometimes it's fun to play an all-dwarf 
party or a troupe of adventuring entertainers. 


CHARACTER OPTIONS 


Races Classes Backgrounds 

Dwarf Bard Acolyte 

Elf Cleric Criminal 

Halfling Fighter Entertainer 

Human Rogue Sage 
Wizard Soldier 


While your players follow the steps of character cre- 
ation as outlined in the rulebook, pay attention to the 
choices they make. The backgrounds they choose define 
who their characters were before becoming adventurers, 
and also include roleplaying hooks in the form of ideals, 
bonds, and flaws—things that you, as the DM, want to 
know. For example, if a player chooses the Criminal 
background, one of the options for the character's bond 
is, "I'm trying to pay off an old debt I owe to a generous 
benefactor.” If that’s the character's bond, work with the 
player to decide who that generous benefactor is. 


RUNNING FOR MULTIPLE PLAYERS 
ат TYN MULIIPLE rLAYERS — 


If you have two or more players, the easiest way to start 
the adventure is to assume that the characters know each 
other and have some sort of history together, however 
brief that history might be. The characters might have 
met in Neverwinter and traveled to Phandalin together, 
or they might have arrived in Phandalin separately and 
gotten to know each other while staying at the local inn. 


RUNNING THE ADVENTURE 


QUESTIONS TO ASK 


Here are some questions you can ask the players as they 
create characters: 


“ Are any of the characters related to each other? 

* What keeps the characters together as a party? 

* What does each character like most about every other 
member of the adventuring party? 


RUNNING FOR ONE PLAYER 


If you're running this adventure for a single player, you 
can give that player a sidekick as a secondary character. 
Let the player choose one of the pregenerated sidekicks 
from the selection of Sidekick Cards. Rules and stat 
blocks for sidekicks appear in the rulebook. You might 
need to help the player run the sidekick for the first few 
sessions. If a sidekick is lost or no longer needed, the 
character can return to Phandalin and acquire a new one. 


USING SIDEKICKS 
Make sure the player understands the roles and limita- 
tions of sidekicks in this adventure: 


* Sidekicks are stalwart companions who can perform 
tasks both in and out of combat, including things such 
as setting up camp and carrying gear. 

+ Ideally, a sidekick's abilities should complement those 
of the main character. For example, a spellcaster 
makes a good sidekick for a fighter or rogue. 


READING AHEAD 


As the players familiarize themselves with the character 
options and adventuring gear described in the rulebook, 
take advantage of the opportunity to read ahead. 

"The Adventure Begins" section tells you everything 
you need to know about what's happening in and around 
Phandalin. It also describes quests that characters can 
pursue, leading them to other locations. The adventure is 
built around these quests. Hopefully, the characters will 
find them tempting enough to undertake. 


L——————————————————————oÓm. 


GLOSSARY 


The adventure uses terms that might be unfamiliar to you. 
A few of these terms are described here. For descriptions of 
rules-specific terms, see the rulebook. 

Characters. This term refers to the adventurers run by the 
players. They are the protagonists in any D&D adventure. A 
group of characters or adventurers is called a party. 

Nonplayer Characters (NPCs). This term refers to charac- 
ters run by the DM. How an NPC behaves is dictated by the 
adventure and by the DM. 

Boxed Text. At various places, the adventure presents de- 
scriptive text that's meant to be read or paraphrased aloud 
to the players. This read-aloud text is offset in boxes. Boxed 
text is most commonly used to describe locations or pres- 
ent bits of scripted dialogue. 

Stat Block. Any monster or NPC that is likely to be in- 
volved in combat requires game statistics so that the DM z 
can run it effectively. These statistics are presented in a for- 
mat called a stat block. You'll find the stat blocks needed for 
this adventure in the “Creatures” section (page 49). 

Tenday. In the Forgotten Realms, a week is ten days long 
and called a tenday, Each month consists of three tendays— 
thirty days total. 


ee 


THE ADVENTURE BEGINS 


The adventure begins in the mining town of Phandalin. 
There, the characters receive quests and can choose 
which ones to pursue. 

The “Adventure Background” section describes the 
events leading up to the adventure and the main threats 
the characters will face. The "Welcome to Phandalin" 
and "Exploring Phandalin" sections describe the town 
where the adventure begins. Knowing Phandalin well 
will ensure a smooth start. 


ADVENTURE BACKGROUND 


Driven from lands farther north by more powerful 
dragons, a young white dragon named Cryovain has de- 
scended upon the Sword Mountains, claiming the snow- 
capped range as its domain. Typical of its kind, Cryovain 
is dim-witted and cruel. The dragon patrols the skies 
around Icespire Peak, surveying its territory while hunt- 
ing for food and easy treasure. With each passing day, 
the dragon's domain grows as it ranges farther across 
the land, preying on anything it can catch with its claws 
or freeze to death with its icy breath. Sightings of the 
dragon are becoming more common, as are its attacks. 
А crumbling fortress on the northeast spur of Icespire 
Peak serves as the dragon's lair. Cryovain seized the 
icy fortress from a tribe of savage orcs, killing the orc 
war chief and forcing the tribe's survivors to flee into 
the foothills and forests. Enraged by the death of their 
war chief, the orcs have called upon ancient allies—evil, 
shapechanging, half-orc spellcasters who bless and 


advise them. These half-orcs worship Talos, an evil god 
of storms, and many dwell in the dark depths of Never- 
winter Wood. In stormy weather, they gather on remote 
hilltops to summon Gorthok the Thunder Boar, a primal 
entity that serves Talos. Like the god it serves, Gorthok 
delights in destruction. 

The orcs aren't the only creatures thrown into up- 
heaval by Cryovain's sudden arrival. A manticore driven 
from its mountaintop nest by the roaming white dragon 
has migrated to the foothills and begun terrorizing folk 
living on the outskirts of the mining town of Phand- 
alin. Other monsters in the region have been similarly 
displaced. 


WELCOME TO PHANDALIN 


The frontier town of Phandalin is built on the ruins of a 
much older settlement. Hundreds of years ago, the old 
Phandalin was a thriving human town whose people 
were firmly allied with neighboring dwarves and gnomes. 
Then an orc horde swept through the area and laid waste 
to the settlement, and Phandalin was abandoned for 
centuries. 

In the last three or four years, settlers from the cities of 
Neverwinter and Waterdeep have begun the hard work of 
reclaiming the ruins of Phandalin. The new settlement 
is home now to farmers, woodcutters, fur traders, and 
prospectors drawn by stories of gold and platinum in 
the foothills of the Sword Mountains. The arrival of a 
white dragon threatens to destroy all that they've worked 
to rebuild. 


RUNNING THE ADVENTURE 


When you аге ready for the adventure to get underway, 
show the poster map of Phandalin to the players and read 
the following boxed text aloud: 


Nestled in the rocky foothills of the snow-capped Sword 
Mountains is the mining town of Phandalin, which con- 
sists of forty or fifty simple log buildings. Crumbling stone 
ruins surround the newer houses and shops, showing how 
this must have been a much larger town in centuries past. 

Phandalin's residents are quiet, hard-working folk who 
came from distant cities to eke out a life amid the harsh 
wilderness. They are farmers, stonecutters, blacksmiths, 
traders, prospectors, and children. The town has no walls 
and no garrison, but most of the adults keep weapons 
within easy reach in case the need for arms should arise. 

Visitors are welcome here, particularly if they have coin 
to spend or news to share. The Stonehill Inn at the center 
of town offers modest lodging and meals. A couple of 
doors down from the inn, posted outside the townmas- 
ter's hall, is a job board for adventurers. 


E 


When the adventurers are ready to inspect the job board 
proceed to the "Townmaster's Hall" section (page 9). 


RUNNING THE ADVENTURE 


EXPLORING PHANDALIN 


The characters might wish to explore key establishments 
within Phandalin. These locations are marked on the 
map of Phandalin and the corresponding poster map. 


STONEHILL INN 

This modest, two-story roadhouse has six rooms for rent 
on the upper floor. A bed for the night costs 5 sp, while a 
meal costs 1 sp. The proprietor is a short, friendly male 
human named Toblen Stonehill. Toblen is a native of 

the town of Triboar to the east. He came to Phandalin to 
prospect, but soon realized that he knew a lot more about 
running an inn than he did about mining. If the char- 
acters talk to Toblen, he shares a brief tale told to him 

by one of his regular patrons. Roll a d6 and consult the 
Phandalin Tales table (page 9) to determine which 

tale Toblen knows, or pick a tale the characters haven't 
heard yet. 


BARTHEN’S PROVISIONS 

The shelves of this general store stock most ordinary 
goods and supplies, including backpacks, bedrolls, rope, 
and rations. Barthen's doesn't stock weapons or armor, 
but characters can purchase other adventuring gear 
here, with the exception of items that cost more than 25 
gp. (For prices, see the rulebook.) Characters in need of 
weapons or armor are directed to the Lionshield Coster. 
Those looking to buy potions of healing are urged to visit 
Adabra Gwynn at Umbrage Hill (see the “Potions of Heal- 
ing” sidebar on page 9). 


The proprietor, Elmar Barthen, is a lean and balding 
human man of fifty years. He employs a couple of young 
clerks (Ander and Thistle) who help load and unload 
wagons, and who wait on customers when Barthen isn't 
around. Characters who engage Barthen, Ander, or This- 
tle in friendly conversation are told a tale. Roll a d6 and 
consult the Phandalin Tales table, or pick a tale the char- 
acters haven't heard yet. 


LIONSHIELD COSTER 


Hanging above the front door of this modest trading post 
is a sign shaped like a wooden shield with a blue lion 
painted on it. 


This building is owned by the Lionshields, a merchant 
company based in the city of Yartar over a hundred miles 
to the east. The company ships finished goods to Phand- 
alin and other small settlements throughout the region. 

The master of the Phandalin post is a sharp-tongued 
human woman of thirty-five named Linene Graywind. 
Linene keeps a supply of armor and weapons, all of 
which are for sale to interested buyers. (For prices, see 
the rulebook.) Linene won't sell weapons to anyone she 
thinks might be a threat to the town. If the characters 
talk to her, she recalls a tale told to her by one of her 
neighbors. Roll a d6 and consult the Phandalin Tales ta- 
ble, or pick a tale the characters haven't heard yet. 


PHANDALIN MINER'S EXCHANGE 

Miners come here to have their valuable finds weighed, 
measured, and paid out. The exchange also serves as 

an unofficial records office, registering claims to various 
streams and excavations around the area. Enough wealth 
is hidden in the nearby streams and valleys to support a 
good number of independent prospectors. 

The exchange is a great place to meet people who 
spend a lot of time out and about in the countryside sur- 
rounding Phandalin. The guildmaster is a calculating hu- 
man woman named Halia Thornton. She is also an agent 
of the Zhentarim, a shadowy organization that seeks to 
exert secret control over the North through wealth and 
influence. Halia is working slowly to bring Phandalin 
under her control, and she can become a valuable patron 
to adventurers who don't cross her. If the characters get 
on her good side, Halia tells them a tale. Roll a d6 and 
consult the Phandalin Tales table, or pick a tale the char- 
acters haven't heard yet. 


SHRINE OF Luck 

Phandalin’s only temple is a shrine made of stones 
taken from the nearby ruins. It is dedicated to Tymora 
(goddess of luck and good fortune) and is normally in 
the care of a zealous elf acolyte named Sister Garaele. 
However, she is out of town for the duration of this 
adventure. 

Sister Garaele is a member of the Harpers, a scattered 
network of adventurers and spies who advocate equality 
and covertly oppose the abuse of power. The Harpers 
gather information throughout the land to thwart tyrants. 
They aid the weak, the poor, and the oppressed. Sister 
Garaele regularly reports to her superiors on events 


PHANDALIN TALES 
46 Tale 


1 “Once again, the orcs have come down from the 
mountains to prey on the lowlands! If Neverwinter 
doesn't send help soon, the orcs will overrun Phand- 
alin and destroy everything we've worked so hard to 
rebuild.” 

2 “As the Triboar Trail runs east, it passes through 
the ruins of Conyberry, a town sacked by barbarians 
years ago. There's a ruined temple south of Cony- 
berry where it's said the locals hid their gold." (If the 
characters visit the temple, see “Shrine of Savras” on 
page 38.) 

3 “Strange magic pervades Neverwinter Wood, con- 
founding navigators and obscuring the ancient ruins 
of bygone kingdoms lost in its depths.” 

4 “Falcon's Hunting Lodge is the only safe haven in 
Neverwinter Wood. It lies deep in the forest along a 
river's edge, and wealthy nobles venture there to hunt 
while under Falcon's protection. Falcon is a retired 
veteran of many wars, and it's said he'll offer free 
room and board to anyone who brings him a bottle of 
wine.” (If the characters pay Falcon a visit, see "Fal- 
con’s Hunting Lodge” on page 24.) 

5 “West of Phandalin, on the coast, is an old stone 
lighthouse. Ships are drawn to this gleaming tower 
like moths to a flame, and are doomed to crash upon 
its rocks, Their wrecks must be filled with treasure!” 
(If the characters visit the lighthouse, see “Tower of 
Storms” on page 40.) 

6 “Some folk claim to have seen a dragon flying 
through the high clouds. At that distance, it’s hard to 
gauge the creature's size, but some say it's as big as 
an elephant and has gleaming white scales." 


in and around Phandalin, and is currently in Never- 
winter doing exactly that. In her absence, the shrine is 
left untended. 


TOWNMASTER'S HALL 


The townmaster's hall has sturdy stone walls, a pitched 
wooden roof, and a bell tower at the back. The job board 
next to the front door features a sparse number of notices, 
all written in Common and in the same hand. 


If the characters inspect the notices on the job board, 
proceed to the “Phandalin Quests" section (page 10). 


al. —————— Á—A€— € — B — us —— —Á—ÀM = 
POTIONS OF HEALING 


No place in Phandalin sells potions of healing. However, 
characters who wish to purchase one or more such potions 
can do so at the Umbrage Hill windmill, located a few miles 
south of Phandalin. The windmill is home to a midwife 
and acolyte of Chauntea (goddess of agriculture) named 
Adabra Gwynn. For more information on this location, see 
"Umbrage Hill" (page 43). 
———————————')U—ÀM—á— 


RUNNING THE ADVENTURE 


10 


PHANDALIN QUESTS 


The job board outside the townmaster's hall is where 
adventurers can learn about quests. Each quest is printed 
on a card, which you can give to the players when that 
quest becomes available (see “Starting Quests” and 
“Follow-Up Quests” below). Let the players choose which 
quest to complete first, second, third, and so on. If the 
players don't like a particular quest, they are under no ob- 
ligation to complete it. However, completing quests helps 
the characters become more powerful (see “Leveling Up" 
on page 11). 


HARBIN WESTER, QUEST GIVER 

AII the notices on the job board are written by Harbin 
Wester, Phandalin's duly appointed townmaster. Harbin 
is a pompous, middle-aged banker who lives in a house 
east of the townmaster's hall. Reports of a white dragon 
in the area have turned him into a veritable shut-in, and 
he rarely goes outside except to get food and post new 
notices calling for adventurers. 

Characters who knock on Harbin's door hear his voice 
on the other side say, "If you're a dragon, know that I'm 
far too thin and bony to make a good meal!" No matter 
what the adventurers do to allay his fears, Harbin refuses 
to open the door, preferring to talk through it. Other resi- 
dents who trouble Harbin with complaints receive similar 
treatment. 

If the characters ask him about a quest, Harbin sets 
them on the right track, offering payment upon their 
return. When the time comes to pay up, he slips the pay- 
ment under the door one gold coin at a time. 


MC ÉÓÁÓÓÓÓMÓÓMÓ MÁ'/'Ó————UUá———— slim 
ADVENTURE LOCATIONS AND ENCOUNTERS 


This adventure encourages characters to explore locations 
marked on the DM's map of the Sword Coast (page 5). 
When the characters embark on a journey to a location, 
flip to the section of this book that describes that location 
in detail. For example, if the players choose to undertake 
the Umbrage Hill Quest, go to the "Umbrage Hill" section 
(page 43). Each location includes an overview that briefly 
describes what characters can expect to find there. This 
overview is followed by information you'll need to run the 
encounters at that location. 

Running Encounters. This adventure describes what 
the characters see when they first arrive at a location, and 
what they'll discover as they explore it. The adventure 
also tells you how the location's inhabitants react to the 
characters' arrival. 

No encounter has a predetermined outcome. For 
example, characters who explore Umbrage Hill are likely to 
encounter a manticore. Although fighting the monster is 
always an option, characters might decide to negotiate with 
the manticore instead. Be flexible, particularly when dealing 
with intelligent monsters. If every encounter becomes a 
fight to the death, your players might get bored and miss 
out on some fun roleplaying opportunities. Whenever possi- 
ble, reward players for being clever. For example, characters 
who disturb the ankhegs at the Loggers' Camp (page 34) 
might be able to escape from the burrowing monsters by 
jumping in the nearby river. Similarly, characters who are 
willing to negotiate with the wererats in the Mountain's Toe 
Gold Mine (page 36) might be able to forge a truce be- 
tween the wererats and the miners, ending their conflict so 
that the mine can be reopened. 


 V————————————'ÁÓ— 


f 


RUNNING THE ADVENTURE 


STARTING QUESTS 

When the characters first visit the job board, there are 
three quests posted. Give the players the cards for these 
quests so that they can choose which to pursue. 


Dwarven Excavation Quest. “Dwarf prospectors found 
ancient dwarven ruins in the mountains southwest of 
here, and have been working an archaeological dig seek- 
ing treasure and relics. They need to be warned that a 
white dragon has moved into the area. Take the warning 
to them, then return to Townmaster Harbin Wester to 
collect a reward of 50 gp.” If the characters undertake 
this quest, see “Dwarven Excavation” (page 22). 

Gnomengarde Quest. “A clan of reclusive rock gnomes 
resides in a small network of caves in the mountains to 
the southeast. The gnomes of Gnomengarde are known 
for their magical inventions, and they might have some- 
thing with which to defeat the dragon. Get whatever 
you can from them. If you bring back something useful 
and don’t want to keep it for yourselves, Townmaster 
Harbin Wester will pay you 50 gp for it.” If the char- 
acters undertake this quest, proceed with “Gnomen- 
garde” (page 26). 

Umbrage Hill Quest. “The local midwife—an acolyte of 
Chauntea named Adabra Gwynn—lives by herself in а 
stone windmill on the side of a hill a few miles south of 
Phandalin. With dragon sightings becoming more com- 
mon, it’s not safe for her to be alone. Urge Adabra to 
return to Phandalin. Once she’s safe, visit Townmaster 
Harbin Wester to claim a reward of 25 gp.” If the char- 
acters undertake this quest, proceed with “Umbrage 
Hill” (page 43). 


UMBRAGE HILL 


QUEST 
The local midwife—an acolyte of 


Chauntea named Adabra Cwynn— 
lives by herself in a stone 


on the side of a hill a few GNO} жн 
of Phandalin. With drag MENG, RDE emm 
becoming common, its A clan of 
her to be alone. Urge А! Sides іп aru Tock gnomes re- 
to Phandalin. Once she the m Ountains | network Of caves in 
Townmaster Harbin М рп vor G о the southeast Tu. 
panit eh OF nomengarde are know, 
е^ agical Inventions, They n 
Гез EST. p. thing with which 
EXCAVATION QUEST fhe dragon. Ger whatever 
MM D M "m Б; ri 1 you bring odi 
rf prospector” fud ins eful and don't want to 
ae ruins in the pmi ро © dus: аад 
= Бале ег will ра 
southwest of mee for treasure ап Pay you 50 
warned that 


return to Т 
to collect à rew 


FOLLOW-UP QUESTS 
After the characters complete two starting quests, the 
following three quests are added to the job board: 


Butterskull Ranch Quest. “Orcs have attacked Butter- 
skull Ranch, five miles east of Conyberry along the Tri- 
boar Trail! Travel there with haste, assess the damage, 
and help any way you can. Ranch owner Alfonse “Big 
AI" Kalazorn is a retired sheriff who can reward you for 
your efforts. If he's dead, return to Townmaster Harbin 
Wester with proof of Kalazorn's demise to receive a re- 
ward of 100 gp." If the characters undertake this quest, 
proceed with "Butterskull Ranch" (page 16). 

Loggers’ Camp Quest. “Deep in Neverwinter Wood, 
along the river that flows west toward Neverwinter, is 
a logging camp. Every two months, Phandalin delivers 
fresh supplies to the camp, which is run by the half- 
brother of Phandalin's townmaster, Harbin Wester. 
Barthen, the local provisioner, has prepared a new de- 
livery. He needs someone to bear the supplies safely to 
the camp. Return to Harbin Wester with a notice of de- 
livery signed by his half-brother, Tibor Wester, to claim 
your reward of 100 gp." If the characters undertake this 
quest, proceed with "Loggers' Camp" (page 34). 

Mountain's Toe Quest. "The Mountain's Toe Gold Mine 
lies fifteen miles northeast of Phandalin. The new 
overseer, Don-Jon Raskin, just made the trip from Nev- 
erwinter to Phandalin and needs to be escorted to the 
mine. There's no telling what dangers lie between here 
and there. Once you deliver Raskin safe and sound, re- 
turn to Townmaster Harbin Wester to collect a reward 
of 100 gp." If the characters undertake this quest, pro- 
ceed with "Mountain's Toe Gold Mine" (page 36). 


After the characters complete two follow-up quests, 
another three follow-up quests are added to the job board: 


Axeholm Quest. “Within a mountain fifteen miles south 
of Phandalin stands the ancient dwarven fortress of 
Axeholm, which has been sealed for years. If a dragon 
attack is imminent, the people of Phandalin might need 
to evacuate and take refuge in Axeholm. To that end, 
someone needs to open the fortress and make it safe 
for habitation. Once you accomplish these tasks, return 
to Townmaster Wester to collect a reward of 250 gp." If 
the characters undertake this quest, proceed with "Axe- 
holm" (page 12). 

Dragon Barrow Quest. “Тһе dragon that besets us is 
not the first to threaten this region. Between here and 
Neverwinter lies the barrow mound of a warrior whose 
magical dragon-slaying sword helped fell a green 
dragon terrorizing the High Road a century ago. Ru- 
mor has it the dragon slayer sword is buried there too. 
Retrieve it, and let the sword be its own reward!" If the 
characters undertake this quest, proceed with "Dragon 
Barrow" (page 20). 

Woodland Manse Quest. “Тһе orcs have fallen under 
the sway of evil spellcasters in Neverwinter Wood, and 
have been sighted in growing numbers near Falcon's 
Hunting Lodge. The spellcasters dwell in a ruined 
manse. Falcon needs someone to make a preemptive 
strike against it. Destroy the evil in the manse, then 
expect him to reward you." If the characters undertake 
this quest, run “Falcon’s Hunting Lodge" (page 24) 
followed by “Woodland Manse” (page 44). 


LEVELING UP 


Characters advance in level by completing quests, using 
the guidelines for leveling up in the rulebook. Regardless 
of the number of characters in the party, the rate of ad- 
vancement is as follows: 


* Characters gain a level each time they complete a 
starting quest, until they reach 3rd level. Once they are 
3rd level or higher, completing a starting quest has no 
effect on their level. 

* Characters gain a level each time they complete two 
follow-up quests. 

* Characters gain a level if they slay Cryovain the 
white dragon. 


WHERE'S THE WHITE DRAGON? 


Cryovain the young white dragon (see page 64 for its 
stat block) is a roaming threat that can be encountered 
almost anywhere. Each time the characters arrive at a lo- 
cation tagged on the map of the Sword Coast (page 5) or 
prepare to leave that location, roll a d20 and consult the 
Dragon's Location table to determine Cryovain's current 
whereabouts. Make your first roll on the table when the 
adventurers leave Phandalin for the first time. 

When the dragon visits a location that is not its lair, it 
surveys the location from the sky, beyond the reach of 
ranged weapon attacks. If it spots nothing it can eat, it 
flies off after circling the location for a minute or two. If it 
spots something tasty, such as a mule, a horse, or a char- 
acter, the dragon swoops down and attacks it. Once the 
dragon kills something, it grabs the carcass and flies off 
with it. Whatever it takes is then eaten within the hour. 

If Cryovain loses more than 10 hit points in battle, the 
dragon disengages from combat and retreats to its lair at 
Icespire Hold, remaining there until it finishes a long rest 
and regains all its hit points. Only at Icespire Hold does 
the dragon fight to the death. 


DRAGON's LOCATION 
d20 Location 
Axeholm (page 12) 
Butterskull Ranch (page 16) 
Conyberry (page 4) 
Dragon Barrow (page 20) 
Dwarven Excavation (page 22) 
Falcon's Hunting Lodge (page 24) 
Gnomengarde (page 26) 
High Road (page 4) 
Icespire Hold (page 30) 
10  Leilon (page 4) 
11 Loggers’ Camp (page 34) 
12 Mountain’s Toe Gold Mine (page 36) 
13 Neverwinter (page 4) 
14 Phandalin (page 8) 
15 Shrine of Savras (page 38) 
16  Starmetal Hills (page 4) 
17 Tower of Storms (page 40) 
18 Triboar Trail (page 4) 
19 Umbrage Hill (page 43) 
20 Woodland Manse (page 44) 


іі со іс tin ш һу — 


RUNNING THE ADVENTURE 


AXEHOLM 


“AXEHOLM” IS BALANCED FOR CHARACTERS OF 5TH LEVEL, 
though characters of 3rd or 4th level can survive its perils 
if they are cautious and rest between encounters. 


LOCATION OVERVIEW 


Axeholm is a dwarven fortress carved into the base of 

a mountain fifteen miles south of Phandalin. The site 
was abandoned and sealed up long years ago after be- 
ing haunted by a banshee—the restless spirit of a moon 
elf ambassador named Vyldara who tried and failed to 
foment civil unrest among the dwarves. The dwarves im- 
prisoned the elf and sent messages to her people, asking 
that they come to collect her. Before envoys could be sent, 
Vyldara killed two guards trying to escape, only to be cut 
down by dwarven axes before she could succeed. 

When the elf's evil spirit started filling Axeholm's halls 
with deathly wails, the dwarves abandoned their strong- 
hold, but not before several dwarves slain by the banshee 
arose as ghouls to feed on their kin. Ghouls and other 
creatures now prowl Axeholm, while the banshee con- 
tinues to haunt the fortress's upper halls. The banshee 
senses the arrival of adventurers with its Detect Life trait. 
In its twisted spectral mind, they are invaders who must 
be destroyed for their trespass. 


QUEST GOALS 


To complete the Axeholm Quest (page 11), adventurers 
must kill or drive out all the monsters in the fortress. 


T ————— йы, 
AXEHOLM FEATURES 


In the dwarves' absence, Axeholm has become a dark, 
sullen tomb, full of dust and bad memories. It's quiet 
most of the time, except when the sorrowful wails of the 
banshee fill the place. The following features are common 
throughout. 

Arrow Slits. When using an arrow slit for protection, 

a creature gains three-quarters cover (see the rulebook) 
against outside threats. A Medium character can’t squeeze 
through an arrow slit, but a Small character can with a suc- 
cessful DC 10 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check. 

Ballistas. For its defense, Axeholm relied heavily on bal- 
listas—massive crossbows that fire heavy bolts. A crew of 
three dwarves operated each ballista. Before it can be fired, 
a ballista must be loaded and aimed. It takes one action to 
load the weapon, one action to aim it, and one action to fire 
it. Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, range 120/480 ft., one 
target. Hit: 16 (3410) piercing damage. 

Ceilings. Ceilings throughout are fifteen feet high and flat, 
unless the text says otherwise. 

Chimneys. Fireplaces throughout Axeholm have chimneys 
cut from seamless stone. Some of those chimneys can be 
used to gain access to the fortress. 

Doors. Regular doors are made of thick, sturdy oak 
reinforced with iron bands and fitted with iron hinges 
and handles. 

Light. The walls are lined with torch sconces, but the 
torches burned down long ago. Adventurers require darkvi- 
sion or their own light sources to see inside. 

Stench. A foul stench lingers in Axeholm, becoming stron- 
ger as one gets closer to the resident ghouls. 


nn —— 


AXEHOLM 


TRAVEL TO AXEHOLM 


The day-long journey to Axeholm from Phandalin takes 
the characters across grassy lowlands that skirt the rocky 
foothills of the Sword Mountains. The trek passes with- 
out incident, though cool winds and rain blowing in from 
the Sword Coast make the trip far from pleasant. 


ARRIVAL 


When the adventurers arrive at Axeholm, read the follow- 
ing boxed text aloud: 


Thrust out from the base of a dark gray mountain is the 
entrance to the dwarven fortress—a dark, fifteen-foot- 
wide passageway flanked by forty-foot-high bulwarks of 
smooth, seamless stone. An iron portcullis covered with 
rust blocks the entrance. Arrow slits carved into the bul- 
warks are dark, revealing no hint of occupation. 


Entering the fortress is the characters’ first challenge. 
The portcullis in area А1 is too heavy to lift, and its 

bars are too narrowly spaced for even Small characters 
to squeeze through. However, a Small character can 
squeeze through an arrow slit into area A2 or A3, then 
attempt to raise the portcullis using the winches there. 
The winches are rusty and require a successful DC 15 
Strength (Athletics) check to turn. Each successful check 
allows the portcullis to be raised 5 feet. 

Characters who search for another entrance can at- 
tempt DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) checks. A successful 
check spots numerous stone chimneys protruding from 
the mountainside, but an earthquake after Axeholm was 
abandoned closed off most of those to anything but Tiny 
creatures. Only the chimneys leading down to area A21 
and area A23 can be accessed by the adventurers. Scal- 
ing the mountain requires a successful DC 10 Strength 
(Athletics) check, as there are plenty of handholds and 
footholds. 

Crawling down a chimney to area А21 or area А23 
requires another successful DC 10 Strength (Athletics) 
check. If this check fails, the character falls 20 feet to 
the bottom of the chimney, landing in the sooty hearth 
and taking 2d6 bludgeoning damage. Characters who 
use climbing gear to scale the mountain and lower them- 
selves down a chimney have advantage on their checks. 
See the rulebook for more information on advantage. 


KEYED LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to the map of Axeholm. 


A]. OUTER GAUNTLET 

Axeholm's primary entrance and exit is this defensible 
passage, which is blocked by a sturdy portcullis (see 
"Arrival" above). Arrow slits are spaced along the walls 
and murder holes line the ceiling, enabling fortress 
defenders to shoot ballistas at invaders or pour boiling 
oil on top of them. With the dwarves gone, the only 


і 21 
Up to A22 — ae ==>, ~ Upto A22 


ІШІПТІ! 


52 
|з 


5 
E 
Б 


LLLELU 
Y 


\ 
= Upto A24 


I 


1 square = 5 feet 


remaining defenses are the portcullis and the double 
doors to the south, which are barred shut. 

Characters hoping to get through the double doors 
must break them down, which takes a single character 
1 hour. Multiple characters working together can reduce 
the time proportionately. The noise created by smash- 
ing down the doors is loud enough to alert all the dwarf 
ghouls in the fortress, which gather in area A4 and 
attack once the doors fall. (See page 57 for the ghoul 
stat block.) The fortress contains three dwarf ghouls plus 
three additional ghouls for each character in the party, 
not including sidekicks. If these ghouls are killed here, 
the characters encounter no more of them in the fortress. 


A2. WESTERN BULWARK 

This area contains seven ballistas pointed at arrow 
slits, a winch that raises and lowers the portcullis, and a 
stone staircase leading up to area A22. Each ballista is 
equipped with five bolts. 


АЗ. EASTERN BULWARK 
This area has the same features as area A2. 


A4. MUSTERING HALL 

This great hall has a 40-foot-high ceiling supported 

by four thick stone pillars. A thick layer of dust covers 

the flagstone floor. In the middle of each wall past the 
entrance is a double door. Arrow slits are set high up in 
the north and south walls, and a small stone balcony pro- 
trudes from the wall above the east exit, 20 feet above the 
floor. (See areas A22, A24, and A25 for details of these 
features.) 


3. 
Chimney ol 
fireplace in A14 


ІШ 2 


Down 
10414 


А5. WEST HALL 


The floor is strewn with bits of armor and the gnawed 
bones of dwarves who were killed and eaten by ghouls. 
Lurking in the hall is one ghoul (see page 57 for its 
stat block) for each member of the party, not including 
sidekicks. The ghouls pursue prey that flees. 


А6. ARMORY 

The dwarves took all the weapons and armor from this 
area when they left. All that remains are empty stone 
weapon racks, wooden mannequins upon which ar- 
mor once hung, and iron hooks in the walls that once 
bore shields. 


A7. MAIN BARRACKS 

Dozens of meager cots lie scattered about the floor. A pair 
of fireplaces stand cold and dark, their rubble-choked 
chimneys rising 120 feet through the mountain. 


A8. PRIVIES 
Tattered wool curtains conceal three neglected privies, 
each with a wooden bench set against the back wall. 


А9. STIRGE IN THE SMITHY 

Standing before two blackened hearths are a pair of 
rusty anvils, which dwarves once used to fashion and re- 
pair their armor and weapons. 

A fluttering noise can be heard coming from the south- 
ernmost fireplace, indicating the presence of a stirge 
(see page 63 for its stat block) near the bottom of the 
200-foot-high chimney. If anyone shines a light up there, 
the stirge panics, flies out, and attacks the nearest char- 
acter or sidekick. It ignores the characters otherwise. 


AXEHOLM 


А10. TOOL STORAGE 

Dwarven armorsmiths and weaponsmiths stored their 
tools here, which still hang from hooks along the walls. 
Though a bit rusty, the tools are in serviceable shape if 
the characters wish to use them. 


All. INNER GAUNTLET 
Four arrow slits line the walls of this corridor leading to 
Axeholm’s throne room (area А14). 


Al2. West GUARD Post 

Two ballistas point toward arrow slits in the east wall. 
Each ballista is equipped with five bolts. The guard post 
is otherwise empty. 


А13. EAsT GUARD Post 
The gnawed bones, torn armor fragments, and rusty bat- 
tleaxes of two dead dwarf guards lie in the middle of the 
room, The guards were trapped here by ghouls, killed, 
and eaten. 

Two ballistas aimed at arrow slits in the west wall 
come equipped with five bolts apiece. 


А14. THRONE ROOM 
Read the following boxed text out loud to describe this 
area: 


The stench of death hangs heavy in the air of this dusty, 
pillared hall, which has a dark, soot-stained fireplace at the 
east end. A deep alcove in the south wall contains a dais, 
atop which rests a limestone throne flanked by granite 
statues of dwarf warriors. Between the throne and the fire- 
place is a hallway with stairs leading up. 


Hiding behind the throne is a ghoul (see page 57 for 
its stat block) with 40 hit points. This undead creature is 
all that remains of Axeholm’s dwarf castellan, who stayed 
behind to seal up the fortress after most of the garrison 
fled. The ghoul is the source of the hall's foul stench, 
which gets stronger closer to the throne. The hidden 
ghoul can be detected with a successful DC 13 Wisdom 
(Perception) check. 

If any character inspects the throne, the ghoul lets out 
a shriek and attacks. Its shriek is heard by the ghouls in 
area A26, which crawl down the chimney and clamber 
out of the fireplace. This group contains two soot-covered 
ghouls plus one additional ghoul for each member of the 
party, not including sidekicks. After all other creatures 
in the hall have taken a first turn in combat, these ghouls 
join the battle, acting on the same initiative count as the 
former castellan. 

Treasure. The ghoulish castellan wears a gold signet 
ring that bears the Axeholm crest: a handaxe clutched 
in a dwarven gauntlet. The signet ring is worth 5 gp and 
unlocks the chest in area A29. 


А15. DINING Room 

In the middle of this room, a carved stone dining table 
(15 feet long by 5 feet wide) is flanked by a pair of equally 
long wooden benches. Above the table hang two iron 
chandeliers, their candles long since melted away. North 


AXEHOLM 


of the seating area is a sooty fireplace and an alcove con- 
taining a rough-hewn pit that descends 60 feet. 

Abundant handholds and footholds allow a character 
to climb up or down the pit with a successful DC 10 
Strength (Athletics) check. The bottom of the pit contains 
moldy animal bones and other refuse discarded by the 
dwarves after their meals. 


А16. Кітснем 

The dusty room has all the trappings опе expects to find 
in a dwarven kitchen, including metal dishware, utensils, 
and drinking mugs. A stone sink is equipped with a fau- 
cet which, when turned, spouts hot water channeled from 
a naturally heated underground spring. 


А17. EAST HALL IN RUINS 

The earthquake that hit Axeholm triggered a ceiling col- 
lapse that left this hall in ruins. The eastern half of the 
hall is strewn with debris and is difficult terrain (see the 
rulebook). The stench of death hangs heavy here, becom- 
ing stronger as the characters move toward area А19. 


А18. EMPTY ROOM 
This 15-foot-square room was cleaned out by the dwarves 
before they evacuated Axeholm. Only dust remains. 


A19. GHOUL DEN 


Characters can reach this area by following the naturally 
formed tunnel from area A17 or by descending the stone 
staircase from area A24. The door to the north has been 
smashed open, and its remains are strewn on the floor. 

The stench of death and decay grows stronger as the 
characters approach this room, and they can hear the 
hisses and snarls of the ghouls (see page 57 for their 
stat block) that lair here. The room contains one ghoul 
plus one additional ghoul for each member of the party, 
not including sidekicks. 

After dealing with the ghouls, the characters can in- 
spect the room more closely. Describe it to the players as 
follows: 


This chamber was once a shrine, as evidenced by wall 
carvings that depict dwarves carrying censers and observ- 
ing religious rites. However, the eastern section of the 
room has collapsed, filling the area with rubble. Gnawed 
bones scattered among the debris are the remains of a 
number of dwarves. 


Treasure. Characters who search through the rubble 
in the eastern portion of the room find two treasures: 


* A platinum amulet on a thin but sturdy gold chain. This 
amulet is a holy symbol of Moradin (the dwarven god 
of creation) and bears his symbol: a hammer and anvil. 
Any dwarf character recognizes the symbol immedi- 
ately, while a non-dwarf recognizes it with a successful 
DC 10 Intelligence (Religion) check. 

An unlocked steel coffer weighing 5 pounds. This small 
box is packed with silt, nestled in which is a potion of 
superior healin$. Give the players the Potion of Supe- 
rior Healing card when they find this magic item. 


A20. NARROW TUNNEL 

Ghouls dug this winding, rubble-strewn tunnel connect- 
ing the upper and lower levels of Axeholm. The tunnel is 
2 feet wide, 5 feet high, and 60 feet long. 


A21. EAST UPPER BARRACKS 

The ghouls trashed this room, leaving behind wrecked 
cots, chairs, tables, and other furnishings. A blackened 
fireplace is set into the east wall, its chimney rising 20 
feet to the outside. Characters can use this chimney to 
enter or exit the fortress (see "Arrival," page 12). 


A22. UPPER BASTION 
This large chamber extends over the outer gauntlet of the 
main entrance (area A1) and contains many former defen- 
sive measures. Arrow slits to the north allow outside light 
to enter, filling the northern half of the room with sun- 
light or moonlight depending on the time of day or night. 
Thick webs are strung between the walls and pillars. 
Lurking among them are several giant spiders (see page 
58 for their stat block)—three spiders plus one addi- 
tional spider for each character in the party, not including 
sidekicks. The spiders are spread throughout the south- 
ern half of the room and move to attack all interlopers. 
Other defenses include two fireplaces, which were 
used to heat cauldrons full of oil that the dwarves poured 
through narrow slits in the floor. Three empty cauldrons 
are lined up along one of these slits. Arrow slits along the 
south wall open up onto area A4, and stone staircases 
descend to areas A2 and A3. 


A23. WEST UPPER BARRACKS 
A fireplace is built into the west wall of this room. Hang- 
ing from a hook above its mantelpiece is a nonmagical 
steel shield bearing the symbol of Axeholm: a dwarven 
gauntlet clutching a handaxe. Characters can use the fire- 
place's soot-stained chimney to enter or exit the fortress 
(see "Arrival," page 12). 

Тһе room's other furnishings—cots, tables, chairs, and 
empty footlockers—are intact but covered in dust. 


А24. HAUNTED HALL 

The banshee (see page 52 for its stat block) haunts 

the east-west stretch of this L-shaped hall. The creature 
floats in the middle of the hall, outside the door to area 
A27. Describe it to the players as follows: 


The luminous, wispy form of a female elf floats in the 
dusty hallway before you, its face wreathed in a tangle of 
gossamer hair, its body clad in spectral rags that flutter 
around it. The apparition's face becomes a mask of rage 
as it screams, “Get out of my house!” 


If the characters flee the banshee's presence of their own 
accord, it lets them go. If they advance toward the un- 
dead, attack it, or attempt to parley, it turns violent. 

In the first round of combat, the banshee uses Horrify- 
ing Visage. On the second round, it uses Wail. After wail- 
ing, it withdraws to area A27, passing through the closed 
door as though it weren’t there. In area A27, the undead 
makes its final stand. 


A25. UPPER EAST HALL AND BALCONY 

The earthquake caused part of this empty hall to col- 
lapse. A double door in the west wall leads to a small 
stone balcony overlooking area A4. 


A26. GHOUL BATH 

Several ghouls (see page 57 for their stat block) gather 
here—a total of two ghouls plus one additional ghoul for 
each member of the party, not including sidekicks. The 
ghouls enter and leave the room through a 2-foot-diame- 
ter hole in the east wall, which breaks into the chimney 
of area А14. 

In the middle of this room stands a carved stone tub 
filled with gnawed dwarven bones. The tub is equipped 
with a faucet which, when turned, spouts hot water chan- 
neled from a naturally heated underground spring. A 
stone plug seals the drain in the tub’s bottom. 


A27. BANSHEE'S BEDCHAMBER 

This bedroom was set aside for honored guests, but its 
furnishings have decayed with age and are covered with 
dust and cobwebs. Vyldara once stayed here, but the elf's 
possessions were taken during her captivity, leaving 
nothing of value. 


A28. CASTELLAN'S BEDCHAMBER 

A stone-framed bed with a moldy mattress stands in 

the middle of this room, covered in dust and cobwebs. 
Set into the south wall is a soot-stained fireplace. 
Stirges (see page 63 for their stat block) nest in the 
rubble-choked chimney—a total of one per party mem- 
ber (including sidekicks). The stirges attack anyone who 
pokes around in the fireplace. 

Secret Door. The back wall of the fireplace is a secret 
door. A character who searches the interior of the fire- 
place and succeeds on a DC 15 Wisdom ( Perception) 
check notices dwarven hand prints in the soot on the 
back wall. Pushing on the secret door causes it to swing 
open on hidden stone hinges, revealing area A29 beyond. 


A29. SECRET VAULT 

Against the south wall of this otherwise empty room 
rests a 80-pound iron chest with clawed feet. Its built-in 
lock bears a tiny circular indentation instead of a tradi- 
tional keyhole. Close inspection of the indentation reveals 
a tiny symbol of a handaxe clutched in a gauntlet. This 
symbol matches the one on the castellan's signet ring 
(found in area A14), albeit reversed. If the castellan's 
signet ring is placed in the indentation, the chest unlocks 
and remains unlocked until its lid is closed tight. The 
chest can also be unlocked with a successful DC 20 Dex- 
terity check using thieves' tools, or by a knock spell or 
similar magic. 

Treasure. The chest contains а dread helm and a pair 
of gauntlets of ogre power. Give the players the Dread 
Helm and Gauntlets of Ogre Power cards when they find 
and identify these two magic items. 


A30. PRIVIES 

Rusty chain mail curtains conceal a pair of privies, each 
with a wooden bench set against the back wall. The 
chutes for these privies descend deep into the mountain, 
passing just east of area A10. 


AXEHOLM 


BUTTERSKULL RANCH 


“BUTTERSKULL RANCH” IS BALANCED FOR CHARACTERS 
of 3rd level, but characters of 2nd level can survive this 
quest if they avoid combat and focus on rescuing Alfonse 
Kalazorn, the ranch owner. Characters of 4th level or 
higher should be able to save Big Al and his ranch with- 
out hardship. 


LOCATION OVERVIEW 


Alfonse Kalazorn used to be the sheriff of Triboar, a town 
to the east, where he was known as Big Al Kalazorn. He 
retired a decade ago, but retirement didn’t sit well with 
him. Looking for a new challenge, he claimed a plot of 
fertile land five miles east of Conyberry and turned it 
into a cattle and horse ranch. Later, he added a pig farm, 
chicken coops, vegetable gardens, corn fields, and an 
apple orchard. Most of his money comes from the sale 

of butter skulls—lumps of butter cleverly molded into 

the shapes of humanoid skulls. He sells his butter skulls 
primarily in towns to the east, although a few make their 
way to Barthen's Provisions іп Phandalin. Big Al's butter 
is made from the milk of Petunia, his prized cow. 

When the white dragon Cryovain drove the orcs out of 
Icespire Hold, they descended into the lowlands. A tenday 
ago, a small band of them attacked the ranch, freeing 
the pigs before setting fire to the barn and the smithy. A 
few other animals, including a dozen horses and Petunia 
the cow, escaped during the blaze. Big Al and five of his 
ranch hands were not so lucky. In their attempt to fend off 
the orcs, Big Al was captured and the ranch hands were 
killed. The only surviving hand escaped on horseback, 
fled to Phandalin, and delivered news of the attack. 


QUEST GOALS 


To complete the Butterskull Ranch Quest (“Follow-Up 
Quests,” page 11), adventurers must rescue Alfonse 
Kalazorn and either convince him to return to Phandalin 
or rid his ranch of orcs. Alfonse also wants help finding 
his prized cow, promising a splendid reward in exchange. 


TRAVEL TO THE RANCH 


The fastest and safest way to Butterskull Ranch from 
Phandalin is to follow the Triboar Trail northeast. The 
trek is 60 miles long, and characters can walk about 24 
miles in a day. Thus, they can expect to take two long 
rests in the course of the journey. 


ENCOUNTERS ON THE WAY 


The characters have the following encounters as they 
travel to the ranch. 


HORSES ІМ CONYBERRY 

The abandoned town of Conyberry is eerily silent except 
for the whistling of the wind as it blows through the set- 
tlement’s burned and crumbled-down structures. As the 
characters make their way through or around the ruins, 
they spot three unsaddled riding horses (see page 62 

for their stat block) grazing near an old well. Anyone who 
succeeds on a DC 10 Wisdom (Perception) check sees 


BUTTERSKULL RANCH 


that the horses are branded with the letters BAK (for 
Big Al Kalazorn). A character who succeeds on a DC 15 
Wisdom (Animal Handling) check can approach a horse 
without startling it, and can even ride it. 


PETUNIA THE Cow 

Between Conyberry and the ranch, the characters spot 
Petunia the cow (see page 55 for its stat block) ina 

field a few hundred feet off the Triboar Trail. Petunia 
wears a cowbell around her neck. Characters who ap- 
proach her spot a brand on her hindquarters: the letters 
BAK. Petunia has a calm, unflappable demeanor. If 
treated well, she follows her new benefactors everywhere. 


ARRIVAL 


The following locations are keyed to the map of Butter- 
skull Ranch. When the adventurers come within sight of 
the ranch, read the following boxed text aloud: 


Butterskull Ranch occupies a large plot of land on the 
north side of the Triboar Trail, nestled between two hills, 
Beyond a ramshackle wooden fence stand corn fields, an 
apple orchard, gardens, and pasture land. A path breaks 
off from the trail to lead to a two-story farmhouse next to 
a pond. West of the farmhouse are the charred remains of 
a barn and smithy that have been burned to the ground. 


Pigs harmlessly wander the fields, gardens, and orchard. 
Between the farmhouse and the gutted barn lie the scat- 
tered corpses of two orcs and five humans (ranch hands) 
swarming with flies. The bodies carry nothing of value. 


EXPLORING THE FARMHOUSE 


The farmhouse is a two-story log building with a pitched, 
shingled roof and a stone chimney. Its wooden doors are 
set with iron handles and hinges. Its windows are fitted 
with wooden shutters that can be bolted shut from inside. 
All the shutters are open when the characters arrive. 
Raucous ores (see page 62 for their stat block) dwell 
in the farmhouse, consuming Big Al's ale and food stores. 
There are three times as many orcs as there are charac- 
ters in the party, not including sidekicks. Place the orcs 
in areas ВІ through B9 as you see fit. The orcs are not 
expecting trouble, but they fight to the death. 


Bl. KITCHEN 

The front door of the house leads into this area, which 
holds a large butter churn, worktables, shelves of food- 
stuffs and ale, and hanging pots and pans. Atop a small 
table is a skull-shaped wooden butter mold. 


B2. EMPTY FOYER 
А creaky wooden staircase ascends from here to area B5. 


ВЗ. DINING ROOM 
This room contains two wooden trestle tables flanked by 
benches. Cattle skulls on the walls add to the decor. 


JASON A, ENGLE 


т 


| 


аа, 
IUE u 


Tr md | 
e 877 


В4. DOWNSTAIRS CLOSET 
This closet contains shelves holding dinnerware. 


B5. COMMON RooM 

Padded chairs and game tables are arranged about this 
room. Scattered on the floor are Three-Dragon Ante play- 
ing cards and wooden Dragonchess pieces. 


B6. Bic Avs BEDROOM 

A large bed and a bulky cedar wardrobe dominate this 
room, which also has framed paintings of landscapes 
hanging on the walls. 

Treasure. Any character who searches the wardrobe 
and succeeds on a DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check 
finds a secret compartment at the bottom, stuffed inside 
which is a suit of mithral chain mail. (If the characters ac- 
quire and identify this magic item, give them the Mithral 
Chain Mail card.) 


B7. RANCH HANDS' BEDROOMS 

Each of these rooms contains two beds and two footlock- 
ers. Each footlocker contains neatly folded clothing and 
worthless personal effects. 


B8. Bic Ars OFFICE 

Big Al's desk is buried under stacks of ledgers and papers 

chronicling ten years' worth of business transactions. 
Treasure. Characters who search the messy office find 

a small sack buried under the paperwork. It contains 

earnings and wages: a total of 65 gp, 145 sp, and 220 cp. 


B9. UPSTAIRS CLOSET 
This closet contains a mop, a broom, and a bucket. 


В10. Corp SroRAGE CELLAR 

Wooden doors set against the north side of the farm- 
house cover stone stairs leading down to the cellar. When 
the characters explore the cellar, read the following text: 


The cellar has a dirt floor, walls of mortared stone, and 

an eight-foot-high plank ceiling braced by wooden pillars. 
Tied to a chair is a large figure with a burlap sack pulled 
over his head. Shelves along the walls are lined with skulls 
made of butter and protected by a thin coating of wax. 


The bound figure is Alfonse Kalazorn, a human veteran 
(see page 63 for his stat block). It takes 1 minute for 

a character to free Big Al from his rope bonds. Having 
been beaten by the orcs, he has 9 hit points remaining 
and appreciates any healing the characters can provide. 
He is also without weapons and armor (AC 11). 

Once liberated, Big Al can be convinced to abandon 
his ranch by any character who succeeds on a DC 10 
Charisma (Intimidation or Persuasion) check. But he 
would rather stay, borrow a weapon, and kill any orcs 
that remain. 

Big Al can't turn a profit without his prized cow. He 
offers his suit of mithral chain mail (hidden in area B6) 
as a reward for her safe return. If the characters didn't 
bring Petunia with them, they can scour the countryside 
for her. At the end of each hour spent searching, roll a 
d6. On a roll of 6, the party finds Petunia. If one or more 
characters search on horseback, they find Petunia on a 
roll of 5 or 6. 


BUTTERSKULL RANCH 


CIRCLE OF THUNDER 


“CIRCLE OF THUNDER” IS BALANCED FOR CHARACTERS 
of 6th level, though characters of 4th or 5th level can 
weather its challenges if they are cautious. 

No quest leads the party to this location. However, 
characters who brave Dragon Barrow might come here 
with Xanth the centaur (see page 20), while those who 
raid the Woodland Manse (page 44) might be led here 
by Grannoc's map. In the aftermath of the counterattack 
on Falcon’s Hunting Lodge (see “Counterattack!” on page 
47), characters can follow Gorthok's trail back to the 
Circle of Thunder, where that creature was summoned. 


LOCATION OVERVIEW 


The reclusive anchorites of the Circle of Thunder gather 
on this hill to make sacrifices to Talos the storm god. In 
stormy weather, the anchorites also perform rituals to 
summon Gorthok the Thunder Boar, a destructive force 
they can unleash against their enemies. A circle of stand- 
ing stones atop the hill helps to focus the anchorites’ 
magic to make the summoning of Gorthok possible. 
Three anchorites—Flenz, Narux, and Yargath—de- 
fend the hill. When not performing rituals in the circle 
of standing stones, they patrol the surrounding woods, 
forage for food, and lurk in caves dug out of the hillside. 
When the characters arrive, the anchorites are gathered 
on the hilltop. If Gorthok has not been defeated yet, the 
anchorites are in the midst of summoning the great boar. 
Otherwise, they are conjuring a storm. 


а 


Cave DESCRIPTIONS 


Three caves are set beneath the hilltop, each serving as 
the lair of an anchorite of Talos. The caves are dug out of 
the earth, with each cave mouth braced by two rectangular 
stone slabs topped with a heavy lintel stone. All the caves 
have 7-foot-high ceilings and crude wooden gates for 
doors. Each cave features a different layout but has simi- 
lar contents. 

A: Entryway. Situated in the middle of this intersection, 
facing the cave mouth, the skull of a boar rests atop a pile 
of humanoid and animal bones. A character who succeeds 
ona DC 10 Intelligence (Religion) check can ascertain that 
the bones аге a warning to stay away. 

B: Boar Pen. The gate to this room is lashed shut with 
rope. It holds a boar (see page 54 for its stat block) that is 
the anchorite's companion and garbage disposal. The boar 
can’t harm anyone while trapped in this room. If the gate is 
opened by anyone other than an anchorite of Talos, the boar 
tries to flee the cave, attacking anyone in its path. 

С: Cell. The gate to this cell is lashed shut with rope. The 
cell is used to hold animals doomed to be sacrificed in rit- 
uals to Talos. There’s a 25 percent chance that a harmless 
deer is trapped inside. Otherwise, the cell is empty. 

D: Anchorite’s Retreat. This unfurnished room serves as 
the anchorite's quarters. Niches in the walls hold clay dish- 
ware, wooden utensils, gathered berries, bundled herbs, 
and creepy totems. In areas C2 and C3, the anchorites have 
hidden treasure buried under the earthen floor in a random 
5-foot square. See those areas for details of the treasure. 

E: Secret Exit. This tunnel slopes up to a secret trapdoor 
that is plainly visible from the underside. 


ник нн К —— M 


CIRCLE OF THUNDER 


‘TRAVEL TO THE CIRCLE 


Characters traveling to the Circle of Thunder have the 
following two encounters en route, 


TREE TRAP 


This encounter can occur anywhere in Neverwinter 
Wood. Set the scene by reading the following boxed text: 


You come upon a sixty-foot-wide forest clearing, in the 
middle of which is a black, needle-like spire—a forty-foot- 
tall pine tree ravaged by fire long ago, its limbs burned off. 
Tied to the dead tree near its base are several ghastly dolls 
made of twigs bound with black hair. 


Ten twig dolls are bound to the charred tree, all within 
easy reach. A detect magic spell reveals an aura of trans- 
mutation magic emanating from the tree and the ground 
in a 60-foot radius around it. 

Close examination of a twig doll reveals something 
wrapped inside it. By breaking a doll apart, characters 
can see that it contains a still-beating pig's heart. Any 
damage to a heart kills it and causes the dead tree’s roots 
to magically animate and erupt from the ground. 

When the constricting roots erupt, each creature stand- 
ing in the clearing must succeed on a DC 12 Dexterity 
saving throw or take 5 (2d4) bludgeoning damage and be 
restrained. The creature takes this damage again at the 
start of each of its turns until it escapes. A creature can 
use an action to free itself or another creature within its 
reach with a successful DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check, 
or by dealing 5 or more slashing damage against a root 
with a single melee weapon attack. The roots have AC 13 
and immunity to all damage except slashing. 


YARGATH'S PATROL 


As they move through the forest, the characters are beset 
by Yargath, an anchorite of Talos (see page 51 for her 
stat block), and a band of ores (see page 62 for their 

stat block)—two ores per character in the party, including 
sidekicks. Set the scene as follows: 


As you make your way across uneven ground rising to a 
ridge, several hulking orcs ascend a similar ridge across 
from you, separated from you by a sixty-foot-wide, ten- 

foot-deep gully. The orcs unleash terrible battle cries as 
they are joined by a humanoid with elongated claws. 


On the first round of combat, Yargath casts bless on up to 
three orcs. Meanwhile, the orcs charge across the ravine 
and close to melee range. 

Treasure. Yargath carries a potion of greater healing. 
If the characters acquire this potion, give the players the 
Potion of Greater Healing card. 


ARRIVAL 


Characters coming from the Woodland Manse approach 
the Circle of Thunder from the south. Describe the loca- 
tion to the players as follows: 


Ominous storm clouds gather in the sky as you approach 
a ninety-foot-tall hill with trees spreading across its 
slopes. Atop the hill is a large ring of standing stones. Two 
ghastly figures dance within this henge, surrounded by a 
number of smaller capering creatures. 


The standing stones and the dancing figures are de- 
scribed in area C1. Characters who circle the hill before 
climbing it spot three caves (areas C2, C3, and C4) near 
the hilltop. 


CIRCLE OF THUNDER LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to the map of the Circle 
of Thunder. 


СІ. HENGE 

Atop the hill is a ring of eight upright stone structures, 
each one consisting of two 10-foot-high vertical stone 
slabs spaced 5 feet apart and topped with a 3-foot-thick 
flat lintel stone. These uprights сап be toppled by crea- 
tures with a combined Strength score of 80 or higher. 

In the middle of the circle, two humanoid figures dance 
around a deer carcass, each wearing the rotting head of 
a boar as a mask. These foes are Flenz and Narux, two 
anchorites of Talos (see page 51 for their stat block). 


AREA СЗ NORTHEAST CAVE, 


They are joined by frolicking twig blights (see page 
53)—two blights for each character in the party, includ- 
ing sidekicks. Flenz and Narux are either performing a 
ritual to summon Gorthok the Thunder Boar (see page 
58), or they are making a sacrifice to appease Talos 

and call forth a storm. If the characters have not yet de- 
feated Gorthok, the boar arrives once both anchorites are 
dead, appearing out of nowhere in the middle of the circle 
with a thunderclap. Gorthok fights to the death. 

Secret Trapdoors. Any character who searches the 
hilltop and succeeds on a DC 10 Wisdom (Perception) 
check finds one of three flimsy wooden trapdoors hidden 
under the grass and dirt. Below these trapdoors are tun- 
nels leading to areas C2, C3, and C4. 


C2. NORTHWEST CAVE 

Carved into the lintel stone above the cave mouth is a pic- 

ture of a boar chasing after a stick-figure humanoid. 
Treasure. Flenz hides a potion of invulnerability in his 

quarters, buried in a random square beneath the floor. 

If the characters obtain the potion, give the players the 

Potion of Invulnerability card. 


C3. NORTHEAST CAVE 

The lintel stone above the mouth of this cave is bare. 
Treasure. Narux hides a +1 shield in his quarters, bur- 

ied beneath the floor. If the characters obtain and identify 

it, give the players the *1 Shield card. 


C4. SouTHEAST CAVE 

Carved into the lintel stone above the mouth of this cave 
is a pictograph depicting three stick-figure humanoids be- 
ing struck by lightning. Yargath keeps no treasure here. 


CIRCLE OF THUNDER 


I9 


20 


DRAGON BARROW 


“DRAGON BARROW” IS BALANCED FOR CHARACTERS OF 
Sth level, though characters of 4th level can survive this 
quest if they are cautious and rest between encounters. 
Characters of 6th level or higher should have no trouble 
plundering the barrow and surviving its challenges. 


LOCATION OVERVIEW 


Lady Tanamere Alagondar was a royal scion of Never- 
winter more than a century ago. Along with two parties 
of adventurers, she fought and killed Azdraka, a green 
dragon that had long terrorized the High Road. Lady 
Alagondar died in the battle and was laid to rest beneath 
a barrow near where the dragon fell. The remains of 
her fallen compatriots and the corpse of Azdraka were 
sealed in the barrow with her, in accordance with Lady 
Alagondar's dying wishes. 


QUEST GOALS 


To complete the Dragon Barrow Quest (page 11), 

the adventurers must retrieve Lady Alagondar's dragon 
slayer longsword which, according to legend, was bur- 
ied with her. 


‘TRAVEL TO THE BARROW 


The barrow is roughly 40 miles northwest of Phandalin. 
amid the rolling hills and grasslands between the High 
Road and Neverwinter Wood. Since the characters can 
travel roughly 24 miles in a day, they should expect to 
take one long rest in the wilderness before arriving at the 
barrow on the second day of their trek. A cold wind blow- 
ing in from the coast assails them for most of the trip, 
bringing occasional rain. 


CENTAUR OF ATTENTION 


After being driven from his home in Neverwinter Wood 
by marauding orcs, Xanth the centaur (see page 55 

for its stat block) has taken refuge in the hills around the 
barrow. When he spots the characters, Xanth approaches 
peacefully and shares the following warnings: 


+ "Strange witchlights hover over Dragon Barrow at 
night. The hill is haunted by the restless spirits of 
the dead.” 


ee <a 


CATACOMBS FEATURES 


A series of chambers and tunnels at ground level form the 
catacombs beneath the barrow mound. They reek of damp 
earth and stale, deathly air. 

Ceilings. Ceilings throughout are 8 feet high and flat. 

Earthen Construction. All tunnels and rooms have walls, 
floors, and roofs made of packed earth. 

Light. There is no light within the barrow. Adventurers 
require darkvision or their own light sources to see inside. 

Sarcophagi. The sarcophagi found throughout the cata- 
combs are carved from solid blocks of granite and sealed 
with heavy granite lids. The seals are airtight. Lifting a lid 
requires a successful DC 20 Strength (Athletics) check. Each 
lid is a Medium object with AC 17, 12 hit points, and immu- 
nity to poison and psychic damage. 


KT 


DRAGON BARROW 


* "Neverwinter Wood has become overrun with orcs in 
league with half-orc spellcasters. Deep in the forest, 
atop a cave-riddled hill, is a circle of standing stones 
where the evil half-orcs perform their dark rites.” 


Xanth avoids Dragon Barrow and would like to see the 
evil half-orc spellcasters of Neverwinter Wood driven off 
or killed. He offers to guide characters to the Circle of 
Thunder (page 18) if they wish to take on the half-orcs 
there, and is willing to wait until the characters are done 
exploring the barrow. The Circle of Thunder is roughly 
40 miles away, deep within the forest. 


ARRIVAL 


When the adventurers come within sight of the barrow, 
read the following boxed text aloud: 


A thirty-foot-high hill rises ahead of you, its top too flat to 
be a natural occurrence. Jutting from the grassy hilltop is 
a row of ten-foot-tall, bone-white rocks that arc toward the 
stormy sky like outstretched talons. 


Characters who climb to the top of the barrow and survey 
it notice its distinctive dragon-like shape with a success- 
ful DC 10 Wisdom (Insight) check. The pale rocks resem- 
ble spikes protruding from the dragon's back. 

At night, the will-o'-wisps in area D2 emerge from the 
hill using their Incorporeal Movement and float above the 
barrow, hoping to attract prey with their lights. If they de- 
tect characters nearby, the will-o’-wisps turn invisible and 
withdraw into the barrow. 


BARROW LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to the map of 
Dragon Barrow. 


Dl. SECRET ENTRANCE 

One of the white rocks atop the hill acts as a stone plug 
embedded in the earth. Characters searching the hilltop 
can spot a opening beneath the base of the rock with a 
successful DC 10 Wisdom (Perception) check. By lashing 
ropes around the top of the rock, the characters can top- 
ple it with a successful DC 19 Strength (Athletics) check. 
А knock spell also causes it to topple over. The opening 
beneath the rock reveals a 2-foot-wide spiral staircase 
with flagstone steps, descending 30 feet to area D2. 


D2. WiLL-o'-WisPs 

The tunnels around the spiral staircase are haunted by 
three will-o'-wisps (see page 63 for their stat block). 
The wisps are invisible until they hear intruders coming 
down the stairs, whereupon they illuminate and move 
to the far side of the three concealed pit traps (area D3), 
hoping to lure intruders to their doom. Each wisp has 
its own pit and attacks any character who falls into it. A 
wisp reduced to 7 hit points or fewer turns invisible on 
its next turn and flees to hide until the characters leave 
the barrow. 


асы ай Ан ы Nam іі 


TU ГЕК ЫМ 
пшне 


az. gw uw es е 


1 square = 5 feet 


р чес 


D3. CONCEALED PIT TRAPS 
Each of these pits is 5 feet wide, 10 feet deep, and dug 
out of the earth. Rows of rusty swords are embedded into 
the floor of each pit, whose tops are covered by rotted 
wooden planks hidden under a thin layer of earth. A crea- 
ture using a pole or similar tool to prod ahead detects the 
pit with a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Perception) check. 
Any creature that steps onto a pit falls into it, taking 
146 bludgeoning damage and impaling itself on 1d4 
swords, each of which deals 1d6 piercing damage. 


D4. SKELETAL SURPRISE 

The bones and rotting saddle of Lady Alagondar’s horse 
lie in the southern niche of this cavern. When a creature 
approaches within 5 feet of the bones, they knit together 
and rise as a skeletal horse. This steed has the statistics 
of a riding horse (see page 62), except that it's undead. 
It bonds with any character who wants to ride it. 


D5. NARROW TUNNEL 

This tunnel is only 2 feet wide. At the halfway point, a 
5-foot-long pressure plate is hidden under a 2-inch-thick 
layer of earth. A character prodding ahead with a pole or 
similar tool can detect the plate with a successful DC 10 
Wisdom (Perception) check. The first character to step 
on the plate causes the walls of the tunnel to collapse 
inward, burying all creatures in the tunnel. A buried crea- 
ture is blinded and restrained, has total cover against at- 
tacks, and begins to suffocate when it runs out of breath 
(see “Suffocation” in the rulebook). Only a creature that is 
not trapped in the tunnel can clear away the collapse, us- 
ing an action to open up the 5-foot-deep section of tunnel 
closest to it. A creature in that space is no longer buried. 


ШЕ 
17121237420 


D6. FALSE TOMB 

Two sealed stone sarcophagi rest in alcoves dug into the 
south wall here. Each sarcophagus releases a cloud of 
corrosive dust when opened, filling the 10-foot-by-10-foot 
area north of the sarcophagus. Any creature in the area 
must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 14 
(4d6) acid damage on a failed save, or half as much dam- 
age on a successful one. The cloud then disappears. The 
sarcophagi contain nothing of interest. 


D7. ADVENTURERS’ SEPULCHER 

Four sarcophagi in alcoves contain the moldy bones of 
adventurers (a bard, a cleric, a fighter, and a wizard) who 
perished fighting Azdraka. 

Treasure. The northwest sarcophagus contains the 
dead bard, who was buried with a Jute of illusions. Sealed 
with the dead wizard in the southeast sarcophagus is a 
necklace of fireballs. If the characters acquire and iden- 
tify these magic items, give them the Lute of Illusions and 
Necklace of Fireballs cards. 


D8. DRAGON SLAYER 

Two sarcophagi in alcoves contain the moldy bones and 
rusty armor of Tanamere Alagondar and her faithful 
squire, but hold nothing of value. The area north of the 
sarcophagi has the bones of Azdraka, a Huge dragon, em- 
bedded in its walls. The dragon’s skull rests on the floor 
and has a longsword set atop it. 

Treasure. The sword is Lady Alagondar's dragon slayer. 
Give the Dragon Slayer card to whoever takes it. If the 
sword is taken, an invisible stalker (see page 59 for its 
stat block) appears and attacks anyone in this area until 
the sword is put back, or until that guardian is destroyed. 


DRAGON BARROW 


DWARVEN EXCAVATION 


“DWARVEN EXCAVATION” IS BALANCED FOR CHARACTERS 

of Ist level, though even characters of 2nd level will find 

certain elements of the quest challenging. Characters of 
3rd level or higher should have an easy time clearing out 
the ruins and defeating the orcs that arrive later. 


LOCATION OVERVIEW 


Dazlyn Grayshard and Norbus Ігопгипе are shield dwarf 
prospectors and business partners. While looking for 
gold in the mountains southwest of Phandalin, they de- 
cided to explore a nearby canyon and found evidence of 
an ancient dwarven settlement buried by an avalanche. 
They've spent the past several months clearing the rubble 
and scouring the ruins for treasure, but have found noth- 
ing of value so far. 

Behind the settlement, carved into the back wall of the 
canyon, is an old temple of Abbathor, the evil dwarven 
god of greed. During solar eclipses, Abbathor is appeased 
with sacrifices of blood and gemstones. On one occa- 
sion, the god found the sacrifices of this temple's priests 
lacking, so he caused an earthquake and avalanche that 
collapsed parts of the temple and buried the settlement. 
The priests in the temple who were not killed outright 
were transformed into ochre jellies—debased reflections 
of Abbathor's hunger and greed. 


QUEST GOALS 


To complete the Dwarven Excavation Quest (page 10), 
the adventurers need only to warn Dazlyn and Norbus of 
the white dragon. The grateful dwarves then tempt the 
adventurers with a quest of their own, offering their pair 
of sending stones as a reward if the characters rid the 
temple of the monsters within. If they stay long enough to 
help Dazlyn and Norbus, the characters encounter orcs 
before they leave (see “When Orcs Attack,” page 23). 


ARRIVAL 


The dwarven excavation lies due east of Leilon, 15 miles 
southwest of Phandalin, at the eastern end of a canyon 
(area E1). When the characters reach area El on the 
map, read the following boxed text aloud: 


The canyon's rocky walls rise to a height of eighty feet. 

At the end of the canyon, a twenty-foot-high wall of black 
stone has a broken gate carved into it, with one stone 
door hanging precariously by a hinge and the other door 
missing. Beyond this open gate, in the shadow of a great 
mountain to the east, lies a ruined settlement. All is quiet. 


If the characters announce their arrival, Dazlyn and Nor- 
bus come forth to greet them. Otherwise, the characters 
encounter the dwarves in area E3. 


EXCAVATION LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to the map of the dwar- 
ven excavation. 


DWARVEN EXCAVATION 


El. CANYON 
The canyon floor is strewn with rubble and bereft of vege- 
tation except for a few tough, scraggly weeds. 


E2. RUINED SETTLEMENT 
All knowledge of this settlement, including its name, van- 
ished along with its original inhabitants, who were killed 
by an avalanche. The rubble that once buried the settle- 
ment has been hauled away, leaving the outlines of stone 
buildings visible as collapsed walls. A stone well on the 
far side of the ruins is filled with rubble. 

The settlement has been thoroughly ransacked. Char- 
acters who search the ruins find a few crushed dwarf 
bones and signs of recent campfires, but nothing of value. 


E3. COURTYARD AND TEMPLE FACADE 
Describe this location as follows: 


A partially collapsed, ten-foot-high wall separates this 
courtyard from the settlement west of it. Three heaps of 
rubble are piled high in this area. Hewn from the canyon’s 
back wall, а thirty-foot-high temple facade features steps 
rising to a stone platform. Cut into this facade is a ten- 
foot-high open doorway flanked by crumbling, life-sized 
granite statues of cloaked dwarves. Evil grins can be seen 
on their weatherworn faces. 


If they haven't been encountered yet, Dazlyn and Norbus 
are eating rations behind the easternmost rubble pile 
while keeping an eye on the temple entrance (area E4). 
Each is a shield dwarf commoner (see page 55 for its 
stat block) who speaks Common and Dwarvish, and who 
has darkvision out to a range of 60 feet. Dazlyn is forth- 
right and honest to a fault. Norbus is gruff and exces- 
sively cautious. They banter like an old married couple. 
Each dwarf has ten days of rations, a waterskin, min- 
ing tools, and one of two matching sending stones. Тһе 
dwarves offer these magic items to anyone willing to kill 
the ochre jellies in area E5, search the temple for other 
obvious threats, and make it safe. If the characters obtain 
these stones, give the players both Sending Stone cards. 
Eager to resume their excavation, the dwarves offer to 
split what they find with characters who help them. 
eee 
TEMPLE FEATURES 
The temple (areas E4 through E11) is smoothly hewn from 
solid rock. The following features are common throughout. 
Ceilings. Ceilings throughout are 10 feet high and flat. 
Doors. All doors are made of carved stone with stone 
pins for hinges. Secret doors blend in with the surrounding 
stonework. Finding a secret door requires a search of the 
wall and a successful DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check. 
Dazlyn and Norbus have found one secret door thus far, in 
area Е4. The others have yet to be discovered. 
Dust and Debris. The temple is choked with dusty rubble. 
Rubble-filled squares are difficult terrain (see the rulebook). 
Light. There are no light sources in the temple, since the 
dwarf priests of Abbathor relied on darkvision to see. 


SS 


E4. Dusty FOYER 

Spikes hammered into the floor hold open two sets of 
double doors. A once-secret door to the north stands 
open, with a room beyond it holding nothing but rubble. 


E5. TEMPLE 
This area contains five secret doors, including one that 
opens up into one of the stone pillars holding up the ceil- 
ing. A bloodstained limestone altar stands at the far end 
of the room. Dazlyn and Norbus got this far into the tem- 
ple before an ochre jelly (see page 61 for its stat block) 
scared them off. It clings to the ceiling above the altar. If 
the party includes two or more characters (not counting 
sidekicks), a second ochre jelly clings to the south wall. 
Treasure. The secret door in the pillar conceals a 
cavity packed with dwarf skulls that tumble out when the 
door is opened. At the bottom of the cavity is an unlocked 
stone coffer containing 15 gemstones worth 10 gp each. 


E6. PARTIALLY COLLAPSED ROOM 
An earthquake collapsed part of this room, which holds 
nothing of value. 


E7. SECRET TUNNEL 

Trapped behind the secret doors, an ochre jelly (see page 
61 for its stat block) lurks in the rubble at the south 

end of this hall. 


E8. PRIESTS' BEDCHAMBER 
Three stone bed frames stand against the east wall. 


E9. VESTRY 
An empty stone font juts out of the southwest wall. A 
stone wardrobe against the east wall holds the rotted 


1 square = 5 feet 


remains of two suits of red leather armor (vestments 
worn by priests of Abbathor, now ruined and worthless). 


Е10. PARTIALLY COLLAPSED ROOM 

Half-buried in the rubble here is the skeleton of a dwarf 
priest wearing rotted red leather armor. The dwarf was 
killed when part of the room collapsed. 

Treasure. Around the skeleton's neck hangs a holy 
symbol of Abbathor: a tiny jeweled dagger on a silver 
chain. The symbol is inscribed with Dwarvish runes that 
translate to "Greed is good," and is worth 50 gp. 


Ell. HALL OF GREED 

To reach this room, the characters must clear away the 
rubble that seals it off, which takes a single character 40 
hours. Multiple characters working together can reduce 
the time proportionately. 

An alcove in the south wall holds the rubble of a shat- 
tered statue. An alcove to the north holds a statue of a 
dwarf with horns, which stares greedily at a glowing 
green gem in its hands. If the gem is taken, it turns to 
dust and the statue explodes. Any creature within 10 feet 
of the exploding statue must make a DC 15 Dexterity sav- 
ing throw, taking 22 (4d10) piercing damage on a failed 
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


WHEN ORCS ATTACK 


Orcs (see page 62 for their stat block) arrive at area 

E1 as the characters conclude their business with the 
dwarves. The number of orcs is equal to the number of 
characters in the party, including sidekicks. Driven from 
their territory by Cryovain, the orcs are looking for a new 
lair and fight to the death. 


DWARVEN EXCAVATION 


24 


FALCON’S HUNTING LODGE 


FALCON’s HUNTING LODGE IS A SANCTUARY IN THE HEART 
of Neverwinter Wood. This location is not connected to 
any quest, but the characters might come here while un- 
dertaking other quests or exploring the forest. 


LOCATION OVERVIEW 


Falcon the Hunter maintains this hunting lodge to cater 
to nobles from Neverwinter. He offers his services as a 
guide to those nobles, most of whom wouldn't last long 
in the forest without his protection and survival skills. 
Falcon abhors city life, preferring a rustic existence and 
simple pleasures. His lodge has all the creature comforts 
he requires, though he never turns down a good bottle of 
wine (or even a bad one) from a visitor. 

Falcon has two retainers: an elderly, world-weary cook 
named Corwin, and a mute twelve-year-old stablehand 
named Pell. Both are noncombatants. 

In addition to the main house, the hunting lodge 
grounds include a guest house for visitors, a conjoined 
stable house and smithy, an outhouse, and pens to hold 
Falcon's livestock. Accustomed to long and lonely win- 
ters, Falcon keeps a season's worth of provisions in his 
pantry at all times, supplementing those stores with fresh 
game. He has also begun hunting orcs and mounting 
their heads in his trophy hall. Corwin has advised Falcon 
not to do this for fear of retaliation, but Falcon has a long 
history of killing orcs and can't abide them as neighbors. 

Visitors are free to stay in the guest house and dine 
with Falcon at no charge. For discriminating guests, Fal- 
con offers a comfortable private room in the main lodge 
(area F12) for 10 gp a night. 


ARRIVAL 


The following description assumes that the characters 
approach the lodge from the west side of the river: 


A thin fog surrounds a fortified compound standing in 

a clearing on the east side of a narrow river. A ten-foot- 
high log palisade surrounds the compound, whose main 
building is a two-story stone-and-wood affair with a 
high-pitched roof, gables, window shutters, and a stone 
chimney. Attached to the main building is a blocky tower 
of gray stone, its high roof lined with battlements. Other 
structures include a two-story stable house and a gate- 
house whose flat roof is enclosed by iron railings. A stone 
bridge spans the river, ending before an oaken door set 
into the gatehouse's outer wall. Mounted next to the door 
is a bell with a short rope hanging fróm its clapper. 


If the characters announce their arrival by ringing the 
bell or yelling over the walls, Corwin makes his way over 
to assess them from the gatehouse, slides back the heavy 
wooden bar securing the outside door, and lets them in. If 
the characters have horses or pack animals, Corwin has 
Pell look after them while he shows the characters to the 


FALCON'S HUNTING LODGE 


guest house (area F3) to store their gear. He then leads 
them to the dining and trophy hall (area F11) before fetch- 
ing Falcon, who is usually in his quarters at area F13. 


ROLEPLAYING FALCON 


Falcon the Hunter (see page 56 for his stat block) 

wears a fur-lined cloak over his studded leather armor. 
He stands 6 feet, 6 inches tall, and has black hair and 
broad shoulders. His eyes are as blue, cold, and sharp as 
ice, and he sports a neatly trimmed beard. Falcon moves 
with the casual confidence of one who fears nothing, and 
he greets every concern with nonplussed indifference. He 
loves good wine and treats other people as he would like 
to be treated—fairly and with patience. 

Falcon's real name is Gustaf Stellern, but he has long 
since abandoned it. His hunting skills have earned him 
the name he now bears. Given the chance, he shares the 
following useful information with the characters: 


+ “I've seen more orcs in the woods of late. Ugly brutes." 

* "The orcs appear to be in league with the evil half-orcs 
that dwell southeast of here. These half-orcs are often 
seen in the company of little stick creatures known to 
creep about these woods. All in all, a nasty lot." 

* "The half-orcs dwell in a ruined stone manse over- 
grown with vines, roughly ten miles from here. Tales 
say that the manse was built by a scholar who studied 
the elven ruins scattered throughout these woods." 


WOODLAND MANSE QUEST 


If the characters are eligible to undertake the Woodland 
Manse Quest, Falcon offers a pair of boots of elvenkind 
as a reward for completing it. Give the players the Boots 
of Elvenkind card once the boots are acquired. 

Falcon politely declines any offer to join the char- 
acters on a quest, stating that he must remain at the 
lodge in case nobles from Neverwinter come looking for 
his services. 


ey O 


LODGE FEATURES 


The map of Falcon's Hunting Lodge shows the upper levels 
and main levels of the buildings, as well as the main level’s 
two courtyards—one to the north and one to the south. 
Other features are summarized below. 

Animal Pens. The pens extend east from the south yard 
and are divided by wooden fences. They hold two dozen 
chickens and a rooster, six pigs, and four goats. The animals 
are well treated and not dangerous. 

Ceilings. Interior ceilings are 9 feet high and flat. 

Doors. Doors are made of sturdy oak fitted with iron han- 
dles and hinges. Exterior doors are barred from the inside. A 
creature can use an action to force open a barred door with 
a successful DC 25 Strength (Athletics) check. Each door is 
a Medium object with AC 15, 30 hit points, and immunity to 
poison and psychic damage. 

Light. At sundown, Corwin lights oil lanterns that hang 
from hooks on the walls in all interior locations. 

Palisade. The log palisade is 10 feet high and designed 
to keep wild forest animals at bay, not hold off armies, A 
character can scale a palisade wall with a successful DC 15 
Strength (Athletics) check. 


_——————_— 


x 


LODGE LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to the map of Falcon's 
Hunting lodge. 


Fl. STONE BRIDGE 


The 5-foot-wide stone bridge that spans the river is sturdy 
and newly built. 


Ғ2. GATEHOUSE 

A wooden ladder climbs to a trapdoor in the ceiling that 
grants access to the gatehouse's 12-foot-high rooftop. A 
flagpole in the northeast corner of the roof sports a black 
banner with a silver falcon insignia. 


ЕЗ. Guest HOUSE 

The guest house has a barn-like quality. A carpet of straw 
covers the dirt floor. Arranged about the room are nine 
cots that come with soft pillows and thick wool blankets. 


Е4. STABLES 

Falcon's riding horse (see page 62 for its stat block), a 
reliable gray stallion named Baatorius, is usually lodged 
in the westernmost stall. The other stalls are empty. 


F5. STORAGE 
Riding gear is kept here, along with food for the animals. 


F6. SMITHY 
The smithy is mostly used to forge horseshoes, but guests 
can also use it to repair weapons and armor. 


F7. PELUS BEDROOM 
The stablehand's bedroom is plainly furnished. 


T7. 2282 Фаш 
$ 1.6 


LIEU 


ШИМ? xc 
ШЕ ШШШ ` Fr 
ME FIRME... A 


Еа 
49 
Li 
an 
ae 
NUM 

Я 


EE 


AYN 
MIX 


square = 5 feet: 


F8. CORWIN’s BEDROOM 
Corwin likes to keep a fire always burning in the fire- 
place of his modestly outfitted bedroom. 


F9. KITCHEN 


Originally, Falcon's lodge consisted entirely of this stone 
building and the outhouse north of it. When the lodge 
grew in size, this building became the kitchen. 


Е10. PANTRY 
Nonperishable foodstuffs and ale casks are stored here. 


F11. DINING AND TROPHY HALL 

A second-floor trophy gallery opens up above an oak din- 
ing table surrounded by tall-backed chairs on the main 
floor. Two iron chandeliers hang from the high rafters. 


F12. DELUXE GUEST BEDROOM 


For 10 gp a night, wealthy guests can enjoy the comforts 
of this luxurious bedchamber, including a washbasin, a 
box of pipeweed, and a down-stuffed mattress. 


F13. FALCON's BEDROOM 
Falcon's bedroom is cozy and warm, but untidy. 


Е14. TOWER BASEMENT 
This dirt-floored room is used for cold storage. 


F15. TOWER GUARD Post 
Arrow slits line the walls of this empty guard post. 


F16. TowER ROOF 
This 30-foot-high roof offers an unobstructed view of the 
clearing around the lodge and the nearby woods. 


FALCON'S HUNTING LODGE 


GNOMENGARDE 


"GNOMENGARDE" IS BALANCED FOR CHARACTERS OF 1ST 
level, though characters of 2nd level might find certain 
traps and hazards challenging. Characters of 3rd level or 
higher should be able to deal with the unexpected trouble 
here and get what they need from the rock gnomes with- 
out having to expend many resources, though the role- 
playing in this quest should be fun regardless. 


LOCATION OVERVIEW 


The caves of Gnomengarde are carved into the base of a 
mountain southeast of Phandalin, around a narrow wa- 
terfall. The rock gnome wizards who occupy these caves 
form strategic alliances with their human and dwarf 
neighbors as needs warrant. Reclusive and secretive, the 
gnomes craft minor magic items and useful, nonmagical 
inventions to pass the time. In these endeavors, their 
failures outnumber their successes. They seldom stray 
far from home, subsisting largely on the mushrooms that 
grow on misty islands outside their caves. 

Gnomengarde has two married kings who rule in tan- 
dem—Gnerkli and Korboz. Korboz recently lost his mind 
and is keeping Gnerkli as his prisoner. Their subjects 
don't understand the nature of Korboz's affliction, and are 
at a loss as to what to do. They wish no harm to befall ei- 
ther king, but they acknowledge that Korboz has become 
a danger to himself and others. 

In addition to the danger posed by the mad king, 
two gnomes have mysteriously vanished within the 
last tenday. No one except King Korboz knows that 
a shapechanging monster (a mimic) has crept into 
Gnomengarde and is feeding on the gnomes, changing 
its appearance as it makes its way through the complex. 
Korboz was attacked and almost killed by the creature, 
with that event inspiring his madness. He has seques- 
tered himself and his beloved Gnerkli in their quarters 
because he doesn't want the monstrous shapechanger to 
devour them. Korboz hopes the creature will tire of eat- 
ing gnomes and leave. Providing Korboz with evidence of 
the mimic's demise restores his sanity. 


LLLL———————————————————aÓ 
GNOMENGARDE FEATURES 


Gnomengarde's caves are hewn from solid rock and share 
the following features. 

Ceilings. Ceilings throughout are 7 feet high and flat. 
Doors. Normal doors are made of wood fitted with rusty 
iron handles and hinges. A locked door can be opened with 

a successful DC 10 Dexterity check using thieves' tools. A 
locked door can be forced open as an action with a success- 
ful DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check. Secret doors are made 
of stone and blend in with the surrounding stonework. 
Finding a secret door requires a search of the wall and a 
successful DC 10 Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Light. All caves are illuminated by hanging oil lanterns at- 
tached to rope-and-pulley mechanisms that make it easy for 
the gnomes to lower the lanterns and refill them with oil. 

Waterfall. The caves of Gnomengarde echo with the roar 
of the nearby waterfall. The sound is so loud that gnomes 
and visitors must shout to be heard unless there's a closed 
door between them and the waterfall. 


Tp—————————— 


GNOMENGARDE 


QUEST GOALS 


To complete the Gnomengarde Quest (page 10), the 
characters must obtain at least one magic item from the 
gnomes. Of the items they can secure, only the hat of wiz- 
ardry interests Townmaster Harbin Wester, who offers 

to buy it for 50 gp even though he knows no one who can 
attune to it. However, the gnomes won't hand over any 
magic items until the characters speak to Fibblestib and 
Dabbledob in area G11. 


GNOME-MADE MAGIC ITEMS 

If the characters rescue Gnerkli and end Korboz’s mad- 
ness, the grateful gnomes give them a clockwork amulet 
and pole of collapsing (from area G13). The characters 
also receive a gift from each king: a wand of pyrotechnics 
from Gnerkli and a hat of wizardry from Korboz. Give 
the players the Clockwork Amulet, Hat of Wizardry, Pole 
of Collapsing, and Wand of Pyrotechnics cards as their 
characters obtain and identify each item. 


ARRIVAL 


A stream leads the characters to a pool fed by a waterfall 
that tumbles down the mountainside. Describe Gnomen- 
garde's location to the players as follows: 


You follow a stream uphill to the base of the mountain, 
where waterfall erosion has carved out a natural concavity. 
The roaring waterfall creates a cloud of mist as it plunges 
into a shallow pool of water, within which rise two small 
islands covered with two-foot-tall red, green, and purple 
mushrooms. Several cave openings overlook the pool 
from rocky ledges twenty to thirty feet above. The moun- 
tain blocks any sunlight from reaching this place. 


Gnomengarde has five cave entrances perched atop 
ledges with sheer, rocky slopes. Climbing to a cave re- 
quires a successful DC 13 Strength (Athletics) check. A 
narrow footpath ascends the northeast slope, making it 
an easy climb to that cave entrance without a check. 


GNOMENGARDE ROSTER 


Twenty rock gnome recluses (see page 62 for their 

stat block) dwell in Gnomengarde, including King Gnerkli 
and King Korboz. The gnomes' names and locations are 
described in the "Gnomengarde Locations" section. 


MYSTERY MONSTER 

There used to be twenty-two gnomes living in the caves, 
but a mimic (see page 60 for its stat block) devoured 
two gnomes—named Orryn and Warryn—in the past 
tenday. The creature is currently disguised as a barrel in 
area G8, but it will devour more gnomes once its hunger 
returns unless it is dealt with. It can move around and 
adopt other disguises as needed, though its forms are 
limited to Medium objects such as chairs, large chests, 
lecterns, and weird gnomish inventions of the mimic's 


1 square = 5 feet 


size and mass. The mimic can also disguise itself as a 
door, a false section of wall, or a rocky bulge on the floor. 

After speaking to Korboz and learning about the pres- 
ence of a shapechanging monster, the characters’ pri- 
mary goal should be to find and slay the creature. When it 
attacked Korboz, it looked like a 10-foot-square rug in the 
throne room (area G14), but it has since moved elsewhere 
and changed its appearance. 

If pressed, the rock gnomes help the characters find the 
mimic by poking objects with nonmagical wands to see if 
they fight back. The gnomes aren't adventurers, however, 
and they flee at the first sign of danger (real or imagined). 

The mimic completely devours and dissolves its vic- 
tims, leaving no trace behind and relocating after each 
kill. It won't leave Gnomengarde of its own accord, as it’s 
taken a liking to the taste of gnome flesh. 

If you want a more interesting antagonist, make the 
mimic one of the rare varieties that can carry on simple 
conversations in Common. Characters who corner the 
talking mimic can negotiate with it, and can compel it to 
leave Gnomengarde with a successful DC 15 Charisma 
(Intimidation or Persuasion) check. 


WILD MAGIC 


Wild magic is a kind of magic that can’t be controlled, 
and Gnomengarde has long been a source of it. When a 
creature anywhere on the Gnomengarde map expends 

a spell slot to cast a spell of 1st level or higher, an ad- 
ditional effect might occur. Roll a d20 and consult the 
following table to determine the effect, if any. This wild 
magic effect lasts for 1 hour, or until ended with a remove 
curse spell or similar magic. 


420 Wild Magic Effect 
1-6 None 

7-10  Thecaster's skin turns a vibrant shade of blue. 

11-14 Tiny, insubstantial motes of light circle the caster, 
shedding bright light in a 10-foot radius and dim light 
for an additional 10 feet. 

15-17 The caster sprouts wings like those of a butterfly. The 
wings give the caster a flying speed of 30 feet. 

18-19 The caster teleports up to 60 feet to a random unoc- 
cupied space of the DM's choice. 

20  Awhimsical effect of the DM's invention. 


GNOMENGARDE LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to the map of 
Gnomengarde. 


Gl. Misty POOL AND MUSHROOM ISLANDS 
The gnomes subsist on 2-foot-tall mushrooms that grow 
atop two small islands in the middle of this 3-foot-deep 
pool. The islands are perpetually shrouded in mist 

from the waterfall. Magic bestowed upon the islands by 
Gnomengarde's first settlers causes the mushrooms to 
grow to abnormally large size. This same magic is the 
source of Gnomengarde's wild magic (see above). 

The mushrooms come in three colors. Red mushrooms 
provide oil that the gnomes use to fuel their lanterns and 
other mechanical devices. Green mushrooms are ground 
into flour and used to make a tasty green bread. Purple 
mushrooms are crushed and fermented to make mush- 
room wine, which tastes as good as it sounds. 


M 
“J 


GNOMENGARDE 


28 


G2. WATERFALL AND ROPE BRIDGE 

The waterfall plunges 60 feet, its mist lightly obscuring a 
35-foot-long rope bridge firmly anchored to 20-foot-high 
ledges. The bridge is difficult terrain (see the rulebook), 
and sags so that its midpoint is only 15 feet above the wa- 
ter. A creature that falls or jumps from the bridge takes 
no damage if it lands in the water, which is 5 feet deep 

in the area below the bridge. The bridge has AC 11, 30 
hit points, and immunity to poison and psychic damage. 
The barrel crab contraptions in area G6 are too clumsy to 
cross the bridge without getting tangled in its ropes. 


G3. DINING ROOM 

This room contains several dining tables and chairs 
sized for Small folk. A stout wooden cabinet against the 
east wall holds tin dishware and utensils. 


G4. KITCHEN 

This kitchen is furnished with gnomes in mind, so every- 
thing is either close to the floor or readily reachable by 
tugging on an overly complicated rope-and-pulley mecha- 
nism. Five rock gnome recluses (see page 62 for their 
stat block) busy themselves here: 


+ Joybell (female) uses a poker to stoke the fire of a hot 
iron stove standing against the east wall. 

* Dimble (male) uses a complicated press-like contrap- 
tion to squeeze oil out of a big red mushroom and filter 
the liquid into four oil flasks. 

* Panana (female) stands atop a low table and uses a me- 
chanical rolling pin contraption to kneed green bread 
dough. The severed caps of several big green mush- 
rooms are set around her. 

* Uppendown (male) forms the dough into loaves of 
green bread, his tongue sticking out as he carefully 
shapes each loaf like a master sculptor. 

* Tervaround (female) teeters on a stool as she stuffs a 
big purple mushroom into a barrel, so that it can fer- 
ment and be turned into mushroom wine. 


Characters who question the gnomes are urged to 
speak to Fibblestib or Dabbledob in the workshop (area 
G11), as they know more about what's going on than апу 
other gnomes in the complex. These gnomes won't leave 
the kitchen, but they can point characters in the right 
direction. The gnomes avoid talking about the missing 
gnomes or Mad King Korboz. 


G5. PANTRY 

This room is piled high with small wooden crates. Each 
contains loaves of green mushroom bread and other food- 
stuffs collected and kept by the gnomes. 


G6. BARREL CRABS 
Parked in alcoves in this otherwise empty room are two 
gnomish contraptions. Each resembles a crab with a 
barrel for a shell, six articulated metal legs, and a pair of 
forward-facing pincer claws. A hatch on the top of each 
barrel opens to reveal an interior compartment equipped 
with a small, leather-padded seat surrounded by levers, 
pedals, and gears. The barrels are not airtight. 

The gnomes built these crablike contraptions to grip 
and move other objects, rather like crude forklifts. How- 
ever, the contraptions are so clumsy that they are useless 


GNOMENGARDE 


for delicate work. They are just small enough to navigate 
Gnomengarde's 5-foot-wide passageways. 

Each barrel crab is a Large object with AC 15, 30 hit 
points, a Strength score of 10, and immunity to poison 
and psychic damage. It is designed to hold a single Small 
humanoid, though a Medium humanoid can fit inside 
with some discomfort. While in the barrel with the hatch 
closed, a creature has total cover against attacks from 
outside the contraption. It can use its action to make the 
contraption scuttle across the ground at a walking speed 
of 15 feet or make one attack with its pincer claws. 

Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: *2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 5 (2d4) piercing damage, and the target is 
grappled (escape DC 10). 


G7. AUTOLOADING CROSSBOW PLATFORM 

Bolted to the floor of this room is a rotating platform 
equipped with four heavy crossbows that reload automat- 
ically. Each crossbow comes with twenty bolts. Mounted 
above the crossbows at a height of 6 feet is a chair 
equipped with pedals that causes the entire contraption 
to spin counterclockwise, and with levers that reload and 
fire the crossbows. This clanking, clattering contraption 
is a Large object with AC 13, 45 hit points, and immunity 
to poison and psychic damage. Every time it loses 10 hit 
points, one of its crossbows breaks. 

А creature sitting іп the chair can use an action to 
rotate the device up to 360 degrees counterclockwise 
and fire up to two of its crossbows in any direction. Each 
crossbow makes the following attack. 

Heavy Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 
to hit, range 50/200 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1410) 
piercing damage. 

Sitting in the chair when the characters first enter this 
area is the device's inventor, a rock gnome recluse (see 
page 62) named Facktoré. When she sees strangers, 
Facktoré decides to test out the contraption on them. 
She stands down only when she or her contraption cease 
to function, or when she can no longer see any targets. 
Being deranged and utterly consumed by her work, she 
can barely string together a cohesive sentence, let alone 
advise visitors on where to go or whom to talk to. 


G8. MIMIC AND MUSHROOM WINE 

This room contains twelve forty-gallon barrels set into 
wide alcoves. Each barrel is secured by a wooden brace. 
The barrels in the south alcove have been tapped with 
wooden spigots. Two of those barrels are half full, and 
two are nearly empty. 

Seven of the eight barrels in the north and east alcoves 
are untapped and full of mushroom wine. The eighth 
barrel is the mimic (see page 60 for its stat block). You 
can decide where the mimic is, or roll a d8 to randomly 
determine which barrel is the fake one. See “Mystery 
Monster” (page 26) for more information on the mimic 
and its behavior when discovered. 


G9. GNOME GUARD Post 

Mist from the waterfall dampens this empty cave, which 
has a 10-foot-high ledge overlooking it to the south. The 
ledge can be reached by following the curved tunnel to 
the east, or by scaling the slick rock wall with a success- 
ful DC 12 Strength (Athletics) check. 


Two rock gnome recluses (see page 62 for their 
stat block) stand on the ledge—a female named Ulla 
and a male named Pog. When anyone enters the cave, 
Ulla calls out, “Who goes there?” in Gnomish, then Pog 
repeats the question in Common. Their orders are to 
“attack shapechangers on sight.” Since anyone might be 
a shapechanger, they attack anyone who can't prove they 
are who they claim to be. Characters who don't want to 
be attacked must succeed on one of the following checks: 


* ADC 10 Charisma (Deception) check to trick the 
gnomes into thinking the characters have an audience 
with the kings of Gnomengarde. 

* ADC 10 Charisma (Intimidation) check to scare the 
gnomes into thinking that any harm visited upon the 
characters will result in Gnomengarde's destruction. 

* ADC 10 Charisma (Persuasion) check to convince 
the gnomes that the characters can't be shapechang- 
ers, as shapechangers would surely take less 
conspicuous forms. 


G10. SPINNING BLADES 

This area is lightly obscured by mist from the waterfall. 
The larger eastern part of the room contains two rap- 
idly spinning devices that look like turnstiles fitted with 
stacks of long, sharp blades spaced 1 foot apart. The 
northern turnstile spins counterclockwise, while the 
southern one spins clockwise. Any creature that enters 
or starts its turn in the eastern part of the room while the 
blades are spinning must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving 
throw, taking 18 (4d8) slashing damage on a failed save, 
or half as much damage on a successful one. 

Set into the south wall of the smaller western part of 
the room is а brass lever in the down position. Pulling the 
lever up causes the turnstiles to stop spinning, allowing 
safe passage through the chamber. The rock gnomes by- 
pass this trap by using the mage hand cantrip to move the 
lever from the east doorway. 


G11, INVENTORS’ WORKSHOP 

As the characters approach this area, they overhear 

an argument in Gnomish between two rock gnome 
recluses (see page 62 for their stat block)—a male 
named Fibblestib and a female named Dabbledob. As 
Gnomengarde's foremost inventors, they are trying to 
dream up an invention that will cure King Korboz's mad- 
ness. Fibblestib's proposal is a “sanity ray.” Dabbledob 
thinks that's dumb, and wants to build something called 
a "straitjacket" instead. If the characters interrupt them, 
the gnomes realize that the new arrivals might have an- 
other solution, so they fill in what's been happening and 
ask for any advice on how they might help cure Korboz 
and rescue King Gnerkli. 

Fibblestib and Dabbledob consider the mystery of 
the vanishing gnomes of secondary importance to their 
mission of aiding their kings. They focus оп Korboz and 
Gnerkli to the exclusion of all else, promising magical 
rewards in exchange for aid (see “Gnome-Made Magic 
Items," page 26). 

The workshop is cluttered with half-completed gnomish 
inventions that serve no purpose, as well as worktables 
strewn with tinker's tools. А 10-foot-high ledge overlooks 
the room, set with a wooden pedestal on which sits a 
leather-bound book. 


Treasure. The book on the pedestal is a spellbook that 
the rock gnomes of Gnomengarde share. Its cover de- 
scribes its title as Magick of Gnomengarde (in Common 
and Gnomish), and it contains the wizard spells burniné 
hands, detect magic, identify, mage armor, magic missile, 
shield, and sleep. 


G12. GNOME DOMICILES 

The floor of this cave is strewn with the remnants of old 
campfires. Four side caves serve as sleeping areas, with 
five small wooden cots crammed into each one. Eight 
rock gnome recluses (see page 62 for their stat block) 
sleep soundly here when the characters first arrive, with 
two gnomes in each side cave—Caramip, Jabby, Nyx, and 
Quippy (females), and Anverth, Delebean, Pallabar, and 
Zook (males). Characters can move through the area 
without waking the sleeping gnomes, who defend them- 
selves if attacked but pose no danger otherwise. They 
avoid talking about the recent troubles, but advise visitors 
to speak with Fibblestib and Dabbledob (see area G11), 
Gnomengarde's two most gifted rock gnome inventors. 


G13. TREASURY 
The door to this room is locked, and Fibblestib and Dab- 
bledob (see area G11) carry the keys. The room contains 
a jumble of nonfunctional gnomish gizmos, as well as 
loose gears, twisted bits of metal, and other scraps that 
the gnomes use to cobble together new inventions. 
Treasure. Amid the clutter, the characters can find a 
clockwork amulet and a pole of collapsing, most easily by 
scanning the room with a detect magic spell. It otherwise 
takes 1 hour to find each item. Give the players the Clock- 
work Amulet and Pole of Collapsing cards if their charac- 
ters acquire and identify these magic items. 


С14. THRONE ROOM 

Situated atop a stone dais are two squat thrones made of 
scrap metal and sized for gnomes. A secret door in the 
north wall conceals a short tunnel leading to area G15. 
Only the gnome kings know of this secret passage. 


G15. GNOME KINGs’ BEDROOM 
King Korboz has locked himself and King Gnerkli in 
their bedroom, forgetting that there's a secret door that 
others could find and use to gain entry. Only Korboz and 
Gnerkli have keys to the locked main door. If the char- 
acters knock on the door or otherwise announce their 
arrival, Korboz speaks to them from inside the room and 
warns of a "shapechanger" in their midst. Korboz doesn't 
regain his senses until the characters assure him that the 
monster has been found and killed. Whether the mimic 
is truly killed or not, convincing Korboz that it's dead re- 
quires a successful DC 12 Charisma (Persuasion) check. 
Korboz and Gnerkli are rock gnome recluses (see 
page 62 for their stat block), each wearing a jagged 
metal crown and a patchwork cloak. Gnerkli is glued to 
a chair and restrained. Korboz carries a flask of solvent 
that dissolves the glue on contact. Their room contains 
all the trappings of a nicely appointed gnome bedroom. 
Treasure. A small unlocked chest under the gnomes' 
bed contains a hat of wizardry and a fully charged wand 
of pyrotechnics. Give the players the Hat of Wizardry and 
Wand of Pyrotechnics cards if their characters acquire 
and identify these magic items. 


GNOMENGARDE 


зо 


ICESPIRE HOLD 


ICESPIRE HOLD IS WHERE ADVENTURERS CAN EXPECT TO 
find Cryovain if they haven't defeated the young white 
dragon elsewhere. This location is designed for charac- 
ters of 6th level, though lower-level characters can defeat 
the dragon if they're cunning and cautious. 


LOCATION OVERVIEW 


Icespire Hold is a stone fortress perched on the icy north- 
east spur of Icespire Peak. A warlord named Delsendra 
Amzarr built the stronghold, and dwelled there for many 
years while she and her soldiers kept the orcs of the 
Sword Mountains in check. When supply lines were cut 
off by heavy snow and blizzards during a brutal winter, 
Delsendra and her followers starved to death. Orcs later 
took over the fortress, which was damaged by an earth- 
quake ten years ago and never repaired. 

When Cryovain decided to make Icespire Hold its lair, 
it stormed the fortress through the crumbled southwest 
section and ate several orcs before settling on the roof. 
With a terrible roar, the gorged dragon drove the remain- 
ing orcs out of Icespire Hold. 

Recently, evil mercenaries calling themselves the 
Stone-Cold Reavers infiltrated the gatehouse and es- 
caped Cryovain's notice. They assume (incorrectly) that 
the dragon has amassed a hoard and hidden it in the for- 
tress. The next time the dragon flies off, they plan to steal 
it. They treat adventurers as they would any other com- 
petitors—either trying to scare them off or killing them. 


M LLLL—————————————————————oÓm— 


IcESPIRE HOLD FEATURES 


Icespire Hold is situated at an altitude of 2,500 feet and 
surrounded by sheer, icy cliffs. Other features of the location 
are summarized below. 

Arrow Slits. When using an arrow slit for protection, 

a creature gains three-quarters cover (see the rulebook) 
against outside threats. A Medium character can't squeeze 
through an arrow slit, but a Small character can with a suc- 
cessful DC 10 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check. 

Ceilings. Rooms and passageways in the gatehouse and 
fortress have 15-foot-high, arched ceilings. Ceilings in the 
undercroft are 8 feet high and flat. 

Doors. Normal doors are made of wood fitted with rusty 
iron handles and hinges. Secret doors are made of stone 
and blend in with the surrounding walls. Finding a secret 
door requires a search of the wall and a successful DC 15 
Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Light. Interior areas with no natural light to illuminate 
them are completely dark. 

Temperature. The temperature is slightly above freezing 
during the day and plunges at night. Whenever the tempera- 
ture is at or below 0 degrees Fahrenheit, a creature exposed 
to the cold must make a DC 10 Constitution saving throw at 
the end of each hour. Creatures with resistance or immunity 
to cold damage automatically succeed on the saving throw, 
as do creatures wearing cold weather gear and creatures 
naturally adapted to cold climates. On a failed saving throw, 
the creature has disadvantage on ability checks, attack rolls, 
and saving throws, and its speed is halved. The creature 
freezes to death if it suffers these effects for six consecutive 
hours. These effects end on the creature after it spends at 
least an hour in a place of warmth. 


———————————— 


IGESPIRE HOLD 


FINDING IcESPIRE HOLD 


Icespire Hold is so tucked away in the mountains that 
few people know of its existence, let alone anything about 
its history or current state. Characters might learn of it 
after experiencing a vision at the Shrine of Savras (page 
38), or they might search for it on their own. In the lat- 
ter case, let the players use the poster map of the Sword 
Coast to plot a search. Icespire Hold is marked on the 
DM's map (page 5). Characters spot Icespire Hold if they 
come within 1 hex of it. 

If the characters are ready to confront the dragon but 
need help finding its lair, use one of the following hooks 
to get them to Icespire Hold: 


Captured Orc. A dozen orcs (see page 62 for their stat 
block) attack Phandalin. If the characters are not pres- 
ent during the attack, the townsfolk repel the orcs but 
suffer losses. One wounded orc is captured alive. This 
orc speaks Common and knows where the dragon's lair 
is. The characters can also capture an orc themselves 
and get the information they need from it. 

Tymora's Luck. A sidekick or friendly NPC suggests that 
the characters pray for Tymora's blessing at the Shrine 
of Luck (page 9). If one or more characters do so, 
Tymora's blessing comes after a long rest when a mys- 
terious, cloaked man arrives in town on a riding horse 
(see page 62 for its stat block) to gather supplies for 
his companions. The man's name is Dobin Noreth, a 
neutral evil member of the Stone-Cold Reavers (see the 
sidebar on page 32). Both he and the horse know the 
way to the dragon's lair, having come from there. Do- 
bin's steed is a retired, well-behaved race horse named 
Four-Leaf Clover. 


TRAVEL TO IcESPIRE HOLD 


Icespire Hold is more than 30 miles from Phandalin. En 
route to the dragon's lair, the characters have the follow- 
ing encounter. 


FROZEN OGRE 


Set the scene by reading the following boxed text aloud: 


As you make your way across the cold, windblown foothills 
of the Sword Mountains, you happen upon a large, prone 
creature frozen in ice. 


The frozen creature is an ogre (see page 61) that 

the white dragon killed with its cold breath. The ogre’s 
corpse was too big to carry off, so the dragon left it. A 
character who examines the scene closely and succeeds 
on a DC 15 Wisdom (Survival) check can ascertain that 
the ogre was killed within the past 24 hours. The cold of 
the foothills has kept the ice from thawing. 

Frozen in the ice with the ogre is a hefty sack, but it 
can't be reached or searched until the characters chip or 
melt away the ice that covers it. The sack contains a rusty 
dwarven helm, two halves of a splintered wooden shield, 


а tumbleweed, а crumpled-up cowboy hat, and a sack- 
cloth doll in desperate need of restitching. 

Treasure. If the characters are low on healing magic, 
they find three potions of healing in the ogre's sack along 
with the worthless items above. (Give the players three 
Potions of Healing cards.) 


ARRIVAL 


As the characters approach Icespire Hold, read the fol- 
lowing boxed text aloud to the players to set the scene: 


Clouds partly obscure a stone fortress situated atop the 
icy spur of a jagged, snow-covered mountain that you 
recognize as Icespire Peak, a landmark so enormous as 

to be visible from Phandalin on a clear day. The mountain 
dwarfs the fortress, which consists of two separate struc- 
tures joined together by a stone bridge. A narrow, winding 
path corkscrews up the mountainside to the smaller of 
the two structures, and appears to be the only safe way to 
reach it by land. It's an unwelcome path, but not as unwel- 
come as the cold, howling wind that buffets you. 


If Cryovain is alive, the young white dragon (see page 
64 for its stat block) is sleeping on the rooftop of the 
main fortress (area H20), where it can enjoy the cold 
mountain air while surveying its domain from over the 
battlements. It sleeps in a 10-foot-square area in the mid- 
dle of the roof, away from obstacles, and awakes if one of 
the following things occurs: 


* The dragon is targeted by a spell or takes damage. 

+ Someone or something makes a noise loud enough to 
interrupt the dragon's slumber. Noises that qualify in- 
clude the clap of a thunderwave spell, sounds of combat 
in areas not completely sealed off from the outside by 
doors, or a whisper in the dragon's ear. 


If the dragon realizes intruders are near but can't deter- 
mine their whereabouts, it lets out a roar and takes to the 
air. As it circles the fortress, it glances around for signs 
of intrusion. If it finds nothing to attack, it returns to the 
rooftop and waits for intruders to come to it. The dragon 
is small enough that it can squeeze through doorways 
and passageways, but it needs an incentive to enter the 
fortress because it dislikes confined spaces. Like most 
white dragons, Cryovain is slow-witted and easily baited. 

The howling of the wind prevents Cryovain from 
hearing intruders who remain relatively quiet. The wind 
also silences the characters as they follow the icy path 
(area H1) that leads to and from the gatehouse (areas H2 
through H6). 


ICESPIRE HOLD LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to the map of 
Icespire Hold. 


H1. NARROW TRAIL 

This narrow trail clings to the mountainside as it twists 
around and up to the gatehouse. Tracks from horses 
coming and going along the trail are clearly visible. Char- 
acters must traverse the trail in single file. If there's more 
than one character, determine their marching order and 
how far apart they’re spaced in case it becomes relevant. 


ICESPIRE HOLD 


The trail is safe, though а 20-foot-long stretch of it 
is buried under rubble that is difficult terrain (see the 
rulebook). 

Reaching the Gatehouse. The trail ends at the outer 
door of the gatehouse. This door can be barred shut from 
within, but its heavy wooden crossbar isn’t in place when 
the characters arrive. They must let themselves in, as no 
one answers the door if they knock. 

The mercenary stationed in area H6 watches the trail 
and alerts her companions in area Н4 if she sees strang- 
ers approaching the gatehouse. Careful not to wake the 
dragon, the mercenaries allow characters to enter the 
gatehouse unchallenged. See the “Stone-Cold Reavers” 
sidebar for more information about the mercenaries. 


H2. STABLES 

Four saddled riding horses (see page 62 for their stat 
block) are kept in stalls. A fifth stall stands empty. The 
horses belong to the mercenaries in areas H4 and H6. 


H3. STORAGE 


This room contains empty wooden barrels and crates 
that are so old and brittle they fall apart if disturbed. 


а. 
STONE-COLD REAVERS 


The Stone-Cold Reavers are neutral evil human veterans 
(see page 63 for their stat block) who speak Common. 
When they can’t find work as sellswords, they resort to 
brigandry and thievery. After spotting the white dragon, they 
decided to follow it back to its lair. They're now waiting for it 
to go hunting so they can plunder Icespire Hold during its 
absence. Until the dragon leaves, the reavers do everything 
they can to avoid attracting its attention. If the characters 
killed the dragon elsewhere, assume that the mercenaries 
searched the fortress, found nothing, and are now angrily 
waiting for a companion named Dobin Noreth to return 
with supplies (see “Tymora’s Luck” on page 30). 

The Reavers threaten the characters with bodily harm to 
scare them away, turning to violence if their threats fall on 
deaf ears. If the characters try to bribe them, the merce- 
naries realize that it would be easier to rob the characters 
than accept the bribe. If two or more Reavers are killed or 
incapacitated, the others stand down and try to negotiate a 
truce to ensure their own survival. 

Characters encounter the following four Stone-Cold 
Reavers іп Ісеѕріге Hold: 


Syleen Wintermoon. The leader of the Stone-Cold Reavers 
is a lean, brash woman who hails from Neverwinter and 
keeps her red hair pulled back in a ponytail. Syleen enjoys 
taking risks, living as though each day will be her last. She 
lies compulsively and always assumes she’s being lied to. 

Runa Vokdottir. A muscular woman with black hair and cold 
blue eyes, Runa hails from Icewind Dale far to the north. 
A lifetime of sunless days and frigid nights falsely taught 
her that cruelty is natural, not evil. Runa speaks few words 
but is armed with a biting sense of humor. 

Brakkis Elspaar. An unshapely man whose best years are 
behind him, Brakkis is an opportunist who likes following 
orders, as it frees his mind to think about retirement and 
dogs—two topics he can't stop talking about. 

Jabarl the Orc-Biter. Jabarl is a rugged, sullen brute with a 
criminal past that never manages to catch up to him. He’s 
good at scaring people, caving in skulls, and tending to 
the horses, around which he seems more at ease. 


_-_--——-———— 


ІСЕЗРІВЕ HOLD 


H4. GATEHOUSE BARRACKS 
Wooden cots lie in broken heaps against the walls, leaving 
a clear space in the middle of the room where the Stone- 
Cold Reavers have laid out bedrolls and other gear. If 
warned that strangers are near, all the mercenaries greet 
the new arrivals in the open area between this room and 
the stables. If the characters reach this area without being 
spotted, Syleen Wintermoon sits on a stool and sings qui- 
etly to herself while sharpening a knife. Sleeping under 
threadbare blankets nearby are Brakkis Elspaar and Ja- 
barl the Orc-Biter. See the “Stone-Cold Reavers” sidebar 
for more information on these ne’er-do-wells. 

The mercenaries’ supplies include enough water and 
rations to sustain four people for one day. 


H5. 5мітнү 

Ап anvil rests on the floor near a fireplace that hasn't 
been lit in years. To one side of the hearth is a bellows so 
old that it falls apart if handled. Scattered about the floor 
are rusty tools and old horseshoes. 


H6. BARBICAN 

Arrow slits look down on the trail that winds around the 

gatehouse, and an unlit fireplace stands to the south. 
Runa Vokdottir (see the *Stone-Cold Reavers" sidebar) 

uses the arrow slits to watch the trail. If she sees strang- 

ers, Runa leaves the room and alerts her companions 

in area H4. 


H7. STONE BRIDGE, IRON BELL 

This solid stone bridge spans the 35-foot gap between the 
gatehouse and the main fortress, 50 feet above the trail 
that passes underneath it. The bridge is edged by 3-foot- 
high stone railings. 

Mounted to the fortress wall north of the door to area 
H8 is an iron bell with a short, rusty chain dangling from 
it. Ringing the bell wakes the dragon in area H20. The 
door to area H8 stands ajar, its crossbar broken. Damage 
to the door suggests it was forced open at some point. 


H8. ForTRESS ENTRANCE 


This short, empty corridor has arrow slits in the north 
and south walls. 


H9. OuTER DEFENSES 

These cold, empty halls are hidden behind secret doors 
and have arrow slits along their outer walls. The orcs 
never entered or inhabited these areas. 


H10. RUBBLE 


Years ago, an earthquake caused two corners of the for- 
tress to collapse into great piles of rubble. This rubble is 
difficult terrain (see the rulebook). 


НІ. ABANDONED GUARD Post 

Between piles of rubble stands an empty hall with arrow 
slits lining the outer wall. Cryovain smashed through the 
east door to get inside but found nothing of interest here. 


H12. AUDIENCE CHAMBER 

Three stirges (see page 63 for their stat block) flutter 
anxiously about this cold and dismal hall. The stirges are 
thirsty for blood and heedlessly attack any warm-blooded 
creature that attempts to cross the room. 


Shields, weapons, and tapestries once festooned the 
walls here, but orcs tore down and destroyed the decor. 
A dozen humanoid skeletons in rusty armor lie scattered 
amid the debris. (All died of hunger.) Painted on the stone 
floor is a 10-foot-diameter, shield-shaped crest that fea- 
tures a black tower being struck by a golden bolt of light- 
ning—the emblem of the warlord Delsendra Amzarr. 

Secret Door. This room has two secret doors. The east 
secret door pushes open to reveal area H9. The west se- 
cret door pulls open to reveal a 3-foot-wide staircase de- 
scending 10 feet to area H21. Cryovain is too big to enter 
this staircase. 


H13. Dintnc Room 

Ores destroyed everything in this room, going as far as to 
pull down a pair of chandeliers that once hung by chains 
from the ceiling. Smashed furnishings include a long 
wooden dining table and a dozen wooden chairs. Lying 
in the sooty fireplace is the stuffed and mounted head of 
a large white wolf with glassy blue eyes. The head once 
hung from hooks above the mantelpiece. 


H14. KITCHEN 

The orcs trashed this room, destroying its furnishings 
and scattering debris everywhere. A cold breeze blows 
out of the twin fireplaces built into the south wall. 


Н15. PANTRY 

This room has been ransacked, leaving nothing but 
smashed shelves, broken barrels, torn sacks, and other 
detritus lying about. Amid the detritus, the characters 
find the skeletal remains of a male humanoid clad in a 
rusty breastplate. On the verge of starvation, this guard 
was killed trying to steal rations. 


H16. ARMORY 

Weapon racks that once stood against the north and 
south walls lie smashed on the floor amid the remains of 
wooden mannequins. Rusty hooks on the walls once held 
armor, shields, and helms. 


H17. WARLORD’S QUARTERS 

As her soldiers were dying from starvation, Delsendra 
Amzarr was forced to quell a revolt by a handful of follow- 
ers. After slaying them, the warlord took her own life by 
drinking poison from a goblet. Skeletons scattered about 
the room testify to these events: 


+ Three humanoid skeletons in rusty suits of chain mail 
lie on the floor near rusty longswords. 

* A fourth humanoid skeleton in rusty plate armor lies 
slumped in a chair that faces the fireplace. A steel gob- 
let lies on the floor between the legs of the chair. (The 
orc war chief stole the dead warlord's greataxe, which 
the characters can find in area H19.) 


In the middle of the room stands a sturdy oak table 
around which Delsendra and her officers would plan bat- 
tles. Tiny, carved wooden figures of soldiers are strewn 
about, as are the torn-up remains of old maps. 

Secret Door. The secret door in the east wall pulls 
open to reveal a 3-foot-wide staircase that descends 
10 feet to area H21. Cryovain is too big to enter this 
staircase. 


H18. Orc BARRACKS 
Orcs have long laired here, as evidenced by the filth in the 
room. The furnishings that were once here have all been 
burned in the fireplace. Characters can chart the drag- 
on’s rampage through the fortress by following a series of 
smashed doors up the stairwell to the east, and to areas 
Н19 and Н20. 

Treasure. Characters who search through the filth 
find a leather sack containing 450 cp and 182 sp, and a 
cracked spyglass worth 100 gp. 


H19. Окс Wan CHIEF’S LAIR 
Kra, the orc war chief, dwelled here until Cryovain ate 
him. All that remains of Kra is a severed right hand still 
clutching the haft of an elegant-looking nonmagical great- 
axe, which the war chief found in area H17. The room 
is decorated with the spoils of war, including impres- 
sive-looking furniture that was mostly destroyed when 
Cryovain attacked. Also heaped about the room are furs, 
antlers, the rotting heads of Kra's enemies (dwarves, hu- 
mans, and rival orcs mostly), as well as other trophies. 
Treasure. Characters who search the room find an 
ornate wooden chair missing one of its arms. Crafted by 
sea elves as a gift to their land-dwelling cousins, it has 
six branches of red coral worked into its design. The 
branches can be detached and are worth 25 gp each. 


H20. Roor 

If the characters haven't defeated Cryovain yet, the final 
encounter with the young white dragon (see page 64 

for its stat block) occurs here as it stubbornly defends 

its new home. The rooftop is enclosed by a 3-foot-high 
battlement, except in the corners where the wall has 
collapsed. Cylindrical stone chimneys jut 5 feet above 
the rooftop but are too narrow for even Small characters 
to squeeze through. These chimneys connect to the 
fireplaces in areas H12, H13, H14, апа Н17. 

Slippery Ice. Slippery ice covers the rooftop. The ice 
is difficult terrain (see the rulebook). When a creature 
other than Cryovain moves on the ice for the first time on 
a turn, it must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity (Acrobatics) 
check or fall prone. 


H21. UNDERCROFT 
This empty room is deathly cold. Chiseled into the lintel 
above each door is the word “CRYPTS” in Common. 


H22. Crypts 

These rough-hewn passageways contain unmarked stone 
caskets in alcoves. Sealed within each casket are the 
bones, rusty armor, and rusty weapons of warriors who 
fell in battle under Delsendra Amzarr's command. 


H23. EMPTY CRYPT AND SECRET EXIT 

Of the five unmarked stone caskets in this tomb, four are 
empty. The middle casket contains a dismantled tobog- 
gan that takes 10 minutes to assemble. The toboggan was 
designed for barreling down the mountainside—a last- 
ditch escape route that was never used. 

One-Way Secret Door. The secret door in the south 
wall is designed so that it can be opened only from inside 
the room by pulling on a hidden handle. A knock spell 
or similar magic can open it from the outside. The door 
opens onto a ledge overlooking an icy mountain slope. 


IGESPIRE HOLD 


34 


LOGGERS’ CAMP 


"LOGGERS' CAMP" IS BALANCED FOR CHARACTERS OF 3RD 
level, though characters of 2nd level can survive the per- 
ils of this quest if they are cautious and clever. Characters 
of 4th level or higher should have an easy time dealing 
with the threats to the camp. 


LOCATION OVERVIEW 


Years after the eruption of Mount Hotenow, the city of 
Neverwinter continues to rebuild itself after the destruc- 
tion wrought by that event. Loggers have set up camps 
along the river that flows out of Neverwinter Wood, using 
the river to transport logs to the city. 

One particular camp, located on the south side of the 
river, is run by a craven opportunist named Tibor Wester, 
the half-brother of Phandalin’s townmaster, Harbin 
Wester. Tibor employs skilled loggers to find the best 
trees, chop them down, and haul them back to the camp 
to be sent downriver. He gets his supplies from Phand- 
alin so that he doesn’t have to pay the outlandish “devas- 
tation tax” that Neverwinter applies on essential goods. 
The challenge lies in getting the supplies safely through 
Neverwinter Wood, which is why Harbin uses adventur- 
ers to make deliveries. 

Tibor has a bigger problem than supply lines, however. 
His loggers have drawn the ire of anchorites of Talos (see 
page 51), who resent intrusions into their territory in 
Neverwinter Wood. The anchorites have hidden a totem 
in his camp that has attracted ankhegs. The burrowing 
monsters caught the loggers by surprise, killing all twelve 
of them. Tibor survived by locking himself in his office, 
where he intends to remain until someone rescues him. 


QUEST GOALS 


To complete the Loggers’ Camp Quest (page 11), the 
adventurers must deliver supplies to the camp and have 
Tibor Wester sign for them. Tibor’s signature assures 
Harbin Wester that the supplies reached their intended 
destination. 


PREPARATIONS 


The characters need to pick up the supplies for the log- 
gers’ camp before setting out. Harbin Wester has made 
the necessary arrangements with Barthen's Provisions 
in Phandalin (described on page 8). When the char- 
acters arrive to pick up the supplies, read the following 
boxed text aloud: 


Barthen tells you that his clerks have filled two crates with 
supplies as he hands you a sheet of parchment, upon 
which is written an inventory of the crates’ contents: food- 
stuffs such as dried meat, blocks of cheese, and loaves 

of bread, as well as casks of ale and flasks of oil. The two 
heavy crates are loaded onto a two-wheeled cart pulled by 
ап ох. "The ox's name is Vincent,” says Barthen. “I'll ex- 
pect to see him and the cart returned, thanks." 


LOGGERS' CAMP 


The ox (use the cow stat block on page 55) is a reliable 
beast. Each full crate holds enough provisions to sustain 
twelve people for a month, as long as the supplies are 
supplemented with fish and fresh water from the camp. 

If the characters tell Barthen that they intend to visit 
Falcon's Hunting Lodge (see page 24) on the way, Bar- 
then suggests they buy a bottle of fine wine (10 gp) and 
give it to Falcon as a gift. 


TRAVEL TO THE CAMP 


The characters can travel 24 miles in a day, and the log- 
gers’ camp is roughly 50 miles north of Phandalin. The 
characters will need to take a long rest near the halfway 
point in their journey. They can choose to camp in the 
woods or veer eastward and spend their long rest at 
Falcon's Hunting Lodge. 

The party member with the highest Wisdom (Survival) 
modifier is the most qualified to navigate Neverwinter 
Wood. Use the map of the Sword Coast (page 5) to chart 
the characters' progress through the forest. Whenever 
the characters enter a new hex on the map, have the 
navigator make a DC 10 Wisdom (Survival) check. If the 
check succeeds, the party stays on course. If the check 
fails, the party gets back on course after wasting 1d4 
miles of movement going in the wrong direction. 


А BOAR-ING ENCOUNTER 


Shortly after entering the woods, the characters have an 
encounter that is not what it seems. Read the following 
boxed text aloud: 


About sixty feet ahead of you, a wild boar stands in a small 
clearing. The boar glares at you suspiciously. 


The boar is actually a female anchorite of Talos (see 
page 51 for her stat block) in boar form. The anchorite, 
Drethna, attacks only in self-defense. If the characters 
circle around the boar or otherwise avoid a confrontation 
they can continue on their way. If the boar is spared, it 
darts off to warn the anchorites at the Woodland Manse 
(page 44) that strangers have entered the forest. 


ARRIVAL 


If the characters follow the river from Falcon's Hunting 
Lodge, they arrive from the east. If they come straight 
from Phandalin, they approach from the south. When 
they arrive, read the following boxed text aloud: 


The logging camp spreads along the south shore of the 
river, where a dozen tents are arranged on a sandy beach. 
Near a dock stands a cabin with logs stacked under an 
awning. Older cabins close by have been torn down to 
leave only stone chimneys and foundations. A grim silence 
hangs over the camp, and you see no one around. 


eamm rim 


The ankhegs hide underground and rely on their 
tremorsense to detect prey. They burst out of the ground 
in the squares marked “ankheg eruption" on the map 
when certain conditions are met, as described in areas 
L3 and L6. If you're running this scenario for one charac- 
ter, only one ankheg can be encountered at a time. 


CAMP LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to the map of the log- 
gers' camp. 


Ll. CABINS ON THE ROCKS 

These cabins have been mostly torn down, but their ruins 
stand atop a 10-foot-high escarpment of rock that the 
ankhegs can't burrow through. 


L2. OLD CABIN AND CHIMNEY 
All that remains of this cabin is a ruined fireplace whose 
chimney has mostly collapsed, and a stone foundation 
that the ankhegs can’t burrow through. 

Totem. A character who searches the chimney finds 
a totem buried in its debris: thirteen tiny, androgynous 
stick figures dipped in pig’s blood, inscribed with tiny 
lightning bolt symbols, and tied together in a bundle with 
hair. A character who succeeds on a DC 15 Intelligence 
(Religion) check can discern that the totem’s purpose is 
to bring ill fortune to all who reside near it. Destroying 
the totem causes any ankhegs that haven't attacked yet to 
lose interest in the camp and burrow away. 


L3. OFFICE AND TOOL STORAGE 
This cabin has a wooden floor and is divided into two 
rooms. The larger room is cluttered with logging equip- 


ME 


EIAS" | js ' 
EI НИЖЕ Sod, 


ment (saws, leather harnesses for climbing trees, and so 
on). An ankheg (see page 51 for its stat block) is hid- 
den under the floor. The first time a character crosses the 
room, the ankheg bursts through the floorboards in the 
square marked “ankheg eruption" and attacks. 

Tibor Wester, a human commoner (see page 55 for 
his stat block), has barricaded himself in the smaller of- 
fice to the north. He has pushed his desk against the door 
and huddles atop it. When faced with any decision, Tibor 
makes the most cowardly, self-serving choice. 


L4. RrvER DOCK 
Rowboats and river barges can be moored here, though 
there are none present when the characters arrive. 


L5. NoRTH CAMP 

A dead campfire is surrounded by six tents, each contain- 
ing a bedroll and a mess kit. Further inspection reveals 
that the tents and bedrolls have been partially dissolved 
by some kind of acid spray. Footprints and strange marks 
in the sand suggest several humanoids were attacked 
here and dragged away. Any character who succeeds on a 
DC 10 Intelligence (Investigation) check can deduce that 
the humanoids were killed and dragged down into the 
sand by burrowing monsters. Ankhegs collapse their tun- 
nels behind them, leaving no way to follow them. 


L6. SOUTH CAMP 

This camp is similar to area L5, but three ankhegs (see 
page 51 for their stat block) are hidden underneath it. 
When a creature steps within 20 feet of a square marked 
"ankheg eruption" on the map, a hostile ankheg bursts 
out of the ground in that square and fights until slain. 


LOGGERS' CAMP 


MOUNTAIN’S TOE GOLD MINE 


"MOUNTAIN's ТОЕ GOLD MINE" IS DESIGNED FOR 
characters of 4th level, but characters of 3rd level can 
survive if they avoid unnecessary combat or possess a 
magic weapon. Characters of 5th level or higher will face 
less peril but should enjoy the roleplaying opportunities. 


LOCATION OVERVIEW 


The Mountain's Toe Gold Mine, owned by a business con- 
sortium in Neverwinter, has been troubled by recent pro- 
ductivity problems. The owners have hired a no-nonsense 
overseer named Don-Jon Raskin to sort things out. But 
neither Raskin nor the owners know that the troubled 
mine has recently been taken over by a band of wererats 
calling itself the Whiskered Gang. 


QUEST GOALS 


To complete the Mountain's Toe Quest (page 11), the 
adventurers must escort Don-Jon Raskin safely to the 
mine. Once he sees that wererats have infested it, Raskin 
urges the characters to eradicate the “varmints.” If the 
characters refuse, Raskin is left to negotiate a truce with 
the wererats on his own—and is quickly turned into one. 


ROLEPLAYING DoN-JoN RASKIN 


Full of bluster and stories of his great exploits, Don-Jon 
Raskin (see page 56 for his stat block) walks and talks 
like a giant. He has worked as a gold prospector, miner, 
fur trader, privateer, and whaler. He even ran a trading 
post on the outskirts of Neverwinter for a few seasons. If 
the characters take up the quest to escort Raskin to the 
Mountain's Toe Gold Mine, they'll find him staying at the 
Stonehill Inn in Phandalin. Townmaster Harbin Wester 
has an agreement with Raskin's employers to ensure the 
overseer reaches the mine safely. 

If his employers didn't insist on providing an escort, 
Raskin would just as soon make the trip alone. That be- 
ing said, he expects that young adventurers will delight 
in his recounting the tales of his exploits, and he secretly 
looks forward to the company. 


TRAVEL TO THE MINE 


The fastest way to reach the mine from Phandalin is to 
head northeast, skirting the foothills of the Sword Moun- 
tains. The mine is only 15 miles from Phandalin, so if the 
characters leave at dawn, they'll be there before sunset. 


а. 
MINE FEATURES 


All tunnels and caverns in the mine are hewn from rock that 
has thin veins of gold ore running through it. Other com- 
mon features are described below. 

Ceilings. Ceilings throughout are 8 feet high and braced at 
regular intervals by wooden pilasters and beams. 

Doors. All doors are made of wood with iron hinges and 
handles. The doors are fitted with locks, but none of them 
are locked. The keys needed to unlock and lock them are 
gone—stolen by a previous overseer who fled the mine. 

Light. Oil lanterns hang from ceiling hooks in every room 
and tunnel. 


———— ——— ——— 


MOUNTAIN'S TOE GOLD MINE 


DEAD Oncs 


When the party gets within five miles of the mine, read 
the following boxed text aloud: 


A low ridge rises to your right, beyond which you see the 
Sword Mountains scrape the gray sky. But closer in, some- 
thing is strewn across the rocky ground ninety feet ahead. 

"Well, ain't that something," says Don-Jon, pointing at 
what appear to be six dead orcs. 


The orcs were killed by Cryovain the white dragon. They 
are clad in hide armor, and their greataxes and javelins 
litter the ground around them. Any character who ex- 
amines the corpses and succeeds on a DC 12 Wisdom 
(Medicine) check can determine that extreme cold killed 
the orcs about three days ago. If the players can't piece to- 
gether what happened, Don-Jon says, “Looks like a white 
dragon saved us from some trouble." 


ARRIVAL 


The characters arrive at the west entrance to the mine, 
which you can describe as follows: 


Hidden among bushes, a tunnel burrows into the foot of a 
soaring, snow-capped mountain. Above the mouth of the 
tunnel is a wooden plank with the words "Mountain's Toe" 
carved into it in Common. 


Don-Jon doesn't have a map of the mine and has never 
visited it before, so he knows nothing about its layout. 


MINE LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to the map of the 
Mountain's Toe Gold Mine. 


MI. GUARD Post 

This cave is guarded by two female wererats (see page 
64 for their stat block) in hybrid form. They offer to 
escort new arrivals to the mine's overseer, Zeleen Varn- 
aster, in area M4. 


M2. WooDEN Posts 
Wooden posts used for shoring up tunnels and caves lean 
against the walls here. 


M3. CRATES AND CASKS 
Stacked against the walls of this storage area are a dozen 
empty crates and a similar number of empty casks. 


M4. WERERAT DEN 

Scattered about this cave are pickaxes, shovels, and 
other mining tools. The northeast section contains 
four giant rats (See page 57 for their stat block). The 
southwest section contains wererats (see page 64) in 
human form: one male wererat for each party member 


(ош MINE’ -0 


(including Don-Jon Raskin but not sidekicks) plus a fe- 
male wererat named Zeleen Varnaster—the leader of the 
Whiskered Gang. If Zeleen dies, another wererat takes 
over as leader as long as any of them survive. 

The wererats invaded the mine after orcs pushed them 
out of their previous lair—an old shrine near Conyberry 
(see “Shrine of Savras,” page 38). The wererats say 
they'll go back to their old lair if the characters get rid of 
the orcs at the shrine, but this is a only a ploy. The were- 
rats have no intention of abandoning the mine. 

Treasure. Characters who search the cave find two 
sacks hidden under debris. One sack contains ten fist- 
sized chunks of gold ore worth 10 gp each. The other 
holds 82 sp, 450 cp, and a pair of goggles of night. If 
the characters obtain and identify the goggles, give the 
Goggles of Night card to the players. 


M5. STOREROOM 


A dozen crates of dry foodstuffs and nine casks of drink- 
ing water are stacked in the middle of this cave. 


M6. SLEEPING QUARTERS 
This cave contains a dozen wooden cots. 


M7. GOLD STORAGE 
This cave contains two wheelbarrows and an empty bin. 


M8. EQUIPMENT STORAGE 
Picks, shovels, and wheelbarrows are stored here. 


M9. DEAD END 

Leaning against the back wall of this tunnel is a dead 
human miner with a pickaxe. Inspection of the corpse 
reveals that the miner was stabbed to death. 


1 
P. 
i 
3 


"rmm enm nj 


MIO. OvERSEER'S OFFICE 
The wererats ransacked this cave, whose furnishings in- 
clude a desk, a chair, an empty wooden chest, and a cot. 


МП. CARRION CRAWLER 

A carrion crawler (see page 54 for its stat block) lairs 

in this tunnel, the north end of which is 20 feet up the 
mountain’s rocky slope. Characters can scale the slope 
with a successful DC 10 Strength (Athletics) check. The 
crawler can’t open the door at the south end of the tunnel, 
so it clings to the ceiling in the middle of the tunnel and 
attacks anyone who approaches from either direction. 


M12. SLEEPING QUARTERS 
This cave holds six wooden cots. 


M13. RAT-INFESTED CAVE 

This cave contains five giant rats (see page 57 for 

their stat block) that attack anyone who opens the doors 
to area M14. 


M14—M15. MINERS’ RETREAT 

These caves are home to five hungry dwarf miners. They 
are commoners (see page 55 for their stat block) who 
speak Common and Dwarvish, and who have darkvision 
out to a range of 60 feet. The miners refuse to surrender 
the mine to a bunch of “filthy rats.” The wererats assume 
these miners will flee or die of starvation eventually. 


M16. GRAVEYARD 

This field contains a ring of earthen graves with pickaxes 
sticking out of the ground where headstones ought to be. 
Buried here are ten miners who died fighting the were- 
rats for control of the mine. 


MOUNTAIN’S TOE GOLD MINE 


38 


SHRINE ОЕ SAVRAS 


“SHRINE OF SAVRAS” IS BALANCED FOR CHARACTERS 

of 1st to 6th level. This location is not connected to any 
quest, though one of the entries in the Phandalin Tales 
table (page 9) might lure adventurers here. Charac- 

ters might also visit the shrine after hearing of it from the 
wererats іп the Mountain's Toe Gold Mine (page 36). 


LOCATION OVERVIEW 


Five miles south of Conyberry is a shrine dedicated 

to Savras, god of divination and fate. Many years ago, 

the shrine's priest-seers foresaw a barbarian attack on 
Conyberry, giving the townsfolk time to escape. Not all 
the townsfolk chose to flee, but those who did went to the 
shrine and brought much of the town's gold with them. 

The barbarians eventually tracked the townsfolk to the 
shrine, besieged it, and slaughtered everyone inside. In 
the days leading up to this final battle, the priest-seers 
helped the townsfolk hide their gold in plain sight. They 
melted down the coins and recast them into a bell, which 
they painted and hung in the shrine's belfry (replacing the 
old iron bell). The gold bell hangs there to this day. 

Over the years, many other creatures have occupied the 
shrine. Most recently, a gang of wererats laired here until 
they were driven out by orcs displaced by Cryovain the 
white dragon. Recently, ogres wandered by the shrine, 
saw the orcs, and decided to join them. 


ARRIVAL 


An old dirt trail stretches from the outskirts of Conyberry 
to the shrine, which characters first see from a distance. 
Read the following boxed text aloud: 


A ruin stands in the middle of a vast field north of the 
rocky foothills of the Sword Mountains. Ап old stone tem- 
ple with a belfry jutting from its peaked roof is enclosed 
by stone walls, many sections of which have collapsed. 
The trail ends at a crumbling gatehouse, the doors to 
which were sundered long ago. Three of the four towers 
that once stood at the corners of the outer walls have 
collapsed. Only the northeast tower remains, and a guard 
stands atop it. 


The guard spotted atop the northeast tower (area S6) is 
an orc (see page 62 for its stat block). During the day, 
the characters can't approach the shrine without being 
seen by this sentry, as there are no places to hide in the 
level field surrounding the shrine. If the characters wait 
until nightfall, clouds obscure the moon and enable them 
to approach unseen, as long as they stay outside the 60- 
foot range of the orc's darkvision. If the orc spots the 
characters, it cries out, rousing the shrine's other occu- 
pants. Once roused, all those occupants attack. 

The Enemy Roster table adjusts the number of orcs 
and ogres (see page 61 for the ogre stat block) in the 
shrine based on the level of the characters and the num- 
ber of characters in the party, not counting sidekicks. 


SHRINE OF SAVRAS 


ENEMY ROSTER 
Character 
Level | Number of Orcs and Ogres 
Ist 2orcs per character plus 1 ogre in the courtyard 
(area $2), 1 orc atop the northeast tower (area S6) 
2nd-3rd 3 orcs per character plus 2 ogres in the courtyard 
(area 52), 1 orc atop the northeast tower (area S6) 
4 orcs per character plus 3 ogres in the courtyard 
(area S2), 1 orc atop the northeast tower (area S6) 
6th 4 orcs per character plus 4 ogres in the courtyard 
(area S2), 1 orc atop the northeast tower (area S6) 


4th-Sth 


When rolling initiative for these foes, roll once for all 
the orcs and once for all the ogres. 


SHRINE LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to the map of the 
Shrine of Savras. Squares filled with rubble are difficult 
terrain (see the rulebook). 


Sl. GATEHOUSE 

The gatehouse is 20 feet high, and its outer doors have 
been smashed to flinders. A rusty iron portcullis blocks 
the south exit, but is bypassed by a rubble-filled hole in 
the southwest corner of the gatehouse. The winch to 
raise the portcullis has been destroyed, but the portcullis 
can be lifted manually with a successful DC 25 Strength 
(Athletics) check if desired. 


S2. COURTYARD 
The orcs and ogres camp in this grassy courtyard, 
which is littered with bones, broken weapons, and 
shattered armor from past battles. The courtyard has 
four quadrants. The ogres claim the southeast quad- 
rant, while the orcs claim the remaining quadrants. 
See the Enemy Roster table for the number of orcs and 
ogres present. 

The courtyard's northwest and northeast quadrants 
contain rotted wooden troughs and posts that were once 
used to feed, water, and tether horses. 


53. NORTHWEST TOWER 
This tower is open to the sky and strewn with rubble. 


54. SOUTHWEST TOWER 
This roofless tower has a rubble-filled break in its 
southeast wall. 


55. SOUTHEAST TOWER 
Little remains of this tower. Lying amid the debris is a 
rusty iron bell that weighs 500 pounds. 


S6. NORTHEAST TOWER 

This tower is the only one of the shrine's four towers that 
has not fallen. An iron ladder inside the tower climbs to 
a stone trapdoor in the ceiling, through which characters 
can reach the tower's battlemented rooftop. An orc (see 
page 62 for its stat block) watches the surrounding 
countryside from atop the tower. 


57. MAIN HALL AND BELFRY 


Rows of crumbling pillars support the 40-foot-high 
vaulted ceiling of this hall. Humanoid bones litter the 
dusty floor, and a 10-foot-square hole in the ceiling leads 
to the belfry. No rope hangs from the bell, which appears 
to be made of untarnished copper. The belfry can be 
reached from outside by climbing the outer walls and 
rooftop, which requires a successful DC 15 Strength 
(Athletics) check. Characters can reach the belfry from 
inside using magic such as a spider climb or fly spell. 
Treasure. Close examination of the bell reveals that 
it's thin sides are solid gold covered with peeling cop- 
per paint. The bell, which is 3 feet wide and weighs 50 
pounds, hangs from an iron fixture bolted to a wooden 
crossbeam. A character with carpenter's tools ог smith's 
tools can use them to detach the bell from the beam in 
1 minute. Any creature under the bell when it falls must 
succeed on a DC 12 Dexterity check to get out of the way, 
or take 14 (4d6) bludgeoning damage. The gold bell is 
worth 2,500 gp. 


58. Vistrors’ SANCTUARY 

Guests of the shrine were housed here. Later, the were- 
rats used this area as a lair. The room contains six 

beds with moldy mattresses, the shattered remains of a 
wooden table and six chairs, and a soot-stained fireplace 
containing a rusty cauldron hanging from a spit. A nar- 
row break in the north wall provides an alternative exit. 


S9. PRIEST-SEERS' SANCTUARY 

The priest-seers of Savras slept and cooked their meals 
here. АП the furnishings in this area have been de- 
stroyed, and part of the south wall has collapsed. 


510. ALTAR OF FATE 


Six stone pillars brace the vaulted ceiling of this temple, 
the floor of which is buried under a thick layer of dust. 
Also covered in dust are four humanoid skeletons in tat- 
tered priestly vestments, lying near a stone altar situated 
in an alcove under four narrow windows. Carved into the 
front of the altar is a humanoid eye. 


A detect табіс spell reveals an aura of divination magic 
around the altar. If Cryovain has been slain, nothing hap- 
pens when a character touches the altar. Otherwise, any 
character touching the altar experiences a vision lasting 
1 minute, during which time the character is incapaci- 
tated. In the vision, the character floats through the roof 
of the shrine, soars toward Icespire Hold (page 30), 
and sees the white dragon asleep on the fortress's roof- 
top. (The divination power of the altar is effectively telling 
the characters where they must go to defeat the dragon.) 
A character receives this vision only once. Nothing hap- 
pens to a character who touches the altar a second time. 
Treasure. Any character who searches the altar and 
succeeds on a DC 10 Wisdom (Perception) check realizes 
that the altar's base doesn't quite touch the floor. The 
altar has stone rollers built into it and can be pushed 3 
feet to the south, revealing an unlocked wooden coffer 
tucked inside a 1-foot-square cavity in the floor. This 
coffer contains 57 gp and a mystery key. If the characters 
acquire and identify the mystery key, give the players the 
Mystery Key card. 


SHRINE OF SAVRAS 


40 


TOWER ОЕ STORMS 


"TOWER OF STORMS" IS NOT CONNECTED TO ANY QUEST, 

though one of the entries in the Phandalin Tales table 

(page 9) might lure the adventurers here. This loca- 

tion is balanced for characters of 3rd level, but lower-level 

characters can survive if they're cautious and rest often. 
Before running this location, review the underwater 

combat rules in the rulebook. 


LOCATION OVERVIEW 


The Tower of Storms is more than just a lighthouse—it's 
a temple dedicated to Talos, the evil god of storms. Moe- 
sko, the half-orc anchorite who guards the lighthouse, 
uses its pulsing beacon to draw ships to their doom, for 
the light acts as an irresistible lure to passing seafarers 
who sail too close to shore. The source of the beacon's 
eerie green light is Moesko's own heart, which was torn 
from his chest in a ritual. If the heart is destroyed, the 
beacon's light goes out. 

The lighthouse is built atop a barren, 80-foot-high out- 
cropping of rock. At low tide, a narrow causeway extends 
from the shore to this outcropping, allowing easy access 
to the lighthouse. This causeway is 5 feet above sea level 
at low tide. At high tide, the causeway and the sandy 
beach are submerged under 5 feet of water. 


TRAVEL TO THE LIGHTHOUSE 


The Tower of Storms stands along the coast roughly 35 
miles west of Phandalin. If the characters leave Phand- 
alin at dawn, they can reach the High Road by nightfall 
and spend a long rest camping nearby. As the charac- 
ters travel west of the High Road the next day, they see 
a storm brewing out to sea. By the time they reach the 
100-foot-high cliffs overlooking the lighthouse and the 
Sea of Swords, the thunderstorm has reached the coast. 


ARRIVAL 


The characters arrive at low tide, when the causeway 
leading to the lighthouse is above sea level. Describe the 
location to the players as follows: 


Below the high cliff that hugs the coastline, an outcrop- 
ping of rock is nearly surrounded by water, with only a 
narrow causeway connecting it to the beach below, Atop 
this outcropping is a stone building surmounted by a light- 
house tower. An eerie green light pulses from this beacon, 
shining westward out to sea. With each green pulse of 
light, you hear the thump of a slow-beating heart. 


Characters searching for a safe way down the cliffs dis- 
cover a staircase carved into a narrow fissure. They can 
follow these steps all the way down to the shore just east 
of area T1. Crawling along the beach as they arrive there 
is a giant crab (see page 57 for its stat block). 

The giant crab waves its claws at the characters, who 
can interpret this behavior as a friendly gesture with a 
successful DC 13 Wisdom (Animal Handling) check. A 


TOWER OF STORMS 


sea elf named Miraal used magic to imbue this creature 
with an Intelligence of 10 and the ability to speak Com- 
mon. If the characters approach it peacefully, the crab 
says, "Well met!" and tries to strike up a conversation, 
during which it imparts the following information: 


* "Evil harpies nest atop the rocky outcropping." 

* "There are sharks in these waters, but the one to fear 
is a mean old brute named Daggermaw. She'll bite your 
head off and take pleasure in it." 

* "Five shipwrecks are spread around the rock beneath 
the lighthouse. I'll fetch treasure from one of these 
wrecks if you help me." 


HELPING THE GIANT CRAB 

If the characters agree to help the giant crab, it asks them 
to lay to rest its dead sea elf master, Miraal, whose spirit 
haunts a nearby cave (area T1). If the characters do so, 
the crab thanks them and makes good on its promise, 
retrieving the */ weapon from the wreck of the Star- 
Crossed Lover (see the Shipwrecks table on page 42). 


TOWER OF STORMS LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to the map of the 
Tower of Storms. 


ТІ. HAUNTED САУЕ 

Rough-hewn steps climb a 7-foot-high tunnel that passes 
all the way through a 30-foot-tall natural pillar of rock. 
A damp, 8-foot-high cave encrusted with lichen is con- 
nected to this tunnel. The cave remains above sea level 
at high tide and is haunted by a banshee (see page 52 
for its stat block). The banshee, Miraal, manifests as a 
ghostly elf with gills, webbed hands, and webbed feet. It 
wears spectral garments that sway as though the undead 
is floating underwater. The banshee can't travel farther 
than 100 feet from this cave, and thus can’t reach the 
lighthouse. 

Miraal was a sea elf killed by Moesko, who took her 
spellcasting focus—an opalescent conch—as a trophy. 
The banshee demands that the characters retrieve the 
conch and bring it to the cave, which will set her spirit to 
rest. It tries to kill the characters if they refuse, pursuing 
them as far as it can if they flee. 


T2. PLATEAU 

Rough-hewn stairs climb the eastern face of the rocky 
outcropping. The harpies in area T5 (see page 59 for 
their stat block) accost the characters as they climb these 
steps. See area T5 for details. 

At the top of the stairs, a rocky plateau spreads out 
some 80 feet above the water. Wooden doors leading to 
area T3 have rusty iron hinges and handles, as well as 
decorative lightning bolts carved into them. All other 
doors in the Tower of Storms are of similar construction 
and ornamentation. None of the doors are locked. 


ТЗ. FOYER 

This 15-foot-high room is empty. Through a dirty window 
in the south wall, the characters can see two ships' masts 
jutting crookedly from the water. 


асо даа 


AV 


ТА. SHRINE OF TALOS 
Describe this location to the players as follows: 


The walls of this fifteen-foot-high room are adorned with 
frescoes that depict ships being tossed on stormy seas, 
with a dark and terrible god looming above them and 
smiling. Set into the west wall is a dirty, salt-encrusted 
window. A stone altar with lightning bolts carved into it 
stands against the south wall. A metal rod descends from 
the ceiling above the altar, splitting in two before it em- 
beds itself into the stone. 


The smiling figure depicted in the frescoes is the chaotic 
evil storm god Talos, who can be recognized with a suc- 
cessful DC 15 Intelligence (Religion) check. Clerics of the 
Tempest domain succeed on the check automatically. 

Through the window, the characters can see the bro- 
ken masts of several sunken shipwrecks jutting up from 
the water. 

Altar. The lightning rod on the roof (area T8) channels 
electricity into the altar, which converts that raw ele- 
mental power into magical energy. The first character to 
touch the altar gains the Charm of the Storm, described 
below. Give that character’s player the Charm of the 
Storm card. 


Charm of the Storm. You become charged with the power of 
the storm, to the extent that tiny sparks crackle in your eyes. You 
can cast the lightning bolt spell (3rd-level version) as an action. 
Once used three times, the charm vanishes from you. 


Once the altar bestows this benefit, it can’t do so again 
until it recharges. The altar recharges when the lightning 
rod on the roof (see area Т8) is struck by three bolts of 
lightning from a storm and channels that energy down 
into the altar. Lightning from other sources doesn't count. 


T5. HARPIES’ AERIE 

A ledge enclosed by a 3-foot-high stone retaining wall 
serves as a nest for harpies (see page 59 for their stat 
block). The harpies line their nest with rotting vegetation 
and the bones of previous meals, which they hunt up and 
down the coast. The number of harpies present equals 
the number of characters in the party, including sidekicks 
(maximum three harpies). A harpy reduced to 10 hit 
points or fewer tries to fly away on its next turn, hoping to 
live to fight another day. 

Treasure. Characters who search through the har- 
pies’ nest find a potion of water breathing. If the charac- 
ters acquire this potion, give them the Potion of Water 
Breathing card. 


T6. LIGHTHOUSE INTERIOR 

A spiral staircase with an ornate stone railing climbs up 
the inside wall of this round stone tower. Each staircase 
landing is 20 feet higher than the one below it. 


T7. MOESKO THE ANCHORITE 

This 15-foot-high room has two north-facing windows. A 
barnacle-encrusted chair stands against the south wall. 
Sitting in the chair is Moesko, an anchorite of Talos (see 
page 51 for his stat block) clad in armor made from 

giant octopus hide. Resting in his lap is an opalescent 
conch he took from Miraal the sea elf (see area T1). 


TOWER OF STORMS 


Beneath his armor, Moesko has a hole in his chest 
where his heart used to be. If his heart (located in area 
T9) has been destroyed, Moesko is dead and slumped in 
the chair. Otherwise, he’s alive and demands that intrud- 
ers leave the Tower of Storms at once or face his wrath. 
He attacks those who defy him, confident in his ability to 
defend the lighthouse. 

If Moesko is killed but his heart has not yet been de- 
stroyed, his body reforms in 24 hours, regaining all its hit 
points and becoming active again. The new body appears 
within 5 feet of the heart. 

Treasure. Returning the opalescent conch to area T1 
dismisses the banshee as its spirit is set free. The char- 
acters are then free to sell the conch, Linene Graywind of 
the Lionshield Coster (see page 9) offers 125 gp for it, 
or it can be sold for 250 gp in a city such as Neverwinter. 


T8. ROOFTOP AND LIGHTNING Вор 

From this vantage point, the characters can see the shat- 
tered masts of the five shipwrecks west of the lighthouse 
(areas T10 to T14). Enclosing the rooftop is a 1-foot-high 
stone wall with a 2-foot-high iron railing atop it. A similar 
railing circles the walkway of the lighthouse beacon (area 
T9), which is 20 feet above this area. 

Lightning Rod. A 10-foot-tall, wrought-iron lightning 
rod reaches toward the sky. During a thunderstorm, light- 
ning strikes the rod at random intervals as determined by 
the DM, and is channeled through the roof to the altar in 
area Т4. A creature that happens to be in contact with the 
lightning rod when it's struck by a bolt of lightning must 
succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 22 
(4410) lightning damage оп a failed save, or half as much 
damage on a successful one. 


T9. MoEsKo's HEART 
The pinnacle of the lighthouse beacon is partly open 
to the elements and surrounded by a narrow walkway 
topped by an iron railing. Three open archways allow the 
beacon's pulsating green light to spill westward over the 
sea. This light is so bright that any character who dares 
look directly at it is blinded for 1 minute. 

The light originates from Moesko's still-beating heart, 
which floats in the air 5 feet off the floor. The heart has 


л ы 
EXPLORING THE WRECKS 
West of the Tower of Storms are five sunken shipwrecks 
(areas T10 through T14), with only their masts visible. Char- 
acters intent on searching the ships for treasure will need 
darkvision or magical light sources to see, as the wrecks are 
submerged in murky, 20-foot-deep water. 

Characters atop the 80-foot-high lighthouse outcropping 
might try to climb down its slope to reach the water. The 
slope has abundant handholds but is wet, so that ascend- 
ing or descending it requires a successful DC 10 Strength 
(Athletics) check. A character who fails the check slips and 
falls, landing in the water below and taking 1d6 bludgeoning 
damage per 10 feet fallen. 

Three 15-foot-long hunter sharks (see page 59 for their 
stat block) glide among the wrecks. Daggermaw is the 
meanest and hungriest of the three, and it attacks charac- 
ters without provocation after they finish searching two of 
the wrecks. If Daggermaw wounds a character, that charac- 
ter's blood in the water attracts the other two sharks, which 
join the fray on Daggermaw's next turn. 


na 


TOWER OF STORMS 


been magically enlarged to ten times its normal size, and 
is considered a Small object with AC 10, 10 hit points, 
and immunity to psychic damage. The heart can’t be 
moved. If reduced to 0 hit points, the heart's light goes 
out as the organ implodes and is destroyed, leaving no 
trace behind. Attacks made against the heart have dis- 
advantage unless the attacker is immune to the blinded 
condition or the heart's light is blotted out (by throwing a 
blanket over it, for example). 


T10—T14. SHIPWRECKS 

The crews aboard these five vessels perished when 

the beacon’s evil light compelled them to crash into the 
rocky outcropping. Fish have picked clean their skeletal 
remains, which lie scattered throughout the doomed ves- 
sels. Three sharks patrol the wreckage (See the “Explor- 
ing the Wrecks” sidebar). 

The Shipwrecks table below gives the name of each 
ship and the treasure that can be found within it. A 
character can spend an action searching the inside of a 
shipwreck. As part of that action, the character makes 
a DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check, finding the ship's 
treasure on a success. Once a ship's treasure is found, 
nothing else of value can be retrieved from that wreck. 

If the item found is a locked chest, a character can use 
an action to search the wreck for the key to the chest, 
finding it with a successful DC 20 Wisdom (Perception) 
check. Conversely, a character can pick the chest's sturdy 
lock with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check using 
thieves' tools. 

When a magic item is found and identified, give the 
players the corresponding magic item card. In the case 
of the +1 weapon in area T10, choose from among the 
weapons available (+1 battleaxe, +1 longbow, +1 mace, 
or +1 shortsword). Only one +1 weapon can be found, so 
choose a weapon with which at least one party member 
has proficiency. 


SHIPWRECKS 

Area Ship Name Treasure 

110 — Star-Crossed Lover +1 weapon of your choice, found 
in the grip of a skeleton that used 
to be the ship's captain 
Starfish clinging to a locked chest 
filled with straw, within which 
is packed a delicate, 9-inch-tall, 
blue quartz statuette of a mer- 
maid (75 gp) 
Cloak of many fashions worn by 
the skeleton of the ship's captain 
Locked chest containing 120 ep 
and six pearls (100 gp each) in a 
black silk pouch 
Locked chest that holds a fully 
charged wand of secrets and a 
leather-bound spellbook that 
contains the wizard spells blur, 
charm person, comprehend lan- 
guages, hold person, mage armor, 
sleep, and spider climb 


TI  SeaUrchin 


T12  Vainglory 


TI3 Golden Gull 


TI4 Orca 


JASON A, ENGLE 


UMBRAGE HILL 


“UMBRAGE HILL” IS BALANCED FOR CHARACTERS OF 3RD 
level or lower. Higher-level characters won't face great 
peril here, but they might need to visit this location to buy 
potions of healing from Adabra Gwynn. 


LOCATION OVERVIEW 


Umbrage Hill got its name after two feuding dwarf clans 
fought a pitched battle atop it. The cause of their umbrage 
is a tale lost to time, and only the cairns of the dead now 
remain. The stone windmill on the hill is a later addition, 
but is still more than a hundred years old. 

Adabra Gwynn, a midwife and apothecary devoted 
to Chauntea (goddess of agriculture), resides here. A 
manticore (see page 60 for its stat block) driven out of 
the mountains by Cryovain the white dragon attacks the 
windmill shortly before the adventurers arrive. Read the 
following boxed text to set the scene: 


Built on the slope of Umbrage Hill is an old stone windmill 
surrounded by an iron fence. A large winged monster with 
a spiky tail is trying to knock down the windmill's front 
door. A woman appears in a second-floor window, waves 
at you, and yells, “A little help?!” 


Adabra uses the commoner stat block (See page 55). 
Characters can fight or negotiate with the manticore, 
which ceases its attack and flies away if given at least 25 
gp in treasure or a few pounds of meat. 


If it’s not killed, the manticore could return with its 
mate to make more trouble in the future. 


QUEST GOALS 

Adabra declines to return to Phandalin, but the charac- 
ters can complete the Umbrage Hill Quest (page 10) 

by asking her for a note for Harbin Wester confirming her 


safety. Adabra also gives her saviors one potion of healing 
for dealing with the manticore (see below). 


UMBRAGE HILL LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to the map of Um- 
brage Hill. 


Ul. DWARVEN CAIRNS 
Dwarves were buried under these rock piles, but their 
bones, armor, and weapons disintegrated long ago. 


U2. RuINS ОЕ А HOUSE 
A fireplace is all that remains of this old stone house. 


03-05. STONE WINDMILL 
Adabra uses the millstone on the ground floor (area U3) 
to grind herbs and other ingredients for poultices and po- 
tions. Her quarters are on the second floor (area U4). The 
third floor (area 05) is a loft where guests can stay. 
Treasure. Adabra sells potions of healing for 50 gp. 
Give a Potion of Healing card to any player whose charac- 
ter acquires one of these potions. If you run out of cards, 
Adabra has no potions left to sell. 


P id Bt d 21-і ааа a Mt el at 
T т f | | Т 1 н 


WOODLAND MANSE 


“WOODLAND MANSE" IS BALANCED FOR CHARACTERS OF 
5th or 6th level, though characters of 3rd or 4th level can 
survive the challenges of this quest if they rest between 
encounters. 


LOCATION OVERVIEW 


Many years ago, a half-elf wizard interested in the ex- 
ploration of ancient elven ruins built a stone house in 
Neverwinter Wood, not far from several ruins that piqued 
her interest. In the course of her explorations, the wizard 
disappeared, and the protective magical wards on her 
home expired. The house fell into disrepair, then eventu- 
ally into ruin. Ivy has all but engulfed it in the years since. 

Recently, a half-orc anchorite of Talos named Grannoc 
took over the ruined house and planted seeds at the bot- 
tom of its well. From these seeds, a malignant tree grew 
to fill the well and began spawning evil plant monsters 
called blights (see page 52). The blights obey Grannoc, 
who uses them to defend his woodland manse and kill 
trespassers within the forest. 


QUEST GOALS 


To complete the Woodland Manse Quest (page 11), 
the adventurers must eradicate the evil dwelling in 
and around the manse. Their reward awaits them at 
Falcon's Hunting Lodge (page 24). 


ARRIVAL 


Characters who come here from Falcon's Hunting Lodge 
(page 24) arrive from the west. Those coming from the 
Circle of Thunder (page 18) arrive from the north. 


а Ж 
WOODLAND Manse FEATURES 
The manse is a dilapidated stone villa enveloped in ivy. Its 
common features are described below. 

Ceilings. Ceilings on the ground floor are 8 feet high and 
flat. Second-floor ceilings are 15 feet high and peaked, with 
wooden rafters crossing below them at a height of 10 feet. 

Doors. Normal doors are made of wood, and are so 
rotted as to be soft and easily breakable (no ability check 
required). Secret doors are made of stone and blend in with 
the surrounding walls. A secret door can be found by a char- 
acter who searches the surrounding wall and succeeds on a 
DC 10 Wisdom (Perception) check. 

Ivy. The ivy enveloping the manse is poisonous and 
makes the walls difficult to climb. Scaling a wall requires a 
successful DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check. A creature that 
comes into contact with ivy must succeed on a DC 12 Con- 
stitution saving throw or take 2 (1d4) poison damage. 

Light. Most locations on the ground floor are dark, as the 
ivy blocks out the natural light except in areas that are open 
to the sky (such as the courtyard) or that have openings 
through which sunlight or moonlight can enter. Rooms and 
halls on the upper level are dimly lit by natural light that fil- 
ters through holes in the roof. 

Windows. Windows аге 21/2-foot wide, 5-foot-high aper- 
tures with wooden shutters but no glass. Those along the 
outside walls are covered with ivy, which must be cleared 
away before the shutters can be opened or closed. 


-—————————————————— We 


WOODLAND MANSE 


Describe this location to the players by reading the fol- 
lowing boxed text aloud: 


Following a trail through the woods, you come to a foggy 
clearing, in the midst of which stands a crumbling two- 
story manse all but hidden beneath thorny ivy. The large 
house is set atop a six-foot-high stone foundation, and 
the main entrance has a balcony above it. Pumpkins grow 
wild in patches around the manse, with several wild boars 
feeding among them. The boars snort with contempt as 
you draw near. 


The trail heading north off the map leads to the Circle 
of Thunder (page 18). The trail heading west leads to 
Falcon's Hunting Lodge (page 24). 


WOODLAND MANSE LOCATIONS 


The following locations are keyed to the map of the wood- 
land manse. 


W1. PUMPKIN PATCHES 

Nine boars graze in the pumpkin patches—one per 
patch. Of these, six are actual boars (see page 54 

for their stat block), The other three are anchorites of 
Talos in boar form (see page 51). The anchorites ig- 
nore the characters until they try to leave (see “Leaving 
the Manse,” page 47). If the characters attack a boar, 

it flees on its turn by darting into the nearby woods. If 
the characters attack an anchorite, all of the boars and 
anchorites retaliate. If you need to determine whether a 
boar is an anchorite or not, roll а 46. On а 5 or 6, the boar 
is an anchorite in disguise. 

Pumpkins. A detect magic spell reveals a dim aura of 
transmutation magic around each pumpkin. As an ac- 
tion, a character can carve open a pumpkin to reveal six 
servings of seeds within. Any creature that eats a serving 
of pumpkin seeds as an action regains 1 hit point. If a 
creature eats more than five servings of pumpkin seeds 
in 1 hour, it must succeed on a DC 12 Constitution saving 
throw or be poisoned for 1d4 hours. 


W2. PORTICO AND BALCONY 
Describe the main entrance of the manse as follows: 


Stone steps climb to a portico with a stone balcony over- 
hanging it at a height of ten feet. Vines wrap around the 
balcony's support pillars and its crumbling stone railing. 
The ground-floor entrance features a double door with a 
giant boar's head crudely carved into it. An unmarred dou- 
ble door stands closed on the balcony. 


A character can climb up to the balcony with a successful 
DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check. If another character 
assists, the check is made with advantage. Both sets of 
double doors are free of ivy and safe to open. 


зе IP aie 
rr шн? 


шн 


W3. DOWNSTAIRS HALL 
This undecorated hall features a creaky and moldy 
wooden staircase. 

Trapped Stairs. The staircase climbs 10 feet to area 
W14. Its upper half has been weakened to the extent that 
it collapses under 50 pounds or more of weight. A crea- 
ture on the collapsing stairs must make a DC 15 Dex- 
terity saving throw to avoid falling onto a bed of wooden 


spikes planted underneath the staircase. On a failed save, 


the creature lands on 1d6 wooden spikes, each one deal- 
ing 1d6 piercing damage. 


W4. PARLOR 


The door to this parlor has been smashed to pieces. The 
room is strewn with broken furniture—the remains of 
chairs, side tables, and a wine cabinet. A moldy circular 
rug covers most of the stone floor. 


W5. DINING Коом 

The walls are covered with crude drawings in blood that 
depict boars chasing stick-figure humanoids. A fireplace 
dominates the south side of the room, and a smashed 
wooden dining table lies in a heap in the eastern half of 
the room, surrounded by six broken chairs. 

If the characters met the shapechanged anchorite of 
Talos on the way to the loggers’ camp and let it get away 
(see “A Boar-ing Encounter,” page 34), small twig 
figures rest on the mantelpiece—one representing each 
party member (including sidekicks). These are twig 
blights (see page 53 for their stat block) that attack if 
they are touched or harmed. 

Treasure. Amid the ruined furnishings is a tarnished 
silver candelabrum worth 25 gp. 


W6. KITCHEN 


Nature has run roughshod over this kitchen, whose fur- 
nishings are wholly decayed. The outside door was bro- 
ken down years ago, and rats have chewed holes in the 
bottom of the door leading to the pantry (area W7). 


W7. PANTRY 


Much of the roof above this chamber has collapsed, leav- 
ing debris scattered across the floor. Birds have made 
nests on the wooden shelves that line the north and south 
walls, Rats long ago devoured anything they could reach, 
and all other foodstuffs have rotted away. 


W8. COURTYARD 
Describe this area to the players as follows: 


Stone steps lead down to a flagstoned courtyard that has 
a pillared arcade to the east. Seven windows on the upper 
level overlook the courtyard, in the middle of which is a 

five-foot-wide stone well with thick vines erupting from it. 


If the ores in area W18 have not yet been dealt with, add 
the following: 


Guttural snorts and yells erupt from the southeast corner 
of the manse, signaling the presence of orcs nearby. 


Characters who understand the Orc language can over- 
hear the orcs planning some sort of attack. 


WOODLAND MANSE 


46 


Gulthias Tree. The well, which is 30 feet deep, con- 
tains a Gulthias tree, the roots of which extend deep 
underground. With little room to spread out, the tree has 
grown into a malformed column of twisted wood with 
narrow gaps between its curling branches. 

Hidden in the shaft are a number of vine blights (see 
page 53 for their stat block)—one blight plus one addi- 
tional blight for each member of the party, not including 
sidekicks (maximum five blights). The blights form a 
descending column, with the closest one 5 feet below the 
well’s mouth. With their blindsight, they can sense intrud- 
ers in the courtyard. However, they emerge to attack only 
when they or the Gulthias tree take damage, or when 
Grannoc (see area W10) commands them to do so. Once 
the blights are out of the shaft, a Medium or smaller char- 
acter can climb down it, slipping between the branches of 
the tree with ease (no ability check needed). 

The Gulthias tree is a Huge plant with blood for sap. It 
has AC 15, 250 hit points, vulnerability to fire damage, 
and no actions, reactions, or defenses. Like an ordinary 
tree, it's immobile. Unless it's completely uprooted, how- 
ever, it regrows from its roots even if it’s reduced to 0 hit 
points, regaining 1 hit point every 24 hours. 

On any night when the moon is blood red, the Gulthias 
tree can spawn 2d6 twig blights, 1d6 needle blights, or 
1d4 vine blights. These blights split from the tree and 
crawl out of the well, ready to do Grannoc's bidding. 

Sounding the Alarm. Any loud noise in the courtyard 
alerts the creatures in areas W10 and W138. Roll initiative 
for these creatures and the vine blights in the well, and 
have them react as follows: 


+ Grannoc and the twig blights in area W10 investigate 
immediately. On their first turn, they enter the court- 
yard, whereupon Grannoc commands the vine blights 
to emerge from the well. Grannoc and the blights then 
use their actions to attack their nearest foes. 

* The ores in area W18 use their first turn to drop down 
into area W9. They barge through the door and join the 
battle on their second turn. 


W9. APPRENTICES’ ROOM 
Describe this area to the players as follows: 


This room was once a bedchamber, kitchen, and dining 
room rolled into one. Four beds stand along the south 
wall, with shuttered windows and nightstands between 
them. Against the west wall are four wardrobes and a cabi- 
net full of plain dishware and cutlery. Four chairs surround 
a small dining table in the northeast corner, and a trestle 
table strewn with pots and cooking utensils stands near a 
blackened fireplace. All the furnishings are made of wood. 
The ceiling in the southwest corner of the room has 
collapsed, filling the area below with debris and leaving a 
jagged hole through which the room above is visible. 


The wizard who built the manse had four apprentices. 
When it became clear that the wizard wasn't coming 
back, the apprentices pillaged the library (area W1 1) and 
fled, taking their personal belongings with them. 


WOODLAND MANSE 


Any loud noise in this area alerts the orcs in area W18. 
On their first turn, they drop down through the hole in 
the ceiling. On the following turn, they attack. 

Adventurers can move tall furniture underneath the 
hole and climb up it to reach area W18 without having to 
make an ability check. 


W10. WIZARD’S LABORATORY 

The door on the east side of this room has been smashed 
down, but any light from the courtyard isn't enough to 
illuminate the room. Characters with darkvision or a light 
source see the following: 


What used to be some sort of laboratory lies in ruins, 
its furnishings broken and heaped against the walls. In 
the middle of the room, painted on the floor with mud, 
is a ten-foot-wide symbol depicting three lightning bolts 
joined at their tips. 


Any character who succeeds on a DC 15 Intelligence 
(Religion) check recognizes the symbol as that of Talos, 
the evil god of storms. A cleric with the Tempest domain 
succeeds on the check automatically. 

If the characters manage to get this far without alerting 
Grannoc, they catch him performing a ritual: 


Where the lightning bolts converge, a half-orc wearing 
hide armor performs an eerie dance while consuming the 
entrails of a dead possum. Standing around the half-orc 
are several small twig figures. 


The half-orc, Grannoc, is an anchorite of Talos (see 
page 51 for his stat block). Under his command are a 
number of twig blights (see page 53)—three blights 
for each character in the party, not including sidekicks. 
Characters who watch Grannoc without alerting or inter- 
rupting him can determine that he's performing a ritual 
with a successful DC 15 Intelligence (Religion) check. 
Grannoc hopes Talos will answer his prayers and rain 
destruction down upon Falcon's Hunting Lodge. Any in- 
terruption by the characters spoils the ritual and incurs 
Grannoc's wrath. 

Map. Grannoc has a map scrawled on the torn-off flap 
of a leather satchel. It shows Neverwinter Wood and 
marks the location of the Circle of Thunder (page 18). 


WII. LIBRARY 


This area extends through both floors of the house. De- 
scribe it to the players as follows: 


This room has a ten-foot-high wooden balcony forming its 
upper level, reached by a wooden spiral staircase curling 
down to the flagstone floor. Tall, empty bookcases line 
the walls, their shelves mostly bowed and broken. On the 
lower level, east of two pillars, are four old desks with 
chairs tucked behind them. A few moldy books are scat- 
tered about. 


Secret Door. One of the bookcases on the balcony con- 
ceals a secret door into area W12. Tugging on the book- 
case Causes it and the secret door to swing open. 

Treasure. The books found here are old texts written 
in Elvish that describe long-lost elven kingdoms and civ- 
ilizations. They are too damaged to be worth anything. 
Additionally, one desk has a small book tucked under 
one of its back legs to level it off. The book is titled Elvish 
Idioms, and its pages have been cut out to conceal a tiny 
leather packet containing dust of disappearance. If the 
characters find the packet and identify the dust, give the 
players the Dust of Disappearance card. 


W12. MASTER BEDROOM 

A four-poster bed stands between two shuttered windows 
against the west wall. Other furnishings include a desk 
and chair against the north wall and an empty wardrobe 
against the east wall. A fireplace built into the south wall 
features an elegantly carved mantelpiece. 

Treasure. A detect magic spell reveals an aura of con- 
juration magic emanating from the fireplace mantel. Any 
character who searches it and succeeds on a DC 10 Wis- 
dom (Perception) check discovers that the mantelpiece 
is actually a lid concealing a long, hidden compartment. 
The wizard who built the manse hid her staff of birdcalls 
here. If the characters obtain and identify the staff, give 
the players the Staff of Birdcalls card. 


W13. MAGIC ITEM VAULT 

This room has been sealed for years behind its secret 
door. When the characters open the secret door, describe 
the room's features as follows: 


Hanging on a hook on the far wall is a handsome cloak 
that billows softly as the door opens. Against the north 
wall sits a wooden chest with tiny clawed feet. 


The chest weighs 30 pounds and is magically locked. A 
knock spell unlocks it, or the chest can be smashed open. 
It's a Small object with AC 15, 20 hit points, and immu- 
nity to poison and psychic damage. 

Treasure. The garment hanging on the hook is a cloak 
of billowing, and the chest contains an immovable rod 
wrapped in a black cloth. If the characters acquire and 
identify these magic items, give the players the Cloak of 
Billowing and Immovable Rod cards. 


W14. UPSTAIRS HALL 
Describe this area to the players as follows: 


The walls of this L-shaped hall are lined with closed doors 
and shuttered windows. Between them are hooks where 
decorations once hung. A fireplace along one wall has a 
large insectoid head mounted above it. Natural light en- 
ters through a hole in the roof at the east end of the hall. 
The floor beneath the collapsed roof is strewn with debris. 


The wooden staircase that leads downstairs is trapped 
(see area W3). 


The head mounted above the fireplace is that of an 
ankheg (see page 51 for an illustration). 

The hallway leading to area W12 is dark. Stirges (see 
page 63 for their stat block) hang from the rafters 
here—three stirges per party member, not including 
sidekicks (maximum twelve stirges). The hungry stirges 
attack any warm-blooded creature that enters the area. 


W15. BATHROOM 

This room has a conical roof and an open window to 

the north, through which ivy grows. A cast-iron tub with 
clawed feet stands in the middle of the room. Next to the 
tub is a rusty iron water pump that still works, drawing 
water from a hot spring under the house. 


W16. SLANTED ROOFTOP 

Sections of this wood-shingled roof have collapsed into 
area W7, leaving gaping holes. The westernmost 15-foot- 
square section of roof collapses if 50 pounds or more 

of weight is placed on it. Any creature standing on this 
section of the roof when it collapses must succeed on а 
DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or fall into area W7 below, 
taking 3 (1d6) bludgeoning damage on impact. 


W17. UPPER ARCADE 

This corridor is enclosed by two double doors and four 
open windows. Characters can easily sidestep the ivy 
growing in through the windows to the east. If the orcs 

in area W18 haven't been dispatched yet, the characters 
hear their raucous talk through the southern double door. 


W18. GUEST ROOM 

This room has been claimed by hostile orcs (see page 

62 for their stat block) in league with Grannoc. Four 
orcs are here, plus an additional orc for each character in 
the party, not including sidekicks. The orcs are sharpen- 
ing their weapons in anticipation of an attack on Falcon’s 
Hunting Lodge. The orcs have destroyed this room's 
once-fine furnishings, leaving nothing of value. A hole in 
the southwest corner of the floor leads to area W9 below. 


LEAVING THE MANSE 


When the characters finish exploring the manse, they 
are attacked as they make their exit. The attacking force 
consists of any anchorites of Talos and boars in area 
WI that were not previously killed or forced to flee. In ad- 
dition, needle blights (see page 53 for their stat block) 
emerge from the woods to join the battle—two blights for 
each character in the party, not including sidekicks. 


COUNTERATTACK! 


The day after the characters attack the manse, dark 
clouds settle over Neverwinter Wood as the anchorites 
of Talos stage a counterattack against Falcon’s Hunting 
Lodge (page 24). Gorthok the Thunder Boar (see 
page 58 for its stat block) smashes through the lodge’s 
palisade, allowing twenty ores (See page 62 for their 
stat block) to storm the lodge. 

If the characters aren't present when the lodge is at- 
tacked, Falcon and his servants flee on Falcon's riding 
horse and make their way to Phandalin, surrendering the 
lodge to the orcs. 


WOODLAND MANSE 


47 


ENDING THE ADVENTURE 


THE ADVENTURE CAN END IN ONE OF SEVERAL WAYS. 
Ideally, it concludes with the defeat of Cryovain the white 
dragon, the completion of all the Phandalin quests, or 
both. By then, the characters should be 6th level. Give the 
players a chance to wrap up loose ends before declaring 
the adventure over. For example, the characters might 
need to return to Phandalin to collect an outstanding 
reward or notify townsfolk that the dragon has been dealt 
with. Armed with such good news, Townmaster Harbin 
Wester might plan a feast in the heroes’ honor. What hap- 
pens next is up to you. 

If the worst happens and the characters die, their ad- 
venture is also over. You can let the players roll up new 
characters and pick up where their last ones left off, or 
you can also start over with new characters, tweaking 
quests as you see fit to surprise players who might be 
familiar with them. 

You might also expand the adventure by inventing new 
quests and new locations. Another introductory product 
called the D&D Starter Set contains an adventure titled 
Lost Mine of Phandelver, which takes place in the same 
region as this adventure and is designed for characters 
of Ist through 5th level. You can add locations from that 
adventure to this one, giving your players and their char- 
acters even more places to explore. 

Once you've exhausted all the content this adventure 
has to offer, you can run it again for different players, 
or you can find an adventure that takes the characters 
beyond 6th level. The “Where Next?” section below offers 
a few suggestions. 


WHERE NEXT? 


If your players want to advance their characters beyond 
6th level, they'll need the Player's Handbook or the D&D 
Beyond app (www.dndbeyond.com) to do so. 

If you plan to run more D&D for your players, you'll 
also need the Dungeon Master's Guide, the Monster Man- 
игі, and new adventures. Many DMs like to create their 
own adventures. Others prefer to run published adven- 
tures like this one. You'll find fun, inexpensive adventures 
for characters of all levels and groups of all sizes in the 
DMs Guild (www.dmsguild.com). Wizards of the Coast 
also publishes hardcover books that contain stand-alone 
adventures that can entertain you and your players for 
months. You can run these adventures as written, or you 
can do what many experienced DMs do: use the parts you 
like, ignore the rest, and add a few surprises of your own. 
Here are brief descriptions of some of these published ad- 
ventures, to help you choose the one that's right for you. 


Curse of Strahd (for levels 1—10). Eerie mist engulfs 
the adventurers and transports them to Barovia, a 
land of Gothic horror ruled by the vampire Strahd von 
Zarovich. To escape Barovia, the characters must con- 
front and defeat the vampire in his terrifying castle. 
Hoard of the Dragon Queen (for levels 1-7) and The 
Rise of Tiamat (for levels 8—15). Tiamat, the Queen of 
Evil Dragons, is trapped in the Nine Hells—but not for 
long if her servants amass enough treasure to buy her 
freedom. This adventure is split across two books. 


ENDING THE ADVENTURE 


Rock бмоме RectLuse 


Out of the Abyss (for levels 1—15). Trapped in a vast sub- 
terranean labyrinth called the Underdark, the charac- 
ters must fight monsters and forge alliances to survive. 
Along the way, they encounter wandering demons that 
are spreading madness wherever they go. 

Princes of the Apocalypse (for levels 1-15). East of 
Phandalin lies the peaceful Dessarin Valley, where four 
evil elemental cults have gained a foothold. To protect 
the valley and its settlements, the characters must root 
out and destroy these cults and their leaders. 

Storm King’s Thunder (for levels 1—10). Evil giants seek 
to conquer the Sword Coast. If the characters can find 
Hekaton the storm giant king, he can put an end to the 
giants' rampage, but a secret enemy stands in their way. 

Tomb of Annihilation (for levels 1—11). A trap-ridden 
tomb holds a device that is capturing and devouring the 
souls of the dead. To save these poor souls, the char- 
acters must cross a vast jungle, descend into the tomb, 
and defeat the horrors within. 

Waterdeep: Dungeon of the Mad Mage (for levels 
5-20). Beneath the city of Waterdeep lies the dungeon 
of Undermountain, ruled by the mad wizard Halaster 
Blackcloak. Many heroes enter, but few escape! 


= 


PLAYTESTERS 


Special thanks to our playtesters: Glen Ausse, Cory Barlog, 
Brandon Beck, Dave Bendit, Greg Broadmore, Jacob Defas- 
sio, lan Fiebig, Ray Fisher, Daniel Garrett, Chad Gokey, Mark 
Greenberg, James Herbert, Doug Hopkins, Joe Hughes, 
Michael Jones, Ty Koebernick, Kevin Konieczko, Josh 
Mosqueira, Sebastian Ortiz, Bob Pursley, Jade Raymond, 
Jesse Robinson, Rebecca Robinson, David Steele, James A. 
Thompson, Morgan “The Sleeper” Webb. 


ad 


CREATURES 


THIS SECTION CONTAINS STAT BLOCKS AND DESCRIPTIONS 
for the creatures that appear in Dragon of Icespire Peak. 


CREATURE STAT BLOCKS 


A creature's stat block provides the essential information 
that you, as the DM, need to run the creature. 


SIZE 


The Size Categories table shows how much space a crea- 
ture of a particular size controls in combat. This space is 
not a measure of the creature’s physical dimensions. For 
example, a typical Medium creature isn’t 5 feet wide, but 
it controls a space that wide. If a Medium orc stands in 

a 5-foot-wide doorway, other creatures can't get through 
unless the orc lets them. 


SizE CATEGORIES 


Size 

Tiny 

Small A 
Medium ‘S by 5 ft. 
Large 10 by 10 ft. 
Huge 15 by 15 ft. 


SQUEEZING INTO A SMALLER SPACE 

A creature can squeeze through a space large enough for 
a creature one size smaller than itself. When squeezing 
through such a space, the creature's speed is halved. 
While squeezing, a creature has disadvantage on attack 
rolls and Dexterity saving throws, and attack rolls against 
it have advantage. 


ТүрЕ 


A creature's type speaks to its fundamental nature. The 
following types of creatures appear in this adventure. 


Beasts. Nonhumanoid creatures that, like real-world ani- 
mals, are a normal part of the world’s ecology. 

Dragons. Winged, reptilian creatures of ancient origin 
and tremendous power. 

Elementals. Creatures comprised of one or more of the 
fundamental elements of air, earth, fire, and water. 

Giants. Humanoid-like creatures that tower over humans 
and their kin. 

Humanoids. Bipedal peoples of the civilized and savage 
world, including humans, dwarves, elves, and halflings. 

Monstrosities. Frightening creatures that sometimes re- 
semble beasts but that are often touched by magic and 
almost never benign. 

Оогев. Gelatinous creatures that generally have no fixed 
shape. They are mostly subterranean. 

Plants. Plant creatures, as opposed to ordinary plants, 
have some degree of sentience and mobility. 

Undead. Once-living creatures brought to a horrifying 
state of undeath through the practice of necromantic 
magic or some unholy curse. 


Tacs 


A creature might have опе or more tags appended to 

its type, in parentheses. For example, a mimic has the 
monstrosity (shapechanger) type. These parenthetical 
tags provide an additional layer of categorization for cer- 
tain creatures, but they have no bearing on how a crea- 
ture is used in combat. 


ALIGNMENT 


A creature's alignment reflects its disposition. Alignment 
indicates whether a creature leans toward law or chaos 
and good or evil, or whether a creature is neutral. 

Any Alignment. Some creatures, such as the veteran, 
can have any alignment. In other words, you choose the 
creature’s alignment. Depending on the creature, its 
alignment entry might indicate a tendency or aversion 
toward law, chaos, good, or evil. 

Unaligned. Many creatures of low intelligence have no 
comprehension of law or chaos, good or evil. They don't 
make moral or ethical choices, but rather act on instinct. 
These creatures are unaligned, which means they don’t 
have an alignment. 


ARMOR CLASS 


А creature that wears armor or carries a shield has 
an AC that takes its armor, shield, and Dexterity into 
account. Otherwise, a creature's AC is based on its Dex- 
terity modifier and any natural armor or supernatural 
resilience it might possess. 

If a creature wears armor or carries a shield, the kind 
of armor it wears or shield it carries is noted in parenthe- 
ses after its AC value. 


HIT POINTS 


A creature usually dies or is destroyed when its hit points 
drop to 0. For more on hit points, see the rulebook. 


SPEED 


A creature's speed tells you how far it can move on its 
turn. For more information on speed, see the rulebook. 

All creatures have a walking speed; those that have no 
form of ground-based locomotion have a walking speed 
of 0 feet. Many of the creatures herein have one or more 
additional movement modes. 

Burrow. А creature that has a burrowing speed сап 
use all or part of its movement to move through sand, 
earth, mud, or ice. It can't burrow through solid rock un- 
less it has a special trait that allows it to do so. 

Climb. ^ creature that has a climbing speed can use all 
or part of its movement to move on vertical surfaces. The 
creature doesn't need to spend extra movement to climb. 

Fly. ^ creature that has a flying speed can use all or 
part of its movement to fly. If the creature is incapacitated 
or knocked prone while flying, it falls unless it can hover. 

Swim. A creature that has a swimming speed doesn't 
need to spend extra movement to swim. 


CREATURES 


49 


БО 


ABILITY SCORES 


Every creature has six ability scores (Strength, Dexterity, 
Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma) and 
corresponding modifiers. For more information on ability 
scores and how they're used in play, see the rulebook. 


SAVING THROWS 


The Saving Throws entry is reserved for creatures that 
are particularly adept at resisting certain kinds of effects. 


SKILLS 


The Skills entry is reserved for creatures that are profi- 
cient in one or more skills. For example, a perceptive and 
stealthy creature might have higher-than-normal bonuses 
to Wisdom (Perception) and Dexterity (Stealth) checks. 

Skills in a creature's stat block are shown with the total 
modifier—the creature's ability modifier plus its profi- 
ciency bonus. If a creature's stat block says "Stealth 46," 
roll a d20 and add 6 when the creature makes an ability 
check using Stealth. 


ARMOR, WEAPON, AND TOOL PROFICIENCIES 
Assume a creature is proficient with its armor, weapons, 
and tools. If you swap out a creature's armor and weap- 
ons, you must decide whether the creature is proficient 
with its new equipment. See the rulebook for what hap- 
pens when you use these items without proficiency. 


VULNERABILITIES, RESISTANCES, 
AND IMMUNITIES 


Some creatures have vulnerability, resistance, or immu- 
nity to certain types of damage. Additionally, some crea- 
tures are immune to certain conditions and other game 
effects. These immunities are also noted here. 


SENSES 


The Senses entry notes a creature's passive Wisdom 
(Perception) score, as well as any special senses the crea- 
ture might have, such as the following senses. 

Blindsiéht. A creature with blindsight can perceive its 
surroundings without having to rely on sight, within a 
specific radius. 

Darkvision. A creature with darkvision can see in the 
dark within a specific radius. The creature can see in 
dim light within the radius as if it were bright light, and 
in darkness as if it were dim light. The creature can't dis- 
cern color in darkness, only shades of gray. 

Tremorsense. А creature with tremorsense can detect 
and pinpoint the origin of vibrations within a specific 
radius, provided that the creature and the source of the 
vibrations are in contact with the same ground or sub- 
stance. Tremorsense can't be used to detect flying or in- 
corporeal creatures. Many burrowing creatures, such as 
ankhegs, have this special sense. 


LANGUAGES 


The languages that a creature can speak are listed in al- 
phabetical order. Sometimes a creature can understand a 
language but not speak it, and this is noted in the entry. 


CREATURES 


CHALLENGE 


An appropriately equipped and well-rested party of four 
adventurers should be able to defeat a creature that has a 
challenge rating equal to their level without suffering any 
casualties. Creatures that are significantly weaker than 
1st-level characters have challenge ratings lower than 1. 


EXPERIENCE PoiNTS (ХР) 
The number of experience points a creature is worth is 
based on its challenge rating. Typically, XP is awarded for 
defeating the creature, and characters gain levels as they 
accumulate XP. 

In Draéon of Icespire Peak, you don't need to track 
experience points, as characters advance in level by 
completing quests instead of accumulating XP. 


TRAITS 


Traits are special features of the creature that are likely 
to be relevant in a combat encounter. 


ACTIONS 


When a creature takes its action, it can choose from the 
options in the “Actions” section of its stat block. The rule- 
book describes other actions available to all creatures. 


MELEE AND RANGED ATTACKS 
The most common actions that a creature will take in 
combat are melee and ranged attacks. These can be spell 
attacks or weapon attacks, where the “weapon” might be 
a manufactured item or a natural weapon, such as a claw, 
Hit. Any damage or other effects that occur as a result 
of an attack hitting a target are described here. As the 
DM, you can take average damage or roll the damage; for 
this reason, both the average damage and the die expres- 
sion are presented. For example, a monster might deal 4 
(1d8) slashing damage with its longsword. That notation 
means you can have the monster deal 4 damage, or you 
can roll 1d8 to determine the damage. 


REACTIONS 


Ifa creature can do something unusual with its reaction, 
that information is contained here. Most creatures don't 
have special reactions, in which case this section is ab- 
sent. Reactions are explained in the rulebook. 


LIMITED USAGE 


Some special abilities—whether they are traits, actions, 
or reactions—have restrictions on the number of times 
they can be used. 

X/Day. The notation “X/Day” means a special ability 
can be used a certain number of times and that a crea- 
ture must finish a long rest to regain expended uses. 

Recharge X-Y. The notation “Recharge X-Y" means а 
creature can use a special ability once and that the ability 
then has a random chance of recharging during each sub- 
sequent round of combat. At the start of each of the crea- 
ture's turns, roll a d6. If the roll is one of the numbers in 
the recharge notation, the creature regains the use of that 
special ability. The ability also recharges when the crea- 
ture finishes a short or long rest. 


CREATURE DESCRIPTIONS 


The creatures that appear in the adventure are presented 
in this section in alphabetical order. 


ANCHORITE OF TALOS 


These religious recluses are granted spellcasting power 
by Talos, the god of storms. Their human ancestors bred 
with orcs, and now all anchorites of Talos are half-orcs. 


_ANCHORITE ОҒ TALOS 


Medium humanoid (half-orc, shapechanger), neutral evil 


Armor Class 13 (hide armor) 
Hit Points 58 (9d8 + 18) 


| Speed 30 ft. 

STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
| 16(3) BE) 14(2) 9(1) 15 (82) 12(4) 
| 


Skills Nature +1, Stealth +3, Survival +4 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages Common, Orc 

Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Innate Spellcasting. The anchorite’s innate spellcasting ability 
is Wisdom (spell save DC 12). It can innately cast the following 
spells, requiring no material components: 


1/day each: augury, bless, lightning bolt (846 damage), revivify 
3/day: thunderwave (248 damage) 


Shapechanger. The anchorite can use its action to polymorph 
into a boar or back into its true form, which is humanoid. Its 
Statistics are the same in each form. Any equipment it is wear- 
ing or carrying isn't transformed. It reverts to its true form 

if it dies. 


ACTIONS 


Clawed Gauntlet (Humanoid Form Only). Melee Weapon 
Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (144 + 3) slash- 
ing damage. 


Tusk (Boar Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 
ft., one target. Hit: 6 (146 + 3) slashing damage. 


ELÁ———M——————M———M—— MÁ——— 


ANKHEG 


An ankheg resembles an enormous, many-legged insect 


that burrows underground while using its tremorsense 
to detect prey. When it detects movement above, it bursts 
from the ground and uses its mandibles to seize prey. 
From its maw, it secretes acidic enzymes that help dis- 
solve a victim for easy swallowing. It can squirt these 
enzymes to take down foes beyond its reach. 


Large monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor), 11 while prone 
Hit Points 39 (6d10 « 6) 
Speed 30 ft., burrow 10 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS СНА 
17(9) (0) 13 (91) 1(5) 13 (6) 6(-2) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., tremorsense 60 ft., 
passive Perception 11 

Languages — 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 10 (246 + 3) slashing damage plus 3 (146) acid damage. If 
the target is a Large or smaller creature, it is grappled (escape 
DC 13). Until this grapple ends, the ankheg can bite only the 
grappled creature and has advantage on attack rolls to do so. 


Acid Spray (Recharge 6). The ankheg spits acid in a line that is 
30 feet long and 5 feet wide, provided that it has no creature 
grappled. Each creature in that line must make a DC 13 Dexter- 
ity saving throw, taking 10 (346) acid damage on a failed save, 
or half as much damage on a successful one. 


E 


CREATURES 


BANSHEE 


A banshee is the hateful spirit of a once-beautiful female 
elf. It appears as a luminous, wispy form that vaguely 
recalls its mortal features. A banshee's face is wreathed 
in a wild tangle of hair, and its body is clad in wispy rags 
that flutter and stream around it. 
А banshee is forever bound to the place of its demise. 

It abhors mirrors, for it can't bear to see the horror of its 
undead existence. 

[e ER E e e ABE T e з 


BANSHEE 


Medium undead, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 58 (13d8) 
Speed 0 ft., fly 40 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
1(-5) 1442) 10(0) 12 (+1) 11 (+0) (3) 


Saving Throws Wis +2, Cha +5 

Damage Resistances acid, fire, lightning, thunder; bludgeoning, 
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks 

Damage Immunities cold, necrotic, poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, frightened, 
grappled, paralyzed, petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages Common, Elvish 

Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) BLIGHTS 


Влмвнее 


Blights аге malevolent, supernatural plant monsters 
that try to spread evil wherever they can. Three kinds of 
blights are described here. 


Detect Life. The banshee can magically sense the presence of 
creatures up to 5 miles away that aren't undead or constructs. 
She knows the direction they're in but not their exact locations. 


Incorporeal Movement. The banshee can move through other NEEDLE BLIGHT К A , 

creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. She takes In the shadows of a forest, needle blights might be mis- 

5 (1d10) force damage if she ends her turn inside an object. taken at a distance for shuffling, hunched humanoids. Up 
close, these creatures reveal themselves as horrid plants 

ACTIONS whose conifer-like needles grow across their bodies in 

Corrupting Touch. Melee Spell Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one quivering clumps. A needle blight lashes out with these 

target. Hit: 12 (346 + 2) necrotic damage. needles or launches them as an aerial assault that can 


punch through armor and flesh. 
! Horrifying Visage. Each non-undead creature within 60 feet of 


the banshee that can see her must succeed on a DC 13 Wisdom Twic BLIGHT 
saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. A frightened target 
can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, 

| with disadvantage if the banshee is within line of sight, ending 
the effect on itself on a success. If a target's saving throw is 
successful or the effect ends for it, the target is immune to the 
banshee's Horrifying Visage for the next 24 hours. 


Twig blights can root in soil and resemble woody shrubs 
while rooted. When it pulls its roots free of the ground 
to move, a twig blight's branches twist together to form 
a humanoid-looking body with a head and limbs. Given 
how dry they are, twig blights are particularly suscepti- 


ble to fire. 
Wail (1/Day). The banshee releases a mournful wail, provided 
that she isn't in sunlight. This wail has no effect on constructs VINE BLIGHTS 
! and undead. All other creatures within 30 feet of her that can Appearing as masses of slithering creepers, vine blights 
hear her must make a DC 13 Constitution saving throw. Оп а can animate the plants around them, using these plants 5 
| failure, а creature drops to 0 hit points. On a success, а crea- | to entangle foes. Vine blights are the only blights capable 2 
| ture takes 10 (3d6) psychic damage. mI | of speech, which they use to taunt victims or bargain with 5 


+ са 


=_—————=———————————— powerful foes. 


CREATURES 


< е S 


Twic Bruisar 


B 


, NEEDLE BLIGHT 


Medium plant, neutral evil 


! Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 
| Hit Points 11 (248 + 2) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS CHA 
1241)  12(0) BA 4(3) 8(1 3(-4) 


Condition Immunities blinded, deafened 

Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
passive Perception 9 

Languages understands Common but can't speak 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (2d4 + 1) piercing damage. 


Needles. Ranged Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, range 30/60 ft., one 
target. Hit: 8 (2d6 + 1) piercing damage. 


| н SSS See PE 
Бақасы з= же алын НЕ = RE 31 
Twic BLIGHT 


Small plant, neutral evil 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 4 (1d6 + 1) 
Speed 20 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
6 (-2) 13(1) 12(1) 4(-3) 8 (-1) 3 (-4) 


Skills Stealth +3 

Damage Vulnerabilities fire 

Condition Immunities blinded, deafened 

Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
passive Perception 9 

Languages understands Common but can’t speak 

Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


False Appearance. While the blight remains motionless, it is 
indistinguishable from a dead shrub. 


ACTIONS 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) piercing damage. 
| € 


Neeoce BiicHr 


Vine Виснт 


VINE BLIGHT 


Medium plant, neutral evil 


Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 26 (4d8 + 8) 
Speed 10 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT — WIS СНА 
15(2) 8(41) 1462) 5(-3) 10(40) 3(-4) 


Skills Stealth +1 

Condition Immunities blinded, deafened 

Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
passive Perception 10 

Languages Common 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


False Appearance. While the blight remains motionless, it is 
indistinguishable from a tangle of vines. 


ACTIONS 


Constrict. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage, and a Large or 
smaller target is grappled (escape DC 12). Until this grapple 
ends, the target is restrained, and the blight can't constrict 
another target. 


Entangling Plants (Recharge 5-6). Grasping roots and vines 
sprout in a 15-foot radius centered on the blight, withering 
away after 1 minute. For the duration, that area is difficult ter- 
rain for nonplant creatures. In addition, each creature of the 
blight’s choice in that area when the plants appear must suc- 
ceed on a DC 12 Strength saving throw or become restrained. 
A creature can use its action to make a DC 12 Strength check, 
freeing itself or another entangled creature within reach on 

a success. 


53 


CREATURES 


BOAR 


Boars are dim-witted omnivores that avoid combat unless 
they are particularly hungry or ornery. A boar attacks by 
charging and goring enemies with its tusks. 


CARRION CRAWLER 


Carrion crawlers are large subterranean predators and 
scavengers that scour putrid flesh from carcasses and 
gobble the slimy bones that remain. They aggressively 
attack any creature that trespasses on their territory or 
disturbs their feasting. 


ELLA 
BOAR 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 11 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 11 (248 + 2) 


Speed 40 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (4) 60) 12(3) 2(-4 9(1) 5(43) 


Senses passive Perception 9 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Charge. If the boar moves at least 20 feet straight toward a 
target and then hits it with a tusk attack on the same turn, the 
target takes an extra 3 (1d6) slashing damage. If the target is a 
creature, it must succeed on a DC 11 Strength saving throw ог 
be knocked prone. 


Relentless (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). If the boar 
takes 7 damage or less that would reduce it to 0 hit points, it is 
reduced to 1 hit point instead. 


ACTIONS 


Tusk. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (146 + 1) slashing damage. 


SSS € MÀ 4 —À— 12€ 


CREATURES 


CARRION CRAWLER 


Large monstrosity, unaligned 


Armor Class 13 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 51 (6410 + 18) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS CHA 
14(2) 13.41) 1663) 1(-5 12) 5(-3) 


Skills Perception +3 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13 
Languages — 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Keen Smell. The carrion crawler has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on smell. 


Spider Climb. The carrion crawler can climb difficult surfaces, 
including upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 
ability check. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The carrion crawler makes two attacks: one with 
its tentacles and one with its bite. 


Tentacles. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 4 (194 + 2) poison damage, and the target must 
succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or be poisoned 
for 1 minute. Until this poison ends, the target is paralyzed. 
The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its 
turns, ending the poison on itself on a success. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) piercing damage. 
aan] ey 


ш 
2 
te 
m 


CENTAUR 


Reclusive wanderers and omen-readers of the wild, cen- 
taurs avoid conflict but fight fiercely when pressed. They 
roam the vast wilderness, keeping far from borders, laws, 
and the company of other creatures. 


COMMONER тал 


Commoners include peasants, serfs, servants, pilgrims, 
merchants, artisans, and hermits. 


CENTAUR 


Large monstrosity, neutral good 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 45 (6410 + 12) 
Speed 50 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS СНА 
18 (+4) 14 (+2) 14(2) 9(-3) 13 (+1) 11 (+0) 


Skills Athletics +6, Perception +3, Survival +3 
Senses passive Perception 13 

Languages Elvish, Sylvan 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Charge. If the centaur moves at least 30 feet straight toward a 
target and then hits it with a pike attack on the same turn, the 
target takes an extra 10 (3d6) piercing damage. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The centaur makes two attacks: one with its pike 
and one with its hooves or two with its longbow. 


Pike. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 
Hit: 9 (1d10 + 4) piercing damage. 


Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 150/600 ft., 
one target. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) piercing damage. 


COMMONER 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 10 
Hit Points 4 (1d8) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10 (+0) 10(+0) 10(0) 10(+0) 10(+0) 10 (+0) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages any one language (usually Common) 
Challenge 0 (10 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Club. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 2 (1d4) bludgeoning damage. 


CENTAUR 


Cow 


Use the cow stat block to represent common varieties of 
cattle, including oxen. 


Cow 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 10 
Hit Points 15 (2d10 + 4) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18 (+4) 10(:0) 14(2) 2(-4 10(0) 4(-3) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Charge. If the cow moves at least 20 feet straight toward a 
target and then hits it with a gore attack on the same turn, the 
target takes an extra 7 (2d6) piercing damage. 


ACTIONS 


Gore. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (1d6 4) piercing damage. 


сл 
1 


GREATURES 


DON-JON RASKIN 


Adventurers who undertake the Mountain's Toe Quest 
meet Don-Jon Raskin (see page 36), a fearless trouble- 
shooter who has experienced more than his fair share of 
adventures. 


ШО ш лалы С сла SEE 
Ром-Јом RASKIN 


Medium humanoid (human), neutral 


Armor Class 10 
Hit Points 44 (8d8 + 8) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS CHA 
11 («0  10(40  13(3) 12(М) 10(+0) 14 (42) 


Saving Throws Dex +2, Con +3 
Skills Deception +4, Persuasion +4 
Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages Common, Dwarvish 
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Brave. Don-Jon has advantage on saving throws against being 
frightened. 


Not Dead Yet (Recharges after a Long Rest). If damage reduces 
Don-Jon to 0 hit points, he drops to 1 hit point instead and 
gains advantage on attack rolls until the end of his next turn. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Don-Jon makes three melee attacks. 


Dagger. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 20/60 ft., one target. Hit: 2 (144) piercing damage. 


Sling. Ranged Weapon Attack: «2 to hit, range 30/120 ft., one 
target. Hit: 2 (144) bludgeoning damage. 


ELM MÉRÉÉ——M—— Á— E— 


CREATURES 


FALCON THE HUNTER 


Adventurers encounter Falcon the Hunter if they visit his 
hunting lodge in Neverwinter Wood (see page 24). 

a ee 
FALCON THE HUNTER 


Medium humanoid (human), neutral good 


Armor Class 14 (studded leather) 
Hit Points 112 (15d8 + 45) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
14 (+2) 15 (+2) 1663) 11 (+0) 16(3) 15 (+2) 


Saving Throws Dex +4, Wis +5 

Skills Athletics +4, Perception +7, Survival +5 
Senses passive Perception 17 

Languages Common 

Challenge 4 (1,100 XP) 


Archer. A longbow or shortbow deals one extra die of its dam- 
age when Falcon hits with it (included in his longbow attack). 


Sharpshooter. Falcon's ranged weapon attacks ignore half cover 
and three-quarters cover. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Falcon makes three melee attacks or two 
ranged attacks. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 6 (1d8 2) slashing damage, or 7 (1d10 + 2) slashing 
damage if used with two hands. 


Longbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 150/600 ft., 
one target. Hit: 11 (228 + 2) piercing damage. 


> == == eee re 


GHOUL 


Ghouls roam in packs, driven by an insatiable hunger for 
humanoid flesh. They thrive in places rank with decay 
and death. If they can’t gorge on dead flesh and decom- 
posing organs, they pursue living creatures and attempt 
to make corpses of them. 


GIANT CRAB 


A giant crab weighs as much as an average adult human. 
Protected by a thick shell, it attacks with its pincer claws. 


GHOUL 


Medium undead, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 22 (5d8) 


Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
13 (91) 1562) 10(0) 7(2 10(0) 6(-2) 


Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities charmed, exhaustion, poisoned 
Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Common 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (244 + 2) slashing damage. If the target is a creature 
other than an elf or undead, it must succeed on a DC 10 Consti- 
tution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. The target can 
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending 
the effect on itself on a success. 


GIANT CRAB 


Medium beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 13 (3d8) 
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 


13 (+1) 15(2) (6) 1(5) 9(-1) 3(-4) 
Lo ———————— ы 
Skills Stealth +4 
Senses blindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 9 
Languages — 


Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Amphibious. The crab can breathe air and water. 


ACTIONS 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (146 + 1) bludgeoning damage, and the target is grap- 
pled (escape DC 11). The crab has two claws, each of which can 
grapple only one target. 


GHOUL 


GIANT RAT 


Giant rats roam in packs through sewers, caves, and 
other dank places. They are often found in the company 
of wererats (see page 64). 


GIANT RAT 


Small beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 7 (2d6) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS CHA 
7(-2) 15 (+2) 1(«0 2(-4) 1040) 4 (-3) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


Keen Smell. The rat has advantage on Wisdom (Perception) 
checks that rely on smell. 


Pack Tactics. The rat has advantage on an attack roll against a 
creature if at least one of the rat's allies is within 5 feet of the 
creature and the ally isn't incapacitated. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) piercing damage. 


л 
ч 


CREATURES 


GIANT SPIDER 


To snare its prey, a giant spider spins elaborate webs or 
shoots sticky strands of webbing from its abdomen. Giant 
spiders are most commonly found underground, mak- 
ing their lairs on ceilings or in dark, web-filled crevices. 
Such lairs are often festooned with web cocoons holding 
past victims. 


Шош ШШШ О т Sees 


GIANT SPIDER 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 26 (4d10 + 4) 
Speed 30 ft., climb 30 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS — CHA 
14(2) 16(3) 12) 2(-4) 1(0) 4(-3) 


Skills Stealth +7 

Senses blindsight 10 ft., darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages — 

Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


Spider Climb. The spider can climb difficult surfaces, includ- 
ing upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 
ability check. 


Web Sense. While in contact with a web, the spider knows the ex- 
act location of any other creature in contact with the same web. 


Web Walker. The spider ignores movement restrictions 
caused by webbing. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 
Hit: 7 (148 + 3) piercing damage, and the target must make a 
DC 11 Constitution saving throw, taking 9 (2d8) poison damage 
ona failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 
If the poison damage reduces the target to 0 hit points, the 
target is stable but poisoned for 1 hour, even after regaining hit 
points, and is paralyzed while poisoned in this way. 


Web (Recharge 5-6). Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 
30/60 ft., one creature. Hit: The target is restrained by webbing. 
As an action, the restrained target can make a DC 12 Strength 
check, bursting the webbing on a success. The webbing can 
also be attacked and destroyed (AC 10; hp 5; vulnerability 

to fire damage; immunity to bludgeoning, poison, and psy- 
chic damage). 


E 


CREATURES 


GORTHOK THE THUNDER BOAR 


Gorthok is a primal nature spirit that takes the form of 
a boar as big as an elephant, with lightning that dances 
along its tusks. Gorthok serves the will of Talos, god of 
storms, and can be summoned during stormy weather 
to do the bidding of Talos's evil followers. Like its patron 
deity, Gorthok revels in destruction. 


ERE UU MM 
GORTHOK THE THUNDER BoAR 


Huge monstrosity, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 15 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 73 (7d12 + 28) 


Speed 50 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
20 (+5) (40 19(4) 6(-2) 10(0) 14(2) 


Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical attacks 

Damage Immunities lightning, thunder 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 

Languages — 

Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


Relentless (Recharges after a Short or Long Rest). If Gorthok 
takes 27 damage or less that would reduce it to 0 hit points, it 
is reduced to 1 hit point instead. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. Gorthok makes two melee attacks: one with its 
lightning tusks and one with its thunder hooves. 


Lightning Tusks. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 ft., 
one target. Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) slashing damage plus 7 (2d6) 
lightning damage. 


Thunder Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 10 fta 
one target. Hit: 12 (2d6 + 5) bludgeoning damage plus 7 (2d6) 
thunder damage. 


Lightning Bolt (Recharge 6). Gorthok shoots a bolt of lightning 
at one creature it can see within 120 feet of it. The target must 
make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 18 (4d8) lightning 
damage оп a failed save, or half as much damage оп a suc- 
cessful one. 


__—_ ————Є—Є—Є————Є————— 


HARPY 


A harpy is always on the hunt for prey. Its sweet song 
has lured countless adventurers to their deaths, drawing 
them in close for the harpy to kill and then consume. 


——————— SSS «аре? ЧЕР СТА. 


HARPY 


Medium monstrosity, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 11 
Hit Points 38 (7d8 + 7) 
Speed 20 ft., fly 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
12(+1) BA) 126) 7(-2) 10(90) 13 (91) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages Common 
Challenge 1 (200 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack, The harpy makes two attacks: one with its claws 
and one with its club. 


Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (244 + 1) slashing damage. 


Club. Melee Weapon Attack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 3 (1d4 + 1) bludgeoning damage. 


Luring Song. The harpy sings a magical melody. Every human- 
oid and giant within 300 feet of the harpy that can hear the 
song must succeed оп а DC 11 Wisdom saving throw or be 
charmed until the song ends. The harpy must take a bonus 
action on its subsequent turns to continue singing. It can stop 
singing at any time. The song ends if the harpy is incapacitated. 

While charmed by the harpy, a target is incapacitated and 
ignores the songs of other harpies. If the charmed target is 
more than 5 feet away from the harpy, the target must move on 
its turn toward the harpy by the most direct route, trying to get 
within 5 feet. It doesn't avoid opportunity attacks, but before 
moving into damaging terrain, such as lava or a pit, and when- 
ever it takes damage from a source other than the harpy, the 
target can repeat the saving throw. A charmed target can also 
repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns. If the 
saving throw is successful, the effect ends on it. 

A target that successfully saves is immune to this harpy's 
song for the next 24 hours. 


HUNTER SHARK 
A fully grown hunter shark is 15 to 20 feet long. 


INVISIBLE STALKER 


An invisible stalker is a remorseless creature of elemen- 
tal air. It's naturally invisible, hence its name. 


HUNTER SHARK 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 45 (6410 + 12) 
Speed 0 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
18(«4) 13 (+1) 15 (+2) 1(-5) 10(0) 4(-3) 
Skills Perception +2 
Senses blindsight 30 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages — 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Blood Frenzy. The shark has advantage on melee attack rolls 
against any creature that doesn't have all its hit points. 


Water Breathing. The shark can breathe only underwater. 


ACTIONS 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) piercing damage. 


INVISIBLE STALKER 


Medium elemental, neutral 


Armor Class 14 
Hit Points 104 (16d8 + 32) 
Speed 50 ft., fly 50 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS СНА 
16 (+3) 19(+4) 14(42) 1040) 15 (+2) 11 (+0) 


Skills Perception +8, Stealth +10 

Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical attacks 

Damage Immunities poison 

Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed, 
petrified, poisoned, prone, restrained, unconscious 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 18 

Languages Auran, understands Common but doesn't speak it 

Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


Invisibility. The stalker is invisible. 


Faultless Tracker. The stalker is given a quarry by its summoner. 
The stalker knows the direction and distance to its quarry as 
long as the two of them are on the same plane of existence. The 
stalker also knows the location of its summoner. 

ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The stalker makes two slam attacks. 


Slam. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 10 (2d6 3) bludgeoning damage. 


CREATURES 


“ 


> 


MANTICORE 


Manticores are fierce killers that hunt far and wide for 
prey. They aren't particularly bright but can converse 
with intelligent prey. If a manticore sees an advantage to 
be gained by sparing a creature's life, it does so, asking 
for a tribute or sacrifice equal to the loss of food. 


ELEM 
MANTICORE 


Large monstrosity, lawful evil 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 68 (8410 + 24) 
Speed 30 ft., fly 50 ft. 


STR DEX 
17 (+3) 16 (+3) 


CON INT WIS 
17 (+3) 7(-2) 12(4) 


СНА 
8 (-1) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages Common 
Challenge 3 (700 XP) 


Tail Spike Regrowth. The manticore has twenty-four tail spikes. 
Used spikes regrow when the manticore finishes a long rest. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The manticore makes three attacks: one with its 
bite and two with its claws or three with its tail spikes. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (148 + 3) piercing damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 6 (146 + 3) slashing damage. 


Tail Spike. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, range 100/200 ft., 
one target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) piercing damage. 


CREATURES 


Mimics are shapeshifting predators that can alter their 
outward texture to resemble wood, stone, and other ba- 
sic materials. They do so to assume the appearance of 
inanimate objects that other creatures are likely to come 
into contact with. A mimic in its altered form is nearly un- 
recognizable until it sprouts pseudopods and attacks. 


MIMIC 


Medium monstrosity (shapechanger), neutral 


Armor Class 12 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 58 (9d8 + 18) 


Speed 15 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
173) 12 (1) 15 (+2) 5(3) 13(0) 8(3) 


Skills Stealth +5 

Damage Immunities acid 

Condition Immunities prone 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 11 
Languages — 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Shapechanger. The mimic can use its action to polymorph into 
an object or back into its true, amorphous form. Its statistics 
are the same in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or car- 
rying isn't transformed. It reverts to its true form if it dies. 


Adhesive (Object Form Only). The mimic adheres to anything 
that touches it. A Huge or smaller creature adhered to the 
mimic is also grappled by it (escape DC 13). Ability checks 
made to escape this grapple have disadvantage. 


False Appearance (Object Form Only). While the mimic remains 
motionless, it is indistinguishable from an ordinary object. 


Grappler. The mimic has advantage on attack rolls against any 
creature grappled by it. 


ACTIONS 


Pseudopod. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) bludgeoning damage. If the mimic is in 
object form, the target is subjected to its Adhesive trait. 


RELICLE 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 7 (148 + 3) piercing damage plus 4 (148) acid damage. 
ЕЕЕ шаша ШЕ Тл г 


Ғғ. T- 


OCHRE JELLY 


Ochre jellies are yellowish blobs that can slip through 
narrow cracks in pursuit of creatures to devour. Their 
digestive enzymes dissolve flesh quickly but have no ef- 
fect on other substances such as bone, wood, or metal. 


OCHRE JELLY 


Large ooze, unaligned 


Armor Class 8 
Hit Points 45 (6d10 + 12) 
Speed 10 ft., climb 10 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
15 (+2) 6 (-2) 14 (+2) 2 (-4) 6 (-2) 1 (-5) 


Damage Resistances acid 

Damage Immunities lightning, slashing 

Condition Immunities blinded, charmed, deafened, exhaustion, 
frightened, prone 

Senses blindsight 60 ft. (blind beyond this radius), 
passive Perception 8 

Languages — 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


re 


Amorphous. The jelly can move through a space as narrow as 1 
inch wide without squeezing. 


Spider Climb. The jelly can climb difficult surfaces, including 
upside down on ceilings, without needing to make an 
ability check. 


ACTIONS 


Pseudopod. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) bludgeoning damage plus 3 (1d6) 
acid damage. 


REACTIONS 


Split. When a jelly that is Medium or larger is subjected to 
lightning or slashing damage, it splits into two new jellies if it 
has at least 10 hit points. Each new jelly has hit points equal to 
half the original jelly's, rounded down. New jellies аге one size 
smaller than the original jelly. 


ELILIMMMRR——————————É————Á—— 


OGRE 


Ogres are as lazy of mind as they are strong of body. 

They live by raiding, scavenging, and killing for food and 

pleasure. The average adult specimen stands 9 to 10 feet 

tall and weighs close to a thousand pounds. 
ee >” E € € s 


OGRE 


Large giant, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 11 (hide armor) 
Hit Points 59 (7d10 + 21) 
Speed 40 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT WIS CHA 
19(4) SEY  16(3) SEI- 7(-2) 7(-2) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 8 
Languages Common, Giant 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Greatclub. Melee Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage. 


Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +6 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) piercing damage. 
———>——_——————___EE ES SS 


61 
CREATURES 


62 


Orc 


Ores are savage raiders with an unmatched lust for car- 
nage. They worship a pantheon of evil gods, the mightiest 
being Gruumsh. While they regard dwarves as natural 
enemies, ores hate elves above all, for the elven god 
Corellon Larethian half-blinded Gruumsh with a well- 
placed arrow to the orc god's eye. Since then, orcs have 
taken particular joy in slaughtering elves. 


ЕЕЕ 


Овс 


Medium humanoid (orc), chaotic evil 


Armor Class 13 (hide armor) 
Hit Points 15 (2d8 + 6) 
Speed 30 ft. 


STR DEX СОМ INT wis CHA 
16 (+3) 12 (+1) 16 (+3) 7(-2 110) 10(0) 


Skills Intimidation +2 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Common, Orc 

Challenge 1/2 (100 XP) 


Aggressive. As a bonus action, the orc can move up to its speed 
toward a hostile creature that it can see. 


ACTIONS 


Greataxe. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 9 (1d12 + 3) slashing damage. 


Javelin. Melee or Ranged Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft. or 
range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) piercing damage. 


у= ——=——=———————————=————= 


CREATURES 


RIDING HORSE 


A character can purchase or sell a healthy riding horse in 
Phandalin for 75 gp. 


Коск GNOME RECLUSE 


Rock gnome recluses are skilled in the arcane arts. They 
use their magical talents to create all kinds of wondrous 
inventions, very few of which work as intended. 


RIDING HORSE 


Large beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 10 
Hit Points 13 (2410 + 2) 
Speed 60 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 10 (+0) 12(0) 2(-4 11(9) 7(2) 


Senses passive Perception 10 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


б 
ч 
о 
2. 
л 


Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) bludgeoning damage. 


б 
© 
m 
| 
д 
O 
& 
s 
ж 
ti 
= 
С 
ua 
Бі 


Small humanoid (gnome), chaotic neutral 


Armor Class 10 (13 with mage armor) 
Hit Points 7 (2d6) 
Speed 25 ft. 


STR DEX CON INT wis CHA 
6(-2 11 (+0) 10 (+0) 15 (+2) 10(0) 13 (41) 


Skills Arcana +4, History +4 

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 10 
Languages Common, Gnomish 

Challenge 1/4 (50 XP) 


Gnome Cunning. The gnome has advantage on Intelligence, 
Wisdom, and Charisma saving throws against magic. 


Spellcasting. The gnome is a 2nd-level spellcaster. Its spellcast- 
ing ability is Intelligence (spell save DC 12, +4 to hit with spell 
attacks). It has the following wizard spells prepared: 


Cantrips (at will): mage hand, prestidigitation, ray of frost (see 
"Actions" below) 

Ist level (3 slots): detect magic, mage armor, magic missile (see 
"Actions" below), shield 


ACTIONS 


Magic Missile (Expends a 1st-Level Spell Slot). The gnome 
creates three magical darts. Each dart hits a creature the 

gnome chooses within 120 feet of it and deals 3 (1d4 + 1) 
force damage. 


Ray of Frost. Ranged Spell Attack: +4 to hit, range 60 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 4 (1d8) cold damage, and the target’s speed is 
reduced Бу 10 feet until the start of the gnome's next turn. 


BRYNN METHENEY 


STIRGE 


Stirges attach to living creatures and drain their blood. 
Packs of them can be a formidable threat, reattaching as 
quickly as their weakening prey can pluck them off. 


. STIRGE 


Tiny beast, unaligned 


Armor Class 14 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 2 (1d4) 
Speed 10 ft., fly 40 ft. 


CHA 
Т1 (60) 2(-4) 8(1) 6(-2 


STR DEX CON INT Wis 
4 (-3) 16 (+3) 


Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 9 
Languages — 
Challenge 1/8 (25 XP) 


ACTIONS 


Blood Drain. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
creature. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) piercing damage, and the stirge at- 
taches to the target. While attached, the stirge doesn't attack. 
Instead, at the start of each of the stirge's turns, the target 
loses 5 (1d4 + 3) hit points due to blood loss. 

The stirge can detach itself by spending 5 feet of its move- 
ment. It does so after it drains 10 hit points of blood from the 
target or the target dies. A creature, including the target, can 
use its action to detach the stirge. 


|, VETERAN 


Medium humanoid (any race), any alignment 


Armor Class 17 (splint) 
Hit Points 58 (9d8 + 18) 


| Speed 30 ft. 
STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
16 (+3) 13 (+1) 14(42) 10(0) 11 (+0) 10 (40) 


| Skills Athletics +5, Perception +2 
| Senses passive Perception 12 
Languages any one language (usually Common) 


Multiattack. The veteran makes two longsword attacks. If it 
has a shortsword drawn, it can also make a shortsword attack. 


Longsword. Melee Weapon Attack: --5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one tar- 
get. Hit: 7 (148 + 3) slashing damage, or (1410 + 3) slashing 
damage if used with two hands. 


Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one 
target. Hit: 6 (146 + 3) piercing damage. 


Heavy Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: «3 to hit, range 
100/400 ft., one target. Hit: 6 (1410 + 1) piercing damage. 


5 


STIRGE 


VETERAN 


Veterans include soldiers retired from military service 
and warriors who never served anyone but themselves. 


WILL-O'-WisP 


Will-o'-wisps haunt lonely places and battlefields, where 
they feed on fear and despair. They look like wispy, bob- 
bing lantern lights in the distance. 


WILL-O’-WISP 


Tiny undead, chaotic evil 


Armor Class 19 
Hit Points 22 (9d4) 
Speed 0 ft., fly 50 ft. (hover) 


STR DEX CON INT Wis CHA 
1(-5) 28(9) 10(0) 13 (91) 14(9) 1 (+0) 
ОИ 
Damage Immunities lightning, poison 
Damage Resistances acid, cold, fire, necrotic, thunder; 
bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from nonmagical attacks 
Condition Immunities exhaustion, grappled, paralyzed, 
poisoned, prone, restrained, unconscious 
Senses darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 12 
Languages the languages it knew in life 
Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


rr 


Consume Life. As a bonus action, the will-o’-wisp can target 
one creature it can see within 5 feet of it that has 0 hit points 
and is still alive. The target must succeed on a DC 10 Consti- 
tution saving throw against this magic or die. If the target dies, 
the will-o'-wisp regains 10 (346) hit points. 


Ephemeral. The will-o'-wisp can't wear or carry anything. 


Incorporeal Movement. The will-o'-wisp can move through 
other creatures and objects as if they were difficult terrain. It 
takes 5 (1d10) force damage if it ends its turn inside an object. 


Variable Illumination. The will-o'-wisp sheds bright light in a 5- 
to 20-foot radius and dim light for an additional number of feet 
equal to the chosen radius. The will-o’-wisp can alter the radius | 
as a bonus action. | 


ACTIONS 


_ Shock. Melee Spell Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature. 


Hit: 9 (2d8) lightning damage. 


Invisibility. The will-o'-wisp and its light magically become | 
invisible until it attacks or uses its Consume Life, or until its | 
concentration ends (as if concentrating on a spell). 


63 
GREATURES 


WERERAT 


Wererats are cunning lycanthropes that operate much 
like a thieves’ guild. Through its bite, a wererat can pass 
along the curse of lycanthropy—something it normally 
reserves for new gang recruits, A player character cursed 
with wererat lycanthropy becomes an NPC under the 
DM's control on nights of the full moon. 


WERERAT LYCANTHROPY 
Any humanoid creature cursed with wererat ly- 
canthropy retains its statistics except as follows: 


The creature gains the wererat’s speed in rat form, 

as well as the wererat’s damage immunities, traits, 
and actions that don’t involve equipment. It can't speak 
while in rat form. 

The creature gains a Dexterity of 15 if its score isn't 
already higher. 

The creature is proficient with the wererat's bite attack. 
Attack and damage rolls for its bite are based on the 
creature's Strength or Dexterity, whichever is higher. 
The save DC for the creature's bite is 8 + the creature's 
proficiency bonus + the creature's Constitution modifier. 


——E—EE——L SSeS 


WERERAT 


Medium humanoid (human, shapechanger), lawful evil 


Armor Class 12 
Hit Points 33 (6d8 + 6) 


Speed 30 ft. 
| STR DEX CON INT WIS CHA 
10(0) 15 (02) 12(4) 11() 1040) 8 (-1) 


Skills Perception +2, Stealth +4 

Damage Immunities bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing from 
nonmagical attacks not made with silvered weapons 

Senses darkvision 60 ft. (rat form only), passive Perception 12 

Languages Common (can't speak in rat form) 

Challenge 2 (450 XP) 


Shapechanger. The wererat can use its action to polymorph 
into a rat-humanoid hybrid or into a giant rat, or back into its 

| true form, which is humanoid, Its statistics, other than its size, 
are the same in each form. Any equipment it is wearing or car- 
rying isn't transformed. It reverts to its true form if it dies. 


Keen Smell. The wererat has advantage on Wisdom 
(Perception) checks that rely on smell. 


ACTIONS 


Multiattack (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). The wererat 
makes two attacks, only one of which can be a bite. 


Bite (Rat or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, 
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 4 (144 + 2) piercing damage. If the 
target is a humanoid, it must succeed on a DC 11 Constitution 
saving throw or be cursed with wererat lycanthropy. 


Shortsword (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). Melee Weapon 
| Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) pierc- 
ing damage. 


Hand Crossbow (Humanoid or Hybrid Form Only). Ranged 
| Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, range 30/120 ft., one target. Hit: 5 


| (1d6 + 2) piercing damage. 


CREATURES 


н) 


YOUNG WHITE DRAGON 


White dragons prefer cold climates. They are vicious, 
cruel reptiles driven by hunger and greed. Their bestial 
nature makes them the best hunters among dragonkind. 


YOUNG WHITE DRAGON 


Large dragon, chaotic evil 


_ Armor Class 17 (natural armor) 
Hit Points 133 (14410 + 56) 
Speed 40 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 80 ft., swim 40 ft. 


STR DEX 
18 (+4) 10 (+0) 


CON INT WIS 
18 (+4) 6(-2) («0 12 (+1) 
Saving Throws Dex +3, Con +7, Wis +3, Cha +4 
Skills Perception +6, Stealth +3 
Damage Immunities cold 


| Senses blindsight 30 ft., darkvision 120 ft., passive Perception 16 


Languages Common, Draconic 


. Challenge 6 (2,300 XP) 


Ice Walk. The dragon can move across and climb icy surfaces 
without needing to make an ability check. Additionally, difficult 
terrain composed of ice or snow doesn't cost it extra moment. 


| ACTIONS 


Multiattack. The dragon makes three attacks: one with its bite 
and two with its claws. 


Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: «7 to hit, reach 10 ft., one target. 


| Hit: 15 (2910 + 4) piercing damage plus 4 (148) cold damage. 


Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. 
Hit: 11 (246 + 4) slashing damage. 


Cold Breath (Recharge 5-6). The dragon exhales an icy blast in 
a 30-foot cone. Each creature in that area must make a DC 15 

Constitution saving throw, taking 45 (10d8) cold damage on a 
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 


| 
i 
CHA 
| 


LARS GRANT WEST 


МАР КЕҮ 


[5] ALTAR 


ANVIL 
Е 

ARROW SLIT 
BALLISTA 
BARRELS 
BATTLEMENT 
BROKEN DOOR 
CAMPSITE 


CART 


Lam 
E 


Ыр | 
| 
vad 


ШШШ 


Door ] PiT TRAP 

DOUBLE DOOR PORTCULLIS 

FENCE PRIVY 

FIREPLACE RAILING 

GRAVE ROUGH-HEWN STAIRS 
LADDER DD RUBBLE 
| LEDGE SARCOPHAGUS 
PALISADE т^ SECRET DOOR 
PILLAR SHRUB 


TH] STAIRS 


| STANDING STONE 


STATUE 


| STOVE 


STUMP 


TENT 


THRONE 


TRAPDOOR 


WINDOW 


INVERNA NIGHTBREETE GALANDRO LUNA DONNABELLA Fiasco 


QUINN HIGHTOPPLE Pickteo Pere Nis ADDLESPUR 


TALON THORNWILO SHANJAN KWAN Rusy HAMMERWHACKER 


DONNABELLA FIASCO 
Human Spellcaster | 


Donnabella is a young magic-user 
who wears a papier-máché unicorn 
mask because it makes her feel 
more magical. Use the Spellcaster 
sidekick stat block in the rulebook to 
represent her. 

Personality. “Га rather talk to a 
book than most people." 

Ideal. “We all have a little magic in 
us. The trick is finding it and bringing 
it forth." 

Bond. “1 want to join a prestigious 
wizards' academy one day. I just hope 
they accept unicorns!" 

Flaw. "| can't keep a secret to save 
my life—or anyone else's." 


* SIDEKICK * 


NIB ADDLESPUR 
Lightfoot Halfling Spellcaster 


Nib is a happy-go-lucky gambler who 
keeps a deck of Three-Dragon Ante 
cards in her vest pocket. She also 
has a goldfinch named Lil. Use the 
Spellcaster sidekick stat block in the 
rulebook to represent her. 

Personality. “І can't resist a sure 
bet or a friendly wager." 

Ideal. "The more complicated the 
scheme, the better." 

Bond. “| love birds and will do 
what I can to look after them.” 

Flaw. “Deep water terrifies me. 
I would rather be swallowed by 
a dragon than get in a boat or go 
for a swim.” 


* SIDEKICK © 


RuBY HAMMERWHACKER 
Shield Dwarf Warrior 


Ruby lacks the customary dwarven 
stoicism and greets every day with a 
warm smile and a renewed sense of 
optimism. Use the Warrior sidekick 
stat block in the rulebook to rep- 
resent her. 

Personality. “Nothing can shake 
my optimistic attitude.” 

Ideal. “We should all seek the bet- 
terment of ourselves. There’s always 
room for improvement.” 

Bond. “| fight for those who cannot 
fight for themselves.” 

Flaw. “Tell me I can't do some- 
thing, and I must prove you wrong." 


* SIDEKICK * 


GALANDRO LUNA 
Human Expert. 


Galandro's most treasured posses- 
sion is a fiddle that he tunes and 
plucks constantly. Use the Expert 
sidekick stat block in the rulebook to 
represent him. 

Personality. “I love a good insult, 
even one directed at me." 

Ideal. "I like seeing the smiles 
on people's faces when I perform. 
That plus their adoration is all 
that matters." 

Bond. "My fiddle was gifted to me 
by a good friend. I cherish it above all 
other things." 

Flaw. “ГЇЇ do anything to win fame 
and renown." 


* SIDEKICK + 


PICKLED PETE 
Human Expert 


Pete likes ale and tends to function 
better while tipsy. At his best, he's 
quite the handyman and comes up 
with all sorts of crazy ways to get 
things done. Use the Expert sidekick 
stat block in the rulebook to rep- 
resent him. 

Personality. "My friends know 
they can rely on me, no matter what." 

Ideal. “I like coming ир with new 
ways to do things. What problem can't 
be solved with a little ingenuity?" 

Bond. “А full flask of wine is worth 
ten pockets full of gold." 

Flaw. "All this drinking is bad for 
my memory. Seriously, І can't remem- 
ber my last name." 


* SIDEKICK * 


SHANJAN KWAN 
Human Spellcaster 


Kwan died and was raised from 
the dead as an infant, whereupon 
a tiny black glyph—the symbol of 
necromancy—appeared on his fore- 
head. Use the Spellcaster sidekick 
stat block in the rulebook to rep- 
resent him. 

Personality. "I've cheated death 
once. | can do it again." 

Ideal. “Great beauty can hide great 
ugliness. The reverse is also true." 

Bond. “Гуе been searching my 
whole life for the answer to a simple 
question: Am I a god?" 

Flaw. “I don't like mysteries. Un- 
raveling them keeps me up at night.” 


* SIDEKICK > 


INVERNA NIGHTBREEZE 
Moon Elf Warrior 


Inverna has a scar on her cheek 
where she was grazed by an orc’s 
javelin. She is cautious by nature 
and suspicious of strangers. Use the 
Warrior sidekick stat block in the 
rulebook to represent her. 

Personality. “1 choose my words 
very carefully. Sarcasm, I’m told, is 
my sharpest weapon.” 

Ideal. “АП people deserve to be 
treated with dignity, regardless of their 
station. Of course, ores aren't people." 

Bond. “Orcs are a blight on the 
land. For the sake of the natural and 
civilized worlds, I kill them on sight.” 

Flaw. "I can't admit when 
I'm wrong." 


* SIDEKICK + 


QUINN HIGHTOPPLE 
Lightfoot Halfling Warrior 


Quinn is a happy little scrapper who 
likes to punch people in the groin. 
Use the Warrior sidekick stat block in 
the rulebook to represent him. 

Personality. “Nice set of teeth you 
got there. Be a shame if something 
bad happened to 'em." 

Ideal. *No challenge is too big to 
overcome. As Papa Bartho always 
says, the bigger they are, the harder 
they fall." 

Bond. "Nothing's more important 
than friendship. That's why ГЇЇ never 
leave a friend behind." 

Flaw. “I can't resist punching 
tall folk in the groin. I call it the 
Halfling Hello." 


* SIDEKICK * 


TALON THORNWILD 


Human Expert 


Talon loves gold and adventure, 
and dreams of being a famous gold 
prospector. Use the Expert sidekick 
stat block in the rulebook to rep- 
resent them. 

Personality. "Yes, І eat like a pig 
and have bad manners, but those are 
my only flaws, I swear. I'm darn near 
perfect otherwise." 

Ideal. “Тһе low are lifted up, and 
the high and mighty are brought 
down. Change is the nature of things." 

Bond. “1 like gold. I like its color, 
its texture, its majestic gleam." 

Flaw. "It's not stealing if I need it 
more than someone else." 


* SIDEKICK * 


TM & ©2019 Wizards of the Coast LLC. Iilustrations by Shawn Wood. 


DWARVEN “ е 
EXCAVATION QUEST 


Dwarf prospectors found ancient 
dwarven ruins in the mountains 
southwest of here and have begun an 
archaeological dig for treasure and 
relics. They need to be warned that 

a white dragon has moved into the 
area. Take the warning to them, then 
return to Townmaster Harbin Wester 
to collect a reward of 50 gp. 


* QUEST + 


BUTTERSKULL 
RANCH QUEST 


Ores have attacked Butterskull 
Ranch, five miles east of Conyberry 
along the Triboar Trail! Travel there 
with haste, assess the damage, 

and help any way you can. Alfonse 
Kalazorn, the ranch owner, is a 
retired sheriff who can reward you 
for your efforts. If he’s dead, return 
to Townmaster Harbin Wester with 
proof of Kalazorn’s demise to receive 
a reward of 100 gp. 


* QUEST - 


AXEHOLM QUEST 


Embedded in a mountain south of 
Phandalin is the ancient dwarven 
fortress of Axeholm, which has been 
sealed for years. If a dragon attack 
is imminent, the people of Phand- 
alin can evacuate and take refuge in 
Axeholm. To that end, someone needs 
to open the fortress and make it safe 
for habitation. Once you accomplish 
these tasks, return to Townmaster 
Wester to collect a reward of 250 gp. 


» QUEST » 


GNOMENGARDE QUEST - 


A clan of reclusive rock gnomes re- 
sides in a small network of caves in 
the mountains to the southeast. The 
gnomes of Gnomengarde are known 
for their magical inventions. They 
might have something with which 

to defeat the dragon. Get whatever 
you can from them. If you bring back 
something useful and don't want to 
keep it for yourselves, Townmas- 

ter Harbin Wester will pay you 50 
gp for it. 


Deep in Neverwinter Wood, along 
the river that flows west toward Nev- 
erwinter, is a logging camp. Every 
two months, Phandalin delivers fresh 
supplies to the camp, which is run by 
the half-brother of Phandalin's town- 
master, Harbin Wester. Barthen, the 
local provisioner, has prepared a new 
delivery. He needs someone to bear 
the supplies safely to the camp. Re- 
turn to Harbin Wester with a notice 
of delivery signed by his half-brother, 
Tibor Wester, to claim your reward 
of 100 gp. 


The dragon that besets us is not the 
first to threaten this region. Between 
here and Neverwinter lies the barrow 
mound of a warrior whose magical 
dragon-slaying sword helped fell a 
green dragon terrorizing the High 
Road a century ago. Rumor has it the 
dragon slayer sword is buried there, 
too. Retrieve it, and let the sword be 
its own reward! 


* QUEST - 


UMBRAGE HILL 


fe Ovrsr 


The local midwife—an acolyte of 
Chauntea named Adabra Gwynn— 
lives by herself in a stone windmill 

on the side of a hill a few miles south 
of Phandalin. With dragon sightings 
becoming common, it’s not safe for 
her to be alone. Urge Adabra to return 
to Phandalin. Once she’s safe, visit 
Townmaster Harbin Wester to claim a 
reward of 25 gp. 


* QUEST - 


 MouNTAIN's TOE QUEST 


The Mountain's Toe Gold Mine lies 
fifteen miles northeast of Phandalin. 
The new overseer, Don-Jon Raskin, 
just made the trip from Neverwinter 
to Phandalin and needs to be es- 
corted to the mine. There's no telling 
what dangers lie between here and 
there. Once you deliver Raskin safe 
and sound, return to Townmaster 
Harbin Wester to collect a reward 

of 100 gp. 


* QUEST * 


WOODLAND MANSE 


The orcs have fallen under the sway 
of evil spellcasters in Neverwinter 
Wood and have been sighted in grow- 
ing numbers near Falcon’s Hunting 
Lodge. The spellcasters dwell in a 
ruined manse. Falcon needs someone 
to make a preemptive strike against 
it. Destroy the evil in the manse, then 
expect him to reward you. 


* QUEST • 


TM & ©2019 Wizards of the Coast LLC. 


INITIATIVE INITIATIVE INITIATIVE 


& ёс ёс 


INITIATIVE INITIATIVE INITIATIVE 


& ёс ёс 


INITIATIVE INITIATIVE INITIATIVE 


& ёс ёс 


ri 6 721115802 34} 10 SpJe2|M 61022 ЕТТЕ 


$ 
tA 


> 


* INITIATIVE * 


* INITIATIVE * 


* INITIATIVE 


* INITIATIVE * 


RESTRAINED 


MAGIC 
CHARM 


б UNCONSCIOUS | STUNNED 


COMBAT COMBAT COMBAT 


ёс ёс б 


POISONED 


* A poisoned creature has disad- 
vantage on attack rolls and abil- 
ity checks. 


* CONDITION * 


STUNNED 


* Astunned creature is incapacitated 
(it can't take actions or reactions), 
can't move, and can speak only 
falteringly. 

* The creature automatically fails 
Strength and Dexterity sav- 
ing throws. 

* Attack rolls against the creature 
have advantage. 


* CONDITION * 


COMBAT STEP BY STEP 


1. Determine surprise. The DM deter- 
mines whether anyone involved in the 
combat encounter is surprised. 

2. Establish positions. The DM decides 
where all the characters and monsters 
are located. Given the characters' 
marching order and their stated po- 
sitions, the DM figures out where the 
adversaries are—how far away and in 
what direction. 

3. Roll initiative. Everyone involved 
rolls initiative, determining the order 
of combatants' turns. 

4. Take turns. Each participant in the 
combat takes a turn in the initia- 
tive order. 

5. Begin the next round. When every 
participant in the combat has had a 
turn, the round ends. Repeat step 4 
until the fighting stops. 


PRONE 


* А prone creature's only movement 
option is to crawl, unless it stands 
up and thereby ends the condition. 

* The creature has disadvantage on 
attack rolls. 

• An attack roll against the crea- 
ture has advantage if the attacker 
is within 5 feet of the creature. 
Otherwise, the attack roll has 
disadvantage. 


* CONDITION * 


UNCONSCIOUS 


* An unconscious creature is inca- 
pacitated (it can't take actions or 
reactions), can't move or speak, and 
is unaware of its surroundings. 

* The creature drops whatever it's 
holding and falls prone. 

* The creature automatically fails 
Strength and Dexterity sav- 
ing throws. 

* Attack rolls against the creature 
have advantage. 

* Any attack that hits the creature is a 
critical hit if the attacker is within 5 
feet of the creature. 


* CONDITION * 


COMBAT STEP BY STEP 


1. Determine surprise. The DM deter- 
mines whether anyone involved in the 
combat encounter is surprised. 

2. Establish positions. The DM decides 
where all the characters and monsters 
are located. Given the characters' 
marching order and their stated po- 
sitions, the DM figures out where the 
adversaries are—how far away and in 
what direction. 

3. Roll initiative. Everyone involved 
rolls initiative, determining the order 
of combatants' turns. 

4. Take turns. Each participant in the 
combat takes a turn in the initia- 
tive order. 

5. Begin the next round. When every 
participant in the combat has had a 
turn, the round ends. Repeat step 4 
until the fighting stops. 


RESTRAINED 


* Arestrained creature's speed be- 
comes 0, and it can't benefit from 
any bonus to its speed. 

* Attack rolls against the creature 
have advantage, and the creature's 
attack rolls have disadvantage. 

* The creature has disadvantage on 
Dexterity saving throws. 


* CONDITION * 


CHARM OF THE STORM 


You become charged with the power 
of the storm, to the extent that tiny 
sparks crackle in your eyes. You can 
cast the /ightning bolt spell (3rd-level 
version) as an action. Once used three 
times, the charm vanishes from you. 


(This magical ability is bestowed by 
the altar in the Tower of Storms.) 


* MAGIC CHARM * 


COMBAT STEP BY STEP 


1. Determine surprise. The DM deter- 
mines whether anyone involved in the 
combat encounter is surprised. 

2. Establish positions. The DM decides 
where all the characters and monsters 
are located. Given the characters' 
marching order and their stated po- 
sitions, the DM figures out where the 
adversaries are—how far away and in 
what direction. 

3. Roll initiative. Everyone involved 
rolls initiative, determining the order 
of combatants' turns. 

4. Take turns. Each participant in the 
combat takes a turn in the initia- 
tive order. 

5. Begin the next round. When every 
participant in the combat has had a 
turn, the round ends. Repeat step 4 
until the fighting stops. 


8 


TM & ©2019 Wizards of the Coast LLC. illustrations by Richard Whitters. 


PETRIFIED 


CHARMED 


GRAPPLED 


PARALYZED 


BLINDED 


FRIGHTENED 


INVISIBLE 


BLINDED 


* A blinded creature can't see and 
automatically fails any ability check 
that requires sight. 

* Attack rolls against the creature 
have advantage, and the creature's 
attack rolls have disadvantage. 


* CONDITION * 


FRIGHTENED 


* Afrightened creature has disadvan- 
tage on ability checks and attack 
rolls while the source of its fear is 
within line of sight. 

* The creature can't willingly move 
closer to the source of its fear. 


* CONDITION * 


INVISIBLE 


* An invisible creature is impossible 
to see without the aid of magic or 
a special sense. For the purpose of 
hiding, the creature is heavily ob- 
scured. The creature's location can 
be detected by any noise it makes or 
any tracks it leaves. 

* Attack rolls against the creature 
have disadvantage, and the crea- 
ture’s attack rolls have advantage. 


* CONDITION * 


+ A charmed creature can't attack the 
charmer or target the charmer with 
harmful abilities or magical effects. 

* The charmer has advantage on any 
ability check to interact socially with 
the creature. 


* CONDITION * 


* A grappled creature's speed be- 
comes 0, and it can't benefit from 
any bonus to its speed. 

* The condition ends if the grappler is 


incapacitated (it can't take actions or 


reactions). 

* The condition also ends if an effect 
removes the grappled creature 
from the reach of the grappler or 
grappling effect, such as when a 
creature is hurled away by a thun- 
derwave spell. 


* CONDITION * 


* A paralyzed creature is incapaci- 
tated (it can't take actions or reac- 
tions) and can't move or speak. 

* The creature automatically fails 
Strength and Dexterity sav- 
ing throws. 

* Attack rolls against the creature 
have advantage. 

+ Any attack that hits the creature is a 
critical hit if the attacker is within 5 
feet of the creature. 


* CONDITION * 


DEAFENED 


* A deafened creature can't hear and 
automatically fails any ability check 
that requires hearing. 


* CONDITION * 


, INCAPACITATED 


* An incapacitated creature can't take 
actions or reactions. 


* CONDITION * 


PETRIFIED 


* A petrified creature is transformed, 
along with any nonmagical object it 
is wearing or carrying, into a solid 
inanimate substance (usually stone). 
Its weight increases by a factor of ten, 
and it ceases aging. 

* The creature is incapacitated (it 
can't take actions or reactions), can't 
move or speak, and is unaware of its 
surroundings. 

* Attack rolls against the creature have 
advantage. 

* The creature automatically fails 
Strength and Dexterity saving throws. 

* The creature has resistance to 
all damage. 

* The creature is immune to poison and 


diseases, although a poison or disease 


already in its system is suspended, not 
neutralized. 


* CONDITION - 


TM & ©2019 Wizards of the Coast LLC. lilustrations by Richard Whitters, 


POTION OF HEALING. 
Potion, common “См 
You regain 244 + 2 hit points when 


you drink this potion. The potion’s red 
liquid glimmers when agitated. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


POTION OF WATER 
BREATHING 


Potion, uncommon 


You can breathe underwater for 1 
hour after drinking this potion. Its 
cloudy green fluid smells of the sea 
and has a jellyfish-like bubble float- 
ing in it. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


STAFF OF BIRDCALLS 
Staff, common 


This wooden staff is decorated with 
bird carvings. It has 10 charges. 
While holding it, you can use an 
action to expend 1 charge from the 
staff and cause it to create one of the 
following sounds out to a range of 
60 feet: a finch's chirp, a raven's caw, 
a duck's quack, a chicken's cluck, a 
goose's honk, a loon's call, a turkey's 
gobble, a seagull's cry, an owl's hoot, 
or an eagle's shriek. 

The staff regains 146 + 4 expended 
charges daily at dawn. If you expend 
the last charge, roll а 420. On a 1, the 
staff explodes in a harmless cloud of 
bird feathers and is lost forever. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


POTION OF 
INVULNERABILITY 
Potion, rare 


For 1 minute after you drink this 
potion, you have resistance to all 
damage. The potion’s syrupy liquid 
looks like liquified iron. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


SENDING STONE 


Wondrous item, uncommon 


Sending stones come in pairs, with 
each smooth stone carved to match 
the other so that the pairing is easily 
recognized. While you touch one 
stone, you can use an action to cast 
the sending spell from it. The target 
is the bearer of the other stone. If no 
creature bears the other stone, you 
know that fact as soon as you use the 
stone and don't cast the spell. 

Once sending is cast through the 
stones, they can't be used again until 
the next dawn. If one of the stones in 
a pair is destroyed, the other one be- 
comes nonmagical. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


WAND OF PYROTECHNICS 


This wand has 7 charges. While 
holding it, you can use an action to 
expend 1 of its charges and create а 
harmless burst of multicolored light 
at a point you can see up to 60 feet 
away. The burst of light is accompa- 
nied by a crackling noise that can be 
heard up to 300 feet away. The light 
is as bright as a torch flame but lasts 
only a second. 

The wand regains all expended 
charges daily at dawn. If you expend 
the wand's last charge, roll a 420. On 
a l, the wand erupts in a harmless 
pyrotechnic display and is destroyed. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


22 POTION OF 
SUPERIOR HEALING 
Potion, rare 


You regain 8d4 + 8 hit points when 
you drink this potion. The potion’s red 
liquid glimmers when agitated. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


SENDING STONE 


Wondrous item, uncommon 


Sending stones come in pairs, with 
each smooth stone carved to match 
the other so that the pairing is easily 
recognized. While you touch one 
Stone, you can use an action to cast 
the sending spell from it. The target 
is the bearer of the other stone. If no 
creature bears the other stone, you 
know that fact as soon as you use the 
stone and don't cast the spell. 

Once sendin£ is cast through the 
stones, they can't be used again until 
the next dawn. If one of the stones in 
a pair is destroyed, the other one be- 
comes nonmagical. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


WAND OF SECRETS 


Wand, uncommon 


This wand has 3 charges. While hold- 
ing it, you can use an action to expend 
1 of its charges, and if a secret door or 
trap is within 30 feet of you, the wand 


pulses and points at the one nearest to 


you. The wand regains 1d3 expended 
charges daily at dawn. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


TM & ©2019 Wizards of the Coast LLC. 


MYSTERY KEY 0 


Wondrous item, common. | 


A question mark is worked into the 
head of this key. The key has a 5 per- 
cent chance of unlocking any lock into 
which it's inserted. Once it unlocks 
something, the key disappears. 


* MAGIC ITEM + 


POTION OF 
GREATER HEALING 


Potion, uncommon 


You regain 4d4 + 4 hit points when 
you drink this potion. The potion's red 
liquid glimmers when agitated. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


PoTION or HEALING 


 Potion, common 


You regain 2d4 + 2 hit points when 
you drink this potion. The potion's red 
liquid glimmers when agitated. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


NECKLACE OF FIREBALLS 
Wondrous item, rare 


This necklace has 146 + 3 beads 
hanging from it. You can use an action 
to detach a bead and throw it up to 60 
feet away. When it reaches the end of 
its trajectory, the bead detonates as a 
3rd-level fireball spell (save DC 15). 

You can hurl multiple beads, or 
even the whole necklace, as one ac- 
tion. When you do so, increase the 
level of the fireball by 1 for each bead 
beyond the first. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


PoTION OF HEALING 


Potion, common 


You regain 2d4 + 2 hit points when 
you drink this potion. The potion's red 
liquid glimmers when agitated. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


POTION OF HEALING 
Potion, common 


You regain 2d4 + 2 hit points when 
you drink this potion. The potion’s red 
liquid glimmers when agitated. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


POLE OF COLLAPSING 


Wondrous item, common 


While holding this 10-foot pole, you 
can use an action to speak a com- 
mand word and cause it to collapse 
into a 1-foot-long rod, for ease of stor- 
age. The pole’s weight doesn’t change. 
You can use an action to speak a 
different command word and cause 
the rod to revert to a pole; however, 
the rod will elongate only as far as the 
surrounding space allows. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


PoTION оғ HEALING 


Potion, common 


You regain 2d4 + 2 hit points when 
you drink this potion. The potion's red 
liquid glimmers when agitated. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


POTION OF HEALING 


Potion, common 


You regain 2d4 + 2 hit points when 
you drink this potion. The potion's red 
liquid glimmers when agitated. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


TM: & ©2019 Wizards of the Coast LLC. 


© Weapon (олдзшога),гаге | 
You have а +1 bonus to attack 
and damage rolls made with this 
longsword. 

When you hit as dragon with this 
weapon, the dragon takes an extra 
3d6 slashing damage. For the pur- 
pose of this weapon, “dragon” refers 
to any creature with the dragon type. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


GAUNTLETS OF 
OGRE POWER 


Your Strength score is 19 while you 
wear these gauntlets. They have no 
effect on you if your Strength is 19 or 
higher without them. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


IMMOVABLE Вор 


Rod, uncommon 


This flat iron rod has a button on one 
end. You can use an action to press 
the button, which causes the rod to 
become magically fixed in place. Un- 
til you or another creature uses an 
action to push the button again, the 
rod doesn't move, even if it is defying 
gravity. The rod can hold up to 8,000 
pounds of weight. More weight causes 
the rod to deactivate and fall. A crea- 
ture can use an action to make a DC 
30 Strength check, moving the fixed 
rod up to 10 feet on a success. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


DREAD HELM 
. Wondrous item, common 


This fearsome steel helm makes your 
eyes glow red while you wear it. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


GOGGLES ОҒ Міснт 
Wondrous item, uncommon 


While wearing these dark lenses, you 
have darkvision out to a range of 60 
feet. If you already have darkvision, 
wearing the goggles increases its 
range by 60 feet. 


* MAGIC ITEM + 


While you are playing this magic lute, 
you can create harmless, illusory 
visual effects within a 5-foot-radius 
sphere centered on the instrument. If 
you are a bard, the radius increases to 
15 feet. Sample visual effects include 
luminous musical notes, a spectral 
dancer, butterflies, and gently falling 
snow. The magic effects have neither 
substance nor sound, and they are ob- 
viously illusory. The effects end when 
you stop playing. 


* MAGIC ITEM + 


Dust ОЕ DISAPPEARANCE 


Idrous item, uncommon 


m 


Found in a small packet, this powder 
resembles very fine sand. There is 
enough of it for one use. When you 
use an action to throw the dust into 
the air, you and each creature and 
object within 10 feet of you become 
invisible for 2d4 minutes. The dura- 
tion is the same for all subjects, and 
the dust is consumed when its magic 
takes effect. If a creature affected by 
the dust attacks or casts a spell, the 
invisibility ends for that creature. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


HAT OF WIZARDRY 


Wondrous item, common 


~~ REQUIRES ATTU: "UNEMENT BYA WIZARD: 


While you are wearing this hat, you 
gain the following benefits: 


* Youcan use the hat as a spellcast- 
ing focus for your wizard spells. 

* Youcan try to cast a cantrip that you 
don't know. The cantrip must be on 
the wizard spell list, and you must 
make a DC 10 Intelligence (Arcana) 
check. If the check succeeds, you 
cast the spell. If the check fails, so 
does the spell, and the action used 
to cast the spell is wasted. In either 
case, you can't use this property 
again until you finish a long rest. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


MITHRAL CHAIN MAIL 
Armor (chain mail), uncommon 


Mithral is a light, flexible metal. Un- 
like normal chain mail, mithral chain 
mail doesn't have a Strength require- 
ment and doesn't impose disadvan- 
tage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


TM & ©2019 Wizards of the Coast LLC. 


+] ВАТТІЕАХЕ | 
Weapon (battleaxe), uncommon | 


This magic battleaxe was forged 
by dwarves. You have a +1 bonus to 
attack and damage rolls made with 
this weapon. 

Minor Property. While the bat- 
tleaxe is in your possession, you can 
speak and understand Dwarvish. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


+1 SHIELD 


Armor (shield), uncommon 


While holding this shield, you have 
а +1 bonus to AC. This bonus is 

in addition to the shield's normal 
bonus to AC. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


CLOAK OF BILLOWING 


Wondrous item, common 


While wearing this cloak, you can 
use a bonus action to make it billow 
dramatically. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


+1 LONGBOW 
Weapon (longbow), uncommon 


This magic longbow was crafted 
by elves. You have a +1 bonus to 
attack and damage rolls made with 
this weapon. 

Minor Property. While wielding 
the longbow, you can use an action to 
learn which way is north. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


*] SHORTSWORD 
Weapon (shortsword), uncommon 


This magic shortsword is coveted by 
thieves and assassins alike. You have 
a +1 bonus to attack and damage rolls 
made with this weapon. 

Minor Property. While holding 
the shortsword, you can use a bonus 
action to cause the weapon to shed 
bright light in a 10-foot radius and 
dim light for an additional 10 feet, or 
to extinguish the light. 


> MAGIC ITEM * 


CLOAK OF MANY FASHIONS 


While wearing this cloak, you can use 
a bonus action to change the style, 
color, and apparent quality of the 
garment. The cloak's weight doesn't 
change. Regardless of its appearance, 
the cloak can't be anything but a 
cloak. Although it can duplicate the 
appearance of other magic cloaks, it 
doesn't gain their magical properties. 


* MAGIC ITEM + 


+1 МАСЕ 
Weapon (mace), uncommon 


You have a +1 bonus to attack and 
damage rolls made with this weapon. 
Minor Property. While holding 

the mace, you can use an action to 
cause your voice to carry clearly for 
up to 300 feet until the end of your 
next turn. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


BOOTS OF ELVENKIND 


Wondrous item, uncommon 


While you wear these boots, your 
steps make no sound, regardless of 
the surface you are moving across. 
You also have advantage on Dexterity 
(Stealth) checks that rely on moving 
silently. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


CLOCKWORK AMULET 


Wondrous item, common 


This copper amulet contains tiny 
interlocking gears and is powered 

by magic from Mechanus, a plane of 
clockwork predictability. A creature 
that puts an ear to the amulet can 
hear faint ticking and whirring noises 
coming from within. 

When you make an attack roll 
while wearing the amulet, you can 
forgo rolling the d20 to get a 10 on the 
die. Once used, this property can't be 
used again until the next dawn. 


* MAGIC ITEM * 


TM & ©2019 Wizards of the Coast LLC. 


TIM S TULLNASSA 


DUNGEONS 8 DRAGONS 


p—á—E 


. .. Strength 
DEXTERITY .  Dexterity 

Constitution 

. . Intelligence 


Wisdom 


Charisma 


CONSTITUTION SAVING THROWS 


Acrobatics 
Animal Handling 
Arcana 
INTELLIGENCE Athletics 
Deception 
History 
C Insight 
Intimidation 
f wisboM 1 Investigation (| 
Medicine 
Nature 
4ССЬ Perception (V 
Performance 
l enansa T Persuasion 
Religion 
Sleight of Hand 
Stealth (I 


Survival (W 


SKILLS 


OTHER PROFICIENCIES & LANGUAGES 


\ DUNGEONS {< DRAGONS? 


ІА n 
кар p 1 = 
=== 


N 
2 


CLASS, INITIATIVE 


- 
NS 


Hit Point Maximum 


CURRENT HIT POINTS 


TEMPORARY HIT POINTS 


FAILURES О-О-О) 


HIT DICE DEATH SAVES 


ATTACKS & SPELLCASTING 


BACKGROUND 


ALIGNMENT 


PLAYER NAME 


EXPERIENCE POINTS 


PERSONALITY TRAITS 


IDEALS 


FEATURES & TRAITS 


D&D: 


HEIGHT WEIGHT 


=—ыс 


=== НАКАСТЕК МАМЕ 


СНАВАСТЕВ АРРЕАКАМСЕ ALLIES & ORGANIZATIONS 


ADDITIONAL FEATURES & TRAITS 


CHARACTER BACKSTORY Қ. TREASURE > 


a 
e AREE 
> 


"cm m T - 
— m gh 


io 
— I| ғ 


-—— H9 —— — 


CONE CUBE 


Ж POINT OF ORIGIN 


dub 


ACTIONS IN COMBAT 


ATTACK 
You make a melee or ranged weapon attack. 


СА5Т A SPELL 


You cast a cantrip or a spell of 1st level or 
higher. See the spell's casting time. 


DASH 
You gain extra movement equal to your speed 
(plus any modifiers) for the current turn. 


DISENGAGE 
Your movement doesn't provoke opportunity 
attacks for the rest of the turn. 


DODGE 

Until the start of your next turn, any attack 
roll made against you has disadvantage if you 
can see the attacker, and you make Dexterity 
saving throws with advantage. You lose this 
benefit if you are incapacitated or if your 
speed drops to 0. 


HELP 
You help one creature with a task, giving that 
creature advantage on the next ability check it 
makes for that task. Or you distract one crea- 
ture within 5 feet of you, and the next attack 
roll that an ally of yours makes against that 
creature has advantage. 

Whichever option you choose, the advan- 
tage goes away once used or when your next 
turn starts. 


NM 


т 
dub 


HiDE 

You make a Dexterity (Stealth) check in an 
attempt to become hidden—unseen and 
unheard. 


READY 
You wait for a particular circumstance before 
you act, which lets you act using your reac- 
tion before the start of your next turn. You 
must decide in advance (a) what perceivable 
circumstance will trigger your reaction and 
(b) the action you will take in response to that 
trigger. 

If you ready a spell, it must have a casting 
time of 1 action, and you must concentrate on 
it until you release it. 


SEARCH 


You make a Wisdom (Perception) check or 
an Intelligence (Investigation) check to find 
something. 


Use A Macic ITEM | 
You use a magic item that requires your action 
for its use. 


USE AN OBJECT 


You use an object, other than a magic item, 
that requires your action for its use. 


Use A SPECIAL ABILITY 


You use a class feature or other special ability 
that requires your action for its use. 


LONG JUMP 


Move 10+ feet, and then jump a number of 
feet up to your Strength score. When you 
make a standing long jump, you can leap only 
half that distance. 


HIGH JUMP 


Move 10+ feet, and then jump a number of 
feet equal to 3 + your Strength modifier. When 
you make a standing high jump, you can jump 
only half that distance. 


CONCENTRATION 


If a spell must be maintained with 
concentration, its description specifies how 
long you can concentrate on it. You can 
end concentration at any time (no action 
required). The following factors can break 
your concentration: 


* You start casting another spell that requires 
concentration. 


* You take damage. Succeed on a Constitution 
saving throw to maintain your concentration, 
with a DC equal to 10 or half the damage you 
take, whichever number is higher. 


+ You're incapacitated or killed. 


* You're overwhelmed by an enormous 
distraction, such as a wave crashing into 
you. Succeed on a DC 10 Constitution 
saving throw to maintain your 
concentration. 


— THINGS You CAN = 
7 Do oN YouR TURN 
* Move up to your speed. 

* Take one action. 


* Communicate with speech, gestures, 
or both. 


* Interact with one object or feature of 
the environment as you move or take 
your action. To interact with a second 


E ЕЕЕ Ет»: 


Es 


object, take the Use an Object action. 


trations by 
11420212PS1 


BLINDED 
* A blinded creature can't see and automatically 
fails any ability check that requires sight. 


+ Attack rolls against the creature have ad- 
vantage, and the creature's attack rolls have 
disadvantage. 


CHARMED 

. Acharmed creature 
can't attack the charmer 
or target the charmer 
with harmful abilities or 
magical effects. 


* The charmer has advan- 
tage on any ability check 
to interact socially with 
the creature. 


DEAFENED 

* A deafened creature can't hear 
and automatically fails any ability 
check that requires hearing. 


FRIGHTENED i 

* A frightened creature has disadvantage 
on ability checks and attack rolls while the 
source of its fear is within line of sight. 


“ The creature can’t willingly move closer to 
the source of its fear. 


GRAPPLED 


* A grappled creature's speed becomes 0, and 
it can't benefit from any bonus to its speed. 


* The condition ends if the grappler is incapac- 
itated (see the condition). 


“ The condition also ends if an effect removes 
the grappled creature from the reach of the 
grappler or grappling effect, such as when a 
creature is hurled away by the thunderwave 
spell. 


INCAPACITATED 


• An incapacitated creature can't take actions 
or reactions. 


INVISIBLE 

+ An invisible creature is impossible to see 
without the aid of magic or a special sense. 
For the purpose of hiding, the creature is 


heavily obscured. The creature's location 
can be detected by any noise it makes or any 
tracks it leaves. 


+ Attack rolls against the creature have disad- 
vantage, and the creature's attack rolls have 
advantage. 


PARALYZED 


* A paralyzed creature is incapacitated 
(see the condition) and can't move or speak. 


+ The creature automatically fails Strength and 
Dexterity saving throws. 


+» Attack rolls against the creature have advantage. 


* Any attack that hits the creature is a critical hit 
if the attacker is within 5 feet of the creature. 


PETRIFIED 

* A petrified creature is 
transformed, along with 
any nonmagical object it is 
wearing or carrying, into a 
solid inanimate substance 
(usually stone). Its weight 
increases by a factor of ten, 
and it ceases aging. 


+ The creature is incapacitated 
(see the condition), can’t 
move or speak, and is un- 
aware of its surroundings. 


. Attack rolls against the creature have advantage. 


* The creature automatically fails Strength and 
Dexterity saving throws. 


“ The creature has resistance to all damage. 


* The creature is immune to poison and dis- 
ease, although a poison or disease already in 
its system is suspended, not neutralized. 


POISONED 


• А poisoned creature has disadvantage on 
attack rolls and ability checks. 


——— 


PRONE 


RESTRAINED 


A prone creature's only move- 
ment option is to crawl, unless it 
stands up and thereby ends the 
condition. 


The creature has disadvantage on 
attack rolls. 


An attack roll against the creature 
has advantage if the attacker 

is within 5 feet of the creature. 
Otherwise, the attack roll has 
disadvantage. 


A restrained creature's speed becomes 0, and 
it can't benefit from any bonus to its speed. 


* Attack rolls against the creature have ad- 


STUNNED 


vantage, and the creature's attack rolls have 
disadvantage. 


The creature has disadvantage on Dexterity 
saving throws. 


A stunned creature is inca- 
pacitated (see the condi- 
tion), can't move, and can 
speak only falteringly. 


The creature automatically 
fails Strength and Dexterity 
saving throws. 


Attack rolls against the crea- 
ture have advantage. 


UNCONSCIOUS - = 


An unconscious creature is incapacitated 
(see the condition), can't move or speak, and 
is unaware of its surroundings. 


The creature drops whatever it's holding and 
falls prone. 


The creature automatically fails Strength and 
Dexterity saving throws. 


Attack rolls against the creature have advantage. 


Any attack that hits the i 
creature is a critical hit қ 
if the attacker is within 
5 feet of the creature. 


SETTING ADC 
Difficulty 

Very easy 

Easy 

Moderate 

Hard 

Very hard 

Nearly impossible 


Level 
1-4 
5-10 
11-16 
17-20 


Substance 
Cloth, paper, rope 


NEL 


Crystal, glass, ice 
Wood, bone 
Stone 


Setback 
1410 
2410 
4410 
10410 


OBJECT ARMOR CLASS 


AC 
n 
13 
15 
17 


Овјест Hit Points 


Size 
Tiny (bottle, lock) 
Small (chest, lute) 


Medium (barrel, chandelier) 
Large (cart, 10-ft.-by-10-ft. window) 


TRACKING DCs 
Ground Surface 


Soft surface such as snow 


Dirt or grass 
Bare stone 


Each day since the creature passed 
Creature left a trail such as blood 


DAMAGE BY LEVEL AND SEVERITY 


Dangerous 
2d10 
4d10 
10d10 
18d10 


Substance 
Iron, steel 
Mithral 
Adamantine 


Fragile 
2 (144) 
3 (1d6) 
4 (148) 
5 (1d10) 


SKILLS AND ASSOCIATED ABILITIES 


Skill 

Acrobatics 
Animal Handling 
Arcana 

Athletics 
Deception 
History 

Insight 
Intimidation 
Investigation 


Ability 
Dexterity 
Wisdom 
Intelligence 
Strength 
Charisma 
Intelligence 
Wisdom 
Charisma 
Intelligence 


Skill 


Deadly 
4d10 
10d10 
18410 
24410 


АС 
19 
21 

23 


Resilient 
5 (244) 
10 (346) 
18 (448) 
27 (5410) 


Medicine 
Nature 
Perception 
Performance 


Persuasion 


Religion 
Sleight of Hand 
Stealth 


Survival 


Ability 
Wisdom 
Intelligence 
Wisdom 
Charisma 
Charisma 
Intelligence 
Dexterity 
Dexterity 
Wisdom 


DC 
10 
15 


20 


+5 
-5 


Ғоор, DRINK, AND LODGING 


Item Cost 
Ale 
Gallon 2sp 
Mug 4cp 
Banquet (per person) 10 gp 
Bread, loaf 2cp 
Cheese, hunk 15р 
Inn stay (per day) 
Squalid 7 ср 
Роог 15р 
Modest 5 sp 
Comfortable 8 sp 
Wealthy 2 gp 
Aristocratic 4 gp 
Meals (per day) 
Squalid 3 ср 
Poor 6 cp 
Modest 3 sp 
Comfortable 5 sp 
Wealthy 8 sp 
Aristocratic 2gp 
Meat, chunk 3 sp 
Wine 
Common (pitcher) 2 sp 
Fine (bottle) 10 gp 
SERVICES 
Service Pay 
Coach cab 
Between towns 3 cp per mile 
Within a city 1ср 
Hireling 
Skilled 2 gp per day 
Untrained 2 sp per day 
Messenger 2 cp per mile 
Road or gate toll 1ср 
Ship’s passage 1 sp per mile 


TRAVEL PACE 
Distance Traveled per ... 


Pace Minute Hour Day 

Fast 400 feet 4 miles 30 miles 
Normal 300 feet 3 miles 24 miles 
Slow 200 feet 2miles 18 miles 


OBSCURED AREAS 


ENCOUNTER DISTANCE 

Terrain 

Arctic, desert, farmland, or grassland 
Forest, swamp, or woodland 

Hills or wastelands 

Jungle 

Mountains 


Audible Distance 
Trying to be quiet 
Normal noise level 
Very loud 


Visibility Outdoors 


Clear day, no obstructions 
Rain 

Fog 

From a height 


Effect 
-5 penalty to passive Wis- 


‘dom (Perception) scores 


Able to use stealth 


Obscureness Effect Examples 

Lightly Creatures have disadvantage Dim light, patchy fog, 

obscured on Wisdom (Perception) moderate foliage 
checks that rely on sight. 

Heavily Vision is blocked; creatures Darkness, opaque 

obscured are effectively blinded. fog, dense foliage 


Encounter Distance 
6d6 x 10 feet 
248 x 10 feet 
2d10 x 10 feet 
2d6 x 10 feet 
4d10 x 10 feet 


2d6 x 5 feet 
2d6 x 10 feet 
2d6 x 50 feet 


2 miles 

] mile 

100 to 300 feet 
x 20 


Cover 
Half cover 


Three-quarters 
cover 


Total cover 


LiGHT 


Source 

Candle 

Lamp 

Lantern, bullseye 
Lantern, hooded 
Lowered hood 
Torch 


*2 bonus to AC and Dexterity saving throws 
against attacks and effects that originate on 
the opposite side of the cover 

*5 bonus to AC and Dexterity saving throws 
against attacks and effects that originate on 
the opposite side of the cover 

Can't be targeted directly by an attack or a spell 


Bright Light Dim Light ^ Duration 
5 ft. +5 ft, 1 hour 
15 ft. * 30 ft. 6 hours 
60 ft. cone + 60 ft, 6 hours 
30 ft. + 30 ft, 6 hours 

-- +5 ft, ЕЯ 
20 ft. + 20 ft. 1 hour 


SSS 


^N ау Ж. 


M ACON 
УЛ; ods AUT US B ORES ТЕЛ, 
St 5 2 all т-у. 


. / 
ӨГ. 
Че. 


Ж - 


г. x 


/ 
- 


` . .“.. / Т” 
IP Mf «Y í 
/% %% “2%. - fe j -- 
"x =: VE -— 
/ > РА 


—{ уу Л NM. 


ак“ 


nat 


uina 


P 


n = (Жур 
CUN 4%” 


> 


АД; | i f 7. .“ $^ » 
CNN AMT w At 2; -mip Lr. 
x 


АЛХ i f asa аа 


2 


ERSE ”“ 2 
=e ь- аяз етше» г< 4 1. 
,ж =” s Е d Е У - | 


ж.ж 


ре " 


.. 
“oS 


SS nom 
> " um Fo 


T 
кə & 
..% 


ТәУе|ЕРЕТІ 


"e т 


ТТЕ" 


» V 
- ` 


И 


ч L ; 
Де ы - 
" D e Е 
-sS 9 ч . 
:% { J " 
е „А А ж 
2 ^ 
ч ` 4 и .. 
" 4 B 
А › B. ^ 4 * v 
- АЁ, < М 
{ 
> Е ы“, 
й 
» E. С 
б 


uojs „уе. 


Li 


& 


Sh 


1775 €. v ‘3 
4.7 “SUOISIAO i 


тт 
; 
repr aT 


ras 


“ --- эш 
ы, QUE HORS 
Ф = - . 


Е 
t pa? 
А LJ 


^P 


^ 
"sje % >. 
әле 


‘ety 


4 { A. 


2 
Y E 4 б 
қ 4 Е - - P » « 
ж T » › , er 
- * ^ ЕС * Е ^ . М s “ " (^ .. 
| ~ б, % "y; * 4 p > А 
"T. » " А 4 - JA \ 2 < 
\ . һы Ж \ m - 
ә е D + s : й ; y 
Bae ( s 4 c 
- 4” < | 5 Е ‚ ` « Қ 
РА s^ 3 ж , { ST 73 7 Я 1 - D 
* T) Г “ч ; Е @ 
>. ia ^ ж “ ; - 4 
` ^" ‘ К ^ Ae 7 F А E 
X . 1 жя ^ MES Е В “ e 4 б ? 
| Б { -—^ d * j 1 4 
~ -æ ” ~ 
р „ an 
s 9 
"- 


АТР 
.4. ” 
M 


> iii 3, pa 


| LY ІЛЕРО ENX ot 
4 s 1E LJ - ~ =: +“ р 5 >> 4” ) с Ж + | : 4 ў ` PPTI (Es M 4 5% x i т. " f x 


Е ^ .. е ч 


. m ; E ER 226 aS mre ==. A—— Al 
ZO NEAT CE DN эсу “Үзу Ios y хтар дара ae 227, 294 (DINER 2 C£ TOY Т? УС 7. Y Uoc momo 
FN RR Ett ASN г STS OM a RT ee Od а” Oe ку бо құлатады 
4 “ен арз гач VA ME “ми, AP А ЕТТЕ р жі - - E a 310 
“4 4 _ ( 7| NV > К 
TI теж, A ү T 
. v > 4] e. 


.% 


б 


WELCOME 
ADVENTURER' 


Your journey to 
the fantasy worlds of 
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 
starts here! 


KAT 


22 


ESSENTIALS 


1. SR. 


ULIS HILAWLS 


—— ^ 


“ 


DUNGEONS (Гг DRAGONS 


es 38+ 


BEYOND 


Enhance your experience with the 
official DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 
toolset, D&D Beyond! 

Visit and 
unlock more fantastic stories! 


50% OFF 


PLAYER’S HANDBOOK ON 
D&D BEYOND 


ДД ЕРАМЕЛЛЕРАЕ МІ. 
DEFEAT THE DRAGON OF ICESPIRE PEAK 


DUNGEONS & DRAGONS 15 a 

cooperative storytelling game that 

harnesses your imagination and 

invites you to explore a fantastic world 2 Р | 

of adventure, where heroes battle 5 ВА 2 40% S704 Алты m 
monsters, find treasures, and overcome à uw 

epic quests. This box contains the 

essentials you need to run a D&D" 

game with one Dungeon Master and 

one to five adventurers. 


: 2 


CHARME, 


STUNNED 


64-page rulebook that teaches you how to create Includes codes to continue your D&D journey 
characters of levels 1-6 and to play the game on D&D Beyond’, the official digital toolset for 


Dragon of Icespire Peak, anintroductory adventure DUNGEONS & DRAGONS: 


Unique discount code for 50% off the digital 


Double-sided poster ma 
В E version of the Player's Handbook? 


Dungeon Master's screen 2 iyi f 
Unique product key to unlock a digital version 
6 blank character sheets of the Dragon of Icespire Peak adventure 


11 polyhedral dice Access to supplementary content for Dragon 


81 cards describing magic items, sidekicks, and more of Icespire Peak 


EE 


C | a ISBN: 978-0-7869-6683-7 


52499 
DUNGEONSANDDRAGONS.COM | | 


Dungeons & Dragons, D&D, their respective logos, the dragon ampersand, all other Wizards titles, and characters’ names and distinctive 

likenesses are property of Wizards of the Coast LLC in the USA and other countries. ©2019 Wizards of the Coast LLC, PO Box 707, Renton, 9"780786"966837' 
WA 98057-0707, USA. Manufactured by: Hasbro SA, Rue Emile-Boéchat 31, 2800 Delémont, CH. Represented by: Hasbro, De Entree 240, Sug. Retail: US $24.99 CAN $33.99 
1101 EE Amsterdam, NL PRINTED IN USA. DICE MADE IN CHINA Printed in USA C70080000 


